THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURT MARTIAL ON THE TRIAL OF Admiral BYNG, Held on
Board his Majesty's Ship St. George, in Portsmouth Harbor; begun December 27,
1756, and continued till January 27, 1757.

CONTAINING A Summary of the Evidence as delivered each Day in Court,
methodically digested, and the Proofs and Arguments as well for as against him,
fairly and impartially stated.

To which is added, The Admiral's DEFENSE, as presented by him, and read in the
Court January 18, 1757. Together with an Account of his Behavior in his last
Moments.

With general Observations on the whole.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND, Reprinted and Sold by GREEN and
RUSSELL, at their Office Queen Street, and by R. DRAPER, in Newbury-street.
M.DCC.LVII

INTRODUCTION
COPY of Admiral BYNG's INSTRUCTIONS.
WHEREAS the King's Pleasure has been signified to us by Mr. Fox, one of his
principal Secretaries of State, that, upon Consideration of the several Advices
which have been received relating to the supposed Intention of the French to
attack the Island of Minorca, a Squadron of Ten Ships of the Line do forthwith
sail for the Mediterranean, under your Command; and whereas we have appointed
the Ramilies, Buckingham, Culloder, Captain, Revenge, Lancaster, Trident,
Intrepid, Kingston and Defiance, for this Service. You are hereby required and
directed, immediately to put to Sea with such of them as are ready (leaving
Orders for the Rest to follow you as soon as possible) and proceed with the
utmost Expedition to Gibraltar.

Upon your Arrival there, you are to enquire whether any French Squadron is
come through the Straits; and if there is, to inform yourself as well as
possible, of their Number and Force, and if any Part of them were Transports:
And as it is probable they may be designed for North America, and as his
Majesty's Ships the Grafton, Stirling-Castle, Fougueux, Nottingham, Litchfield,
Centurion, Norwich, Success and Vulture Sloop, are either at, or going to
Halifax, and are to cruize off Louisbourg and the Mouth of the River St.
Lawrance, you are immediately to take the Soldiers out of so many Ships of your
Squadron, as, together with the Ships at and going to Halifax, will make a
Force superior to the said French Squadron (replacing them with Landmen, or
ordinary Seamen from your other Ships) and then detach them under the Command
of Rear Admiral West, directing him to make the best of his Way off Louisbourg,
and taking the aforementioned Ships, which he may expect to find there, under
his Command, to cruize off the said Place, and the Entrance of the Gulf of St.
Lawrance, and use his utmost Endeavors to intercept and seize the aforesaid
French Ships, or any other Ships belonging to the French, that may be bound to,
or returning from that Part of North America.

If, upon your Arrival at Gibraltar, you shall not gain Intelligence of a
French Squadron having passed the Straits, you are then to go on, without a
Moment's Loss of Time, to Minorca; or, if in Consequence of such Intelligence,
you shall detach Rear Admiral West, as before directed, you are to use equal
Expedition in repairing thither with the Ships which shall remain with you; and
if you find any Attack made upon that Island by the French, you are to use all
possible Means in your Power, for its Relief: If you find to such Attack make,
you are to proceed off Toulon, and station your Squadron in the best Manner you
shall be able, for preventing say French Ships getting out of that Port or for
intercepting and seizing any that may get out; and you are to exert the utmost
Vigilance therein, and in protecting Minorca and Gibraltar, from any hostile
Attempt.

You are also to be very vigilant for Protecting the Trade of his Majesty's
Subjects from being molested, either by the French, or by Cruizers from (...),
or any other of the Barbary States; and for that Purpose to appoint proper
Convoys and Cruizers.

You are likewise to be as attentive as possble to the intercepting and
seizing, as well Ships of War and Privateers, as Merchant Ships belonging to
the French, where ever they may be met with, within the Limits of your Command:
But in Pursuance of the King's Order in Council, you are not to suffer any of
the Ships in your Squadron to take any French Vessels out of any Port belonging
to the Ottoman Empire, upon any Pretense; nor to molest, detain, or imprison
the Persons of any of the Subjects of the Ottoman Empire; and also, not to
seize and detain any French Ship or Vessel whatsoever which they shall meet
with in the Levant Seas, bound from one Port to another in those Seas, or to or
from any Ports of Egypt, having any Effects of Turks on board.

Upon your Arrival in the Mediterranean, you are to take under your Command,
his Majesty's Ships and Vessels, Princess-Louisa, Portland, Deptford,
Chesterfield, Dolphin, Phoenix, Experiment, and Fortune Sloop, which are at
present there.

If any French Ships of War should sail from Toulon, and escape your Squadron,
and proceed out of the Mediterranean, you are forthwith to send, or repair
yourself, to England, with a proportionable Part of the Ships under your
Command; observing, that you are never to keep more Ships in the Mediterranean,
than shall be necessary for executing the Services recommended to you.

To enable you the better to perform the aforementioned Services, you are to
take Care to keep the Ships and Vessels under your Command, in constant good
Condition, and to have than cleaned as often as shall be requisite for that
Purpose.

Given under our Hands the 30th of March, 1756. Anson, Thomas Villiers, William
Rowley, Edward Boscawen, Bateman, Richard Edgecumbe.
By Command of their Lordships, J. Clevland.
Ramillies, Gibraltar-Bay, May 4th, 1756.
SIR,
THIS comes to you by Express from hence by Way of Madrid, recommended to Sir
Benjamin Keen, his Majesty's Minister at that Place, to be forwarded with the
utmost Expedition.

I arrived here with the Squadron under my Command the 2d Instant, in the
Afternoon, after a tedious Passage of Twenty-seven Days, occasioned by contrary
Winds and Calms, and was extremely concerned to hear from Captain Edgecumbe,
who I found here with the Princess-Louisa, and Fortune Sloop, That he was
obliged to retire from Minorca, the French having landed on that Island, by all
Accounts from thirteen to fifteen thousand Men.

They failed from Toulon the 10th of last Month, with about 160, or 200 Sail of
Transports, escorted by 13 Sail of Men of War, how many of the Line I have not
been able to learn with any Certainty.

If I had been so happy to have arrived at Mahon before the French had landed,
I flatter myself, I should have been able to have prevented their getting a
Footing on that Island; but as it has so unfortunately turned out, I am firmly
of Opinion, from the great Force they have landed, and the Quantity of
Provisions, Stores, and Ammunition of all Kinds they brought with them, that
the throwing Men into the Castle, will only enable it to hold out but a little
Time longer, and add to the Numbers that must fall into the Enemy's Hands; for
the Garrison in Time will be obliged to surrender, unless a sufficient Number
of Men could be landed to dislodge the French, or raise the Siege: However, I
am determined to sail up to Minorca with the Squadron, where I shall be a
better Judge of the Situation of Affairs there, and will give General Blakeney
all the Assistance he shall require, though I am afraid all Communication will
be cut off between us; as is the Opinion of the chief Engineer of this Garrison
(who has served in that Island) and that of the other Officers of the Artillery
who are acquainted with the Situation of the Harbor: For if the Enemy have
erected Batteries on the two Shores near the Entrance of the Harbor (an
Advantage scarce to be supposed they have neglected) it will render it
impossible for our Boats to have a Passage to the Sally Port of the Garrison.

The TRIAL OF Vice Admiral BYNG.
THE Summer of the Year 1756, will be ever memorable for the Losses and
Disgraces we suffered in the Mediterranean. The Loss of Minorca without the
least Attempt for its Relief, and the Loss of a Victory after it was more than
half gained, are Facts too notorious to be denied; die fatal Consequences of
which are sensibly felt as well in the Disreputation brought on the British
Arms, as in the vast Detriment to our Commerce in that Part of the World. But
to whom these Misfortunes and Miscarriages ought to be imputed, is the great
Question which for these six Months past, has been the general Topic of
Conversation, and raised such a Spirit throughout the Kingdom, as evidently
showed how dearly the Glory of their King and Country is prized by all True
Britons. Some have laid the Blame on the Ministry, in delaying too long the
sending Succors for the Relief of so important a Place, and the Incompetency
of those Succors, when sent, for accomplishing a Business in which the
Interest of the Nation in general was so nearly concerned. Others again were no
less warm in their Censures of Admiral Byng, and impute the whole Miscarriage
to his Neglect, Cowardice, or Misconduct. And as the Admiral was the immediate
Instrument employed in this great Affair, the general Voice was loud in
demanding Justice upon him, as if to his Mismanagement alone this irreparable
Misfortune ought to be attributed. And the Letter which he wrote to the
Admiralty, giving an Account of his Engagement with the French Fleet, as
inserted in the Gazette, instead of allaying the Clamor, served only to
increase the general Indignation of the Public against him. The Admiral,
however, to vindicate his own Conduct, and to stop the Torrent of Calumny,
which came pouring upon him from every Quarter, thought proper to publish some
Pamphlets, wherein he affirms that the Letter published in the Gazette, as
coming from him, was so altered, mutilated and curtailed, by those who conveyed
it to the Press, that a quite different Turn was given to his true Sense and
Meaning, with a Design, as he supposes, to bring upon him the Resentment of his
King and Country, and the general Odium for the Loss of Minorca; which, he
says, ought rather to be attributed to those who had the Direction or the
Expedition, than to him who was only employed as an Instrument in the Execution
of it. But whether the Admiral was deficient in his Duty or not, yet I think,
to speak impartially, his Letter ought to have been given to the Public in his
own identical Words, for which only he could be answerable, and the doing
otherwise, was certainly inconsistent with that Honor and Justice which is due
to an Officer of such Distinction, whether guilty or innocent of the Crime laid
to his Charge, since, at that Time, it was the only authentic Information the
Public could have of such an important Transaction, of which he was the sole
Manager.

Upon Receipt of the Admiral's Letter, and other Advices from the
Mediterranean, that the Garrison at Fort St. Philip's had not been relieved,
and was in the utmost Danger of falling into the Hands of the Enemy, the
Government thought fit to send out another Squadron, under the Command of Sir
Edward Hawke, with a Commission to examine into the Conduct and Behavior of
the Admirals and Officers, and enquire into the Causes of the ill Success of
that Expedition. Sir Edward, pursuant to his Instructions, when he came to
Gibraltar, and had got what Intelligence he could by Enquiry, delivered to
Admiral Byng, the Order for his Suspension, and sent him home Prisoner in the
Antelope.

On the Admiral's Arrival at Portsmouth, an Order was sent to Admiral Osborne
to put him under Arrest, and for his Removal to London; but he was not got far
on his Way, before his Guard were met by a Messenger from the Admiralty, with
an Order to convey him back again to the Ship. In a few Days after, a strong
Detachment of the Guards brought him away, and lodged him in the House of the
Governor of Greenwich Hospital, where he was strictly confined, under a strong
Guard, till the Time of his Trial.

As soon as the Admiral was made acquainted with the Nature of the Charge
against him, as contained in the Warrant of the Lords of the Admiralty to their
Marshal, he writes to Mr. Cleveland, their Lordship's Secretary, desiring the
Liberty of sending for such a Number of Witnesses as he judged necessary for
his Defense, and gave a List of Thirty-seven, with their Names; which their
Lordships complied with. This Letter was dated August 4, and he was further
told by the Secretary, that they would be sent for Home in the Colchester. The
Admiral however, about a Month afterward, September 6, desires, in a Letter to
the Secretary, Permission of their Lordships, to send for another Set of
Witnesses from the Fleet, to the Number of Thirty-one. But their Lordships
considering how detrimental to the public Service, the Absence of such a Number
of Officers from their Duty might be, and imagining that Mr. Byng's Design was
only to gain Time and delay his Trial, did not think fit to comply with his
Request; and acquainted him, that as soon as the Witnesses already sent for
should come over, they intended to bring on his Trial, which they saw no Reason
to postpone any longer.

The Witnesses being all arrived and in Readiness, the Trial was appointed to
come on on Monday, December 27, on Board the St. George, lying in Portsmouth
Harbor.

December 23, the Admiral arrived at Portsmouth in a Coach and Six, guarded by
a Party of fifty Horse, and went directly to Mr. Hutchins's, Boatswain of the
Dock-yard, where a Marine Guard mounted every Day.

Monday, December 27. A Jack in the Mizen Shrouds was hoisted on Board the St.
George as a Signal for a Court Martial; about nine a Gun fired for all Captains
in the Harbor to come on Board; the Commission was read, and the Members of
the Court were sworn; which was all that was done this Day; and then adjourned
till next Morning nine o'Clock. The Court consisted of the following Members,
viz.

ADMIRALS.
PRESIDENT. Thomas Smith, Esquire Vice Admiral of the Red. Thomas Holbourne, Esquire
Rear Admiral of the Red. Harry Norris, Esquire Rear Admiral of the White. Thomas
Broderick, Esquire Rear Admiral of the Blue.
Captains.
Charles Holmes, William Boys, John Simcoe, John Bentley, Peter Dennis, Francis
Geary, John Moore, James Douglass, Hon. Augustus Keppel.
Five Hours were appointed for their sitting each Day; but none of them allowed
to go ashore till the Trial should be finished; but Mr. Byng and his Witnesses
might come ashore every Night, if they thought fit. The Court was ordered to be
open, and free Admittance given to every Body who had the Curiosity to hear the
Trial, which occasioned a numerous Concourse of People on Board every Day.

All Things being in Order, and the Witnesses ready, the Charge was opened,
which was to this Effect,

THAT he, John Byng, Esquire Admiral of the Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet in
the Mediterranean, during the Engagement of His Majesty's said Fleet, and the
Fleet of the French King, on the 20th of May last, did withdraw, or keep back,
and did not do his utmost to take, seize and destroy the Ships of the French
King, which it was his Duty to have engaged, and to assist such of his
Majesty's Ships as were engaged in Fight with the French Ships, which it was
his Duty to have assisted; and for that he the said John Byng did not do his
utmost to relieve St. Philip's Castle, in his Majesty's Island of Minorca, then
besieged by the Forces of the French King; but acted contrary to, and in Breach
of his Instructions given the Lords of the Admiralty, by his Majesty's Command.

After which he made the following Speech to the Court:

Gentlemen,

I think myself extremely happy in my present Situation, to have my Conduct
enquired into by Gentlemen of your well-known Abilities, Integrity, and Candor;
and, from thence I hope to answer for my self with Honor, and to demonstrate
my Innocence of the Accusations exhibited against me.

Wednesday, 29. The first Witness sworn was Admiral West, who deposed to the
Effect following:

Being asked, whether he had ever delivered his Opinion, answered: This
Question appears to me of an extraordinary Nature, I cannot conceive that, as a
Witness, I am at all called upon to know at what I expressed Dissatisfaction.
It is not a Matter of Fact as to my particular Opinion: There might be
Appearances at which I might express Dissatisfaction, and they not Facts. When
I saw the Rear of our Fleet astern, I could not but be dissatisfied with that
Appearance. I saw the Fleet in that Situation, but cannot tell the Reason:
Therefore my Opinion, that I may have given, may be founded upon what was not
really Fact, though it appeared to me to be so. As to the other Ships, I know
nothing of their Situation. I went down and engaged my proper Ship till she
bore away; after that I went and engaged ahead with the Lancaster; then the
Rear came up, and engaged them as long as they staid. I have given in all these
Particulars; and if the Court desires to know my Opinion without Facts, it was
what I did not expect. I desire to give every Light into this Matter that may
inform the Court, but the Court may be misled by my Opinion, without Facts.
Where a Judgment is drawn from Evidence, it is drawn from Evidence of Facts. I
may have conceived a wrong Opinion, either from its not being well founded on
Facts, or from my making a wrong Judgment of those that did appear. I only mean
to say, that this is a Question, my Answer to which may mislead, because it may
be founded on Appearances; there was an Appearance from the Fleet's being so
far a-stern; there was an Appearance of some Want in somebody, but with whom I
cannot pretend to say.

His Examination lasted till near Five in the Evening. When the Court was
adjourning, he begged they would complete his Examination that Night, because
he was going out upon an Expedition of great Importance, by the King's Special
Order: But as the Court and Mr. Byng had many Questions to ask him, the Court
informed him, they should be glad to go through, but that there was not Time;
and then the Court adjourned till next Morning.

Thursday 30. Admiral West appeared, and finished his Examination about three
in the Afternoon. In the Course of his Examination, some of the most material
Questions were, Whether any unnecessary Delay was made at St. Helen's, or at
Gibraltar? Answered in the Negative. At what Distance the Ramillies was from
the Buckingham at the Time of the Engagement? He replied, about three Miles.
Whether the Admiral and the Rear could have come up to the Assistance of the
Van, and come to a close Engagement with the Enemy? He answered, he knew no
Impediment to the contrary; but that he would not be understood to mean that
there was none. How the Wind and Weather was? He replied, very calm and fine.
Whether he could keep his lower Ports open? He replied, yes; and that he knew
of but one Ship that could not, and that was the Deptford, who lowered her
Ports occasionally. How many Men he had killed and wounded? He answered, Three
killed and Seven wounded. What Damage he received in his Hull, Masts, Yards,
and Rigging? For an Answer to which he referred them to a written Account he
had delivered into Court thereof. He was asked in what Condition the Ship was
in regard to Men, on the 20th of May, the Morning of the Engagement? He replied
in very good. Whether he saw any Fire from the Admiral's Ship during the
Engagement? He said, when he was looking toward the Intrepid, which was in
Distress a-stern of her, he did see some Smoke, which probably might be from
the Admiral's Ship, or some of his Division; but he could not discover at what
Ship it was directed. Whether on the 24th of May, the Day of the Council of
War, his Ship was repaired, fit for a second Engagement? He answered, yes,
before that. When? He answered, the very next Night after the Engagement.

Mr. Byng asked him, whether it was not in the Power of the Enemy to decline
coming to a close Engagement, as the two Fleets were situated? He replied, yes;
but as they lay to for our Fleet, he apprehended they intended to fight.
Whether he was of Opinion, that the Forces on board the Fleet could have
relieved Minorca? He said, He believed not. -- Whether some of the Ships were
not deficient in their Compliment of Men, some of the Ships out of Repair, and
whether not deficient in Point of Force with the Enemy? To which he answered in
the Affirmative.

The Court having done with Mr. West, Lord Blakeney was sworn. In the Course of
the Examination, he informed the Court of the Time the British Fleet was
discovered by the Garrison, and the Time of its disappearing; that upon Sight
of it he wrote a Letter to be carried off by Mr. Boyd the Store-keeper, and Aid
de Camp to Col. Jeffreys, to inform the Admiral of his Situation, etc. A Copy
of which Letter he had in his Hand, and desired it might be read. But Mr. Byng
objecting thereto, as it was only a Copy, and not the Original, it was not
read, because Mr. Boyd was to be examined thereto, and could produce the
Original.

Mr. Byng asked the General, Whether he thought the Forces could be landed? He
answered very easily. Whether there were not Fascines in the Way? He said, Yes;
but they might easily have been destroyed. Whether the Attempt to land the Men
would not have been attended with Danger? The General replied, Danger! most
certainly. It could not be so easy as stopping into this Ship. I have been
upwards of 50 Years in the Service, and I never knew any Expedition of
Consequence carried into Execution, but what was attended with some Danger; but
of all the Expeditions I ever knew, this was certainly the worst. Mr. Byng
asked, Whether the French had not a Castle at the Point, which might have
prevented their Landing? The General answered, Not the 20th of May; and said,
that the Enemy were in such Distress for Ammunition, that they fired Stones at
the Garrison. Mr. Byng asked the General, Whether the Officers and few Men he
had on board the Fleet, would have been of any great Service to the Garrison?
He answered, Yes, of very great Service; for that he was obliged, at that Time
to set some of his Men to plaster the Breaches. He added, That he believed,
had the Detachment been landed, he might have held out, 'till Sir Edward Hawke
came, though without sufficient Force to drive the Enemy away, he could not save
the Island.

Friday, 31. Mr. Boyd was sworn. In the Course of his Examination it appeared
that he was sent off with a Letter, in a Boat, to deliver to the Admiral, but
could not be particular to the Time; that he kept out as long as he thought it
probable to reach the Admiral; but when he found it impracticable to close the
Admiral, as he was then going to the Southward, he returned without delivering
the Letter.

The President of the Court asking him, if a 20 Gun Ship could have come and
destroyed the Battery? Answered, Yes, if there had been deep Water, which he
could not say, not having ever sounded it, though he had often heard it reported
that there was deep Water at that Place.

Mr. Byng asked him, How long he waited before the Boat was ready to bring him
off. He could not recollect, but remembered he waited for it till he was very
impatient. Whether he in the Boat did not pass through some Firings of the Enemy?
Answered, There was some straggling Fire of small Arms, and about three or four
Cannon Shot. Whether it did not do them some Damage? He answered, No; he did
not know that so much as one of them touched the Boat. How long he might be off
in the Boat? About an Hour and a Half. Whether there was not a Breeze of Wind?
Answered, When he got from the Land, he found a Breeze. Whether he thought the
Admiral could see the Boat? Answered No; he believed not at that Distance, and
so late in the Evening.

The next Witness examined was Capt. Everitt, who, before he gave his Evidence,
desired to hear the Articles of the Charge, he not happening to be in Court
when they were formerly read, which Mr. Byng objected to, as contrary to the
Custom of the Court; but on the Captain's Request they were read. Captain
Everitt being sworn, and having some Papers in his Hand, was asked what they
were? He answered, They were Minutes he had taken from the Ship's Log-Book, and
his own Journal, to refresh his Memory. To the using of which Mr. Byng
objected, the Log-Book not being a proper Testimony. Whereupon the Court was
cleared, to deliberate upon the Point. Upon the Court's being opened again,
their Opinion was, That those Minutes might be used to refresh his Memory upon
such Points only as fell immediately under his own Observation.

In the Course of his Examination it appeared, that there was all possible
Dispatch made, and no unnecessary Delay in the Sailing of the Fleet from St.
Helen's to Gibraltar, and from thence to Mabon; that the Buckingham's Men were
healthy, having but two incapable of coming to their Quarters; that they had 90
or 100 Tons of Water on Board; that they got Sight of the Island of Minorca
about Six in the Morning of the 19th of May; that about Eleven in the Forenoon
they were two Leagues distant from St. Philip's Castle, and believed that was
the nearest Distance he was to it; that about Two in the Afternoon the French
Fleet was seen distinctly, standing to the Westward, but could not say at what
Distance; that our Fleet was standing to the S.E. the Wind at S.S.W. moderate
fine Weather; that on the 20th of May, about Eight in the Morning, they saw the
French Fleet preparing for Engagement.

The like Questions were proposed to him as to Admiral West; and in his Answers
was of Opinion, That the Admiral's Division might have carried all their Sail,
and thereby assisted the Van, and prevented them from receiving so much Fire
from the Enemy's Rear.

Mr. Byng was asked. Whether he chose to ask Captain Everitt say Questions? To
which he replied. He had no Questions to propose then, but should have Occasion
to ask him some hereafter, therefore desired he might be kept in the Way for
that Purpose. Captain Everitt said, He should have been very glad if those
Questions could then be asked, as he was under Sailing Orders with Admiral
West. Mr. Byng answered, He could not propose them at that Time, but would as
soon is possible; upon which Capt. Everitt was ordered to attend the Court.

Mr. Byng then informed the Court, that he wanted to ask Lord Blakeney some
Questions. Whereupon the General was ordered to attend the next Morning at Nine
o'Clock; to which Time the Court then adjourned.

Saturday, Jan. 1. Lord Blakeney appeared in Court, in Consequence of Mr.
Brag's Request; when the Admiral proposed a Question, the Substance of which,
and the Answers were as follows: Whether if the Admiral had landed his Troops,
it could have saved St. Philip's from falling into the Hands of the Enemy? His
Lordship said, It was impossible for him to answer that Question with any
Certainty; but he was of Opinion, that had they been landed, he should have
been able to have hold out the Siege till Sir Edward Hawke had come to his
Relief.

Then the four First Lieutenants of the Buckingham, Captain Everitt, Admiral
West's Ship, were examined, and all agreed, that they knew of no Impediment to
hinder the Admiral and his Division, from coming to the Assistance of the Van,
which was closely engaged, and raked by the Enemy's Rear as they came up; and
that the Admiral was not seen by them to go to a close Engagement with the
Enemy, agreeable to his own Signals.

Monday, Jan. 3. Captain Everitt was cross-examined by the Court and Mr. Byng;
and being asked, How many Guns the Ships in the Van carried? answered, That the
Sides of those next the Buckingham had 14 on the lower Deck, all the others 13.
Of what Rats they were? answered, One a 74 Gun Ship, the others 64, and six in
Number. Whether, if Admiral Byng had come to a close Engagement, a complete
Victory might not have been obtained? Answer, There was all the Reason in the
World to expect it; it being well known that Admiral West beat off two Ships,
though he had but five Ships to their six, and ours smaller Ships than theirs,
and their Metal heavier. How the Wind? as fair a Gale as could be wished for.
Whether he had too much or too little? Answer, Just enough, and no more. What
Sail had Mr. Byng? Answer, His lower Courses, Top and Top-Gallant Sails full;
but his Main-Sail, Main-Top-Sail, and Top-gallant Sail, a-back.

The Court then asked Mr. Byng, If he should have Occasion to ask Capt.
Everitt, or any of the Buckingham's People, any more Questions? and being
answered in the Negative, the Captain, and the rest of the Officers of the
Buckingham, were discharged from any further Attendance on the Court, and were
informed they might repair on Board their Ship.

Capt. Gilebrist sworn. He acquainted the Court, that he was situated opposite
the Rear Admiral on the 20th of May to repeat Signals. In the Course of his
Examination he said, Every Ship did not bear down at a proper Distance to
attack the Enemy, according to Signals thrown out by the Admiral, about Half an
Hour past Two o'Clock; but the Rear-Admiral and his Division bore down before
the Wind, and hauled up opposite to their proper Ships, and attacked the Enemy,
except the Defiance, which appeared to be ahead; that the Ships in the Rear
were in a Line of Battle ahead; upon which the Defiance threw all a-back, and
fell down upon her proper Ship, the Head-most Ship of the Enemy; that the
Admiral did not bear down before the Wind upon the Enemy, nor any of his
Division; that the French Fleet, at the Time of the Signal, were all lying too
with their Main-Top-Sails to the Masts; and that our Van was in the same
Position. He could not take upon him to say, whether the Admiral ever engaged
at a proper Distance, on Account of the Smoke from the Firings of the Revenge,
Princess Louisa, and Trident, He agreed that the Wind, Weather, and Situation
of the Enemy's Fleet, were such as to enable them to engage at a proper
Distance; that the Ships in the Rear did not make all the Sail they could to
close with the Enemy, from the Time the Signal was given for Battle till the
Action was over; but that, in the latter Part of the Action, Mr. Byng set all
his Sail, except his Top-Gallant Sails; that the Wind and Weather was such,
that he could have carried all the Sail in the Ship that he commanded, and knew
no Reason why he did not; that the Van of our Fleet was engaged about an Hour
and a Quarter; that the Admiral did not continue in the same Position, but kept
lasking away, angling upon the Enemy; that he saw the Ramillies fire; that the
Distance of the Rear Division from the Van seemed to be about three Miles; that
he made no Doubt, if the Admiral had carried Sail all along, but they might
have prevented the Enemy's Rear from pouring some of their Fire into our Van;
and that the Distance between our Rear and Van, was occasioned by the Rear
throwing their Topsails a-back when they began to fire.

Being asked, If the Admiral had engaged, whether he might have defeated the
French? answered, That his Opinion was, he might.

Another Officer, whose Name is forgot, was peremptorily asked, If he saw the
Admiral engaged? answered, He saw a Firing. When one of the Gentlemen said
somewhat smartly, Is not firing engaging? The Officer replied, He did not call
firing of Guns at so great a Distance engaging.

Capt. Hervey, of the Phoenix, sworn. He was stationed abreast the Admiral to
repeat Signals. He said, that about Forty-three Minutes after Two, Signal was
made for the Deptford to quit the Line; and about fifty Minutes after Two the
Ramillies began to fire upon the Enemy, having before that received the Fire of
the three sternmost Ships of the Enemy for about ten or twelve Minutes, in
which Time he observed some of the Enemy's Shot to fall between the Ramillies
and his Ship the Phoenix; about the same Time he observed the Intrepid's
Fore-top Mast to be lost; he observed then the quick Motion of the Intrepid in
bearing down, had occasioned her to be raked by the Enemy, to have lost her
Topmast, and to have run the Risque of falling on Board the Admiral, who was
then engaged, and might not see them Time enough to prevent it. Some Time after
the Ramillies ceased Fire, the eleventh Ship in the Enemy's Line bore away from
the Ramillies Fire, as was concluded by the People on Board; that the Culloden
fired but a few Times, and at a greater Distance than the Ramillies; that the
whole Fire ceased about Five in the Afternoon; that the Enemy seemed to go off
from the Fire of our Van, some of them not damaged. This in general; but the
President desiring him to give as distinct and particular Account as he could
of the Action, after the Signal to engage; he gave his Evidence as follows:

I presume, I am to begin with the Signal to engage; the Minutes I have in my
Hand are only in respect to Time. The Signal was made about 20 Minutes after
Two for engaging. At the Time the Signal was made, some of the English Fleet
bore away more than others; which I take to be owing to the Ships in the Van
not having observed the Signal before for leading large, which was made by the
Admiral, and which I repeated about Two; I recollect to have repeated it two or
three Times afterward. The Admiral bore down with his Topsails, and, as near
as I can recollect, with his Foresail set at that Time; and I very well
remember saying, that the Admiral seemed to me to bear away rather more than
either of the Seconds. The Buckingham and Lancaster bore down also on the Ships
of the Enemy, which, as I imagined, they took to have fell to their Lot. The
Intrepid I saw bear right down. I cannot say, I was excessively minute upon the
Proceedings of the Van then, I was more attentive to the Admiral, whole Signals
I was to repeat; and another Reason was, I was then employed in shifting Men
and Things into a Schooner, which was ordered to attend me, and in completing
and fitting my Ship for burning as a Fire-ship.

It was about half an Hour past Two, I think, when some of the French Van began
to fire, and soon after that the Fire became general, except from two or three
of the Sternmost of the Enemy, and they seemed to be reserving their Fire for
the Admiral Commander in Chief, who was then going down upon them. About 43
Minutes after Two, the Signal was made for the Deptford to quit the Line; I had
my Watch in my Hand, and therefore can be more particular, and I think it was
about fifty Minutes after Two that the Ramilies began to fire, having before
received the Fire of these sternmost Ships of the Enemy for about 10 or 12
Minutes (I am not certain as to a Minute or two) in which Time, I observed
several of the Enemy's Shot to fall between the Ramilies and the Ship I
commanded. It was about this Time, when I observed the Intrepid's Foremast to
be shot away; it might have been done sooner, but I did not observe it till
then; she seemed then to lay muzzled, her Fore-sail a-back, or in the Wind, and
her Main top-sail in the Wind also; I imagined that to be from her Fore-tack
being shot away, or some of that Kind. About Three I saw the Revenge, Princess
Louisa and Trident, all three with their Topsails a-back, the Revenge very near
the Intrepid, under her Lee Quarter, and a little a-stern withal. I remember
then to have said upon Deck, that quick Motion of the Intrepid's, in bearing
down right before the Wind, occasioned her being raked and losing her
Fore-top-Mast, and the Ship next to her not passing her would bring those Ships
a-stern of her, and ahead of the Admiral, in such a Cluster, that they would
run the Risque of dropping on Board of the Admiral, who was then engaged, and
probably might not see them soon enough to prevent it. About five or six
Minutes after Three, I saw the Ramilies's Topsails a-back, and at the same
Time, a Yellow Flag at the Mizen-top-Mast-Head, which was hauled down while I
was endeavoring to repeat it, and a Yellow Flag hoisted at the Fore-top-Mast
Head. I take that Yellow Flag at the Mizen-top-Mast Head to have been up five
or six Minutes, because, while the Men at the Mizen-top-Mast were bending it, I
was obliged to order it down again, to repeat that which was hoisted on Board
the Admiral at the Fore-top-Mast Head, I having but one Yellow Flag on Board.
About six or seven Minutes afterward, a red Ensign was hoisted at the
Mizen-top-Mast Head; and I believe it was much about the Time of the Signals
being made to bring to, that the Ramilies ceased firing. In Narratives of this
Kind, one cannot keep Time so exactly as I could wish, but must go back from
one Thing to another.

At the Time of the Smoke being cleared away by their ceasing firing, I
observed the eleventh Ship in the Enemy's Line to have kept away large with his
Main-topsail Yard down, which I remember, on board, we then concluded was from
the Ramillies Fire, for the Culloden had fired but very few Guns, and those at
a greater Distance than the Ramillies.

It was about Three when the Ramillies filled and made Sail, Fore-sail, Jibb
and Stay-Sail; I think that was the Sail at that Time; and at Four the Signal
was made for the Chesterfield to lay by the Intrepid, and then the Revenge,
Princess Louisa, and Trident were recovering their Stations in the Line ahead
of the Admiral, who then had his Courses, Topsails, Jibb, and Stay-sails set;
I think the Main-sail was set then, it was just then I saw it; it might have
been set before, but I did not observe it till then; at that Time, or about
that Time, the Intrepid being then got clear of the Line, I then saw the
Deptford shifting her Pendant to the Fore-top-Mast Head, hoisting a red Ensign,
and she crowded Sail, seemingly to me, to be standing for the Intrepid's
Station in the Line.

About Five the whole Firing ceased; I then saw the Buckingham with her
Main-top-Sail Yard down, and I think her Fore-top-gallant Sail and Sprit-sail
set. The Lancaster and Portland were then at some Distance from the Buckingham,
the Captain rather upon the Buckingham's Weather Quarter, and a-stern withal,
and the Defiance close upon the Captain's Weather Quarter. The Defiance, before
that seemed to be disabled in her Sails and Rigging, which I imagined,
occasioned her to fall a-stern out of her Station.

The French fourth or fifth Ship from the Van, seemed to me to have bore away
from the Fire of our Ships in the Van, and very soon afterward the three
headmost of the Enemy did the same; but none of them appeared to me to be
disabled: So that, whether it was to avoid the Action, or by a Signal from the
Commander in Chief (for I saw Flags flying on board the French Admiral) I
should rather imagine the latter, as I had not observed any such close
Engagement as to oblige Ships of their seeming Force, to avoid an Action, which
I imagine they had in their Power from the Beginning, by out-sailing the Ships
of our Fleet, as well as I could observe, when our Ships had more Sail set than
what I observed the Enemy to have.

Being asked, If the Flags which he saw on board the French Admiral, might not
be Signals to recall his retreating Ships, as well as to call them off?
answered, Certainly Yes.

The French Admiral with the rest of the Ships, were then edging down under
their Topsails and Fore-sails to close their Van; and though I observed, that
the Rear of the Fleet closed our Van very fast, which was then very much
disordered, yet they did not appear to me to gain any thing of the Enemy. A
little after Five, the Rear had closed the Van; when I speak of the Van, I mean
the Buckingham, who then had the Captain and Defiance upon her Weather Quarter;
the Portland and Lancaster were then a considerable Way ahead.

About thirty Minutes after Five, the Signal was made to bring to; and a little
before Six, the Signal was made to fill and stand on. The Intrepid and
Chesterfield were then a considerable Way a-stern, and upon the Weather Quarter
withal.

At twenty Minutes after Six, the Signal was made to tack; and for the Ships
that led before with the Larboard Tack, to continue to lead with the Starboard
Tack. At Seven, the Signal of the Line was hauled down.

I then ceased from repeating Signals, and went on Board the Admiral to receive
his Commands. That is all I know in general of the Action.

Tuesday, 4. Capt. Hervey was re-examined till near Two, with very little
Variation from the Narrative he had given the Court the Day before.

Captain Amburst, on his Examination, said, he thought Mr. Byng would have
fought, if the French had staid: But the Confusion this Evidence was in, his
advancing no plausible Reason for his Belief, and his negative Answers to the
Questions respecting Distance, Sailing, etc. added to the Circumstance of the
French Rear's lying to an Hour and a Quarter, and in Fact, not going away till
their Van retreated, made his Opinion too weak to be depended upon.

Wednesday, 5. Mr. Lloyd, a Lieutenant, and Mr. Philips, a Volunteer on board
the Fleet, but now a Captain, were examined; in whose Examination nothing
particular appeared further than has been already noted.

Thursday, 6. The Lieutenant of the Lancaster was examined, and then a
Gentleman who was a Volunteer on board. Their Evidence seemed very clear and
certain as to some particular Facts which fell immediately under their
Observation, but were not much in Favor of the Admiral.

Captain Young being called and sworn, deposed, That the Rear might have went
down as well as himself, who had only his Topsails and Foresails; but the most
remarkable Thing in his Evidence was, his saying, that the losing his Topmast
could neither then make him run soul of the Rear, he being to Leeward, nor was
it probable they could on him, the Distance being so great; though this was the
Admiral's Excuse, in his Letter published in the Gazette: and what Captain
Hervey, the Admiral's principal Advocate, intimated in his Evidence, was very
likely to have happened, had not the Admiral thrown his Sails a-back to prevent
it.

Captain Young added, that after he had cut his Rigging away, he hoisted Main
Topsail and Foresail, and fought again, till the Revenge's Boat came with
Notice from Captain Cornwall, that he was coming to his Assistance, to desire
him to cease firing, and he would place himself betwixt him and the Enemy,
which he did.

But this Matter being more fully explained in the Captain's Cross-Examination,
we shall give it verbatim as follows:

Friday, 7. Did the Loss of your Fore-top-Mast put any of our Ships in our Rear
in Danger of being on board you? A. Not as I could perceive, Q. Did it occasion
any Impediment to the Admiral and his Division from going down, and engaging
the Enemy closely? A. Not as I could perceive. Q. Did any of the Ships tack at
that Time? A. I did not observe just then; they were to Windward of me; and I
saw several of the Ships upon my Weather Quarter with their Topsails aback. Q.
Did you think at that Time they were in any Danger of being a-board you? A. No;
I was to Leeward of them, so could not drive a-thwart them. Q. Could they at
that Time have wore clear of you, and gone down to the Center and Rear of the
Enemy? A. Yes; because I was ahead and to Leeward. Q. Did the Admiral and his
Division bear down on your Stern, and go to the Center and Rear of the Enemy?
A. No; not when my Topmast went away. Q. Did they at any Time afterward? A.
Yes, near an Hour after, and went to Leeward of me, and passed me. Q. Did they
go down to the Center and Rear to engage properly? A. The French were then
gone, and left me a-stern. Q. What Sail had the French Rear set when they
passed you? A. I think their Topsails and Foresails. Q. What Sail had the
Admiral and his Division abroad then? A. Foresails and Staysails, and the
Calloden her Top-gallant-Sails. Q. How long after you lost your Topmast was it
before the Admiral and his Division passed to Leeward of you? A. About three
Quarters of an Hour or an Hour. Q. With the Wind as it then was; could the
Admiral and his Division, if they had set all their Sails, from the Time the
Signal for engaging was made and borne away properly, could they have come to a
close Engagement with the Enemy? A. Yes; the French were lying to for us; I
went down only under my Topsails, and they might have added Sails in
Proportion to the Distance and Going of their Ships. Q. During the three
Quarters of an Hour, or an Hour, which you mentioned just now, did you observe
what Sail the Admiral and his Division were under? A. No, not particularly. Q.
Did you observe any Motions that were made for going down to the Enemy? A. No.
Q. How long after you lost your Foremast did the Center and Rear of the French
Line lay to? A. Till the Revenge's Boat came on board me; and desired I would
leave off firing, that they might make Sail and go between me and the Enemy,
which they did directly; the French Fleet then run, who were opposite to me,
and the Rear followed them. Q. After the Admiral and his Division had made
Sail, did they get up with the Center and Rear of the Enemy, so as to come to a
close Engagement A. There was very little Action after that Time. Q. Did you,
before the French run, see the Admiral and his Division closely engaged with
the Enemy? A. No; they were a-stern and to Windward of me. Q. Did you see the
Admiral and his Division engage from first to last? A. Yes; some of the Ships;
they fired. Q. Did you observe at what Distance they were one from the other?
A. I did not take Notice. Q. Did you see any of their Shot fall? A. No; I was
too much employed to take Notice. Q. Was you within point blank Shot of the
Enemy? A. I cannot judge that exactly. Q. At what Distance do you suppose you
were at that Time? A. Within random Musket Shot, I believe, as the Lieutenant
was wounded with a Musket Ball. Q. How far were the Rear off at that Time? A.
I did not take Notice. Q. When you bore down on the Enemy, did the Admiral and
his Squadron do so too? A. No. Q. Under what Sail were the Admiral and his
Division at that Time. A. Under their Topsails and Fore-sails. Q. If they had
bore down as the Intrepid, could they have closed the Enemy so as to have
engaged properly? A. Yes, the French were laying to. Q. Did they lay to long
enough to admit of it, supposing the Admiral and his Division had set all their
Sails? A. Yes, long enough for me, and I suppose for the rest too. Q. Were our
Ships in a proper Line of Battle ahead of one another, when the Signal for
engaging was made? And had all our Ships bore away at the same Time, would it
not have prevented the running aboard each other? A. Yes, there was a very good
Line formed; they were not so near together but every Ship had Room to wear.

Saturday, 8. Capt. Cornwall was sworn. In the Course of his Examination, he
said, that he went to his Windows abaft to take a View of the Fleet when in
Line of Battle; that he was greatly surprised to see the Admiral and his
Division at so great a Distance, as he was upon the Weather Quarter; that
seeing the Intrepid in Distress and no Signal given for removing her out of the
Line, he sell into her Station, engaged the Foudroyant the French Admiral, as
the Ship he imagined fell to his Lot, according to the then Line of Battle;
said, he knew of no Impediment to prevent the Admiral's engaging at a proper
Distance, any more than the rest of the Fleet; observed, he was upon his Oath
to swear the whole Truth, and would do so, though some Things he was going to
say would affect himself; confessed, he went without Orders to assist the
Intrepid; and being asked by the Admiral, If he did not break through an
Article of his Instructions in going without his Command? answered, Yes; but
added, If I did go beyond my Duty, it was my Zeal for my Country, though he
mentioned another Article that favored him.

Mr. Byng, upon this, observed to the Court, that his Reputation, which was
dearer to him than his Life, nay his Life also, were in the Hands of the Court
Martial, and in better Hands he desired them not; but said, he should prove,
that the Revenge, by breaking the Line, was a great Impediment in his Way; and
that if he could not prove that, or Something like it, The Lord have Mercy upon
me.

N. B. This Captain Cornwall lost his Arm in the memorable Engagement in the
Mediterranean, under Admiral Matthews, on Board the Marlborough, when his Uncle
Captain Cornwall lost his life; being then First Lieutenant.

Monday, 10. Captain Cornwall's Cross-Examination was finished. Capt. Cornwall
gave his Testimony with great Clearness; and behaved like the Gentleman, the
Sailor, and the Man of Honor.

Captain Durell, of the Trident, being sworn, deposed much the same as Captain
Cornwall; did not accuse the Admiral of any unnecessary Delay to Minorca; was
of Opinion, that the Admiral and his Division did not set all their Sail to
join the Van of the British Fleet; but could not say the Admiral had not any
Impediment to prevent it.

Tuesday, 11. Captain Gardener, Admiral Byng's Captain, was under Examination
and Re-examination all Day. He could not say all their Sails were set, or that
the Rear Division could not come up to a close Engagement, as well as the Van;
but said he advised the Admiral to bear down, to which the Admiral objected,
and gave his Reasons against it; lest an Accident of a similar Nature with that
of Admiral Matthews in the same Seas, should be the Consequence; and had
nothing to say against the Admiral's personal Behavior; said, he believed the
Admiral intended a close Engagement, by his telling the Sailors, whose
Eagerness for Action had engaged them to fire without Orders, to save their
shot till they came nearer to do Execution.

Wednesday, 12. Captain Gardener was again examined, and made it appear, that
the Admiral took the whole Command of the Ship from him, and that nothing was
done that Day but what he ordered.

Then the Land Officers on board the Ramillies were examined. The Lord Robert
Bertie's Examination was as follows: Q. Was not your Lordship, with your
Regiment, ordered to serve in the Fleet under Admiral Byng's Command? A. The
Orders I received are dated the 28th of March, from the Secretary at War. They
are to put myself under the Command of Admiral Byng, and obey such Orders as I
might receive, from Time to Time, from him, or any other commanding that
Squadron. Q. Do you know of any Troops embarked in the Fleet, besides your
Regiment, except some few Officers and Recruits, and the Detachment from the
Garrison at Gibraltar, that were put on Board the Ships of Mr. Edgcumbe's
Squadron, in the room of some of their Men that were left in the Garrison of
St. Philip? A. No. Q. Do you apprehend, that the throwing in about an hundred
Men, consisting of Officers and Recruits, would have enabled the Garrison to
hold out against the Enemy's Attacks? A. No; I apprehend they were of much more
Service on Board the Fleet. Q. Was you upon the Quarter Deck near the Admiral,
during the whole Time of the Enemy's firing? A. Yes; I was near the Admiral
during the whole Time that the Ramillies was fired upon. Q. Did the Admiral,
from the Time the Signal was made to engage, continue going down upon the
Enemy? A. It appeared to me, that he was going down standing to the Enemy, till
such Time as the Admiral laid a-back. Q. Will you be pleased to inform the
Court, if, during the Time of Action on the 20th of May, the Admiral expressed
any Impatience or Uneasiness at any Accident the Admiral judged to impede his
engaging the Enemy properly? A. At the Time the Admiral lay a-back, I heard him
say, he wondered what the Ships ahead were about. Q. While the Ramillies
continued going down upon the Enemy, did not their Shot reach her and pass over
her? A. At the Time the French fired at the Ramillies, they reached her, passed
over, and some hulled her. Q. At the Time that the Enemy were firing upon us,
and their Shot passing over us, did you hear the Admiral say any Thing on that
Occasion? A. I recollect, that when the French were firing upon us, the Admiral
desired Captain Gardener not to fire, till such Time as we were down along side
of them. Q. Did you not inform the Admiral, during the Time of the Firing, that
you discerned through the Smoke, one of your Ships close under the Starboard Bow;
and that if we did not immediately cease firing, we should fire into her? A.
The Words I made use of to the Admiral, as well as I can recollect, were Do
you, or Captain Gardener, see that Ship upon our Starboard Bow? I apprehend her
to be one of ours; if you do not take Care we shall fire into her. Q. Did
firing cease on board the Ramillies, as you apprehend, to avoid firing through
our own Ship? A. Yes. Then Admiral Byng delivered some Questions to the
President, which he desired the Judge Advocate might ask of the Witness. The
President answered, I will ask them. Q. Was you near the Admiral's Person
before, during, and after the Action, and did you observe his Behavior? A. I
was near him the whole Day of the Action. Q. Did you perceive any Backwardness
in the Admiral during the Action, or any Marks of Fear or Confusion, either
from his Countenance or Behavior? Q. He seemed to me to give his Orders cooly
and distinctly; and I don't apprehend he was in the least wanting in personal
Courage. Q. Did the Admiral appear sollicitous to engage the Enemy, and to
assist his Majesty's Ships that were engaged with the Enemy? A. Yes. Q. Did
you, on or after the Day of Action, hear any Murmuring or Discontent among the
Officers or Men, upon any Supposition that the Admiral had not done his Duty?
A. I never heard any one of the Ramillies speak disrespectfully of the Admiral.

Col. Smith, who was also upon the Quarter Deck with the Admiral, confirmed the
above in every Particular with this additional Circumstance, that a Shot from
the Enemy passed between him and Lord Bertie, as they were a-bast the Mainmast,
which took off the Head of a Timber upon Deck, and went through the Hammocks in
the Main Shrouds; said, the Admiral showed no Signs of Fear, but quite the
Reverse.

Capt. Edgar, who was quartered upon the Poop, confirmed such of the above
Circumstances as came immediately under his own Observation; but was not asked
any Questions relative to the personal Behavior of the Admiral, his Situation
not giving him an Opportunity of answering to the same.

Col. Cornwallis, being sworn, said, that lie was on Board the Kingdom, could
give no Account of the Action, and was willing to answer any Questions the
Court demanded, or Mr. Byng would propose; but none were asked.

Capt. Gough first Lieutenant of the Ramillies, being sworn, said, That at the
Time of the Signal being made for engaging, the Fleet appeared in a close and
regular Line; that two Ships, which he believed to be the Trident and Louisa,
were under their Lee-Bow; could not say at what Distance the Ramillies was from
the Enemy at the Time of the Signal for engaging, being mostly at his Quarters,
but believed when they began to engage, they were nearly at Point Blank with
the Enemy.

Capt. Besset, Second Lieutenant, being quartered upon the Lower-Deck, could
not answer to the Distance, nor how long they continued firing; said, that
several of the Enemy's Shot struck the Sides of the Ramillies; and one in
particular cut one of the Hinges of the Ports close to him, but did not
afterward go through her Sides; but must have done so it had been properly
loaded. He also said, that as the Enemy's Shot reached the Ramillies, he
doubted not but her Shot reached them also.

Capt. Welbey, Third Lieutenant of the Ramillies, quartered upon the Middle
Deck, said, that the Ramillies was bearing down when the Signal was made; that
he was ordered to double-shot the Guns, for the Admiral did not intend to fire
all he came close up with the Enemy, and confirmed the above Testimony of a
Ship or Ships being on their Lee-bow; agreed there was a commanding Breeze, and
if all their Sails had been set, they should have been closer to the Enemy, and
said, he believed they were within half a Mile of the Enemy.

Mr. Clark, the Fourth Lieutenant, was called, but not being on board, Mr.
Waterfall, the Fifth Lieutenant, was examined, who said, he was quartered on
the Lower-Deck, knew not the Distance from the Enemy, but apprehended they were
within proper Distance for Engaging; that he received Orders by Lord Robert
Berlie, to leave off firing on Account of the Ship on the Lee-bow.

Mr. Hamilton, the Sixth Lieutenant of the Ramillies, who was quartered on the
upper Gun-Deck, by the Mainmast forward, confirmed the preceding Testimony
chiefly, and said, when the Ramillies, begun to bear down, it might be about
two Miles Distance, and was at the Distance of about half a Mile when they
began to fire; said, that through the Smoke he discovered the Trident's red
Stern, and Part of her blue Colors, and that she was then upon her Lee-bow
very near.

Thursday, 13. Lieut. Clark was examined, whose Evidence agreed in general with
the other Lieutenants. The Carpenter of the Intrepid was sworn, and was asked
but one Question, viz. If he could justify the Defects of the Ship, as he had
given them in? which he answering positively in the Affirmative, the Court
discharged him.

The Gunner of the Ramillies was examined as to the Powder expended that Day,
who answered 20 Barrels, and 300 double-headed Shot. He was much confused, and
said, the Intrepid was in their Way, and they could not bear down; but was
told, he could not be Judge of that, being quartered on the Lower Gun-Deck. The
Carpenter said, he could give no Account, being at his Duty in the Wings. The
Boatswain said, he was minding his Rigging, and therefore could give no Account
of the Matter. The Master gave his Evidence very confusedly, and by saying and
unsaying, did the Admiral more Detriment than Service.

Friday, 14. Several Midshipmen were examined, and the Surgeon of the
Ramillies, whose Evidence was not very material one way or the other. Capt. H.
Ward, of the Culloden, was likewise examined, who declared, that the Admiral
was retarded by backing his Topsails near or quite half an Hour; and that had
the Admiral set more sail at first, and bore down upon the Enemy, it was his
Opinion, they might have taken every Ship. After him, several of his
Lieutenants were examined, who all deposed to the very same Purpose.

Saturday, 15. Capt. Perry, was examined, whose Evidence was near the same with
the rest of the Captains, viz. that he thought the Admiral might have carried
his Top-gallant Sails that Day.

Here the Evidence for the King was closed by the Judge Advocate, and the Court
adjourned to Monday Morning nine o'Clock, when Admiral Byng was to begin his
Defense.

Monday, 17. Mr. Byng appeared to make his Defense; but nothing material was
done.

Tuesday, 18. Mr. Byng delivered his Defense into Court, which was read by the
Judge Advocate, in which he took Notice of the many Indignities which he had
undergone, by an enraged and deluded People; that he had been treated like a
Felon; had been hanged and burnt in Effigy; his Person closely confined, and
the Windows of his Prison barricaded. He then observed to the Court, That he
humbly presumed, no Proof had been given against him of any unnecessary Delay
in the Fleet's sailing to Minorca, nor of his discovering any Backwardness or
Signs of Fear, against engaging the Enemy; therefore moved the Court to give
their Opinion thereon, as it might be a Means in saving some Time in the Course
of his Defense.

[The Defense is annexed to the Trial.]

The Court was then ordered to be cleared upon this Motion, and in about an
Hour and a Half was opened again. The Judge Advocate then read the unanimous
Resolution of the Court; which was, That they could not give any Opinion till
the Witnesses in his Defense were examined. Mr. Byng then called Capt. Gardener
again, and asked many Questions, most of which being Matter of Opinion, he
begged Leave to refer them to the Court. Capt. Gardiner's Cross-Examination
being gone through, the Court asked Mr. Byng, Who he should have Occasion to
call Tomorrow? He replied, Capt, Amburst, Hervey and Phillips. The Court then
adjourned till next Morning.

Wednesday, 19. Mr. Byng delivered a Paper, declaring he had no more Evidence
to produce but his Secretary, and would give the Court no farther Trouble; and
likewise said, That his not going down to engage the Enemy, was not owing to
his Want of Courage, but must be an Error in his Judgment. The Admiral having
nothing more to say in his Defense, the Court closed. The next Morning the
Members of the Court met, in order to revise the Evidence that had been given
by the Witnesses during the Course of this long Trial, to consider the Strength
of the Proofs for and against him, and to pass such an equitable Sentence as
might do Justice both to their Country and the Prisoner.

Full eight Days were taken up in canvassing the Proceedings; and the Variety
of the Evidence gave Occasion for several warm Debates among them, and they
were a good while divided in their Opinions as to his Guilt or Innocence. Five
of them found him guilty of the whole Charge, and consequently that he ought to
suffer Death. Four of them were only for breaking him, and thought the Loss of
his Commission was a sufficient Punishment. And four of them were for entirely
acquitting him. But as they could not deviate from the Articles of War, settled
by Act of Parliament, they at length unanimously agreed to Thirty-Six
Resolutions. [See Page 34. after the Admiral's Defense.]

The following Letters were sent to the Secretary's Office, who transmitted
them to the President of the Court Martial at Portsmouth. The first was wrote
in English by the celebrated M. Voltaire, and directed to Admiral Byng. The
other the Translation of a Letter in French from the Marshal D. Richlieu, and
sent to M. Voltaire. But with what View they were wrote is not easy to be
conceived. Surely these Gentlemen must have very mean and unworthy Notions of
English Equity and Justice, to suppose that his Judges would condemn him,
unless on the Testimony of unexceptionable Evidence; or that they were not as
inclinable to acquit as to punish him. Or, rather, is it not a French
Gasconade, to magnify the Bravery of their Fleet, and banter the English for
their Folly and Temerity in pretending to cope with a Power so much their
superior? In whatever Light we view these Letters, we plainly discover the
Impertinence and Insult of their Writers. If the French were really victorious,
as the Marshal has the Front to affirm, how came they to quit the Field of
Battle, and not return to see what was become of their Enemy? Or, for what
other Reason than their Misbehaviour in the Engagement, did they break four of
their Captains immediately on their Arrival at Marseilles? But let the Reader
judge for himself, after he has perused the two following Letters.

Cl^^x del^^^s pres de Ge^^^e.
SIR,
THOUGH I am almost unknown to you, I think it is my Duty is send you the Copy
of the Letter which I have just received from the Marshal Duke of Richlieu:
Hereas, Humanity, and Equity, order me to carrey it into your Hands. This noble
and unexpected Testimory from me of the most candid as well as the mos generous
of my Countrymen, makes me presume your Judges will do you the same Justies.

I am with Respect, Sir, etc. VOLTAIRE.

To the Hon. J. BYNG, Esquire

SIR,
I Am very sensibly concerned for Admiral Byng: I do assure you whatever I have
seen or heard of him does him Honor. After having done all that Man could
reasonably expect from him, he ought not to be censured for suffering a Defeat.
When two Commanders contend for Victory, though both are equally Men of Honor,
yet one must necessarily be worsted, and there is nothing against Mr. Byng but
his being worsted; for his whole Conduct was that of an able Seaman, and is
justly worthy of Admiration. The Strength of the two Fleets was at least equal;
the English had thirteen Ships, and we twelve much better furnished and much
cleaner. Fortune that presides over all Battles, and especially those that are
fought at Sea, was more favorable to us than our Adversaries, by sending our
Balls into their Ships with greater Execution. I am persuaded, and it is the
general received Opinion, that if the English had obstinately continued the
Engagement, their whole Fleet would have been destroyed.

In short, there can be no higher Act of Injustice than what is new attempted
against Admiral Byng, and all Men of Honor, and all Gentlemen of the Army, are
particularly interested in the Event.

RICHLIEU.
I received this original Letter from Marshal D. Richlieu, the 1st of January,
1757, in Witness of which I have signed my Name.

VOLTAIRE.




THE Admiral's Defense, the Resolves of the Court Martial, etc. are contained
in the following Sheet.


