AN ADDRESS TO THE People of New England.

REPRESENTING The very great IMPORTANCE of attaching the INDIANS to their
Interest; not only by treating them justly and kindly; but by using proper
Endeavors to settle Christianity among them.

By SAMUEL HOPKINS, A. M. PASTOR of a Church in Springfield.

I perceive that GOD is no Respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he that
fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him.

Apostle PETER. Printed in Boston, 1753. Being a Conclusion to the Historical
Memoirs relating to the Housatunnuk INDIANS; with an Account of the Methods
used for the Propagation of the Gospel amongst the said Indians, by the late
reverend Mr. JOHN SERGEANT.

Now recommended to the serious Consideration of the Inhabitants of
Pennsylvania, and the other Colonies.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. 1757.

AN ADDRESS. etc.
MY Design in this Address is to represent, to the People in this Country, the
very great Importance of treating the Indians, who live among us, and upon our
Borders, in a just, kind and charitable Manner; and that we do, by all proper
Means and Methods, endeavor to attach them to us, and to the British Interest.
This, I apprehend, is a Subject that has been too much neglected, and that
greatly wants to be set in a clear and just Light. And I sincerely wish that
some Gentleman of greater Abilities and Address than I can pretend to, would
take it in Hand: Though if my weak Endeavors may be a Means of moving others to
do Justice to a Subject of such Weight, I shall heartily rejoice in it.

That I may offer what I have to say in the clearest and most concise Manner I
can, I shall go into the following Method.

First, I shall endeavor to show, that it is of vast Importance to the British
Provinces and Colonies in America, especially to the Provinces of the
Massachusetts, New York, and New Hampshire, that they be in good Terms with the
Indians, and attach them to their Interest. And,

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, by what Means this may be effected: Or
what are the most likely Methods to bring it to pass.

1. I am to show, that it is of vast Importance, that we be in good Terms with
the Natives; and that we engage them in our Interest. I freely grant, that the
Indians, simply considered, are not of such great Consequence to us. We can
subsist without them. But yet, their Trade is a considerable Article, worthy
the Care of any politic People, and managed as it might, and ought to be,
would yield us great Profit. But if we consider them with Relation to Peace and
War, as attached to us, or to our Enemies, they are of the last Importance to
us; for they certainly have the Balance of Power in their Hands, and are able
to turn it for or against us, according as they stand affected to us. Canada,
inconsiderable as it is, and from which, separate from the Indians, we have
little or nothing to fear, in Time of War; Canada, I say, would be more than a
Match for us, in case they join with them against us. He must be a great
Stranger to, and very ignorant of, the Circumstances both of the English and
Indians, who is not sensible of this. Our Circumstances are such, that we
cannot guard ourselves against the Incursions of such Enemies in Time of War;
for our Frontiers are of vast Extent, and border upon the adjacent Wilderness;
which, though almost inaccessible to us, yet is the very Element in which they
delight to live. They are at Home in it. The People therefore who inhabit our
Frontiers, while they follow their necessary Business, are exposed to be an
easy Prey to them; and many of them have been surpised in their Fields and
Houses, and in a most barbarous Manner put to Death. A small Number of Indians,
encouraged and supported by the French (which they are ready enough to do) can
easily keep us in a constant Alarm, put us to an immense Charge, destroy many,
and impoverish more, in our exposed Places, and not put themselves at all out
of their Way; yea, find their Account in it; for as they live by Hunting, so
where Game is most plenty they are best off: And where can they find a better
Supply, than among our Cattle, Sheep, and Cornfieldsd? There they live at Ease,
distress and impoverish us, and the adjacent Wilderness is their Refuge. By
retiring into it, they are soon out of our Reach; and long Experience has
taught us how ineffectual the Measures we have taken for our Safety and Defense
have proved.

Some, I am sensible, will say, let us not be at any Cost and Pains to gain the
Friendship of such a perfidious Crew, but let us destroy them all. Quickly said
indeed, but not so soon nor so easily effected. Those Persons who are for
destroying them would doubtless soon do it, were they first bound and delivered
up to them. But one Question here is, how we shall get them into our Power? And
another is, Whether it would be so humane, generous and Christian-like, to take
away their Lives, were that in our Power, as it would be to cultivate
Friendship with them, and to seek their best Good? If we should be so sanguine
as to endeavor to destroy them, it would doubtless prove a vain Attempt; and
serve only to drive them to the French, who would be very ready to receive and
protect them. If we neglect them, and take no Measures to engage them in our
Interest, or to cultivate Friendship with them, this will probably render them
indifferent to us, and dispose them to hearken to the enticing Insinuations of
Romish Emissaries; and our Situation must be very unhappy, when they become
engaged in the French Interest.

If it be objected, that the French have already gained a large Number of
Indians to their Interest, and therefore if we use our best Endeavors to gain
others, it will avail nothing; for those who are devoted to the French, will
nevertheless distress us in Time of War. I reply,

It is very true, that the French of Canada, through their Policy and Vigilance,
have taken the Advantage of our Neglect, and gained a large Number of the
Natives to their Interest, and are gaining more and more every Year; and some
even from among our own Indians. They spare neither Cost nor Pains to
accomplish their Designs of this Nature, being sensible enough how advantageous
it is to them, and how injurious to us; and if they continue to be active, and
we negligent, as in Times past, is it not too probable that they will, in a
little Time, attach to themselves all the Indians in North America? Does it not
then concern us to use proper and vigorous Endeavors to prevent this apparent
Mischief, by counter-working the French? who are, I suppose, tampering with all
the Tribes of North America, to engage them in their Interest. And should we
succeed in our Endeavors (as it is highly probable we might, if proper Steps
were taken) so as to engage the Five Nations, and some other Tribes, in hearty
Friendship with us; and especially if we should bestow such Favors upon them,
as would induce them to settle upon our Frontiers; it would in all Probability
prevent the Evil spoken of in the Objection; for the Indians from Canada would
not molest us, if a Number of the Natives, in hearty Friendship with us, were
placed in our Borders. Of this we have had a very plain Proof the last War, in
the Safety of Stockbridge, and the adjacent Places, from any Attempts of the
Enemy from Canada.

Stockbridge is in the very Road of, and more exposed to, the Indians from
Canada, than any other Place whatever; and yet we see that the Enemy turned off
East to Connecticut-River, and West to the Dutch Settl^^^^^ (...) they did much
Mischief; while Stoc^ (...) ^^^ffield, New-Marlborough, and Number One, (...)
more exposed, were not molested. This, so far as we can discern, was owing to a
small Number of Indians dwelling at Stockbridge, who are our hearty and fast
Friends; which the Enemy being sensible of, cared not to come within their
Reach, lest they should be taken in their own Snare. And if we should encourage
the Settlement of other Indian Towns upon our Frontiers, where Hunting is most
handy to them, as Stockbridge has been encouraged; should we give them
Townships of Land suitable for their Improvement, build a Meeting House and
School-House in each Town, and support Ministers and Schoolmasters in them;
would not this convince them that we are their true Friends, and seek their
Good? Would it not induce them to settle in our Borders? especially those of
them who are desirous that they themselves and their Children should be
instructed? Would they not be a Guard to us in Time of War? And if, after all,
we should meet with some Trouble from the Indians of Canada, might it not be
effectually prevented, by playing our Indians upon them, as they do theirs upon
us? And would not the Charge of all this be a Trisle, compared with that of
defending ourselves in Time of War? But if we neglect them, and take no
Measures to cultivate Friendship with them, and especially if we deal
injuriously by them, shall we not put an Advantage into the Hands of the French
(which they will not fail of improving) to engage them in their Interest, and
to employ them against us in Time of War? which would prove a very great
Calamity to us, if not our utter Ruin. These Things considered, is it not of
very great Importance, that we be at good Terms with the neighboring Natives?

2. I will, in the ne^^ (...) ^^^eavour to show what are the likely (...) this
to pass: Or what Measures we (...) with the Indians, if we would engage them in
hearty Friendship with us.

And here, in general, our Conduct toward them must be such as shall make them
sensible that we are indeed their hearty Friends; and such also as shall
convince them that it is their Interest and Advantage to be in Friendship with
us. Nothing short of this, I apprehend, will attach them to us, so as to answer
the Ends proposed. If we often treat with them, renew the Friendship, and
bestow upon them large Presents: Or, as they phrase it, Smoke together,
brighten the Chain, or put the Brands together, to kindle up the former Fire;
and yet leave Room for them to suppose that this proceeds nor from true
Friendship, but rather from Fear of them, or from Suspicion that they will join
with our Enemies, etc. this will never be sufficient to engage them; the utmost
we can rationally expect from it is, that they will not openly break with us,
but keep up a Show of Friendship, that they may have the Benefit of future
Presents at our Hands.

Again, if we should by any Means convince them that we are their true Friends,
and yet not go into such Measures with them as should turn to their Advantage,
they would hardly be engaged for us. As all other People are governed by
Interest, so are they. And the principal Handle we can take hold of, to attach
them to us by, is their Interest, and that would not fail of doing it. If a
Tribe of Indians can sell their Skins to us for Twenty Shillings, and buy their
Blankets for Ten Shillings; they will never go to Canada where they must sell
their Skins for Ten Shillings, and give Twenty Shillings for a Blanket.
Convince them that it is much for their Interest and Advantage to be our
Friends and Allies, and we need not fear but that they will be so. Now, in
order to convince them that we are truly their Friends, and that it is their
Interest to be ours, we must,

In the first Place, treat them according to the Rules of Equity and Justice.
We must not defraud and oppress them, but be honest and just in our Dealings
with them.

The Natives, with whom we have to do, are Persons of so much Sagacity, that
they can distinguish between just and injurious Treatment, as well as other
Men. They are also as ready to resent, and perhaps more forward to revenge
Injuries, than any other People under Heaven. If therefore we treat them in an
unjust Manner, we may rationally expect that they will be so far from being our
Friends, that they will join with our Enemies, and seek Opportunities of
Revenge.

It is well known, that the Indians are generally addicted to Drunkenness, and
that when they have tasted a little Liquor, they have a strong Thirst for more,
and will part with any Thing they have, for a sufficient Quantity to make them
drunk. -- And is it not as well known, that we have taken the Advantage of this
their vicious Appetite, and for a few Quarts of Rum have purchased valuable
Effects of them? Have not private Persons thus made their Gains of them,
notwithstanding the good Laws that have been in Force to prevent it? And is not
this the Manner of all private Traders, who go among their several Tribes for
Gain?

In our public Dealings with them at our Truck-Houses, where Rum has been
freely sold them, Care has been taken that they should not be cheated, but that
they should have the full Value of what they had to sell: An Indian therefore,
who was Owner of a Pack of Beaver, Deerskins, or any other valuable Goods,
could buy a large Quantity of Rum, and might get drunk perhaps ten times, or
more; whereas, if he had fallen into private Hands, he must have contented
himself with being drunk but once or twice. Which of these proves most
injurious to the Indians in the End, I shall not pretend to determine.

When they are thus intoxicated, they fall out among themselves, fight; and
sometimes kill one another, and some have drunk themselves dead on the Spot. An
Instance of each of these there has been, if I am rightly informed, at Fort
Dummer, since that has been improved as a Truck-House. And whether the Guilt of
that Blood does not lie upon us, I leave others to judge.

Now, if we treat the Natives in this Form, will they, can they, live with us?
Will not the Law of Self-Preservation oblige them to leave us, and to go where
they may be better used? Some of the Five Nations plainly speak it out, and
say, "We cannot live with the English and Dutch; they bring us so much Rum,
that it destroys us; we must go to the French, who will let us have but little
strong Drink." Thus we alienate the Indians from us, and as it were oblige them
to go over to the French, who are often our Enemies, and fail not to employ
them against us in Time of War. And if we proceed to deal thus injuriously with
them, what can we expect but that they will leave us, and be a severe Scourge
to us?

Though the Indians, are sunk below the Dignity of human Nature, and their Lust
after Drink exposes them to be cheated out of what little they have; yet this
gives us no Right to deal unjustly by them. They have a natural Right to
Justice, and may, with great Propriety, challenge it at our Hands, seeing we
profess to be subject to the Laws of Christ, which teach us to do that which is
altogether just. And we should be so far from taking the Advantage of their
Ignorance, Vice and Poverty, to defraud them of what is their just Right, that
we should rather be moved to Pity, and compassionate their deplorable State,
and be Eyes to the Blind, etc.

I am fully persuaded, that if we were upright and just in all our Transactions
with them; if our Trade with them was put into the Hands of faithful Men, who
would deal justly by them; and if they were supplied with all Necessaries for
themselves and Families at a moderate Price, it would not be in the Power of
all the French at Canada (subtle as they are) to alienate them from us. The
French are not upon equal Ground with us in this Affair. For their Northern
Climate is much more inhospitable and severe than ours is: Their Country is not
so productive of those Fruits, which the Indians very much live upon, as ours:
Nor can they afford Goods which are proper and necessary for the Indians at so
cheap a Lay as we can: Therefore we can give them those Advantages which Canada
cannot. We can, without Damage to ourselves, make it their Interest to adhere
to us: And when Experience has once taught them, that their Interest lies with
us, they will want no other Inducement to engage them to us: Yea, it will not
only attach those of them to us, who are not yet gone to Canada, but it will
induce those who are, to return to their Brethren, for the Sake of the Profit
they might reap by it; especially if we give them all the Advantage we can,
consistent with our own.

As unjust and abusive Treatment of the Indians tends naturally to alienate
them from us, and to turn them off to the French; so a Series of just and
faithful Dealing with them would be likely to attach them to us, and to make
them our fast Friends. This again appears from the Temper and Conduct of that
Part of the Tribe of the River Indians who live at Stockbridge. For though they
were, for a considerable Time, extremely jealous, that we had some ill Design
upon them, even in the Favors they received at our Hands (a Jealousy founded,
I suppose, upon the ill Usage the Natives have too often been the Subjects of)
yet by the just Treatment they, for a Course of Years, have met with from the
Government, from Mr. Sergeant, Mr. Woodbridge, and others, they are become our
hearty Friends; willing to live or die with us, whether in Peace or War.

It is very true, that in order to obtain the End proposed, our Trade with the
Indians must not be in private Hands. It must not be in the Power of every
private Person to treat them as he pleases. We may upon good Grounds despair of
their being treated with Equity and Justice, if every one may gratify his
avaricious Temper in dealing with them. Our trade therefore must be of a
public Nature, and must be committed to the Care and Management of faithful
Men: Not to such as will seek the Service, and make Friends to procure the Post
for them; (certain Indications of a Self-seeker) but Men of Uprightness and
Integrity must be sought out; such, and such only, must be trusted with
Business of such Importance: Good Instructions must be given them, which must
be carefully adhered to.

If the Indian Trade at Canada was in private Hands; if every private Person
there might deal with the Indians at Pleasure, we might then hope that those
who are gone from us would soon return; for, in that Case, it is supposable
enough that they would not meet with much better Usage there than they do here;
though it is scarcely supposable that they would meet with much worse. The French
Trade with the Indians is wholly in the Hands of public Officers, (if I am
rightly informed) and a private Man, if he wants a Dear-skin, a Beaver-skin,
etc. is not allowed to purchase of an Indian, but must go to the public
Stores. Upon the Supposition that those Officers are faithful, and deal justly
by the Indians, it is surely a wise and politic Method to engage them in their
Favor. And so long as every private Person in the English Government is at
Liberty to trade with them, when, and where, he pleases, and to cheat them out
of what they have, what can we expect but that they will repair to Canada,
where they may be better used? Is it not owing to the ill Treatment they have
met with from the English and Dutch, that so many of them are gone already? And
if no proper Measures are taken to prevent their being ill used, will not those
who are yet behind soon follow their Brethren? Yea, if we furnish them with
large Quantities of Rum, make them drunk, and then defraud them of what they
have, do we not reduce them to a Necessity, either of living low and miserable
with us, or of going from us, that they may fare better? How low, how
dispirited, how miserable and brutish these few are, who live within our
Borders, is too manifest. And whether we, by our ill treating of them, have not
contributed to their Misery, is worthy of our serious Enquiry. Yea, would it
not be proper for us to enquire, Whether we have not, by our Neglect and Abuse
of them, provoked Heaven to let loose the Natives upon us, who have been one of
the sorest Scourges that we were ever chastised with? What Multitudes have
they, in a most cruel Manner, murdered in our Borders? How many of our
Neighbors have they led into Captivity? Some of whom have been redeemed at a
very great Expense, and others are become either Pagans or Papists, and
continue still in a foreign Land. And who can count the Cost we have been at,
to defend ourselves against their Incursions?

If the British Government should be disposed, in Time to come, to set up and
maintain a public, honest and just Trade with the Five Nations, or any other
Tribes, thereby to attach them to us, to promote their true Interest, with
other valuable Ends, that might thereby be answered; this Objection perhaps
would arise, viz. That such a Proceeding will be a very great Expense to the
Public, for our Trade cannot be safe, unless it be protected by a considerable
Force. A Fort must be built, and a Garrison of 50, 60, or perhaps 100 Men, with
their proper Officers, must be maintained at each Place where the Trade is set
up; therefore the Advantage would not countervail the Cost. To this I reply,

If such Garrisons should be thought necessary in the Places where a Trade is
set up, to be a Guard to it, the Charge would nothing like equal that of an
Indian War, which perhaps it might prevent.

But further, I apprehend that the Charge of such Garrisons might be spared;
and that, instead of being necessary, they would prove very injurious to the
Design; and that it would be a very wrong Step to be taken in that Affair.

All who are in any good Measure acquainted with the Indians know, that they
are extremely jealous, lest any Encroachments should be made upon them; and it
is not strange it should be so, considering what has past over them. And if a
Number of armed Men were placed among them, and Forts built for the Defense of
our Trade, they would be suspicious that something hostile was intended, and we
should not be able to remove the Suspicion. They would behold us with a jealous
Eye, and perhaps take Measures to frustrate the whole Design.

The most effectual Way to induce them to trust us, is to trust them; and they
will be ready enough to protect our Trade if we desire it, and show that we
confide in them to do it. And when a little Experience has taught them how
advantageous such a Trade would be to them, they would be ready enough to do
it, for their own Advantage. If therefore we should desire them to admit a
Trader into one of their own Forts, or to build a Fort at our Charge in some
convenient Place for such a Design, and to take Care that our Trade be safe;
this would tend to convince them, both of our Friendship to, and of our
Confidence in, them; and they would not only be pleased with it, but also
ambitious to show us that we may safely trust them: And were I to be the
Truck-Master, I should esteem myself much safer in their Protection, than in a
Garrison of 100 English Men: For if such a Garrison should be placed among
them, they themselves would suspect some ill Design carrying on against them;
and the French would infallibly tell them, that though we pretended Peace and
Friendship, yet our Design in the End is to dispossess them of their Country.

If indeed a Truck-Master should prove an unfaithful Servant, and enrich
himself by defrauding them, he might have Occasion for English Soldiers to
protect him and his Stores; but if they found him faithful, friendly and just
in his Dealings with them, they would be as careful of him as of their own
Eyes, and venture their own Lives for him. What would not the Indians of
Stockbridge have done for Mr. Sergeant in his Day, whom they had found to be
their true and hearty Friend? And what would they not now do for Mr.
Woodbridge, of whom they have had the like Experience? Indians will be as ready
as the English, and perhaps much more so, to serve and protect, if there be
Occasion, those whom they have found to be their faithful and real Friends.

In a Word, I apprehend, that if we had in Times past treated the Natives
according to the Rules of Equity and Justice, it would have been quite
sufficient to have engaged them in our Interest, and to have kept them in Amity
and Friendship with us; and that, even now, they might in a little Time be
attached to us, by such Treatment: But this, I confess, I despair of, if every
private Person must be left at his Liberty to treat them as he pleases, and to
defraud them of all they have; which I take to be the Case in New York
Government, who lie next to the Five Nations, and have their Trade; though in
this Province we have good Laws in Force to restrain private Persons from
selling them strong Drink.

2. We should also exercise that Kindness and Generosity toward them, that
shall convince them that it is for their Interest to be in Friendship with us.
We should not, in a Case of such Importance, content ourselves with being
barely just in our Treatment of them, but we should also be kind and generous,
as a proper Expedient to obtain the End proposed: I am aware, I shall here be
quickly interrupted with this Exclamation;

What! kind and generous to such an ungrateful evil Crew! To which I shall only
answer, We have good Authority for being kind to the Unthankful, and to the
Evil. And if that good Being who recommends it to us, had not given an Example
of it, in his Dealings with us, how deplorable had our State been? This kind
Temper and Behavior is recommended to us in the Gospel, not only because it is
the Will of our heavenly Father that we should be kind, but also because the
Exercise of it answers excellent Ends; produces very good and desirable
Effects; such as Love, Friendship, Peace, etc. And while we make a Profession
of Christianity, it is Pity the Practice of it, in so material an Article,
should be objected against. And is it not very proper that we should exercise
Kindness and Generosity to the poor Natives, when there is a strong Probability
of its being of very happy Consequence both to them and us?

A great deal of Kindness and Generosity has been exercised toward the River
Indians at Housatunnuk, by this Government, by the honorable Corporation at
Home, by their honorable and reverend Commissioners at Boston, by the Rev. Mr.
Hollis, by the Rev. Mr. Sergeant, Mr. Woodbridge, and others; and the
Consequence has been very happy as to them; they are brought to the Knowledge
of the Gospel, and to a Christian Profession; and many of them, we hope, to the
saving Knowledge of God. We also have found the Benefit of this kind Usage of
them; for thereby they are become our hearty Friends, are united to us in their
Affections, and were a Means, in the Hand of Providence, of covering our most
Western Frontiers the last War. And were the like Kindness shown by us to other
Tribes, is there not Room to hope that the Effects might be alike happy? If
Townships, suitable for Indians to settle in, were provided in our Frontiers,
and it were proposed to them, that if they would come and settle in them, they
should not only enjoy the Land as their own, but also have a Minister supported
among them to instruct them in the Christian Religion; and also a Schoolmaster
to teach their Children to read and write; would not this induce many of them,
especially of the better Sort, to come and settle in our Borders? And would
they not cover our Frontiers in case of a War with France?

What has been done for the Indians at Stockbridge, has doubtless been much
observed and approved of by the Natives far and near. That there is a School
set up at Canada, in Imitation of Mr. Sergeant's School at Stockbridge, and a
large Number of Scholars in it, we have heard and receive for Truth. That the
French, who esteem Ignorance to be the Mother of Devotion, and do not desire to
teach the Indians any Thing more than to say their Beads, and to cross
themselves, have done this out of Choice, is not at all likely. They do not
desire that their Indians should become a knowing People. But yet, being
sensible that the Report of Mr. Sergeant's School had spread itself far and
wide, and that their Indians were pleased with the Method the English had taken
to furnish the Natives with Knowledge, they apprehended, that unless something
like it were done among among them, there would be Danger of the Indians
repairing to us for Instruction, and to prevent this, and to engage them to
themselves, they set up their School. This, I conjecture, is the Truth of the
Case. And if so, it is manifest that the Indians are inclined to seek after
Knowledge; and therefore would be disposed to hearken to such kind and generous
Proposals, if they were made to them. And who can tell but that this, that, or
the other Tribe, would gladly settle such Towns, if they were invited to it in
a proper Manner?

3. Another Step, and perhaps the most promising one we can take, to engage the
Indians in Friendship with us is, to send Missionaries among their respective
Tribes, Ministers and Schoolmasters, to instruct them in the Principles, and to
persuade them to the Practice of Christianity. Though they have so long lived
near us, and been conversant with us, yet they remain ignorant of the Way of
Salvation, Strangers to the Gospel, and are perishing for lack of Knowledge: A
Case that might well move our Pity and Compassion toward them, and put us upon
doing what we can for their Relief. And whether our former Neglect of Things of
this Nature has not been provoking to Heaven, may be worthy of our serious
Enquiry.

The Interest the Rev. Mr. Barclay had in the Mohawks, while he was with them,
the Reformation of Manners he wrought among them, their Willingness to receive
Instruction, and their Engagedness to prosecute Learning, are a plain
Indication that faithful Missionaries would be welcome to them. And the Five
Nations being nearest us, and their Friendship of very great Consequence, it
might be proper to begin with them: And what has been done among them by Mr.
Barclay and others, might be no small Help in the Case. If we should send
Persons well qualified for the Business to reside among them, and support them
well, there would be no Foundation for any Jealousy that we have an ill Design
upon them, and if at any time such Jealousies should arise, they would soon
subside, upon the Indians having a little Experience of our Kindness and
Friendship to them. The prudent Conduct and faithful Labors of such
Missionaries might, by the Blessing of God, serve to remove their Barbarity,
correct their Manners, reform their Lives, promote in them virtuous Sentiments,
and by Degrees form them to true Religion. This we may hope would be the happy
Event, with Respect to many of them, though not to all; and if, by much Labor
and Expense, it might be brought to pass, should we not find our Account in it;
for what would be the Charge of supporting a few Missionaries, compared with
that of an Indian War? And is there not great Probability that such Measures
would in a few Years Time attach them to us in a hearty Friendship? And if the
Five Nations, who are a Terror to, and have in great Measure the Command of,
other Tribes, were indeed our Friends, and made so by such Obligations laid
upon them, would it not be an effectual Means of restraining other Indians from
giving us Trouble in case of a War?

The general Objection here, I am sensible, will be; -- There is no Likelihood
of succeeding, and therefore it is not worth While to make any Trial; it would
only be to spend Labor and Money to no good Purpose. To which I reply,

How can we draw the Conclusion before we have made the Experiment? Have we
ever made any proper Trial, and found ourselves disappointed? And can it be
looked upon just to draw such a Conclusion, in a Case of such Importance,
unless we had better Grounds for it?

It is true, Mr. Sergeant made a Visit to the Susquehanna Indians, Mr. Brainard
also, in his Day, did the same, without Success; but we know that the Excuse
those Indians made was, that they held their Lands of the Five Nations, and
therefore could not comply with such a Motion, till their Consent was first
obtained. And besides, shall we esteem two or three Visits made by private
Persons a sufficient Trial in this Case? Sufficient indeed it was to show that
those good Gentlemen were possessed of an excellent Spirit, and of a laudable
Zeal for the Good of the poor Natives; but yet I apprehend not sufficient to
discourage further Attempts. If those Gentlemen, who went in a private
Capacity, had sustained a public Character, perhaps they had been more
regarded. But however, when we have used our best Endeavors, and they indeed
prove unsuccessful, we may be excusable; but can we look upon ourselves so, if
we fit still, and use no Endeavors for the Help of those poor benighted People?

If proper Attempts should be made for Christianizing the Five Nations, there
would, I am sensible, some notable Difficulties lie in the Way, but yet perhaps
none but what might be surmounted.

One Difficulty that would doubtless attend such a laudable Undertaking, would
arise from those who maintain a private Trade among them, from which they reap
great Gain; especially by the Article of Rum, too much of which they convey to
them; and by the Influence of which the Indians are easily defrauded.

These Traders would be very sensible, that if Christianity should prevail
among those Nations, the Hope of their Gain would be gone, and seeing by this
Craft they have their Wealth, they would use their utmost Endeavors to
dissuade the Indians from embracing the Ways of Religion. They in Fact did so
at Housatunnuk, where the Number of Indians was small, and their Trade not so
considerable. How much more then will they do it, if Endeavors should be used
to convert the Mohawks, whose Trade is vastly more advantageous? But as the
Indians at Housatunnuk, by Mr Sergeant's Help, saw through the Artifice they
used, and were made sensible of the selfish Views of the Traders, so doubtless
the Five Nations may easily be informed, and the Obstruction soon removed.

Another Difficulty will arise from the false Insinuations of Romish
Emissaries, who will not fail to tell them, that we are about to teach them a
false Religion, and if they hearken to us, they will all certainly be damned.
But when those Indians are properly informed of the Conduct of the French, and
other Roman Catholics, how they deny the Use of the Bible to the common People
among themselves, and that they have no Design to acquaint the Indians with the
Word of God: And on the other Hand, that our Design is not to impose upon them,
but to open the Bible to them, to enable them to read it, and to judge for
themselves; will not this satisfy them of our honest Intentions toward them,
and of the Safety and Propriety of their examining Things, that they may form a
Judgment for themselves?

A third, and perhaps much the greatest Difficulty that would attend this good
Design is, that those Indians esteem themselves Christians already, and value
themselves upon their being as good Christians as their Neighbors. Mr.
Sergeant, in his Journal of November 25, 1734, says, -- The Mohawks are
generally Professors of Christanity, but for want of Instruction have but
little of it in Reality. -- They are so ignorant of the Principles of Religion,
that they know not the Difference between one who is baptized, and calls
himself a Christian, and one who lives agreeably to the Rules Christ has given
us to walk by. They are not sensible of the Necessity of being conformed to
those Rules of Virtue and Holiness which Christ has prescribed. Romish
Emissaries have baptized some of them, others (as I have been informed) have
been baptized by Dutch Ministers; and they esteem it a Privilege belonging to
them to have their Children baptized, whenever they present them, without any
Regard being had, either to the Qualifications of the Parent, or the religious
Education of the Child. When the Rev. Mr. Spencer was among them a few Years
ago, they were much displeased that he declined baptizing some Children, whose
Parents were notoriously ignorant, vicious and wicked. Some Indians from
Canada, who had an English Woman to their Mother, came a few Years past to
Westfield to visit their English Relations there, and while they staid at that
Place, they had a Child born, and were much offended with the Rev. Mr.
Balantine, who declined baptizing of it, as they desired. Since the Rev. Mr.
Edwards has been at Stockbridge, one of the Mohawks residing there had a Child
born, and was highly affronted because Mr. Edwards did not baptize it upon his
Desire. From these Instances it is evident, that they account their Children
have Right to Baptism, whenever they desire it. And being baptized, they esteem
them good Christians, whatever their Conversation may be; for they derive their
Notions of Christianity, not from the Bible (to which they are Strangers) but
from the Example of the Dutch and French, with whom they are conversant, and
who profess themselves to be Christians.

And so far forth as being baptized, in the forementioned Manner, and calling
themselves Christians will make them so, they are so to be esteemed. Now these
Things being so, it may prove a difficult Thing to make them sensible, that
Drunkenness, and other vicious Practices, are inconsistent with Christianity;
because these Christians, who fall under their Observation, give them an
Example of Vice, and go such Lengths therein.

But yet I apprehend this Difficulty might also be removed, by giving them a
just and true Account of the Nature and Extent of the Christian Religion, by
informing them what the Will of Christ is; how he expects that we should be
conformed to his Likeness, and to his Laws. The Indians are as capable of
hearing Reasons, and giving them their Weight, as other Men; and it is because
they know not what Christianity is, that they esteem themselves Christians, in
their present Circumstances. When they are made acquainted with the Terms of
Salvation, proposed in the Gospel, and what they must do that they may inherit
eternal Life; when they are well instructed in the Doctrines of Christ, they
will be sensible that the Religion which they now have, is little or nothing
like that which is taught by the Gospel. When Mr. Edwards refused to baptize a
Mohawk Child born at Stockbridge (which I have before mentioned) and they were
very much displeased with him on that Account, he went to them, gave them the
Reasons of his Conduct, and informed them as clearly as he was able, of the
Nature and End of Baptism: Those Indians received the ^orce of his Reasons, and
appeared to be satisfied and contented, when he had taken Pains to inform them.
And I doubt not but proper Instruction and Information would remove the
Difficulty I have been speaking of.

Though Christianizing those Indians may prove a difficult Work, yet if our
Endeavors might, by the divine Blessing, be succeeded, would not the Advantage
thence arising to them, and us, more than compensate the Pains and Expense we
should be at? And is there not so much Ground to hope for Success, as should
induce us to make the Experiment?

I shall now conclude, by briefly suggesting a few Things, not yet mentioned,
the serious Consideration of which may excite us to use our best Endeavors for
the Conversion of the neighboring Indians to the Christian Faith.

1. And in the first Place, should not the Consideration of the divine Bounty
and Goodness, bestowed upon us, excite us to employ Part of that undeserved
Goodness to promote the Knowledge of God, our bountiful Benefactor, among those
who are destitute of it? Through the undeserved Favor and Blessing of God, we
have been prosperous in our secular Affairs, succeeded in our Husbandry, Trade,
etc. and are become a wealthy People. And, were we as willing as we are able,
might (...) not spare large Sums for the Propagation of the Gospel among the
Heathen? Ought we not then to show our Gratitude to the glorious Author of all
our Comforts, by employing a Part of his Bounty to promote the Redeemer's
Kingdom? Is it not fit that we should thus honor the Lord with our Substance?
Does it not (...) Reproach upon us, who make an high Profession, that we expend
so little to promote the Knowledge (...) among the Natives, and so much to ill
Purposes? Were what we employ in unnecessary Expenses, by which Pride and
Luxury are indulged and nourished, employed in the laudable Method I am
recommending; would it not be sufficient well to support a Multitude of
Missionaries among the neighboring Tribes? Would it not probably be a Means of
turning many of them from the Power of Satan to God? And would it not be an
Odor of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God Phil. iv 18
? And seeing God, by his Blessings, has enabled us to contribute to such a good
Design, should we not cheerfully give of our Substance, for the spiritual
Benefit of the perishing Heathen?

2. Should not the Light and Grace of the Gospel, which we, through divine
Goodness enjoy, by a stronger Argument still to ex^^te us to endeavor the
Conversion of the Heathen?

A few Generations back we were in a State of Heathenism, as they now are:
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel -- and without God in the World Ephesians.
ii. 1^.
. But, through divine Goodness, the Day spring from on High has visited us, and
we enjoy the Light and Privileges of the Gospel Dispensation. Seeing then God
has had Compassion on us, and bestowed upon us those richest Blessings, ought
we not to have Compassion on the neighboring Heathen, and use our best
Endeavors that they also may be made Partakers of the Light and Blessings of
the Gospel?

3. Should we not be moved to such charitable Endeavors from the Consideration
of the wretched and forlorn Circumstances, in which the poor Natives appear
before our Eyes? We often behold those piteous Objects, appearing half naked,
and almost starved; which is the Effect of their vicious Way of Living. We see
them also in the Depths of Ignorance and Barbarity; wholly unacquainted with
the Way of Salvation, and quite unconcerned for their eternal Good: And yet
their Powers, both of Body and Mind, are not inferior to our own. Were they
brought to Civility and Industry, they might stand upon equal Ground with us,
respecting the Comforts of Life; and were they instructed in divine Things,
made acquainted with the great and important Truths of the Gospel, they might
stand as fair for the Kingdom of Heaven as we do. Should not our Eyes therefore
affect our Hearts, when we behold them in such miserable Circumstances? And
should we not exert ourselves in all proper Ways for their Help? Did the Wounds
of the poor Man half dead, who fell among Thieves, plead with so much Eloquence
for human Compassion, as the unhappy State of the poor Natives does for
Christian Charity? And if the Compassion of a Samaritan was moved by the
former, how much more should the Bowels of a Christian be moved by the latter?

4. The noble Example of some generous and pious Persons, at Home, may well
excite us to liberal Contributions for the Benefit of the poor Heathen.

Not only public Societies, but also private Persons, in Great Britain, have
generously and liberally contributed for the Benefit of the Natives, in this
distant Part of the World. Though they are at 3000 Miles Distance, and never
beheld, as we do, those miserable Objects; yet, from a truly pious and generous
Spirit, they have sent over their liberal Contributions, that the Heathen, by
their Means, may be informed in the Way of Life. Verily, they shall not lose
their Reward. A noble Example they set before us, most worthy our Imitation:
And how can we excuse ourselves, if we neglect to copy after it? Some indeed
may plead their Inability, but this is not the Case of all. Are there not among
us many wealthy Merchants and Traders? Are there not also many Farmers, who
abound in Wealth, upon the Lands which were, a few Years ago, the Property of
the Indians, who now stand in Need of their Charity? Should not such Persons be
moved, by the generous Examples of others, to help forward the noble Design of
converting the Heathen? Yea, are not the People in general able to do something
to help forward so good a Design? And will it not lie as a Reproach upon us, if
we, who make a high Profession of Religion, prove void of Charity, when we are
so loudly called to the Exercise of it, not only by the laudable Example of
generous Benefactors at Home; but also by the perishing Circumstances of the
neighboring Indians?

I shall only add my hearty Wishes, that this American Continent, which, for
Ages unknown, has been a Seat of Darkness, and full of the Habitations of
Cruelty, may become a Scene of Light and Love; that the Heathen in it, who have
been wont to thirst after Blood, may hunger and thirst after Righteousness;
That the Wilderness and solitary Place may be glad for them, the Desert rejoice
and blossom as the Rose; -- That the Glory of Lebanon may be given unto it, the
Excellency of Carmel and Sharon; That they may see the Glory of the Lord, and
the Excellency of our God Isaiah xxxv. 1, 2.
.

FINIS.

