MINUTES OF CONFERENCES, HELD WITH THE INDIANS, At HARRIS'S FERRY, and at
LANCASTER, In March, April, and May, 1757.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. MDCCLVII.

MINUTES OF CONFERENCES, etc.
From GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire to the Honorable Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, Baronet, His
MAJESTY's sole Agent, and Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations,
their Allies and Dependents.
May it please your HONOR,
IN Pursuance of your Instructions, as soon as I was informed of the Indians
being come to John Harris's, I set off from Philadelphia to meet them, and
arrived at John Harris's the 29th of March, 1757, where I met about One Hundred
and Sixty Indians, Men, Women and Children, Part of eight Tribes.

The Thirtieth, I examined Joseph Peepy, and Lewis Montour, in regard to the
Messages I had sent by them to the Sasquchannah Indians.

They informed me, that Teedyuscung was gone to the Seneca Country, to get a
Number of the Senecas to come down with him; and they delivered me a Belt of
Wampum sent me by Teedyuscung, in Return of mine sent him by them; by which
Belt he informs me, that he will be down as soon as possible, with Two Hundred
Indians, but could not tell, whether he would come in at Easton or at John
Harris's.

The remaining Part of this Day I spent in getting what Intelligence I could of
the Strength of the French on Ohio, and the Disposition of the Delawares and
Shawanese; and by the best Accounts I can get, I find the French have not had
above Three Hundred Men in Garrison at Ohio this Winter, and that the Delawares
and Shawanese on Ohio were divided amongst themselves, one Half of each Tribe
going down Ohio to where the Lower Shawanese are settled, and the other Half
were determined to go off to the Six Nations.

I am informed, that all the Sasquehanna Indians are disposed for Peace, except
the Munseys, or Minisink Indians; yet I understand that a Number of them will
be down with Teedyuscung.

I am informed, by a Six Nation Indian, one of Reputation amongst them, that
resided at Diahago, that as soon as Joseph Peepy and Lewis Montour had
delivered their Message there, the Council, that Night, dispatched two Men to
the Ohio, to inform the Delawares and Shawanese, living there, of this Meeting,
desiring some of them to come to it; but if none of them should choose to come,
these Messengers were then to insist that none of the Delawares and Shawanese,
living on the Ohio, should come to War against the English till this Meeting
was over, and they have Time, after returning Home, to let them know how it
ended:

At a MEETING of the Six Nations and their Allies, and George Croghan, Esquire
Deputy Agent to the Honorable Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, Baronet, His Majesty's sole
Agent and Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations, their Allies and
Dependents, and by his special Order, at John Harris's, the First Day of April,
1757.
PRESENT, The Reverend Mr. John Elder. Captain Thomas Mc Kee, Mr. James
Armstrong, Mr. Hugh Crawford, Mr. John Harris. William Prentup, Interpreter.
Mohawks. Tiahansorea, Connadagaughia, Sogehoanna, Peter, With 31 others, Men,
Women and Children.
Oneidoes. Thomas King, Scarroyady, Tawnaquanagis, With Thirteen others, Men,
Women and Children.
Tuscaroras. Rut King, With Twenty-six others, Men, Women and Children.
Onondagoes. Ossaratonqua, and his two Brothers, with Eighteen others, Men,
Women and Children.
Cayugas. Ogaratawrea, Orarroquare, Jenkasarone, With 20 others, Men, Women and
Children.
Senecas. George, With Eight more, Men, Women and Children.
Nanticokes. Robert White, Joshua, With Eleven more, Men, Women and Children.
Delawares. Samuel, Joseph Peepy, Thomas Evans, Jonathan, with 20 more, Men,
Women and Children.
Connestogoes. Sabays, Captain John, With Twenty-nine more, Men, Women and
Children.



Brethren,

I AM sent here by the Honorable Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, to represent him at this
Meeting; and I desire you all to give Attention to what I am going to say to
you in Behalf of your Brother Onas and the wise Men of this Government, who are
truly sensible of your Afflictions, occasioned by the Death of many of your
Counselors and Warriors, since they had the Pleasure of seeing you in this
Government; and as they have ever looked upon your Misfortunes as their own,
they mix their Tears with yours, and have desired me to condole with you,
agreeable to the ancient Custom of our Forefathers.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

With this Belt of Wampum I wipe the Blood off the Seats round your Council
Fire, that your old Men at this critical Juncture, when convened in Council,
may sit with Comfort, and direct their Warriors with Wisdom.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

As I have wiped the Blood off the Seats round your Council Fire, I, with these
Strouds, wrap up the Bodies of your deceased Friends, and bury them decently,
covering their Graves with these Blankets and Halfthicks.

Gave the Goods.

Brethren,

As the Blood is wiped off the Seats of your Counselors, the Dead decently
buried, and their Graves covered, I, with this Belt of Wampum, wipe the Tears
from your Eyes, and desire you may mourn no more.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

As you are now out of Mourning, I with this Belt of Wampum disperse the dark
Clouds which are gathered over your Heads, that you may see the Sun clear, and
shake Hands with your Brethren when you meet in Council.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

As we have now gone through the ancient Customs used by our Forefathers upon
their Meeting, I with this Belt of Wampum heal your Hearts, and free your Minds
from Trouble, that we may meet each other in Council, and brighten the Chain of
Friendship.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

I now wipe the Sweat off your Bodies after your long Journey, and bid you a
hearty Welcome to this Government in the Name of your Brother Onas.

Gave a String.

Sachems and Warriors of the Six United Nations, our Friends and Brethren,

I embrace this Opportunity of acquainting you, that last Year your Brother
Onas held two Conferences at Easton with your Nephews the Delawares, and your
Brethren the Shawanese, that live on Sasquehannah, in order to settle the
Differences subsisting between them and us; but as that good Work could not be
accomplished at that Time, they agreed to have a Meeting this Spring to finally
settle all Differences subsisting between them and us their Brethren: And that
this Meeting might be the more general, I dispatched Messengers up
Sasquehannah, and to Ohio, and I wrote to your Brother, Sir William Johnson,
desiring him to request a Number of you our Brethren, the Six United Nations,
to be present at this Meeting, who I am heartily glad to see here; and when
your Nephews and Brothers arrive, I am in great Hopes, by your Assistance, to
be able to accommodate Matters to the mutual Satisfaction of both them and us
their Brethren the English in the several Governments.

And by this Belt of Wampum, I request you to make use of all your Interest
with your Nephews the Delawares, and Brothers the Shawanese, to bring about an
Accommodation between them and us, that the Sun may once more shine upon us in
Peace, and that the Peace may last as long as the Sun, the Moon and the Stars
give Light.

Gave a Belt.

At a MEETING with the Indians, at John Harris' s, April 2, 1757.
PRESENT, The Reverend Mr. Elder, Captain Thomas Mc Kee, Mr. James Armstrong,
Mr. Hugh Crawford, Mr. John Harris. The Deputies of the Six United Nations, The
Delawares, and Nanticokes. Scarroyady, Speaker for the Indians. William
Prentup, Interpreter.


Brother,

YOU and our Brother Onas wisely considered the ancient Custom of our
Forefathers, in condoling with us, and mixing your Grief with ours: And as we
make no Doubt but some of your wise Counselors are dead since we were here,
and many of our Brethren have been killed by the evil Spirit, we wipe the Blood
off your Council Seats, and put them in Order with this Belt of Wampum.

Gave a Belt,

Brother,

After wiping the Blood off your Council-Seats, we, with these few Skins, wrap
up the Bones of our Brethren that died or were killed by the evil Spirit, and
cover their Graves.

Gave a small Bundle of Skins.

Brother,

We, by this Belt of Wampum, wipe the Tears from your Eyes, and desire you may
mourn no more.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

We, with this Belt of Wampum, disperse the dark Clouds, that the Sun may
always shine upon us in Friendship; we heal your Heart, and free your Mind from
Trouble, that we may meet each other in Council, and brighten the Chain of
Friendship made by our Forefathers; and that the Council Fire may burn clear,
we throw a few Chips on it.

Gave a Belt.

This Evening I had a Meeting of the Sachems, and proposed the Going to
Philadelphia, to hold the Treaty; but I could prevail on none of them, except
the Mohawks, to go there; the rest were afraid of Sickness.

When I found they were not to be prevailed on to go there, I called a Council,
and, with a Belt of Wampum, I removed the Council Fire to Lancaster; to which
Place they all agreed to go, and wait the Arrival of Teedyuscung, with the
Senecas, Delawares, and Shawanese.

Gave a Belt, to remove the Council Fire to Lancaster.

April the 7th, I arrived at Lancaster from John Harris's; from whence Mr.
Shippen, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Boude, and Captain Cane, with a Number of other
Gentlemen, Inhabitants of that Borough, went out with me to meet the Indians
(who I had left a few Miles behind) to bid them welcome to Lancaster.

As soon as the Indians were settled at the Place taken for them by James
Wright, Esquire I then kindled a small Fire for them to sit by till they should
hear from their Brother Onas of the Arrival of Teedyuscung.

April the 10th, I received a Letter from his Honor the Governor, acquainting
me of the Arrival of Fifty Delawares and Shawanese at Fort-Allen, and that they
were ordered to wait there the Arrival of Teedyuscung, with the rest of the
Indians who were coming with him.

I immediately ordered a Meeting of the Indians, and acquainted them with what
the Governor had wrote me about the Arrival of the Delawares and Shawanese at
Fort-Allen, which was very agreeable to them.

I then acquainted them, by a Belt of Wampum, that their Brother Onas had
prepared a very convenient Place for them within a Mile of Philadelphia, and
that he proposed to hold the Conference at Philadelphia, as Teedyuscung had, at
the last Treaty at Easton, given his Honor the Governor a Promise to come to
Philadelphia this Spring.

The Indians, after considering what had been said to them, returned the
following Answer.

Brother,

We have considered what you said to us from our Brother Onas; when you
proposed to us, at John Harris's, to go to Philadelphia, we refused for the
Reasons we then gave you. By the Message you sent us by (...) and (...), we
understood that the Delawares and Shawanese were to fix the Place of Meeting
where they thought proper.

Brother,

We tell you we will sit where we are till they arrive and fix the Place of
Meeting with our Brother Onas.

Returned the Belt of Wampum.

April the 11th, I delivered the Goods purchased by James Wright, Esquire for the
Indians, in the Presence of Mr. James Webb, which was well received by them.

After the Goods were divided, the Chiefs of the several Tribes came in a Body,
and returned Thanks to the Government for the Clothing they had received.

The 13th, the several Chiefs came to me, and told me, they observed that I
gave no Clothing to our Brothers the Connestogoes, and desired that I would
give them some, else they should be obliged to give them Part of what had been
given them.

Gave a String.

The 17th, I called a Meeting of all the Indians, and returned them Thanks for
condoling with me at John Harris's for the Loss we their Brethren the English
had sustained by Death and the evil Spirit.

Brethren,

I return you Thanks for mixing your Grief with ours, and wiping the Blood off
our Council Seats.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

I give you Thanks for wrapping up the Bones of our deceased Brothers, and
covering the Graves, and wiping the Tears from our Eyes.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

I return you Thanks for dispersing the dark Clouds from over our Heads, for
healing our Hearts, and freeing our Minds from Trouble, and for brightening the
Chain of Friendship made by our Forefathers.

Gave a Belt.

April the 20th, I received a Letter from his Honor Governor Denny, enclosing
two Messages from Teedyuscung to the Governor, which were delivered to Major
Parsons in Easton, and forwarded by him.

As soon as I received his Honor's Letter, I called a Meeting of the Indians,
and repeated over to them the Messages, and let them know, that Teedyuscung's
being so long detained on the Way was the Scarcity of Provisions; and then
acquainted them, that his Honor the Governor had ordered a Supply to be sent
to meet them, for which the Indians returned his Honor the Governor their
hearty Thanks, and said, their Brother Onas's sending Provisions to meet their
Cousins on the Road, was giving them the strongest Assurances of his Regard and
Esteem for them.

Gave a String of Wampum.

April the 23d, Six Onondago Warriors applied to me for Liberty to go to Fort
Cumberland, to join the Southward Indians, who they understood were going to
War against His Majesty's Enemies at Ohio; I granted their Request, and fitted
them out for their Journey.

April the 26th, Scarroyady, with a Party of Mohawk Warriors, came and told me
that they were apprehensive the French would make some Attempt against
Fort-Augusta, and desired I would fit them out to go there; to which I agreed,
giving them Orders to reconnoitre the adjacent Woods, for a few Days, then to
proceed toward the Ohio, and to reconnoitre the Country well as they went, and
if they discovered any Body of French, or Parties of Indians, coming toward
Fort-Augusta, or any Part of this or the neighboring Governments, they were
immediately to return and give Notice to the Commanding Officer at
Fort-Augusta, or to the Commanding Officer of the Fort nighest to that Part of
the Country where they should come into.

The 26th of April, P. M. the Chiefs of the several Tribes called a Meeting,
and sent for me, and desired to know what Time they might expect their Brother
Onas up, and their Nephews the Delawares, and Brothers the Shawanese, to hold
the Conference.

To which I answered, I had not yet received any certain Account of the Arrival
of the Delawares and Shawanese; and until the Governor had fixed the Place and
Time of Meeting with Teedyuscung, I could not give them a full Answer.

To which Little Abraham, a Mohaw^ Sachem, spoke as follows, in Behalf of the
Whole.

Brother,

We have been here a great while, and the Spring is coming on fast: It is Time
for us to think of going Home to plant. We have heard what you have said to us
from our Brother Onas, both at John Harris's and here, that our Brother Onas
proposed to hold the Treaty at Philadelphia. Every Time you spoke to us upon
that Head, we gave you our Objections against going so far down, which we
expected would have been considered before now; but as our Brother Onas has not
yet agreed to come here, we have determined in our own Minds to treat with our
Brother Onas here, and go no further down the Country.

Brother,

We have appointed three Men to go to Philadelphia to speak with our Brother
Onas, and request of him to come up, and we desire you will find Horses for
them to ride down, and a Man to go with them to the Governor.

And we have appointed three more to go and meet our Nephews the Delawares, and
Brothers the Shawanese, and bring them here, and we desire you will find them
Horses, and a Man to go and take Care of them, and provide Necessaries for them
on the Road.

Gave a String.

May the 5th, P. M. Captain Trent returned from Bethlehem, with the Deputies
that went from here to meet the Delawares and Shawanese, and brought with them
four Delaware Men, and one Woman.

About two Hours afterward, Captain M'Kee returned from Philadelphia, with the
Deputies who were sent down to the Governor to invite him here to hold the
Conference.

May the 6th, I called a Meeting of the Chiefs of the several Tribes, when
William Logan, Esquire a Member of his Honor the Governor's Council, returned the
Governor's Answer to the Message sent him by Thomas King, and Rut King.

Brethren, the Deputies of the Six United Nations, and your Cousins and
Brethren the Delawares.

I am sent to you by your Brother Onas, from Philadelphia, as a Member of his
Council, and your very good Friend, and I desire you will attend to what I am
now going to say to you, and consider my Words as if they were spoken by Onas
himself.

Gave a String.

Brethren,

A few Days since, Thomas King, and Rut King, accompanied by Thomas M'Kee, as
their Guide, came to me in Philadelphia, and informed me, by this Belt of
Wampum, that you held a Council Fire at Lancaster, and had sent for our Friend
George Croghan to it, and had made a Speech to him; in which you acquainted
him, that on his Invitation you came to John Harris's, understanding the
Council Fire was to be kindled there; that after you had staid there some Time,
you were desired to accompany him to Lancaster, and that I would meet you
there; that therefore you had appointed these two Indians to wait on me, and to
take me by the Hand, and invite me to your Council; that you had determined
among yourselves to come no further, and would be glad to see me, and that my
coming would rejoice your Hearts.

Brethren,

You must be very sensible, that in the transacting Public Affairs, in these
troublesome Times, many Difficulties and unforeseen Accidents happen which
require my particular Attendance in Philadelphia; this is my present Case. And
as Teedyuscung, the Chief of the Delawares, our Countryman, and your Cousin,
with some other Chiefs and Head Men of that Nation, has sent me lately a
Message, acquainting me, that he was on his Way, with a great Number of
Indians, coming to meet me, in order to finish the Treaty of Peace begun last
Year by our late Governor and myself with the said Chiefs, and desired me to be
ready with my Counselors to assist in finishing the said Treaty which was so
happily begun, and that I would be so kind as to send for Moses Tatamy, and
John Pumpshire (two Delaware Indian Interpreters) from the Jerseys, to be
present; and that as there was so great a Number of Indians who were coming
with him, they would want Provisions on their Way, and desired I would send
some to Wyoming for them, which I immediately complied with. These, Brethren,
have been the Reasons for my delaying my Journey to meet you at Lancaster, and
for my desiring George Croghan would endeavor to prevail on you our Brethren
to come to the Council Fire at Philadelphia, where the old wise People, who are
your hearty Friends, would have been exceeding glad to see you; and as I have
heard nothing from Teedyuscung very lately, I am uneasy left some Accident has
happened to him. I thank you very kindly for your affectionate Invitation: I
accept of it, and will, with great Pleasure, come and consult with you at your
Council Fire at Lancaster.

Gave a Belt of eight Rows.

May the 9th, three of the Messengers I sent to the Ohio returned, and make the
following Report.

That on their Arrival at Venango (an old Indian Town) on Ohio, they found
several of the Delawares there, one, named Castalago, their Chief. They
immediately called a Meeting, and delivered the Speeches sent by them, which
were very well received by the Delawares; who told them, in Answer, That they
would accept of the Invitation, and come down with them; but that they must
first go and consult their Uncles the Senecas, who lived further up the River.
The next Day they set off to a little Town further up the River Ohio, where
they summoned a Number of the Delawares and Senecas together. After repeating
the Messages over, one of the Senecas, named Garistagee, one of the Chiefs,
said to the Delawares; Nephews, You must not accept of that Call, for the Belts
which are sent you are not proper Belts on this Occasion. I know George Croghan
very well, and would be very glad to see him; and if he will send a proper
Belt, with Men wrought in it, for the several Tribes he wants to meet with
(himself taking us by the Hand) made of old Council Wampum, which is the Custom
of the Six Nations on these Occasions, I will go down with you and see him: To
which the Delawares agreed, and then returned the Belts.

They say that one of the Messengers proceeded further, to where the Delawares,
that lived formerly at Kittanning, were now settled, on Beaver-Creek, with a
View of finding out the Dispositions of them; and they expect he will be soon
down, if not killed. These Messengers say, that there were but fifteen
Frenchmen at Venango, and that the Fort there is very weak; and that the
Indians in them Parts are very much distressed for Provisions.

They say that the Ohio Indians are much afraid of the Southern Indians, having
been struck three Times by them this Spring, twice near Fort Du Quesne, and
once at the Logs-Town; and that the Indians are moving fast up the Ohio toward
the Senecas.

They heard from the Indians there, that the French were defeated at Fort
William-Henry, and that there was another Party defeated by Sir William
Johnson, at the German-Flats; and the French were determined yet to make
another Trial against the English, but that they could not tell where they
intended to strike next.

They say the two Men killed at Fort Augusta, were killed by the Delawares and
French, which was the only Party of Delawares or Shawanese that has come
against us this Spring; that the other Parties that have been on the Frontiers
of this and the neighboring Provinces, were Indians from over the Lakes; that
the Delawares made great Game of the Lake Indians, and told those Messengers,
that one Party of them, who had been down, had, on their Return, killed and eat
three of the English Prisoners, for want of Food; that there was an Account
came there whilst they were at Venango, that the French Conewagas had differed
with the French, because the French would not supply them with Provisions; the
Difference rose so high at last, that they came to Blows; that Sixty of the
Conewagas were killed, and a great Number of the French.

I quere the Truth of this News, as the French undoubtedly know their Interest
too well to differ with the Conewagas at this Time.

These Messengers, on their Return, touched at Diabogo, where they met with
Teedyuscung, who enquired of them what they had been doing at Ohio; they
repeated over to him the Messages that had been sent by them from this
Government, and the Answer they had received from the Ohio Indians; on which
Teedyuscung sent the following Message by them to their Brother Onas and me.

Brothers,

YOU have been at a great deal of Trouble in sending Messages to us, your
Brothers the Delawares and Shawanese; but the Persons you employed are young
Warriors, and not Counselors, theresore unsit for such Business; likewise the
Belts you have sent, in Comparison, are no more than Strings; but if you will
send to call us together, and send proper Belts, and wise Men to take us by the
Hand, we will come down with them, and give you a Meeting. In which Meeting I
hope we shall settle all Differences subsisting between us; and I assure you,
by this Belt of Wampum, that our Minds are well disposed, and that our Hearts
are warm and true toward you our Brothers the English; and we desire that you,
as Messengers from our Brothers, may take this Belt to Capt. Thomas M'Kee, and
let him deliver it in our Name to our Brother Onas and George Croghan.

Gave the Belt.

Brothers

There is one Thing that gives us a great deal of Concern, which is, our Flesh
and Blood that lives among you at Bethlehem, and in the Jerseys, being kept as
if they were Prisoners. We formerly applied to the Minister at Bethlehem, to
let our People come back at Times and hunt, which is the chief Industry we
follow to maintain our Families; but that Minister has not listened to what we
have said to him, and it is very hard that our People have not the Liberty of
coming back to the Woods, where Game is plenty, and to see their Friends.

They have complained to us, that they cannot hunt where they are; and if they
go into the Woods, and cut down a Tree, they are abused for it, notwithstanding
that very Land we look upon to be our own; and we hope, Brothers, that you will
consider this Matter, and let our People come into the Woods, and visit their
Friends, and pass and repass, as Brothers ought to do.

Gave a String.

Lancaster, Monday, May the 9th, This Evening the Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire
Governor of this Province, attended by a Number of his Council, a Number of the
House of Representatives, the Commissioners for the Province, with a great
Number of other Gentlemen, arrived here.

May the 10th, The Sachems of the several Tribes, with a Number of their chief
Warriors, waited on the Governor at Mr. George Gibson's, in Lancaster; when the
Governor, with the Gentlemen that attended him, took them by the Hands, bid
them welcome, and his Honor made them the following Speech.

Brethren,

I give you a very hearty Welcome, agreeable to my Message by Mr. Logan. I have
waited all this Time at Philadelphia, expecting the Arrival of Teedyuscung, as
the principal Business to be transacted at this Meeting is between this
Government and your Cousins the Delawares and Shawanese; but receiving your
kind Invitation, I have hastened here, and am glad to see you.

At a MEETING in the Courthouse, in the Town of Lancaster, on Thursday, the
12th of May, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province
of Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex, on Delaware.
James Hamilton, Esquire, Member of the Governor's Council. William Logan,
Esquire, Member of the Governor's Council. Richard Peter's, Esquire, Member of
the Governor's Council. Lyn-Ford Lardner, Esquire, Member of the Governor's
Council. John Mifflin, Esquire, Member of the Governor's Council. Benjamin
Chew, Esquire, Member of the Governor's Council. Isaac Norris, Esquire, the
Speaker, and Committee of the House of Representatives. William Masters,
Esquire, the Speaker, and Committee of the House of Representatives. Joseph
Galloway, Esquire, the Speaker, and Committee of the House of Representatives.
John Baynton, Esquire, the Speaker, and Committee of the House of
Representatives. George Ashbridge, Esquire, the Speaker, and Committee of the
House of Representatives. William West, Esquire, the Speaker, and Committee of
the House of Representatives. The Magistrates of the Borough, with a great
Number of other Gentlemen. The Deputies of the Mohawks, Oneidoes, Tuscaroras,
Onondagoes, Cayugas, with some Senecas, Nanticokes, and Delawares. William
Prentup, Interpreter for the Crown. Conrad Weiser, Esquire Interpreter for the
Province.


On opening the Meeting, his Honor the Governor asked me, as I represented the
Honorable Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON at this Treaty, if I was provided with a
Secretary: Upon answering I was provided with one, his Honor then gave Orders
that no Person else should take any Notes.

Then the Governor made the following Speech.

Brethren of the United Nations,

YOU are sensible of the unhappy Differences that have subsisted for some Time
past between us, the People of Pennsylvania, the English in the several
Colonies, and our Brethren and Countrymen, the Delawares and Shawanese, your
Nephews and Brothers.

By the Mediation of Sir William Johnson, His Majesty's sole Agent and
Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Northern District of America, a
Cessation of Arms was agreed upon, and they, at a Conference held in Otsaningo,
promised to lay down their Hatchet; which Agreement they since ratified and
confirmed in another Conference with that Gentleman in your Presence; at which
Time Sir William desired to know what was the Cause of their committing
Hostilities on their Brethren the English, which Question they did not then
give a full Answer to. But at a subsequent Treaty with me at Easton, in
November last, the same Question being put to Teedyuscung, he frankly
acknowledged that their foolish young Men, being deluded by our Enemy, the
false hearted French King, were persuaded to take up the Hatchet against us.
This, he said, was the first and principal Cause; but that one Reason why the
Blow fell the heavier on us was, that their Brother Onas had fraudulently
possessed himself of some of their Lands, without having first purchased, or
given any Consideration for them.

Gave a Belt of nine Rows.

Being very desirous that all Causes of Discontent should be removed, I
proposed that the Matter should then be finally accommodated; but Teedyuscung
declaring, that he was not sufficienty empowered to finish that Business,
declined it, and desired another Meeting this Spring, when he engaged to bring
with him those Indians to whom the said Lands belonged, at which Time this
Complaint might be fully heard, and amicably adjusted.

Gave a Belt of nine Rows.

Having the greatest Confidence in the Friendship and Justice of our Brethren
the Six Nations, I immediately acquainted Sir William Johnson with these
Proceedings, and requested that he would be pleased to send some of the wise
Men of those Nations to be present and assist at the proposed Meeting. I
expected Teedyuscung would have been here before this Time, and am greatly
concerned at his Stay.

It would afford me great Satisfaction, if it had suited your Convenience to
wait his Arrival; but as you have informed me your Business will not admit of
being longer absent from your Country, if you can now think of any Measure that
may be likely to promote the good Work in which we are engaged, and establish a
firm and lasting Friendship between us and your Nephews, you shall find me
sincerely disposed to join with you in doing every Thing in my Power conducive
to so desirable an End. In Confirmation whereof, I give you this Belt of
thirteen Rows.

Gave the Belt.

At a MEETING in the Courthouse, Friday, May 13, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. The Council.
The Committee of the Assembly. The Magistrates of the Borough, and a great
Number of other Gentlemen. The same Indians. Thomas King, an Oneido Sachem,
Speaker for the Indians. Little Abrabam, a Mohawk Sachem, Speaker for the
Indians. William Prentup, Interpreter for the Crown. Conrad Weiser, Esquire
Interpreter for the Province.


Little Abraham opened the Meeting, addressing himself to the Governor as
follows.

Brother,

AFTER you had done speaking to us Yesterday, you left the Appointing the Time
for the next Meeting to us. We are now met in Council, and I desire you to
listen to what we are going to say.

Thomas King then got up, and repeated over the two first Speeches made to them
by the Governor Yesterday, and returned his Honor Thanks, for acquainting them
with the particular Circumstances that happened during the Course of the
Conference at Easton last Fall, between his Honor and the Delawares and
Shawanese; and expressed the great Satisfaction it gave them to hear that their
Brother Onas was to fortunate as to find out the true Causes from whence the
Difference arose between their Brethren the English, and their Nephews the
Delawares, and their Brothers the Shawanese, for that they had taken a great
Deal of Pains to find it out without Success.

Gave a Belt.

Thomas then addressed himself to the Governor, and said, he hoped, that if
they should make any Blunders, or have forgot any Part of the Speech, he would
excuse them, as they could not write; therefore were obliged to keep every
Thing in their Memory.

Gave a Belt.

Little Abraham then desired the Governor to give Attention, as they were going
to return an Answer to his Honor's last Speech; and after he had repeated over
the last Speech delivered them by the Governor Yesterday, he spoke as follows.

Brother,

You desired our Advice in Regard to the Differences that arose between you and
our Nephews the Delawares, and Brothers the Shawanese; and you desired us to
give you our Opinion which would be the best Method now to pursue to bring
about an Accommodation: We have considered what you required of us. Brothers,
We are disappointed, by the Heads of our Relations not coming to this Meeting;
it was on their Account that we met our Brothers at this Time. -- If they had
come here at this Time, we should have sat still, and heard the Complaints on
each Side, then we should have been the better able to judge who was in the
Fault, and would have given our Opinion freely: However, as Things now stand,
we must inform you, our Brothers, That in the Time of our Great-Grand-Fathers,
and when the Six Nations first united, it was agreed that the Seneca Country
should be the Door to the Six Nations, into which all Messengers should pass in
Time of War, and there deliver their Messages, and the Senecas, our Brothers,
were to forward the Messages to all the United Nations.

But in the Differences subsisting at present between you and our Nephews and
Brothers, we have heard nothing from that Quarter, though we are sensible that
Messengers arrived there upon this Affair. And as we, the Mohawks, are a Door
to the Eastward of the Six Nation Country, established at the same time with
that to the Westward, finding that they neglected their Offices, we took the
Affair in Hand, and sent Messengers to Otsaningo, and there a Council was held,
and the Deputies we sent charged them to get sober, as we looked upon their
Actions as the Actions of drunken Men: This was the Substance of the Speeches
sent to them. -- They returned for answer, That they looked upon themselves as
Men, and would acknowledge no Superiority that any other Nation had over them.
-- We are Men, and are determined not to be ruled any longer by you as Women;
and we are determined to cut off all the English, except those that may make
their Escape from us in Ships; so say no more to us on that Head, lest we cut
off your private Parts, and make Women of you, as you have done of us. In the
mean time, though they did not any longer acknowledge the Six Nations as their
Uncles, yet they would listen to what Anugh Kary Tany Tionen Holorowy should
say to them. -- Him only they acknowledged for their Uncle. -- Notwithstanding
this rash Speech, they afterward, at the Instance of Sir William Johnson,
agreed to a Cessation of Arms, to come to an Interview with him and their
Brother Onas.

Now, Brother, our Advice is to you, that you send proper Messengers
immediately to the Senecas, to invite them, with our Nephews the Delawares, and
Brothers the Shawanese, to a Meeting with you here; and when they come, be very
careful in your Proceedings with them, and do not be rash, and it will be in
your Power to settle all the Differences subsisting between you and them: And we
assure you, Brethren, by this Belt of Wampum, that we will continue our good
Offices till this Affair is brought to a happy Conclusion.

Gave a Belt, marked G. R.

At a MEETING at the Courthouse, Monday, May 16, 1757, A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. The Honorable
Colonel JOHN STANWIX. The Council. The Committee of Assembly. The Magistrates
of the Borough, with a great Number of other Gentlemen. The same Indians.
William Prentup, Interpreter for the Crown. Conrad Weiser, Esquire Interpreter for
the Province. Little Abraham, a Mohawk Sachem, Speaker for the Indians. Thomas
King, an Oneido Sachem, Speaker for the Indians.


The Governor spoke as follows.

Brethren of the United Nations,

I HAVE duly considered what you were so kind to say to me the other Day, in
Answer to my peech to you; and I return you my hearty Thanks for your
Information and Advice as to what you judge proper to be done for the
Restoration of Peace between us, your Cousins the Delawares, and Brethren the
Shawanese.

We look upon your informing us of that close Connection, at present subsisting
between your Cousins and the Seneca Nations, of which we were till now
ignorant, as the greatest Mark of your Regard and Esteem for us. -- Brothers,
Your Advice is good and wholesome, and I shall, in Pursuance of it, send an
Invitation to Teedyuscung to come down, and leave it entirely to his Choice to
bring with him such and so many of his Uncles, and others his Friends, as he
thinks proper, and will then cautiously and carefully pursue your Advice in
treating with them.

In the mean time, if, on your Return, you should meet with Teedyuscung, I
desire you will let him know what has been done between us at this Meeting, and
advise him of the Continuance of the good Disposition of the People of this
Province toward him and his People; and that we are ready to fulfill the
Engagements we entered into with him at Easton, and shall be glad to see him
and his Friends, as soon as they can conveniently come.

Gave a Belt.

Little Abraham then stood up, with the Belt delivered them by the Governor in
his Hand, and repeated over the Speech made them on it; then addressing himself
to the Governor, he spoke as follows.

Brother Onas,

We return you Thanks for accepting of our Advice; and we make no Doubt, if you
pursue the Measures we have recommended, but that your Endeavors will be
crowned with Success. -- We have come a great Journey, in order to see the
Differences subsisting between you and our Cousins amicably fettled, and could
wish they had met here at this Time. On our Return, we assure you we will
recommend it to our Nephews and Brothers, in the strongest Manner we can, to
come down and meet you, in order to have all Differences subsisting between you
settled in an amicable Manner.

Gave a Belt.

At the Courthouse in Lancaster, Tuesday, May 17, 1757.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. The Honorable
Colonel JOHN STANWIX. The Council. The Committee of the Assembly. The
Magistrates of the Borough, with a great Number of other Gentlemen. The same
Indians. William Prentup, Interpreter for the Crown. Conrad Weiser, Esquire
Interpreter for the Province. Little Abraham, a Mohawk Sachem, Speaker for the
Indians. Thomas King, an Oneido Sachem, Speaker for the Indians.


After the Minutes of the Treaty were read, and the Indians acquainted by the
Interpreter with what had been doing, the Governor spoke as follows.

Brethren of the Six United Nations,

I DESIRE to be informed if you have any Complaints against this Province, with
Regard to Purchases of Land, or for any other Cause whatsoever: In Expectation
that you would freely open your Hearts to me on these Heads, I give you this
Belt.

Gave a Belt.

I then acquainted the Indians by the Interpreter, that I was going to speak to
them in Behalf of the Honorable Sir William Johnson, Baronet, His Majesty's
sole Agent and Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations, and their
Allies and Dependents, and desired them to consider my Words as if spoken by
himself.

Sachems and Warriors of the Six United Nations, our Friends and Brethren,

When Teedyuscung, at the Treaty held at Easton, complained that the Indians
had been defrauded of some of their Lands, this Government agreed to meet him
upon his own Appointment this Spring; to which Meeting you were invited, that
you might see and hear every Thing to be then transacted with your Nephews the
Delawares, and Brothers the Shawanese. You are now here on that Invitation, and
are Witnesses how ready this Government is to redress any Injuries or Injustice
done to the Indians whenever they can make that appear, and that they, your
Brethren of Pennsylvania, are now attending for that Purpose, and you must be
convinced, from their Conduct toward you, that they are not come empty handed.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

His Majesty's Subjects that have settled this and the neighboring Provinces
by Law, are not allowed to buy any of your Lands, and accordingly they have
never done it; and if those who only have a Right from the Crown to purchase
your Lands have done you any Injustice, or injured the Indians on this Account,
the Governor of this Province, with a Number of the chief Men of this
Government, are here, and appear hearty and willing to make Satisfaction; but
if they, or the People of these Provinces, should refuse doing you Justice,
when you make it appear that you are injured, I will then carefully represent
your Case to the King of England, my Master, and your Father, in order to
procure you ample and immediate Satisfaction.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

As Deputies from most of the Tribes of the Six Nations are now here, who may
not be present when Teedyuscung comes down, and as I am ordered and required by
the Honorable Sir William Johnson, Baronet, His Majesty's chief Agent and
Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations, their Allies and Dependents,
to enquire into and hear the Complaints made by the Indians, and, if justly
grounded, to use my utmost Endeavors to get them redressed, I do insist upon
it, that you open your Hearts to me without Reserve, and inform me of every
Thing you know concerning Frauds complained of by Teedyuscung, or any other
Injuries or Injustice done to you, or any of the Tribes of the Six Nations, or
other Indians in Alliance with His Majesty King GEORGE, in this or the
neighboring Colonies, that I may be thereby enabled to represent the true
State of your Grievances to His Majesty. -- Brethren, after this candid Conduct
toward you, and my thus pressing you to open your Minds to me, I do expect
that you will hide nothing from me, but speak from the Bottom of your Hearts:
And I expect that you will recommend it to your Nephews the Delawares, and
Brothers the Shawanese, to come down and give your Brother Onas a Meeting, to
make their Complaints appear, and have them adjusted, else I shall take it for
granted that they have no just Cause of Complaint: To enforce what I have said,
I give you this Belt of Wampum.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren of the United Nations,

You remember that your Nephews the Delawares, and Brothers the Shawanese, in a
Council with you at Otsaningo, promised to lay down their Hatchet, and in a
subsequent Meeting with Sir William Johnson, at his House, in July last,
ratified and confirmed it in the most solemn Manner in your Presence; then
promising to deliver up all the English Prisoners that were by any Means
brought to their Country, or in their Possession; and I desire that on your
Return to your Country, you will remind your Nephews and Brothers of their
Promises to Sir William Johnson, and recommend it strongly to them to bring
down what English Prisoners they have amongst them, and deliver them up, as
that is the only Proof they can give us of their Sincerity and good Disposition
toward us.

Gave a Belt.

Sachems and Warriors of the United Nations,

In that Meeting with your Brother Warraigheyagey, your Nephews the Delawares,
and Brothers the Shawanese, renewed and brightened the Chain of Friendship
between them and us, and promised to fix their Eyes on you their Uncles, and
regulate their Conduct by yours; and at the same time declared, in a public
Manner, by dancing, and singing the War Song, that they would turn the Edge of
their Hatchet, in Conjunction with you their Uncles the Six Nations, against
the French, the treacherous and faithless Invaders of the Property of Mankind.
And I must now desire that you will insist upon their being ready, when called
upon, to join His Majesty's Troops, in Conjunction with you our Friends and
Allies, against our common Enemy. -- That this Speech may have its full Force
upon your Minds, I present you with this Belt of Wampum.

Gave a War Belt.

Little Abraham then spoke as follows.

Brothers,

The Speeches you have just made are of great Consequence both to you and us.
-- We shall duly consider them, and, as soon as possibly we can, we will return
you an Answer.

May 18, 1757. This Day four Persons that were killed on the Frontiers, in the
Settlement of Swetara, by the Enemy Indians, were brought to this Town. -- In
the Afternoon the chief Sachems, with a Number of their Warriors, called a
Meeting in the Indian Camp, and spoke to us as follows.

Brethren,

We have called this Meeting with Tears in our Eyes, on Account of seeing so
many of our Brethren killed by the evil Spirit; and we take this Opportunity,
as we have a good deal of Business yet to do, to wipe the Tears from your Eyes,
so that Tomorrow, when we meet in Council, we may see each other with the same
Good Will we have hitherto done.

Gave a String.

Brethren,

Now we have wiped the Tears from your Eyes, agreeable to the ancient Custom of
our Forefathers, we clean the Blood off your Council Seats, that you may sit
with Comfort, and hear what we have to say to you. No Doubt but the French
King, who takes delight in Mischief, has taken this Opportunity to send his
Children down to commit these Murders, with Expectation of breeding a
difference between you our Brethren and us; but we desire you will hold fast by
the Chain of Friendship subsisting between us, and disappoint him in his
Designs.

Gave a Belt.

At a MEETING in the Courthouse in Lancaster, Thursday, May 19, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor The Honorable
Colonel JOHN STANWIX. The Council. The Committee of the Assembly. The
Magistrates of the Borough, with a great Number of other Gentlemen. The same
Indians. William Prentup, Interpreter for the Crown. Conrad Weiser, Esquire
Interpreter for the Province. Little Abraham, a Mohawk Sachem, Speaker for the
Indians. Thomas King, an Oneido Sachem, Speaker for the Indians.


After reading over the Condolance Speeches made Yesterday by the Indians, on
Account of our People that were killed by the Enemy, Little Abraham, addressing
himself to the Honorable Sir William Johnson, Baronet, and the Governor, spoke
as follows.

Brethren,

EACH of you made us a Speech Yesterday on the same Subject; both which
Speeches I now propose to answer at once, and then spoke as follows.

Brothers,

Some Years ago, in the Jerseys, one of the Head Men of the Delawares had been
out a Hunting. -- On his Return, he called to see a Gentleman, a great Friend
of his, one of your People, who he found in his Field: When the Gentleman saw
him he came to meet him. It was rainy Weather, and the Delaware Chief had his
Gun under his Arm. -- They met at a Fence, and as they reached out their Hands
to each other, the Delaware's Gun went off by Accident, and shot him dead. He
was very much grieved at the Accident, and went to the House, and told the
Gentleman's Wife what had happened, and said he was willing to die, and did not
choose to live after his Friend. She immediately sent for a Number of the
Inhabitants. -- When they were gathered, some said it was an Accident, and
could not be helped; but the greatest Number were for hanging him, and he was
taken by the Sheriff, and carried to Amboy, where he was tried, and hanged. --
There was another Misfortune that happened. -- A Party of Shawanese, who were
going to War against their Enemies, in their Way through Carolina, called at a
House, not suspecting any Harm, as they were amongst their Friends, a Number of
the Inhabitants rose and took them Prisoners, on Account of some Mischief that
was done there about that Time, suspecting them to be the People that had done
the Mischief, and carried them to Charlestown, and put them in Prison, where
the chief Man, called The Pride, died. -- The Relations of these People were
much exasperated against you our Brethren, the English, on Account of the ill
Treatment you gave their Friends, and have been continually spiriting up their
Nations to take Revenge -- Brothers, you desired us to open our Hearts, and
inform you of every Thing we knew that might give Rise to the Quarrel between
you and our Nephews and Brothers. -- We must now inform you, that in former
Times our Forefathers conquered the Delawares, and put Petticoats on them. -- A
long Time after that they lived among you our Brothers, but upon some
Difference between you and them, we thought proper to remove them, giving them
Lands to plant and hunt on at Wyoming and Juniata, on Sasquehannah. -- But you,
covetous of Land, made Plantations there, and spoiled their hunting Grounds;
they then complained to us, and we looked over those Lands, and found their
Complaints to be true. At this Time they carried on a Correspondence with the
French, by which Means the French became acquainted with all the Causes of
Complaint they had against you; and as your People were daily increasing their
Settlements, by this Means you drove them back into the Arms of the French, and
they took the Advantage of spiriting them up against you, by telling them;
"Children, you see, and we have often told you, how the English, your Brethren,
would serve you; they plant all the Country, and drive you back; so that in a
little Time you will have no Land: It is not so with us; though we build
Trading-Houses on your Land, we do not plant it; we have our Provisions from
over the great Water." -- We have opened our Hearts, and told you what
Complaints we have heard that they had against you; and our Advice to you is,
that you send for the Senecas and them; treat them kindly, and rather give them
some Part of their Fields back again than differ with them. -- It is in your
Power to settle all the Differences with them if you please.

Gave two Belts, one for Sir William Johnson, and one for the Governor

Little Abraham spoke again as follows.

Brothers,

As to what passed between you and Teedyuscung last Fall, respecting the
Purchase of Lands we know nothing of; -- they are not here, and if we enquire,
we can only hear what you say on that Head. -- We should have been glad our
Nephews the Delawares, and Brothers the Shawanese, had been here at this Time,
that we might have heard the Complaints on both Sides; then we should have been
able to judge who was in the Fault, and we are determined to see Justice done
to the Party aggrieved. -- As they are not here, we can say nothing about it;
but you yourselves, between whom the Business was transacted, must be the best
Judges.

Gave a String.

Brothers,

You acquaint us there are certain Persons empowered by the King to purchase
Lands here from the Indians: -- We are unacquainted with that, neither do we
know how our Father, the King of England, has divided his Provinces. -- You
say, if you have done the Indians any Injustice, you are willing to make them
Satisfaction. We are glad to hear it; and as you have Writings to refresh your
Memories about every Transaction that has happened between you and our Nephews
and Brothers, the Delawares and Shawanese, we recommend it heartily to you to
do Justice. -- We are much concerned to see how you are used by them and the
French, every Day having your People killed, and you sitting with your Heads
between your Legs, and receiving the Blow, without resenting it, as if you
could not, or would not, fight to defend yourselves.

Brother Onas,

We desire that you may not think of great Expeditions far off. -- Use your
best Endeavors to defend your Frontiers, and protect the Lives of your People.
-- It is better for you to give up some Points to them, than to contend,
provided they should be in the Wrong, and settle all Differences subsisting
between you as soon as possible.

Gave a Belt,

He added, Brother Onas, take Pattern by Sir William Johnson; he always keeps
large Parties patrolling across the Frontiers where he lives, and you do not
hear of any Murders being committed there. -- That is the Way to defend
yourselves. -- The Enemy is afraid to enter the Settlements there; and if you
pursue the same Measures, they will be afraid to come into your Settlements.

Thomas King then spoke as follows.

Brethren,

We have considered what you said to us, about our requesting the Delawares and
Shawanese to bring down and deliver up all the English Prisoners they have,
agreeable to their Promises to Sir William Johnson. -- We will do every Thing
in our Power that may induce them to do it; but perhaps it will not be in our
Power to prevail on them to give them up. -- Once more we desire that you would
send for the Senecas and them, and endeavor to settle all those Differences.
-- It is in your Power to do it. When it is done, you will certainly see some
of your own Flesh and Blood again.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

It is true, we were present when the Delawares and Shawanese brightened the
Chain of Friendship with Sir William Johnson, and promised to turn the Edge of
their Hatchet against the French. -- But you must know that last Fall, though
they went out to War with us, they always turned back, and did not perform what
they had promised; so that we cannot account for what they will do now. -- But
for our Parts, the Six Nations, we have been engaged in the War with you, and
are always ready, when we see an English Flag, to join our Brothers, and to go
with them, and share the same Fate.

Gave a Belt.

At a MEETING in the Courthouse, at Lancaster, Friday, May 20, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. The Honorable
Colonel JOHN STANWIX. The Council. The Committee of the Assembly. The
Magistrates of the Borough, with a great Number of other Gentlemen The same
Indians. William Prentup, Interpreter for the Crown. Conrad Weiser, Esquire
Interpreter for the Province. Little Abraham, a Mohawk Sachem, Speaker for the
Indians. Thomas King, an Oneido Sachem, Speaker for the Indians.


After reading over the Speeches made the Day before, and the Interpreter
acquainting the Indians with what had been doing, the Governor spoke as follows.

Brethren of the Six United Nations,

I RETURN you my hearty Thanks for the kind and open Manner in which you have
informed us of the Causes from whence the Dissatisfaction of our Brethren the
Delawares and Shawanese first arose; but, as you have observed, they are not
present, it must be deferred until we have the Pleasure of seeing them. -- I
shall only assure you that I think your Advice good, and shall, with great
Satisfaction, conform to it, by sending for the People you have so earnestly
recommended to be sent for. -- I think with you, that our Frontiers should be
carefully and strongly guarded; and it shall be my particular Care to endeavor
to have this done, in which I shall take kind any Assistance you will give me.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

Soon after the present Troubles first broke out between us and the French,
some of the Six Nation Indians requested of this Government to build a strong
House at Shamokin, and a Storehouse, with Indian Goods, and to give an
Invitation to Indians, as well of the United Nations as Delawares, to come and
live there; I must now inform you, that in Compliance with their Request this
Government has built a strong House, where Goods will soon be sent, and sold as
cheap as any where on this Continent. -- To this Place I have appointed Mr.
Thomas M'Kee to conduct as many of you as shall choose to return that Way, and
shall leave it to you to settle as many Families as shall incline to live
there; promising you, that Care shall be taken by this Government, that as many
as stay shall be furnished with such Necessaries as they may want till they can
support themselves.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

I shall immediately report the whole that has passed at these Conferences to
Sir William Johnson, who is glad of all Occasions to show his Attachment to our
Friends the Indians, and promote His Majesty's Service. -- It is that
Gentleman's peculiar Province to treat and finish all Treaties with the
Indians. -- Let me add, my Brethren of the United Nations, that you shall find
no Deceit in me, and I shall be happy if my Conduct deserves your Esteem and
Approbation.

Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

I have ordered the Presents provided by the good People of this Province to be
carried to the Indian Camp early in the Morning; and inform you, that a Part of
these Presents is given by those who are the Descendents of the Inhabitants
that first came over to this Country with your old Friend William Penn, as a
particular Testimony of their Regard and Affection for the Indians.

I then spoke in Behalf of Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON.

Sachems and Warriors of the United Nations,

You see how the French, the Enemies of Mankind, set on their Children to
murder, in a barbarous Manner, your Brethren that are settled on the Frontiers
of this and the neighboring Provinces. -- Brethren, I must now desire you, in
the Name of the Great King of England, your Father, and my Master, that on your
Return to your own Country, you will be active, and not suffer any of the
French, or their Children, to pass over your Lands to murder your Brethren; and
that you will let Teedyuscung and his People know, I expect he will do the
same. -- Tell them it is not, nor will not be, their Interest to carry on the
War against their Brethren the English. -- Their Father, the French King, makes
Fools of them, and will, in the End, make Slaves of them: But you, Brethren,
are convinced, that the English have always treated you as their Brethren, and
I expect a due Regard and Performance to this Request on your Side.

Gave a Belt.

Little Abraham made the following Answer to the Governor.

Brother Onas,

We return you our hearty Thanks for accepting of our Advice in sending for the
Delawares, Shawanese and Senecas, and we hope, when you meet them, you will be
able to settle all Differences to your Satisfaction.

Brother Onas,

We likewise return you our hearty Thanks for your kind Invitation to us to
settle at Genossa, and your Promise to supply those that will stay, or come and
settle there, with Provisions and Goods. -- We accept of the Invitation, and
will take it into Consideration as we go Home, how many of us will stay there,
or come back from our Towns to settle there; and we return you Thanks for
appointing our Brother Thomas M'Kee to take Care of us, as he is a Person very
agreeable to us.

He spoke again as follows.

Brother Warraighiyagey,

We have all given Attention to what you have said to us by Anaquarunda; and
you may depend upon our being on the Active, and doing every Thing in our Power
to prevent the French or their Chidren coming to murder our Brethren; and we
will recommend it strongly to Teedyuscung, and his People, to do the same. --
Brother, we must desire you will assist our Brother Onas in settling the
Differences between him and our Nephews and Brothers, the Delawares and
Shawanese, which will be the only Method to prevent these cruel Murders daily
committed on our Brethren.

May the 21st. The Presents were delivered to the Indians in their own Camp;
after which I condoled with them on account of some of their People who died of
the Smallpox since they came here, and gave them a Piece of Stroud to cover
the Graves of the Deceased, agreeable to the ancient Custom of the Six Nations.

The several Chiefs returned their hearty thanks for our condoling with them,
and covering the Graves of their deceased Friends, agreeable to the ancient
Custom used by their Forefathers, and expressed great Satisfaction with the
Treatment they met with in this Government, and returned Thanks for the
Presents they had received.

May 22. I called a Meeting of the Chiefs of the several Tribes, and I repeated
over to them the Messages going to be sent to Teedyuscung by this Government,
agreeable to their Request; and at the same time I acquainted them, that there
was a small Present provided by this Government for their Brethren the
Cherokees, who had come into this Government, and was now waiting in
Expectation of its being sent them, agreeable to their Request. -- I then
desired them to give their Opinion about the Message to be sent to Teedyuscung,
and whether it was agreeable to them.

To which they made me the following Answer.

Brother,

We have considered every Part of your Message to Teedyuscung, and we approve
much of it, and think it will be acceptable to our Nephews and Brothers; and we
likewise approve of our Brother Onas's sending a Present to our Brothers the
Cherekees. -- You, our Brothers the English, took some Pains to bring about a
Peace between them and us, and we embrace this Opportunity of brightening the
Chain of Friendship between us in your Presence. -- We have appointed three Men
to go with you to see them, and hope you will provide for them on the Road.

Gave a String.

The Speech sent by the Governor to Teedyuscung.

Brother Teedyuscung,

AT the Treaty held at Easton last Fall, you complained unto me that the
Indians had been defrauded of their Lands. -- This you told me was one of the
Causes that had alienated the Minds of our Brethren, the Delawares and
Shawanese, from us your Brethren; -- upon which I told you, if you could make
it appear that you had received any Injustice or Injuries from this Province, I
was ready to hear it, and promised to make you Satisfaction.

Brother,

You then informed me, that the People who claimed those Lands, as they did not
expect that Affair would come under Consideration at that Treaty, were not
present, and had not empowered you to transact that Business for them, and
therefore you could not finish it at that Time, but that you would come down
again in the Spring, and would bring with you as many of those Indians as could
be got together, in order to a full Settlement of all Differences between us,
that a firm and lasting Peace might be established for ever.

Brother,

As you had thus promised to be down in the Spring, we were pleased to find a
considerable Number of your Uncles, the Six Nations, were come amongst us, to
be present and hear all your Complaints. -- They staid a considerable Time for
that Purpose, in Expectation of seeing you here; but as some Accident may have
prevented your coming, your Uncles grew very uneasy at being detained here so
long, and desired me to meet them at Lancaster, whither I went, and opened my
Heart to them, giving them a full Account of all that passed between us at
Easton, promising your Uncles, that I would take Care to see you redressed,
either on account of your Lands, or any other Injuries you may have received
from your Brethren of this Province.

Brother,

Your Uncles, the Six Nations, at this Treaty, showed a great deal of Kindness
for you, and would have been extremely pleased to have seen you here, being
resolved to see Justice done to you; but as you were not come in, they advised
us to treat you very tenderly, and to advise you to bring with you some of your
Uncles, the Senecas, that we might open our Hearts to one another freely, by
which Means all Causes of Jealousies, or Misunderstandings between us, might be
settled and taken away for ever, and that they would join their best Endeavors
to bring about a firm and lasting Peace between you and your Brethren.

Brother,

I gave your Uncles my hearty Thanks for their good Advice; and told them, that
as I highly approved it, as good and sound Advice, I would act as they had so
earnestly desired me to do, being sincerely disposed to hear all your
Complaints, and to do you Justice, as I had formerly promised you at Easton.

Brother,

As I have now informed you of the earnest Request of your Uncles, the Six
Nations, and of my own Opinion, which is the same with theirs, I do by this
Belt of Wampum invite you to come down as soon as it will suit your
Convenience, and leave it to you to bring with you your Uncles, the Senecas, or
such of them as will be most agreeable to you, to open your Hearts to us your
Brethren; and if it shall appear that you have been defrauded of your Lands, or
received any other Injuries from this Province, I do promise you shall receive
Satisfaction.

Brother,

By some late Letters received from your Brother Onas, in England, in Answer to
my Representation of the late Conferences, and your Complaints at Easton, he
acquaints me he is willing to have the Injuries complained of fully heard and
settled as soon as possible. -- If you rather choose Sir William Johnson should
determine these unhappy Differences, I most warmly recommend it to you to apply
to that Gentleman, as he has the Honor to be appointed sole Agent and
Superintendent of Indian Affairs in the Northern District.

Gave a Belt.

After this Speech was delivered to the Messengers, the Sachems of the several
Tribes made the following Speech.

Brother,

As we have finished the Business for this Time, and we design to part
Tomorrow, you must be sensible that we have a long Journey, and a hilly
Country to pass over, and several of our old Men very weak, we hope that you
will not send us from your Frontiers without a Walking-stick Meaning a Cag of
Rum.
. -- In answer, I acquainted them, that the good People of this Province had
provided some Cags for them on the Frontiers, which would be given them by the
Persons employed to conduct them through the Settlements.

A true Copy, taken by CHARLES MOORE, Clerk of Assembly.

The REPORT of CONRAD WEISER, the Indian Interpreter, of his Journey to
Shamokin on the Affairs of Virginia and Maryland; his Mediation for
accommodating the Differences between the Indians of the Six Nations and the
said Provinces, delivered to the Governor in Council the 21st Day of April,
1743.
THE Ninth of April, 1743, I arrived at Shamokin, by Order of the Governor of
Pennsylvania, to acquaint the neighboring Indians, and those on Wyoming, that
the Governor of Virginia was well pleased with his Mediation, and was willing
to come to an Agreement with the Six Nations about the Land his People were
settled upon, if it was that they contended for, and to make up the Matter of
the late unhappy Skirmish in an amicable Way. The same Day Shickallemo, his
Son, and Suchsed^wa, who were sent to the Six Nations, returned from Onondago;
and the next Day they, in open Council, delivered the following Message,
directing their Speech, in Behalf of the Six Nations, to the Governor of
Pennsylvania, according to what was agreed upon by the Council of the said
Indians in Onondago.

Brother Onas,

At this critical Time we received a kind Message from you, the Result of the
good Friendship subsisting between you and us. For such Purposes a Road was
cleared from our Country to yours, in which, at any Time, Conrad Weiser and
Shickallemo may travel; we open our Doors with Cheerfulness to your Messengers,
and are glad to hear from you.

He laid down two Strings of Wampum.

Brother Onas,

We thank you for the Concern you show for the Misfortune that besel our
Warriors in Virginia. We take it as a particular Mark of Friendship. We assure
you, that notwithstanding the unjust Treatment our Warriors met with in
Virginia, we did not allow our Heads to be giddy, nor to resent it as it
deserved, which might have occasioned a Violation of Treaties, and the
Destruction of many.

He laid down four Strings of Wampum.

Brother Onas,

We thank you very kindly for the early Steps you made in calling your old and
wise Men together to consult with them. It was a very prudent and good Advice
they gave you to become Mediator betwixt us your Brethren, and the Virginians
your Neighbors. We thank them for such good Advice: And we assure you, we will
accordingly come to an amicable Accommodation with the Governor of Virginia, if
he will come to reasonable Terms. And if a War should break out betwixt us and
him, you will be convinced of his being the Author of it: For when in former
Times we received a deadly Blow, we never returned it, if it was ever so
dangerous; we always judged it to be given by disorderly People, and we used
always peaceable Means to make it up; but when we received the second Blow, we
judged that War was intended against us, and then we rose and knocked down our
Enemies with one Blow, and we are still able to do the same, but we leave now
our Case to you. We have ordered our Warriors, with the strongest Words, to sit
down, and not revenge themselves: Therefore, Brother Onas, go on with Courage
in your Mediation; we assure you we will not violate or do any Thing contrary
to your Mediation. We desire you, and the old and wise Men of Pennsylvania, not
to believe any Thing to the contrary, let it come from whom it will, till you
receive Messages from us: We will do the same on our Side. In Confirmation of
what we say, we lay down this Belt of Wampum before you.

Then the Speech was directed to the Governor of Maryland.

Brother, the Governor of Maryland,

You have invited us to come to your Town; and you offered to treat with us
concerning the Messages we sent to you by our Brother the Governor of
Pennsylvania, and to establish good Friendship with us: We are very glad you
did so; and we thank you for your kind Invitation.

Brother,

We have a great deal of Business and Things of Moment under our Deliberation,
and it will take us the best of the Day That is, this Summer.
, before we can finish them: We therefore desire you will set your Heart at
Ease, and think on nothing but what is good. We will come and treat with you at
Canataquanny, on Sasquebannab, Tomorrow Morning That is, next Spring
, since you live so near the Sea, and at such a great Distance from us. We
accept kindly of your Invitation; our Brother, the Governor of Pennsylvania,
recommended your Message to us, which he would not have done, if he had not
been satisfied your Intention was good: We therefore promise you, by these
Strings of Wampum, to come and treat with you at the aforesaid Place.

The Speaker laid down four Strings of Wampum.

Then the Speaker directed his Speech to the Governor of Pennsylvania again,
and said;

Brother Onas,

The Dutchman on Scohooniady (Juniata) claims a Right to the Land, merely
because he gave a Little Victuals to our Warriors, who stand very often in Need
of it. This String of Wampum serves (the Speaker then took two Strings of
Wampum in his Hands) to take the Dutchman by the Arm, and throw him over the
big Mountains within your Borders. WE HAVE GIVEN THE RIVER SCOHOONIADY
(JUNIATA) FOR A HUNTING-PLACE TO OUR COUSINS THE DELAWARE INDIANS, AND OUR
BRETHREN THE SHAWANESE; and we ourselves hunt there sometimes. We therefore
desire you will immediately, by Force, remove all those that live on the said
River of Scohooniady.

Here be laid down two Strings of Wampum.

Brother, the Governor of Pennsylvania;

I live upon this River of Ohio harmless like a little Child: I can do nothing;
I am but weak; and I do not so much as intend Mischief. I have nothing to say,
and do therefore send these Strings of Wampum to Catchcawatsiky, the Chief Man,
again; he will answer your Message, as he is the older, and greater, Man.

Then Sachsidora took up the four Strings of Wampum, and spoke in Behalf of
Catchcawatsiky, as follows.

Brother, the Governor of Pennsylvania,

The Place where I live, and the neighboring Country, has been overshadowed of
late by a very dark Cloud. I looked with a pitiful Eye upon the poor Women and
Children, and then looked upon the Ground all along for Sorrow, in a miserable
Condition, because of the poor Women and Children. In all that dark Time, a
Message from you found the Way to Shamakin; and when it was delivered to us,
the dark Cloud was dispersed, and the Sun immediately began to shine; and I
could see at a great Distance, and saw your Good Will and kind Love to the
Indians and the white People: I thank you, therefore, Brother Onas, for your
kind Message; I am now able to comfort the poor Women and Children.

Here the Speaker laid down four Strings of Wampum.

Then the Speaker took up two Strings of Wampum, and directed his Discourse to
the Delaware Indians, the Shawanese, and to Onas.

Cousins the Delawares,

We are informed that you can talk a little English, by which you have heard
many Things amongst the white People; and you frequently bring Lies amongst the
Indians; and you have very little Knowledge and Regard for Treaties of
Friendship; you give your Tongue too much Liberty. This String of Wampum serves
to tie your Tongue, and to forewarn you from Lies.

Brethren, the Shawanese,

You believe too many Lies, and are too forward in Action. You shall not
pretend to revenge our People that have been killed in Virginia: We are the
Chief of all the Indians; let your Ears and Eyes be open toward us; and order
your Warriors to stay at Home as we did ours.

Brother Onas,

Your Back Inhabitants are People given to Lies, and raising of false Stories;
stop up their Mouths; you can do it with one Word; let no false Stories be
told; it is dangerours to the Chain of Friendship.

The Strings of Wampum were delivered to the Delawares.

After the Speaker had finished, an handsome Indian Dinner was given to all
that were present by Shickallemo's People.

After Dinner I delivered my Message to them, and presented the Company with
two Rolls of Tobacco, about three Pound each Roll, to smoke whilst they were in
Company together, to talk about the good News they had heard that Day,
according to the Custom of the Indians.

Shickallemo told me, by Way of Discourse, that they (the Council of Onondago)
had sent Strings of Wampum by him to all the Indians upon the River
Sasquehannah, to tell them to use their Endeavors to stop all their Warriors,
and not permit them to go to fight with the People of Virginia; and to acquaint
them of what was agreed upon in Onondago, which was accepted of in every Town.
-- I enquired what Business of Moment the Six Nations had under Deliberation
that prevented their coming down to treat with the Governor of Maryland.
Shickallemo asked whether I could not guess at it. I told him no. Then he said,
How should they come down with a Hatchet struck in their Head? The Governor of
Virginia must wash off the Blood first, and take the Hatchet out of their Head,
and dress the Wound (according to Custom, he that struck first must do it) and
the Council of the Six Nations will speak to him, and be reconciled to him, and
bury that Affair in the Ground, that it never may be seen nor heard of any more
so long as the World stands. -- But if the Virginians would not come to do
that, he (Shickallemo) believed there would be a War; but I might assure the
Governor of Pennsylvania, the Warriors would not come then within the inhabited
Part of Pennsylvania, but direct their Course directly to Virginia. over the
Big Island, in the North-West Branch of Sasquehannah.


