THE Manufacture OF POT-ASH IN THE British NORTH-AMERICAN PLANTATIONS
Recommended.

BOSTON: Printed by Z. FOUL for T. LEVERETT, in Cornhill. 1757.

To His Excellency Thomas Pownall Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in
and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, etc.
etc. etc.
May it please your Excellency,
THE early attention which your Excellency has discovered toward promoting the
Trade and encouraging the Manufactures of this Province, induces me to hope
that the following Pages, attempting to show some of the Advantages which may
arise from introducing the Manufacture of Pot-Ash into the British Plantations
of North America, will meet with a favorable reception, and that the Branch of
Trade therein recommended will obtain your Excellency's Patronage and
Encouragement.

That your Excellency's Administration may be productive of much good to this
Province, as well as of your own Ease and Happiness, is the earnest Desire of,

Sir, Your EXCELLENCY'S most Obedient, and most Obliged humble Servant, John
Mascarene,


THE Manufacture OF POT-ASH IN THE British NORTH-AMERICAN PLANTATIONS
Recommended.
AS no One will I believe pretend to dispute the necessary Connection between
Great Britain and her Plantations, so neither will it be denied that the mutual
Advantage, arising from their Commerce with each other, is what tends very much
to support that Connection; and consequently that every Advantage, which their
Trade receives, contributes in a greater or less degree to strengthen it. This
being premised, I hope the following Hints, respecting the introduction of a
new branch of Trade which may be carried on between England and North America,
will (however imperfect) be esteemed as the endeavors of One desirous to
promote the welfare of his Country.

It has long been matter of Complaint, that the Articles of Export from the
Colonies of America are so few; and some even of these of so little Value, that
we are not able to make suitable returns for the Manufactures of Great Britain,
and other Produce, which are annually imported amongst us: But as the defect
complained of proceeds not so much from the Poverty of the Country, as from a
neglect in improving the natural Advantages of it, is it not much to be wished
that some Methods were taken to enquire into the Nature, and encourage the
Cultivation of such Produce, as would become both useful to ourselves, and also
beneficial to our Mother Country?

Amongst other Productions which might be named, the only One, that will here
be insisted upon, is the Manufacture of Pot-Ash, for which we are sufficiently
supplied with proper Materials; and which for the Advantages to be reaped from
it, both by Great Britain and ourselves, has been often recommended to our
Improvement, but for want of the Method of making it, has not yet been
undertaken to any Purpose: However as the necessary Process is now sufficiently
known, I hope those, who have labored to find out so useful an Art, will not
want the needful Assistance to put it into Practice; especially as the
Parliament of Great Britain have so lately testified their Desire of promoting
so good a Design.

In order to give Encouragement to making Pot-Ash and Pearl-Ash in the
Plantations, an Act was passed in 1751. to take off the Duty which was payable
upon the Importation of them from thence; and since that in the Year 1755. the
Sum of 3,000 L. Sterling was granted to Mr. Thomas Stephens, upon certain
Conditions to be performed by him, relative to the Improvement of the said
Manufacture: But what those Conditions were, and whether they have been, or are
like to be complied with, I do not pretend to determine; nor would I say how
far Experience has proved the said Gentleman's method, and plain process for
making Pot-Ash, insufficient to answer the end proposed. Those, who may
hereafter be made acquainted with the Method since discovered, will upon
comparing it with his no doubt be able to judge.

What induced the Wisdom of Parliament, so far to encourage this undertaking,
was doubtless the Advantage, they foresaw would arise to Great Britain, from
the introduction of this Manufacture into the Plantations. It is computed that
there is annually imported, into Great Britain and Ireland, Three Thousand Tons
of Pot-Ash: which, according to a moderate Price, amounts to upwards of One
Hundred Thousand Pound, and this paid to Russia, Poland, and other foreign
States in ready Money. If then the Plantations could furnish this Supply, it
would be a saving to the Nation of so much Money, as they would receive it in
return for their Produce and Manufactures, already so largely exported, and
which, by means of this Staple, the Plantations would be enabled to take off in
still larger Quantities. Besides, so long as the Nation is beholden to foreign
Powers for this Article, it is kept still more dependant, and subjected to the
extravagant Prices which Foreigners may at any Time think proper to impose. I
am informed that the Price obtained for this Commodity has been so various,
that Pot-Ash of the same Quality has been Sold at different Times from 25 L. to
70 L. per Ton, which it is not likely would be the Case were it (as other
Articles of Export are) regularly produced in the Colonies of America. These
are probably some of the Reasons, which might induce the Government to promote
this useful Branch of Trade; but many more might be given, why we should think
it worth encouraging amongst ourselves; some of which I shall take Occasion
presently to mention.

Many Schemes have been projected of late, either for increasing our Export, or
lessening our Import, which seem not likely to succeed, for want of being fixed
upon a right Basis, viz. the Improvement of such natural Productions of the
Country, as by being either peculiar to ourselves, or else by means of some
favorable Circumstances attending the Improvement of them, we are enabled to
afford as cheap at a foreign, or, at least, our own Market, as they can be
brought from other Quarters, for unless this be the Case, such Schemes, like a
Building without a Foundation, will fall to the Ground, as soon as the Props,
which were designed to support it for a while, are taken away; how far the
Manufacture now under Consideration can boast of these Advantages, may in some
Measure appear from the following Particulars.

In the first Place then I would Observe, that no Country in the British
Dominions is under better Advantages, for making the best Pot-Ash, than the
North-American Plantations; as they abound with Wood of all Kinds most suitable
for that Purpose, and which unless put to some such Use, proves of little or no
Value to the Inhabitants. It has been the Practice in settling new Lands, which
are commonly covered with a thick growth of Wood, for the Farmer to consume as
fast as possible the Wood he Possesses, without any farther Benefit proposed,
than to prepare his Ground for Pasturing or Tillage: And this is done either at
a considerable Expense, where any large Improvement is to be made, or else he
is obliged to be content with clearing a little every Year, for want of Ability
to support the Charge naturally attending the employment of much Labor
thereupon. Now the Advantage which he might receive, from the produce of his
Wood in Ashes, for the support of this Manufacture, would in a great measure,
if not wholly, pay him for the clearing his own Land; which would naturally
induce him to extend his Improvements, and consequently tend to the quicker
growth and Settlement of the Country. This Consideration should I think make
every Gentleman, who is possessed of landed Interest, desirous of promoting
this Design. Nor needs there any Arguments to show how beneficial it must prove
to the Farmer, who for the small trouble of saving his Ashes, is thereby
reimburs'd the Expense of clearing his own Land.

It is true that Wood, which lies contiguous to Water carriage, may be better
improved by being carried to Market in the Seaport Towns, which for the most
Part use it for Fuel; but in respect of a large inland Country which is
destitute of that Advantage, the Wood has hitherto been accounted an useless
Burden, and consequently the Land rather undervalued than prized for the thick
growth upon it; whereas on the contrary the Improvement which may be made
thereof in this Manufacture, will remove that Objection, and the more Wood
there is upon the Land (caeteris paribus) the more it will be esteemed; for
although Transportation be still necessary, yet the assential Properties of the
Wood being taken out at or near upon the Spot, and reduced to a compact
Merchandise, become able thereby to sustain the Charge of a considerable length
of Land-Carriage.

Farther Advantages might be shown to arise from the Improvement of this Branch
of Trade, such as the Encouragement given to New-Settlers to enter upon our
uncultivated Lands, the Labor employed in the Manufacture itself, the
additional Freight given our Ships thereby, and the promoting of Industry and
Frugality amongst us, the only Means to retrieve our decaying Circumstances,
and enable us to support the Burden of a distressing and expensive War. Nor
would it be difficult to prove that the Farmer, the Merchant, the Tradesman,
the Sailor, and in short each individual, will receive more or less Benefit
from this so useful an undertaking. But what I would chiefly insist upon is the
very great Advantage arising to this Country, from having so good a Staple of
Export, and a saving thereby of so much Money as this Branch of Trade would
constantly Produce, of which the following may in some Measure serve as an
Estimate.

It is supposed, that each Set of Works, for carrying on the Manufacture of
Pot-Ash, will have the range of ten Miles round for its supply, less than which
will not be sufficient; and I would here by the way Caution such who may
undertake to erect Works for this Purpose, that the Place they fix upon be at
least twenty Miles distant from any other Works of the like Kind, lest they not
only injure their Neighbor, but themselves, by cutting off the Prospect of a
sufficient supply of Ashes. Each Set of Works, under such Advantages of
obtaining Stock, will I presume at the least annually produce twenty Tons of
good Pot-Ash, which at the lowest Rate it has ever been Sold for viz. 25 L.
would amount to 500 L. Sterling. And if twenty of these Works were to be
erected within the Limits of the Province of the Massachusetts, (which I think
a very moderate Number) there might be annually exported out of that Province
alone 400 Tons of Pot-Ash, which at the beforementioned low Rate would amount
to 10,000 L. Sterling. To which if we add what might be manufactur'd in the
other Provinces and Plantations on the Continent, we shall soon find a
sufficient supply for the home Consumption, and consequently an additional
Trade acquired thereby of 100,000 L. Sterling per Annum, and all this out of
our own Produce.

But it may here be inquired, whether, besides the Quantity, we are able to
make it also equal in Quality, and afford it at (...) Rate, as it is obtained
from foreign Countries. To which I answer,

First in regard to the Quality,

That what has been lately sent from hence, made in the Method which I would
recommend, has obtained the top of the Market; and were Justice done the
Exporters of it, would I believe have been esteemed preferable to, and
consequently worth more than the best Russia Pot-Ash; but for Reasons, which
may under the next Article be hinted at, we must be content at Present to find
it is esteemed at least as good, and fetches an equal Price.

As to the second Enquiry, respecting the Price it may be afforded at from the
Plantations, it will be necessary to Observe,

That Pot-Ash having been hitherto chiefly imported into England from Russia,
and paid for as has before been observed in Money, the Advantages arising from
that Branch have centered wholly with the Russians, and the Company trading
thither; it is therefore natural to suppose that the said Company will (though
contrary to the Interest of their Country) oppose the Introduction of this
Manufacture into the Continent of America: And it is not without reason
supposed, that the Price is at this Time kept low, in order to discourage if
possible those who might attempt to set it forward in the Plantations. However
as the Parliament of Great Britain have ((...) been before shown) testified
their Desire of promoting so good a Design, it is reasonably presumed, that
they will assist the Undertakers, so far as to enable them to get the better of
this Opposition, and establish a Trade which appears so conducive to the
Interest of Great Britain, as well as that of her American Colonies.

I have not been able to obtain so good Imformation as I could wish, respecting
the Price of Pot-Ash in England, however from the best I can get, the ordinary
Price of good Russia Pot-Ash, and what has been esteemed by the Soap-Boilers,
and others who use this Commodity, to be a reasonable One, is 40 L. Sterling
per Ton. I find by the London Price Current for the Year 1751. that it was then
48 L. and, by information from a Person employed in the Soap-Boiling Business
in London, that soon after, it advanced as high as 70 L. since which it has
fallen, but for what Reason I am not able to say to 25 L. which is the lowest
Price that I can find it was ever sold for, and which was the Price this
present Year. Now from what Knowledge I have gained of the Method lately
practiced, and the Charges attending the making it in this Country, I judge it
may be afforded at the London Market for 35 L. even at this Time, when the
Charges and Risque, which attend the shipping of all Merchandises to Market,
occasioned by the War and extraordinary Premiums for Insurance now demanded,
are perhaps higher than ever has been known here: which Price appears upon a
Medium to be lower than it has commonly been sold for. And as I have no
sufficient Grounds to believe, that the Price of Pot-Ash from Russia will be
lower than it has been in common Years, (allowing none to be made in the
Plantations) it will appear from thence cheaper for England to receive it from
us at the rate of 35 L. than to import it from Russia, even allowing other
Advantages to be Equal, which however cannot be granted if the foregoing
Observations are admitted to be true.

The only Objection, that I imagine will be made to the Improvement of this
Manufacture amongst us, will be the Danger apprehended to arise from too great
a comsumption of our Wood; but as I take it for granted that none will be cut
down, but such as I have before observed from its Situation will not offord to
pay a Transport; or with a farther Design of improving the Land cleared
thereby, This Objection can avail but little. However should it be otherwise,
Experience teaches us that where a Piece of Woodland has been cleared at a
proper Season of the Year, and left in a State of rest, the Wood has renewed
itself again, in greater Abundance, and in the course of twenty or thirty Years
become of a moderate Bigness; so that where due Care is taken there will be no
Danger of our wanting a proper supply of Fuel, should there be no Coal-Mines to
be opened, which seems highly probable may be found in many Parts of this
Continent.

Thus much may suffice for the present Design, which was only to hint in
general at some of the Advantages which may arise from making Pot-Ash in the
Plantations; And to stir up if possible some able Pen to write upon this
Subject, which I should be glad the Public might have the Benefit of seeing
handled in such a Manner as it justly deserves. I have only one Proposal to
make, which I believe will be judged necessary toward maintaining the Credit
of this Manufacture, should it be established upon this Continent, which is
that an Assay-Master should be appointed with Liberty of substituting Deputies
where they may be necessary, in Order to try the Quality of what Pot-Ash may be
made, and that none be cleared for Exportation, without proper Assurance of its
having passed the necessary Examination. For want of these Precautions there
have been frequent Complaints, and that not without Reason, of the bad Quality
of Merchandises imported into Great Britain from the Plantations, which has
tended very much to their discredit, and not only defeated the Designs of the
Parliament, which has generally encouraged the Manufactures of the Colonies,
but often proved in the End detrimental to those very Persons, who for the Sake
of a little sordid Gain have endeavored to impose upon the Market with
unmerchantable Commodities.

FINIS.

