Dr. Chauncy's SERMON, On the DEATH of Mr. Edward Gray.

Charity to the distressed Members of Christ accepted as done to himself, and
rewarded, at the Judgment-day, with blessedness in God's everlasting Kingdom.

A SERMON, Preached the Lord's Day after the DEATH of Mr. Edward Gray. Who
Departed this Life July 2nd, 1757, in the 84th Year of his Age.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D.D. One of the Pastors of the first Church in Boston.

"He that sows bountifully shall reap also bountifully." Apostle PAUL BOSTON:
Printed by GREEN and RUSSELL in Queen Street. 1757.

Deeds of Charity Rewarded, at the Judgment-Day, with everlasting Blessedness.
MATT. XXV. 34, 35, 40. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand,
come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and ye took me in. -- Verily, I
say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.
THE passage of scripture, of which the words I have read to you are a part,
contain an account of the process of the great and general judgment: an
account, perhaps, the most observable of any to be met with, in a single view,
throughout the new testament.

IT might be profitable for our instruction in righteousness, to go over the
particulars of this account: But the limits to which I am confined will not
allow of this, nor indeed to discourse upon every thing worthy of notice in the
text it self.

THREE things only may come under consideration, at present, as being of more
signal importance.

I. The influence of deeds of charity on the sentence that will be pronounced,
at the general judgment, on the righteous. II. The particular and distinct
mention that is here made of this kind of deeds before any other. III. The
endearing manner in which our Savior, the great Judge of the world, speaks of
deeds of charity.
I. THE first thing to be considered is, the operation of deeds of charity with
respect to the sentence, which will be pronounced on the righteous, at the
judgment. The sentence is that, ver. 34. Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And then
follows, ver. 35, the influence of charity on the procurement of this happy
sentence, For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave
me drink, and so on.

OUR Lord, you see, has connected the sentence, at the judgment-day, which
pronounces and makes men blessed, with deeds of charity to the needy and
distressed. This kind of deeds therefore are of service, in some sense or
other, in order to the procurement of this sentence.

BUT the question is, what is their influence? How do they operate to the
obtainment of blessedness at the judgment?

IN answer whereto, we may be sure, they are of no use, have no influence, as
the meritorious cause, ground, or reason, of this blessedness. The church of
Rome may think highly of the value of good works, hoping to be bid, at the
judgment, to inherit God's heavenly kingdom, on account of the worthiness of
them; and they may support themselves in their hope, from what our Lord has
said in my text. But they certainly mistake his meaning. To speak of works,
whether of righteousness or charity, as meritorious of heavenly blessedness is
an absurdity too gross to be entertained by any, who are allowed the free use
of their reason, and the word of God.

IT IS one of the most obvious truths, that all that we have, and are, we derive
from God. Not only our ability, but our very inclination, to every good work,
is the free gift of God. The apostle Paul therefore makes those appeals, 1 Cor.
iv. 7 Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou
did not receive? And his reasoning hereupon is strictly conclusive; Now, if
thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?
This same apostle makes that solemn challenge, Romans xi. 35. Who has first
given to him? If any are able to answer and say, we have given to God that
which we did not first receive from him they may then claim, as is conceded in
the next words, to have it recompensed to them again. But as no mere man could
ever justly plead thus, it must forever be acknowledged, that an admission to
blessedness in heaven is a reward of grace, and not of debt. Especially,

IF it be considered, that, when we have done our all in serving God, and doing
good to men, we have done only our duty. And where is the merit of this? As our
Savior argues, Luke xvii. 9, 10. Does he thank that Servant, because he did
the things that were commanded him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye have
done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. And we have the more
reason, after we have done our all, to esteem ourselves "unprofitable
servants," because our best services carry in them so great a mixture of
frailty and imperfection, and are accompanied with so many faults and follies,
that we stand absolutely in need of the pity and mercy of God. Besides all
which,

"Our goodness extends not unto God:" Nor if we are ever so righteous, or
charitable, can we "be profitable to the Almighty." Excellent is the reasoning
in the book of Job to this purpose. "Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that
thou art righteous? or gain to him, that thou make thy ways perfect? Look to
the heavens, and see, and behold the clouds which are higher than thou. If thou
sinnes^, what do thou against him? Or if thy transgressions be multiplied,
what does thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what give thou him? Or what
receives he of thine hand?" The words are a most solemn check to the fond
conceit, we are too apt to entertain of ourselves, and of the significancy of
our services, as they respect God. When we look up to the heavens, and behold
the sky, and the clouds, we see them to be high above us: But the great God is
still infinitely higher; exalted far above all heavens, and as far beyond the
reach of being affected by any conduct of our's toward him. We may be ready to
indulge the though it, as if the glorious God was mightily disserved by our sins,
and as much benefited by our acts of goodness: But this is altogether a vain
imagination. If we are wicked, it is no hurt to the Almighty: Nor if we are
righteous, is he at all advantaged by it. He is neither the worse for our sins
committed against him; nor the better, though we should make our ways perfect
before him. And whatever our carriage is, he unchangeably remains the same
blessed God forever more. How impossible is it then, that we should merit at
his hands! If he receives nothing from us, if he is nothing bettered by any
goodness of our's, all though it of desert must be totally laid aside; especially
that most vain of all imaginations, the pretense of meriting so great a reward
from God as heaven, and the everlasting blessedness of it.

BUT though all claim of reward upon the foot of works, in point of merit, must
be forever excluded; yet are they far from being useless. And works of charity
may properly be considered as having some influence on the bestowment of
blessedness, at the judgment-day. And their influence seems to lie in this,
that they are among those fruits of faith and love, which, as there is
opportunity therefore, are made requisite, in the gospel covenant, in order to
our being qualified for the rewards of the heavenly kingdom. It having pleased
God, of his mere mercy, upon the account of Christ, for his sake, and in virtue
of his merits, to make the promise of heavenly everlasting blessedness to
persons so and so qualified, our having "fed the hungry, and clothed the
naked," and this, from a principle of faith that has wrought in these effects
of love, operates to our advantage, at the judgment, as it declares us to be
the persons that are qualified, according to the gospel-scheme, for the
kingdom, God has prepared from the foundation of the world.

WHEN therefore our Savior, in the text, pronounces the happy sentence on the
righteous, "come ye blessed of my Father" --, and adds this account of the
matter, "FOR I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat" --, his design is, not to
point out the proper cause, the meritorious ground, of this reward; but the
connection the gospel has made between the reward, and the way to it. He would
hereby, in the strongest manner, give us to understand, the necessity of deeds
of charity in order to an admission to future blessedness; and that there can
be no such thing, according to the constitution of the gospel covenant, as our
being though it meet, at the general judgment, to inherit the kingdom of God,
unless we are the subjects of that faith, which has wro't by love, not only
love to God, but to our brother also, evidencing it is reality by all proper
acts of beneficence, as there has been opportunity therefore.

IN a word, the chief thing aimed at by our Lord is, to assert the absolute and
indispensible necessity of deeds of charity, so far as God gives opportunity;
to declare it, in the most solemn and formal manner, that if we have this
world's goods, and are of such a temper as that we can "see our brother have
need, and shut up our bowels of compassion from him," we shall in no wise be
counted worthy, at the judgment-day, to receive the sentence, "come, ye blessed
of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world"! -- But I may not enlarge any further here. To go on,

II. THE second thing observable in the text, is the particular and distinct
mention of deeds of charity, rather than any other. "I was an hungered, and ye
ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink", -- You observe, deeds of
charity are the only ones our Lord his instanced in. And these are singled out,
and mentioned with particularity, and distinctness.

"Not but that many (as one expresses it) will be found at the right hand of
Christ, who never were in a capacity to "feed the hungry, or cloth the naked";
but were themselves both fed and clothed by the charity of others." It Is
particularly recorded of Lazarus a poor beggar, so reduced as to desire to be
"fed with the crumbs which fell from Dives's table", that, when he died, he was
"carried by the angels to Abraham's bosom". And, to say the least, as great
numbers from among the poor, as from among the rich, will hereafter be admitted
into the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

NEITHER may we think, because works of charity are here particularly
mentioned, that other good works are needless; or that these will atone for the
want of the other. Charity is not here singled out to exclude the concurrence
of other christian virtues. We may not imagine, that it is of little
consideration how a man lives in other respects, if he is but bountiful in his
distributions to the necessitous. No; how pleasing soever the sacrifice of alms
may be to the Father of mercies, 'twill be of no account, another day, if we
are negligent of our duty in other regards. We must be pious toward God, sober
as to ourselves, and righteous, as well as charitable, toward our neighbor:
Nor otherwise shall we, at the judgment, be pronounced "good and faithful
servants," and be bid to "enter into the joy of our Lord."

BUT if other works besides charitable ones are thus necessary, why, you will
say, are these latter singled out, and distinguished, as it were, from the rest?

SEVERAL good reasons may be assigned for this; and they are these that follow.

ONE may be obviously collected from the very sentence itself, which is here
passed on the righteous. For it is a sentence of mercy; pronounced, not
according to the rigors of justice, but the allowances of grace. Our Lord and
Judge is now exercising the most illustrious act of grace toward righteous
men: And what works so proper to be particularly mentioned by name as works of
mercy? At such a time as this, there seems to be a special fitness in our
Savior's taking a distinct notice of the charitable deeds, which good men have
done, in obedience to his gospel, and in relief of those who needed their
compassion.

IT ought also to be remembered, that deeds of charity are often performed in so
secret a manner, that they will never be known, unless they are revealed at the
day of judgment. Many good men so punctually, in many cases, observe the
direction of their Lord, that they suffer not their "left hand to know what
their right hand does," in the article of "giving alms," Their good deeds to
the distressed members of Jesus Christ lie concealed from the knowledge of the
world. It Is not imagined, and would scarcely be believed, how frequently, and
with what liberality, they make distributions to the necessities of the saints.
And is it fit so much goodness should forever be buried in secrecy? It shall
not, but, according to the promise of Christ himself, be opened to the world,
and rewarded. So we read, Matt. vi. 3, 4. "When thou do alms, let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does, that thine alms may be in secret: And
thy Father, which sees in secret, himself shall reward thee openly." Our Lord
might, probably, have in view this promised reward; so wording his account of
the judgment, as to assure good men, that all their deeds of charity should
then be openly acknowledged, and particularly related, to their eternal honor,
before the general assembly of men and angels.

ANOTHER reason of this conduct of our Lord might be, the great stress he has
laid upon the duty of charity, in the new-testament-writings. Of all the duties
we owe to our neighbor, there is no one, perhaps, in the whole system of
christian morality, that is more particularly, frequently, and pressingly urged
upon us. That we should love one another, not in profession only, but with a
love expressing itself in all instances of beneficence, was the great message
the Son of God came into the world to deliver to us. So we are told, 1 John
iii. 2. "This is the message ye have heard from the beginning, that ye should
love one another." The law of love, as discovering itself "in deed and in
truth, and not in word and tongue" only, is emphatically the law of
christianity. Says our Savior, John xv. 12. "This is MY commandment, that ye
love one another." Says the apostle Paul in his name, Col. iii. 14, "Above all
these things put on charity." And the apostle John so connects the duty of
loving one another with the first and great duty of loving God, that if we do
not love one another, neither can we love God. His words are these, 1 John iii.
17. "But whosoever has this world's goods, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him"? The manner of diction imports a most vehement denial. It does not dwell
in him, be his pretenses what they will. In fine, this charity is made so to
enter into the very being of christianity itself, as that, without it, we are
not allowed the character of real christians. To this purpose we read. 1 John
iii. 10. "In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
devil; whosoever does not righteousness is not of God: neither he that loves
not his brother." So in the 14th ver. "We know that we have passed from death
to life, because we love the brethren: He that loves not his brother, abides
in death." Vast stress, you see, is laid upon this duty of love, not the name,
but the thing, that is to say, love as it discovers itself in all proper deeds
of charity. And we are herefrom taught the pertinency of the distinguishing
notice our Savior takes, at the general judgment, of this kind of deeds. It
cannot be thought strange, that he should thus single them out, since they are
so emphatically particularized in the gospel, and spoken of as necessary in
order to an acquittance at the bar of judgment.

MOREOVER, deeds of charity, springing from a principle of love, are a sure
proof of our being universally qualified for the rewards of God's heavenly
kingdom. For our whole duty, both to God and man, is nothing but love
diversified in its working.

WHAT is our duty to God but love varied in its actings? It is the root of all
holy obedience to him, and seminally comprehends it all. The apostle John
therefore observes, 1 John v. 3. "This is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments." And, if our love be real and hearty, it will express itself in a
dutiful regard to him as our King and God, in a steady care to observe
whatsoever he has commanded.

AND the same may be said of love to our neighbor. It includes in it virtually
all the offices of justice and charity, and whatever duty we are obliged to,
with reference to one another. So we are expressly taught by the apostle Paul,
in Romans xiii. 8. "Owe no man any thing but to love one another; for he that
loves another has fulfilled the law." It follows in the two next verses,
"Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill" --; and if there be any
other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. -- Therefore love is the fulfilling of
the law."

So that where love is, that love which expresses itself in deeds of charity to
the poor members of Christ, there no other christian grace can be totally
wanting. Our Savior therefore, by mentioning deeds of charity, as springing
from love, has done the same thing in effect, as if he had mentioned every
thing else.

IN fine, another reason, why our Savior takes such distinguishing notice of
acts of charity may be, because he looks upon every one of them as a kindness
done to himself. And this leads me to the next thing to be discoursed to from
the text; and that is,

III. The endearing manner in which he speaks of deeds of charity. "I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink," and so on.
What is done by the righteous, in a way of charitable distributions to the
distressed members of Christ, he graciously speaks of as done to himself. For
this is the meaning of the words, as our Lord has himself explained them. For
it is observable, when the great Judge of the world had said, "come, ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, -- for I was an hungered,
and ye gave me meat" --; The righteous, to whom he had thus applied, filled
with humble wonder, to find such poor and worthless services of their's, so
graciously ow^^d and amply rewarded, break forth in the following admiring
address to their King and Judge, "Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed
thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? when saw we thee a stranger, and took
the in" --? To which our Savior makes the astonishing answer, in the latter
part of my text, "Verily, I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." Me indeed, in my
own person, ye have not relieved, refreshed, and comforted; but these offices
of charity ye have done to my brethren, to those I am nearly related to, and
tenderly concerned for: And what ye have thus done to them, even the least of
them, I take kindly at your hands, looking upon it with the like friendly
regard, as if done to myself.

O WONDERFUL condescension of the Son of God, our Savior and Judge! That he
should take any notice of the charities of such poor, imperfect, selfish
creatures, deserves our humble and grateful acknowledgments; but that he should
make so great account of them, esteem them as so many kind services done to his
own person, speak of them as such openly in the face of all angels and men, and
admit us hereupon to the rewards of grace in his Fathers heavenly and eternal
kingdom; -- it is unspeakably astonishing! Nothing could have been said more
powerfully adapted to convey an idea of the warmth and strength of the grace of
Christ toward men* and we must be lost to all sense of ingenuity, if our
hearts are not touched with it.

BUT that we may be led into a right understanding of this language of our Lord
and Judge, and conceive aright of the propriety of his saying, "inasmuch as ye
have done it to the least of my brethren, ye have done it to me," let it be
observed,

THAT, as he was pleased to become a partaker of flesh and blood, in fashion as
a man, mankind in common are his brethren. Their relation to him as such arises
from his being a man, like as we are, sin only excepted. And in consequence of
his possessing manhood, he may properly be considered as, in some measure,
interested both in the joys and sorrows of them, who, in common with him,
partake of the same nature. He is accordingly spoken of, Heb. iv. 15. as "an
high priest, who could be touched with the feeling of our infirmities." What is
done to us may, in a sense, on account of his alliance to humanity, be said to
be done to him.

BUT there is an higher and more glorious sense, in which the words of our Lord
may be understood. As we are christians, not in profession, and appearance
only, but in reality and truth, we are, in the moral and religious sense,
whatever nation or kindred we are of, members of that body of which Jesus
Christ is the head. The inspired penmen often set the matter before us in this
light. 1 Cor. xii. 12, 13. "For as the body is one, and has many members, and
all the members of the body, being many members, are one body: So also is
Christ. For by one spirit we are baptized into one body." In like manner, it is
observed of believers, ver. 27th, "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular." Now, according to the reasoning, in this same chapter, 26th ver.
"Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it." And as Christ is the head of the
body, the church, it is eminently true, with respect to him, that he is a
sharer with its several members in their joys and griefs. As they are parts of
his body, it cannot be but he should have a tender sympathy with them.

IT IS in allusion to this manner of speaking, not infrequently used in
scripture, that what is done to the disciples of Christ, is represented as done
to himself. In this point of light, we are, at once, let into the meaning of
that surprising voice from heaven, Acts ix. 4, 5. "Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? -- I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." In the same light, we may
readily see the propriety, and force, of that remarkable passage, in the
gospel, "Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of
cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in
no wise lose his reward." And it is with a view to the same consideration of
good men as the body of Christ, that he says, "I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink." -- And again, "Verily I say unto
you, inasmuch as ye have done it to the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me."

HAVING, with as much brevity as I could, gone over the several particulars
proposed to be considered, there is time to turn the discourse into a serious
exhortation, calling upon my self and you to abound in deeds of charity. Nor
can the wisdom of men or angels present to our view, for our quickening and
encouragement, stronger arguments than those contained in my text. Our Savior
and Judge will accept it kindly of us, if we open our hearts at the cry of his
needy disciples, and stretch forth our hands to their relief. Yea, he will
reckon it an act of beneficence done to himself, and acknowledge it as such
before the general assembly at the great day. And can we withstand so moving,
so endearing, a consideration? Where, in that case, is our love to the Savior,
our best friend, and greatest benefactor? Was our dear Lord now on earth, and
could we behold him, with our bodily eyes, in a suffering state, as he once
was, should we think any thing too much to part with for his comfort? Let us
make it appear, that we should not, by ministering to the necessities of poor
saints. In this way, we may now minister even to Christ himself. For he is the
head of that body, of which believers, however poor and needy, are parts; and
the kindness we show them, we show it constructively to him: Yea, there is no
office of love we can express toward them, even the meanest of them, but our
Lord will take it as though personally done to himself. O the astonishing
stupidity of those men, who are not made willing, by this constraining motive,
to do good, as they have opportunity, and ability, to the household of faith!

IF this should be the truth with respect to any of us, let us look forward to
the coming day of judgment, and know, that our admission to the rewards of an
eternal kingdom is essentially connected with that "love to the brethren,"
which will show it self in all suitable instances of beneficence toward them.
The inquiry, at the judgment, will be, what have been our charities, in
obedience to the gospel? What disttributions have we made to Christ's poor,
which we have always had with us to move our commiseration? Nor will it be in
our power to give a good account of ourselves, if we cannot say, that we have
fed the hungry, and clothed the naked, in some proportion according to the
ability God has given us. It will not then avail us, though we should have done
no hurt, if we have done no good. It will not then suffice, that we have been
fair and honest in our dealings, that we have been sober and temperate in our
enjoyments, or that we have appeared zealous and devout toward God, if, at the
same time, we have been heard-hearted and uncharitable; if, while we have had
it by us, we have said to our poor neighbor, "go, and come again to morrow,
and I will give thee"; if, while we have had ability, we have said to this and
the other "brother and sister, when naked, or destitute of daily food, depart
in peace, be ye warmed, be ye filled, and have not given them those things
which are needful for the body."

IT may be worthy of our particular notice, and most solemn remembrance, that
the dreadful curse spoken of, in the context, as denounced against the wicked,
is grounded on their neglect of deeds of charity. "Depart from me ye cursed;
for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink," and so on. They were, no doubt, sinners in other respects; [the want of
charity is commonly accompanied with many other sins] but their
uncharitableness only is mentioned by name; and it is on this account, in
special, that they are doomed to "the fire prepared for the devil and his
angels."

Do we, my brethren, believe a coming day of judgment? Do we expect to see the
Son of man descending from heaven, in great glory, with his holy angels, to
summon both quick and dead to an appearance before his tribunal? Let us prove
our faith by our works. "To do good and communicate, let us not forget; for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased." Do we hope to be found at the right
hand of our Judge, when he shall "appear a second time without sin unto
salvation"? Let us then be "rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate": So shall we "lay up in store for our selves a good foundation
against that time, and shall lay hold on eternal life."

THE blessed sentence, we have heard, will, at the judgment-day, be pronounced
on those, and only those, who have "fed the hungry, and clothed the naked." If
therefore we have not, when God has given us ability and opportunity, done
these kind offices to the distressed in Christ, and are conscious to our selves
that we have been thus uncharitable, we can be at no loss to determine, that we
are not in the number of those, concerning whom the great King and Judge of the
world will say, at his appearing, "come, ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world."

SURELY, if we had faith in a judgment to come, and did but realize the
advantage, the unspeakable and everlasting advantage, it would then be to us,
to have abounded in deeds of charity, we should not be disposed to "withold
more than is meet," as we too commonly are. It Is a certain truth, however
backward we may be to admit it, that the best thing we can do with "the mammon
of unrighteousness" is, to "make to ourselves friends of it," by employing it
to the uses of charity, that "when we sail, they may receive us to everlasting
habitations." We are hardly brought to believe it, but it is a gospel truth,
that we then most consult our own interest, when we do the most good with our
estates. We may, in this way constructively remit them to another world, where
we may enjoy the benefit of them forever. Every deed of charity, springing from
a principle of faith in Christ, and love to God and our neighbor, is as so
much treasure laid up in heaven. We may be ready to think, all that is done
this way is lost, esteeming it as "bread cast upon the waters." as the wise man
speaks; but we shall "find it again after many days: perhaps, in this world,
without a possibility of failure in the coming eternal world. The least good we
do to the least disciple of Christ, done in faith and love, shall be remembered,
and taken notice of, by him at the judgment, and amply rewarded. And the more
good we do, the more distinguishingly glorious will the sentence of our Judge
be, when he bids us "enter into the joys of our Lord."

SOME, perhaps, may be ready to find fault with me for not bringing a discourse
better fitted to the designs of a communion-day. But it ought to be remembered,
our being hereafter admitted to set down at the eternal supper of the Lamb, in
God's heavenly kingdom, is connected, in the text I have been upon, even by our
Savior himself, with the regard we have paid to that duty of charity I have
been recommending.

AND it is observable, that very death, which we commemorate, at the holy
supper, was owing to charity in the blessed Jesus to the perishing sons of men,
greater charity than was ever before expressed in this world of our's, or ever
will be expressed again. And the supper, at which we are about to communicate,
is an appointed memorial of this very charity of our Savior and Lord: Nor can
we suitably remember his death, without remembering that charity of his, which
made him willing to undergo this death for our eternal good.

AND it is, moreover, a feast of charity that we are about to attend. And if we
would attend it aright, it must be in the exercise of that charity, which will
influence us to "love one another, even as Christ loved us," when he "gave
himself an offering for our sins."

BESIDES all which, the subject I have been upon is, at this time, the more
seasonable, as, in the providence of God, there is an opportunity, and a fair
call, to present to your view an illustrious instance of one of those righteous
ones, of whose deeds of charity to the poor, we have reason to believe, our
Redeemer will take particular notice, at the great day of judgment, and publish
to the general assembly of angels and men to his eternal honor.

YOUR thoughts, I doubt not, are at once fixed on that dear brother of our's,
and friend of Christ and the poor, who departed this life yesterday Morning.

WHAT is said upon such occasions is sometimes apt to give disgust, as being
esteemed a compliment to the dead, rather than their just character. But, in
the present case, I am in no fear of giving offense, the person I am to speak
of was so unexceptionable, so unenvied unless for his goodness, and so
universally well spoken of, both while living, and now he is dead.

IT was his glory and happiness, that he began early to seek and serve God; and
he made good progress in religion, exemplifying in his temper, and conduct, the
things that were virtuous and praiseworthy.

HE had upon his mind an habitual awe and reverence of the great God; was a man
of undissembled piety; prayerful and devout; conscientious in his observation
of the Lord's day; a constant serious attendant on all the institutions of
gospel worship; a bright pattern of meekness and humility, patience and
subjection to the Father of spirits; remarkable for his regard to justice,
which he ever discovered in the fairness in his dealings, punctual veracity to
his word; for his uprightness and integrity; his generous and public spirit;
his plain-heartedness and simplicity; his freedom from deceit and guile; his
disregard to the pomps and vanities of the world; his peaceable, inoffensive
and kind carriage toward all men.

HE was of an active spirit, diligent in business; but did not pursue it to the
neglect of the one thing needful. His share of this world's goods, the fruit of
his own labor, under the divine blessing, was very considerable; but he did
not keep it to himself. He "honored the Lord with his substance"; cheerfully
embracing the opportunities providence put into his hands of relieving the
necessities of the poor. He was "rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate": Though how often he did so is not fully known, nor will
it be known, till the day of the revelation of Jesus Christ. And what added
much to the beauty and value of his charities, he dispensed them without noise
and bustle, without show or ostentation; not seeking, not regarding, the praise
of men, and concerned chiefly to approve himself to his great Lord and Judge.
He was, in a word, one of those "good men for whom (as the apostle Paul speaks)
one would even dare to die." He "gave much alms to the people," and they went
up "for a memorial before God."

HE was, as might be expected of such a man, reconciled to the thoughts of
death, willing to be "absent from the body," as hoping he should go to "be with
Christ, which is best of all. And when Christ shall come in the clouds of
heaven, in great glory, and his holy angels with him, to judge the quick and
dead, then we shall, I trust, see this his servant at his right hand; and that,
we have reason to believe, will be the sentence, he will pronounce on him,
"Come, thou blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: For I was an hungry, and thou gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and thou gave me drink; I was a stranger, and thou tookest me in;
naked, and thou cloathedst me; I was sick and thou visitedst me; in prison, and
thou came unto me: Inasmuch as thou have done these things to these and those
of my brethren, thou have done it unto me."

WE cannot wish any thing better for the children, and the children's children,
than a double portion of the same spirit that rested on their father! And may
they all be blessings in the world, and do worthily for God in their day and
generation!

AND may we of this church suitably resent this repeated stroke of God's hand
upon us* within so short a time! We have lost a true friend, and a liberal
benefactor; and our poor, one who was as a father to them. The Lord is hereby
thinning our glory, and weakening our strength. "Help Lord, for the godly man
cease, the faithful fail from among us." Instead of the fathers, may there be
the children, to supply their place, and continue this church to the second
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ!

LET us be concerned to follow those who through faith, and patience, and
charity are gone to inherit the promises. Let us labor that we may abound in
every good work doing all the good we can especially to the household of faith.
Let us deal our bread to the hungry, and draw out our souls to the distressed:
So will our Lord Jesus Christ, when he appears to judge the world in
righteousness, place us at his own right hand, pronounce us blessed in the
audience of all angels, and the whole race of men, and give us an open and an
abundant entrance into God's everlasting kingdom. AMEN.


