A FUNERAL ELOGIUM, ON THE REVEREND MR. AARON BURR, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE
COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY.

BY WILLIAM LIVINGSTON.

-- OF COMFORT NO MAN SPEAK!
LET US TALK OF GRAVES, AND WORMS, AND EPITAPHS,
MAKE DUST OUR PAPER, AND WITH RAINY EYES,
WRITE SORROW IN THE BOSOM OF THE EARTH.
SHAKESP. STAT SUA CUIQUE DIES; BREVE, ET IRRETARABILE TEMPUS
OMNIBUS EST VITAE: SED FAMAM EXTENDERE FACTIS,
HOC VIRTUTIS OPUS.
NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY H. GAIN, AT THE BIBLE AND CROWN IN
HANOVER-SQUARE. MDCCLVII.

A FUNERAL ELOGIUM, etc.
IT has been the laudable practice of all ages, to perpetuate the memory of
their illustrious dead, either by erecting to their fame, monuments of the most
durable materials; or immortalizing their names, in the faithful pages of
history. These methods, of expressing our esteem, are indeed of no avail to the
deceased; but to be considered as grateful memorials of their superior merit;
and to prevent time, which molders away their mortal part, from obliterating
the remembrance of their virtues. They are, moreover, of singular use, to
inspire posterity with an emulation of examples so deservedly honored, and
transmitted to futurity with such eminent marks of distinction. Hence there is,
perhaps, not a more useful study than that of BIOGRAPHY, which presents to our
view the glorious patterns of antiquity; and while the amiable portraits are
passing before our eyes, can scarcely fail of imprinting on our minds, some
beautiful and striking lineament. To see virtue and vice exemplified in real
life, is instead of a thousand lectures; and infuses greater veneration and
horror, than whole volumes of moral philosophy. And, when finally, we consider,
that all those celebrated characters have long since submitted to the
inevitable stroke of fate, such a reflection will out-preach the preacher, and
more effectually than the boy at PHILIP'S ear, remind us of our own mortality.
But shall heroes and conquerors, ingross the admiration of posterity, while the
christian and the patriot, lie buried in oblivion? Shall the splendour of
martial renown, wholly extinguish the mild -- the gentle luster of private
worth? Is not the sage, the philosopher, and the friend, who diffused joy and
happiness all around him, as worthy the funeral eulogy, as those victorious
ravagers who seatter famine and war; and owe the blaze of their glory to the
terror of their arms?

To have all the qualifications that render a man amiable or great; -- to be
the object of delight wherever one is known; -- to possess learning, genius,
and sublimity of soul; -- can there be born a greater blessing to the world? To
exert those shining endowments for the benefit of mankind, and employ a great
and elevated spirit, only in doing great and diffusive good. -- Can a nobler
use be made of the happiest talents? Amidst such striking colors, in so
degenerate an age, who can mistake the picture of the excellent deceased, whose
memory these pages are intended to celebrate?

CAN you image to yourself, a person modest in prosperity, prudent in
difficulty, in business indefatigable, magnanimous in danger, easy in his
manners, of exquisite judgment, of profound learning, catholic in sentiment, of
the purest morals, and great even in the minutest things. -- Can you image so
accomplished a person, without recollecting the idea of the late PRESIDENT BURR?

WHETHER we consider him in a private, or public view, he is still equally
striking, equally distinguished; and, without exaggerated expression, something
surpassing the ordinary bounds of human nature.

FEW were more perfect in the art of rendering themselves agreeable in company.
'Twas in those social moments, when frequently the human mind lies all open and
ungarded, that he blended improvement with delight; and happily tempered the
serious with the gay. His knowledge of men unfolded to him all the avenues to
the heart, which he could variously affect with wonderful dexterity. Nothing is
more difficult, than to please in conversation, without betraying a design to
please, which never fails to disgust. Pride cannot bear to be diverted by a
companion, who, under the disguise of entertaining others, appears intent on
securing his own applause. Hence good nature and modesty, with a slender share
of ingenuity and reading, generally carry the palm against wit and erudition,
attended with ostentation and parade. Of this so sensible was the PRESIDENT,
that unless the subject required it, no one would have suspected his learning;
and when it did, every one was astonished how a perion so immersed in books,
had acquired so large a share of ease in converse, and freedom of behavior.
But in him every thing was agreeable, because every thing was natural: and he
had the secret to be intimately familiar, without degrading the dignity of his
function. As he had not studied the philosophers, without sacrificing to the
graces; so neither in the sallies of humor, did he ever forget the character
of a DIVINE. In a word, his open benevolent and undissembling heart, inspired
all around him with innocent cheerfulness; and made every one who knew him,
court his engaging society.

IN his FRIENDSHIPS how varm! how sincere! how refined and disinterested!
Power, with her mighty arm, may extort a reluctant submission: Wealth, with her
golden lure, may attract the obsequious levee: Honor, with its surrounding
blaze, may dazzle the wondering multitude: And eloquence, with her enchanting
voice, bewitch the transported audience. But neither power, with her mighty
arm; nor wealth, with her golden lure; nor honor, with its surrounding blaze;
nor eloquence with her enchanting voice, can fix a single heart, or procure a
cordial friend.

THOUGH a person of a slender and delicate make, to encounter fatigue he had a
heart of steel; and for the dispatch of business, the most amazing talents,
joined to a constancy of mind, that induced success in spite of every obstacle.
As long as an enterprise appeared not absolutely impossible, he knew no
discouragement; but in proportion to its difficulty, augmented his diligence:
and by an insuperable fortitude, frequently accomplished, what his friends and
acquaintance conceived utterly impracticable. To his unparalled assiduity,
next to the divine blessing, is doubtless to be ascribed the present
flourishing state of the COLLEGE of NEW JERSEY; which, from a mere private
undertaking, is in a few years, become the joy of its friends, and the
admiration and envy of its enemies.

HE was life and activity itself; and though cut off in the bloom and vigor of
his years, attained, with respect to his public utility, the remotest period of
old age. His every year was replete with good works; and while others could
here and there boast a shining action, like a scattered star in the vast
expanse of heaven, his LIFE, like the milky way, was one continued universal
glow.

IN the sacred scriptures, he was a perfect APOLLOS. These were his constant
study, the subject of his daily meditation: From these, he extracted his
divinity: From these, the maxims of his conduct: and by these, was made wise
unto salvation.

HIS PIETY eclipsed all his other accomplishments. He was steady in his faith;
unfluctuating in principle; ardent in devotion; deaf to temptation; open to the
motions of grace; without pride; without oftentation; full of GOD; evacuated of
self; having his conversation in heaven; seeing through the veil of mortality,
the high destiny of man; breathing a spiritual life; and offering up a
perpetual holocaust of adoration and praise.

I MENTION not his private CHARITY and ALMS. I say nothing of his PRAYERS, his
FASTINGS and his WATCHINGS. I pass by all those virtues, which shunned
applause, and sought obscurity and retirement. These were only to be observed
by that all-penetrating eye, which pervades immensity; and to be noticed by
that omniscient judge, who sees in secret, but will reward before the grand
consistory of angels and men.

HOWEVER steady to his own principles, he was perfectly free from every
appearance of BIGOTRY. He prized religion as an inestimable jewel, whose real
value was neither inhanced nor diminished by the casket in which it is
deposited. Hence he loved and revered the sincere and exemplary of every
communion; and particularly cultivated a strict correspondence, with several of
the greatest ornaments of the CHURCH established in ENGLAND; who, in their
turn, treated him with the highest affection and respect.

IN the PULPIT he shone with superior luster. He was fluent, copious, sublime
and persuasive. The momentous truths, and awful mysteries of religion, so
strongly possessed his mind, that he spoke from the heart, which is the only
way of speaking to it. His language was intelligible to the meanest capacity;
and above the censure of the greatest genius. He was neither destitute of the
ornaments of style; nor so captivated with the flowers of rhetoric, as to bury
beneath them, the fruits of improvement. More sollicitous to penetrate the
heart, than to amuse the head, he aimed at perspicuity; and instead of subtle
speculations and metaphysical distinctions, inculcated the luminous and
uncontroverted truths of revelation. His invention was not so properly
fruitful, as inexhaustible; and his elocution equal to his ideas. Out of the
well-stor'd treasure of his mind, he produced things new and old; while his
human literature, like an obsequious handmaid, was ever ready to set off and
embellish her mistress DIVINITY. He was none of those "downy doctors," who
sooth their hearers into delusive hopes of the divine acceptance; or substitute
external morality, in the room of vital godliness: On the contrary, he scorned
to proclaim the peace of GOD, 'till the rebel laid down his arms, and returned
to his allegiance. He was an ambassador, that adhered inviolably to his
instructions; nor ever acceded to a treaty, that would not be ratified in the
court of heaven. He searched the conscience with the terrors of the law, before
he essuaged its anguish with the balm of Gilead, or prescribed the sweet
emollients of a bleeding deity. He acted, in short, like one not entrusted with
the lives and fortunes, but the everlasting interests of his fellowmortals; and
therefore made it his business to advance the divine life, and restore the
beautiful image of GOD, disfigured by the apostasy of man -- to represent
religion as the offspring of light, and the parent of liberty and
self-dominion; -- to expose the shadowy gratifications of pomp and power, and
recommend the superior exalted pleasures of a constant intercourse with the
father of spirits, the fountain of life, and light and love; -- to call our
wandering thoughts from the siren allurements of the world and the flesh, and
direct them to the supreme magnet of souls, the center and origin of beatitude
and perfection; -- to enlighten the understanding; to reform the judgment; to
regulate the passions, and to rectify the will.

WHAT he preached in the pulpit, he lived out of it. His LIFE and EXAMPLE were
a comment on his sermons: and by his engaging deportment, he rendered the
amiable character of a christian still more attractive and lovely. In many,
religion appears awkward and disgustful: In some, more agreeable and becoming;
in others, charming and ornamental; but in him she seemed to have erected her
throne, and as it were doubled the beams of her majesty.

THE PASTORAL FUNCTION he discharged with equal fidelity and success. To
examine into the condition of his flock; -- to watch against essential errors;
-- to instruct the ignorant; -- to revive the disconsolate; -- to animate the
penitent; -- to reclaim the relapsing; -- to confirm the irresolute; -- to
humble the arrogant, and reprove the contumacious and immoral, were his
constant and most delightful employments.

FOR PUBLIC SPIRIT, and the love of his country, who ever surpassed this
reverend patriot? Amidst all the cares of his academical function, he thought,
and studied, and plan'd, and toiled, for the common weal. He had a high sense
of english liberty; and detested despotic power, as the bane of human
happiness. With him the heresy of ARIUS was not more fatal to the purity of the
gospel, than the positions of FILMAR, to the dignity of man, or the repose of
states. Of our excellent constitution he entertained the justest idea; and
gloried in the privileges of a Briton, as much as he lamented their
prostitution and abuse. If any thing ever ruffled the serenity of his mind,
besides the prevalence of vice, it was the adverse fortune and disastrous
situation of his country. His compassionate bosom daily agonized, for the
families bleeding by the sword of the wilderness; or captivated by ruthless
unrelenting savages. His MAJESTY'S arms unsuccessful, and those of the enemy
victorious, fired him with a generous resentment; and made him rouse his
fellow subjects, to efface the memory of our former miscarriage; and avenge the
righteous quarrel of the BEST OF KINGS. How did he lament, that BRITAIN, the
mother of heroes, the school of patriots and warriors, the land of frugality
and virtue, the native soil of liberty, that light of life and source of human
bliss! -- that BRITAIN, which humbled the oppressors of the earth; and bade her
navies carry her name in terror round the world, should at length degenerate
into the shameful seat of venality and corruption; become the nurse of
effeminacy, voluptuousness, and riot; the vile receptacle of impurity, sloth
and dejection; and so ignominiously forget her primitive martial prowess, as to
brook the insults of a people, formerly trembling at her name; and for every
indignity, feeling the vengeance of her arms!

IN propagating the gospel among the heathen natives, how assiduous a
CORRESPONDENT of the SCOTCH SOSIETY! He thought no labor, no difficulty too
great, in the prosecution of so important an enterprise. An enterprise, most
benevolently calculated, to illumine the gloomy wilderness with the beams of
evangelical truth; and proclaim the resurrection and the life, to those who sat
in darkness and the shadow of death! By the smiles of heaven, on the pious
endeavors of that VENERABLE BODY; and the zealous activity of some of their
missionaries, many are undoubtedly converted from paganism to christianity; and
from the error of their ways, to the LIVING GOD. How illustrious an
achievement, to lead the worshippers of deceased heroes and infernal spirits,
to the knowledge of the UNIVERSAL CREATOR AND FATHER OF ALL! To transform rocks
and mountains, till then the pagods of superstition and polytheism, into so
many Bethels to the LORD OF HOSTS! -- To render the howling desert, hitherto
resounding with idolatrous orgies, divinely vocal with the praises of GOD, and
his anointed MESSIAH! -- To prepare, in fine, the obdurate heart of barbarism
for the influences of the HOLY GHOST; and replenish the huts of savages with
the disciples of JESUS!

WITH what dignity and reputation, did he sustain the office of PRESIDENT!
Sensible how important to the public, and through the whole thread of our
existence, is the early culture of the human mind, he considered himself, with
the painter of old, as "designing for eternity". He had the most engaging
method of instruction; nor inferior to the extent of his capacity, was his
facility in communicating. No man had a happier talent of expressing his
sentiments; or calling latent truth from her dark and profound recesses. No man
more capable of opening the mental soil, to the kindly rays of science; or
improving its fertility, with the gentle dews of exposition and comment.
Instead of turning any branch of learning, into inexplicable mystery, the
common pride of pedagogues, he set the most intricate points in the clearest
light, and stripped off all the scholastic clouds, that obscured the simple
majesty of knowledge.

NOR did he neglect any opportunity of imbuing the minds of his PUPILS with the
seeds of VIRTUE, at the same time that he enriched them, with the treasures of
learning. And, indeed, if a pagan mythologist could observe, that to treat of
the world, without saying any thing of its author, would be impious, what
wonder that this divine philosopher, in explaining the appearances of the
universe, should trace the bright and conspicuous footsteps of the deity, through
every part of the magnificent system of nature! What wonder, that he
perpetually raised their thoughts, to the invisible things of GOD, from the
visible wonders of his power; from the beautiful and stupendous fabric of the
world, to the infinite all-governing ARCHITECT; and from the scattered rays to
the IMMENSE OCEAN OF LIGHT!

WITH the same ease, he secured the obedience and the love of the students. He
had the art of leading the will by invisible chains; and making reason, no less
prevalent than authority. Who, like him, could punish an offense, not only
without the resentment, but with the approbation of the delinquent? Speak ye,
who best can tell, ye sons of the prophets, who experienced his affection; nor
ever heard him pronounce punishment, without observing the trickling tear, and
the reluctant heart? Surely, never will his idea be blotted from your memories;
but in your walks, in your studies, in your meditations and amusements, you
will see him, hear him, accost him, admire and deplore him. -- With him,
doubtless, had the MUSES deserted their recent abode; and SCIENCE rusted in her
inexplicated volumes, had not the same all-gracious hand, which removed one
president, instantly pointed out another: Perhaps the only one, capable of
making us forget (could such a calamity be ever forgotten) the loss of his
predecessor.

WHATEVER disguise the hypocrite may assume, at the approach of death,
dissimulation drops her mast. When men have but a moment to live, it is no
longer their interest to wear a vizard. In this precise view, let us therefore
contemplate our illustrious friend. Than a DYING CHRISTIAN, the whole compass
of nature affords not an object of more dignity, astonishment or grandeur.
Come, ye ministers of the LORD, behold a spectacle, even to you, of fruitful
instruction. Behold the triumphs of grace, in the dissolution of nature! What
patience, what resignation, what lively hope and divine affiance! See the king
of terrors disarmed of his sting; and vanquished in the very act of conquering!
Behold heaven commencing on earth; and faith triumphant over pain, disease, and
mortality! Wrapped in the thoughts of immortal life, he appears great even in the
midst of distress; and suffers with all the majesty of woe. How august in ruin!
How immoveably fixed on the rock of ages! What peace passing understanding! What
joy, what ineffable joy, in the HOLY GHOST! O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory?

BUT what heart can conceive, what tongue can utter the anguish of his CONSORT?
Alas! madam, that so bright a sun should decline so soon; and with it, your
every joy and every comfort! An awful lesson, against building our happiness,
except on the foundation of eternity. But why the unavailing tear, or fruitless
lamentation? He is indeed a prisoner to the grave, but he is a prisoner of
hope. Since the omnipotent captain of his salvation has subdued the last enemy,
dispoiled principalities and powers, and led captivity captive, the blasts of
death cannot destroy the buds of his virtue. These are transported to the
paradise of GOD, there to grow, and spread, and flourish, with unwithering and
ever-blooming verdure. It Is death alone, that affords a harbor, to all that
embark on the sea of this tempestuous life. But with him, the storms that vex
this turbulent ocean are blown over, and will molest no more. He has finished
the perilous voyage, and enjoys a secure anchorage in the calm haven of
eternal rest. He is where even you, madam, could not improve his happiness. He
is -- and what a cruel kindness to regret his lot! -- he is removed from all
pain, resolved of all doubt, purified from all sin, delivered from all fear,
and happy beyond hope, or the power of time and vicissitude. Cease then to weep
an angel, whom you loved a man. Rather improve the alarming providence, and
take sanctuary in the consolations of religion; and then, it is the voice of
infallibility, "thy maker will be thy husband." Thus will instruction spring
from his very relics; and wisdom, the best of wisdom, blossom on his sepulcher.

BUT what an unexpected stroke, and how universally deplored! See, how the
churches put on their sables, and mourn like a disconsolate widow! Where is the
unsiowing eye, or the unsorrowing breast? O admirable man! friend! father!
husband! scholar and divine! and worthy a longer life, was the present life of
any other value, than to ripen us for the next. But great and mavelous are
thy works, LORD GOD ALMIGHTY! just and true are thy ways, thou KING of SAINTS.
At so dreadful a blow, and so glorious a change, who can weep, or who refrain
from weeping? But will they not be guilty tears, that bemoan the blessed
transition, from this vale of humiliation and sorrow, to the summit of
immarcessible honor and joy? We may indeed lament ourselves, our country, and
mankind, as berest of a friend; and the church of her ornament and boast: But
we should rejoice, that he has bequeathed us the inestimable legacy of his
virtues; and that, "blessed are the dead who die in the LORD." Instead of
effeminate wailings, let us therefore adorn his memory, by adopting his
excellencies; and while nature drops the inevitable tear, let reason and
religion crown his tomb with triumphant laurels.

METHINKS I see him disingaged from his prison, and regaining his native skies!
Lift up your heads, O ye gates! and be ye listed up, ye everlasting doors! that
an heir of glory may enter in. I behold him, approved by the righteous judge,
and taking his rank among those more-than-conquerors, who through faith and
patience inherit the promises! Mark, how the reverend choir, who here below
served at the altar, cluster about him; and hail his admittance into that city,
which needs neither sun nor moon, but is illuminated with the GLORY OF GOD,
and the LIGHT OF THE LAMB. But, who is HE! that with superior fondness,
congratulates thy arrival on the coast of bliss? It Is that BEST OF FRIENDS His
excellency the late governor BELCHER, whose funeral sermon he preached but a
few days before his own death.
, who left thee only time to perform his obsequies; and pay thy last -- last
duty to his memory, before ye were to meet never -- never more to be parted.

FINIS.

