PROCEEDINGS AND TREATY WITH The Shawanese, Nanticokes, and Mohikander INDIANS,
LIVING At Otsiningo, on one of the West Branches of the Susquehanna River.

NEGOTIATED At Fort-Johnson, in the County of Albany, in the Province of
NEW YORK; BY The Honorable Sir William Johnson, Bart. etc.

PUBLISHED By Order of his Excellency the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of
LOUDOUN, Commander in Chief of all His Majesty's Forces in (...).

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by J. PARKER and W. WEYMAN, at the New
Printing-Office in Beaver-Street, MDCCLVII

FORT-JOHNSON, 14th April 1757, P. M.
PETER SPELIMAN, a German, who has lived these Seven Years past among the
Indians, and whose Indian Name i^ Owiligas^h^* Son-in-Law to one of the Chiefs
of the Shawanese Indians, living on one of the (...) Branches of the
Susquehanna River, arrived here; after taking some Refreshment, spoke to Sir
WILLIAM JOHNSON, as follo^s:

Brother,
The King of the Shawanese has sent me forward wi^^ these two Strings of
Wampum, to acquaint you, that he is on the Road, and (...) be here Tomorrow
with near Two Hundred Indians, Shawanese, Nantico^^^, and Moh^ck^nde^s. They
are coming to sm^ke a friendly Pipe with you, after the Ma^^^r of our
Forefathers, and to offer their Assistance to you in the present (...) Times.
The Aughguages and Tuscaroros told him, that (...) up to come and see you, they
would also rise and accompany (...). He (...) wa^^ed on the Road expecting
them, but as they are not yet (...), he will make no further Delay, but proceed
hither. Gave two Str^ng^ of Wampum.

Sir William told him to acquaint the King of the Shawanese, and the (...) of
the Indians, that he should be glad to see them, and would prepare for their
R^ception. Gave two Strings of Wampum.

15th April, P. M.
The aforesaid Indians arrived on the opposite Side of the River, and (...)
saluting the Fort with a Discharge of their Guns, (...) Side. Sir William sent
the Secretary over to them to tell them* that (...) glad to see and smoke a
Pipe with two or three of their (...) ac^ordingly came over the River. They
acquainted Sir William that there were (...) Nations of them, to wit,
Shawanese, Nanticokes and Mohickanders, (...) at Ostiningo, on one of the West
Branches of the Susqu^hanna River.

Sir William treated them with Pipes, Tobacco and R^m; and after staying (...)
Time, they took their Leave for that Evening.

16th April.
There being such a Fresh in the River, as render^d (...) Pas^^ge over
diffic^lt and tedious; the Indians removed, came on this Side, and encamped
behind the House.

17th April, P. M.
The Chief Men of the aforesaid Indians, with several of their P^^ple* ^^me
into the Meeting-Room, and sent Word to Sir William, that the^ desired to speak
a few Words to him* but he being indisposed, sent the Secretary (...) to te^^
them, that if they had any Thing of Moment to say now, they might speak it to
him, and which he would take down in Writing.

Whereupon a young Mohickander, named Jonathan, Son of the King or Chief of
that Nation, and who spoke very good Low Dutch, said as follows;

AR^NT STEVENS, the Interpreter, being present.

Brother,
(...) Belt (holding a Belt in his Hand) which you sent to invite our People
^ither The Arrival of these I^^ians, was wholly unexpected by Sir William
(...), and upon Enqui^y, he f^^nd the Case to be as follow^*

Last (...), the before mentioned P^ter Spel^man, or, (...), came to Fort
(...), and said he was sent b^ the (...) Chief with a (...) of Intelligence,
which he then delivered.

Sir (...) sent by him two large (...) of Wampum* one for the (...), reminding
them of the Engagements they had entered into at th^^ Hou^^^ ^ast Summer* The
(...), to (...) the (...) Chief for his Intelligence, and ^oping He and his
People would be ready to come and (...) Majesty^s Arms, whenever he might (...)
to them.

The said Messenger made a Mistake in delivering these Belts, and told the
Shawanese and Mohickan^^rs, that Sir (...) desired to see them as soon as
possible, upon which the^e (...) set off and came hither.


.

Brother,

(...) received your Belt of Invitation, our Hearts rejoiced within us, and
(...) imm^diately r^se up, regardless of the Severity of the Season, and
through Snow, Ice, and Water, come to see you.

Brother,

We are now come to this Council Fire, and we are rejoiced to find Ourselves
sitting over it.

Brother,

When we have finis^^d our present Meeting, we propose to rise up and return to
our Habitati^ns; and when we get there, we shall communicate to the rest of our
People we have left at Home, all that may pass between Us here; and not only to
the People of our Towns, but also to the Shawanese, on the Ohio, and to all the
scattered Delawares and Mohickanders; and we shall acquaint them all that we
have made a Covenant of Peace, Friendship, and Alliance with you, in Behalf of
all our People, and our Brethren the English.

18th April.
Sir William sent for the Heads of the aforesaid Indians, who came into his
Room, when he told them, that he was s^rry his Indisp^^^tion prevented his
meeting them Yesterday -- that he was to Day something better, and a^ there
were several of the Six Nations, who had been here some Days, he propos^d to
finish Business with them to Day, and would Tomorrow speak to them and their
People.

(...), April the 10^^ 1757* P. M PRESENT, Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, Baronet, etc.
Lieutenant (...), of the Royal-Americans. Lieutenant (...), of the
Royal-Americans. Capt. PETER WRAXALL* Secretary. Mr. (...) S^^VIN^,
Interpreter. PAXI^^^^, King of the (...). (...), King or Chief o^ the
Nanticokes. ABRAHAM, alia^ (...), King or Chief of the Mohickanders Above One
Hundred and (...) INDIANS of said Nations. Sundry INDIANS of the Six-Nations.

^

BRETHREN,

I AM glad to see you at this House, -- here a Council Fire is alway^ burning*
-- here a Tree of Shelter is planted, not only for the Six-Nati^^s, but for all
Indians who are, or desire to be in Peace and Friendship with the English, and
will acknowledge the Great King of England, my Master, for their Father. He
has ordered and empowered me to take care of all his dutiful and good Children
the Indians, in these Parts. I do on my Side, keep this Council Room free from
all Defilement. There is nothing allowed to come here which will hurt any good
and honest Indian.

WHEN I consider the Distance you are come, the severe Season of the Year, and
the extreme Badness of the Roads, and also, that there is a great Meeting of
the Susquehanna Indians now holding under my Direction, with Mr. Creghan, my
Deputy, at Harris's- Ferry, on the Susqu^hanna River, so much nearer than this
to your Habitations; I could, from Brotherly Tenderness, have wished you had
deferred your Journey here, till that Meeting had been over. You would then
have had a more pleasant Time, and comfortable Roads for traveling -- Besides,
the Result of that Meeting would have afforded you more Matter for this:
However, I take your coming now, as a strong Proof of your Brotherly Love and
Friendly Dispositions toward your Brethren the English. To this Council Room,
I now heartily bid you welcome. Gave three Strings of Wampum.

Brethren,

Last Summer I held a Meeting, and entered into a Treaty in this Council Room,
with the Shawanese King, now present; and with the King of the Delawares,
settled at Tia^go. This Treaty I sent Home to the Great King, your Father; here
it is printed, that all your Brethren, the English, on this Continent, may know
what past; and what Agreements we have entered into. The Great GOD above is a
Lover of Truth and Sincerity, he will send his Vengeance down on that People or
Nation who deceive each other with Words of Peace and Friendship, when their
Hearts speak War, and their Tongues utter Lies. You will find that the English
will faithfully observe their Parts of this Treaty; and I hope, and doubt not,
but your People will strictly observe the Engagements they solemnly bound
themselves to. By this Belt I expect all you who are now present, will do the
same on your Parts. Gave a Belt.

Brethren,

Some of you Mohickanders were present at this Treaty, and as I make no Doubt
but all of you are acquainted with the Particulars of it, I shall therefore
only put you in Mind, that it was their promised to send and invite all the
Shawanese who live on the Ohio, and all the Delawares and Mohickanders who are
scattered round about Fort Du Quesne, and those Parts, to come and put their
Hands into the same Covenant Chain.

I desire to know what has been done in this Affair.

Gave three Strings of Wampum.

Brethren,

Listen, and I will tell you the Difference between the English and the French.
The English desire and labor to unite all Indians into one general Bond of
brotherly Love, and national Interest. The French endeavor to divide the
Indians, and stir up War and Contention amongst them. Those who intend to
destroy or enslave any People or Nation, will first endeavor to divide them.
-- This you and all the Indians upon this Continent, know, has always been, and
continues to be, the Endeavors of the French. But thoug this is a Fact which I
think all the Indians must certainly see, yet the French have found Means some
how or other, so to bewitch their Understandings, as to make many of them
believe they love the Indians, and mean well toward them. It Is very strange,
Brethren, that any one Man, much more any Number of Men, who are not either mad
or drunk, can believe that stirring up Brethren to spill each others Blood,
dividing them from one another, and making Parties amongst them, are Proofs of
Love, and Marks of friendly Designs toward them.

Not less unaccountable is it, Brethren, that the French should be able to
persuade the Indians, that building Forts in the Middle of their Country and
Hunting Grounds, is for their Interest and Protection. I tell you, Brethren,
and I warn you, that whatever good Words the French may give you -- how much
soever they may now smile on you -- whatever Presents they may now make you,
your Chains are in their Pockets, and when their Designs are ripe for
Execution, they will take the Axe out of their Bosom and strike it into your
Heads -- But this they know they cannot do until you have broken the Covenant
Chain with your Brethren the English, and taken up the Axe against them. It Is
for this Reason the French are always endeavoring, by Lies, by Presents, by
Promises, to stir up all Indians to fall upon the English Settlements, to
destroy their best Friends and faithful Brethren; and many Indians have been so
wicked and foolish, as in Spite of Treaties and ancient Friendship, to become
the Dogs of the French, and come and go as they commanded them.

Brethren,

If the Indians do not return to their Senses, they will see and feel when it
is too late, that they have ruined themselves, enslaved their Posterity, and
lost their Country*

They will find their Country fortified by the French, not against the English,
but against the Indians themselves.

Brethren,

What I have said, and am going to say, I say not to you only, but to all
Indians; and I desire you will with this Belt, make it known amongst all the
Nations you have any Acquaintance or Connections with. Tell them from me, to
look at the French Forts built and building through the Middle of their
Country, and on their best hunting Lands -- Let them look at the (...) F^ags
flying in their Forts at all the great Lakes, along all the great Rivers, in
order to ob^^ge them to trade with the French only, sell their Skins, and take
Goods for them at what Prices the French please to put on them -- And it is a
Thing well known to all Indians, that the French cannot sell them Goods near as
cheap as the English can, nor in such Assortments and Plenty. Gave a large Belt.

Brethren,

Let a^^ Nations of Indians know, that the Great King of England, my Master, is
their Friend; that he desires all Nations of Indians may unite together, be as
one Body and one Blood -- He offers them his Alliance and Protection, which all
Princes and People over the great Lake, are proud and glad of. He is ready to
forgiv^ all that has past, and receive them with the open and tender Arms of a
forgiving Father, and a sincere Friend -- He exho^ts them by me, to take off
the Bandage from their Eyes, wherewith the French has blindfolded them, that
they may see the true State of their Country, and avoid the C^^ins which the
French are preparing for them and their Posterity -- Let them rise up as one
Man, and assist His Majesty's Arms, in driving the French out of their Country.
--

The Great King of England will then take Care that His People shall not invade
your Lands, that His Traders shall supply you with Goods, and deal honestly by
you. --

If the Indians will do their Parts herein, they and the English will be as one
Flesh and one Blood, and every Indian on this Continent may then fit under his
Tree in Peace, praise him that rules above, -- smoke his Pipe, and dread no
Enemy.

Brethren,

Let what I have now said to you, sink into your Hearts -- publish it Word for
Word to all your People at Home, and through all the Nations; make no Delay,
for now is the Time for the Indians to choose, whether they and their Children
after them, will o^ will not be, a Free, a Great, and a Happy People.

By this Belt I fasten all the Words I have said to you on your Hearts. Gave a
great Belt of Wampum.

Brethren,

I would be glad to have the Opinion of you who are present, upon what I have
said with these two Belts, and the Proposal I have made of its being published
through the Nations.

Brethren,

I must inform you of an Accident which happened some Days ago, between Albany
and Schen^ctady. A River, or Mo^^ckander Indian, was shot by a Soldier; who
says the Indian first laid hold of him, abused and threatened him. The Soldier
is in Confinement, will be tried, and if found guilty, will suffer. I am very
sorry for this Misfortune, but there is no recalling the Dead. All therefore
that I can do, is to condole with you on this Occasion according to your
Customs, and cover his Grave with these Blankets, Strouds and Stockings; and
with these Handkerchiefs to dry up the Tears of his Friends and Relations. And
I hope, that after this, as the Soldier is confined, you will rest easy and
satisfied in your Minds, as nothing more could be done if the same Accident had
happened to me.

Here the above Goods were delivered; and after a Glass of Rum round, to drink
the King's Health, the Meeting broke up.

Eod. Die, P. M. A Cayouga Sachem, named Tianoga, came into Sir William's Room,
with old Aquiotta, an Oneida Sachem, and spoke to him as follows: PETER
WRAXA^L, Secretary. ARENT STEVENS, Interpreter.

Brother,
As I was co^ing this Way, I called at Aughguaga. The Indians of that Place
understanding I was to pass by your House, told me that they had a M^ssage to
send by me to you, which was this: That the Shawanese and Mohickander Indians
now here, called upon the Aughguages, and invited them to accompany them down
hither, which the Aughguages agreed to, and were packing up in order to follow
those Indians, but the Weather grew so bad, and raised the Creeks so high, that
they became impassable; besides which, a Sickness came among their People These
Accidents put a Stop to their Intentions They desired me to tell you, Brother,
that howsoever these Indians may be disposed, the Aughguages are steady and
firm in their Attachments toward their Brethren the English -- they added
further, that though they have not yet given you an Answer upon several Belts
you have sent them, they desire you will not be displeased or uneasy on this
Account, for they will take Care, that their Actions shall always prove they
are worthy of your Friendship and Confidence.

The Aughguages gave me another Reason for their not coming to this Meeting --
that they have lately received a Message from two of the Oneida Chiefs, named
Conoghguiesa, and Teughsaniunt, acquainting them that their Country was now in
Danger, as the French threatened to come that Way as soon as the Lakes were
navigable; wherefore they desired all their Friends living at Aughguaga, to be
ready to come to their Assistance when called upon. This they say they are
ready to do, and after that is over, they will be ready to come to the Council
Fire here.

Thus, Brother, I have acquitted myself of the Message delivered to me, for you.

FORT-JOHNSON, 21st April, 1757, P. M. PRESENT, Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, Baronet,
etc. Lieutenant CLAUS. Mr. GUY JOHNSON. Secretary, and Interpreter, as before.

The Shawanese, Nanticoke and Mohikander Indians, being assembled in the
Meeting Room, sent Sir William Word they were come to give their Answer to his
Speech to them the Nineteenth Instant. Upon his taking his Seat, Jonathan, the
Mohickander, spoke in Low Dutch, as follows:

Brother,

If you are prepared to hear us, please to listen to what we have to say:

Sir William said he was ready, and would be attentive.

Brother,

We are very much obliged to you for your kind Reception of us, and your
Concern for the bad Journey we have had; we were not discouraged thereby,
having our Hearts cheared with the Peace and Friendship our People made here
with you last Summer. Gave three Strings of Wampum.

Brother,

You asked us what was done about sending your Belt to the Ohio, and the
Delaware Indians about Fort Du Quesne. We acknowledge that Belt was received,
and it was given to Teediuscunt, the Chief Man at Tiaogo, (who is acquainted
with all our Friends and Allies) what he has done therein, we do not really
know. Gave three Strings.

Brother,

You put us in Mind of the Treaty of Peace and Friendship entered into in this
Council Room last Summer, between you and our Brothers the Shawanese and
Delawares, at Tiaogo.

Brother,

All the Nations here present for themselves, and all belonging to them, lay
hold of the said Covenant Chain, and are determined to keep fast the same as
long as the Sun Shines, and GOD gives us Breath.

You have told us, Brother, that GOD knows all Things, and the Heart of every
one of US. Brother, it is true, and we call GOD to Witness the Sincerity of our
Resolutions, to keep unbroken, the Covenant Chain, with our Brethren the
English: We will not tell you any Lies, and we assure you, that when our People
at Home, shall hear of our entering into this Agreement of Peace and
Friendship, they will, we are sure, be exceedingly rejoiced; and we will not
only faithfully observe it ourselves, but teach the same to our Children yet
unborn. Gave a Belt.

Brother,

All you said to us concerning the Difference of Conduct between the English
and the French, and every Thing you desired us to publish amongst our People,
and all the Nations, gave us great Satisfaction; and we think it to be the
Truth. Be assured, we will not do as was done last Year, refer it to another,
but we will deliver your Words, and send your Belt, with our own Mouths and
Hands; and when we have done this, we will not fail to let you know what
Effects it has had, and what Nations you can depend upon as Brethren; and what
are your Enemies. Gave a Belt.

Brother,

You told us the Day before Yesterday, that the French had put a Bandage over
our Eyes, which you told us to remove, that we might look about and see clearly
the State of our Country, and our true Interest

All you said to us on this Subject, was extremely agreeable, and we thank you
for it from the Bottom of our Hearts; it was acting like a Friend and Brother:
But for our Parts, we have cast off the Bandage, and can see clearly round us,
and which Way soever we look, we can see no Friends so true, no Brothers so
affectionate to us as the English; they have ever been so to us, and our
Forefathers also.

Brother,

You have also told us, that the Great King, our Father, over the Sea, offered
us, by you, his Hand of Favor and Protection; we lay fast hold of it, and will
not quit it so long as the World endures.

Brother,

You (...) made us very joyful, by assuring us, that our Father, the Great
King, is ready to forgive and forget all past Faults and Misdoing^ -- this
makes our Hearts happy and easy, for there have been some Indians who have done
am^^s, and w^o thought He would never forgive them. The King, our Father's
Goodness, will be great Matter of Joy to them, and give us the most un^eigned
Satisfaction -- Brother, we shall publish all this good News amongst all
Nations of Indians with whom we have any Acquaintance. Gave a Belt.

Brother,

We beg Leave to add a few Words; we have not perhaps been so particular as we
ought, -- but we assure you, that what we have said, comes from the Bottom of
our Hearts; and that we mean more and better than we are capable of expressing
-- In these Matters we are but as Children to you white People.

Brother,

We have forgot something, that is, to tell you where we now live; it is at
O^i^ingo; and if you have at any Time, Occasion for us, o^ Messages to send us,
there you will always find us. At O^^i^ing^ live Three Principal Nations, viz.
The Shawanese, Nanticoke^ and M^hickanders, who are all Brethren.

Brother,

We have now concluded our Answer to your Speech to us* and must beg Leave to
say something to you from ourselves, and which is of great Importance to Us. --

Brother,

^lea^e to send us your Attention a little: It Is now Nine Years ago that a
Misfortune happened near Rein^e^k, in this Province: A white Man there, shot a
young Man an Indian -- there was a Meeting held thereon, and Mart^ra^ ^^ffman,
said, Brothers, There are two Methods of settling this Accident, one according
to the white People's Customs, the other acc^^ding to the Indians -- which of
them will you choose? If you will go according to the Indian Manner, the Man who
shot the Indian, may yet live: If this Man's Life is spared, and at any Time,
hereafter an Indian should kill a white Man, and you desire it, his Life shall
be also spared.

Brother,

You told us two Days ago, that when a Man is dead, there is no bringing him to
Life again. Brother, We understand there are two Indians in jail at Albany,
accused of killing a Man; they are alive, and may live to be of Service, and we
beg you, in the Name of the Great King, our Father, that they may be released.
All we that are present, amongst whom are some of their Relations, are all much
dejected and uneasy upon this Affair, and do entreat that these People may be
let free; which will give us All the highest Satisfaction. Gave a great B^^ch
of Wampum.

We have now finished, and have no more to say.

Sir William told them, that as it was now late, he proposed Tomorrow to say
something more to them; and give an Answer upon some Things they had now said.

The Meeting then broke up.

FORT-JOHNSON, 22d April, 1757. PRESENT, as Yesterday. Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON's
Second SPEECH to the aforesaid INDIANS.
BRETHREN,
WHAT you said to me Yesterday, in Answer to my former Speech to you, was very
agreeable and pleasing to me; I look upon your Words as a Tree in full Blossom,
which I hope and expect will produce Fruit suitable to its Appearance.

Brethren,

Let me again put you in Mind of the Belt I have given you, and which you have
promised to show to all those Nations of Indians with whom you have any
Acquaintance or Friendship; and to repeat what I have told you. As I think
those Things are of great Consequence to the Welfare of all Indians, I will
again mention the Heads of what I said upon my second and third Belts, in my
former Speech. [Which he did, and then added three particular Instances, in
which their Friendship and Alliance with the English, was greatly more for
their Interest, than with the French. 1 st. That in Case their Crops ^ailed,
and they were destitute of Provisions, that they could be easily relieved by
their Neighborhood to the English; whereas they were at such a Distance from
Canada, that they might starve before they could get Relief from the French. 2
dly. That in Case they were in w^nt of Ammunition or Assistance against an
Enemy, they might be all destroyed before they could obtain the needful
Assistance from the French. 3 ^ly. the same Consequences with Regard to Trade.]

With this Bunch of Wampum I fix firmer upon your Hearts and Memories, my Talk
and Advice to you. Gave a large Bunch of Wampum.

Brethren,

Last Night I wrote to the Earl of LO^DOUN, who commands all the King's
Soldiers in this Country, and to Sir CHARLES HARDY, Governor of this Province,
concerning the Request you made of having your People discharged, who are now
in Alba^^ Jail: It is not in my Power to give them free, but I dare say those
great Men will comply with your Desire, if the Circumstances of the Affair
appear to be such, as Reason and Justice will permit it to be done. Gave a
Bunch of Wampum.

Brethren,

As you have now, in Behalf of yourselves and all your People, laid hold of the
Covenant Chain of Peace and Friendship with the Great King of England, my
Master, and called the Great GOD above to witness, that you do sincerely
intend, and firmly resolve* that you will hereafter behave to all his Subjects
as fast Friends and loving Brethren; into which Covenant Chain I have taken you
all, your Wives and Children -- Therefore, lest you may have forgot what was
meant by the Covenant Chain, in old Times, I will briefly remind you of its
Obligations.

When the Indians, your Forefathers, first made this Covenant Chain with the
English -- both Parties engaged to keep the Ends of it fast in their Hands --
that they would take great Care to keep it from breaking, or from getting any
Rust or Filth upon it -- that they would be as one Flesh and one Blood, so that
if any Enemy should intend to hurt or strike one Party, the other should
immediately give him Notice, rise up and help him; and that a good Road should
always be kept open between their Habitations, that when they might call for
each other's Assistance, they could easily and speedily come.

Brethren,

As the Road between us has been open last Year, by which Means all Logs and
Stones which were in the Way, has been removed, and made broad, safe and
pleasant: We shall on our Parts keep it so, and I expect you will do the same on
yours.

Brethren,

You have informed me, that you three Nations are settled at Otsiningo, and
that there I may always find you. You have lived in too dispersed a Manner;
which must naturally weaken a People, and make them of little Consequence;
whereas if you keep together in one Body, you may be strong and respectable.

Brethren,

With this Belt I girt your Loins round, after the Manner of Warriors, that
whenever you are called upon, you may be ready to run along this good Road, to
assist us your Brethren, if any Enemy may be coming to hurt them; and we shall
do the same by you, when you have any Occasion to call upon us: By this Means
we shall become a strong Body, and nothing will be able to hurt us. Gave a very
large Belt.

Brethren,

I have but a few Words more to say to you, and then I shall conclude: If you
hear of any News, which concerns the Safety or Welfare of us your Brethren, I
expect you will give us immediate Notice; and we shall do the same by you. Gave
three Strings of Wampum.

Brethren,

The Time of the Year, the Severity of the Season, and my having of late been
obliged to be so much from Home, and that I did not expect you so soon, has
prevented my having as great a Plenty of Goods as I usually have; however, I
shall look about, and when all Business is finished, I hope to find a small
Present for you. So ended this Meeting.

FORT-JOHNSON, 23d April, 1757. A. M. The REPLY of the aforesaid Indians, to
Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON'S SPEECH to them Yesterday. PRESENT, as before.
Brother,
If you are ready to hear us, we shall make some Reply to what you Yesterday
said to us.

Sir WILLIAM answered, he was ready; when the Speaker proceeded:

BROTHER,

YOU told us Yesterday, that you looked on what we had said, and the Assurances
we had given you, as a Tree in Blossom, and that you hoped it would yield good
Fruit.

Brother,

We like the Comparison -- we have spoke to you from our Hearts, and we hope
good Fruit will come from thence. On our Parts, we truly mean what our Tongue
has spoken, and we doubt not, but you will, on your Side, be as a fruitful
Tree to us. Gave two Strings of Wampum.

Brother,

You have repeated to us, and we shall not forget it, the different Behavior
of the English and French, toward the I^^ians; and you gave us Instances, to
prove, that it was greatly mo^e our Interest to keep Friends with the Former
than the Latter. Brother, what you have said hereon, we are convinced is the
Truth; and we thank you heartily for pointing out to us our true Interest and
Welfare: What you have said, has made our Hearts light within us, and we will
not forget it. Gave three Strings of Wampum.

Brother,

You told us that last Year you had opened the Road between our Habitations and
the English, and that you believed we had found nothing bad in this Road. ( The
Speaker here repeated what Sir William had said to them Yesterday with the
large Belt.)

Brother,

We have now renewed the Covenant Chain, with all its Obligations agreed on
between our respective Forefathers.

We are extremely glad that you have made the Road open between us, and it is a
very pleasant one.

We are thankful to you for tying up our Blankets, and whenever you call upon
us, we shall be ready to stand up and come without Delay; and we shall from
this Day forward, consider the English and Ourselves as one Body, one Head, and
one Mind. Gave a belt.

Brother,

You have desired, that whenever we hear any Thing which may concern the
Interest or Welfare of our Brethren the English, we should without Delay
communicate it. You may depend that we will do this; and if we get any
Intelligence, though it should be in the Middle of the Night, we will send off
an Express to you. Some of our young People are generally on the Hunt, and are
very likely to make Discoveries.

Brother,

We are very thankful for your Promise to do the same by us, and to be ready to
come to our Assistance in Case of Need. Gave three Strings of Wampum.

Brother,

What you have told us concerning your writing to the Great Men about our
Friends in Albany Jail, we have put into our Hearts, and when we see our said
Brothers safe in Freedom, it will be a convincing Proof to us, that we are
indeed Brethren and one People with the English.

Brother,

This is all we have to say, and from this Time forth, we are as one Body.

Then the Sachems and Chiefs of the three Nations, with the Speaker, came and
shook Hands with Sir William, and the several Gentlemen present, with great
Appearance of Joy and Sincerity.

The Speaker rose up again, and said,

Brother,

We have forgot something of Consequence, which we desire may be wrote down.

Brother,

We are now become, as was said, One-People: Whenever, therefore, your People
and ours may meet in the Woods or elsewhere, we expect they shall shake Hands
and smoke together as loving Brethren: And as we shall on our Parts, publish
all that has past here, to all our absent People and Friends, we hope, and
desire you will do the same to yours, that none may be ignorant, that from this
Day forward, and forever, we are Brothers, Friends and Allies; and engaged on
all Occasions, to love and assist each other.

A few Words more we beg Leave to say, and then we have done.

Brother, (holding up a Belt)

Last Spring with this Belt, the Nanticokes took us by the Hand, and bid us set
down by them; They said to us, You Mohickanders and we Nanticokes will be one
People, and take you Mohickanders by the Hand as Brethren, and fix you here at
Otsiningo, where the Six-Nations have lighted a Council Fire, and the Se^ecas
appointed Land for you to cultivate; call all your dispersed Brethren together,
and sit down here with them as their Habitation; and we Nanticokes assure you,
that whoever shall pinch or hurt you, we will feel it, and the Six-Nations will
do the same.

Brother,

This Belt we propose to send amongst all our dispersed People. We have
acquainted you herewith, that whenever you see any of our scattered People
passing up the River, you may know that they are removing to Otsiningo.

Sir William said, Brethren,

I am quite pleased with the Conduct of the Nanticokes, an^ think it a very
prudent Measure; it will strengthen them: And you three Nations together, may
be a considerable and flourishing People.

Brethren,

As I expect all that has past here between us, will be printed; by that Means
it will be known throughout this, and the neighboring Governments.

After Sir William had done, the Kings or Chiefs of each Nation, rose up and
made a strong Exhortation to all their People present, to remember every Thing
which had past at this Meeting; and to consider it as done in the Presence of
Him who sits above, and sees all Things.

Sir William recommended it to them, to make such an equal and upright Division
of the Presents intended for them, (which he proposed to deliver to them in the
Afternoon) as none might have just Cause to murmur, or be dissatisfied.

The Number of Indians present at Fort-Johnson, during the above Meeting, were
given in by the Interpreter, as follows: Of Shawanese, 53. Of Nanticokes, 9. Of
Mohickanders, 148. Of the Six-Nations, 70. Total 280. Men, Women, and Children.


A true Copy from the Records, compared and examined, PETER WRAXALL, Secry.


