A MEMORIAL OF Some of the Part-Owners and Proprietors OF THE PATENTS OF
Minisink and Wawayanda, BORDERING ON The Crown Lands in the Colony of New York,
that lie between those Patents and the true Boundaries of NEW JERSEY.

In Behalf of themselves, and the other Owners and Proprietors of the Patents
ranging with the said Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda, between Hudson's and
Delaware RIVERS.

Respecting the Controversy between the Colonies of NEW YORK and NEW JERSEY.

(Published by Order of the General Assembly.)

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by J. PARKER and W. WEYMAN, at the
New-Printing-Office in Beaver-Street, MDCCLVII.

To the Honorable the House of Representatives of and in the Colony of
New York.
The MEMORIAL of us the Subscribers, being Part-Owners and Proprietors of the
Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda, bordering on the Crown Lands in this Colony,
that lie between the said Patents and the true Line of Division between this
Colony and the Colony of New Jersey, in Behalf of ourselves, and the other
Owners and Proprietors of the said Patents, and the Owners and Proprietors of
the other Patents ranging with the said Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda,
between Hudson's and Delaware Rivers.
HUMBLY RELATES,
THAT your Memorialists have been informed, that his Excellency Sir CHARLES
HARDY, Knight, has lately laid before this Honorable House, an additional
Instruction from his Majesty, requiring him to apply to this Honorable House,
for a Provision on the Part of this Colony, to defray One-half of the Expense
that may accrue upon a Settlement of a Line of Partition, between this Colony
and New Jersey, by Commissioners to be hereafter appointed by his Majesty for
that Purpose.

That your Memorialists have also been informed, that in Consequence thereof, a
Proposal has been made in this Honorable House, to subject your Memorialists,
and the other Persons interested in the said Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda,
and the other Patents ranging with them in this Colony, (a Part whereof only
falls within the exorbitant Claim of the Proprietors of East New Jersey,) to
One-half, or some other considerable Proportion of the Sum to be provided on
the Part of this Colony, for defraying such Expense as aforesaid: Which
Proposal, should it take Effect, would, as your Memorialists conceive, and hope
they will be able to evince to this Honorable House, be a Burden too heavy and
unequal, considering the proportionably small Interests of your Memorialists,
and those whom your Memorialists represent in this Matter, to be imposed on
them.

In order whereto, your Memorialists beg Leave to elucidate the following
Points, viz*

1 st. That the Claim of this Colony in Behalf of the Crown, and the Right of
the private Owners of the abovementioned Patents, which only in Part interfere
with the New Jersey Claim, are intirel^ distinct in their Natures; and that the
former, extending a great many Miles more Southerly upon the Pretensions of
New Jersey than the latter, the Crown is principally, nay, almost wholly,
interested in the Determination and Event of the Controversy.

2 dly. That the Persons, holding Lands under the Government of this Colony, in
V^rtu^ of the abovementioned Patents, did obtain their Titles to the same, in a
Dependence on certain public Acts of Government and Legislature; and therefore
ought to be supported in their Rights by the Legislature of this Colony.

3 dly. That the interest of his Majesty, and the general Interest of this
Colony, are greatly concerned in the Event of the Controversy: And, therefore,
that the Expenses on our Part, ought to be defrayed by the Colony, and not by
any particular Number of its Inhabitants.

4 thly. That the true Interest of his Majesty, and of the Inhabitants of this
Colony in general, requires, that the respective Jurisdictions of the two
Colonies be ascertained; and as a Determination of that Point (which ought
doubtless to be at the public Expense) will naturally induce a Settlement, with
Relation to private Property, it would be a Hardship to tax any particular
Persons, (however consequentially interested in such Determination) for paying
the Charges, on the Part of this Colony, to accrue thereon.

5 thly. If the Line should finally be settled in Favor of this Colony, the
private Owners of the abovementioned Patents would gain nothing thereby; and if
the Settlements should turn in Favor of the New Jersey Claim, would
necessarily be considerable Losers. For which Reason also, your Memorialists
humbly conceive, they ought not to be taxed toward such Settlement.

6 thly. That the Patentees of Minisink and Wawayanda, by Reason of the
Encroachments of New Jersey, have already been put to very great Expense; and
are, by that (...) to bear so great a Charge, as the subjecting them to
One-half, or any other considerable Part of the Provision to be made on the
Part of this Colony, toward defraying the Charges that may accrue on the final
Settlement of the said Partition Line, would necessarily create.

7 thly. That by Reason of the complicated Situation of the Rights in the
Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda, (which are the Patents chiefly concerned in
the Controversy) it would be impossible for this Honorable House, equitably to
adjust the respective Quota of the Person^ interested in them, for defraying
such Expense as aforesaid.

8 thly. That it would be impracticable to raise a Sum sufficient for the
Purpose, by Sale of unappropriated Lands in Minisink and Wawayanda: There being
no considerable Quantity in either of the said Patents, that remains unlocated
at this Day, and clear of Controversy.

9 thly. That the said two Patents are largely encroach'd on by the Owners of
other circumjacent Patents within this Colony: And as the former have
originally purchased of the Native Indians to their utmost Bounds, and at great
Expense; they must either lose all the Lands so encroach'd on, or recover them
at Law: In which Method they must unavoidably expend very large Sums of Money;
and therefore, are unable to contribute to the final Settlement of the Line.

And, in Support of the first Point, your Memorialists beg Leave to relate to
this Honorable House,

1 st. That his late Majesty King Charles the II. by his Letters Patent,
bearing Date the 12th of March, 1663-4, did (among other Tracts of Land
mentioned in the said Letters Patent; Hacklai^'s Voyages, 3d Vol. printed in
1000, from page 4, to page 11, and pages 172, 173.

Salmon's Mod. Hist. vol. 30. p. 392, etc.


and in Right of his Sovereignty, Seignority and Property of and in the same,
gained by the Discovery thereof by Sebasti^n Cab^t, in 1497, who was their in
the Service of the English Crown) gra^ unto his Brother James, Duke of York,
afterward King James the IId. all that Part of the Main Land, etc. Together
with Hudson 's River, and all the Lands from the West Side of Connecticut
River, to the East Side of Delaware Bay.

2 dly. That at the Time of granting the said Letters Patent, the Dutch were in
Possession of all the Lands described in the said recited Boundaries; to wit,
The Lands on the West Side of Connecticut River, and from thence Southwardly to
the East Side of Delaware Bay, together with Hudson 's River, as far up as it
is at this Day known by that Name. Of which they had so possessed themselves
(soon after the Discovery of Hudson's River, in 1610, by Henry Hudson, J. De
La^t's Hist. p. 100.101.

Og^ib^'s America, p. 168. V^^derd^^k*s Hist. p. 3. Gov. St^^vesandt's Letter
to Nicholls, etc. in Secretary's-Office.

Another Letter from Gov. St^^ve^sandt, in Answer to one from Boston.

Dutch Book of Voyages last, page 34. printed to 1651.


then in the Service of the Dutch,) as some say, by Permission of the Crown of
England, though according to the Dutch Writers, they claimed the Country by
Preoccupancy. And as an Evidence of the Extent of such their Possession, they,
in the Year 1614, built Fort-Orang^ at Albany, claiming the whole River, and
Country bordering on it, in the Name of the States General* and soon after they
built another Fort, which they called Fort Good-Hope, at the Place now called
Hartford, on the West Banks of Connecticut River, about 50 Miles from its
Mouth: At the same Time extending their Claim to all the Country between the
two Rivers, and as far South as Delaware Bay; at the Head of which they built
another Fort, and named it Fort Cas^^ir. Which three Forts were doubtless
erected, as Testimonials of the Extent of their Right by actual Possession.

3 dly. That the very Lands actually possessed by the Dutch, and no other, were
intended by the Crown to pass by the Words of the Boundaries above described,
will not only appear from the exact Parity between them, which is evident in
the minutest Circumstances, even upon the most severe Inquiry, but is also
further supported by the Arrival of Sir Robert Carr, within a few Months after
the Date of the said Lett^rs Patent, who dispossessed the Dutch, by Order of
King Charles II. and enabled the Duke of York to begin the Settlement and
Improvement of those his Territories, granted to him by the Words above recited.

4 thly. That therefore it appears, that the Crown never intended to grant to
the Duke of York, any Lands along Delaware, higher than the Head of Delaware
Bay; if any Dependence can be placed on the abovementioned Train of Facts,
which are prior, in Point of Time, to the Duke's Grant; and upon which, that
Grant, or at least as much of it as is above described, seems clearly and
indisputably to be founded.

Having ranged in some sort of Order, a few striking Facts, to show the real
Intent of the Crown, in the very Instant of granting the said Letters Patent;
your Memorialists beg Leave to evince that Intent from the Words of the Grant
itself; and upon such a Construction of those Words, as will be warranted, not
only by Reason, but also, as your Memorialists are informed, by the clearest
Rules of law: And in order thereto, your Memorialists beg Leave again to
observe, that Part of the Boundaries of the Duke of York's Patent, as far as
relates to the Colonies of New York and New Jersey; or in other Words, to the
Possessions of the Dutch at, and before the Date of that Patent, is conceived
in these Words, viz. Together with the said River called Hudson's River, and
all the Lands from the West Side of Connecticut River, to the East Side of
Delaware Bay.

Upon which your Memorialists beg Leave to observe, That Reason will dictate
one or other of the two following Constructions on those Words, viz.

1 st. As Delaware Bay, undoubtedly, has a more Southern Commencement at the
Ocean, and a less Northern Extent into the Continent than Connecticut River,
the Words from the West Side of Connecticut River, to the East Side of Delaware
Bay, will, in their rational Construction, pa^^ the Lands contained between
Delaware Bay, the Ocean, Connecticut River, and a Line drawn from the Head of
the latter, to the Head of Delaware Bay, together with the whole Extent of
Hudson's River beyond that Line: Or,

2 dly. They will pass (what is still more liberal to the Grantee) the Lands
contained within the following Boundaries, viz. Delaware Bay, the Ocean, the
whole West Side of Connecticut River, a Line from the Head of that River, to
the Head of Hudson's River, a Line thence along the West Side of Hudson's
River* till it intersect the aforesaid Line from the Head of Delaware Bay, to
the Head of Connecticut River, and from thence such Part of the (...) Line, as
would extend from the Point of such Intersection, to the Head of Delaware Bay;
which last Construction will depend upon Hudson's River being mentioned in the
Description. Your Memorialists say, that they humbly conceive, one or other of
those Construction^ Reason will naturally dictate; but that it would be highly
irrational to give the Boundaries any Extent along Delaware River, because
Reason, and the proper Use of Terms, will never permit the Word Bay to be
construed River, (which are Things as different in their Geographical Meaning,
as Bay and Ocean;) and that the more especially, when there is no Necessity of
such a Construction to give Sense to the Grant; a great Quantity of Land being
evidently included within those Boundaries, upon either of the above
Constructions.

Having thus considered what Reason would dictate in Construction of the
abovementioned Boundaries, your Memorialists beg Leave to observe what Aspect
the Law will have on them: In order the more clearly to do which, permit your
Memorialists to mention what your Memorialists are informed, are some of the
known Rules of Law for the Construction of Crown-Grants, and which are as
follows, viz.

1 st. The King's Grant shall not enure to any other Intent, than is expressed
in the Grant; that is, it shall not enure to any implied Intent, though it may to
several Intents, if they be all expressed.

2 dly. The Words of a Grant (even in the Case of a Subject, and the rather in
that of the Crown) shall be construed according to a reasonable and easy Sense;
and not strained to Things unlikely and unusual.

3 dly. Where the Words are so doubtful, as to admit of several Intents, that
Intent shall govern which is most in Favor of the Crown.

To apply these Rules to the Words Delaware Bay, in the present Case, it seems
clear, that the express Inten^ of the Word Bay, is Bay; and therefore, even
were it possible to put the implied Intent, or Meaning of River upon the Word
Bay, yet the Words Delaware Bay, must mean Delaware Bay, and not Delaware Bay
and River.

So also by the second Rule, if the natural and easy Sense of the Word Bay is
Bay, then Delaware Bay can never mean Delaware Bay and River.

In like Manner, if it should even be thought doubtful ^hether Delaware Bay in
the Patent, means only Delaware Bay, or both the Bay and River; yet by the
third Rule, the former Construction will doubtless govern, because it is most
advantageous for the Crown.

And therefore* your Memorialists humbly conceive, that the most liberal
Construction in Favor of New Jersey, will give no other Sense to the Words
Delaware Bay, than what is commonly and naturally meant by the Terms. As to the
other Boundaries, and their Relation to Delaware Bay, your Memorialists do
conceive, that in Favor of the Crown, the Law, by the 1st Rule abovementioned,
will absolutely reject such a Construction as will pass all the Land between
Connecticut River and Hudson's River; because a Line from the Head of
Connecticut River to the Head of Delaware Bay, would exclude a great Part of
those Lands; and because also the Words are, all the Lands FROM the West Side
of Connecticut River, TO the East Side of Delaware Bay; that is, all the Lands
that lie in a Course or Direction between both, and consequently those Lands
that are excluded by a Line, from the Head of Connecticut River to the Head of
Delaware Bay; or in other Words, that do not lie, in a Direction between the
said River and Bay, are without the Duke's Patent. But even were this Matter
doubtful, the latter Construction must, by the 3d Rule abovementioned, clearly
govern, because it will pass a less Quantity of Land than the other, and
therefore be most in Favor of the Crown. However, as either of those
Constructions will include the Latitude of 41 on Hudson's River, it is not of
much Moment to the Subject of this Memorial, if either of them be admitted.

Your Memorialists do therefore humbly conceive, that although the said Duke of
York, after obtaining the said Letters Patent, did, by Lease and Release, dated
the 23d and 24th of June, 1664, grant unto JOHN Lord BERKLEY, and Sir GEORGE
CARTARE^, all that Tract now called New Jersey, and did in Part describe it as
follows, viz. And extending Southward to the Main-Ocean, as far as Cape-May, at
the Mouth of Delaware, and to the Northward, as far a^ the Northwardmost Branch
of the said Bay, or River, which is in 41, 40, Lat. and (...) thence in a
str^ight Line to the Lat. of 41, on Hudson's River: Yet, as the Duke of York
himself, was bounded at the Head of Delaware Bay, his Grantees cannot, as your
Memorialists conceive, take by the said Lease, and Release, any higher on
Delaware than the Head o^ Delaware Bay, (unless the River has such a Course
from thence, as to coincide with, or be included within a straight Line, from
the Head of Delaware Bay, to the Lat. of 41 on Hudson's River: For, Nemo plus
juris in alium transfer potest, quam ipse ^abet; A Man cannot grant that
which he has not, nor more than he has.

From what your Memorialists have already related to this Honorable House, it
is hoped, that not only the Facts abovementioned, upon which the Grant to the
Duke of York is apparently founded, but also* the plain Dictates of Reason, and
the known Rules of Law, (upon Construction of the very Words of the Grant) do
conspire to limit its Extent on Delaware, to the Head of Delaware Bay; and
consequently, the ne plus ultra of New Jersey, to a Line from the Head of
Delaware Bay, to the Latitude of 41, on Hudson's River. But as a further Proof
of such Const^^ction, your Memorialists beg Leave to observe, That, considering
the Antiquity of that Grant to the Duke of York, it ought reasonably to be
supposed, that its true Intent and Meaning, as far as concerns its Boundaries,
were better understood at, or shortly after the Time of its Date, than at this
Day; and accordingly, the Government of this Colony, so soon after the Date of
the said Letters Patent, as in the Year 1683, did construe their Extension up
Delaware, as for only, as the Head of Delaware BAY. The Evidence of this Matter
is contained in the ancient Minutes of the Council of this Colony, and bears
Date the 16th February 1683, whereby it appears, that at a Council then held at
Fort JAMES, at which were present, not only the Governor, Mr. Flypse^, Capt. A.
Br^ch^ss, Mr. Stephen Courtlandt, and J. Spragg, but also Capt. Matthias
Nicolls, Capt. J. Palmer, and Mr. James Graham, Recorder, who attended upon
special Request, The Patent of his Majesty King CHARLES II. etc. (meaning the
said Letters Patent) to his Royal Highness JAMES Duke of York, etc. was read;
and also his Royal Highness his Letters Patent to the Proprietors of East
NEW JERSEY, (meaning the said Lease and Release to BERKLEY and CARTARET,) were
read, and Mr. GRAHAM said, that the Clause, [whole in the Premises] was to be
understood whole in the Tract of Land; and the other Clause, [as far as in him
lieth] made a Doubt whether the Duke had Authority so far: Which Construction
of Mr. Recorder, together with the Governor's Opinion, viz. That the Council,
Mayor, and Aldermen, should draw up an Address to his Royal Highness, to show
the Inconveniency of suffering East New Jersey to come up the River, plainly
intimate, 1 st. That they had the Boundaries between the two Colonies, then
under Consideration. 2 d. That they took the most rational Means to arrive at
the Truth; to wit, by considering the Grants under which the Proprietors of
East New Jersey did Claim, and giving them their proper Construction. 3 d. That
upon a Perusal of those Grants, it appeared that the Claim of the then
Proprietors, could not be supported by those Grants; or in other Words, that
^^ey could have no Right to extend their Boundaries up Delaware River, because
it was doubtfu^ whether the Duke himself had Authority so far. Which
Consideration, your Memorialists conceive, could, indeed, even (...) that Day,
admit of no Doubt; although the Question was between Subject and Subject, viz.
The Duke of Yo^k, and those to whom he had granted: For that the Law even in
such a Case, will not, by the second Rule abovementioned, allow a Construction
to be put upon any Words in a Grant, even in a Case between Subject and
Subject, contrary to their reasonable and easy Sense. And although wherever the
Meaning of a Term in a Grant from one Subject to another, i^ doubtful, the Law
will interpret it most strongly in Favor of the Grant^^; yet if what is
absolutely certain in the Duke of York's Patent, respecting Delaware Bay, was
indeed doubtful, as in that Case the Doubt would be concerning a Crown Grant,
under which both Parties claim, no Construction could be given in Favor of one
or the other Party, but such as would be consistent with the Interest of the
Crown.

And thus your Memorialists Construction of the Words Delaware Bay, in the Duke
of York's Patent, appears to be founded upon a firm Connection of preceding
Facts, the united Voices of Reason and Law upon the Words of the Patent, and
the Suffrages of Men of high Character in Life, who all lived at the Time of
the Grant, and put the same Construction upon it as your Memorialists do; and
who, considering the Time of such their Construction, may be supposed, to have
better understood what was really intended to pass by the Grant, than any Set
of Men in the present Day. Add to this, that such ^ Construction can be no
Hardship on the Proprietors of New Jersey, seeing, that upon (...) o^ the best
Maps, it evidently appea^s, that a Line from the Head of Delaware Bay, to the
Latitude of 41 on Hudson's River, will give them a prodigious Tract of Land;
for which the Duke of York did formerly, and the Crown does now, receive the
trifling Quit-Rent of twenty Marks, or something near that Sum. Upon the whole,
therefore, of what your Memorialists have above related, though the Duke has
extended his Grant to the Proprietors of New Jersey, as far as the Northermost
Bran^h of Delaware Bay or River, which is in 41, 40 Latitude; yet they can
extend their Boundaries no higher than Delaware Bay, and from thence cross over
in a straight Line to the Latitude of 41, on Hudson's River. It is true indeed,
that in the Year 1674, the Duke obtained a new Grant, Douglass's Summary* vol.
2d. p. 223* 224.
upon the Surrender of the Country to the Crown by the Dutch, who had conquered
it in the then late^ War. See also Record in Secretary's Office.
But as that Grant was in tatidem verbis, as was the first, it could only
operate with equal extent: And therefore, the Boundaries of New Jersey, must be
such as are above related, notwithstanding any After-grant from the Duke of
York, that may be insisted on by the Proprietors of New Jersey.

But if, notwithstanding the above related, so evident a Right in the Crown to
confine the Boundaries of New Jersey, on Delaware, to the Head of Delaware BAY,
it should still be supposed, that the Duke had a Right to extend his Grant to
the Proprietors of New Jersey up Delaware RIVER; thus much however is
undoubtedly certain, that they cannot go beyond the Words of their Grant;
which, as your Memorialists ^ope they shall be able to show, confines itself to
the FORKS of Delaware. In order whereto, your Memorialists beg Leave to premise;

1 st. That as they are to go UP Delaware RIVER, AS FAR AS the Northermost
Branch, etc. they are to go to some Part or other of that, which is the
Northermost Branch.

2 dly. That the Proprietors of East New Jersey insist, and your Memorialists
may suppose, that the East, and not the West Branch, is the Northerm^st Branch
of Delaware RIVER.

3 dly. That the East Branch commences at the FORKS of Delaware.

Which several Facts your Memorialists beg Leave to take for granted for the
present, because they never have been, and doubtless never will be, disputed,
by those concerned on the Part of New Jersey, seeing, that they are the only
Matters upon which they claim a Right to extend their Boundaries to the
Latitude of 41, 40, at (...).

The only Question therefore, as your Memorialists conceive, that remains to be
resolved is, on what Part of the East Branch of Delaware, the Station on
Delaware shall be fixed? Whether at the Forks, or in other Words, at the Mouth
of the East Branch, or at the Latitude of 41, 40 upon that Branch; (...) at the
Place of its utmost Extent? For, if the Words which is in the Latitude of 41,
40. are limiting and not designatory Terms; that is, if they are designed to
limit the Extent of the Boundary on Delaware, and not to designate the
particular Branch of Delaware, some Part of which is the proper Boundary; then
the Boundary cannot stop at the Beginning of the East Branch, nor be carried to
the utmost Extent of it, but must be limited to that Latitude on the Branch;
and if the Latitude is not a (...) Term, or the Terminus ad quem, then (it
being supposed, that the East Branch is the Northermost Branch) the Latitude is
quite out of the Question, and the Terminus ad quem. must be either the Mouth,
or the ut^^st Extent of the East Branch.

But your Memorialists clearly conceive, that the Latitude of 41, 40, is only
d^scriptio^ of the Branch, as i^ obvious from the Relative, which, the
Antecedent whereof, is the Northermost Branch; and therefore, the plain Meaning
of the Words is, as far as the Northermost Branch thereof, which Northermost
Branch is (or lies) in the Latitude of 41, 40: And the Reason that induces your
Memorialists to give the Terms this Construction, is not only, that it is the
natural Sense which arises from the Ordo verborum, or the Arrangement of the
Words themselves; but also, because there are no other Words than the
Northermost Branch, whereto the Word which can possibly relate. For Example, it
cannot mean which Bay, or which River, because neither the one nor the other
lies in that Latitude* besides, in such Case, the Words as far as the
Northermost Branch, would be senseless, for the Branch is beyond the Bay and
River: and therefore in that Sense, would be beyond the Latitude. Neither do
your Memorialists conceive that the Words which is, can be rejected, because
your Memorialists are informed, that if any Sense can be put upon those Words,
which it is plain there can, the Law will not allow of their being rejected:
Besides, if the Intent of the Grantor had been, to give the Latitude as a
Limit, he would naturally have expressed himself thus " and to the Northward up
the said Bay or River, and the Northermost Branch thereof as far as to the
Latitude of 41, 40, or, upon the Northermost Branch of the said River, as far
as the Latitude of 41, 40, or, as far up the Northermost Branch thereof as to
etc. Further, if the Latitude be supposed to be limitive, your Memoriali^^^ do
conceive, that as the Words are, as far as the Northermost Branch of the said
Bay or River; they must also be supposed to imply, either, that the Mouth, or
the utmost Extent, and not any intermediate Part of the North Branch, was
conceived to lie in that Latitude; the first of which, as your Memorialists are
informed, is consistent with the Geography of that Day* For if the Latitude be
supposed to be at any Distance above the Mouth of the Branch, and below the
utmost Extent of it, and yet not descriptive but limitive, the Words import
this Absurdity, viz. That as far as the northermost Branch of the said Bay or
River, to the Latitude of 41, 40, (which would then be their natural
Construction) mean up the Branch, and to the Latitude, which they cannot
clearly, by the most chimical Distortions, be made to intend: Because the Words
as far as, relate to the Branch, and not to the Latitude; and if the Latitude
is a limiting Term, then to the Latitude is necessarily implied, therefore the
Construction must be as far as the Branch, and to the Latitude, which is
impossible, because, that to proceed to the Mouth of the Branch only, and not
to the Latitude, would not satisfy the Terms; and yet, to proceed up the
Branch, and only to the Latitude, would also be inconsistent with them, seeing
that the Words as far as, must in like Manner be satisfied; which could not be
done, if the Boundaries were carried one Inch above the Mouth, but by carrying
them to the utmost Extent of the Branch; in which Case they would exceed the
Latitude, and therefore contradict the Terms. And thus your Memorialists
conceive it is evident, that the Latitude cannot be limitive, even by straining
the Words to their utmost Extent; which Method, if indeed it could work the
Effect, would be contrary to the second abovementioned Rule in Law, which
directs, That Words in a Grant shall be construed according to a reasonable and
easy Sense, and not strained to Things unlikely and unusual. From all which,
your Memorialists conclude, that the Words which is in the Lat. of 41, 40, are
descriptive, and not limitive.

As therefore the Latitude is not limitive, but only descriptive, and as the
East Branch is for the present, supposed to be the Northermost Branch, your
Memorialists conceive, for Clearness and Perspicuity Sake, the Latitude may for
a While be rejected, and then the Words will be, And to the Northward as far as
the Northermost Branch of the said Bay or River. Upon which Words the Question,
in Consequence of the Terms as far as, will be as your Memorialists above
observed, whether the Terminus ad quem, that is, the terminating Station or
Point of the Boundaries of New Jersey on Delaware, shall be construed to be at
the Mouth of the East Branch; or in other Words, at the FORKS; or whether it
shall be deemed to be at the utmost Extent of that Branch.

The proper Answer to this Question, your Memorialists conceive to be clearly
this, That the FORKS of Delaware, or MOUTH of the East Branch, is in such Case
the ne plus ultra, or utmost Extent of the Boundaries of New Jersey, on
Delaware; and that for the following Reasons.

1 st. The Words, as far as, are comparative Terms, used generally either in
describing simple comparative Distances; as for Example, How far is it from
Rome to Paris? Answer. As far as it is from Paris to London: Or they are used
in describing comparative Distances in Progression; as, How far are you
traveling? Ans. As far as Boston: In which latter Sense, the Traveller not
only compares the Length of his Journey to the Distance between the two Places,
but also does it progressively, by saying, I am traveling as far as Boston:
And thus the Word^ as far as, in the Grant to BERKLEY and CARTARET, are used.
And therefore, they necessarily suppose two Stations, viz. The Locus a quo, or
the Place where the Progression begins, and the Locus ad quem, or Place where
the Progression ends.

But the Words as far as, not only suppose two Stations, they also require both
a Subject and an Object of Comparison; which Object is either at a Distance
from the Locus a quo, or begins the Progression at that Place, in Conjunction
with the Subject of Comparison: If the former is the Case, then the Words as
far as, mean, as far as to, and suppose the Progression to end at the Object of
Comparison; if the latter, then the Words as far as, intend, as far as the
Ob^ect of Comparison goes; and therefore the Progression ceases with, and not
before the Course of the Object of the Comparison ends; that is, the Subject of
Comparison, goes as far a^ does the Object of Comparison. This Reasoning is, as
your Memorialists conceive, agreeable to sound Grammar, and the proper Use and
Sense of Words. And to apply it to the present Case, the Ocean as far as
Cape-May* at the Mouth of Delaware Bay or River, is the Locus ^ quo, from
whence the Boundaries are extended Northward AS FAR AS the Northerm^^t Branch
of the said Bay or River; the Beginning of which Northermost Branch, being the
Object of Comparison, is at a Distance from the Locus a quo, or the Ocean at
Cape-May; and therefore the Boundary, which is the Subject of Comparison,
cannot have its Progression Northward with the Northermost Branch, nor go as
far as that Branch extends, but only to the Branch; or, in other Words, to the
Beginning of the Branch. Indeed, there is an Exception to this Rule; which is,
that, notwithstanding the Object of Comparison be at a Distance from the Locus
a quo, if there were explanatory Words, to show that the Intent is as far as
the Object of Comparison goes, then the Boundary or Subject of Comparison would
extend the same Length. As for Example, if the Words had been as far as the
Northermost Branch to Chas^icktonk, then the Boundary, notwithstanding the
Impropriety of the Expression, would extend beyond the Beginning of that
Branch, as far as to Chas^icktonk, because the Words are express, and could not
be satisfied by any other Construction: Or (rather to use an Example taken from
the Boundaries themselves) the Southern Extent of New Jersey, is there declared
to be to the Ocean as far as Cape-May, at the Mouth of Delaware-Bay; in which
Case, the Words to the Ocean, and the Words at the Mouth of Delaware-Bay, would
explain in what Sense the Words as far as Cape-May ought to be understood, did
not the Word Cape alone explain the Matter, which means the very extreme Point
of a Promontory, or Body of high Land, stretching itself into the Sea; and
therefore, that Point having no Extent, the Progression can only be to it, and
not along with it. Therefore, instead of the Cape, supposing (in order to make
the Example more applicable) the Word Promontory had been inserted, th^n the
Words would have been, to the Ocean, as far as the Promontory at the Mouth of
Delaware-Bay. In this Case, the Terms of the Boundary could not be complied
with, but by an Extension to the extreme Point of the Promontory; any Thing
short of that not being sufficient to satisfy the Words, to the Ocean at the
Mouth of Delaware-Bay. But were those latter Words omitted, as in that Case it
would be, and to the Southward as far as the Promontory; the Southern Extent
must necessarily be limited to the Place where the Promontory unites with the
Main-Body of the Continent; and so with Respect to the Northern Extension, it
must be limited to the Beg^nning of the Northermost Branch. This Matter your
Memorialists conceive, will be rendered still more evident, by reversing the
Courses; that is, if instead of the Words extending Southwardly to the Ocean,
etc. and to the Northward, as far as the Northermost Branch, etc. it had been
extending Northerly from the Ocean, etc. and Southerly, from the Northermost
Branch, etc. Your Memorialists observe, that in such Case, unless that were
expressed, which there is no Evidence to prove, is implied in the Words as far
as, viz. from the utmost Extent of the Northerly Branch; the Words as far as,
in such Reversion of the Courses, being turned into (...) would evidently mean,
from the Mouth or Beginning of the Branch; and yet it is cer^ain, that in such
Reversion, the Words as far as the Northermost Branch, could not be turned into
any other Phrase or Mode of Expression, than from the Northermost Branch,
without adding something, which is far from being implied in the Terms as far
as, viz. the utmost Extent of such Branch.

And thus, your Memorialists conceive it appears clearly, that the Words as far
as, etc. in their plain, natural, easy, common and grammatical Sense, do mean,
as far as TO the Northermost Branch, that is, to the Mouth or Beginning of that
Branch, and therefore cannot be construed to intend the utmost Extent of that
Branch: Such Construction being undeniably strained, and contrary to the 2d
Rule of Law abovementioned. Nor indeed could such Construction as would carry
the Boundary to the utmost Extent of the Branch, take Place, even were the
Meaning of the Words doubtful; because, tho they are Part of a Grant from
Subject to Subject, yet, as the Duke of York's Right, by his Letters Patent, is
now vested in the Crown, your Memorialists conceive, that the same Rule should
now take Place in the Construction of his Grant to BERKLEY and CARTARET, (the
Dispute being at present between them and the Crown) a^ if they had held
immediately under the Crown; and therefore, that the Words, as far as, even
were the Meaning doubtful, ought to be construed, as far as to the Mouth, or
Beginning of the Northermost Branch; seeing that such Construction would be
most in Favor of the Crown, which is now vested of this Colony.

Whence your Memorialists conceive, that the Reasons in Favor of such
Construction may be reduced to the following syllogistic Form, in order to show
their Force in a more pointed Light, viz.

The Boundaries of the Grant to BERKELEY and CARTARET, on Delaware, are to
extend to the Northward, as far as the Northermost Branch of Delaware Bay or
River, which is in Lat. 41, 40.

But the East Branch is the Northermost Branch; therefore those Boundaries are
to extend as far as the said East Branch, which is in Lat. 41, 40.

Again;

As those Boundaries are to extend as far as the East Branch, which is in Lat.
41, 40, they are to extend either to the Mouth of that Branch, or to the Lat.
of 41, 40, on that Branch, or to its utmost Extent.

But for the Reasons abovementioned, the Latitude is not limitive, or
expressive of the Locus ad quem, but only designates the Branch; and the Words
as far as, do not, for Reasons above alleged, intend as far as the Branch
extends, but only mean, as far as to the Branch.

Therefore, the Words a^ far a^ the Northermost Bran^h, etc. must intend, a^
far as to the M^uth or Beginning of the East Branch of Delaware.

And the Mouth of this Branch being, confessedly, at the Place now called the
FORKS of Delaware, Your Memorialists do therefore necess^^^ly conclude, that
the (...) of De^^ware, (...) N^ ^^US ULTR^ of New Jersey, even if the Duke of
(...) Right did extend higher on Delaware, than the Head of Delaw^re Bay: The
Contrary whereo^, however, your Memorialists hope they have indisputably p^o^ed.

But in order the more fully to confirm the above Reasoning, your Memorialists
humbly pray to be indulged by this Honorable House, in producin^ (...)
remarkable Fact, to which the Duke of York, and Sir GEORGE CARTARET, one of his
Grantees, were Parties, and pe^^y. Which Fact, as it occurred within a few
Years after the Date of the sa^^ Lease and Release from his said Royal Highness
to Lord BERKLEY, and Sir GEORGE CARTARET, your Memorialists hope, will be
admitted to be good Evidence of the Intent of the abovementioned Par^^es to the
said Lease and Release, with Respect to the above Words, as far as, etc.

And the better to introduce this Fact, your Memorialists beg Lea^e to p^^mise,
that the Duke of York, having, on account of the above related Conquest of his
Territories by the Dutch, for his own Safety, obtained the abovementioned
second Letter^ Pate^^ from his Brother King CHARLES II. to whom those
Territories were again surrendered by Treaty; Sir GEORGE CARTARET* (my Lord
BERKLEY being then dead) took the same Preca^tion; and accordingly, your
Memorialists further relate to this Honorable House, that the said Sir GEORGE
CARTARET, did obtain of the said Duke of York, a sec^^d Grant of EAST
New Jersey, in Severalty, by Lease and Release, bearing Date the 28th and 29th
of July, 1674: (but about ten Years after the first Lease and Release) The
B^^^^aries of which said (...) Lease and Release, are as follow, viz. ALL that
Tract of Land adjacent to New-Englan^, and lying and being to the Westward of
Long Island and (...)-Island, bounded on the East, Part by the Main-Sea, and
Part by Huds^^'s- River; and extends Southward as far as a certain Creek called
(...), being about the Middle between (...) and Cape-May; and bounded on the
West, in a straight Line from the said Creek called (...), to a certain Creek
in Delaware River, next adjoining to, and below a certain Creek in Delaware
River, called Ran^a^us (...); and from then^e up the sa^d Delaware River, TO
the Northermost Branch thereof, which is in the Latitude of 41, 40* and on the
(...) crosses thence in a straight Line to Hudson's River, in 41 of Latitude.

For the Truth of this Fact, your Memorialists appeal to a Bill in Chancery,
filed some few Years ago by the Proprietors of East New Jersey, against the
People of Elizabeth-Town.

Whereupon your Memorialists observe,

1 st. That though the Duke of York and CARTARET, were under no Necess^ty of
obtaining new Grants, in order to revest them of their Lands (they being
reve^^ed J^re (...),) yet, both the said second Letters Patent to the Duke of
York, and the said second Lease, and Release to CARTARET, were evidently
designed for that Purpose: For the Truth of which Observation, your
Memorialists also refer to the said Bill in Chancery* And therefore, your
Memorialists conclude, that the Boundaries both of the first and second (...)
of Grants, (...) as they extend with each other, were intended to be the same,
and not diff^^ent.

2 dly. That though CARTARET was, by the said second Lease and Release, ^ested of
^ast New Jersey, in Severalty; and though also they were afterward (as it is
said) surrendered by CARTARET, yet, your Memorialists conceive, the Boundaries
in the first Lease and Release in BERKLEY and CARTARET, and the second Lease
and Release to CARTARE^ alone, to be intentionally the same, as far as relates
to the Station on Delaware, between this Colony and New Jersey: Whence your
Memorialists do infer, that the Words, as far as the Northermost Branch of the
said Bay or River, in the first Lease and Release, and the Words, to the
Northermost Bran^h thereof, in the second Lease and Release, must mean the same
Thing; and therefore, that* as to ^ Branch, cannot intend up to the Head of
that Branch, not up to any Part of or Latitude on such Branch; but only up to
the Mouth (...) Beginning of that Branch; therefore, the Mouth or Beginning of
that Branch, that is* of the East Branch, must be in^ended by the Words, as far
as the No^^hermost Branch, etc. in the first Lease and Release.

If, after all, it should be thought that the West, and not the East Branch, is
the Nor^hermost Branch of Delaware: yet it is certain, that the above Reasoning
will effectually limit the Ne plus ultra of New-^^r^ey, at the Forks of
Delaware, because the Mouth or Beginning of that Branch, as well as of the East
Branch, is at that Place. Nor can it be insisted, that the Words, Northermost
Branch, mean a Branch of a Branch, because the Locus ad quem, must, for the
Reasons abovementioned, be at the Mouth, or Beginning of the East or West
Branch, one or other o^ of them plainly lying in the Latitude of 41, 40: And
therefore, even if any Branch of a B^anch should lie in that Latitude, yet, the
Locus ad quem, must be at the Forks of Delaware*

^

^

^

^

^

^

4 thly. That, therefore, were the Boundaries of New Jersey, originally (...)
no farthe^ on Delaware, than the Head of Delaware Bay, o^ the Forks of
Delaware, (which has been already shown) yet those who claim under the said
Patents within this Colony, cannot extend their Claim beyond such Settlement in
1686.

5 thly. That though it did appear to the said Committee of this Honorable
House, at what Place the Station on Hudson's River, was then fixed, viz. (...)
West of the (...) Yo^ker 's (...)* yet, with Regard to the Station on Delaware,
it only appeared to them to have been, at that Time, fixed at the Lat. of 41,
40, on the then esteemed Northermost Branch of Delaware; but that it did not
appear to them which was such Branch, or where the said Latitude on such Branch
was* Yet,

6 thly. That M^nis^^k on Delaware, (a Place well known) and the Lands to the
Northward thereof, had been held under this Colony, (by Letters Patents granted
by the Government of this Colony) for near Seventy Years, being described in
such Letters Patents, to be bounded Southwardly by New Jersey. Wherefore, in
order to show that a Line between those Stations would cross at the lower End
of Great M^nisink Island, in the said East Branch of De^aware, your
Memorialists beg Leave to observe*

7 thly. That the several Patents of (...), dated 24th March, 1686; (...) and
(...), 29th June, 1697; Chee^e^^^ks, 25th March, 17^7* Wawayanda, 20th April,
1703; and M^nisink, 28th August, 1704, do all lie in a Range from Hudson's
River to Delaware; and are the most Southwardly Lands which the Crown has
hitherto granted, as lying in this Colony, between the said two Rivers.

8 thly. That all those Patents are either expressly or implicativel^, bounded
Southwardly upon what was then esteemed to be the Boundary between New Jersey
and th^^ C^l^ny; as by the said Patents, all of Record in the Secretary's
Office of this Colony, may appear.

9 thly. That the said Patent of Minisink, is expressly bounded in its most
Southern Extent on Delaware, by the South End of GREAT MINISINK Island
aforesaid.

10 thly. That as no Settlement of the Stations between New Jersey and this
Colony, did ever intervene between the Settlement of 1686, and the Time of the
Da^e of the latest of the abovementioned Patents; and as the most Southerly
Boundary of the said Patent of Minisink on Delaware, is at the lower End of
Great Minisink Island aforesaid; and also, as the said Patent, and all the
other Patents ranging with it, are either expressly or implicatively bounded
Southwardly on New Jersey; therefore your Memorialists conceive, that both the
Government of this Colony, and the several Patentees of those respective
Patents, conceived, that wherever the Station on Delaware might have been
fixed, yet a Line between the Station of ^6^6, would run from the lower End of
Great Minisink Island, to the Latitude of 41 on Hudson 's River, (...) West of
the Lower Yonkers Mills: But your Memorialists proceed.

11 thly. To offer some Evidence, to show where the Station on Delaware was
fixed in 1686. to wit, on a then supposed West Branch of Delaware, and at the
Lat. of 4^, 40, on such Branch. In order whereto, your Memorialists beg Leave
to refer to two Maps, the first of which is Lewis Evans's Map of the Middle
British Colonie^ in America, published in 1799, a Map of great Weight in some
Part of it, with the Proprietors of East New Jersey: The Labors of some of
whom, have added greatly to the Composition. On the Face of which Map, your
Memorialists beg Leave to observe,

1 st. That a Stream of Water is laid down on the said Map, and distinguished
by the Name of the East Branch of Susquehanna.

2 dly. That the West Branch of Delaware, (of which perhaps the said Stream of
Water i^ a Part) nearly approaches that Stream in its Delineation on the said
Map.

3 dly. That the said Stream, in its Course, trenches North-Easterly, so as
very nearly to approach the Extre^^es of the East Branch of Delaware: Its
nearest Approximation thereto, being opposite to the Bend of the Mohawk Branch,
(a Branch of the East Branch of Delaware,) in the Lat. of 42, 10.

4 thly. That the said Stream (as it is delineated on the said Map,) divides
itself exactly in the Latitude of 41, 40, into two considerable Branches.

5 thly. That a Line drawn from that Lat. and Place of the Insertion of those
two Branches, into the said Stream, to the Latitude of 41 on Hudson's River,
will cross the East Branch of Delaware, exactly at Minisink Island, which is
also delineated in the said Map.

6 thly. That the Seat of the Delaware Indians, is laid down in the said Map,
on the West Side of the said Stream of Water.

7 thly. That there is a Place on the said Stream, below the said Brant^ing in
the said Map, called Ma^has^^ng. The other Map (which is now in your
Memorialists Hands, ready to be produced to this Honorable House) was printed
at Amsterdam, and visibly bears the Marks of great Antiquity; but when it was
made, your Memorialists do not know, it having no Date. Upon which Map, your
Memorialists observe,

1 st. That what appears in the said Map to be the West Branch of Delaware, is
extended Northward, with a considerable Easterly Bend or Curve, till it unites
with the East Branch of Delaware, in the Lat. of 42, 10, and therefore,
probably is the same Water that in Evan^ his said Map is described, as Part of
the East Branch of Susqu^hanna, in its nearest Approximation to the Mohawks
Branch in 42, 10.

2 dly. That on the said Dutch Map, that Stream, which is there described as
the West Branch of Delaware, branches out into two Streams, (the Eastermost of
which unites with the East Branch of Delaware, in Manner aforesaid,) which
Branching is in the Lat. of 41, ^0, and is extremely similar in its Form, to
that which is laid down in the same Lat. in Ev^^^ his Map, as a Branch of the
East Branch of Susquehanna.

3 dly. Upon the said West Branch of Delaware, in the said Map, is laid down a
Place called Me^tche^^k, which is probably what is called M^tchasa^ing, on the
said East Branch of Susqu^hanna, in Evans his Map. From which Parity in the two
Maps, your Memorialists do conclude, that what is laid down as a Branching of
the East Branch of Susquehanna, in Evans his Map, in the Lat. of 41, 40, is
that Branching of the West Branch of Delaware, which, in the said Dutch Map, is
laid down in the said Lat. And, as a Line drawn from that Branching of the East
Branch of Susquehanna, in Evans his Map, to the Lat. of 41, on Hudson's River,
will cross at Minisink Island, your Memorialists conceive, that at such
Branching, the Station on Delaware, of 1686 was fixed: But whether such
Branching is Part of the East Branch of Susquehanna, or the West Branch of
Delaware, (the latter of which may probably be the Case, if it be considered,
that the Seat of the Delawares, is, as above is observed, on the West Banks
thereof) your Memorialists, for Want of some late actual Survey that may be
relied on, (which it is impossible to obtain at present) cannot take upon them
to determine.

That the Station of 1686, on Delaware, was fixed, at such Branching, your
Memorialists conceive, will appear from these Circumstances.

1 st. That (...) Map, (which was said before the said Committee of this
Honorable House, and which was then (...) to be made in Consequence of the
said Station^ of 1686* (...) so (...) that a Line drawn from (...), the Suc^
(...) Pa^^^, between East and West-Jersey, (...) Northermost (...) P^int,
which, in the said Map, is located ^n a West (...) of Delaware, (...) the Lat.
of 41, 40, will have a Course N. N. West 50^, (...), which is agreeable to the
said (...) Line of Division, between East and West-Jersey, as described in an
Act of Assembly of the Colony of New Jersey, passed in 1719, (...) Act for
(...) and ascertaining the Line of (...) and Division, (...) the Eastern and
Western Division of the Province of New Jersey. Which Act was also had before
the said Committee of this Honorable House.

2 dly. That ^ Li^e drawn from Li^^e Egg-Harbour ^foresaid, to the said
Branching of the West Branch of Delaware, in the said Dutch Map, will have
almost exactly the same Course, whence your Memorialists do conclude, that the
Station was fixed in 1686, at that Place in the Dutch Map, which appears to be
the same with the abovementioned Branching of the East Branch of Susquehanna,
in Lat. of 41, 40, in Evans his Map: And as a Line drawn from thence to Lat. of
41, on Hudson's River, will cro^^ at the lower End of Great Minisink (...)*
which is the utmost Southern Extent of the Patent of Minisink, on Delaware;
that therefore a Line drawn from the South End of the said Island, to the
Latitude of 41, on Hudson's River, will be the Boundaries of the Patents
ranging with the said Patent of Minisink, between Hudson's and Delaware Rivers,
agreeable to what was supposed to be the Boundary between the Colony and
New Jersey, at the T^^e of the respective Dates o^ those several Patents, and
therefore, that such Line will be the utmost Southern Extent of those Patents,
notwithstanding that on a final Settlement, New Jersey will, probably, be
confined on Delaware, to the Head (...) Delaware Bay, or the For^s of Delaware.

Wherefore, upon the Whole of the above Matters, your Memorialists beg Leave to
draw the following Inferences, in Support of the first Point above advanced,
viz.

1 st. That the true Boundary between this Colony and New Jersey, must be a
Line either from the H^^d of Delaware Bay, or at least, from the For^s of
Delaware, to the Latitude of 41, on Hudson's River.

2 dly. That the true Boundary of the said Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda,
and the other Patents ranging with them, between Hudson's and Delaware Rivers,
must be a Line from the lower End of the said Minisink Island, to the Latitude
of 41, on Hudson's River.

3 dly. That therefore the Claim of this Colony, in Behalf of the Crown, and
the Right of the Owners of the said Patents are entirely distinct, and that a
vast Tract of Crown Land being in this Colony, lies between the Southern
Boundaries of the said Patents, and the (...) Boundaries of New Jersey. And,

4 thly. That therefore the Controversy concerning those Boundaries, is,
properly, between the Crown, and the Proprietors of New Jersey; and that for
this Reason, the Expenses which may accrue on the Part of this Colony, in
settling the said Boundaries, ought, wholly, to be borne by the Public, and no
Part thereof by the Owners of the said Patents, notwithstanding, that the idle
Construction which the Proprietors of New Jersey, give their Boundaries, partly
affects the said Patents: It being clear, that upon any reasonable Construction
of those Boundaries, they cannot be extended as far Northward as to the said
Patents. And in order the better to explain your Memorialists Sentiments on the
first Point, a Copy of so much of Evan^* his said Map, as relates to the
Controversy, is hereunto annexed, with the several Lines abovementioned,
delineated on the same.

In Support of the second Point, your Memorialists observe, that, from what has
been already related, the abovementioned Patents, appear to have been taken up
in a Dependence on the Settlement of the Station^ in 1686, in Virtue of the
Authority of this Government, uniting with that of New Jersey: And as in
further Evidence of the Validity of those Stations, th^^e Act* of the
Legislature of this Colony, were passed in 1691, 1701, and 1709, relating to
the Boundaries of the Counties, and the Regulation of Elections in this Colony;
(in one of which Acts, the Right of Jurisdiction in the Government of this
Colony over Great Minisink Island, ^^ strongly implied, and in the other two,
is clearly asserted:) The Owners of the said Patents, (whereof the Legislature
of this Colony did thereby claim a Jurisdiction) have had the highest Reason to
expect a Protection from the Government of this Colony: Seeing, that as a
Submission in the governed, to the Authority of Government, ought always to be
compensated by that Authority, with a due Protection, not only of their
Persons, but also of their Estates, it would not, as your Memorialists
conceive, be consistent with the true Ends of such Submission, to impose the
Charge of defending those Estates that lie within this Colony, and yet are
claimed, as within a Foreign jurisdiction, upon the particular Persons that
hold them. But, ^^ the contrary, such exterior Claim, evidently rendering the
Controversy public in its Nature; the whole Community ought to defray the
Expenses to accrue on the Part of this Colony, in procuring a final Settlement
thereof. Besides which, such Claim not only affects private Property, but also
tends, as your Memorialists conceive, to infringe the Jurisdiction of the
Government of this Colony* And whenever an Affront is offered, by any exterior
Power, to the Dignity of Government, your Memorialists humbly conceive it to be
the Duty of that Community, which ^ee^^ the bene^^cial Influences of a due
Exertion of its Authority, to contribute, by public A^^^, to its Maintenance
and Support; and not to suffer so heavy a Burden to fall upon those
Individuals, whose Estates being most entangled in the Controversy, are least
able to support a Tax for repe^^ing the Injury.

No^ will the 3d Point appear less evident, as your Memorialists conceive, upon
a due Consideration of the above State of the Controversy. For, if the Boundary
between the two Colonies should hereafter be settled, as your Memorialists
conceive it ought to be, viz. By a Line from the (...) of Del^^are Bay, or,
from the For^s of Delaware, to the Latitude of 41, on Hudson 's River; and ^
the said Patents are bounded, as is above related, by a Line from the (...) End
of Great Minisink Island, to the Latitude of 41, ^^ Hudson 's River; a
prodigious Tract of Land will, in either Ca^e, vest in the Crown, as Part of
this Colony: For which the Possessors of such Parts as are settled, and those
who would hereafter possess themselves of such as are not yet settled, would be
obliged to obtain new Patents; and by this Means, the Royal (...) in this
Colony, would be v^stly increased, by the annual Quit-Rents of those new
Patents; and the Extent, Riches, and Number of its Inhabitants be
proportionably augmented But to reduce those Advantages, that would thus accrue
(...) his Majesty, and this Community, to that Degree of Certain^y, that a
rough Computation will admit of, your Memorialists further beg Leave to relate
to this Honorable House; that the Tract included between the Course (...)
Delaware, from the lower End of Great Minisink Island, to the Falls of
Delawar^^ River, (w^ere a Line from the Lat. of 41, on Hudson's River, to the
Head of Delaware Bay will pa^^) and a Line from the said Falls, to the
aforementioned Latitude on Hudson's River, and a Line from thence to the lower
End of Great Minisink Island, will contain, on a ^^ugh Comp^tation, by the
Scale o^ Evans his Map, at least 2500 square Miles, 1,600000 Acres of Land,
which, at Two Shillings and Sixpence Sterling, per 100 Acres for the
Quit-Rent, would amount to L.2000 Sterling per (...); and the Value of the
Lands, at the moderate Rate of L.^0 per 100 Acres, New York Currency, would
amount to L.640000. And the Number of Inhabitants who might possess that Tract,
upon the large Computation of 500 Acres pe^ Family, would amount to 3200
Families; which State of the Matter, would, in the Course of some Years, be
actually answered; or, if even the Boundary of New Jersey, on Delaware, should
be extended to the For^s of Delaware; yet, in that Case, above One-half of the
said Tract of Land would fall within this Colony, and the Advantages to his
Majesty, and this (...), be proportionably great. The Interest of his Majesty
and of this Colony, being, therefore, so importantly concerned in the final
Settlement of a Partition Line, between th^^ Colony and New Jersey, whether the
Expenses of such Settlement to accrue on the Part of th^^ Colony, ought, in
whole or in P^rt, to be defrayed by the Colony in general, or by the Ow^^rs of
those Patents, which are bounded on a Line, from the lower End of Great
Minisink Island, to the Lat. of 41, on Hudson's River, in particular; is a
Question, which your Memorialist^, most readily, submit to the Wisdom of this
Honorable House to determine.

In Proof of the 4th Point, your Memorialists beg Leave, briefly, to mention
the public Disorders that have arisen in process of Time, from the unsettled
State of the Jurisdiction of the two Colonies, to the Disadvantage of his
Majesty's Interest in Breach of his Peace, and to the manifest Injury of this
Colony in general. And,

1 st. It appears by a Letter from Governor HAMILTON, of East Jersey, to
Governor FLETCHER, of this Colony, dated February 13, 1693-4, and produced also
to the said Committee of this Honorable House, That by Reason of the unsettled
State of the Boundaries, between the two Colonies; and, consequently, of their
Jurisdiction; the respective Governments were unable to make such Detachments,
^^ his Majesty's Service, and the Defense of the Frontiers against the Enemy
then required, There being several Plantations near the Line of Partition,
(that is, near the Place where, as it was then esteemed, it ought to run) which
pretended an Exemption from a Detachment in either Government.

2 dly. That although from the Time of the Settlement of the Stations in 1686,
till the Year 1719, the Government of this Colony, gave full Evidences of a
Jurisdiction, as nearly as possible, agreeable to those Stations, by the Acts
of Assembly abovementioned, by levying of Taxes, and appointing Officers, both
Civil and Military, and by granting of Patents, with a Reference to those
Stations; and although none of the Counties of New Jersey, except B^rg^n, and the
most extreme Part of Morris County, (as your Memorialists conceive, will
appear, on Examination of the Acts of Assembly, erecting the several Counties
in New Jersey,) did, in their Boundaries, approach near to a direct Line, from
the South End of Gr^^t-Minisink Island, to the Latitude of 41, on Hudson's
River, until the late Erection of the new County in New Jersey, called Sussex;
yet the Want of such Line, or in other Words, the Neglect, effectually to
settle the respective Jurisdictions, by running such Line, was declared in an
Act of the Legislature of New Jersey, passed in the Year 1718, for running and
ascertaining the Division Line between that Colony, and this Colony of
New York, to have occasioned many Disputes between the Owners of the Lands in
the two Colonies lying near such Line, as well as between the Officers of the
Governments, and a Number of lawless Men, who ^luded the Laws of both
Governments, and paid Taxes and Obedience to neither, under Pretense of being
situated in each of them.

3 dly. That the Want of such a Line was, as your Memorialists conceive, the
only Occasion of passing the said Act, (there being not the least Mention in it
of the Settlement of Stations) as also of a Clause in an Act of the Legislature
of this Colony, passed in 1717, for paying the Debts of the Colony, whereby a
Provision was made for defraying the Expenses of running such Line, and an
implied Authority given to the Governor, with the Advice of Council, to appoint
Commissioners and Surveyors for that Purpose: And therefore, that had a Line
been originally run, agreeable to the Stations of 1686, it would have fully
settled the Jurisdiction of the two Colonies; and consequently prevented the
flagrant Abuses, which have been made of the said Acts, by the Proprietors of
East New Jersey, in Contempt of the Government and Jurisdiction of this Colony.
Which, as they are well known, your Memorialists only beg Leave, concisely, to
collect them in the following Manner, viz.

1 st. Governor HUNTER, at that Time, being Governor of both Colonies, and
notorious^y under the Influence of some of the Proprietors of East New Jersey,
was prevailed upon, in Quality of Governor of New Jersey, and in Consequence of
the Power given him by the said Act of New Jersey, to appoint two
Commissioners, with the Advice of Council, most, if not all of which Board,
were then Proprietors of East New Jersey: Which Commissioners, in Conjunction
with the Surveyor General, were to be empowered, by Commission under the Great
Seal of the said Colony, to join with such Commissioners and Surveyors, as
should be appointed on the Part of this Colony, for running the said Line: Your
Memorialists say, that, in Consequence thereof, the said Governor HUNTER, was
induced to appoint Dr. John Johnston, and George Willocks, Commissioners, and
James Alexander, Esquire Surveyor General of New Jersey, Persons all greatly
interested in the Eastern Division of that Colony, and Men of great Sagacity,
to execute the said important Trust. And this was the first Abuse.

2 dly. The same Governor HUNTER, in the Quality of Governor of this Colony,
was induced, contrary to the Advice of the Council, excepting the said John
Johnston, who was also of the Council of this Colony, and without the Consent
of his Majesty, or of the private Owners of the Land on the Part of this
Colony, and contrary to the said Act of Assembly, See the Petition hereafter
mentioned to have been signed by upwards of ^orty of the Owners of the said
Patents within this Colony.
to appoint two Gentlemen of this Colony, viz. Col Isaac Hicks, and Capt.
Robert Wal^ers, Persons no ways interested in the said Patents within this
Colony; and though of unspotted Reputations, yet by no Means qualified for such
Employments, in Conjunction with Allin Jarret, Surveyor General of this Colony,
to run the said Line on the Part of this Colony. And this was the second Abuse.
In Consequence of such unwarrantable Appointments, little else could be
expected, than the utmost Stretch of Authority, in Favor of New Jersey. And,
accordingly,

3 dly. That in the Year 1719, the said Commissioners and Surveyors, instead of
running a Line agreeable to the Stations of 1686, or to the true Boundaries
above related, of the Grants to the Proprietors of New Jersey, having, for
Reasons best known to themselves, determined the East Bra^ch of Delaware, to be
the Northermost Branch, without any actual Attempt made by them, (which the
Duty of their Offices however required) to discover a more Northerly Branch, if
any such there were; and that the Boundary ought to be (in open Defiance to
common Sense and the Rules of Law) in the Lat. of 41, 40, on that Branch: And
having also, by an Instrument, much too small for the Purpose, and undoubtedly
erroneous, found that the Lat. of 41, 40, on the said East Branch, was at
Cashicktonk; therefore, least New Jersey should be deprived of the Benefit of
so advantageous a Discovery, the said Commissioners and Surveyors took Care,
immediately, to execute an Indenture tripartite, purporting the Settlement of
the Station on Delaware, to be at Cashicktonck aforesaid. As by the said
Indenture, surreptitiously entered of Record in the Secretary's Office of this
Colony, in the Manner hereafter mentioned, may appear. Which was the third
Abuse.

4 thly. That in endeavoring to fix the Station on Delaware, (in the Absence
of the Commissioners of New York,) the Instrument was found to be erroneous;
and our Surveyor refused to attempt any Thing further with it: And did
thereupon, prefer his Petition to Peter S^^uyler, Esquire then President of this
Colony, and to the Council, setting forth the Reasons which incapacitated him
for proceeding completely to execute his Commission; and therefore, prayed
further Directions of the Council Board. Which Petition was backed with anothor
Petition to the like Purpose, signed by above forty Persons, interested on the
Part of New York. And being referred to a Committee of the Council, they, upon
the whole Matter, reported, that they could not ad^ise his Honor to give any
farther Instructions to our Surveyo^, to proceed with so erroneous an
Instrument: but on the Contrary, That he should be directed to set forth, and
certify, by some Writing under his Hand and Seal, that the Station pretended to
be fixed at the Fish-Kill, was wrong and erroneous. To the End this Colony
might not, at any Time thereafter, receive any Prejudice by the aforesaid
tripartite Indenture, and^. As by the said Petition^ and Report in the
Secretary's Office of this Colony, may appear. And though the Proprietors of East
and West Jersey, did, some Time after, in a Memorial presented to Governor
MORRIS of New Jersey, combat the Reasons alleged on the Part of New York,
concerning this Matter; yet the two Governments never came to any final
Determination. And thus the erroneous Station of 1719, at Cashickt^nk, remained
unconfirmed, until the Year 1738* this Colony still continuing the Exercise of
its ancient Jurisdiction. In which Year, an Act o^ Assembly was passed in
New Jersey, erecting Morris County; Part of which included some of the Lands
lying within the ancient Jurisdiction of this Colony at Minisink. Which Act,
being passed in Defiance of such ancient Jurisdiction of this Colony, and in
Consequence of one erroneous Station, fixed by Persons, some of whom were
Parties interested, and others incapable, and not qualified according to Law,
(and therefore, had no Authority to act) and opposed, before its Confirmation,
by the Government; Surveyor, and Inhabitants of this Colony; is the fourth
Abuse of the abovementioned Acts of both Colonies.

5 thly. That George Clarke, Esquire Lieutenant Govern^r of this Province, did
assert the ancient Jurisdiction of this Colony, as soon as Encroachments were
made on it, in Virtue of the Erection of Morris County aforesaid; and did, by a
Letter dated July 7th, 1740, and directed to William C^^l, William Cartract,
and Peter Cickendall, Esqrs. then Justice^ of the Peace in Orange County,
require them to exercise their Authority, in repelling those Encroachments, and
in asserting their Jurisdiction, in the same Manner as they had done for twenty
Years past. From which Time until this Day, many Acts of Violence have ensued,
on the Exercise of Jurisdiction, by both Governments against each other. Which,
as your Memorialists conceive, are chargeable to the Account of New Jersey, as
arising from their Infringement of the Settlement of 1686, and their
Encroachments on the ancient Jurisdiction of this Colony, under Color of one
erroneous Station, fixed at Cashickt^ck aforesaid not warranted by the said
Acts of Assembly, and rejected by the Government of this Colony. And this is
the fifth Abuse.

6 thly. That, in order the better to countenance the unjustifiable Claims of
New Jersey, and in manifest Opposition to the very Spirit and Design of the
above related Report of the Council of this Colony, the said tripartite
Indenture, so long after its Date as in the Year 1744, appears on the public
Records of this Colony; the Handwriting of which Entry, were it necessary,
could be very easily proved; as well as the Interests, Connections, and
Relations in Life of the Person who wrote it. Thus much however is certain,
that it was neither entered by the proper Officer, nor warranted by any Act of
Government; and is, therefore, a Record, which must necessarily be disowned by
the Government of this Colony, as being an evident Piece of Forgery. Your
Memorialists, indeed, conceive it dishonorable, to the highest Degree, even to
cite such a Record as Evidence; and yet, the Proprietors of East New Jersey,
have not been ashamed to do it in their Memorial to Governor BELCHER. And this
concludes the sixth Abuse.

7 thly. That, not even content with this, the Proprietors of New Jersey, in
1747-8, obtained an Act of that Colony, for giving a Sanction to the
aforementioned Abuses, by running a Line Exparte, if this Colony should not
think proper to acquiesce in their unreasonable Proposals: And therefore, upon
their not meeting with the Concurrence of the Legislature of this Colony, they
sent home the Act for his Majesty's Royal Assent. And such was the seventh
Abuse. The Fate of the said Act, however, at the Board of Trade, is well known
to this H^^^urable House; and is now fully determined by his Majesty's said
Instruction: Whereby, it is plain, that the Crown intends to settle the
Boundaries between the two Colonies, by Commission.

8 t^ly. That, in Consequence of the said erroneous Station at Cashicktonk, and
in Contempt of the ancient Jurisdiction of this Colony, the Government of
New Jersey, taking Advantage of the Necessity to which both Colonies are
reduced of fortifying their Frontiers along Delaware, against the Irruptions of
the savage and perfidious Indians; have, as your Memorialists are informed,
made an Offer of extending their Chain of Block-Houses, as far as C^shicktonk;
and generously leaving a smaller Extent of Country to be fortified by this
Colony. A plausible Pretext this, to oust the Government of this Colony of its
ancient Jurisdiction; and indubitably designed, as a colorable Reason, for a
Determination of the Controversy in their Favor; upon a Supposition, that
those who will resolutely defend the Lands in Controversy, in a Time of general
Danger, are best entitled to reap the happy Fruits of their own Valor! But
your Memorialists have the utmost Reason to rest assured, that a Disguise so
thin, will be easily penetrated, by the Wisdom of this Honorable House. And
this evinces the eighth Abuse. The further to demonstrate which, your
Memorialists beg Leave to mention a single Fact, of which they are informed, by
one of the Members of this Honorable House, viz. That Richard Gardner, the
principal Agent for the Proprietors of East New Jersey, in their Encroachments
on this Colony, and who lives in the very Heart of the Controversy, on a
Plantation formerly held under, and lately wrested from this Colony, not more
than 7 or 8 Miles from Goshen, and about 20 Miles from the Frontiers of the two
Colonies on Delaware; having, some Time ago, met with a Party of Jersey Men,
who were sent to garrison the Frontiers of New Jersey, did, in Virtue of an
Order of Government* direct the said Party to return to his House, which ^e
employed them in fortifying, by incircling it with Stockadoes, at the public
Expense of that Colony. Which Fortification, by Reason of its distant Situation
from the Frontiers, and its being in the Heart of the Controversy, is,
probably, designed principally, to support the Encroachments of New Jersey, on
this Province; especially, if it be considered, that the Command of it is given
to the chief Agent of the Proprietors of East New Jersey; to whom they are
greatly indebted for their late unjustifiable Acquisitions.

From all these Matters adduced in Support of the fourth Point, your
Memorialists conceive, that, for the Want of a Settlement of the Jurisdiction
of the two Colonies, agreeable to the Stations of 1686, His Majesty's Interest,
the Honor of his Government of this Colony, the Jurisdiction and public Peace
and Tranquillity thereof, and the Rights of its Inhabitants, have been, in many
Instances, unlawfully invaded and trampled upon, even by the Government of
New Jersey; and that upon the most idle Pretenses.

These are Evils of a public Nature; to repel which, demands the unite^ ^fforts
of the whole Colony: Wherefore, as it is necessary for the public Weal, that
the Jurisdiction of this Colony should be properly ascertained; so also, as it
is a Matter of general Concern, your Memorialists do humbly conceive, it ought
to be at the general Expense. That although some particular Persons,
unfortunately feel the evil Effects of the Encroachments of New Jersey, on the
Jurisdiction of this Colony, more immediately than any other Members of the
Community; yet, as the Matter concerns the Honor of this Government, all those
who enjoy the happy Consequences of its Care and Protection, ought to
contribute to its Support, by asserting and maintaining its rightful
Jurisdiction. And therefore, that although by determining the Line of
Jurisdiction, the Question of Property, will, consequentially, be determined;
yet the public, and not the private Owners of the controverted Lands, ought
equitably to bea^ the Burden.

In Support of the fifth Point, your Memorialists beg Leave to observe, that if
upon a final Determination of the Boundary between the two Colonies, New Jersey
should be confined by a Line from the Head of Delaware Bay, or from the Forks
of Delaware to the Lat. of 41, on Hudson's River; yet those Patents in this
Colony, that range along a Line from the lower End of Great Minisink Island to
that Latitude, (which was formerly supposed to be the Boundary) will have no
greater Extent of Land, than what they purchased of the native Indian
Proprietors, and for which they obtained those Patents: And how much soever the
Crown, or the Public, may be Gainers by the vacant Lands, in such Case, the
Owners of those Patents being confined by the last mentioned Line, will have no
more than is really their own: Besides, as the Government of this Colony
conceived, and by the said Patents, did, in Effect, declare, the Lands granted
by them, to be within this Colony; if that should actually appear to be Truth,
upon a final Settlement, your Memorialists conceive, the Owners of the said
Patents, are clearly entitled to hold them, without any further Charge, than
what accrued on the obtaining of those Patents. And, on the contrary, should
the Station on Delaware, be extended to Cashicktonk, they must necessarily be
great Losers. In which Case, as they settled the said Lands under the
Government of this Colony, it will be a sufficient Hardship for them to be
deprived of Part of those Lands, without being obliged to pay One-half, or any
other great Proportion of the Expense of a final Settlement, out of their own
Pockets. So that, seeing they cannot be benefited, but may possibly be
prejudiced, by a final Settlement, and seeing that the Controversy is public in
its Nature, the whole Burden of it ought, as your Memorialists conceive, to be
born by the Colony in general, and no Part of it by the Owners of those Patents
in particular.

To what Difficulties the Owners of the Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda have
already been reduced, by the lawless Encroachments of New Jersey, is well
known, and fully insisted on, in the abovementioned Report of the Committee of
this Honorable House. To support their Possessions against Encroachments,
backed by the Authority of the Government of New Jersey, was a Task too severe
for any Persons in their private Capacity to undertake; and yet, heavy as it
was, they have been obliged, for many Years, to submit to it, as the only
Expedient left, to prevent the Proprietors of East New Jersey, from seizing
whatever they thought proper to claim. In Consequence of which, many of them
have been taken by Violence, thrust into New Jersey Goals, and loaded with
excessive Costs, arising both from those Prosecutions, and their own Defense
against them. While* others have been obliged to abandon the Improvement of
their Lands, to the utter Ruin of themselves and their Families; and that
barely for defending what they held under the Government of this Colony. Means
therefore being necessary to defray the Expenses arising from those
Encroachments, and the only Means whereby those Expenses can be defrayed,
consisting in the Sale of some of the unlocated Lands within those Patents, to
raise a Sum of Money sufficient to answer the Purpose; your Memorialists have
for this Reason, procured a Bill to be brought in to this Honorable House, to
warrant such Sale. As, therefore, it was absolutely necessary, to oppose the
unjustifiable Encroachments of New Jersey; as such Opposition could not be made
without very great Expense; and as the Owners of those Patents have never ^ued
for any Assistance from the Public on this Head; but on the Contrary, have, by
applying for an Act to warrant such Sale as aforesaid, cheerfully submitted the
uncontroverted Parts of their Lands, to the Expense of defending themselves, in
the lawful Possession of such Part as is claimed by New Jersey, and that
against Foreign Encroachments, which concern the whole Community; your
Memorialists humbly conceive, it would be adding too much to the Weight of
their Misfortunes, to subject them to the Expenses to accrue on the Part of
this Colony, in the final Settlement of the Controversy, (which principally
concerns the Crown, and this Community) beyond the Amount of their Proportion,
of a general Tax, or Contribution for that Purpose. Thus much in Maintenance of
the sixth Point.

Nor do your Memorialists conceive it possible, to lay the Owners of the
Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda, (which are principally affected by the
Controversy) under an equitable and proportionate Contribution, for defraying
any Part of the Expense of a final Settlement; because the Property of those
Patents, in Virtue of which they would be compelled to such Contribution, does,
in many Instances, consist in undivided Rights: Some of which, as also great
Part of the located Lands, do belong to Feme Coverts, Infants, and Persons
beyond Sea; and the whole State of Property, in general, is so complicated,
that till each Person's Right is adjusted, and clearly settled, it would be
impossible, in a Method of this Kind, to do equal Justice to all Parties.
Besides, many Rights may be, and, doubtless, are controverted: For which
Reason, also, it would be impracticable to determine, where the Burden ought,
in such Cases, to be laid. And this Supports the seventh Point.

To show the Reasonableness of the eighth Point; even should it, in the Wisdom
of this Honorable House, be thought proper, to raise a Sum by Sale of
unlocated Lands, your Memorialists doubt not, but that it will be found, upon a
strict Enquiry, that if the abovementioned Bill be passed into a Law of this
Colony, it will be difficult to find a sufficient Quantity of unlocated Lands,
in the Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda, to answer the Ends of that Act. For
though there are some Rights, to which no adequate Locations have been made, yet
many Persons having taken up much greater Quantities of Land than their Rights
could possibly entitle them to, have left those unlocated Rights, to be located
on the Lands in Controversy: And therefore, there is very little Land, a^ your
Memorialists conceive, left unlocated, and clear of Dispute, in the said
Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda: Which Patents are principally involved in
the Controversy. And therefore, as it is absolutely reasonable, that the
Expenses which have accrued to some particular Persons, in opposing the
Encroachments of New Jersey, should, by a Sale of Lands, be proportionably
imposed on all Parties interested; there will, as your Memorialists conceive,
be no Room for a Provision by a further Sale of Lands, in those two Patents, to
defray any Part of the Charges of a final Settlement.

But your Memorialists humbly conceive, that an Elucidation of the last Point,
will further show the Hardship, of submitting the Owners of those Patents, to
any Part of such Expense as aforesaid. The Patents of Minisink and Wawayanda,
(which are the Patents most considerably affected by the extravagant Claims of
New Jersey, are beset with Encroachments, arising from the Patents that
surround them, within this Colony. By which Means, the Owners of those Patents
are kept out of the Possession of many Thousand Acres of Land, which they think
do justly belong to them. In order, therefore, to procure Justice to
themselves, in this Instance, they will be obliged to resort to the Courts of
Law within this Colony. This Method, considering the Number of Possession^
gained against them, will necessarily create a Multiplicity of Suits; the
Prosecution of which, will subject them to vast Charge and Expense. And in this
Case, your Memorialists conceive, they cannot expect the least Assistance from
the Public; because those Controversies are of a private Nature, and one Party
would have an equal Right with the other, to claim such Assistance. And
therefore, the Owners of those two Patents, must either cede what they conceive
to be their Right, or defend it at a great Expense; which disables them to
support any Part of the public Controversy with New Jersey, beyond their Quotas
of a public Tax.

If after all those Reasons, the Authority of a Precedent may be admitted to be
urged, your Memorialists beg Leave, humbly, to remind this Honorable House,
that the Charge that has already accrued on the Part of this Colony, for
settling the Controversy between this Colony and the Massachusetts Bay, has by
the Legislature of this Colony, been laid on the Publi^. Wherefore, as your
Memorialists conceive, they cannot expect nothing less, from the Wisdom,
Candor, and Impartiality of this Honorable House, than an equal Distribution
of its Favors, to all its Constituents; they are induced to hope, that in this
Controversy, as well as in the other, the Provision to be made on the Part of
this Colony, will be raised at the public Charge: To which your Memorialists,
and those whom they represent in the Premises, will, as Members of this
Community, cheerfully contribute their respective Proportions.

However, as your Memorialists dare not presume to determine, what Weight the
Reasons above alleged, against submitting the Owners of the said Patents to
any considerable Proportion of the Expense of a final Settlement of the
Controversy, may, in the Wisdom of this Honorable House, be thought to merit:
Therefore, lest they should be deemed insufficient to answer the Purpose for
which they are adduced, (the Contrary of which, however, your Memorialists
earnestly hope for) your Memorialists humbly entreat, that, even if they, and
those whom they represent in the Premises, should be obliged to bear any great
Part of that Expense, it may be imposed on them in such Manner, as will be the
most easy and tolerable: And in such Case, do humbly propose, that as, for the
Reasons above urged, an immediate Subsidy cannot be levied, (either by
subjecting the Parties interested to a proportionate Contribution, or by Sale
of Lands) sufficient for the Purpose, that a Sum may be raised, out of some or
other of the public Funds, to be replaced by a future Tax, o^ the whole Lands
included between the Claims of the two Colonies; or, on so much thereof, as
shall, upon a final Settlement, be included within this Colony: Or, that a Sum,
proportionate to what may be thought to be the Interest of the Owners of the
Patents of Wawayanda and Minisink, out of the Sum intended to be raised by each
of the said Patents, by the abovementioned Bill, now before this Honorable
House, may, by a Clause in the said Bill, be applied toward the Charges of a
final Settlement.

Notwithstanding what has been urged by your Memorialists, to show, that the
Crown and the Public are more concerned in the Event of the Controversy, than
the Owners of the abovesaid Patents within this Colony; yet, the latter are so
much affected thereby, as to induce your Memorialists, humbly to lay before
this Honorable House, their Sentiments concerning the Manner of settling the
Boundaries between the two Colonies; which your Memorialists humbly conceive,
may be done most (...) to Law and Equity, by his Majesty's Appointment of some
Persons of eminent Character and Capacities in England, to determine the Matter
there. This Method will not only admit of a Nomination of Persons in the
highest Rank of Importance, (which the Nature of the Contrversy seems to
require) but will, in other Respects, be attended with no Inconveniences;
seeing that a Settlement of the Controversy, must be founded on a proper
Construction, of the Patent to the Duke of York, and his Grant to Lord BERKLEY,
and Sir GEORGE CARTARET; which may as well be made in England, as in America.
After which, it will require no great Skill; neither will there be much Danger
of Error or Partiality, in running a simple direct Line between two Stations,
agreeable to such Determination. Besides which, should Commissioners be
appointed in England, and sent over to settle the Controversy, it may
reasonably be supposed, that they will not be Persons of so distinguished an
Eminence, as some who might be appointed to settle the Matter there: And
moreover, the Expenses of such a Commission, would be prodigiously aggravated,
by the necessary Charges, attending the Removal of Men of considerable
Character, from England to America, and their Stay in this Part of the World,
until the complete Execution of their Commission. Neither would there be the
highest Security, of a Decision perfectly agreeable to the true Merits of the
Controversy, from such an Appointment. And should Commissioners be nominated in
the Colonies, your Memorialists humbly apprehend, there might be Danger of a
partial Judgment, as well on account of the Disputes between this Colony, and
several other Colonies on the Continent, concerning their Boundaries, as the
Acquaintance and Connections between Persons in the other Colonies, and the
Parties to the Controversy.

Wherefore, upon the Whole, your Memorialists humbly supplicate this Honorable
House, that the Methods to be taken, for providing for the Expense of a final
Settlement, may be made as easy to Your Memorialists, and those whom they
represent in the Premises, as the Nature of the Case can possibly admit of; and
that this Honorable House, would be pleased to use its Interest, in procuring
such Settlement, in a Manner most consistent with Justice, and the Rights of
all the Parties interested in the Event of the Controversy: And also, that, as
your Memorialists, and those whom they represent in the Premises, labor under
great Disadvantages, by Reason of the Power of the Proprietors of East
New Jersey, and their Enjoyment of most of the Posts, of the highest Importance
in New Jersey, and in particular, by the great Authority of JAMES ALEXANDER,
Esquire a principal Proprietor in East New Jersey, and of his Majesty's Council in
both Colonies; who imagining the said Proprietors to have a Title to all the
Lands, as far Northward as the said erroneous Station, at Cashightonck, has,
from Time to Time, endeavored to obstruct your Memorialists in their
Prosecution of those Measures, which to them seemed most advancive of their
true Interest; as will appear by the Interview between him and Col. DEKAY, an
Inhabitant of this Province, mentioned in the above remembered Report of the
Committee of this Honorable House; and also, by his Reasons, entered the last
Sessions, in the Minutes of the Council of this Colony, against the passing of
a Bill, of the same Tenor with the abovementioned Bill, now before this
Honorable House. That therefore, in Tenderness to the Owners of the said
Patents within this Colony, this Honorable House would ^e pleased, by the
great Weight of its Authority and Influence, to urge forward, with all possible
Expedition and Justice, the final Settlement of a Controversy, so apparently
injurious to a vast Number of its Constituents. And thus your Memorialists
humbly beg Leave to conclude this their long Memorial; with praying the Excuse
of this Hono^^rable House, for trespassing so much on their Time, seeing, that
to have aimed at more Brevity, in the Hurry with which it has been drawn up,
might have been attended with some f^^al (...).

NEW YORK, the 10 th February, 1756.

