AN ANSWER TO THE LAYMAN's Treatise on Baptism: In which the Author is pleased
to say, That the Quaker Doctrine of Water Baptism is CONSIDERED, their
Objections ANSWERED, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, upon that
important Point, STATED and VINDICATED.

By THOMAS NICHOLSON.

Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge; ye entered
not in yourselves, and those that were entering in, ye hindered.

Luke xi. 52. My People have committed two Evils; they have forsaken me the
Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that
can hold no Water.

Jeremiah ii. 13. WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM HUNTER, MDCCLVII.

THE PREFACE.
POLEMICK Writers, or Books of Controversy, especially upon religious Subjects,
are not in general agreeable to the prevaling Disposition of the present Age:
And it must be acknowledged that an enquiring Mind is too often disappointed in
the Perusal of such Works. It frequently happening that Persons who engage in
disputable Points are either biassed by their Education, or else act from
Prepossession; and instead of sincerely endeavoring to promote Truth in its
Simplicity, they labor to maintain the Doctrines of a Party, or the Principles
of their Education, which perhaps they have implicitly assented to, and deem
Foundamentals in Religion, though they have never impartially examined into their
Validity.

There are scarce any People who have been more frequently attacked than those
called Quakers; or whose Principles have, through the Ignorance or Malevolence of
their Adversaries, been more grossly misrepresented. -- It Is not long since a
Treatise made its Appearance in this Part of the World under a specious Title,
probably with a View to obtain Readers or vend large Numbers of so
extraordinary a Performance. -- The Author asserts that the Quaker Doctrine of
Water Baptism is considered, their Objections answered, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England upon that important Point stated and vindicated. -- The
following Sheets contain an Answer to that Treatise, which we recommend to the
serious Perusal of every impartial and judicious Reader.

Our Antagonist pretends in his Preface that his only Motive for entering into
the Enquiry was to obtain Satisfaction to himself upon the Doctrine of Water
Baptism; and that he had no Thoughts of appearing in Print: From which, we
suppose, he would have us conclude that he was a sincere Seeker after Truth,
and entered into the Enquiry free from Bias or Prejudice: But whether he
commenced his Enquiry upon this Bottom must be left to his own Conscience. Though
if to miscite or mutilate the Quotations he brings from the Writings of those
whom he opposes, and to insert them as fair and genuine, be Evidences of the
Contrary, our Opponent is, we think, highly culpable; and which we conceive
will evidently appear on Perusal of the ensuing Sheets. -- Is it not hard to
know what religious Principles this Author is of? For, notwithstanding he
affects to advocate for the Church of England, does he not advance Doctrine
contrary thereto, when he says, It, Water Baptism, is made one of the
Conditions upon the Performance whereof eternal Salvation is to be obtained? Do
not Protestants deny that Water Baptism is absolutely necessary to Salvation,
though Papists say none can be saved without it?

Our Adversary's Notion of Water Baptism seems somewhat like the Papists
Doctrine of Transubstantiation: They say the Bread after Consecration is the
real Body of Christ; He suggests that Water duly administered washes the most
inveterate and malignant Diseases from the Soul. Is not this to make the Water
spiritual, or to add some Virtue it had not before? It being evident that
elementary Water cannot reach the Soul.

How lamentable is it that Men will not study to be quiet and mind their own
Business: Were they to act in their proper Sphere they might be of Use to
Mankind. -- And if Divinity or the right Knowledge of the saving Truths of the
Gospel were to be attained by human Study, as the Laws of Nations are, our
Opponent might probably have obtained the Character of Learned and Wise: But as
he appears so great a Stranger to the experimental Knowledge of the Nature, End
and Design of the Gospel Dispensation, it is no Wonder he has run into so many
and great Absurdities respecting the Doctrine of Water Baptism.

The Author of this Reply is a plain Man, not practiced in the Art of
Controversy, nor inclined to Disputation; but is diffident of his own Abilities
and Qualifications for such Undertakings; and nothing short of an Apprehension
of Duty and good Will to Mankind was his Inducement to appear in Print. We
think he has treated our Antagonist with Coolness and Moderation, and avoided
unfair Deductions. -- And if any Thing herein written should contribute toward
informing the Ignorant or Unprejudiced, or tend to remove Stumbling Blocks out
of the Way of the Weak, the Design of the Author will in great Measure be
answered.

AN ANSWER TO THE LAYMAN'S Treatise on Baptism.
THE Author, here to be answered, introduces his Complaint, against Robert
Barclay, with a Perversion of his Words, in adding the Word [Utter] Strangers,
instead of how much Strangers to, and averse from, that true and acceptable
Worship that is performed in the Spirit of Truth.

ROBERT BARCLAY, in his Apology, (Page 411) after he has mentioned some
Expressions, of which our Opponent has taken Notice, in his first Page, makes
the following Remark: Which Zeal, says he, if they would but seriously examine
it, they would find to be but the Prejudice of Education, and the Love of Self
more than that of God or his pure Worship; this is verified concerning those
Things which are called Sacraments. And then the Author, by another Perversion
of his Words, says, which are empty Shaddows, and mere outside Things, and not
commanded by Christ, nor any Way necessary to Salvation. All which I readily
grant him, but would have him speak the Truth, and render others Words as they
are. See Apology, Page 411.

HE confesses, that if what is here said of the Sacraments be true, the Church
of England falls very justly under the Censure before complained of. The
Question with me is not what Church or Society falls under that Censure, but
what is agreeable to Scripture, Truth and sound Reason in this important Point;
and in Order to give a Reason to such as asks us of the Hope that is in us,
in Meekness and Fear: First we believe that there is but one Baptism, as well
as but one Lord, one Faith, etc. Apology, Page 413.

SECONDLY, that this one Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a
Washing with, or Dipping in Water, but a being baptized with the Spirit.

THIRDLY, that the Baptism with elementary Water was but a Figure of the
spiritual Baptism; and therefore the Figure must give Place to the Substance,
and when the Substance is enjoyed, the Figure cease.

AS to the Truth of our Principles, that there is but one Baptism to continue
in the Church of Christ, there needs no other Proof than these Words,
Ephesians, iv. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; where the Apostle plainly
affirms that as there is but one Lord, one Faith, etc. so there is but one
Baptism. Apology 414. And the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, being an Ordinance
of Christ, by which, according to the Scriptures of Truth, Sinners have been
made Saints, (...) (...)greeable to the Principles of the People called
Qua(...) the one saving Baptism.

KNOW ye not that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God,
and such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1
Corinthians, vi. 9, 10, 11.

AND now according to the Acknowledgement of the nameless Author the Substance
of the Controversy depends upon this, Whether Christ instituted a Water Baptism
in his Church as a standing Ordinance, or not.

FOR Confirmation of his Water Argument (Page 4) he cites Matthew, xxviii. 19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. From which he boldly asserts two
positive Duties are enjoined, to wit, the Duty of Teaching, and the Duty of
Baptising; but the Reader will find that the Text does not say, teach and
baptize (which according to his Definition it should have done) but teach all
Nations baptising them etc. But herein he explains this Text contrary to most
of the approved Authors of the Church of England, for they say it should be, go
ye therefore and disciple all Nations by baptising them, etc. well knowing that
if they admit of the Word (Teach) according to the Text, it makes against the
Baptism of Infants, they being incapable of being Taught; and although this
Author says in his Preface, that he has on Purpose avoided saying any Thing
of Infant Baptism: Yet Robert Barclay, with whom he is contending, says, It is
a mere human Tradition, for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found
in all the Scriptures.

AND indeed that Text will make against him in that there is no Water there
mentioned, or that can by any necessary Consequence be deduced thence. And as a
certain Author of Note observes, The Commission there to baptize is not into
the Water, but into the Name or Power (as the Word frequently signifies in the
Scripture) of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and this
Interpretation is strongly supported by Verse 18. All Power, says Christ, is
given unto me in Heaven and Earth, where Power and Name (Verse 19) are of the
same Import: And likewise by Acts, i. 5. John truly, said Christ to his
Apostles, baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not
many Days hence: Compare with Verse 8. Ye shall receive Power, after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be Witnesses unto me both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost Part of the
Earth. Thus far Joseph Besse, from R. C's Lux Evangelica Attestata.

AND as Robert Barclay observes, in Page 437, Although it should be granted, that
for a Season they did so far mistake the Commission, Matthew xxviii. as to
judge that Water belonged to that Baptism (which, however, I find no Necessity
of granting;) yet I see not any great Absurdity would thence follow, for it is
plain they did mistake that Commission, as to the main Part of it, for a
Season, as where he bids them go teach all Nations, since some Time after they
judged it unlawful to teach the Gentiles, yea Peter himself scrupled it, until
by a Vision constrained thereunto; for which, after he had done it, he was for
a Season (until they were better informed) judged by the rest of his Brethren.
Now if the Education of the Apostles, as Jews, and their Propensity to adhere
and stick to the Jewish Religion, did so far influence them, that, even after
Christ's Resurrection and the pouring forth of the Spirit, they could not
receive or admit of the teaching of the Gentiles, though Christ in his Commission
to them commanded them to preach to them; what further Absurdity were it to
suppose, that through the like Mistake, the chiefest of them having been the
Disciples of John, and his Baptism being so much prized there among the Jews,
that they also took Christ's Baptism (intended by him of the Spirit) to be that
of Water which was John's, and accordingly practiced it for a Season. It
suffices us that if they were so mistaken (though I say not that they were so)
they did not always remain under that Mistake, else Peter would not have said
of the Baptism which now saves, that it is not a putting away of the Filth of
the Flesh, which certainly Water Baptism is.

OUR Opponent, in Page 6 and 7, brings several Scriptures to prove the Descent
of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles at the Day of Pentecost, which in my Opinion,
are a Confirmation of the Truth of that which he cannot deny, viz. That
Christ's Baptism was a Baptism with the Holy Ghost and Fire: But he labors
afterward to confine that glorious Gospel Privilege to the Days of the
Apostles only, and to prove that the Baptism of the Holy Spirit is now ceased;
and the easier to impose upon his Readers, cites much of the 11th Chapter of
Acts, till he comes to the 39 Verse, which is, For the Promise is to you and to
your Children, and to all that are a-far off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call; not considering likewise, that no Man can (knowingly and
experimentally) say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost.

I would have the Reader observe his Argument in his 7th Page, where he makes
this Remark: Now the Baptism in the Name of the Lord Jesus, being one of the
Conditions upon which the Holy Ghost is promised, the Condition must be
performed before the Promise is to be fulfilled. But how he will make this
Doctrine agree with the Testimony of the Apostle Peter, when at the House of
Cornelius, for my Part I cannot see; but think that this one Instance is enough
to lay waste his whole Building. See Acts, x. 44. While Peter yet spoke these
Words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word; and after this it
was that he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord, Verse 48. So
that it is evident that the Thing promised, viz. the Baptism with the Holy
Ghost, was powerfully received by the efficatious Ministry of the Apostle
Peter, before the Administration of elementary Water was performed in the Name
of the Lord Jesus: And therefore I would hope the Author will take Heed least
he be found darkening Council with Words without true Knowledge, and not only
not entering himself but hindering those that are about to enter.

THAT the Samaritans were baptized with a different Baptism from that of the
Holy Ghost, as our Opponent says, Page 8, we freely grant; and that it was
such a Baptism as fell short of giving the Answer of a good Conscience in the
Sight of God, appears very plain in the same Chapter, from the Instance of
Simon. For notwithstanding he was baptized with Water, yet Peter says to him,
Acts, viii. 23. I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of
Iniquity. Now if this Water Baptism had had that Virtue in it, which this
Author hereafter urges from the Example of the River Jordan, in the Case of
Naaman the Assyrian, I should think that it would have broken Simon's Bond of
Iniquity and taken away his Gall of Bitterness, which it seems it did not, and
therefore cannot be the Baptism commanded; because according to Mark, xvi. 16.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; and to say that he was in a
State of Salvation, and yet in the Bond of Iniquity at the same Time, would be
a Contradiction in Terms.

AS to what this Author says, Page 9 and 10, concerning Philip's baptising the
Eunuch with Water, take the Reply of Josiah Foster, in the Quaker's Answer to
the Norfolk Letter, Page 47. That Philip baptized the Eunuch with Water we
question not, but that he baptized him in Pursuance to Christ's Command,
Matthew xxviii. we do not believe can ever be proved. It seems most probable by
the concurring Circumstances to have been in Relation to John's Dipensation.
First, it does not appear that the Action sprang from any Motion in Philip, but
from the Eunuch's Request: See here is Water, what hinders me to be baptized?
Which Words show that the Eunuch understood that Water Baptism was then in Use,
which he well might being himself a Proselyte to the Jewish Religion, on the
Account of which he had then been at Jerusalem, where he could not easily miss
of being informed of the so noted Administration of Water Baptism by John the
Baptist. And it is evident that John's Baptism was in Practice a long Time
after that. See Acts, xix. 3. Secondly, the prerequisite Qualifications for the
Reception thereof agrees with that of John's: A Belief in Christ was the Terms
upon which the Eunuch was baptized: When John baptized he said unto the People
that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ
Jesus. Acts, xix. 4. Thirdly, Philip's answering so cooly in the permissive
Form [Thou mayest] denotes it to be a Matter of Indifference, and not that
which Christ had so solemnly enjoined. Matthew, xxviii. 19. and Mark, xvi. 16.

AS to the Case of Paul, mentioned Page 10, after his Conversion, Acts, ix. I
would have the Reader observe how the Author, in Order to evade the Scope of
the Text, leaves out Verse 17, where it is said, And Annanias went his way, and
entered into the House, and putting his Hands on him, said Brother Saul, the
Lord (even Jesus that appeared to thee in the Way as thou came) has sent me
that thou might receive thy Sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. From
which it is evident that Paul was filled with the Holy Ghost by Virtue of this
Message, and Annanias, who was not one of the twelve Apostles, was made the
Instrument. But the Author has, in the Margin, referred the Reader to
Gallatians i. 11. to 17. which I hope was not done with Design to pervert
Paul's Meaning, but to draw from thence some Pretense of Argument: Though he must
be a weak Reader who cannot see his Confusion when Paul's Words are fairly
stated; Verse 11 and 12. But I certify you Brethren that the Gospel which was
preached of me is not after Man; for I neither received it of Man, neither was
I taught it but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Which Text is very plain
that Paul here spoke positively of his Commission to preach the Gospel, and it
has no Reference to the Manner in which he was baptized.

AS to what he urges, Page 11, of Peter's baptising the House of Cornelius with
Water, after they had received the Holy Ghost, he must have forgot his
Assertion in Page 7, where he makes a being baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus so necessary a Condition of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost that it must be
performed before the Promise is to be fulfilled. For here it is evident they
had received the Promise, viz. the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, before they
were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

AND is it not manifest, from this Text, to every unprejudiced Reader, that
Water Baptism is not necessary to Salvation; for it is undeniable that when
they had received the Holy Ghost they were in a State of Salvation, and Water
Baptism, with which they had not been baptized, could not put them in that
State.

AND observe, the Apostle puts the Question, Can any Man forbid, etc. and that
being an Appeal to the Judgment of Men, concerning the Fitness or Unfitness of
the Thing, one would think he would not have done it had it been a plain and
positive Duty; which appears to me a good Argument that this cannot be the
Baptism enjoined, Matthew xxviii. But that the being baptized in the Name of
the Lord was no other than John's Baptism we shall endeavor to make appear.

THE Author, Page 11, cites Acts xix. 2, etc. and from thence attempts to prove
three different Baptisms, viz. First, John's; secondly, In the Name of the
Lord; and thirdly, The Baptism with the Holy Ghost. And as he has made Choice
of that of being baptized in the Name of the Lord, for his Foundation to build
his Argument upon, for a Water Baptism to remain a standing Ordinance in the
Church, by Virtue of a Command of Christ, I shall produce sundry Authorities
taken from Josiah Foster, Page 64, etc. To make appear that a being baptized in
the Name of the Lord was understood to be no other than that of John's
Baptism;' Ambrose says, John, baptized in the Name of Christ, not in his own
Name, for the Remission of Sins.' Gregory, Bishop of Neocaesarea, who
flourished in the Beginning of the third Century, maintains in his Exposition
of Matthew iii. 14. 'That John baptized in the Name of Jesus.' Du Viel, on Acts
xix. 5. Tertullian makes John's Baptism and what the Apostles used the same.
Calvin says, 'That both John and the Apostles baptized in the Name of Christ;
for (says he) the diverse Hands wherewith it is administered makes not the
Baptism diverse, but the same Doctrine shows it to be the same Baptism: John
and the Apostles agreed in one Doctrine; both baptized unto Repentance; both
for the Remission of Sin; both in the Name of Christ. Instit. Lib. iv. Chap.
xv. Sect. 7.

DOCTOR Willet, speaking of the Ephesians, Acts xix. 4, 5. says, They had
received the Baptism of John, which was nothing but to be baptized in the Name
of Jesus. Synop. Papismi. Page 585. Ibid. John used the same Form in baptising
which the Apostles did; they baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts ii.
38. and so did John.

DOCTOR Fulk, on Acts xix. 4. says, They that heard John's Doctrine were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. See also Doctor Lightfoot's Harmony,
Page 15 and 105.

NEITHER can the Baptism, used by the Apostles, in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
be the Baptism commanded by Christ, Matthew xxviii. because the Form is
wanting. It being essential to Christian Baptism (says Doctor Burkett, on Acts
xix.) to baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

AND the common Prayer Book, toward the Conclusion of what relates to private
Baptism, signifies, That the Form in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are essential Parts of Baptism.

Josiah Foster, in his before mentioned Discourse, Page 73, in Answer to an
Opposer much in the same Strain with this Author, has this Remark: For as much
then as upon an impartial Examination, it obviously appears not only consistent
with the holy Writ but also correspondent with the express Doctrine of the
Church of England, as laid down by sundry of her apologetical Theologists, and
other Protestant Writers, that the Water Baptism which the Apostles used was no
other than that of John the Baptist; and that it is too apparent to be denied
(even as this Author himself allows) that the Baptism of John is abolished, it
therefore naturally follows, as an undeniable Consequence, from the the
Premises, that that Baptism which the Apostles used is abolished likewise.

WHEREFORE, upon the whole, I doubt not but it will be plain to every
unprejudiced Reader, that this Author, by his maintaining the Abolition of
John's Baptism, has quite done the Business of Water Baptism for ever, and laid
his own Structure as prostrate as ever the Image of Dagon lay before the Ark of
God.

THE Author asserts, in Page 12, that Robert Barclay, in his Apology, Page 431,
acknowledges that the Word baptize always signifies in Scripture a being
baptized with Water, and not with the Spirit, when it stands singly and without
other Words to distinguish the particular Baptism with the Holy Ghost. But as I
have examined that Page and can find nothing that will bear that Construction,
I shall return it upon him as a false Accusation till he makes it fairly appear.

HE has risen to a great Height, Page 14, even to assert that Christ's Baptism
was a Water Baptism as had been and would be further proved; which, if he means
elementary Water, appears to me to be a great Presumption* but, for the
Satisfaction of the Reader, let us examine his Proofs, as referred to in the
Margin: The first is Acts, ii. 28. Thou have made known to me the Ways of Life;
thou shall make me full of Joy with thy Countenance. This has not the least
Shadow of Proof in it, but quite the contrary, as it refers to inward Communion
with God.

HIS second Proof is Mark, xvi. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. Which will be of no Service
to support his Argument, unless he can prove the Baptism herein mentioned to be
a Water Baptism. But it is evident to me that this Text ought not to be
understood of Water Baptism, from the following Considerations: First, the Case
of Simon, mentioned before, who was, notwithstanding his being baptized with
Water, left in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. As to the Author's
Reply to this Argument, in his Treatise, it will be answered in its proper
Place. Secondly, that of Peter in his first Epistle, iii. 21. The like Figure
whereunto even Baptism does also now save us (not the putting away of the Filth
of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And as elementary Water can only wash the Filth
of the Flesh, but not give the Answer of a good Conscience, so the Baptism
which saves must be that which will wash the Heart from Wickedness. Jeremiah,
iv. 14. O Jerusalem wash thine Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be saved.

THAT the Baptism of John had God for its Author we agree with our Opponent,
Page 15, and that it was preparatory to Christ: And we further agree with him
that it is now ceased, as has been observed before.

THAT the Baptism of Christ has not only God for its Author, but was
instituted for much higher and more excellent Ends, we also heartily agree; but
that it was with outward Water he has not yet proved, and therefore we shall
deny his Assertion in that Respect, as it would greatly tend to eclipsing the
glorious Gospel Dispensation.

AND that Baptism which is to continue in the Church of Christ to the End of
the World, and which he will accompany with his Presence, must necessarily be
with the Holy Ghost and Fire; as that alone purifies the Heart, and effectually
cleanses from former Defilements, and puts Mankind into a State of Salvation,
by becoming true Members of that mystical Body, of which Christ is the Head,
through Sanctification of the Spirit of God the Father: Without unnecessarily
running Men and Women into that frequent Presumption, of promising that for
others which they acknowledge they cannot do for themselves, when they stand as
Godfathers and Godmothers, in executing the Ceremony of Water Baptism,
according to what the Church of England requires.

I agree with the Author, Page 16, that the Ends for which the Baptism of
Christ and that of John were instituted are quite different, and that they
cannot be the same Baptisms; but that they were both of Water he has not yet
proved, without his bare Assertion can be taken for Proof. And that the
Difference between these two Baptisms, both in Substance and Effect, is very
great, will plainly appear, by considering John's to be elementary, Christ's to
be spiritual; the one to be preparatory to Christ's Dispensation and figurative
of his Baptism, and the other to be the inward Purgation of the Soul from Sin,
by the cleansing Virtue of the Holy Spirit.

THE Author, Page 16, brings what he calls a most familiar Instance of entering
into three Covenants, and sealing them all with Wax, which, in the Conclusion,
that he confesses he would willingly have excused himself the Trouble of
stating. But as those who deny Water Baptism have confounded this Distinction
and complicated all Water Baptisms, so as if they were one and the same, and
not to be distinguished, he could not allow himself to pass it by altogether.
And so by the Way he asserts three different Baptisms, and that Water is the
Wax in all of them, as if he intended to impose upon his Readers by taking the
Point in Dispute for granted, viz. That Christ's Baptism is a Water Baptism,
without one clear Scripture Proof: So that Reader, if thou will believe him,
thou must rely upon his own bare Assertion, notwithstanding it contradicts the
Scriptures of Truth, and the Judgment of several approved Writers of the
Church of England, for which he would make the World believe that he is now
become an Advocate.

WE deny his Assertion that Water is the Wax in these three Baptisms, seeing he
intends Christ's to be one of them; and he might have spared his Pains, and
shuned running into so great an Absurdity.

AND now I would have the Reader take Notice, that this Author, Page 18, is
going about to prove a Difference between the Baptism ordained by Christ, as a
standing Ordinance in his Church, and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, which, if
he should do, the whole Point must be given up to him; and most of the Writers
upon the Subject of Baptism may put their Hands to their Mouths and say, That
he has done more than ever could be done before.

BUT as the Subject is very important, and ought not to be handled carelessly,
it will be very proper for us to take good Heed that he does not impose upon
us, by endeavoring to limit the Dispensations of the Most High to Mankind.
That the Baptism of Christ was with the Holy Ghost and Fire, is too evident to
be denied; and he himself cites several Places of Scripture to prove it; but
then endeavors to confine this Privilege to the Days of the Apostles only.
Which is a taking away the Key of Knowledge, and falling into the two Evils
complained of, of old: Jeremiah, ii. 13. They have forsaken me the Fountain of
living Waters, and hewed them cut Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no
Water. Now to know whether the pouring forth of the Spirit, on the Day of
Pentecost, was an Accomplishment, according to this Author (by which I suppose
he means a finishing or ending) of the Prophecy of the Prophet Joel; or whether
it had only fallen out at that Time, and upon those Persons, agreeable to what
that Prophet had foretold should come to pass in the latter Days upon all the
Church of Christ, it will be necessary to have the Words of Peter fairly
stated: Acts, ii. 16, 17, 18. But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet
Joel, and it shall come to pass in the last Days says God, I will pour out my
Spirit upon all Flesh; and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and
your young Men shall see Visions, and your old Men shall dream Dreams, and on
my Servants, and on my Handmaids I will pour out in those Days of my Spirit,
and they shall prophecy: And in Verse 39, before cited, For the Promise is to
you, and to your Children, and to all that are a-far off, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. So that the pouring forth of the Spirit, even in
Peter's Judgment, must be the Privilege of every Christian. Yet this Author
affirms, Page 19, That this amazing and miraculous Effusion of the Holy Ghost
is expressly said by St. Peter to be the Accomplishment of Joel's Prophecy. If
he had not intended here to mislead the Reader, he might have kept to the Words
of the Text, This is that which was spoken, etc. and not brought a false Charge
against the Apostle Peter, in rendering it an Accomplishment, etc. but it
suited his Purpose here to evade the Scope of the Text.

AND in Order to confine the Baptism with the Holy Ghost to the Days of the
Apostles, and to exclude it after, he tells us the Meaning thereof, is, being
endowed with extraordinary and supernatural Gifts; such as a Power to work
Miracles, speak with Tongues, etc. And this he says, Page 20, will be more
manifest by considering the Scriptures which speak of those, who, after their
Conversion to Christianity, were baptized with the Holy Ghost. Herein the
Author seems hard to be understood, without he looks upon Believing and
Conversion to be the same. It is said indeed of those Samaritans that they
believed Philip preaching; but that they were converted before they were
baptized with the Holy Ghost, I do not find, and believe he never will be able
to prove it.

AS to his insisting upon Miracles, see 1 Corinthians xiv. 22. Wherefore
Tongues are for a Sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not.
And that he may see how he is joining Papists against Protestants, I would have
him read The Protestant Answered, in Barclay's Apology, Page 296, viz. That we
need not Miracles, because we preach no new Gospel, but that which is already
confirmed by all the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles; and that we offer
nothing but that which we are ready and able to confirm by the Testimony of the
Scriptures, which both already acknowledge to be true.

AS to his Arguments concerning the Samaritans being visibly baptized with the
Holy Ghost, in the Sight of Simon, where he queries, If the Gift of the Holy
Ghost was not visible, how could Simon see it? I shall answer him, in his own
Words, in the same and the next Page, who asks, How did those of the
Circumcision know that the Holy Ghost was fallen on the Gentiles? Why they
heard them speak with Tongues, by which visible Evidence they were convinced
that the Gentiles had received the Gift of the Holy Ghost; by some such like
Evidence was Simon also convinced that the Samaritans had received the Gift of
the Holy Ghost: Herein the Author has fully answered his own Objection to my
Satisfaction. But it looks to me as if he had forgo which Side of the Question
he was of, or else he would not have contradicted himself in such a Manner.

THE Author, again insisting, that being baptized with the Holy Ghost always
signifies, in Scripture, the being endowed with some extraordinary and
wonderful Gift; such as a Power to work Miracles, to speak with Tongues, to
prophecy, etc. In Order to make sure* Work of it, that the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost has long since ceased, he says, Page 21, that the Promise of Christ was
fully accomplished before the Apostles departed from Jerusalem; not considering
how weak, and indeed ridiculous this Doctrine of his own Brain must make the
Practice of the Church of England appear in the Judgment of all such as
consider it. For when the Priest admisters Baptism he says, I beseech you to
call upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous
Mercy he would grant to this Child that Thing which by Nature it cannot have,
that he may be baptized with Water and the Holy Ghost. Which Prayer, if they
that use it are of the Opinion of this Author, must be Sin; because it cannot
be of Faith.

AND that he may see his Emptiness, in his new stated Antichristian-Plea
against the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, I would have him consider heartily the
following Citations of Josiah Foster, in his Book mentioned before, Page 175.
The spiritual Baptism is that which Christ daily baptiseth all that willingly
receive him, says Chrysostom: That which baptiseth our Spirits, says an ancient
and learned Author: That which regenerates and renews the Hearts of the Elect,
says Piscator: That which cleanses the Faithful from Sin, says Alapide: That
which washes the Soul as Water does the Body, says Calvin: That which purges
the Conscience, says the learned Peter's: That which kindles Zeal in our Hearts,
says Doctor Willet: That which is necessary to Salvation, says Doctor Fulk:
That which purges our Lusts and Corruptions, says Pool: That which consumes the
Dross, says Henry: Makes Partakers of the Adoption of the Sons of God, says
the famous Stevens: The only necessary Baptism, according to Walter Brute: That
wherewith Christ baptises all that come to him, says Bishop Tailor: What the
Common Prayer Book directs to pray for: That which only saves, says Doctor
Burket: And without which none can be saved, according to the Assembly of
Divines: That whereby we are all ingrafted into, or made Members of that
mystical Body of Christ, agreeable to the Apostle, 1 Corinthians xii. 13. Here
is such a Cloud of Witnesses against him that it is high Time for him to
acknowledge, that he has uttered Words without true Knowledge.

IN the Bottom of Page 22, this Author asserts that no Person, but the Apostles
themselves, could be the instrumental Cause of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost;
but I have before shown, that Annanias, who was not one of the twelve Apostles,
was the Instrument to Paul's being baptized with the Holy Ghost; which does
evidently appear by Acts ix. 17. And Annanias went his way, and entered into
the House, and putting his Hands upon him said, Brother Saul, the Lord (even
Jesus that appeared unto thee in the Way as thou came) has sent me that thou
might receive thy Sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. If he should say
that this is only a single Instance, I answer, that one single Instance,
supported by undeniable Authority, is sufficient to overthrow his whole
Building, as it stands upon so sandy a Foundation; and I hope there are but few
Members of the Church of England, who are serious in their Religion, that will
venture to join with him.

BUT least he should become wiser in his own Conceit than seven Men that can
render a Reason, I shall add some further Considerations, taken out of Josiah
Foster, Page 168, That this Doctrine is not inconsistent with, but agreeable to
what several Doctors of the Church of England have taught. Doctor Hammond holds
that Christ's Ministers were empowered to communicate spiritual Gifts: See his
Paraphrase and Annotations on Acts i. 5, 11, 38. viii. 17. Romans i. 11, 12.
Doctor Burkett, on Acts ix. 17. asserts, That Annanias, though but an ordinary
and private Christian, yet had Power to confer the Holy Ghost: And on John vii.
38. He says Christ and his Spirit are a living Fountain whose Waters never
fail; they are not a Water Brook, but a Spring of Waters; we shall never miss
of the Waters of Life, if we seek unto, and wait upon Christ for them, for, If
we believe on him, out of our Bellies shall flow Rivers of living Waters,
sufficient for ourselves, and therewith to refresh others. Which (I think) is,
in Effect, to say the Ministers shall baptize with the Spirit.

SEVERAL Pages of this Author's Treatise seem, in my Opinion, to be little else
but the Product of his own Imaginations, to limit the Baptism with the Holy
Ghost to the Apostles only; and his Arguments will amount to little more than
this: That the Apostles were sent for to those that were lately convinced of
the Christian Religion, and that upon the laying on of their Hands the Holy
Ghost was given, or fell on them; but how this does limit that Favor to the
Apostles only does not yet appear, but quite the contrary, in the Case of
Annanias beforementioned. And that the Author may see how ticklish he stands, I
shall add to the foregoing Authorities, as a full Answer to what he has
asserted on this Head, an excellent Passage of Bishop Tailor, who speaking
concerning Matthew iii. 2. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and Fire,
says, Although this was literally fulfilled in Pentecost, yet morally there is
more in it, for it is the Sign of the Effects of the Holy Ghost, and his
Productions on the Soul; and it was an Excellency of our Savior's Office that
he baptises all that come to him with the Holy Ghost and Fire. For so St. John,
preferring Christ's Mission and Office before his own, tells the Jews (not
Christ's Disciples) that Christ shall baptize them with Fire and the Holy
Ghost, that is, all that come to him, as John the Baptist did, with Water.
Libert. of Proph. Page 231.

THE Authorities before mentioned are so far from confining the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost to those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit bestowed on Particulars
in the Apostles Time, as that of Tongues, healing the Sick, raising the Dead,
etc. that they unanimously make it to be that Gift, or Measure of the Holy
Spirit, which regenerates and renews the Heart, purges the Conscience, cleanses
from Sin, illuminates the Mind, kindles Zeal and Love both toward God and our
Neighbor, warms and influences the Heart with a Sense of God's Love, raises
spiritual Habits in the Soul, etc. Nay, in fine, they seem to ascribe thereto
the whole Work of Regeneration and Sanctification produced in the Soul from a
State of Nature to a perfect Man in a State of Grace.

THAT the Baptism with the Holy Ghost is not ceased, the many excellent Effects
and Operations which are appropriate thereunto sufficiently demonstrate; for
take away these and Christianity itself cease. Wherefore if this Author will
abide by his Assertion, that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is ceased, he must
renounce all the before cited Authorities (and lay by his Common Prayer Book,
since it teaches to pray for the Baptism of the Holy Ghost) and thereby, at
once, declare himself to be neither Roman-Catholic, Church of England-Man,
Presbyterian, nor Anabaptist, since this dark Notion will not agree with the
Judgment of either of the beforementioned Communities.

FROM whence this Author has imbibed such a Notion about the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost, as its being ceased, seems strange; but as it is such an
antiscriptural and antichristian Doctrine, it is very necessary to be expelled
the Regions of Christianity. But is there not Reason to fear, that his Envy
against the Baptism of the Holy Ghost proceeds from the same Spirit that caused
Readiness Anger to burn so hot against David, when he said to Jonathan, 1 Samuel
xx. 31. As long as the Son of Jesse lives thou shall not be established nor
thy Kingdom. For he no Doubt foresaw, that his newfound Water Baptism could
not be established, without disannulling that of the Holy Ghost and Fire; but
his Endeavor to effect that, has run him into great Absurdities. For is it not
surprising, that a Man professing himself to be a Member of the Church of
England, should tell the World, in Print, that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is
long since ceased; when at the same Time, not only the Rubric of the said
Church enjoins every Congregation, wherever the Common Prayer Book takes Place,
at the Administration of public Baptism, to pray for the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost, but also since several learned Bishops, Theologists, and approved
Authors of most Christian Societies, are so pathetic, clear, and express in
maintaining the Continuance of the same, as a Thing absolutely necessary for
every true Believer to experience, in Order to their eternal Salvation.

IT IS indeed strange that Men in their right Senses, should lose themselves so
in Confusion, that whilst they oppose the religious Principles of others, they
should proclaim themselves Antagonists to the chief Doctrines of their own
Church.

THE Premises duly considered, I doubt not but it will appear plain to every
unbiassed Reader, that the Baptism with the Holy Ghost is so far from being
ceased, that it is that whereby Christ our Lord baptises all his Disciples,
every true Christian, and without which none can be saved; and considering it
as such, it is certainly most agreeable to conclude, that that was the very
Baptism commanded, Matthew xxviii. 19.

AND moreover, since this Author, Page 27, would make the (supposed) Cessation
of the Spirit's Baptism a decisive Argument to prove that the Baptism enjoined,
Matthew xxviii. was a Water Baptism: The Proof of the Non-Cessation or
Continuance of the Spirit's Baptism must, by the same Parity of Reason, be a
decisive Argument to prove that the Baptism commanded, Matthew xxviii. is that
of the Spirit, especially seeing there is but one Baptism to continue in the
Church of Christ, Ephesians iv. 5.

THIS Author says, Page 28, That he agrees with Robert Barclay in his Argument
drawn from Ephesians iv. 5. that there is but one Baptism; but says, he cannot
agree with him that this one Baptism (which is the Baptism of Christ) is not a
Washing with Water but a being baptized with the Spirit. And yet he allows,
that the one Baptism mentioned Ephesians iv. 5. is the same with the Baptism
commanded, Matthew 21. and that it is the Baptism of Christ, he don't deny; so
that as it has been proved already that the Baptism of Christ is that of the
Spirit, not only according to Scripture, but by the Testimony of several famous
Writers, there needs no other Proof now than this, That the one Baptism is not
a Water Baptism, and then his whole Building must of Consequence fall to the
Ground. And although he says that Robert Barclay's Arguments are not
satisfactory to him, yet as they are so clear and evident they may prove
satisfactory to others: Apology, Page 419. That the one Baptism of Christ is
not a Washing with Water, appears from 1 Peter iii. 21. The like Figure
whereunto even Baptism does also now save us (not the putting away the Filth of
the Flesh but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ. So plain a Definition of Baptism is not to be found in all the
Bible, and therefore seeing it is so plain it may very well be preferred to all
the coined Definitions of the Schoolmen. The Apostle tells, first negatively,
what it is not, viz. not a putting away of the Filth of the Flesh; then surely
it is not a Washing with Water, since that is so. Secondly, he tells us,
affirmatively, what it is, viz. the Answer of a good Conscience toward God by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Where he affirmatively defines it to be the
Answer (or Confession as the Syriack Version has it) of a good Conscience. Now
this Answer cannot be but where the Spirit of God has purified the Soul, and
the Fire of his Judgment has burnt up the unrighteous Nature; and those in
whom this Work is wrought, may be truly said to be baptized with the Baptism
of Christ, i. e. of the Spirit and of Fire.

BUT this Author, Page 34, seems to be offended with Barclay for saying that
this Place is the plainest Definition of Baptism in the Bible. This he denies,
and proposes, as equally plain, sundry other Passages of Scripture; as John
iii. 5. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And Titus iii. 4, 5. But after the Kindness and Love of God our
Savior toward Man, appeared not by Works of Righteousness which we have done,
but according to his Mercy he saved us by the Washing of Regeneration and
Renewing of the Holy Ghost. And then he labors to maintain that all these
Scriptures are agreeable to those Expressions of the Church Catechism, The
outward and visible Sign, and the inward and spiritual Grace. And then mentions
Mark xvi. 16. and says, Belief, or being born of the Spirit, or the Answer of
a good Conscience, or the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, or the inward and
spiritual Grace, is made one of the most necessary Parts; and the being born of
Water, or the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, or the washing of
Regeneration, or the outward and visible Sign, is made the other and less
necessary Part of the same Baptism. Now I would have the Reader consider how
this Author has been laboring to prove the Baptism of the Holy Ghost to be long
since ceased; and yet now he allows the Renewing of the Holy Ghost to be the
most necessary Part of the Baptism of Christ (which is granting the Point to
us, that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is not ceased) and that at most Baptism
with Water is but one of the less necessary Parts of Baptism.

AND since he has been so kind to furnish me with the beforementioned
Scriptures, and allow them to be equally plain and descriptive of the same
Thing with that, 1 Peter iii. 21. mentioned by Robert Barclay, I shall now
endeavor to show that they are good Arguments for us against him. See Joseph
Besse, Page 293. The Washing of Regeneration and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost
mentioned Titus iii. 5. signifying but one and the same purifying Virtue of the
Spirit: An Expression like that in John iii. 5. Except a Man be born of Water
and the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.' Which Text Calvin thus
interprets: "'It Is an Error in those, who, because they hear the Name of Water,
think that Kind of Baptism to be made mention of in this Place. For when Christ
had explained to Nicodemus the Corruption of Nature, and taught him the
Necessity of a new Birth, because Nicodemus dreamt of being born again bodily,
Christ declares in this Place the Manner how God does regenerate us, to wit, by
Water and the Spirit, as if he had said by the Spirit, which in cleansing and
watering the Souls of the Faithful performs as it were the Office of Water: I
take therefore Water and the Spirit simply for the Spirit, which is as Water;
nor is this any new Way of speaking, for it is like that which is used in
Matthew iii. He that comes after me, he it is that baptiseth with the Holy
Ghost and Fire. So then as to baptize with the Holy Ghost and Fire is to give
the Holy Ghost, which in Regeneration has the Office and Nature of Fire; so to
be born again of Water and the Spirit, is nothing else but to receive that
Virue of the Spirit which effects the same Thing in the Soul as Water does in
the Body. I know that some otherwise interpret that Text, but that this is the
genuine Sense I have no Doubt or Question.

THE Author, in Page 30, says, It has been proved that Christ did institute a
Water Baptism different from John's; and from this Supposition denies Robert
Barclay's Argument to prove the Doctrine contained in the Proposition; but
where, or what his Proof is, I cannot find, without his bare Assertion (from
the Imagination of his own Brain, in Opposition to most or all that have wrote
on the Subject of Water Baptism) is taken for Proof, which, in my Opinion,
proves nothing: And therefore he might have forborne quarrelling with Robert
Barclay, Page 31, for calling John's Baptism the Water Baptism, in as much as
it has not, nor cannot be proved from Scripture, that there was more than two
Water Baptisms then in Use, viz. that of the Jews and John's. And that Christ's
Baptism is not John's, we freely grant; but that Christ's Baptism, commanded as
a standing Ordinance in his Church, is a Water Baptism, we do deny; and have
sufficiently proved the contrary. And even according to this Author's own
Doctrine, if he should have his Arguments before cited allowed him, the most
that he can make of Water Baptism is, that it is but one of the less necessary
Parts of the one true Baptism which saves. And that he could not do without
running into that gross Absurdity (often attempted by others when pinched) of
taking the Baptism of the Spirit for one Part, and elementary Water for the
other Part, to make the one Baptism.

BUT as Josiah Foster observes, Page 123, It is an incontestible Point, that
the Baptism with Water and the Baptism with the Holy Ghost are two different
Baptisms and distinct from each other; and the Apostle asserts no more than one
Baptism in the Christian Church, Ephesians iv. 5. it must be allowed to be one
of the two.

To maintain it to be the first, viz. Water Baptism, would be diametrically
opposite to Matthew iii. 2. Mark i. 8. Luke iii. 16, 17. and John i. 33. which
Texts declare Christ's Baptism to be the Second, viz. that of the Spirit; and
it would be erroneous to suppose the Apostle intended any other but Christ's
Baptism.

BUT it is worthy of Observation, that this Author has run himself into a Round
of Confusion: First, to plead that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost has long since
ceased: Secondly to argee with Robert Barclay that there is but one Baptism:
Thirdly, to agree that the Baptism with the Holy Ghost is the most necessary
Part of the Baptism of Christ, and that Water is one of the less necessary
Parts of the same Baptism of Christ: And Fourthly, to say that he has proved
that Christ did institute a Water Baptism, different from John's, as a standing
Ordinance in his Church; so now he has need of equivocal Arguments of which he
has falsely accused Robert Barclay.

IS it not a Pity, that a Man should presume to appear in Print, on a Point of
so great Importance as he acknowledges this to be, who is so much a Stranger to
the Nature of the Cause which he undertakes to vindicate, that he involves
himself in such Absurdities that cannot be reconciled, which, if exposing of
himself was all, it would not be of so bad Consequence; but it may have a
Tendency to ensnare others, and lead the Weak into such dark Notions,
respecting Baptism, as may draw them from adhering to the Truth; by which he
will become guilty of causing the Blind to wander out of their Way.

THE Author, in Page 33, says, 'Enough has been said already about Robert
Barclay's confounding the Distinction between Water Baptisms, by his using the
Word the Water Baptism, instead of John's Baptism;' but I see no Reason but
that Robert Barclay meant any Water Baptism, and had no View of equivocating
with the Water Baptism he has pretended to set up under the Name of Christ's
Water Baptism, and I apprehend that Robert Barclay's Arguments stand good
against him.

AND his own Arguments will resolve in this, that at most Water Baptism is but
the less necessary Part of the one saving Baptism; and as he grants John's
Water Baptism to be ceased, we shall deny any Water Baptism to be to continue
as a standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, by Virtue of a Command of
Christ. But he observes, in the same and the (...) Page, that as Robert
Barclay's other Argument to prove that Christ's Baptism, which now continues is
not a Water Baptism, are taken from several Texts of the Epistles of the
Apostles, in which are (...) Things hard to be understood; so in Consideration
of the Danger of wresting them unto our own Destruction, we must examine them
with great Caution lest being led away by the Error of the wicked one we fall
from our own Stedfastness. This is indeed very good Caution, and if he had kept
to it himself he would not have run into the frequent Perversion I have before
shown.

AND since we are to enter upon the Examination of those Texts with so much
Caution, I would have the Reader carefully examine whether he makes (...)
Substance of them prove any Thing further than what I have mentioned, viz. That
a Belief, or being born of the Spirit, or the Answer of a good Conscience, or a
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, or the inward and spiritual Grace, is made one and
the most necessary Part; and the being born of Water, or the putting away the
Filth of the Flesh, or the Washing of Regeneration, or the outward and visible
Sign (which he says are all Phrases of the same Import) is made the other and
less necessary Part of the same Baptism. And as he allows that that Baptism
which is by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, is the most necessary Part of the
one Baptism, we shall not allow him the Liberty of confounding that of the
Spirit with that of Water. For according to 1 Corinthians xii. 13. By one
Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,
whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
But according to this Doctrine it makes the Apostle confused and inconsistent
with himself (as our Opponent is) to hold two Baptisms, for it is undeniable
that the Apostle here asserted the Baptism of the Spirit. And as Josiah Foster
observes, in Page 124, As the Apostle told the Ephesians, there is one Body and
one Baptism; so he told the Corinthians, that by one Spirit they were all
baptized into one Body.

OUR Opponent says, Page 35, That these Words of St. Peter prove nothing more
than what the other Texts do, viz. That the outward Administration of Water
Baptism is necessary, but not so necessary as the Answer of a good Conscience,
without which, in the Sight of God, the outward Administration will avail
nothing. Which indeed would have been a good Confession if he had put the Words
not necessary after Water Baptism instead of is necessary.

BUT now he proceeds, and says, That Christ who is gone into Heaven has put
that Virtue into Baptism that by it we are saved; so say I: But if he means
Water Baptism it is denied, and the Contrary sufficently proved. The Substance
of what remains in the 35 Page, seems to be comprehended in this, That in Order
to make Water Baptism a saving Baptism there must first be the Answer of a good
Conscience in the Sight of God, by renouncing the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, which, whoever has attained to, as it is the Conclusion of the whole
Matter, viz. to fear God and keep his Commandments, will see beyond empty
Shadows and mere outside Things, which are not commanded by Christ, nor any
ways necessary to Salvation; and will also see his Emptiness in striving to
join the Baptism of the Holy Ghost with that of elementary Water.

IN Page 36, our Opponent asserts, that those who say St. Peter's Words, Not
the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, etc. are a Negation of Water Baptism,
must charge him with a Contradiction, bacause he said, Acts xi. 38. Repent and
be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of
Sins; but here I would have the Reader observe, that this Baptism in the Name
of Jesus Christ has already been proved, by undoubted Authorities, to be
John's, which this Author himself acknowledges to be ceased. And the other
Words of Peter, Not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, were penned about
twenty Years after, by which Time the Apostles (whatever they had thought to
the contrary before) were no Doubt fully convinced that Water Baptism was not
necessary to Salvation, or Peter would not have been so express and clear in
the Point. And let our Opponent make appear, by any Text of Scripture, that
ever any of the Apostles baptized with Water after the penning of this Epistle
of Peter.

BUT before I leave this Paragraph I would willingly query with the Author
concerning those Words of Peter Acts ii. 38. Repent and be baptized for the
Remission of Sins; whether this Baptism is the same which is practiced by the
Church of England? And if it is, whether Infants are capable of Repentance, or
of promising that they will repent; or whether they have any Sin to repent of?
Seeing where there is no Law there is no Transgression. And our Savior said of
such is the Kingdom of God, and proposes little Children to us as Patterns of
Innocence, agreeable to that Expression in the Common Prayer Book: How he
exhorts all Men to follow their Innocence, i. e. little Children's Innocence.

OUR Opponent will not admit, Page 37, of the Sufficiency of that Argument,
viz. That, because many are baptized with Water that are not saved, therefore
Water Baptism is not the Baptism meant by Peter. But being here met with in a
narrow Place, and like Baalam still willing to rush on, let his Way be never so
perverse in the Eyes of the Lord: He stuffs two or three Pages chiefly with
this Argument, That although many are baptized with Water that are not saved
thereby, yet it is no more an Argument against Water Baptism than for those who
had been baptized with the Holy Ghost and fell away from that State, to be
brought as an Argument against the Baptism with the Holy Ghost. According to
which, in Page 41 and 42, he says, If there was a Simon who was baptized with
Water whose Heart was afterward found not right in the Sight of God, there was
also a Nicholas who was baptized with the Holy Ghost whose Practices and
Doctrine were afterward hated by the beloved Apostle of our Lord; and these
Comparisons seem to be supposed by him to be equal, which in my Opinion may be
easily confuted. For first, we can prove that Simon was in the Bond of Iniquity
and Gall of Bitterness at the Time of his being baptized with Water, by the
Testimony of the Apostle Peter, Acts viii. 23. But if he cannot prove that
Nicholas was guilty of such Practices, and held such Doctrine as was hateful to
the beloved Disciple at the Time of his being baptized with the Holy Ghost, I
say, that if he cannot make that appear, his Comparison is no way equal. And we
have always denied that Doctrine, Once in Grace ever in Grace; but do believe a
Possibility of falling from Grace and high Seize, and that our Safety
depends upon a constant Obedience to the righteous Law of God written in our
Hearts; and that no Man after he has put his Hand to the Plough and looks back
again is fit for the Kingdom of God. Luke ix. 62. So that a Person's falling
from Grace of heavenly Seize is no Argument that the Baptism with the
Holy Ghost is not Christ's Baptism which is to continue to the End of the
World; but a Person's being in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity at
the Time of receiving Water Baptism, is an undeniable Proof that People may be
admitted to that Ceremony, and yet be far short of acquiring the Answer of a
good Conscience thereby; and that Water Baptism cannot be that Baptism
mentioned Mark xvi. 10. because Simon both believed and was baptized,
notwithstanding which he remained in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of
Iniquity, which is far short of a State of Salvation.

HAVING thus endeavored to remove this Author's Cavil against Robert Barclay
on this Head, I shall insist upon his Arguments being sound and undeniable
until I see them confuted by better Reasons than (...) has offered. And that
the Reader may see the Absurdity of his Arguments, Page 39 and 40, where he
seems to allow, that those who have been baptized with Water have put on
Christ, I shall offer some Observations taken out of Josiah Foster, Page 109,
who speaking concerning Galatians iii. 17. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ; says, The clearest Way to find out
what Baptism the Apostle has relation to here, whether the Baptism of the
Spirit or that of Water, is to consider what he means by that rhetorical
Phrase, to put on Christ. Beza on Romans xiii. 14. says, "To put on Christ is
to possess him, so as to have him in us and us in him." Doctor Hammond expounds
it thus, "set yourselves to the Practice of all Christian Purity." Burkett
thereon says, "Set the Doctrine and Life of Christ continually before you;
follow every Institution and imitate all the Parts of his holy Conversation;
even as the Garment is commensurate to the Body." May not the Exposition, says
he, imply that the Soul of Man since the Fall is in a naked State, destitute of
those divine Graces of the Holy Spirit which were its original Clothing in the
Day of undefiled Innocence.

AND as this Author, Page 39, seems also to explain the Meaning of this Text,
Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized
into his Death: Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so
we also shall walk in Newness of Life. Romans vi. 3, 4, in Favor of Water
Baptism, I shall furnish the Reader with the Judgment of Bishop Tailor on the
same Place, taken out of Josiah Foster, Page 113, who says, All this is nothing
but Crucifixion of the old Man; a destroying the Body of Sin, that we no longer
serve Sin. And if so, then it is easily forseen what naturally follows from
this Author's Doctrine, viz. That Water Baptism crucifies the old Man, or
Nature of the first Adam, destroys the Body of Sin, etc. which is such a
whimsical Notion as even a Papist would be ashamed of: So that here is a great
Absurdity arising from his Doctrine, and more especially when it is considered
that by his own Confession the most he can make of Water Baptism is this, that
it is but one of the less necessary Parts of the one saving Baptism.

BUT when the Apostle says we are buried with Christ by Baptism into his Death,
his Meaning is very obvious, that as Christ's Humanity or Veil of Flesh was
crucified and buried, so by Baptism, that is, through the regenerating Power of
the Holy Spirit, which washes and sanctifies the Soul, the old Man, the Body of
Sin in us, is crucified, destroyed, and as it were laid in the Grave. Then with
Respect to our being raised from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so
we also should walk in Newness of Life; which plainly sets forth that as Christ
was raised from the Dead by the glorious Power of the Father, so is our new Man
raised to Holiness of Life by the same divine Power or Spirit of God. In short
if all this according to the learned Bishop's Assertion be nothing but
Crucifixion of the old Man, destroying the Body of Sin, etc. then most
evidently the Baptism which produces such an Effect is nothing else but that of
the Spirit, and the very same is to be understood concerning Collosians ii. 12.
13, where the Apostle expresses himself in Terms equivalent to this of Romans
vi. 4. As to the Author's Paraphrase on these Texts, what can it be called more
properly than a Jargon of Words without Coherence respecting the Nature of the
Case? Considering that he himself is obliged to allow that the Renewing of the
Holy Ghost is one and the most necessary Part of the true and saving Baptism,
Page 34.

THE Author being met with in a narrow Place, as I said before, and sorely
pinched, rather than yield to common Justice, has Recourse to the Conclusion of
the Harlot, who had no just Claim to the living Child; 1 Kings iii. 26. Let it
be neither mine nor thine but divide it. For in the Nature of his Arguments,
and by his unequal Comparisons, he has confounded both Baptisms, viz. that of
the Spirit as well as that of elementary Water; but then confesses, Page 42,
that this Argument is false, which I shall readily grant him; but shall deny
him his faint Argument, That Christ's Baptism, instituted as a standing
Ordinance in his Church, may be a Water Baptism, notwithstanding some of those
who were baptized with it afterward became wicked Men: If he had dealt
honestly he should have said were then wicked Men. But the Reader may observe
that his confident Assertions are now come to a may be a Water Baptism, and
this I utterly refuse to grant him, without he can bring me into such a
Straight, that like the true Mother of the living Child, I should rather chose
to see the false Mother have it than that it should divided. But I am confirmed
of the Truth of those Expressions quoted by him, The Truth endures, and is
always strong, it lives and conquereth for ever. 1 Esdras iv. 38.

HE now would insinuate, Page 43, that as soon as the Messiah was made known to
the World, John's Baptism must cease of Course; and that John's Baptism may be
the Figure of a Water Baptism instituted by Christ. I answer, that when the
Messiah offered up himself upon the Cross he blotted out the Hand Writing of
Ordinances, and put an End to Circumcision and all the Ceremonies of the Law;
and he now circumciseth the Hearts of People by which they are made true Jews,
whose Praise is not of Men but of God. Romans ii. 29. And yet we find that
Circumcision was practiced through Condescension, after the Assension of our
blessed Lord, in the Case of Timothy, and that of Peter's constraining the
Gentiles to be circumcised; and why might not the Apostles baptize with John's
Baptism of Water from the same Motives of Condescension of becoming all Things
to all Men, to save some, without giving any more just Argument for Water
Baptism to remain a standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, than for
Circumcision; seeing that the most that can be made of either of them, is this,
that they were but Types or Figures to point out the Substance, and where the
Substance is enjoyed, now under the Gospel, they are become but like the brazen
Serpent, a mere Piece of Brass; which though very good in its Time, yet the good
King Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 4* when he found the People idolizing it, broke
it in Pieces; and I take this Water Baptism which this Author seems to be in so
much Pain to establish the Necessity of, to have no more Virtue in it than a
mere Piece of Brass, a Nehushtan.

AS to John's Baptism being a Figure of a Water Baptism instituted by Christ, I
would have the Reader consider what an absurd Notion it must be; seeing
Christ's Water Baptism (if we could suppose any such Thing) can be nothing but
a Type or Figure, for there is no one I presume so weak as to say it is the
Substance: And is there any Sense in these Expressions? A Figure of a Figure, a
Type of a Type, or a Shadow of a Shadow. But does it not look as if this Notion
proceeded from a Desire of keeping us from the Substance, and ever grasping
after Shadows.

AS to his Assertion, Page 43, that the Apostles always understood the Command
of Christ, Matthew xviii. to mean a Water Baptism, I cannot allow it to be
Truth; and herein he may see that it is not beyond Contradiction: I have before
shown that the Text is, Teach all Nations baptising them, etc. which never can
fairly be construed to mean two positive Duties (as he before affirms) but
simply that as Christ promised his Presence to accompany them in this Service,
their Doctrine should be attended with that Power which should prick the Heart,
and have in it that baptising Quality (as it was not they that were to speak,
but the Spirit of their Father which was in them) that the Holy Ghost should
fall on the Hearers by Virtue of their Ministry, as on Cornelius and his House
at the preaching of Peter. And so I shall agree with this Author that that
Ordinance which Christ has been pleased to institute, and has promised to
accompany with the sanctifying Graces of his divine Spirit must be some thing
more than a mere carnal and ceremonial, it must be a pure and spiritual
Ordinance which I do assert to be the Baptism of the Holy Ghost; and deny his
Water Arguments as being much beneath the Dignity of a glorious Gospel or
spiritual Dispensation.

AND now, friendly Reader, if thy Patience has been sufficient to accompany me
in tracing this Author through his sometimes one Thing and sometimes another, I
doubt not but thou have, with me, found many Inconsistencies, notwithstanding
his Learning and Ability as a Man.

BUT let us have a little more Patience and see whether the rest of his
Arguments have any more Weight in them.

AS to his Argument, Page 45, concerning the Sameness of the Word in the
general Command, Matthew xviii. 19. and in 1 Corinthians i. 17. it can have no
more Force to prove these two Baptisms one and the same, than it would to prove
all Baptisms alike in the whole Scriptures wherever that Word is made Use of;
seeing there are other Words in both Texts sufficient to point out plainly what
Kind of Baptism is meant in each. That in Matthew xxviii. is, Teach all Nations
baptising them, etc. which, as has been shown before, signifies a baptising
Quality to accompany a true Ministry, and so must be meant of the Spirit of
Truth, which leads into all Truth. The other in 1 Corinthians i. is, Christ
sent me not to baptize but to preach the Gospel; so that this must be
understood of Water Baptism as this Author rightly observes, and therefore it
may be safe to conclude that neither Paul nor any of the Apostles had a
Commission to baptize with Water, and what they did in this Respect was in
Condescension to the Infancy of the Times, like that of Circumcision; and
herein Paul was nothing behind the chiefest of the Apostles either with Regard
to Water Baptism or in Respect of the general Commission in Matthew. For this
Author has brought Timothy and the Disciples at Ephesus as Seals that Paul had
Power to confer the Baptism of the Holy Ghost: But to make Water Baptism saving
would not only make Paul inferior to the rest of the Apostles, but also to
accuse him of being guilty of thanking God for having done him so little
Service as the baptising so few with Water.

AND I would have the Reader observe how this Author, about the Middle of Page
46, makes an Addition of the Word and baptize, in the general Command, which if
allowed would bring a Contradiction on Paul, who said Christ sent me not to
baptize but to preach the Gospel, 1 Corinthians i. 17. but it has been
acknowledged to be a Water Baptism, in this last Place, that Paul meant, which
he says he was not sent to baptize with; and the other, in the general Command,
has been proved to be the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and such a Baptism as
accompanies, or is the Effect of Christ's true Minsters teaching or preaching
the Gospel.

THESE Things considered, I doubt not but we are in the Judgment of every
unprejudiced Reader, sufficiently freed from the Dilemma this Author would
gladly bring us into, and all seeming Contradictions fairly reconciled. For the
Reader may see that the Basis or Foundation on which our Opponent's Arguments
on this Head are built, is the ^ameness of the Words baptising and baptize, in
the two Texts of Scripture, Matthew xxviii. 19. and 1 Corinthians i. 17. But as
it has been made appear by plain and express Words in both Texts, that the
Baptisms in those Places are different, it removes his Pillar, and so all his
Arguments built thereon must of Course fall to the Ground.

BUT this Author has wrested Paul's Meaning, 1 Corinthians i. by adding, Page
47, as though they had been Paul's Words; 'I tell you that though I have Power to
baptize, yet my chief Business is to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. And
again after the same Manner, Page 48, but though it is I that plant or convert
you, and Appollos or any other Minister that waters or baptiseth you, it is
Christ that you should call yourselves after, etc. By this Rule of Construction
we may wrest the Scriptures to our own Destruction, and by making the inspired
Writers say what we please, may pretend to prove the most erroneous Doctrine
from thence.

THIS Author, like the poor ignorant Samaritan Woman, descends to material
Water upon the Words Appollos waters, which shows his Weakness, but being in
a great Straight he will catch at any Thing that has the Name of Water: And
seeing he is so in Love with Water I shall furnish him with some other Texts of
Scripture in which Water is mentioned also, from whence the Reader may have an
Opportunity to observe that we can prove a spiritual Water proceeding from the
Well of Salvation that shall be drawn with Joy; with which I apprehend Appollos
watered as an Instrument; and which they who have once drank of shall never
thirst after this Author's elementary Water, or go to him or any in his Spirit
to draw. See John iv. 13, 14. Jesus answered unto her (the Samaritan) whosoever
drinks of this Water shall thirst again: But whosoever drinks of the Water
that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him
shall be in him a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. And again,
Chap. vii. Ver. 37. etc. In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying, if any Man thirst let him come unto me and drink. He
that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow
Rivers of living Water. But this he spoke of the Spirit which they that believe
on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus
was not yet glorified. But it is evident that before the Time of Appollos's
watering the Church Jesus was glorified, and the Holy Ghost given; and so
Appollos and the other Ministers, being Believers in Christ, watered the Church
with living and spiritual Water. And this Author's endeavoring to render it
elementary Water is one of the weakest Arguments that I ever saw in Print on
the Subject; and so I shall reject it as having no Substance.

BUT now he says, Page 49, that Robert Barclay affords him another Argument to
prove that Paul's Words cannot be understood in the Sense he contends for:
Because he says that those few baptized by Paul were not baptized by Virtue of
his apostolic Commission, but rather in Condescension to their Weakness, even
as at another Time he circumcised Timothy. To which our Opponent says, it not
being prohibited, was a Matter of perfect Indifferency, and brings some Reasons
for the Policy of it; but says, as soon as it became a Question of Importance
and likely to be hurtful, then the Apostle declared against it. Now what this
Author here says in Regard to Circumcision, may also be the Case with Water
Baptism. For, as that was not at that Time prohibited, it was a Matter of
Indifferency, and some of the same politic Reasons might be added, as of
meeting with less Opposition, etc. and so baptising those few mentioned by the
Apostle Paul might be in Condescension, and not by Virtue of his apostolic
Commission; but when he saw so bad Use made of Water Baptism, that they
distinguished themselves by the Name of those who baptized them, and that it
was likely to cause Divisions in the Church, it was high Time to take them down
a little, and no better Way could this be done than to lessen their Thoughts of
that Ceremony on which they so valued themselves, and to tell them plainly that
Christ sent him not to baptize, etc. and that he thanked God that he had
baptized so few of them.

HE seems to be offended with Robert Barclay, Page 50, and says, but it is
insisted on with great Positiveness, that the Text, Matthew xxviii. 19. is not
to be understood of baptising with Water; and that the Form of baptising in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, has (...) Warrant
from the Text. To which he says, when the foregoing Proofs, that the Text
Matthew 28. is to be understood of a Water Baptism, are answered, then he will
believe these positive Assersions, and not before.

ROBERT BARCLAY indeed does say, in Page 434, That this Scripture is not to be
understood of baptising with Water; and that the Form of baptising in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, has no Warrant from
Matthew xxviii. 19. And this Author accuses him of departing from his own
Maxim, laid down not to go from the literal Signification of the Text, without
some urgent Necessity forces thereto; but he thinks that Barclay has broke
this Rule, because he argues that the Name of the Lord is often taken in
Scripture for something else than a bare Sound of Words or literal Expression,
even for his Virtue and Power, as may appear from Psalm live. 3. Canticles i. 3.
Proverbs xviii. 3. and in many other Places. But as this cannot be denied, so I
cannot see how Robert Barclay has gone from the literal Signification of the
Text; and if this Author will keep so well to the Text as Robert Barclay has
done, and prove Water Baptism an Institution of Christ, as a standing Ordinance
in his Church, by that Text, Matthew xxviii. then I shall yield the Argument to
him. But this he cannot do, and yet will be carping at something, if it be only
to amuse others, without the least Proof; for he will find it harder to keep to
the literal Signification of that Text and prove Water there mentioned, than we
shall to prove the Holy Ghost there mentioned, which has been already done.

AS to the Baptism which Barclay contends for, into the Virtue and Power of the
Father, etc. this Author says if it means any Thing; it must be a being endowed
with the Virtue and Power of that Person into whom you are baptized, which he
thinks must signify to work Miracles, and if this is not the Meaning of the
Words he confesses he does not understand the Meaning of them. Now if he will
please to read Matthew v. 48. he will find that Christ has said, Be ye perfect
even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; and how this Perfection can
be attained without the Virtue and Power of the Father I cannot see: Neither
can any partake of the Virtue and Power of the Father but such as are baptized
with the Holy Ghost, for it is thereby every Christian becomes Members of the
Body or Church of Christ, or in other Words, Branches of him who is the true
Vine, this appears to be Robert Barclay's Meaning.

AS to what he calls a very strong Argument, Page 52, deduced from Robert
Barclay's own Words, to prove that the Text Matthew xxviii. must mean a Water
Baptism, this Author allows that the Apostles did mistake that Part of their
Commission in Regard to teaching all Nations, but agrees that as God was
pleased in so particular a Manner to remove their Mistake in that Respect, he
certainly would have set them right as to the other Part of their Commission
which related to baptising, if they had mistaken the Meaning of it. It may not
be a-miss here to inform the Reader, that Robert Barclay says in the same Place
which this Author is now carping at, Page 438, It suffices us that if they
were so mistaken (though I say not that they were) they did not always remain
under that Mistake, else Peter would not have said of the Baptism which now
saves, that it is not a putting away the Filth of the Flesh, which certainly
Water Baptism is. To which I shall add Paul's declaring that Christ sent him
not to baptize, 1 Corinthians i. 17. which fully imports that such a Baptism,
that he there makes Mention of, was not saving; for we may safely conclude,
that if it had been saving or conducive to the Salvation of the Soul the same
would have been in Paul's Commission. And as this Author has allowed before,
that the Baptism alluded to by Paul must be a Water Baptism, has strengthened
our Proofs, that if the Apostles were once under such a Mistake concerning
Water Baptism, that their Mistake was removed, and their Judgments so clearly
informed that they have left many full Proofs in Scripture that the one saving
Baptism is that of the Spirit and not elementary Water, which neither this
Author nor any other have been ever able to prove.

AND so his high Charge, Page 53, against Robert Barclay, of calling the
Veracity and Truth of God in Question, which, to heighten, he compares to the
Sin which is not to be forgiven, may be urged with more Force against him than
against Robert Barclay, and the Quakers: And he had Need to pray for himself as
well as others.

NOW as to his Reason which he calls a prudential one, which is of so great
Weight with him, when it is examined the Reader may judge whether it has any
Weight at all in it: Since it cannot with any Reason be supposed that Christ
has left his Church at such Uncertainties in so important and essential a
Point, as he observes himself, in his second Page, this of Baptism is, lest we
should be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine; but
that we may be ready to give an Answer to every Man that asks us a Reason of
the Hope that is in us: But this prudential Reason would leave us in
Uncertainties. And that it cannot be a Sin to use Water Baptism because the
Apostles used it, and Peter commanded it; the same Argument might be used with
as much Force for Circumcision and the other Jewish Ceremonies to be continued:
But the Danger of Sin in this Case of Water Baptism lies in this, that although
it was good in its Time as a Figure of the Substance, even as the brazen
Serpent was a Figure of Christ, yet now by People's putting a Dependence in
that for Salvation, and laying hold of the Shadow, they thereby neglect the
Substance and are left wandering at Uncertainties. As to what this Author says
in the remaining Part of Page 54, it can be of no Force against us, neither has
it any Show of Reason, being built upon his usual Foundation of positive
Assertion without Proof. And observe his Assertions:

1st, That Water Baptism is a positive Command of Christ.

2d, That it is one of the Conditions of eternal Salvation.

3d, That Christ has promised to accompany it with his divine Presence.

4th, That Peter has declared the Effects of it upon the Soul, viz. That by it
we shall obtain Remission of our Sins.

5th, That the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is ceased, Page 52.

6th, That the Renewing of the Holy Ghost is the most necessary Part. And,

7th, That the Baptism with Water is the less necessary Part, Page 34.

WHICH if thou can reconcile, Reader, it is more than I can do.

BUT now as he draws toward a Conclusion he would, I suppose, be understood
that God has instituted, by his Son, a Water Baptism which washes the most
inveterate and malignant Diseases of the Soul; but adds, by Virtue of the
divine Presence of the great Author and Mediator of a new Covenant, and the
sanctifying Graces of his holy Spirit accompanying the due Administration
thereof: Which, without he can make a Divorce between the sanctifying Graces of
the Holy Spirit and the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, must center in this, that
the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is the most necessary Part: And then as he says
that has long ago ceased, his Building at last is but a mere Babel Tower. But
as to that Virtue which he talks of being in Water Baptism, the Multitude of
uncleansed Souls who have passed through that Administration are most irrefutable
Evidences of its being an Application of no Value: And how consistent it is
with the evangelical Dispensation to suppose that Christ commanded a Duty and
the Service thereof never appear, I leave to the judicious to determine.

AS to his Impartiality here boasted of, I have proved the Contrary by a
necessary Consequence, viz. his frequent Perversions and Additions, of not only
Robert Barclay's Writings, but also of the Scriptures of Truth, and I think
that he would do well in Time to repent for his adding to the Words of the
Testimony of Truth which was spoken under the Influence of the Holy Ghost, in
that Case of Peter.

AND now I shall leave it to the judicious and impartial Reader to determine
whether this Author has either stated or vindicated the Doctrine of the Church
of England upon the important Point of Baptism; seeing he has wholly passed
over that of Infants, the most usual Practice of that Church, or whether he has
answered our Objections against Water Baptism in General.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
The READER is desired to correct the foregoing Errors with his Pen, viz. In
Page 10, Line 19 and 20, instead of Ambrose, says John, baptized, read Ambrose
says, John baptized, etc. P. 11, l. 27, blot out the. P. 12, l. 25, blot out a.
P. 13, l. 33, between to and eclipsing insert the. P. 14, l. 33, blot out that.
P. 17, l. 11, instead of endowed read endued. P. 17, l. 27, P. 18, l. 20, and
P. 45, l* 26, before Papists read with. P. 19, l. 10, betwixt that and which
insert with, and in l. 33, instead of that read the. P. 20, l. 21, blot out
their. P. 32, l. 30, after twenty add seven. P. 38, l. 2, between should and
divided insert be. P. 42, l. 22, instead of waters read watered. P. 43, l. 1,
after Samaritan add Woman. P. 46, l. the last, before has read he. P. 47, l.
13. instead of the first and read or.


