A Faithful NARRATIVE

The many Dangers and Sufferings, as well as wonderful and surprising
Deliverances of ROBERT EASTBURN, during his late Captivity among the INDIANS:
Together with some Remarks upon the Country of CANADA, and the Religion and
Policy of its Inhabitants; the whole intermixed with devout Reflections.

By Robert Eastburn.

Published at the earnest Request of many Persons, for the Benefit of the
Public.

With a recommendatory PREFACE, by the Rev. GILBERT TENNENT.

PSALM 124.6, 7. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us up as a Prey to
their Teeth; our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler: The
Snare is broken, and we are escaped.

PSALM 103.2, 4. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits:
Who redeemeth thy Life from Destruction; who crowns thee with loving
Kindness, and tender Mercies.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by GREEN and RUSSELL, opposite the Probate-Office
in Queen Street. 1758.

PREFACE
Candid Reader,
THE AUTHOR (and Subject) of the ensuing Narrative (who is a Deacon of our
Church, and has been so for many Years) is of such an established good
Character, that he needs no Recommendation of others, where he is known: A
Proof of which, was the general Joy of the Inhabitants of this City, occasioned
by his Return from a miserable Captivity! Together with the Readiness of diverse
Persons, to contribute to the Relief of himself, and necessitous Family,
without any Request of his, or the least Motion of that Tendency! -- But seeing
the following Sheets are like to spread into many Places, where he is not
known, permit me to say, That upon long Acquaintance, I have found him to be a
Person of Candor, Integrity, and sincere Piety; whose Testimony, may with
Safety, be depended upon; which give his Narrative the greater Weight, and may
induce to read it with the greater Pleasure; the Design of it is evidently
Pious, the Matters contained in it, and Manner of handling them, will, I hope,
be esteemed by the Impartial* to be enteraining and improving: I heartily wish
it may, by the divine Benediction, be of great and durable Service. I am, thy
sincere Servant, in the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

PHILADELPHIA, Ian. 19, 1758. Gilbert Tennent.


Kind READERS,
ON my Return from my Captivity, I had no Thoughts of publishing any
Observations of mine to the World, in this Manner; as I had no Opportunity to
keep a Journal, and my Memory being broken, and Capacity small, I was
disinclined to undertake it; but a Number of my Friends were pressing in their
Persuasions, that I should do it; with whose Motion I complied, from a sincere
Regard to GOD, my King, and Country, so far as I know my own Heart: The
following Pages contain, as far as I can remember, the most material Passages
that happened within the Compass of my Observation, while a Prisoner in Canada;
the Facts therein related are certainly true, but the Way of representing some
Things especially, is not so regular, clear and strong, as I could wish; but I
trust it will be some Apology, that I am not so much acquainted with
Performances of this Kind, as many others; who may be hereby excited to give
better Representation* of Things, far beyond my Knowledge. I remain,

Your unfeigned Well-Wisher, and humble Servant, Robert Eastburn.
PHILADELPHIA, Ian. 19, 1758.

A Faithful Narrative, etc.
ABOUT Thirty Tradesmen, and myself, arrived at Captain Williams's Fort (at the
Carrying-Place) in our Way to Oswego, the 26th of March, 1756; who informed me,
that he was like to be cumbered in the Fort, and therefore advised us to take
the Indian-House for our Lodging. About Ten o'Clock next Day, a Negro Man came
running down the Road, and reported, That our Slaymen were all taken by the
Enemy; Captain Williams on hearing this, sent a Sergeant, and about 12 Men, to
see if it was true; I being at the Indian House, and not thinking myself safe
there, in Case of an Attack, and being also sincerely willing to serve my King
and Country, in the best Manner I could in my present Circumstances, asked him
if he would take Company? He replied, with all his Heart! Hereupon, I fell into
the Rear, with my Arms, and marched after them; when we had advanced about a
Quarter of a Mile, we heard a Shot, followed with doleful Cries of a dying Man,
which excited me to advance, in order to discover the Enemy, who I soon
perceived were prepared to receive us: In this difficult Situation, seeing a
large Pine Tree near, I repaired to it for Shelter; and while the Enemy were
viewing our Party, I having a good Chance of killing two at a Shot, quickly
discharged at them, but could not certainly know what Execution was done 'till
some Time after; our Company likewise discharged and retreated: Seeing myself
in Danger of being surrounded, I was obliged to Retreat a different Course, and
to my great Surprise, fell into a deep Mire, which the Enemy, by following my
Track in a light Snow, soon discovered, and obliged me to Surrender, to prevent
a cruel Death. (They stood ready to drive their Darts into my Body, in case I
refused to deliver up my Arms.) Presently after I was taken* I was surrounded
by a great Number, who stripped me of my Clothing, Hatt, and Neckcloth (so
that I had nothing left but a Flannel Vest, without Sleeves) put a Rope on my
Neck, bound my Arms fast behind me, put a long Band round my Body, and a large
Pack on my Back, struck me on the Head (a severe Blow) and drove me through the
Woods before them: It is not easy to conceive, how distressing such a Condition
is! In the mean Time, I endeavored with all my little remaining Strength, to
lift up my Eyes to God, from whom alone I could with Reason expect Relief!

SEVENTEEN or Eighteen Prisoners, were soon added to our Number, one of which
informed me, that the Indians were angry with me, and reported to some of their
Chiefs, that I had fired on them, wounded one, and killed another; for which he
doubted they would kill me. Hereupon I considered that the Hearts of all Men
are in the Hand of God, and that one Hair of our Head cannot fall to the Ground
without his Permission: I had not as yet learned what Numbers the Enemy's
Parties consisted of; there being only about 100 Indians who had lain in Ambush
on the Road, to kill or take into Captivity all that passed between the two
Forts. Here an Interpreter came to me, to enquire what Strength Capt. Williams
had to defend his Fort? After a short Pause, I gave such a discouraging Answer
(yet consistent with Truth) as prevented their attacking it, and of Consequence
the Effusion of much Blood; a gracious Providence, which I desire ever to
retain a grateful Sense of; for hereby it evidently appeared, that I was
suffered to fall into the Hands of the Enemy, to promote the Good of my
Countrymen, to better Purpose that I could, by continuing with them; verily the
Almighty is wise in Council, and wonderful in Working.

IN the mean Time, the Enemy determined to destroy Bull's Fort (at the Head of
Wood Creek) which they soon effected, all being put to the Sword, except five
Persons. the Fort burnt, the Provision and Powder destroyed (saving only a
little for their own Use) then they retired to the Woods, and joined their main
Body, which inclusive, consisted of 400 French, and 300 Indians, commanded by
one of the principal Gentlemen of Quebec; as soon as they got together (having
a Priest with them) they fell on their Knees, and returned Thanks for their
Victory; an Example this, worthy of Imitation! an Example which may make
profane pretended Protestants blush (if they are not lost to all Sense of
Shame) who instead of acknowledging a God, or Providence, in their military
Undertakings, are continually reproaching him with Oaths and Curses; is it any
Wonder, that the Attempts of such are blasted with Disappointment and Disgrace!

THE Enemy had several wounded Men both French and Indians among them, which
they carried on their Backs; besides which, about Fifteen of their Number were
killed, and of us about Forty: It being by this Time near dark, and some
Indians drunk, they only marched about 4 Miles and encamped; the Indians untied
my Arms, cut Hemlock Bows, and strewed round the Fire, tied my Band to two
Trees, with my Back on the green Bows (by the Fire) covered me with an old
Blanket, and lay down across my Band, on each Side, to prevent my Escape, while
they slept.

SUNDAY the 28th, rose early, the Commander ordered a hasty Retreat toward
Canada, for fear of General Johnson; in the mean Time, one of our Men said, he
understood the French and Indians designed to join a strong Party, and fall on
Oswego, before our Forces there, could get any Provision or Succors; having,
as they thought, put a stop to our relieving them for a Time: When encamped in
the Evening, the Commanding-Officer ordered the Indians to bring me to his
Tent, and asked me, by an Interpreter, If I thought General Johnson would
follow them, I told him I judged not, but rather thought he would proceed to
Oswego (which was indeed my Sentiment, grounded upon prior Information, and
then expressed to prevent the Execution of their Design.) He farther inquired,
what was my Trade? I told him that of a Smith; he then persuaded me, when I got
to Canada, to send for my Wife, `for said he, you can get a rich Living there;'
but when he saw that he could not prevail, he asked no more Questions, but
commanded me to my Indian Master: Having this Opportunity of Conversation, I
informed the General, that his Indian Warriors had stripped me of my Clothing,
and would be glad he would be good enough to order me some Relief; to which he
replied, that I should get Clothes when I came to Canada, which was cold
Comfort to one almost frozen! On my return, the Indians perceiving I was
unwell, and could not eat their coarse Food, ordered some Chocolate (which they
had brought from the Carrying-Place) to be boiled for me, and seeing me eat
that, appeared pleased. A strong Guard was kept every Night; one of our Men
being weakened by his Wounds, and rendered unable to keep Pace with them, was
killed and scalped on the Road! -- I was all this Time almost naked, traveling
through deep Snow, and wading through Rivers cold as Ice!

AFTER Seven Days March, we arrived at Lake Ontario, where I eat some Horse
Flesh, which tasted very agreably, for to the hungry Man, as Solomon observes*
every bitter Thing is sweet On the Friday before we arrived at the Lake, the
Indians killed a Porcupine, which is in bigness equal to a large Racoon, with
short Legs, is covered with long Hair, intermixed with sharp Quills, which are
their Defense: It is indeed dangerous coming very near them, because they cast
their Quills (which are like barbed Irons or Darts) at any Thing that opposes
them, which when they pierce, are not easy to be drawn out; for though their
Points are sharp and smooth, they have a kind of Beard, which makes them stick
fast: However, the Indians threw it on a large Fire, burnt off the Hair and
Quills, roasted and eat of it, with whom I had a Part.
. The French carried several of their wounded Men all the Way upon their Backs;
many of them wore no Breeches in their Travels in this cold Season, being
strong, hardy Men. The Indians had three of their Party wounded, which they
likewise carried on their Backs, I wish there was more of this Hardness, so
necessary for War, in our Nation, which would open a more encouraging Scene
than appears at present! The Prisoners were so divided, that but few could
Converse together on our March, and (which was still more disagreeable and
distressing) an Indian, who had a large Bunch of green Scalps, taken off our
Men's Heads, marched before me, and another with a sharp Spear behind, to drive
me after him; by which Means the Scalps were often close to my Face, and as we
marched, they frequently every Day gave the dead Shout, which was repeated as
many Times as there were Captives and Scalps taken! In the midst of this gloomy
Scene, when I considered how many poor Souls were hurried into a vast Eternity,
with Doubts of their Unfitness for such a Change, it made me lament and
expostulate in the Manner following; O Sin what have thou done! what Desolation
have thou brought into this miserable World? What am I, that I should be thus
spared? My Afflictions are certainly far less than my Sins deserve! Through the
exceeding Riches of divine Goodness and Grace* I was in this distressing
Situation supported and comforted, by these Passages of sacred Scripture, viz.
That our light Afflictions, which last but for a Moment, shall work for us a
far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. And that, though no Afflictions
are for the present joyous, but grievous; yet nevertheless, they afterward
yield the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, to them who are exercised thereby.
And farther, that all Things shall work together for Good, to them that love
God; to them who are the Called, according to his Purpose. But to return,

I MAY, with Justice and Truth observe, That our Enemies leave no Stone
unturned to compass our ruin; they pray, work, and travel to bring it about,
and are unwearied in the Pursuit; while many among us sleep in a Storm, that
has laid a good Part of our Country desolate, and threatens the Whole with
Destruction: O that we may be of good Courage, and play the Man, for our
People, and the Cities of our God! But alas, I am obliged to turn my Face
toward cold Canada, among inveterate Enemies, and innumberable Dangers! O
Lord, I pray thee, be my Safeguard; thou have already covered me in the Hollow
of thy Hand; when Death cast Darts all around me, and many fell on every Side,
I beheld thy Salvation!

April 4 th, SEVERAL French Battoes met us, and brought a large Supply of
Provision; the Sight of which caused great Joy, for we were in great Want; then
a Place was soon erected to celebrate Mass in, which being ended, we all went
over the Mouth of a River, where it empties itself into the East End of Lake
Ontario, a great Part of our Company set off on Foot toward Oswegotchy; while
the rest were ordered into Battoes, and carried toward the Entrance of St.
Lawrence (where that River takes its Beginning) but by reason of bad Weather,
Wind, Rain, and Snow, whereby the Waters of the Lake were troubled, we were
obliged to lie-by, and hall our Battoes on Shore; here I lay on the cold Shore
two Days. Tuesday set off, and entered the Head of St. Lawrence, in the
Afternoon; came too late at Night, made Fires, but did not lie down to sleep;
embarked long before Day, and after some Miles Progress down the River, we saw
many Fires on our Right Hand, which were made by the Men who left us, and went
by Land, with them we staid till Day, and then again embarked in our Battoes,
the Weather was very bad (it snowed fast all Day) near Night arrived at
Oswegotchy; I was almost starved to Death, but hoped to stay in this Indian
Town till warm Weather* slept in an Indian Wigwam, rose early in the Morning
(being Thursday) and soon to my Grief discovered my Disappointment! Several of
the Prisoners had leave to tarry here, but I must go 200 Miles farther down
Stream* to another Indian Town; the Morning being extremely cold, I applied to
a French Merchant (or Trader) for some old Rags of Clothing, for I was almost
naked, but to no Purpose!

ABOUT Ten o'Clock, was ordered into a Battoe, on our Way down the River, with
8 or 9 Indians, one of which was the Man wounded in the Skirmish before
mentioned; at Night we went on Shore, the Snow being much deeper than before,
we cleared it away, and made a large Fire; here, when the wounded Indian cast
his Eyes upon me, his old Grudge revived, took my Blanket from me, and
commanded me to dance round the Fire Barefoot, and sing the Prisoners Song,
which I utterly refused; this surprised one of my fellow Prisoners, who told me
they would put me to Death (for he understood what they said) he therefore
tried to persuade me to comply, But I desired him to let me alone, and was
through great Mercy, enabled to reject his Importunity with Abhorrence! The
Indian also continued urging, saying, you shall dance and sing; but
apprehending my Compliance sinful, I determined to persist in declining it at
all Adventures, and to leave the Issue to the divine Disposal! The Indian
perceiving his Orders disobeyed, was fired with Indignation, and endeavored to
push me into the Fire, which I leapt over, and he being weak with his Wounds,
and not being assisted by any of his Brethren, was obliged to desist: For this
gracious Interposure of Providence, in preserving me both from Sin and Danger,
I desire to bless God while I live!

FRIDAY Morning, was almost perished with Cold. Saturday, proceeded on our Way
and soon came in Sight of the upper Part of the Inhabitants of Canada; here I
was in great Hopes of some Relief, not knowing the Manner of the Indians, who
do not make many Stops among the French, in their Return from War, till they
get Home: However when they came near some rapid Falls of Water, one of my
fellow Prisoners, and several Indians, together with myself, were put on Shore,
to travel by Land, which pleased me well, it being much warmer running on the
Snow, than lying still in the Battoe; we past by several French Houses, but
stopped at none; the Vessel going down a rapid Stream, it required haste to keep
Pace with her, we crossed over a Point of Land, and found the Battoe waiting
for us, as near the Shore as the Ice would permit: Here we left St. Lawrence,
and turned up Conasadauga River The River St. Lawrence, at Lake Ontario, takes
its Beginning through several Islands, by which we are in no necessity of
coming within Sight of Frontenac, when we go down the River; it is smooth Water
from thence to Oswegotchy (or as it is called by the French LEGALET) but from
hence to Montreal, the (...) is more swift, with a Number of rapid streams,
though not dangerous to pass through with small Boats and Bark Canoes, provided
the Stearsmen are careful and acquainted with the Places; in transporting
Provision and warlike Stores up Stream from Canada to Lake Ontario, there is a
necessity of unloading Battoes at several of the rapid Streams, and hauling
them empty through shoal Water near the Shore; and carrying the Loading by Land
to where the Water is more slack; though there be several of those Places, yet
the Land-Carriage is not very far: The Land on both Sides the River appears
fertile a great Part of the Way from the Lake to Montreal; but the nearer the
Latter the worse, more mirey and stony: The Timber is White Pine, Ash, Maple,
Hickory, Beach, Hemlock, Spruce* and from the Lake about 150 Miles down plenty
of White Oak, but none at Montreal of that Kind.
, but it being frozen up, we hauled our Battoe on Shore, and each of us took
our* Share of her Loading on our Backs, and marched toward Conasadauga an
Indian Town, which was our designed Port, but, could not reach it that Night:
Came to a French House, cold, weary, and hungry; here my old Friend, the
wounded Indian, again appeared, and related to the Frenchman, the Affair of my
refusing to dance, who immediately assisted the Indian to strip me of my
Flannel Vest, before mentioned, which was my All: Now they were resolved to
compel me to dance and sing! The Frenchman was as violent as the Indian, in
promoting this Imposition; but the Women belonging to the House, seeing the
rough Usage I had, took pity on me, and rescued me out of their Hands, till
their Heat was over, and prevailed with the Indian to excuse me from Dancing;
but he insisted that I must be shaved, and then he would let me alone (I had at
that Time a long Beard, which the Indians hate) with this Motion I readily
complied, and then the Indians seemed content.

SUNDAY, April 11 th, Set off toward Conasadauga, traveled about two Hours,
and then saw the Town over a great River, which was still frozen; the Indians
stopped, and we were soon joined with a Number of our own Company, which we had
not seen for several Days: The Prisoners, in Number Eight, were ordered to lay
down our Packs, and be painted; the wounded Indian painted me, and put a Belt
of Wampum round my Neck, instead of the Rope which I had wore 400 Miles. Then
set off toward the Town on the Ice, which was four Miles over; our Heads were
not allowed to be covered, left our fine Paint should be hid, the Weather in
the mean Time very cold, like to freeze our Ears; after we had advanced nearer
to the Town, the Indian Women came out to meet us, and relieved their Husbands
of their Packs.

AS soon as we landed at Conasadauga, a large Body of Indians came and
encompassed us round, and ordered the Prisoners to dance and sing the Prisoners
Song, (which I was still enabled to decline) at the Conclusion of which, the
Indians gave a Shout, and opened the Ring to let us run, and then fell on us
with their Fists, and knocked several down; in the mean Time, one ran before to
direct us to an Indian House, which was open, and as soon as we got in, we were
beat no more; my Head was sore with beating, and pained me several Days. The
Squaws were kind to us, gave us boiled Corn and Beans to eat, and Fire to warm
us, which was a great Mercy, for I was both cold and hungry: This Town lies
about 30 Miles North-West from Montreal, I staid here till the Ice was gone,
which was about Ten Days, and then was sent to Cohnewago, in Company with some
Indians, who when they came within Hearing, gave Notice by their Way of
Shouting, that they had a Prisoner, on which the whole Town rose to welcome me,
which was the more distressing, as there was no other Prisoner in their Hands;
when we came near Shore, a stout Indian took hold of me, and hauled me into the
Water, which was Knee deep, and very cold: As soon as I got ashore, the
Indians gathered round me, and ordered me to dance and sing, now when I was
stiff with Cold and Wet, and lying long in the Cannoe; here I only stamped to
prepare for my Race, and was encompassed with about 500 Indians, who danced and
sung, and at last gave a Shout, and opened the Circle; about 150 young Lads
made ready to Pelt me with Dirt and gravel Stones, and on my setting off gave
me a smart Volley, without my suffering great Hurt; but an Indian seeing me
run, met me, and held me fast, till the Boys had stored themselves again with
Dirt and small Stones, and let me run; but then I fared much worse than before,
for a small Stone among the Mud hit my Right-Eye, and my Head and Face were so
covered with the Dirt, that I could scarce see my Way; but discovering the Door
of an Indian House standing open, I run in: From this Retreat I was soon
hauled, in order to be pelted more; but the Indian Women being more merciful
interposed, took me into a House, brought me Water to wash, and gave me boiled
Corn and Beans to eat. The next Day, I was brought to the Center of the Town,
and cried according to the Indian Custom, in order to be sent to a Family of
Indians, 200 Miles up Stream, at Oswegotchy, and there to be adopted, and
abused no more: To this End, I was delivered to three young Men, who said I was
their Brother, and set forward on our Way to the aforesaid Town, with about 20
more Indians, but by reason of bad Weather, we were obliged to encamp on a
cold, stony Shore, three Days, and then proceeded on; called at Conasadauga,
staid there about a Week, in which Time, I went and viewed four Houses, at a
distance from the Town, about a Quarter of a Mile from each other; in which,
are represented in large Paint-Work, the Sufferings of our Savior, with Design
to draw the Indians to the Papist's Religion; the Work is curiously done: A
little farther stands three Houses near together, on a high Hill, which they
call Mount Calvary, with three large Crosses before them, which compleats the
whole Representation: To all these Houses, the Priests and Indians repair, in
performing their grand Processions, which takes up much Time The Pains the
Papists take to propagate such a bloody and absurd Religion as theirs, is truly
amazing! This brings to my Remembrance, the following Discourse, I had with two
French Priests in my Captivity; one of them asked me, if I was a Catholic;
apprehending he meant the Romish Religion, I answered no; he replied, no Bon.
On my relating the above to a fellow Prisoner, he said, I had answered wrong,
because by the Word Catholic, he meant a Christian: Some Time after, I was
again asked by the other Priest, if I was a Catholic, I answered yes, but not a
Roman Catholic; at which he smiled, and asked if I was a Lutheran, I replied
no; he again inquired whether I was a Calvinist, I told him I was: to which he
said, with warmth, no Bon! no Bon! which signifies, it is not good! O! may not
the Zeal of Papists, in propagating Superstition and Idolatry, make Protestants
ashamed of their Luke-warmness, in promoting the Religigion of the Bible!
.

SET off on our Journey for Oswegotchy, against a rapid Stream, and being long
in it, and our Provision growing short, the Indians put to Shore a little
before Night; my Lot was to get Wood, others were ordered to get Fires and some
to Hunt; our Kettle was put over the Fire with some pounded Indian Corn, and
after it had boiled about two Hours, my oldest Indian Brother, returned with a
She-Beaver, big with Young, which he soon cut to Pieces, and threw into the
Kettle, together with the Guts, and took the four young Beavers, whole as they
came out of the Dam, and put them likewise into the Kettle, and when all was
well boiled, gave each one of us a large Dishful of the Broth, of which we eat
freely, and then Part of the old Beaver, the Tail of which was divided equally
among us, there being eight at our Fire; the Four young Beavers were cut in the
Middle, and each of us got Half a Beaver; I watched an Opportunity to hide my
Share (having satisfied myself before that tender Dish came to Hand) which if
they had seen, would have much displeased them. The other Indians catched young
Mush-Rats, run a Stick through their Bodies, and roasted, without being skinned
or gutted, and so eat them. Next Morning hastened on our Journey, which
continued several Days, till we came near Oswegotchy, where we landed about
three Miles from the Town, on the contrary Side of the River; here I was to be
adopted, my Father and Mother that I had never seen before were waiting, and
ordered me into an Indian House, where we were directed to sit down silent for
a considerable Time, the Indians appeared very sad, and my Mother began to cry,
and continued crying aloud for some Time, and then dried up her Tears, and
received me for her Son, and took me over the River to the Indian Town; the
next Day I was ordered to go to Mass with them, but I refused once and again,
yet they continued their Importunity several Days, saying it was good to go to
Mass, but I still refused; and seeing they could not prevail with me, they
seemed much displeased with their new Son When I was at Oswegotchy, the Indians
took Notice, that I frequently retired alone, and supposing I had some bad
Design, threatened if I did not desist, they would Tomhawk me; but my fellow
Prisoner, who understood their Language, told them it would be a pity to hurt
me on that Account, for I only went into a private Place to pray! which was
true; the Indians replied, if so it was good; but being yet suspicious, took
Pains by watching to find out how the case was, and when they satisfied
themselves, seemed pleased! and did not offer to interrupt me any more, which
was a great Mercy; as the Contrary would have in some Degree, marred my
Converse with God.
. I was then sent over the River, to be employed in hard Labor, as a
Punishment for not going to Mass, and not allowed a Sight of, or any
Conversation with my Fellow Prisoners; the old Indian Man that I was ordered to
work with, had a Wife, and some Children, he took me into the Woods with him,
and made Signs that I must chop, giving me an Ax, the Indian soon saw that I
could handle the Ax: Here I tried to reconcile myself to this Employ, that they
might have no Occasion against me, except concerning the Law of my God; the old
Man began to appear kind, and his Wife gave me Milk and Bread when we came
Home, and when she got Fish, gave me the Gills to eat, out of real Kindness;
but perceiving I did not like them, gave me my own choice, and behaved
lovingly! Here I saw that God could make Friends of cruel Enemies, as he once
turned the Heart of angry Esau into Love and Tenderness; when we had finished
our Fence, which had employed us about a Week, I showed the old Squaw my Shirt
(having worn it from the Time I was first taken Prisoner, which was about seven
Weeks) all in Rags, Dirt, and Lice; she said it was not good, and brought me a
new one, with ruffled Sleeves (saying that is good) which I thankfully
accepted. The next Day they carried me back to the Indian Town, and admitted me
to converse with my Fellow Prisoners, who told me we were all to be sent to
Montreal, which accordingly came to pass.

MONTREAL, at our Arrival here, we had our Lodging first in the Iesuit's
Convent, where I saw a great Number of Priests, and People that came to
Confession; after some stay, we were ordered to attend, with the Indians, at a
grand Council, held before the head General Vaudriel; we Prisoners sat in our
Rank (surrounded with our Fathers and Brethren) but were asked no Questions:
The General had a Number of Officers to attend him in Council, where a noted
Priest, called Picket, sat at his Right Hand, who understands the Indian Tongue
well, and does more Hurt to the English, than any other of his Order in Canada,
(his Dwelling is at Oswegotchy). Here I was informed that some Measures were
concerted to destroy Oswego, which they had been long preparing to execute; we
in our Journey met many Battoes going up Stream, with Provision and Men for an
Attack on our Frontiers, which confirmed the Report: The Council adjourned to
another Day, and then broke up. My Indian Father and Mother took me with them
to several of their old Acquaintance, who were French, to show them their
lately adopted Son; these Persons had been concerned with my Father and other
Indians, in destroying many English Families in their younger Days; and (a one
standing by who understood their Language, said* were boasting of their former
Murders! After some Days the Council was again called, before which, several of
the Oneida Chiefs appeared, and offered some Complaints against the French's
attacking our Carrying-Place, it being their Land; but the General labored to
make them easy and gave them sundry Presents of Value, which they accepted The
French in Canada, well knowing the great Importance of having the Indians in
their Interest, to promote their ambitious and unjust Designs, use a variety of
Methods with them, among which, the following one is excellent in itself, and
well worthy of Imitation, viz. They are exceeding careful to prevent spirituous
Liquors being sold to the Indians, and if any of the Inhabitants are proved
guilty of it, their temporal Interest is quite broke, and corporal Punishment
inflicted on them; unless the General, on some particular Occasion, orders his
Commissioners to deliver some to them. I may add, that knowing their Number is
small, compared with the British Inhabitants on this Continent, and must
quickly fall into their Hands, in case we united, and entered boldly into the
Heart of their Country with a sufficient Force; for that very Reason, they
choose to keep us continually on the Defensive, by sending when Occasion
requires, large Bodies of Regulars, together with a great Number of Indians,
upon long and tedious Marches, that we may not come near their Borders; and
especially by employing the Latter, constantly to waste and ravage our
Frontiers, by which we are murdered by Inches, and beat without a battle! By
what I could learn when I was among them, they do not fear our Numbers, because
of our unhappy Divisions, which they deride, and from them, strongly expect to
conquer us entirely! which may a gracious God in Mercy, prevent!
: After which, I knowing these Indians were acquainted with Captain Williams,
at the Carrying-Place sent a Letter by them, to let my Family and Friends know
that I was yet alive, and longed for Redemption; but it never come to Hand. The
Treaty being ended, the General sent about ten Gallons of red Wine to the
Indians, which they divided among us; after came the Presents, consisting of
Coats, Blankets, Shirts, Skins (to make Indian Shoes) Cloth (to make Stockings)
Powder, Lead Shot, and to each a Bag of Paint for their own Use, etc. After we
Prisoners had our Share, my Mother came to me with an Interpreter, and told me
I might stay in the Town* at a Place she had found for me, if I pleased (this
was doubtless the Consequence of my declining to obey her Orders, in some
Instances that affected my Conscience) this Proposal I almost agreed to; but
one of my fellow Prisoners, with whom I had before some Discourse about making
our Escape, from the Indian Town, opposed the Motion* and said, pray do not
stay, for if you do, we shall not be able to form a Plan for our Deliverance;
on which I told her I chose to go Home with her, and soon set off by Land in
our Way thither, to Lascheen, distant from Montreal about 9 Miles, where we
left our Cannoes, and then proceeded, without Delay, on our Journey; in which I
saw to my Sorrow, great Numbers of Soldiers, and much Provisions, in Motion
toward Lake Ontario.

AFTER a painful and distressing Journey, we arrived at Oswegotchy, where we
likewise saw many Battoes, with Provisions and Soldiers, daily passing by in
their Way to Frontenac, which greatly distressed me for Oswego! Hence I
resolved, if possible, to give our People Notice of their Danger: To this End,
I told two of my Fellow Prisoners, that it was not a Time to sleep, and asked
if they would go with me, to this they heartily agreed; but we had no
Provision, were closely eyed by the Enemy, and could not lay up a Stock out of
our Allowance: However, at this Time, Mr. Picket (before mentioned) had
concluded to dig a large Trench round the Town; I therefore went to a Negro,
the principal Manager of this Work (who could speak English, French, and
Indian, well) and asked him, if he could get Employ for two others, and myself,
which he soon did; for which we were to have Meat and Wages. Here we had a
Prospect of procuring Provision for our Flight; this, I in some Time effected
for myself, and then asked my Brethren if they were ready, who replied they
were not yet, but said, Ann Bowman, our fellow Prisoner, had brought 130
Dollars from Bull's Fort, and would give them all they had Need of, I told them
it was not safe to disclose such a Secret to her, but they blamed me for my
Fears, and applied to her for Provision, letting her know our Intention, who
immediately informed the Priest of it: on which we were apprehended, the
Indians apprised of our Design, and a Court called; by Order of which, four of
us were confined in a Room under a strong Guard within the Fort, for several
Days.

FROM hence, another and myself were sent to Cohnewago, under a strong Guard of
60 Indians, to prevent my plotting any more against the French, and banish all
Hope of any Escape! However, when we arrived at this Place, it pleased God, who
has the Hearts of all Creatures in his Hand, to incline the Captain of the
Guard, to show me great Kindness, in giving me Liberty to walk or work where I
pleased, within any small Distance; on which I went to work with a French
Smith, for six Livers and five Souse per Week; which the Captain let me have to
myself, and farther favored me with the Privilege of Lodging at his Mother's
House, an English Woman (named Mary Harris, taken Captive when a Child, from
Deerfield, in New England) who told me she was my Grandmother, and was kind;
but the Wages being small, and not sufficient to procure such Clothing as I
was in Want of, I proceeded no farther with the French Smith, but went to my
Uncle Peter, and told him I wanted Clothes, and that it would be better to let
me go to Montreal, and work there, where I could Cloth myself better, than by
staying with him, and that without any Charge to him, who after some Reasoning
consented.

SET off on my Journey to Montreal, and on my entering the City met an English
Smith, who took me to work with him; after some Time, we settled to work in a
Shop, opposite to the General's Door, where we had the Opportunity of seeing a
great Part of the Forces of Canada (both Soldiers and Indians) who were
commonly brought there, before their going out to War; and likewise all
Prisoners, by which Means we got Intelligence how our People were preparing for
Defense; but no good News from Oswego, which made me fear, knowing that great
Numbers of French were gone against it, and hearing of but few to defend it.
Prayers were put up in all the Churches of Canada, and great Processions made,
in order to procure Success to their Arms, against poor Oswego; but our People
knew little of their Danger, till it was too late: Certainly, if more frequent
and earnest Application (both in private and public) was made to the God of
Battle, we might with greater Probability suspect, Success would crown our
military Attempts! To our Surprise, the dismal News came, that the French had
taken one of the Oswego Forts: In a few Hours, in Confirmation of this, I saw
the English* Standards (the melancholy Trophy of Victory) and the French
rejoicing at our Downfall, and mocking us poor Prisoners, in our Exile and
Extremity, which was no great Argument either of Humanity, or true Greatness of
Mind; great Joy appeared in all their Faces, which they expressed by loud
Shouts, firing of Cannon, and returning Thanks in their Churches; but our Faces
were covered with Shame, and our Hearts filled with Grief! -- Soon after, I saw
several of the Officers brought in Prisoners in small Parties, and the Soldiers
in the same Manner, and confined within the Walls, in a starving Condition, in
order to make them Work, which some complied with, but others bravely refused;
and last of all came the Tradesmen, among whom was my Son who looking round saw
his Father, who he thought had long been dead; this joyful Sight so affected
him, that he wept! -- nor could I, in seeing my Son, remain unconcerned! -- no;
the Tenderness of a Father's Bowels, upon so Extraordinary an Occasion, I am
not able to express, and therefore must cover it with a Vail of Silence! -- But
he, with all my Philadelphia Friends, being guarded by Soldiers, with fixed
Bayonets, we could not come near each other, they were sent to the common
Pound; but I hastened to the Interpreter, to try if I could get my Child at
Liberty, which was soon effected! When we had the Happiness of an Interview, he
gave me some Information of the State of our Family, and told me, as soon as
the News were sent home, that I was killed, or taken, his Mother was not
allowed any more Support from my Wages, which grieved me much, and added to my
other Afflictions In the mean Time, it gave me some Pleasure, in this (...) to
see an Expression of equal Duty and Prudence in my (...) Conduct; who, though
young in Years (about 17) and in such a confused State of Things, had taken
care to bring, with much Labor and Fatigue, a large Bundle of considerable
Value to me, it being Clothing, etc. which I was in great Need of; he likewise
saved a Quantity of Wampum, which we brought from New York, and afterward sold
here, for 150 Livers. He traveled with me Part of the Journey toward Oswego,
but not being so far on his Way, as I was when taken, he did not then fall into
the Enemy's Hands, but continued free till Oswego was taken, and was then
remarkably delivered from the Hands of the Indians, in the following Manner, 15
young Lads were drafted out to be delivered to them (which from their known
Custom, it is reasonable to conclude, was to fill up the Number they had lost
in the Battle) among which he was one: This barbarous Design, which, is
contrary to Laws of War, among all civilized Nations, the French artfully
concealed, under the Pretext of sending them to work in the Battoes; but my
Child taking Notice, that all that were chosen were small Lads, doubted their
real Intention was bad, and therefore slipped out of his Rank and concealed
himself, by which Means, under GOD, he was preserved from a State of perpetual
Captivity; his Place being filled up in his Absence, the other unhappy Youths
were delivered up a Sacrifice to the Indian Enemy, to be instructed in Popish
Principles and employed in Murdering their Countrymen; yea, perhaps their
Fathers and Brethren, O horrible! O lamentable! How (...) the French* be guilty
in cold Blood, of such prodigious Iniquity? Besides, their insatiable Thirst of
Empire, Doubtless the pardons they get from their Pope, and their Priests,
embolden them, which brings to my Mind, what I saw when among them: On a
Sabbath Day, perceiving a great Concourse of People at a Chapel, built on the
Commons, at some Distance from the City, I went to see what was the Occasion,
and found a kind of a Fair at which were sold (...), Wine, Brandy, etc. I
likewise saw many Carts and Chaises attending, the Chapel Doors in the mean
Time open, Numbers of People going in and out, and a Board hanging over the
Door, on which was written, in large Letters INDULGENCE PLENARY, or FULL PARDON
!

WHEN the People taken at Oswego, were setting out on their Way to Quebec, I
made Application for Liberty to go with them; but the Interpreter replied, that
I was an Indian Prisoner, and the General would not suffer it, till the Indians
were satisfied; and as they lived Two Hundred Miles from Montreal, it could not
be done at that Time: Finding that all Arguments, farther on that Head, would
not avail, because I was not included in the Capitulation; I told the
Interpreter, my Son must go and leave me! in order to be ready at Quebec to go
Home, when the Oswego People went, which probably would be soon; he replied, It
would be better to keep him with me, for he might be a Mean to get me clear
much sooner.

THE Officers belonging to Oswego, would gladly have had me with them, but
found it impracticable; this is an Instance of Kindness and Condescension, for
which I am obliged! Captain Bradley, gave me a good Coat, Vest, and Shirt; and
a young Gentleman, who formerly lived in Philadelphia, gave Four Pistoles (his
Name is James Stone, he was Doctor at Oswego.) These generous Expressions of
Kindness and Humanity, I am under great Obligations to remember with
affectionate Gratitude, and if ever it be in the Compass of my Power, to
requite: This Money, together with what my Son brought, I was in Hopes would go
far toward procuring my Release* from my Indian Masters; but seeing a Number
of Prisoners in sore Distress, among which were the Captains Grant and
Shepherd, and about Seven more in Company, I thought it my Duty to relieve
them, and commit my Release to the Disposal of Providence! Nor was this
suffered to turn to my Disadvantage in the Issue, for my Deliverance was
brought about in due Time, in another, and unexpected Way* This Company
informed me of their Intention to Escape, accordingly I gave them all the Help
in my Power, saw them clear of the Town, on a Saturday Evening, before the
Centries were set at the Gates, and advised them not to part from each other,
and delivered to Captain Shepard two Pocket Compasses; but they contrary to
this Counsel parted, and saw each other no more: By their separating, Captain
Grant, and Sergeant Newel, were deprived of the Benefit of a Compass; the other
Part got safe to Fort William Henry, as I was informed by Sergeant Henry, who
was brought in Prisoner, being taken in a Battle, when the gallant,
indefatigable Captain Rogers made a brave Stand, against more than twice his
Number! But I have not heard any Account of Captain Grant! Was enabled, through
much Mercy, to continue communicating some Relief to other Prisoners, out of
the Wages I received for my Labor, which was 40 Livers per Month!

IN the latter Part of the Winter, Coal and Iron were so scarce, that it was
difficult to get any more Work; I then offered to Work for my Diet and Lodging,
rather than be thrust into a stinking Dungeon, or sent among the Indians: The
Interpreter took some Pains (which I thankfully acknowledge) but without
Success; however, as I offered to work without Wages, a Frenchman took me and
my Son in upon these Terms, till a better Birth presented; here we staid one
Week, but heard of no other Place, then he offered me and my Son, 30 Livers per
Month, to strike and blow the Bellows, which I did for about two Months, and
then was discharged, and traveled about from Place to Place, having no fixed
Abode, and was obliged to lay out the small Remains of my Cash, in buying a
little Victuals, and took a Hay-Loft for my Lodging: I then made my Case known
to the kind Interpreter, and requested him to consider of some Means for my
Relief, who replied he would; in the mean Time, as I was taking a Walk in the
City, I met an Indian Prisoner, that belonged to the Town where my Father
lived, who reported, that a great Part of the Indians there, were just come,
with a Resolution to carry me back with them; and knowing him to be a very
honest Fellow, I believed the Truth of it, and fled from the Town to be
concealed from the Indians; in the mean while, Schemes were formed for an
Escape, and well prosecuted: The Issue of which was fortunate. General
Vaudriel, gave me and my Son, Liberty (under his Hand) to go to Quebec, and
work there at our Pleasure, without Confinement, as Prisoners of War; by which
Means, I was freed from paying a Ransom!

The Commissary Monsieur Partwe, being about to set off for Quebec, my Son
informed me that I must come to Town in the Evening, a Passage being provided
for us; I waited till near Dark, and then entered the Town, with great Care to
escape the Indians, who kept watch for me (and had done so for some Time) which
made it very difficult and dangerous to move; however as they had no Knowledge
of my Son, he could watch their Motions, without their Suspicion (the
Providence of GOD is a great Deep, this Help was provided for my Extremity, not
only beyond my Expectation, but contrary to my Design.) In the Morning, upon
seeing an Indian set to watch for me, over against the House I was in, I
quickly made my Escape, through the back Part of the House, over some high
Pickets, and out of the City, to the River Side, and fled! A Friend knowing my
Scheme for Deliverence, kindly assisted me to conceal myself: The Commissary
had by this Time got ready for his Voyage, of which my Son giving me Notice, I
immediately, with no lingering Motion, repaired to the Boat, was received on
board, set quite off undiscovered, and saw the Indians no more! A very narrow
and surprising Escape, from a violent Death! For they had determined to kill
me, in case I ever attempted to leave them, which lays me under the strongest
Obligations, to improve a Life rescued from the Jaws of so many Deaths, to the
Honor of my gracious Benefactor! -- But to return, the Commissary upon seeing
the Dismission I had from the General, treated us courteously! Saw many Houses
and Villages in our Pass along the River St. Lawrence toward the Metropolis;
and here it may with Justice be observed, that the Inhabitants of Canada in
general, are principally (if not wholly) settled upon Rivers, by reason that
their back Lands being flat and swampy, are therefore unfit to bear Grain.
Their Wheat is sown in the Spring of the Year, because the Winter is long, and
would drown it; they seem to have no good Notion of making Meadow (so far as I
had an Opportunity of observing) their horned Cattle are few and poor, their
Living in general mean, they eat but little Flesh, nevertheless they are strong
and hardy.


ARRIVED at Quebec, May 1st, The Honorable Colonel PETER SCHUYLER, hearing of
my coming there, kindly sent for me, and after enquiries about my Welfare, etc.
generously told me I should be supplied, and need not trouble myself for
Support! This public-spirited Gentleman, who is indeed an Honor to his
Country, did in like Manner, nobly relieve many other poor Prisoners at Quebec!
-- Here I had full Liberty to walk where I pleased, and view the City, which is
well situated for Strength, but far from being impregnable.

HERE, I hope, it will not be judged improper, to give a short Hint of the
French Governor's Conduct; even in Time of Peace, he gives the Indians great
Encouragement to Murder and Captivate the poor Inhabitants on our Frontiers; an
honest good Man, named William Ross, was taken Prisoner twice in the Time of
Peace; when he was first taken, he learned a little of the French Language, was
after some Time redeemed, and got to his Place of Abode: Yet some Years after,
he, with two Sons, was again taken, and brought to Quebec; the Governor seeing
the poor Man was Lame, and one of his Legs smaller than the other, reproved the
Indians for not killing him, asking, what they brought a lame Man there for,
who could do nothing but eat! you should, said he, have brought his Scalp!
However, another of his Countrymen, more merciful than his Excellency, knowing
the poor Prisoner to be a quiet, hard-working Man, redeemed him from the
Indians; and two other Frenchmen bought his two Sons: Here they had been Slaves
more than three Years, when I first arrived at Quebec; this Account I had from
Mr. Roast himself, who farther added, that the Governor gave the Indians
Presents, to encourage them to proceed, in that kind of World, which is a
Scandal to any civilized Nation, and what many Pagans would abhor! Here also, I
saw one Mr. Johnson, who was taken in a Time of Peace, with his Wife and three
small Children (his Wife was big with Child of a Fourth, and delivered on the
Road to Canada, which she called Captive) all which had been Prisoners between
three and four Years, several young Men, and his Wife's Sister, were likewise
taken Captive with them, and made Slaves!

OUR Cartel being ready, I obtained Liberty to go to England in her; we set
Sail the 23d of July, 1757, in the Morning, and discharged our Pilot about 4
o'Clock in the Afternoon; after which we neither cast Anchor or Lead, till we
got clear of the great River St. Lawrence from which I conclude, the Navigation
is much safer then the French have reported; in 28 Days we arrived at Plymouth,
which occasioned great Joy, for we were ragged, lowsy, sick, and in a Manner,
starved; and many of the Prisoners, who in all were about 300 in Number, were
sick of the Smallpox: My Son and Self, having each a Blanket Coat (which we
bought in Canada to keep us warm) and now expecting Relief, gave them to two
poor sick Men, almost naked! But as we were not allowed to go on Shore, but
removed to a King's Ship, and sent to Portsmouth, where we were still confined
on board, near two Weeks, and then removed to the Mermaid, to be sent to
Boston; we now repented our well meant, though rash Charity, in giving our
Coats away, as we were not to get any more, all Application to the Captain for
any Kind of Covering being in vain; our Joy was turned into Sorrow, at the
Prospect of coming on a cold Coast, in the Beginning of Winter, almost naked,
which was not a little increased, by a near View of our Mother Country, the
Soil and Comforts of which, we were not suffered to touch or taste On board the
Mermaid Man of War being in a distressed Condition, and hearing little from the
Mouths of many of my Countrymen, but Oaths and Curses (which much increased my
Affliction,) and finding it difficult to get a retired Place I crept down into
the Hold among the Water Casks, to cry to God; here the Lord was graciously
pleased to meet with me, and give me a Sense of his fatherly Love and Care;
here he enabled me (blessed be his Name for ever) to look back and view how he
had led me, and guarded me with a watchful Eye and strong Arm, and what Pains
he had taken to wean me from an over-love of time and Things, and make me
content that he should choose for me: Here I was enabled to see his great
Goodness in all my Disappointments, and that Afflictions were not Evidences of
God's Wrath* but the Contrary, to all that honestly endeavor to seek him with
Faith and Love; here I could say, God is worthy to be served, loved, and
obeyed, though it be attended with many Miseries in this World! What I have
here mentioned, so far as I know my Heart, is neither to exalt myself, or
offend any one upon Earth, but to glorify God, for his Goodness and Faith
fullness to the meanest of his Servants, and to encourage others to trust in him!
.

September the 6th, SET Sail for Boston, with a Fleet in Convoy, at which we
arrived on the Seventh of November, in the Evening, it being Dark, and we
Strangers, and poor, it was difficult to get a Lodging (I had no Shoes, and but
Pieces of Stockings, and the Weather in the mean Time very Cold) we were indeed
directed to a Tavern, but found cold Entertainment there, the Master of the
House seeing a ragged and lowsy Company, turned us out to Wander in the Dark;
he was suspicious of us, and feared we came from Halifax, where the Smallpox
then was, and told us, he was ordered not to receive such as came from thence:
We soon met a young Man, who said he could find a Lodging for us, but still
detained us by asking many Questions; on which I told him we were in no
Condition to answer, till we came to a proper Place, which he quickly found,
where we were used well; but as we were lowsy, could not expect Beds.

The next Morning, we made Application for Clothing; Mr. Erving, Son-in-Law to
the late General Shirley, gave us Relief, not only in respect of Apparel, but
also Three Dollars per Man, to bear our Charges to Newport: When I put on fresh
Clothes, I was seized with a cold Fit, which was followed by a high Fever, and
in that Condition obliged to travel on Foot, as far as Providence, in our Way
to Rhode Island (our Money not being sufficient to hire any Carriage, and find
us what was needful for Support:) In this Journey, I was exceedingly
distressed! Our Comforts in this Life, are often allayed with Miseries which
are doubtless great Mercies when they are suitably improved; at Newport, we met
with Captain Gibbs, and agreed with him for our Passage to New York, where we
arrived, November 21st, met with many Friends, who expressed much Satisfaction
at our Return, and treated us kindly, particularly Messirs. Livingston, and
Waldron.

November 26th, 1757. ARRIVED at Philadelphia, to the great Joy of all my
Friends, and particularly of my poor afflicted Wife and Family, who thought
they should never see me again, till we met beyond the Grave; being returned,
sick and weak in Body, and empty handed, not having any Thing for my Family's
and my own Support, several humane and generous Persons, of different
Denominations, in this City (without any Application of mine, directly or
indirectly) have freely given seasonable Relief; for which, may God grant them
Blessings in this World, and in the World to come everlasting Life, for
Christ's Sake!

NOW GOD in his great Mercy, has granted me a temporal Salvation, and what is
a Thousand Times better, he has given me with it, a Soul satisfying Evidence
of an eternal one in the World to come!

AND now, what shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits, alas I am
nonplust! O that Saints and Angels might praise thee, for I am not worthy to
take thy Name into my Mouth! Yet notwithstanding, thou art pleased to accept
poor Endeavors, because JESUS CHRIST has opened the Door, whereby we may come
boldly to the Throne of thy Grace, praised be the Lord God Jehovah, by Men and
Angels, throughout all Eternity!

BUT to hasten to the Conclusion, suffer me with Humility and Sorrow to
observe, that our Enemies seem to make a better Use of a bad Religion, than we
of a good One; they rise up long before Day in Winter, and go through the Snow
in the coldest Seasons, to perform their Devotions in the Churches: which when
over, they return to be ready for their Work as soon as Day Light appears: The
Indians are as zealous in Religion, as the French, they oblige their Children
to pray Morning and Evening particularly at Conasadauga; are punctual in
performing their stated Acts of Devotion themselves, are still and peaceable in
their own Families, and among each other as Neighbors!

WHEN I compared our Manner of Living with theirs, I it made me fear that the
righteous GOD (who is wont to, make Judgment begin at his own House first) was
about to deliver us into their Hands, to be severely punished for our Departure
from him; how loeg has he waited for our Return, O that we may therefore turn
to him, before his Anger break out into a Flame, and there be no Remedy.

OUR Case appears to me indeed very Gloomy! notwithstanding our Enemies are
inconsiderable in Number, compared with us; yet they are united as one Man,
while we may justly be compared to a House divided against itself, and
therefore cannot stand long, in our present Situation.

MAY Almighty GOD, graciously incline us to look to him for Deliverance, to
repent of our Sins, reform our Lives, and unite in the vigorous and manly Use
of all proper Means to this End. AMEN.

FINIS.

