THE Following TREATISE, Contains, A Brief ACCOUNT OF Persecutions, in Boston
and Connecticut Governments; Taken out of AUTHORS:

WHEREBY it may be seen, That a People may be Deceived under the highest
Conceit of Religion, and thinking they are worshipping GOD, when, indeed, they
are worshipping the Dragon, and persecuting the Children of GOD, that worship
him in Spirit and in Truth.

By John Bolles, of New London.

Printed for the AUTHOR, 1758.

I Observe, in a Proclamation, given forth by Governor Fitch, of Connecticut,
at the desire of the General Assembly in October last, under the Consideration
of the tokens of God's Displeasure, by his Judgments already come upon us; and
what we have cause to Fear is hastening, etc.
IT is therefore Required, in order to a Reformation in said Colony, in these
Words, -- A Proclamation, commanding and strictly enjoining every Assistant,
Justice of the Peace and all Grandjurymen and other informing Officers within
this Colony, in their respective Offices, duly to put in Execution, the Laws
made for the Observation of the Sabbath or Lord's Day, etc.

To this I Answer, -- There is not the least command, example, name nor the
least breath or tittle in Scripture for said Sabbath, much less for the
observation of it; but commanded to be a day of labor, both in the Old
Testament and New, -- See Exodus 2^.9, 10. Six days shall thou labor and do all
thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God etc. Mat.
26.32. But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee. Compare
this with Chap. 28.1. to 10. and we may see, Christ before he suffered, as also
the Angel of the Lord upon his Resurrection, and Christ himself requiring his
Disciples, calling them Brethren, to go into Galilee, and there they should see
him. Here is not the least word spoken of a Sabbath; but commanded to labor,
by travailing into another Province: Luke 3.1. as also John 20.19. Then the
same day, at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut
where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews. Neither is here the
least tittle relating to a Sabbath, but called the first day of the week, as
through out the New Testament; and no where called Sabbath, but first day of the
week. And whereas you quote in your confession of Faith, Chap. 22.7. parag.
Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, and apply the words of the
Apostle to the first day of the week, and say, which in Scripture is called the
Lord's Day, without any proof, from this text or any other text of Scripture,
that the first day of the week was ever so entitled; or, that the Apostle had
reference to any particular or natural day, but the time of Christ's revealing
himself to him, and requiring him to write those mysteries as Christ purposed
to reveal them; which, for ought we know, might be as long as Moses was with
the Lord in Mount Sinai, writing the words of the Covenant, the ten
Commandments, forty days and forty nights Exodus 34.28. Thus you wrest the
Scriptures, by putting expositions of your own devising, contrary to Scripture,
and make them the foundation of your Sabbath, which is the main principle of
your Religion.

And say, -- This Confession of Faith, we offer as our firm Persuasion; well
and fully grounded upon the holy Scriptures; and commend the same unto all, and
particularly to the people of our Colony; to be examined, accepted and
constantly maintained: We do not assume to ourselves that any thing be taken
upon trust from us, but commend to our people these following Counsels. etc.
Believe in all divine worship: It not enough, that this or that act of worship
is not forbidden in the word of God. If it be not commanded and you perform it,
you may fear you will be found guilty, and exposed to divine displeasure: Nadab
and Abihu paid dear for offering in divine worship that which the Lord
commanded them not, etc.

This taken out of your counsels, and much more to the same purpose, which to
be brief I omit: Thus by your good words and fair speeches you deceive the
hearts of the simple. Romans 16 18. For they that are such, serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ but their own Bellies; and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple: That is, such as lean upon your words but don't
follow your counsels, for your counsels are good; agreeing with Rom 4.15. Where
no law is there is no transgression: also Chap. 5.13. Sin is not imputed when
there is no law. But by your flattering words and wresting the Scriptures, you
deceive the world and worldly powers, who are all joined together in a spirit
of flattery in the love and friendship of the world, and so shut your selves
out from believing in God, John 5.44. And are become enemies to God, Jam. 4.4.
While you think your selves more righteous than others in the performance of
your own institutions of worship; but you are in danger of its turning to your
greater condemnation.

I also observe, in the close of said Proclamation, -- our present King
entitled, Defender of the Faith, etc. As also in the close of a Proclamation,
for a Fast, the 31st day of August ^^st; and both under said Governor's hand,
and doubtless it is his usual manner so to write. It may be well for us to know
how the King came by that Title, it being no Scripture title given to any King
neither Jew nor Gentile; but I find the Pope gave to Henry the 8th, King of
England, the Title, Defender of the Faith, and to all his Successors, because
he wrote a Book against Luther, in defense of Popery, see the Hist, of Engl. N.
Tindal Vol. I. Page 749. But said Luther was an instrument under God, of a
great reformation out of Popery, which caused the Pope to do his utmost
endeavor to suppress him, and by succession, the Title is continued to the
Kings of England to this day, as we see; so that if we acknowledge the authority
of the Title we must acknowledge the authority of the giver; which opens a door
to all Popery, for the Pope gave the Title in commendation of the said King,
for opposing God's faithful Minister, for preaching against the said Pope, or
popish Idolatry; and by said King and Parliament confirming and defending
popish Articles, it opened a door to Bishops, Chancellors, Prelates and diverse
ranks of Men, both in the popish Church and common Wealth, to break in upon
Christ's flock like so many sorts of ravenous Beasts, taring and devouring, and
few got out of their hands, but were burnt to Death, under the name of
Heretics. Thus we may see the stupidness, yea, blindness of our reputed wife
and learned Men; to wit, the rulers and established Ministers, to testify
against Popery* and yet adore such a popish title, for now 200 years or more;
for faith in God i^ the foundation of (...) Religion, but without faith it is
impossible to please him, see Heb. 11.6. also Mark 11 22 Jesus answering, says
unto them, have faith in God To have faith in God excludes our faith to be in
Popes or Kings, or in any mortal flesh: but as the Devil deceived our first
Parents through his subtilty, so also by this Title given to the King, by the
most holy Lord Pope, Christ's vicegerent on earth, so called. It is a title of
Honor, and must needs be ensnaring to the whole Kingdom; for, if the King be
defender of the Faith, then every Man in authority under him, has a share in
the Title, and may be said to be defenders of the Faith with the King,
according to their office. Now let us see how far the two Governments, to wit,
Boston and Connecticut, have closed in practice with this popish Title, to
defend their institutions of Worship; first Connecticut, see their Law,
Entitled Heretics, as follows.

At the Court at Kensington, 11th day of October, 1705.
Present
The Queens most excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness, Prince George of
Denmark. Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord
President. Earl of Renelaugh. Mr. Boil. Mr. Secretary Hedges. Mr. Secretary
Harley. Lord chief Justice Holt. Lord chief Justice Trevor. Duke of Somerset.
Duke of Ormond. Mr. Vernon. Mr. Earl.
A Representations from the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, being
this day read at the board, upon an Act passed in her Majesty's Colony of
Connecticut, entitled only Heretics; whereby it is enacted, That all who
shall entertain any Quakers, Ranters, Adamites and other Heretics, are made
liable to the penalty of five Pounds, and five Pounds per week for every Town
that shall so entertain them; That all Quakers shall be committed to Prison, or
be sent out of the Colony; That whosoever shall hold unnecessary discourse with
Quakers, shall forfeit twenty shillings; That whosoever shall keep any Quakers
Books, the Governor, Magistrates and Elders excepted, shall forfeit ten
shillings; and That all such books be suppressed; That no Master of any Vessel
do land any Quakers without carrying them away again, under the penalty of
twenty Pounds.

And the said Lords Commissioners, humbly offering, that the said Act be
repealed by her Majesty, it being contrary to the Liberty of Conscience,
indulged to Dissenters by the Laws of England, as also to the Charter granted
to that Colony, Her Majesty with the advice of her privy Council, is pleased to
declare her Disallowance and Disapprobation of the said Act, and pursuant to
her Majesty's Royal Pleasure thereupon, the said Act passed in her Majesty's
Colony of Connecticut in New England, Entitled, Heretics, is hereby Repealed,
and declared Null and void, and of none effect.

Signed John Povey.

BUT notwithstanding the repealing this Law, there has been great Persecutions
in Connecticut Colony, by Fining, Whipping and Imprisoning, and other inhumane
doings, toward those that under scruple of Conscience, have withdrawn from
their established Worship.

As to Boston Government, they Persecuted the Annabaptists in 1651, by Fining,
Whipping and Imprisoning, in defense of the then established Worship: See
Daniel Neal's History of New England, Vol. I. Page 278, etc.

And the first People called Quakers that came from England to Boston, was in
the beginning of July, 1656, viz. Mary Fisher and Ann Austin; but before they
came on Shore, the Deputy Governor sent on board the Ship, and took their
Papers, and about 100 Books from them, and ordered them, to be kept Prisoners
there until he should send for them; and said Books were Burnt by the common
Hangman. And in the Month following, came eight more, viz. four Men and four
Women, and Suffered in like manner: Their Boxes, Chests and Trunks being
searched before they came on Shore; and their Books were Burnt, and they
committed to Prison, because such as were called Quakers, but not for what they
had done, either good or evil; and kept close Prisoners, and a Five Pound Fine
for any that should speak with them; to prevent People from having any
Communion or Communicating to them things not practiced to the worst of
Murderers, together with many other Inhumanities.

I here note a Speech of John Indicot, Governor of Boston, to one that came to
Boston with those aforesaid, -- Take heed, says he, you break not our
Ecclesiastical Laws, for then ye are sure to stretch by a Halter -- A
threatening word by the Papists to the Martyrs, was, fry a Faggot. And shall we
believe when God takes Vengeance on those that put his Saints and Martyrs to
Death by Fire and Faggots, will not Measure the same Measure to them that put
them to Death by a Halter and Gallows. I also cite another speech of said
Governor, to a Woman, after she had been put in Prison, and Whipped Ten Stripes,
with a threefold Corded knotted Whip; That they were likely to have a Law to
Hang her, if she came hither again. To which she answered, -- If God call us,
woe be to us if we come not: And I question not, but he whom we love will make
us not to count our Lives dear unto our selves, for the sake of his NAME. To
which said Governor replied, -- And we shall be as ready to take away your
Lives as ye shall be to lay them down.

Patience Scot, a Girl about eleven Years old, came from Providence to bear
Witness against Persecution; who was sent to Prison, there to remain until the
setting of the Court of Assistants: The Child, it seems, was not of Years as to
Law, to deal with her by Banishment, but otherwise in understanding, for she
confounded her Adversaries; and some of them confessed, that they had many
Children, and they had been well Educated; and that it were well if they could
speak half so much for God as she could for the Devil: An Ignorant and
Blasphemous Speech! See Matthew. 21.16 Have ye never Read, says Christ, out of
the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected Praise. Luke 21.15. For I
will give you a Mouth and Wisdom which all your Adversaries shall not be able
to gain say nor resist. Your Priest Wilson, your high Priest of Boston, for so
I find him Entitled, Said he would carry Fire in one Hand and Faggots in the
other, to Burn all the Quakers in the World, etc.

A Warrant sent to a Constable as follows, -- To the Constable of Salem: You
are required by Virtue here of to search in all suspicious Houses, for private
Meetings; and if they refuse to open the Doors, you are to break open the Door
upon them, and return the Names of all you find to Ipswich Court.

William Hatborn.

I shall cite a few Instances of the Causes and further Sufferings of the said
People, viz. the many and cruel Whippings, the like I never Read in any
History; and many and long Imprisonments, exposed to Cold, and kept from Food
five Days together, not suffering them to Buy it with their own Money; and at
many other Times kept from Food several Days together in a perishing Condition.
A certain Woman going through Cambridge, and crying repent, was laid hold of,
and had before two Magistrates, and was delivered to a Jailer, who thrust her
into a noysom, stinking Dungeon, having nothing to lie down on, or sit on, and
kept he there two Days and two Nights, without Bread or Water; and because a
tender Friend brought her a little Milk in her great Distress and perishing
Condition, he was cast into Prison for entertaining a Stranger, and Fined him
Five Pounds; and she was Cruelly Whipped in three Towns and sent toward Rhode
Island, and toward Night left her as a prey to the wild Beasts, and draged
others at Cart's-Tails, and Whipped from Town to Town, and some their Ears cut
off, but all these Cruelties they not attaining to keep them out of the
Government, they were Banished not to return, on pain of Death; but obedience
to God prevailed above the fear of Man, and in obedience to God they returned
and were put to Death, and so sealed their Testimony with their Blood, as in
Rev. 12.11. And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony, and they loved not their Lives unto the Death. These and many
more Cruelties inflicted on said People, are to be seen in George Bishop,
New England Judged: The established Ministers being the Counselors, and
executed under humane Authority. Now let us hear Gamaliel's Counsel to the Jews
that Persecuted the Apostles, Acts 5.38, 39. viz. If this Counsel or this Work
be of Men it will come to naught, but if it be of God, says he, ye cannot
overthrow it, least happily ye be found even to Fight against God: See also
Christ's Testimony, Matthew. 7. 24, 25. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine
and does them, I will liken him unto a wise Man, which built his House upon a
Rock, and the Rain descended and the Floods came, and the Winds blew and beat
upon that House, and it tell not, for it was founded upon a Rock. And as the
Gospel was received by the Apostles Doctrine, notwithstanding all its
opposition, and so proved it to be of God; so also notwithstanding all the
Wisdom and Violence used to hinder said People's Testimonies and Doctrine
spreading among the Inhabitance, it did not hinder it but turned for a
Testimony against their Persecutors, that such doings as aforesaid were not of
God, that many withdrew from the established Meetings, and kept Meetings by
themselves, and suffered as follows, -- Nicholas Phelps was fined Five
Shillings a Week for not coming to the established meeting, and Forty Shillings
for people meeting at his House, and sent to Goal as one called a Quaker, where
he was Whipped three times in five Days with a threefold corded Whip with knots,
Ten Cruel Strokes each time because he would not work for to work, at their
Wills he could not, Edward Wharton and Samuel Gaskin for not coming to the
Established Meeting were fined the one Five Pounds Ten Shillings, and the other
Eight Pounds concerning Swearing and Meetings, the said People were scrupulous
of an Oath for Conscienee sake it being contrary to Christ's Doctrine, and upon
this scruple the Authority put in force an old Law says my Author, that all
must take the Oath of fidelity; and if any Man refuse or neglect to take it by
such a Time, he shall pay Five Pounds, or depart the Colony. But they not
departing, and under the same scruple came under the Penalty of another Five
Pounds; and so from Time to Time. -- William Allin, his Fines were Forty
Pounds, for having Twenty Meetings of the people called Quakers at his House,
Four Pounds for being at Meetings abroad, Five Pounds for entertaining those
People, Twenty-five Pounds for not Swearing: They Summon them, says my Author,
three Times a Year, as often as they have Courts for that purpose; and fine them
Five Pounds each, etc. and to satisfy said Fines take away their Cattle. Edward
Perry, for Meetings and refusing to Swear was fiined 89L. 18 s. See George
Bishop aforesaid, Page 187, as also for not coming to the Ordinances of God,
and for contemning Authority therein; therefore have we done thus and thus unto
you, said your Governor. Now Boston and Connecticut does not your
forementioned Persecutions well become your popish Title as aforesaid, though not
to defend the Faith of God, but to defend Doctrines of Devils against Faith in
God: And now to pass from the living to the dead, when you took William
Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson out of Prison to the Gallows, your Captain
with his Band of Men, led them the back way, lest it should affect the People,
and placed them near the Drums, and caused the Drums to beat when they
attempted to speak; that so the People might not hear them; and when their dead
Bodies were cut down, their Shirts were ripped off, and they cast naked into a
Pit, without a covering: Some Friends desired their Bodies to put them in
Coffins and take them away, but your Executioner suffered them not, saying he
was strictly charged to the contrary. And all this not because they were
Murderers, but of the accursed Sect of the Quakers, see your Law of Banishment
on pain of Death. Let us consider such inhumane Violent means are not the
weapons of a Christian's Warfare, for when Christ was Proclaimed, it was Peace,
good will toward Men, Luke 2.14. And Christ said, The Son of Man is not come
to destroy Men's Lives but to save them, Chap. 9.56. who is also said to be
King of Peace, Heb. 7 2. And James says, The wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of God, James 1.20. And all that will live Godly in Crist Jesus,
says the Apostle, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. And the Apostle John
says, This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, 1 of John
5.4. These Texts of Scripture, are sufficient to prove the contrary Works to be
of the Devil; neither can a Christian give a greater Testimony of his Faith in
God then by his Sufferings; and the greater his Suffering the greater his
Testimony. So neither can Persecutors give a greater Testimony that they were
Worshippers of the Dragon, than by their Persecutions to defend their Worship.
And the more inhumane and cruel they are in their Persecutions, it shows the
Devil's Wrath so much the greater: And as to said Persecutors, (...) was the
life and power of Godliness they struck at, to crush and keep under, or to
expel out of their Government; which was fighting against God himself, by
disregarding his Message, and persecuting his Messengers: Those that thus
Persecuted were our Ancestors, that left their native Land because of
Persecution, and came into this, that they might in freedom Worship God
according to their Consciences, but soon set up the Doctrins and Commandments
of Men to be observed for Worship to God, and established and defended them by
all the aforesaid injustice Violence and Cruelties, as is to be seen at large
in said Bishope and John Whiting, both in one Volumn, containing more than 700
Pages; wherein is also observed the remarkable Judgments of God on diverse of
the most Violent Persecutors, as foretold by the Sufferers; as also Cotton
Mather, a Minister of Boston, bewailing New England under the Judgments of God,
for now more than 20 Years, says he, the Blasting Strokes of Heaven have
rather abated than enlarged the growth of it: There have been several Years,
wherein the terrible Famine stared the Town in the Face: The very course of
Nature has been altered; among us, a lamentable Cry for Bread, Bread has been
heard in our Streets; pestilential Sicknesses have made fearful Havoc in
diverse Places; he also complains, that through the displeasure of God, he has
put over his People into the Hands of Tawny and Bloody Salvages, calling them
the worst of Executioners: They stripped their unhappy Prisoners, and caused
them to run the Gantlet, and Whipped them after a Cruel and Bloody manner, etc.
and so with a lingering Fire roasted them out of the World. -- In another
Place, calls them merciless Tigers, whose tender Mercies are Cruel; and
further, calls them the most beastly and bloody Things, that ever wore the
shape of Men in the World; -- need I tell you, says he, that those Devils
Incarnate, have tied their Captives unto Trees, and first cutting off their
Ears, have made them to eat their own Ears, and then have broiled their whole
Bodies with slow Fires, dancing the mean while about them, and cutting out
collops of their Flesh, 'till with lingering Torments, they have Martyred them
to Death -- A wise Observation of these Things, says he, will cause you to
see, that the War, which has been upon us, has been a War of God -- The
serious People throughout the Country, says he, were awakened by these
intimations of divine Displeasure, to enquire into the causes and matters of
the Controversy; the scourges of Heaven were employed upon the Churches of
New England, for their Mischarriages, and they lashed one Blow after another.

Thus I have given the Reader, a View of the sufferings of said Quakers, and of
the inhumane Cruelties done to them, taken out of said Bishope; as also said
Mather, in his late Church History of New England; his confessions to the just
Judgment of God on them recited out of said Whiting, to which said Histories I
refer the Reader.

I shall Cite some Texts of Scripture, and Conclude, Rev. 12.7, 11. And there
was War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the
Dragon fought and his Angels, it was Christ in his Saints that fought by the
Word of their Testimony; And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by
the word of their Testimony, and they loved not their Lives unto the Death. --
And in the Case now treated on, it was the established Ministers and Authority
in fellowship together, who fought by Persecution, under the Dragon; as in
Chap. 13.6. And he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to Blaspheme his
Name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. In Answer, to this
Text, I shall recite some of the foregoing Instances; as first, Governor
Endicot's Answer to a Woman, as aforesaid; that in obedience to God, they
should not count their Lives dear, etc. Said Governor replied, -- And we shall
be as ready to take away your Lives, as ye shall be to lay them down. This was
high Contempt against the Throne of God, and Blaspheming his Name and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; and in a special Manner, such Saints
as should so cheerfully lay down their Lives for God's Name, and truth sake,
etc. As also of Patience Scot aforesaid; that they had many Children, and they
had been well Educated, and that it were well if they could speak half so much
for God as she could for the Devil: This was also Blasphemy, to put God in the
place of the Devil, and the Devil in the place of God; but so they Worship, see
ver. 4. And they Worshipped the Dragon, which gave Power to the Beast, and they
Worshipped the Beast, etc.

I shall also mention one instance of said Wilson, Priest of Boston; who said
he would carry Fire in one Hand, and Faggots in the other, to Burn all the
Quakers in the World: Who having Friend's Books in his Hand, as they were
Burning; Friend's Books by order of Authority; he threw them also into the
Fire, saying, From the Devil they came, and to the Devil let them go: This
shows he was both a Blaspheamer and a Murderer in his Heart.

I desire the Reader to take Notice. That all the aforesaid Persecutions were
carried on to defend their form of Worship, or image made to the Beast, Rev.
Chap. 13 ver. 14, 15. And not the least tittle of a tender Conscience toward
God in it all; neither in Ministers nor Authority; for when they could not
overcome by Cruelty and Death, to keep them out of their Government, but their
Doctrine spread among the People, then they tried to weary them out by Fines,
without regard to Conscience or Scripture, Five Shillings a Week, for not
coming to the allowed Meetings; and if they met among themselves, the Fine was
Forty Shillings a Time, for every Speaker, and Ten Shillings a Time for every
hearer, and Forty Shillings a Time for the owner of the Place; and for refusing
to Swear, the Fine was Five Pounds, so often as the Oath was tendered as
aforesaid, and they refused for Conscience sake, because it was forbidden by
Christ, Matthew. 5.34, etc. As also, James 5.12. And the not taking off the Hatt
before Authority, was a Fine of Twenty Shillings; and if any entertained a
Quaker, if but a quarter of an Hour, he was to forfeit Five Pounds, said
Authority also caused Mary Fisher, and Ann Austin aforesaid, to be stripped
start Naked, and so to be Searched, under a suspicion of Witches, and misused
as one of them: A married Woman, and a Mother of five Children, suffered not
the like in the bearing any of them into the World; but what proof of Witches
could they have in so doing: But mark what followed in Boston Government,
Twenty innocent Persons were put to Death, for supposed Witchcraft, and above
an Hundred and Fifty Imprisoned, and above Two Hundred more Accused, and some
fled into other Governments to save their Lives; see Cotton Mather's Book of
Witches, Page 110, etc. But not one Quaker accused on that Account; see said
Whiting, Page 37.

By all these doings, under a pretense to defend the Worship of God, it is
evident it was to defend the Worship of the Devil, under all their formalities
and institutions of Worship; the Devil was the Author of all their Cruelties:
And as to the Cruelties done to the English Captives by the Indians, noted by
said Mather, who calls them merciless Tigers, whose tend. Mercies are Cruel;
the worst of Executioners, the most Beastly and Bloody Things that ever wore
the shape of Men in the World, and Devils Incarnate. Thus he Condemns the
Cruelties done to the English Captives by the Indians, but don't call in
question their Cruelties done to the Quakers. And as to his Confessions to the
Judgments of God on them, in his late Church History of New England; as also
the Ministers, in the Book of their Confession, Page 94, in two Questions,
Question 1st, What are the Evils that have provoked the Lord to send his
Judgments on New-Enland? Their second Question, Page 107, What is to be done,
that so these Evils may be reformed?

I say, neither said Mather nor Ministers have called in question a word of
their Persecuting the Quakers: And many of the Quakers foretelling the
Judgments of God coming upon some of the most violent Persecutors, which also
came to pass; and of God's Judgments coming on New England in general; which
said Mather and Ministers have confessed too, but not as fore told by the
Quakers; which shows they were in the same willful Blindness and hardness of
Heart, and not willing that the Truth should be made manifest; as their
Ancestors were that Persecuted them; which is now more than an Hundred Years
past; first the Annabaptists, then the Quakers.

And as for Connecticut, from what is aforesaid, it is evident they have been
vile Persecutors; and God has been going on with his Judgments, on both
Governments; and they have been going on, Worshipping the Dragon, under their
own Institutions of Worship; and Ministers, in the manner of Jeroboam's
Priests, and defended by humane Authority, which makes it the complete Worship
of the Dragon; and they Crying, What are the Evils, that have provoked the Lord
to send his Judgments on New England?

Will God be enquired of by such a People as this? that have rebelled against
his Warnings, and so inhumanely Persecuted his Servants; and put some to Death,
viz. Boston, and say, There is not such another Church in the World, as the
Church at Boston; See said Bishop, Page 488.

I say, will God be enquired or by such a People as this? no verily, what says
the Prophet, Isai. 1.27. Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts
with Righteousness. That is, the obstinate Sinners shall be cut off by God's
Judgments; and those that come to Repentance in Time, as to confess their own
Sins, and the Sins of the Land, will be converted to Righteousness.

John Bolles.

FINIS.

