Mr. Raynolds's Election SERMON. May 12 th, 1757.

THE Kingdom is the LORD's, OR, GOD the Supreme Ruler and Governor of the
World.

A SERMON PREACHED before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT, At
HARTFORD, On the DAY of their ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 12th, 1757.

By PETER RAYNOLDS, A.M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Enfield.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by JOHN GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR, and
COMPANY, 1757.

At a General Assembly of the GOVERNOR, and COMPANY of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, Anno Domini,
1757.
ORDERED, That ROGER WOLCOTT, junr. Esquire and Capt. EPHRAIM TERRY, Return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. PETER RAYNOLDS, for his Sermon
delivered (on the 12th Day of this Instant May) before this Assembly, and
desire a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

AN Election SERMON.
PSALM XXII. 28. FOR the Kingdom is the Lord's: And He is Governor among the
Nations.
THE Necessity and Importance of civil Government, to the Welfare of Mankind,
and the manifold Advantages of it to humane Society, have been so often, and so
well treated of upon such Occasions as this; that it is needless to add any
thing to what has been said by my Reverend Fathers who have gone before me, on
this Subject.

But after all that Man, that the wisest and best of Men, in the most exalted
Stations can do, there Manifestly needs a superior Wisdom, Power and Goodness,
to govern the World, and order the great Affairs of Kingdoms and Nations to the
best and wisest Purposes.

It will not therefore be improper or unseasonable to raise our Thoughts to the
Blessed and only Potentate, and to consider something of his universal Empire
and Dominion over all Nations, yea over all Creatures, and all Events; when the
Heads and Rulers of our Tribes are assembled, to give Thanks to GOD for his
great Goodness to this People, in the many distinguishing Privileges, which
through his good Providence, we have been, and are yet indulged with; and to seek
his Guidance and Blessing on our public Interests and Concerns; particularly,
upon the important Affairs that lay before our General Assembly; especially, at
such a Season as this, when our Nation and Land are involved in the Calamities
of War, when Kings of the Earth are setting themselves, and Rulers and Kingdoms
combining and taking counsel together against us, and not against us only, but,
as it is apprehended, against the whole Protestant Interest, and the Reformed
Churches in general.

It Is just matter of Support and Comfort that GOD governs the World, that the
Supreme Ordering and Disposal of all things is in the Hands of infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness: The LORD reigns, let the Earth rejoice: let the
Multitude of the isles be glad thereof. Psalm. 97.1. It adds Weight to the
delightful Thought, that the Administration of this universal Government, is
put into the Hands of CHRIST, our great Mediator, whom God has set at his own
Right hand in heavenly Places -- and has put all things under his Feet, and
gave Him to be Head over all things to the Church Ephesians. 1.20.22.

This Psalm, wherein is our Text, is undoubtedly a Prophecy of CHRIST, there
are several Passages of it expressly applied to Him in the New Testament, and
there are some Passages in it, that can be applied to none else in their
strictest and most proper Sense, and can belong to David, who (...) be here
considered as a Type of Christ in a figurative and metaphorical Sense only. --
The deep Abasement, and bitter and unparalled Sufferings of our Blessed
Savior, -- The very kind, and manner, and circumstances of his Death, his
glorious Exaltation, and the spreading and propagation of his Kingdom through the
World, are here foretold, and some remarkable Circumstances attending them, so
very minutely pointed out; and all was so exactly fulfilled in our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ. as to give very convincing Evidence that this is indeed
the CHRIST, the promised Savior of the World.

What the inspired Apostle says of Him Phil. 2 6, -- 10. is here foretold, and
may serve as a Comment or Illustration on great Part of this Psalm: viz. That
being in the form of GOD, He thought it not Robbery to be equal with GOD: But
made himself of no Reputation and took upon him the form of a Servant; and was
made in the likeness of Men: and being found in Fashion as a Man, be hum led
himself and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross Wherefore
GOD also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every
Name: that in the Name of JEsUS every Knee should bow, etc.

CHRIST was raised from the deepest Abasement and Sufferings, to the highest
Dignity, Honor and Glory: This gives Hope to his People when in a low
afflicted State, that Light will sooner or later arise to them out of Darkness,
since He who once suffered for them, in their Stead, as well as for their Good,
now lives and reigns above, to dispense the Blessings He died to purchase, and
always has shown, and will always show, a very tender Concern for his Church
and People whom He has redeemed with his own Blood. Let the Prospect look never
so dark and threatening, which way soever else we turn our Eves; yet here Light
arises, and we may find something to bear up our Hearts and Hopes, when we fix
them upon the all-disposing Providence of GOD, especially, as it is administered
by Christ our great Mediator, whom GOD has set as King upon his holy Hill of
Zion, Psalm. 2.6. (...) the (...) of our (...) refer directly to the Mediatorial
Kingdom of CHRIST, or in a more general way (...) the supreme and (...)
Providence of GOD, they are in either View full of Instruction and
Encouragement, and may, I hope, suggest some Thoughts; not altogether
unsuitable to our present Circumstances, and the present Occasion.

What I shall attempt in speaking to them shall be.

I. Briefly to Illustrate, and Confirm the important Truth contained in them.
And then,

II. To Improve, and Apply it to the present Occasion.

The Words of our Text very plainly and strongly assert* GOD's supreme and
universal Empire, and Dominion over all Nations, yea over all Creatures: For
the Kingdom is the LORD's and He is Governor among the Nations. And what we
have First to do is,

I. Briefly to Illustrate, and Confirm this Important Truth, viz That GOD is
the Sovereign of the World, the supreme, absolute, and universal LORD and Ruler
of the whole Creation

GOD has a Two fold Kingdom in the World -- The Kingdom of his Power, or
Providence: And the Kingdom of his Grace. The Time will not allow to consider
these (...), they are both included in his universal Empire, and Dominion. And,

That this universal Empire and Dominion belongs to GOD, is a Truth so evident,
both from Scripture, and Reason, and so generally acknowleg^d by allwise Men,
in all Parts, and Ages of the World, that there needs little to be said for the
Proof of it.

Omitting therefore the Arguments that offer themselves from the Nature and
Perfections of GOD. etc.

To Christians the plain, and express Testimony of sacred Scripture is Proof
abundantly sufficient; and (...) assures us, That the LORD has (...) in the
Heavens; (...) over all. Psalm. 13.19. (...) High GOD, whose Dominion is an
ever.(...) Dominion, and his Kingdom is from Generation to Generation, and
(...) the Earth are reputed as nothing: and He (...) according to his Will in
the (...) of Heaven, and among the (...) is of the Earth: and none can stay his
hand, or say unto Him, what do Thou? Dan 4 34.35. That He does great Things
and unsearchable marve^lous Things, etc. see Job 5.9. -- 13. and 9.4. -- 10. In
a Word, That He works all Things according to the Counsel of his own Will Ephesians
I.II. and Psalm. 135 6 Whatsoever. etc. And observation, and Experience give in
their Testimony to confirm this; How else is it, that the whole Frame of
Nature, without Reason or Design of its own, and notwithstanding the contrary,
opposite, and jarring (...) of the various Beings of which it consists, is
preserved in its Beauty, Harmony, and Order, for so many Ages: that the various
Sorts of Creatures are preserved, and provided for: that Man continues upon
Earth: and some tolerable Peace and Order is upheld in the World,
notwithstanding Men's Lusts and Corruptions: that the smiles of Heaven attend
the Practice of Virtue and serious Religion; and its frowns, the Practice of
Sin and Wickedness, tho not so constantly, as to anticipate, or give just
Occasion to question a future Judgment; yet so visibly as to give strong
Conviction, that verily there is a^ Reward for the Righteous: verily He is a
GOD that Judges in the Earth as Psalm. 58. 11.

Would the Time allow us to view the several Parts of the Creation, we might
easily observe, convincing and surprising Proofs of the important Truth, now
under our Consideration, in every Part of the Creation.

Here a large Field opens, -- But I must confi^e myself to the (...) Limits.

We (...) vast Number, and Variety of Creatures of which the World (...), kept
in that Religion, (...), Harmony, and Subserviency in the common God, (...)
were at first put into; and (...) their Natures, Powers, Influences for their
own, and the common Pres;ervation, and Benefit.

The (...) and Invariable Course, and has the same (...), Comforting, (...),
and (...) Influences, it is not (...), nor its Virtues exhausted, nor (...) it
over (...) from its proper Course. Psalm 19.5

The Earth returns its delightful Look, and its (...) Virtues and by its (...)
Growth (...) of Food for its (...). Psalm. 14.14.15.

The Sea returns the (...) generally speaking much (...) ^o^fi^ed within its
proper Limits by (...) ba^k of (...) us Waves, so that tho (...) they can not
prevail tho they (...) pass over it. J^r. ^ 22. (...) GOD gives (...) and then
they overflow all (...), and (...), with (...) Floods and (...).

The Air in which we Breath, and without which we can live but few Men (...)
while Globe, (...) every where, and pertaining in a (...) salutary (...)

The Fire warms and (...) us with the same (...) and (...) Heat.

And the whole (...) and Frame of Nature, or the Works of GOD, utter his Kind,
wise, and powerful (...) its appointed (...) return in a regular Course, (...),
Summer and Winter, (...), -- and (...) us with the (...) Works of GOD (...) as
they (...) the (...) to give the (...), to see, and (...) -- And so (...) (...)
that (...) not of the (...) preserve (...) Being, (...) and Activity every
(...) with all Things (...) their support every Day; GOD's Care (...) to all
the (...), not to all the (...) Individuals or every Tribe, the (...), and
(...) not excepted, Not a single Sparrow is forgotten before GOD. Luke 12 6.
And it is indeed surprising to follow the wise and kind Providence of GOD in
providing not only for the laborious Be, and provident Ant: Prove. 6.8. and the
Fowls at the Door, who are fed by Men; but the Fowls of the Air, whom no Man
takes Care of, or provides for, nor do they lay up for themselves, yet GOD
feeds them. Mat. 6 26. Behold the Fowls of the Air; which sow not. etc.

These Observations, tho too commonly passed over, without Noi^e, or Regard,
are yet worthy of it. Reason and Scripture call upon us, wisely to observe, and
to improve them, to the best and most excellent Purposes; viz. to encourage our
Trust in GOD, and quicken our Obedience to Him, as well as to excite in us
admiring and adoring Thoughts of Him; see, Psalm. 36.6.7, 8. and 147.7, 8, 9
Mat. 6.25, 26 and Luke 12 22, 23, One thing more I would here observe, that GOD
makes use of these inferior Creatures, in a way of Mercy, or Judgment to
Mankind: He makes the Air, either healthful or contagious -- shuts up Heaven,
so that there is no Rain; or unstops the Bottles of Heaven, and pours out
Showers of Blessing, so that, etc. Joel 2.24. -- or sends such sweeping Rains
as leave no Food. -- And when ever He pleases, draws up, and sends forth the
Locust, the Conker worm, the Catterpillar and the Pa^mer worm, his great Army,
which Man is unable to Resist. Joel 2 25. Health and Sickness, Plenty and
Scarcity, the Success or Defeat of Armies, and Navies; and so the support and
comfort of our Lives, and the fate of whole Kingdoms, and Nations may be
greatly affected by such Things as these: by favorable, or frowning Seasons.

But thus much of the Providence of GOD, over the inanimate, and irrational
Part of the Creation. It Is Time to proceed to the Consideration of GOD's
Empire, and Dominion over Reasonable Creatures, as Men, and Angels.

As to GOD's Government of Angels, it is but little that We know, and I shall
say less.

The Scriptures assure us that great Numbers of these excellent Creatures,
retaining their Integrity, continue holy and happy. These holy Angel, who excel
in Strength, always cheerfully do his Commandments; and not only stand, as his
heavenly Courtiers, about his Throne; but are employed, as Ministers of his
Providence, for his Peoples Good. Heb. 1.14. They incamp about GOD's faithful
People while they live; Psalm. 34.7. and stand ready to convoy their departing
Spirits with Safety, and Honor to the (...) Mansions prepared for them, when
they (...) Luke 16 22 And in how many other Ways they Minister unto them, I am
neither able exactly to explain, not may now stay to inquire.

But great Numbers of these, once glorious Spirits, revolving from their Duty
and Alegiance to GOD, are banished Heaven, and continue to (...) and Torment.
Jude ver 6 These (...) in their Rebellion against GOD, and (...) attempting,
and often permitted to do Hurt and Mischief to Men 1 Pet. 5.8. Yet they are a
(...) GOD's Restraint. Rev. 20.1. and cannot do the (...) Hurt, to the mannest
Creature with (...) his Permission Mat. 8 31.

But it is (...) we should be a (...) more particular, in (...) GOD's Government
of M^n; toward whom GOD has distinguished his Goodness; not only in making
him, at first, but (...) lower than the Angels -- giving (...) an excellent and
perfect Law, in all Things, holy, just, and good -- Taking Man into Covenant
with (...). -- And after Man had ruined himself, by his Revolt from GOD -- in
opening a Way for our Recovery from the Ruins of the Apostasy, by the
Incarnation, Death, and Sufferings of his own Son; and the Influences of his
Holy Spirit: -- in setting up Churches and Ordinances for the spiritual, and
civil Government, for the Temporal Good and Welfare of Men.

But further, as GOD had a special Regard to Man, in the Formation,
Preservation, and Government of the inferior Orders of Creatures; so his
Providence watches over Man, and all his Affairs, and Concerns, with a very
particular Care. How much is needful to one Man's Preservation, Support, and
Comfort: And what Wisdom, Power; and Goodness must be employed, in upholding a
whole World of Men; supplying them with Necessaries, Comforts and Delights of
various Kinds; and that not for a Day, or Year, or one Age only; but through the
several Ages and Generations of Men that have existed, and been provided for,
in these, almost Six Thousand Years, that the World has stood, and that
notwithstanding, Ten Thousand Bars and obstructions, that Men have been
continually laying in the way of their own Happiness, by their Sins, Follies,
and Disorders.

We might here more particularly, tho it must be but briefly, Consider.

1. GOD's Providential Government over Men, as combined in civil Societies.
Mankind is made for Society, and stands in need of mutual Help. -- Government
is necessary to the Being, and Well-Being of Society. -- There would probably
have been some Sort of Government among Mankind, as there seems to be among the
Holy Angels, had Man retained his Integrity. -- It Is more absolutely necessary
in this our fallen and depraved State, wherein Men's Lusts, and irregular,
sinful Inclinations are become so impetuous, and headstrong, and bear such a
dreadful Sway -- The sense of GOD and Religion is so much effaced, and worn out
of Men's Minds, and the State of future Rewards and Punishments (if not
disbelieved) is by many, so little thot of, or looked upon as so far off; that
it has but a feeble Influence upon the Minds of most. -- There needs some
nearer, and more sensible Restraint, to curb Men's irregular and vicious
Inclinations, and keep the World in any tolerable Peace and Order. -- What an
unsafe and uncomfortable Place would this World be, were Men left at their
full, unrestrained Liberty, to do every One, what seems Right in his own Eyes,
or rather what is most agreeable to his own irregular and sinful Inclinations?
Men's Wills and Strength would be their Rule; many would be ready to snatch
from others what they was able to get, and had a mind to have, and to crush or
destroy those that would hinder or oppose them No Man's Life, Possessions or
Comforts would be safe; But Men like the Fishes of the Sea, that have no Ruler
over them, would be preying upon, and devouring one another. Habb. 1. 14. GOD
has therefore, in great Wisdom, and Mercy to Mankind, appointed civil
Government, to be a Protection, and Praise to them that do well, and a Terror
to evil doers; that under its Shadow Men may find Rest and Safety, and lead
quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty.

The necessity of civil Government is evident from the very Nature and Reason
of Things; and that it is of divine Institution and Appointment appears as
evident from Scripture, which teaches us also the End and Designs of it. See,
Prove. 8 15, 16. By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, By me Princes
Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. Romans 13. beg. Let every
Soul be subject to the higher Powers. For there is no Power but of GOD: the
Powers that be are ordained of GOD, etc. See also, I Tim. 2.1, 2.1 Pet. 2.13,
14. Civil Rulers derive their Authority from GOD, the supreme Ruler and
Governor of the World; they rule under Him, and should rule for Him; and
improve their Power and Authority to those great and good Ends and Purposes for
which He has appointed it.

And his all-disposing Providence presides over Kingdoms, Nations, and
Governments. The most High GOD divides to the several Nations their
Inheritance. Deuteronomy. 32.8. And appoints the Bounds of their Habitation. Acts
17.26. And when any People have, not only their Lot cast in a good Land; but a
good form of Government set up among them, -- well qualified Persons raised up,
and vested with Authority, -- good Laws and Rules found out, and established;
the Agency and Influence of divine Providence is to be acknowleged, and the
divine Goodness is to be Adored therein.

It Is the great Ruler of the World, that sets up, and pulls down earthly Rulers
as He pleases. Psalm. 75.6, 7. For Promotion comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South: But GOD is the Judge; He puts down one,
and sets up another. Dan. 4.17, 32. The most High GOD rules in the Kingdom
of Men, and gives it to whomsoever He will. He either raises up good Rulers,
and sets them over a People in Mercy, as he raised up David his Servant, and
set him over His People Israel; To feed them according to the integrity of his
Heart; and guide them by the fulfillness of his Hands; Psalm. 78.72. And He
endured Solomon, his Son and Successor, with extraordinary Wisdom, and set him
upon the Throne, Because the LORD (...) his People; 1 Kings 10 9.2 Cor. 2.11.
Or, He sets bad and wicked Rulers over them as the just Punishment of their
Sins. We read of GOD's giving a King in his Anger, Hos. 13.11. And of the Kings
he had set over his People for their Sins, Neh. 9.37.

And then, GOD presi^es in the Counsels, Courts, and Assemblies of earthly
Rulers, to observe, direct, and overruled their Consultations and Actions.
Psalm. 82 1. GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, He judges among
the gods. -- He either inlightens and directs them to make, and strengthens
them to execute good, and wholesome Laws; and to guide the public Affairs with
Discretion, or scatters Darkness in their Path, so that they cannot find the Way
themselves, nor lead their People in the Way of their Safety and Welfare. It Is
He that inclines and enables Rulers, like good Nehemiah, to seek and promote
their Peoples Welfare. Neh. 2.10. And gives them Acceptance, as he did to
Mordecai, when they are doing so. Esth. 10.3.

And all the Affairs of Kingdoms, and Nations are ordered, and determined by
his Sovereign Providence. Job 12.23. He increases the Nations, and destroys
them; He enlarges the Nations, and straitneth them again. -- He increases
their Numbers, enlarges their Borders, Blesses them with Health, Peace,
Plenty, Prospers the Works of their Hands, and causes their Trade, Merchandise,
and Husbandry to flourish; or straitens and distresses them with contrary
Judgments. -- He either gives the great Blessing of Peace, or sends the sore
Judgment of War; -- either suffers Enemies to rise up and prevail against a
People, or makes their Enemies to be at Peace with them, -- or gives Victory
and Success, and subdues the People under them, -- Favors them with the free
Enjoyment of their civil and religious Liberties and Privileges, or causes them
to groan under Oppression, Tyranny, and Persecution, -- directs and succeeds
their Counsels, and Enterprises, or infatuates their Counsels, blasts their
Enterprises, and sends Cursing, Vexation, and Rebukes on all they set their
Hands unto. See this further Illustrated: Job 12.16, -- 25. and Psalm. 107.33.
But we proceed to say,

2. The Affairs of the Church are under the special Care, and Conduct of divine
Providence.

GOD early set up a Church in the World, and has hitherto preserved it, and
many ways expressed his special Care and Kindness toward it, from its earliest
Infancy in the days of Adam, down to this very Day; and has assured us, that
through his continued Care, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Mat.
16.18.

It Is worthy of Observation, that as we cannot worship GOD aright, any further
than we know how it is his Will and Pleasure to be Worshipped; so (besides what
may be learned from the dim beclouded Light of natural Reason) GOD has all
along favored his Church with the Light of divine Revelation; for many Ages of
the World, by Prophets immediately Inspired, or Messages from Heaven by holy
Angels; and these Revelations communicated by Oral Tradition. But it has
pleased GOD long since, to commit his Will to Writing in the holy Scripture,
that sure Word of Prophecy, which was given by divine Inspiration, and contains
all we need to know, or practice, in order to GOD's Acceptance, and our own
Salvation. 1 Timothy 3.6. To these sacred Writings, GOD has given the strongest
Attestation, and by his special Providence has preserved them to this Day. --
GOD's public Worship was early set up in the World, and Men began in solemn
Assemblies to Call upon the Name of the Lord. Genesis 4.26.

When the sense of Religion, and Virtue was so far lost in the World, and
Mankind was grown so very corrupt and degenerate that GOD determined to destroy
that wicked Generation of Men from the face of the Earth by a remarkable
Vengeance: He preserved Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness with his Family. And
when alter this, the World was running fast into Idolatry; and GOD in his holy
Providence, suffered other Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. GOD
called Abraham, taught him the true Knowledge, and Worship of GOD, and preserved
it among his Posterity: And tho even they were so much addicted to Idolatry and
Wickedness, that the true Religion seemed sometimes to be almost lost among
them, yet in the worst of Times, GOD preserved a Number of true, and faithful
Worshippers. 1 Kings 19.14.18. And tho for their Sins, GOD often raised up
Enemies against them, and chastized with a variety of other Judgments, and at
length sent them into a miserable Captivity; yet He again returned them to
their own Land, and that in so remarkable a Way that his Hand appeared visible
in it: When their Enemies had, at one Time and another, plotted, attempted, and
seemed almost to have affected their Ruin, He always, seasonably interposed for
their Help: See Book of Esth. And at length, when the fullness of Time was come,
GOD sent his own Son to atone for Men's Sins, by his Sufferings, and Death; to
give the World a perfect Pattern and Example of Holiness; and to set up that
pure and spiritual Dispensation, which is to continue to the end of the World;
and so soon did He spread this holy Religion abroad, that the Apostle Paul
applies what the Psalmist spoke of the Sun in the Heavens, to the disfusive
Light of the Gospel, even at that Day. Romans 10.18. And having set up the
Christian Church, He has still upheld it, against all the Power and Policy of
Hell and Earth -- carried it through a Sea of Blood, in Ten Heathenish, and a
greater Number of Popish Persecutions, -- has reformed a considerable Part of
it from the gross Errors, Superstitions, and Idolatries of Popery, -- and has
always had a Number of faithful Witnesses, to profess, and bear Testimony to
the Truth, against the Corruptions of Antichrist, -- has often revived Religion
when decayed and languishing, and always had a Church in the World, wherein
Christ has Reigned even in the midst of Enemies, -- who tho they have often
afflicted, yet have never been able to destroy it. See Psalm. 129. and 124.

But I may not enlarge on this delightful Theme of GOD's Care over his Church:

But proceed to say, that as GOD's Providence presides over Mankind in General,
and governs the larger Bodies, and Societies of Men. So,

3. The same good Providence presides over particular Persons, and orders all
their Affairs and Concerns. Psalm. 33 13, 14, 15. The LORD looks from Heaven:
He beholds all the Sons of Men: From the Place of his Habitation he looks
upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth. He (...) their Hearts alike: He
considers all their Works. All Mankind, both Good and Bad, and all their
Concerns and Circumstances personal and relative, are alike under his View, and
subject to his providential Government and Disposal. Every particular Person,
yea every Creature, and all their Actions, and all Events that be^al them are
over ruled by GOD.

There is nothing so great, as to be above his Power; For the LORD is high
above all gods: and wherein they deal (...), He is above them, Exodus 18 11.
Those that walk in Pride, He is able to (...). Dan. 4.37. Nor is there any
Thing (...) to be below his Notice and (...) -- He (...) the Grass of the
Field. Mat. 6 30. and (...) of the Air, ver 26. Not a Sparrow, nor an Hair of
our Head falls to the Ground without his Notice and Direction. Mat. 10.29. --
The most (...) Creatures are under his Control. Psalm. 65.7. He (...) the Noise
of the Seas, the Noise of their Waves, and the Tumult of the People, and 89 9.
And those things that seem most Accidental, are under his Direction. Prove.
16.33. The Lot is cast into the Lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the
LORD. And by small, and seemingly accidental Things; great Events are often
brought to pass, and a Turn given to the most important Affairs, quite
different from Men's Projections, Prospects, and Expectations. Eccl. 9 11. The
Race is not to the Swi^t, nor the Battle to the strong, etc. And even Men's
Free and Voluntary Actions are subject to GOD's Influence, Government and
Control. Prove. 21.1. The Kings Heart is in the Hand of the LORD; as the Rivers
of Water He turns it whithersoever He will. Prove. 16.9. A Man's Heart
devises his Way; but the LORD directs his Steps. So that Prove. 19.21. either
by a secret Touch upon Men's Hearts, as 1 Samuel 10.26. or by some external
Motives or Inducements, GOD can (and no doubt) often does, give a Turn to Men's
Thoughts, Purposes, and Actions quite different from their standing Temper,
Purposes, and Inclinations, so that, Jer. 10.23. Prove. 20 24. Instances of this
may be seen in Laban, Genesis 31. Esau, Genesis 33. and Saul 1 Samuel 24. etc. To good
and holy Actions GOD excites and influences by his special Grace. Phil. 2.13.
Job 15.5. And Men's Evil and Wicked Actions, He not only, always sorbids, and
often restrains and prevents; but is pleased also, for wise and holy Ends and
Reasons, often to permit; and when He does so, to overruled to Good in the
Event and Effect; See Acts. 2.23. and 4.28. In all these Things GOD acts, in a
Manner becoming Himself, how far soever it is above our Thoughts and
Conceptions: So as, neither to be the Author of Sin, nor an unactive,
unconcerned Spectator: But the holy, wise, powerful Orderer, and Disposer of
all Things. In brief, GOD is infinitely Holy, and hates Sin; infinitely
Powerful, and could prevent Sin; and therefore would never permit Sin, were He
not also, infinitely Wise, to bring Good out of Evil; as He did, in the Case of
Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 50.20. And above all, in the Instance of the Betrayers,
and Crucifiers of our Blessed Savior, out of which He has brought the highest
Glory to GOD, and Good to Men.

Thus we have seen this great Truth, very imperfectly Illustrated, and
Confirmed. Let us fix it in our Minds, and may it duly influence our Lives. --
And whatever Mysteries there may be in the Book of Providence. Romans 11.33. O
the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! Yet all must
certainly be Well and Wisely done, that infinite Wisdom and Goodness does. When
Clouds and Darkness are round about him: Righteousness and Judgment are the
Habitation of his Throne. Psalm. 97.2. The LORD, is certainly Righteous in all
his Ways, and Holy in all his Works, Psalm. 145 17 Yea, All the Paths of the
Lord are Mercy and Truth. unto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies,
Psalm. 25.10. And He makes every Thing Beautiful in his Time, Eccl. 3.11. Our
Thoughts and Views are very narrow and contracted: We see but little of GOD's
Work, and know but little of his Designs: Could we see the whole Plan and Scope
in one View, and how every Part conspires to further the Great Design; we
should no doubt, see great Reason to unite our Hearts and Voices in that Song,
Rev. 15.3, 4. Great and Mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty; just and
true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not, etc.

What has been said might afford a large and profitable application in many
Useful and Instructive Instances. As

Hence, How Glorious and Adorable is the LORD JEHOVAH, the Supreme LORD. and
Sovereign of the World; the Great KING of Heaven and Earth. -- How Faulty are
they, who overlook the Providence of GOD, and ascribe all the Good they enjoy
to themselves, as Deuteronomy. 8.17. and all Evils to Chance, as 1 Samuel 6, 9. or to
Instruments and second Causes only. -- How Thankful should we be to GOD, from
whom comes every Good and Perfect Gift. Jam. 1.17. -- And how resigned,
patient, submissive under all Affections he is pleased to lay upon us. -- How
well contented with that Concition his Wisdom and Goodness order out to us. --
How Reasonable are the Duties of Prayer to GOD, Trust in GOD, and Care to
please Him? -- How much does it Concern us all to have GOD, our Friend, and to
commit Ourselves, and all our Concerns to Him? -- and what Support must this
afford the Godly under the darkest Prospects, and heaviest Affections? -- and
what Encouragement, cheerfully to follow his Guidance, and serve his Providence
in the Use of Means, and in the Stations He assigns us, having our Hearts
always possessed with a Holy Fear and Reverence of Him, Trust in Him, and
Devotedness to Him? But this Public Occasion may rather lead us, By Way of

IMPROVEMENT, to Consider,

I. To whom we are Indebted for the many distinguishing Favors, our Nation and
Land have been, and are yet Indulged with.

Great Britain is highly Favored, not only in the Commodiousness of its
Situation, the Fruitfulness of its Soil, and the Happy Constitution of its
Civil Government: -- But it was early enlightened with the Gospel, and perhaps,
longer preserved from some of the gross Corruptions of Popery, than many other
Nations. -- The Light of the Reformation began early to dawn there, in the
Preaching and Writings of Whicklif, and his Followers and shone more and more,
'till the Popish Yoke was pretty early cast off: And tho there was a short
Interruption, in the dark and bloody Days of Q. Mary, and have been some bold
and threatening Attempts since, to bring back Popery; yet the reformed Religion
(tho not carried to that Perfection that is to be desired, through divine Favor,
is still continued, together with civil and religious Liberty, -- and many, and
very remarkable have been the Interpositions of divine Providence, to preserve
these invaluable Blessings. As, in Defeating the formidable intended Spanish
Invasion: In Discovering the hellish Powder Plot; And in bringing, first King
WILLIAM, and then King GEORGE I. to the British Throne, to defend our holy
Religion, and civil Liberties, against the infatuated Counsels, and bold
Attempts, of those, who seemed fond and zealous to Exchange these invaluable
Blessings, for the dreadful Curse of Popery, and arbitrary Power, -- and in
blasting the secret Plots and Conspiracies that have been formed, and open
Rebellions that have been raised at Home; and Invasions intended, or attempted
from Abroad; and continuing the Protestant Religion, and the Protestant
Succession to this Day, in despite of our Enemies, at home, and abroad, who
have all-along been plotting and contriving, and often attempting; but never
have been sufferred to effect our Ruin, by all their restless Malice, and
notwithstanding our great Sins and Provocations.

And we of this Land, and particularly of this Colony, not only share in these
Blessings, in common with our Fellow Subjects; but have some distinguishing
Privileges granted to us by Royal Charter, in Consideration of the great Cost
and Labor expended, and Service done to the Crown and Nation, in Su^duing and
Setting this Land; and thereby enlarging the British Trade and Dominions.

And how many distinguishing Favors of Providence have we to be Thankful to
GOD for? (too many to be now Enumerated) in directing our Fathers to this Good
Land, -- carrying them through the almost inconceivable Hardships and Difficulties
of their Infant State and first Beginnings, in a remote inhospitable
Wilderness, far Distant from their Christian Friends, as well as from needed
Supports and Supplies, -- and in the midst of numerous, barbarous, savage
Heathen, who soon became their Enemies, -- in driving out the Heathen, and
subduing the Wilderness before them, -- defending them against their Enemies,
-- increasing their Numbers -- enlarging their Borders -- blessing and
prospering their Labors -- establishing a good Civil Government among them --
raising up wise and good Rulers to lead them -- setting up, and upholding Pure
Evangelical Churches, freer from humane Inventions than most in the World, and
by his Blessing upon our Colleges and Means of Education, raising up a
Succession of Able Faithful Pastors to Feed them with Knowledge and
Understanding, and giving so much of his gracious Presence with them, and in
his Churches especially in the Days of our Fathers* and often reviving Religion
when under Decays and Languishments; as well as in many signal Appearances of
his Providence, both in our Days, and in the Days of our Fathers; among which
the Series of Providence in the Reduction of Cape Br^ton, and the Defeating
and Destroying the (...) Fleet ought never to be forgotten. These are the
LORD's Doings, and they should be Mavelous in our Eyes. We may say, as Psalm.
44. ^eg.

II. Hence it becomes us to consider, what Returns we have made to God for
these Great and Distinguishing Favors. Our Savior has told us, Luk 12 48.
That unto whomsoever Much is given, of him shall be Much required. And common
Reason tells us that such Expectations are Just, and agreeable to the Sense of
Mankind, as the following Words intimate: For unto whom Men have committed
Much, of him they will ask the More. What then does GOD justly expect from us?
for whom He has done so much? You may see, 1 Samuel 12.24. Only fear the LORD,
and serve Him in Truth, and with a perfect Heart: for consider how great Things
He has done for you. What People upon Earth have been under greater Advantages
and Obligations to Fear GOD and Serve Him; to be a Virtuous, Religious, and
Holy People, than we have been? But does our Character and Carriage answer our
Obligations?

We make a Profession, and have the Appearance of Religion among us; and there
are, I Trust, no small Number of truly Godly and Religious People in the Land;
and I suppose, the People of this Land, and of this Colony, are not in general,
sunk into so great a Depth of Profaneness, Vice, and Wickedness, as some other
Parts of the World. But are we not far degenerated from the Virtue and Piety of
our Ancestors? Where is that strict, serious Virtue and Religion that Once
prevailed? That Industry and Diligence, that Sobriety and Temperance, that
Honesty and Peaceableness, that Humility and Heavenlymindedness, that ardent
Affection to the House, the Ways, the Ordinances, the Ministers of GOD, that
Subjection and Deference to Magistrates and Superiors, that Regularity and Good
Order in Families and larger Societies, that Love to GOD and Love to Man, that
lively thorough Practice of Religion and Virtue, and Fortitude and Firmness of
Mind in adhering to it? Are they not much abated?

And as there is a sad Decay and Decline in these excellent Things; so on the
other Hand, are not those Sins and Vices grown much more common and frequent,
that were seldom known among the first Settlers of this Land? It was a very
honorable Testimony that was given by One that had lived Seven Years in this
Country: That he never saw a Beggar, nor a Man overcome with strong Drink, nor
did he ever hear a profane Oath among them But are not these and many other
Vices now become too, too common? Are not Pride, Idleness, Intemperance,
Uncleanness, Injustice, Strife and Contention, Falsehood and Evil Speaking,
Disrespect to Parents and Civil Rulers, the Profanation of GOD's Name and Day,
and neglect and Contempt of his Public Worship Ministry and Ordinances, yea a
vile Contempt of CHRIST, his Laws and Grace, and all the Blessings of the
Gospel become common, growing and prevailing Sins? May not GOD complain of us,
that we have left our first Love? that Iniquity abounds, and tha Love of many
waxes Cold: that as our Numbers, and Worldly Comforts and Accommodations have
Increased, so have our Sins, -- that we are grown more corrupt in our
Principles: more loose and irreligious, profane and vicious in our Practice;
and that the Things that remain are Languishing and ready to Die? Have we not
lost much of the Form, and more of the Power of Godliness? Is not a thorough,
humble, steady, exemplary Christian become somewhat (...) among Professors? Is
there not a great Languor prevailing among Christians in general, or where
there appears a Fervor and Warmth, does it not too often run out into barren
wrangling Controversy, or irregular Heats and Transports of misguided Zeal, to
the hurt and wounding of Religion: while many make little Pretensions to
Religion, and give a loose to their Victous Inclinations. Have we not Cause to
be Humbled and Mourn? and has not GOD Cause to Complain of ^s for these Things,
as Deuteronomy. 32.6. Days that require the LORD: etc. Isa. 1.2, 3.

III. May we not then here see the Reason of the increasing Frowns and Rebukes
we are and have been under? GOD's Rule of Dealing with People and Nations we
have Jer. 18.9.10. And have not his Dealings with us been agreeable to it?

Our Fathers no Doubt, had their Failings and Imperfections; and they had
likewise their Troubles and Trials: But as we have been gradually declining
from GOD, have not his Frowns, and our Troubles been increasing in a variety of
Judgments? as Wars, Sickness, Droughts, and Difficulties in our Civil and
Religious Affairs. Indeed GOD has in Judgment remembered Mercy, and seemed loath
to proceed to Extremity; as Psalm. 78.38. But He bring full of Compassion,
forgave their Iniquity, and Destroyed them not; yea, many a Time turned He away
his Anger, and did not stir up all his Wrath. But have we not continued, to a
sad Degree impenitent and unreformed, under Mercies and Judgments; yea, been
waxing worse and worse under both?

And as our Sins, so his righteous Frowns seem to be increasing upon us: It Is
now a dark Day. The aspects of Providence appear very frowning and threatening:
We are deeply involved in the Troubles and Calamities of War: And tho our
Rulers and People have shown a forward Spirit to engage and exert themselves,
to their Power; yea, may I not say, beyond their Power, for our necessary
Defense, and for repelling the injurious Force and Violence of our Enemies: Yet
it has not pleased GOD to smile, but frown upon most of our Enterprises. Our
Enemies have been sufferred to gain great Advantages against us, which I need
not, and delight not to relate; while our Expeditions against them (in which
great Numbers of Lives have been lost, and considerable Part of our moderate
Treasure or Substance has been spent) have Once and Again proved unsuccessful:
And when our Numbers are lessened, and considerable of our small Treasure
spent, the Burden of War lies still heavy upon a Young and Infant Country,
whose Sinews are but feeble to sustain it; our Experience in Campaigns but
small; and our Minds, I fear, not suitably affected, -- more disposed to
complain of Men, than to humble ourselves before GOD, and to Trust in an Arm of
Flesh, than to seek and engage his Almighty Help. These are dark Symptoms, and
sore Frowns upon us, and in what they are to Issue GOD only knows.

IV. It therefore becomes and concerns us to see, and suitably to take Notice
of the Hand and Providence of GOD, in all the Troubles and Calamities we are
under. It Is but too common, and too natural to us to fix our Eyes so much upon
Means and Instruments, and second Causes, as to forget and overlook the great
First Cause, and Supreme Orderer of all Things, and hence to be either
Unaffected, or unsuitably Affected. But does not GOD govern the World? Is there
any Evil in the City, and the LORD has not done it, Amos 3.6. Who gave Jacob
to a Spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did not the LORD, He against whom we
have Sinned? for they would not walk in his Ways, neither were they obedient to
his Law, Isa. 42.24. And should not his Hand be taken Notice of? -- We have
Cause more than enough to complain of the Injuriousness of our Enemies, -- and
we have great Reason to lament the Unsuccessfulness of our Friends, -- But we
have, at the same Time, no less Reason to humble ourselves under the righteous
Hand of GOD in both: And 'till we get into this Way, to look at the Hand of
GOD, and look into ourselves, and to humble ourselves, for our Sins, and under
his Frowns, and pray, and seek his Face, and turn from our evil Ways, we have
little Reason to expect the Removal of our Troubles. See Isa. 9. ver. 11, 12,
13.

Wherefore,

V. This shows us, and should excite us all to take the true and only Way of
our Safety, Welfare, and Happiness. Men are wont to be very sensible of what
Importance it is to have the Favor of Earthly Rulers; is infinitely more
concerns us to obtain Favor in the Eyes of the Supreme Ruler of Heaven and
(...). Prove. 29.26. Many (...) Rulers Favor, but every Man's (...) from the
LORD. Our (...) up in his Favor; and it (...) us all, Rulers, Ministers, a
People to unite in seeking this, and getting into the Way to enjoy it. Let us
all do to.

And Here, I shall take the unexpected Occasion, with all due Deference, to
Address myself

I. To our Honored Rulers; particularly, To the Honorable the GOVERNOR in
Chief, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, the ASSISTANTS, and the REPRESENTATIVES of the
Freeman of this Colony. And say, That as GOD, the Supreme Ruler of the World
has put some Image of his Authority upon you in the Offices you sustain; so He
justly expects and requires that You improve the Authority and Influence He has
given You for Him; in promoting his Honor, and his Peoples Good.

It becomes us to accept always, with all Thankfulness, the many worthy Deeds
that have been done by our Honored Rulers, in making Good and Wholesome Laws,
and in the Provision made for the just Execution of them; In the pious
Proclamations issued forth from Time to Time, for Days of public Fasting, and
Thanksgiving, exhorting us to return to GOD, and to give Him the Glory of his
Mercies: In their Care for our Safety and Protection; and frequent
Consultations for our Good and Welfare: But does there need yet more to be done
by all Ranks and Orders of Men among us. to make us a virtuous, religious, and
happy People? Our Regeneracies, and with them GOD's Frowns upon ^s have been
increasing, notwithstanding all that GOD and Man have (...) to Reform us. This
calls loudly upon all to do their utmost, to put a Stop to the Course of GOD's
Anger, and to recover his Favor -- And with You -- Our Honored Fathers, lead
the Way, and set us an Example? The Godly Rulers in Israel, much furthered the
Peoples Reformation and Happiness, -- GOD has put Honor upon You, and Power
and Authority into your Hands, and there with superior Advantages and
Obligations to promote Religion and Virtue, and thereby our best Good; and you
cannot better improve them, than to these Ends. -- You will therefore hold
yourselves obliged, not only equally with others, but above most others, to
Honor GOD by a hearty Submission to his Grace and Government, and to Recommend
Religion by your pious Examples, and not only Discountenance Vice, and
Recommend Religion and Virtue by your Practice; but by Executing the good and
wholesome Laws against Vice, Profaneness and Immorality; and if you find it
needful, by adding further Laws, or Inforcements to those in Being for the
Suppression of Vice, and the Support, Countenance, and Encouragement of
Religion and Virtue, and the Securing the Honor of GOD's Laws and Government.

You will give all due Countenance, Support and Encouragement, to a learned,
able, faithful Ministry, who labor under some Discouragements at this Day: You
will therefore think it incumbent on you to encourage their Hearts, and
strengthen their Hands in the LORD's Work. And to give all proper and needful
Support and Encouragement to the College, which has been so great an Honor and
Blessing to the Land, and has not only Supplied our Churches with a learned
Ministry; but furnished many accomplished Persons for superior Usefulness in
civil Life.

GOD has made it a Part, and not the least important Part of the honorable
Work and Office of civil Rulers to be Nursing Fathers to his Church. Isai. 49
23 And Religion is not a vain Thing, for it is our Life Deuteronomy. 32.47 You will
not therefore think it, and what tends to uphold and promote it, unworthy of
your highest Regard both as Men, and as Rulers.

And next, the Dangers and Burdens of the War, will engage your Attention, to
provide for our common Safety by Methods the most effectual, and at the same
Time, the most easy to the People your best Wisdom can contrive. War
unavoidably brings the Burden of heavy Taxes as well as many other Calamities
with it. You will make these Burdens as light as our common Safety will allow

The most equal and impartial Administration of Justice, in Methods as easy,
and as little expensive as may be. -- The securing our Rights and Privileges
Civil and Religious. -- The encouragement of Industry -- and promoting all our
Interests, you will always think worthy to employ your Superior Wisdom and
Abilities, and most Engaged Attention, that you may approved yourselves
Ministers of GOD to us for Good. By what Methods these Things are to be best
Effected, and what are the particular Tempers and Distempers of this People,
You who live in all Parts of the Colony, and are acquainted with the Mysteries
of State and Government, are much better able to Judge that I. May GOD give you
that tender Concern for the Good of your People, and that great Degree of
Wisdom and Direction, that the uncommon Difficulties of this Day call for. --
And may you have the great Honor to be instrumental in Recovering us from our
Declensions, -- To Conduct our public Affairs with all that Wisdom, Skill, and
Integrity that is needful, while our Difficulties continue, -- and under the
Conduct of GOD's all-wise and all-disposing Providence, to lead us happily out
of them. Then will you not Repent of the many anxious Cares you employ for us,
and the Weight and Difficulties of our public Affairs cost you. May GOD direct,
(...), and support you under them -- and (...) your Administration to these
Ends.

2. The common Usage leads, and therefore my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in
the Ministry will allow one who very sensibly (...) Direction and Instruction
from those, much more than he is able to give it to them. Briefly to suggest;
That as (...) has pleased GOD to put us into the Ministry, so He has made it
our Duty, and it will be our Honor, Comfort and Happiness, to be
Fellow-workers to the Kingdom of GOD, Col. 4.11. It Is our Business to pull down
the Kingdom of Satan, and to build up the spiritual Kingdom of GOD, of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, who is True GOD; to give Him the Throne in our Hearts, and while
diligently working out our own Salvation, to endeavor to our utmost to promote
the Salvation of others, by persuading them to renounce those other lords that
have had Dominion over them, and compelling them to come in and submit to
CHRIST our SAVIOR and LORD, and take his Yoke upon their Necks, and by an
unseigned Subjection to his Grace and Government -- a diligent Attendance upon
his Ordinances -- a careful Obedience to his Laws, and Imitation of his
Example, to approve themselves his faithful loyal Subjects. This will make them
better Subjects to our civil Rulers, more useful Members of Society, and
greater Blessings in every Relation, and it will be the best Method that can be
taken, to open the Way to their and our Enjoyment of Peace, Prosperity,
Protection and all other needful Blessings here, and eternal Blessedness
hereafter.

This benevolent Design is worthy to employ all our Labors, Studies, Prayers,
no Pains is too much, if this may, by the Blessing of GOD, be effected.

The growing Degeneracy of the Times we live in, increases the Difficulty and
Burden of our Work, and that, together with the Frowns of GOD we are under,
calls loudly upon us to spare no Pains to awaken Men to a sense of their Sins,
their Danger, and their Duty, and to reclaim them from (...) Errors of their
Ways, to the Wisdom of the Just.

Our Work is Great, as well as Good: We need each others Help and Assistance in
it, as well as all of us continual Help and Assistance from GOD; it therefore
becomes us to be Fellow Workers herein, and by our mutual Affection, Prayers,
Counsels and Assistance to encourage each others Hearts, and strengthen each
others Hands, and further each others Usefulness and Comfort as much as we are
able; striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, and to promote the
Practice of that pure and holy Religion CHRIST has taught us in his Word, and
recommended by his Practice. -- And the Distresses of the Day call upon us who
are Ministers of the LORD to be much in our Prayers and Cries to GOD, that He
would spare and bless his People, as Joel 2.17.

3. To this whole Assembly, or People in General. Let every one renounce the
Tyranny of Sin and Satan, and subject themselves to the righteous and gracious
Government of GOD in CHRIST. -- His Throne is in the Heavens, and his Kingdom
rules over the whole World. -- But He has set up his Spiritual Kingdom among
us, and it will be our Wisdom, and Safety, and Happiness to submit to it, and
become the willing loyal Subjects of it, -- 'till we do so, we are exposed not
only to GOD's heavy Judgments in the World, but to his eternal Wrath in the
World to come -- Our revolt from GOD is the source of all our Miseries, -- our
return to Him is necessary to our Welfare and Happiness here, as well as
hereafter, see Isa. 48 18. Ezekiel. 18.30.

And in Duty and Obedience to GOD, let us all yield due Subjection, Respect and
Obedience to Those He has set over us, -- Praying for them, 1 Tit. 2.1, 2.
Yielding Obedience to them, Tit. 3 1. Cheerfully paying the Tribute and Taxes
due to the public Support, Romans 7.13. and not increasing their Burdens, which
are themselves heavy, by groundless Jealousies, Complaints, or Censures of
their Administrations, Designs, or Actions when not well understood, or perhaps
much Mistaken. This the Difficulties of our Affairs may prove a Temptation to;
we should therefore guard the more carefully against it. Remember that
Perfection is not to be expected in Man. That there may Difficulties arise
which humane Wisdom can neither foresee and obviate, nor humane Power prevent.
It becomes us rather to eye the Hand of GOD in the Difficulties we are under,
to humble ourselves before Him, to see and realize our Dependence on Him, and
to seek to Him, and wait on Him for Help and Deliverance, and to strengthen the
Hands of our Rulers when seeking our Good.

These Things, the Frowns of GOD we are under -- the threating Danger we are in
-- the dark Cloud that gathers over us (and not over us only, but over the
whole Reformed Interest) loudly call us to.

There is yet Hope in GOD, He is able to Help: And if we return to, and seek,
and trust in Him, there is Hope he will.

It Is a great Work that is now in the Hands of our Rulers, our Officers, and
Soldiers, the Defense of our Lives, our Liberties and Properties, our Holy
Religion. -- All that is dear to us in this World seems evidently to be struck
at, and threatened, by the Designs and Attempts of our ancient, active,
inveterate, and alas! now too successful Enemies, who have long been
projecting to bring North America under their Power, and against whom we are
never safe, when it is in their Power to Hurt and Destroy us, our entire
Dependence is on GOD for Success against them. -- But what have we done more
than formerly, to engage his Presence, Help and Blessing? Let us see our
Danger, our Duty and our Dependence upon GOD, let us humble ourselves before
Him, for our Sins, and under his Frowns, carefully and speedily reform whatever
is amiss, every One, First in Himself or in his Family; and every One in his
Place and Station, endeavor to further a general Reformation, and all unite in
our Prayers and Cries to GOD for his Help and Blessing: This has been tried,
and not found in vain. ver. 4, 5. Context, Our Fathers trusted in Thee: They
trusted, and Thou (...) deliver them. They cried unto Thee and were delivered:
They trusted in Thee, and were not confounded.

Then may GOD's supreme and universal Empire and Dominion afford Support and
Comfort and Encouragement to us, under the darkest Prospects that are or can be
before us.

There is Help in GOD, and when his People are prepared, and in his appointed
Way waiting for it, he is ready to bestow it.

It Is an encouraging Consideration that our Enemies are also his -- either
Heathen Idolaters, or Idolatrous Christians, in whose Skirts is found the Blood
of GOD's Saints and Servants.

And is it not a further Token for Good, that GOD has given us such Favor in
the Eyes of our Royal Father the KING, and of the Nation, and given them such a
Sense of our Danger, and Concern for our Safety and Welfare, as to send, not
only considerable Supplies of Men and Money, and Military Stores, as well as
Naval Force; but One of the NOBLES of the Land, of tried and approved Skill and
Valor, as well as of unshaken Loyalty, and firm Attachment to the British
Liberties civil and religious, to conduct our Military Affairs. May GOD make
him a happy Instrument of our Protection and Safety.

Let us be Thankful to GOD for these Smiles of his Providence. But let us not
trust in an Arm of Flesh, but in the LORD of Hosts, and may He be our
Protection and Defense, and give us Cause to Sing, as Psalm. 3.8. Salvation
belongs to the LORD: His Blessing is upon his People. May his spiritual
Kingdom spread over the whole Earth, be continued, advanced, and flourish in
this Land, and may have here, A Seed to serve Him, which shall be counted to
Him for a Generation, who shall come, and shall declare his Righteousness unto
a People that shall be Born, That He has done This. AMEN.

FINIS.

