SERMONS Upon the following Subjects, viz.

The Divinity of JESUS CHRIST.

The Millenium.

The Wisdom of God, in the Permission of Sin.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Bethlem.

I bring you good Tidings of great Joy. LUKE ii. 10. Light is sown for the
Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart. PSALM xcvii. 11. -- There was
a thick Darkness in all the Land of Egypt -- But all the Children of Israel had
Light in their Dwellings. EXODUS X. 22, 23. BOSTON Printed and Sold by EDES and
GILL; and by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street, M, DCC, LVIII.

THE PREFACE.
(...) God? -- Answer. The Decrees of God are his eternal Purpose, according to
the Counsel of his own Will, (...) own Glory, he (...) foreordained whatsoever
comes to pass. -- Often has it been said, If God foreordained whatsoever
comes to pass, then he foreordained Sin. As though it were evidently the
greatest Absurdity in Nature, to suppose, that God really thought it best in
the whole, that Sin ever should exist in the World he had made. And I suppose,
it is generally taken for granted, that it had been much better, if Sin and
Misery had been for ever unknown; and looked upon one of the most, accountable
Things, that God ever suffered Affairs in his World to take such a Course as
they have. I do not imagine, Mankind would ever have thought of disputing God's
Right to lay out a universal Plan, had the Plan appeared to them wise and good.
We do not dispute our Superiors Right, in Time of War, to lay out a Plan of
Operation for an ensuing Campaign, although it is expected it will cost many a
precious Life, when on the Whole we think the Plan is wise and good. But while
Mankind take for granted, that the present universal Plan is unwise and bad,
all Things going wrong, they can by no Means believe, that from eternal Ages it
was contrived by infinite Wisdom and Goodness; but are under a Necessity to
suppose, that Things have taken a different Course from what God intended, and
turned out contrary to his original Design and Expectation; and that he is
really disappointed and grieved. -- And doubtless, if God is disappointed and
grieved, all the Inhabitants of Heaven are very sorry too: So that the Grief
and Sorrow is universal in the World above. And if it is universal there, it
may well be universal here. And this Disappointment, Grief and Sorrow is likely
to be eternal, as the Wicked, according to Scripture, must be eternally
miserable. And thus, it seems, Hell will be full of the Groans of the Damned,
for ever lost and undone; and Heaven full of Disappointment and Grief, God and
all holy Beings heartily sorry that Things have come to such an Issue. And
where will be the Triumph and Joy? If God is disappointed and grieved, and
Angels and Saints in Heaven are grieved, and poor Sinners for ever lost, there
seems to be nothing but Grief in the whole System; not one Being perfectly
suited, unless that very worst of all Beings, who is called the Old Serpent,
the Devil: who yet is the very one, that, above all, was finally to (...)
disappointed, according to the ancient ORACLE, The Seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpent's Head.

A chief Design of the following Sermons is to rectify these mistaken Notions,
and scatter these gloomy Apprehensions. Not by proposing mere Conjectures, but
by turning the Reader to a certain Light, which shines in this dark and
benighted World, the only sure Guide we poor Mortals have, and to which we do
well to give Heed (2 Pet. i. 19.) I mean, the Holy Scriptures; but for which, I
think, we might have groped in total Darkness, as to this Particular, unable
ever to have extricated ourselves.

IT was necessary, that the true Character of Jesus Christ should be
determined, in order to open the Wisdom of God's universal Plan to View: This
therefore is attempted in the first Sermon. And it was equally necessary, that
the final Success of Christ's Undertakings should be brought into View, to
rectify some Mistakes or to Matters of Fact: and this is attempted in the next.
And the Reader may see the Method I have taken to give Light to the main
Subject, by a careful Perusal of the following Sermons, on the Wisdom of God in
the Permission of Sin.

AND these Sermons are the rather published at this Season, when the State of
the World and of the Church appears so exceeding gloomy and dark, and still
darker Times are by many expected, as they are calculated to give Consolation
to such as fear the Lord, and are disposed to hearken to his holy Word. A firm
Belief of the supreme Godhead of our Savior, who now sits at the Head of the
Universe, conducting all Things, and whose Love to his Church is as fervent as
when he hung on the Cross; -- and a realizing Sense of the glorious Days
approaching, when the Knowledge of the Lord shall fill the Earth, as the Waters
do the Sea, -- together with an Insight into the Nature and Wisdom of God's
universal Government, may afford abundant Support, let the present Storm rise
ever so high, and the Times grow ever so dark.

Joseph Bellamy.
Bethlem, 21. March 1758.
The Divinity of Christ.
PHILIPPIANS II. 6, 7. -- WHO being in the Form of God, thought is our Robbery
to be equal with God: but (...) self of no Reputation, and took upon (...).
Form of a Servant, and was (...) Likeness of Men.


HOWEVER clearly, any (...) the chief Principles of (...) may be found (...) by
the (...) Light of Nature. yet all are agreed, that Matters of (...) are to be
learned only from the holy Scriptures; and our Sentiments, as to such Points,
are to be formed entirely from these sacred Writings. Nor is it doubted, but
that we may safely believe, what we find there plainly revealed, although the
Things are not fully understood. There are many Things we know to be true, from
Experience and Reason, in the natural and moral World, the Manner of which, we
can by no means understand. The (...) knows, his Grass and Corn grow, the
Philosopher knows his Soul and Body are united, the Divine knows that God has
existed from Eternity; but these Things, and a Thousand more, as to the Manner
of them, are beyond their Comprehension: yet their Certainty is not for this
Reason as all called in Question. So, if some Things, plainly revealed in the
Bible, are, as to the Manner of them, beyond our Reach, it can be no Objection
against their Truth. -- If we cannot conceive, for Instance, what there is in
the divine Essence, which may lay a just Foundation, for the one true God (and
we know there is but one) to speak and act as though he were three distinct
Persons; yet if we find this is, in Fact, the Case, from consulting God's holy
Word, we may as firmly believe it as though we could fully understand it. -- And
if we cannot conceive how the divine Nature and the human should be united so
as to constitute but one Person; yet if we find, that, in Fact, this is the
Case, there is an End to all Doubt. For what God says may be as firmly
believed, as what our Eyes see. Nor is there any more Reason to doubt his Word,
for want of a full understanding of the Thing, than to doubt our Eyesight on
the same Account. -- Let us now, then, quite willing to form our Sentiments
from the holy Scriptures, apply to these sacred Writings, and enquire into the
true Character of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And perhaps, the Words of
our Text may serve, as a Clue, to lead us into the true Sense of what we find
written, in the old and new Testaments, on this important Subject.

"WHO being in the Form of God." -- But when? Plainly, before he took upon him
the Form of a Servant: before he appeared in the Likeness of Man: i. e. before
his Incarnation. -- But where had St. Paul any Accounts of Jesus Christ before
his Appearance in Flesh? Did he exist, did he indeed exist, antecedent to his
Incarnation? Yes, says our blessed Savior, "Before Abraham was, I am." Joh.
VIII. 58. -- In the Writings of the Old Testament, no doubt, were the Accounts,
referred to by the Apostle: for "they were they which testified of him," as our
Savior observed to the angry Jews in Joh. V. who were enraged at his
pretending to "be equal with God." ver. 18. "Search the Scriptures," (said he)
to them I appeal to decide my true Character, for "they are they which testify
of me." ver. 39. -- In those sacred Writings it was, that he appeared in "the
Form of God:" and spoke and acted as thinking it "no Robbery to be equal with
God." All which divine Glory and Splendour he laid aside, at the Time of his
Incarnation; and instead of it, took on him "the Form of a Servant," and
appeared in "the Likeness of Men." Wherefore let us take a View of our blessed
Savior, as appearing, speaking and acting in this twofold Capacity. (1.) "In
the Form of God." (2.) "In the Form of a Servant, and in the Likeness of Men":
that from the whole we may learn his true Character.

I. LET us view our blessed Savior, when he appeared in the "Form of God," and
spoke and acted, as thinking it "no Robbery to be equal with God."

AND the first Time he is brought into View, in the sacred Writings, is in the
first Chapter of Genesis, as the Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth. "In the
Beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth." Genesis I. 1. For we are assured
by one divinely inspired, that this God, was the God, who was "manifest in the
Flesh," even the very same Being who "was made Flesh and dwelt among us." For
thus it is written, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the WORD WAS GOD, the same was in the Beginning with God: ALL THINGS WERE
MADE BY HIM, and without Him was not any Thing made that was made. Joh. I. 1,
3. For he created not only this Earth, and this solar System; but by Him were
even all Things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
ALL THINGS were created by Him. Col. 1. 16. So that, here, he stands forth as
the "CREATOR OF THE WHOLE UNIVERSE." And "his ETERNAL POWER AND GODHEAD are
clearly to be seen by the Things which he has made." ( Romans 1. 20.) He is the
CREATOR; and an higher Character than this the MOST HIGH GOD never assumes to
himself in the sacred Writings. For this is the Style of supreme DEITY. Thus
says the Lord, that created the Heavens, God himself that formed the Earth and
made it: I am the LORD, and there is none else. Isai. XLV. 18. And in Heaven
they worship the supreme God under this Character. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: for thou have created all Things, and for
thy Pleasure they are, and were created. Rev. IV. 11. That Christ was not a
mere Instrument which God used in the Work of Creation, as the Arians pretend,
is plain from this, that the Scriptures not only teach, that Christ was the
very supreme God himself that created all Things; ( Psalm. CII. 25. Heb. 1. 10.)
but also that no Instrument was used in that Work. It was wrought immediately
by God himself. As it is written, "God himself formed the Earth and made it." (
Isai. XLV. 18. (This, all grant, was the supreme God: And this God was Jesus
Christ, as will soon appear.) "He alone spread out the Heavens" ( Joh IX. 8.)
Not by an Instrument, but by himself alone, ( Isai. XLIV. 24.) with his own
Hands. ( Isai. XLV. 12) The Scripture-Expressions the Arians urge to the
contrary, shall be explained presently.


AND, as Jesus Christ appears "in the Form of God" in the first Chapter of
Genesis, calling universal Nature out of Nothing into Existence; so likewise
does he appear, and act, and speak, as thinking it "no Robbery to be equal with
God," in all the grand Dispensations of divine Providence, from the Calling of
Abraham, and forward, through all the Jewish Dispensation.

TURN to the third Chapter of Exodus, at the beginning, and there you may see,
the Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses, in a Flame of Fire out of the midst of
a Bush, Not a created Angel, but the Angel of the Convenent, Christ Jesus, who
then and ever was God, and was to be (...), and to be sent into the World in
our Flesh, as a Messenger from God. And these temporary Apparitions of his,
were Presages or Forerunners of his more (...) Mission and Coming, and
therefore he is (...) called an Angel. That this Angel was no Creature, plainly
appears by the whole Context, and especially by his saying, I am the Lord, etc.
The Angels never speak that Language in Scripture: but, I am sent from God, and
I am thy Fellow Servants, etc. And it is a vain (...), to say, That the Angel as
God's Ambassador speaks in God's Name and Person. For what Ambassador of any
King in the World did ever speak thus, I am the King, etc. Ministers are God's
Ambassadors; but if any of them should say, I am the Lord, they would be guilty
of Blasphemy; and so would any created Angel too, for the same Reason. P^^l
(...).
and God called unto him out of the Bush, and said, I am the God of thy Father,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Now who was this
God, that thus spoke to Moses? It was plainly the God who had appeared to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and to whom they had built Altars, and whom they had
worshipped. To Jacob, in particular, as he was going to Padan-Aram. Genesis
XXVIII. 12, 13. He dreamed, and behold, a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the
Top of it reached to Heaven: and the Angels of God [these were created Angels]
ascending and descending on it. And behold, the LORD [this was the supreme God]
stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and the God
of Isaac: the Land whereon thou lie, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed,
etc. And "Jacob called the Name of that Place Bethel," i. e. the House of God,
ver. 19. And he anointed a Pillar, and vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with
me, etc. then shall the Lord be my God -- ver. 20, -- 22. And when he was at
Padam-Aram the same God appeared to him again, and is called the Angel of God.
Genesis XXXI. "And the Angel of God spoke to me in a Dream." ver. 11. This was not
a created Angel; for he said, ver. 13. I am the God of Bethel, where thou
anointedst the Pillar, and vowedst a Vow unto ME. GOD the Father is never
called the Angel of God: But the God of Bethel is called the Angel of God:
Therefore the God of Bethel is not God the Father. -- The God of Bethel is the
same who is called the Angel of the Covenant in Mal. III. 1. But that Angel of
the (...) is Christ, (...) plain from Mark 1, 2. Therefore the God of Bethel
win Christ. -- The God of Bethel was the God who appeared to Abraham ( Genesis
XII. 1, -- 7.) to Isaac ( Genesis XXVI. 24, 25.) to Jacob ( Genesis XXVIII. 13. and
XXXI. 13.) to Moses (Exodus III. 2, -- 6.) on Mount Sinai ( Exodus XX. 2.) and is
usually called the God and King of Israel, through the old Testament: But the God
of Bethel was Jesus Christ: Therefore Jesus Christ was the God and King of
Israel. -- If Jesus Christ was the God and King of Israel, then may St. Paul be
justified in representing him on the Creator of the Universe, Col. 1. 16. And
in applying to him, in his Epistles, what was evidently spoken of the God and
King of Israel, in the sacred Writings of the old Testament. Compare Psalm.
LXVIII. 18. with Ephesians. IV. 8. And Psalm. CII. 25. with Heb 1. 10. etc. etc. etc.
-- And our blessed Savior may be justified in laying down his Life, rather
than to give up his Claim. -- And there was more Truth in the Title set up over
his Head when on the Cross( Jesus of Nazareth the KING OF THE JEWS) than his
Crucifiers were aware of: For had they known, they would not have crucified the
LORD OF GLORY.
And to this God he afterward built an Altar ( Chap. XXXV. 1.) and he calls
upon this God, this Angel, to bless the Lads (the two Sons of Joseph) a little
before his Death. ( Chap. 48. 15, 16.) -- Now, who was this, sometimes called
God, sometimes the Angel of God? It was, if we may give Credit to his own
Declaration, The God of Abraham ( Chap. XXVIII. 13.) and the God of Isaac. --
And this was the God who now appeared and spoke to Moses in the Bush, and who
afterward gave the Law from Mount Sinai. And of him, even of this very same
God, David speaks in the LXVIIIth Psalm, ver. 7, etc. O God, when thou wentest
forth before thy People, when thou did march through the Wilderness; the Earth
shook, the Heavens also dropped at the Presence of the Lord: even Sinai itself
was moved at the Presence of God, the God of Israel. ver 17. -- The Chariots of
God are twenty Thousand, even Thousands of Angels; the Lord is among them, as
in Sinai, in the holy Place, ver. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
Captivity captive, thou have received Gifts for Men, etc. -- And now, who was
this? -- Turn to the IVth Chapter of Ephesians, and there an inspired Apostle
tells us, that it was Jesus Christ. ver. 8. It was He Who ascended up on high,
and led Captivity captive.

So that it was Jesus Christ, who appeared to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to
Moses in the Burning Bush, and on Mount Sinai. And He appeared in the "Form of
God," and spoke in the Language of supreme Deity, as thinking it "no Robbery to
be equal with God," saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, and out of the House of Bondage. Thou shall have no other Gods before
me. Exodus XX. -- And what could he have said more than this -- to set up thus
for supreme God, and enjoin that none should be worshipped but himself!

AND this God, who thus brought Israel out of Egypt, and gave the Law from
Mount Sinai, even he was "the KING of the Jews," their civil Chief. For their
Government was a Theocracy, and God was their KING, as King George is King of
Great Britain. And therefore when in the Days of Samuel, they desired to have a
King from among themselves, like the Rest of the Nations, God said, (1 Samuel
VIII. 7.) "They have rejected ME, that I should not REIGN over them." (See also
1 Samuel X. 18, 19.) This was in their Hearts; for they were weary of God's
Government, and did not like to be in a State of such entire Dependence on him,
but wanted a King of their own. However God did not give up his Government over
them, nor grant them a King, in the Sense they desired; but only nominated and
constituted one to be his Vicegerent, to be his Deputy, to govern for and
under him, therefore called the Lord's anointed, God himself still their King.
-- Now it was at Mount Sinai God became their King, and they covenanted and
promised to be his loyal and obedient Subjects. Exodus XIX. 3 -- 8. -- But that
God was Jesus Christ, as has been before proved. -- Therefore Jesus Christ was
the KING of the Jews, and they were his peculiar People. -- And to this St.
John evidently alludes in those Words, Joh. 1. 11. "He came to his own," his
own People and Nation, over whom he had reigned, "He came unto his own, and his
own received him not." Yea, look up, and view him on the Cross, and read the
Superscription put over him, and that will declare who he is, JESUS OF NAZARETH
THE KING OF THE JEWS. (See Joh. XII. 15. (...). IX. 9.)

And as their God was their King, their civil Chief; so it was suitable he
should have a Palace built him, that he might dwell among them. And accordingly
by his Appointment the Tabernacle was built in the Wilderness. And there he
dwelt, in the Holy of Holies, as their God and King, giving out Laws and Orders
from above, the Mercy-seat. In Allusion to which St. John speaking of the same
God, says, "The Word was made Flesh and tabernacled among us" (for so it is in
the Original.) Joh. I. 14. -- And this God who thus dwelt in their Tabernacle,
and whom they tempted and tried forty Years in the Wilderness, St. Paul
testifies was Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. X. 9. "Neither let us tempt Christ, as some
of them also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents." (See also Isai. LXIII.
9. Compared with Exed. XXIII. 20. and XXXIII. 14.)

AFTERWARD, in the Days of Solomon, a Temple was built, exceeding grand and
glorious; however, not equal to his infinite Greatness: for "the Heaven, and
the Heaven of Heavens could not contain him." (1 Kin. VIII. 27.) But yet in
this Temple he condescended to take up his Abode, "in the Cloud of Glory which
filled the House." (2 Chronicles. V. 14.) And there he dwelt as God and King of the
Jews. Solomon, in his Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple, speaking to the
God and King of Israel, said, For thou, even thou ONLY know the Hearts of
all the children of Men. 1 King. VIII. 29. This being peculiar to the God of
Israel. 1 Samuel XVI. 7. Psalm. VII. 9. Jer. XI. 20. and XVII. 10. and XX. 12. --
"And all the Churches shall know, that I AM HE," says our blessed Savior,
"that I AM HE, which searches the Reins and Heart" Rev. II. 23. i. e. that I
am that very Being, formerly known by the Name of the God of Israel, to whom
alone this Character belonged. All the Churches shall know it.
-- In Remembrance of which, and conscious to his own Dignity, our Savior, in
the Days of his Flesh, was filled with Indignation to see the Temple, once his
holy Dewlling Place, turned into an House of Merchandise, and he drove out the
People. -- And being questioned for this his Conduct, he answered, "Destroy
this Temple (speaking of his Body) and in three Days I will raise it up." Joh.
11. 19. As if he had said, I am the God who once dwelt in your Temple, now I
dwell in this Body, this is now my Temple, destroy it, as I foresee you will,
and in three Days I will raise it from the Dead; and in three Days I will raise
it from the Dead; and thereby give you full Proof who I be, and by what
Authority I do these Things.

To Abraham he sometimes appeared as a Man. ( Genesis XVIII. 1, 2.) To Moses, in a
Flame of Fire in the Bush. To all the Host of Israel, in a Pillar of Cloud by
Day and of Fire by Night, from the Time they went out of Egypt till they came
to Mount Sinai. On the Mount He took up his Abode till the Tabernacle was
built, and his Appearance was as devouring Fire. Exodus XXIV. 17. After the
Tabernacle was built, that became the Place of his Residence; and in a Pillar
of Cloud by Day and of Fire by Night, he led the Israelites through all the
Wilderness, till he had brought them into the holy Land; and the Tabernacle was
set up at Shiloh: ( Josh. XVIII. 1.) and there He dwelt till the Days of Eli:
(1 Samuel III.) when, for the Wickedness of the Children of Israel, He forsook
Shiloh: (1 Samuel IV. Psalm. LXXVIII. 60.) as he afterward did the Temple of
Solomon. ( Jer. VII. 14.) And after the Babylonish Captivity this Token of the
divine Presence was never more seen. But the pious Jews were assured by the
last Prophet under that Dispensation, after the building of the second Temple,
that their God and King would return to their Temple again. Mal. III. 1. "The
LORD whom ye seek," longing for his Presence as in former Days, "shall suddenly
come to HIS Temple," where he used to dwell; "even the Messenger [or Angel] of
the Covenant." -- But when he "came unto his own, his own received him not." (
Joh. I. 11.) For his ancient Glory was laid aside, and he appeared in the Form
of a Servant, and in the Likeness of Men. Wherefore they put him to Death for
claiming to be "the Son of God and King of the Jews;" not knowing that he was
the LORD OF GLORY. 1 Cor. II. 8. See Hag. II. 7, 9.

BUT if we want any further Evidence, that Jesus Christ was indeed the very GOD
and KING of Israel* let us turn to the VIth Chapter of Isaiah, where we shall
find the Prophet, in a Vision, seeing "the LORD* sitting upon a Throne high and
lifted up," as sole Monarch of the Universe, and worshipped by the heavenly
Hosts as supreme God, crying, "Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole
Earth is full of thy Glory." Holy, Holy, Holy, three Times. This Vision was a
Vision of one God in three Persons. Of God the Father, Romans XI. 8. Of God the
Son, Job. XII. 41. Of God the Holy Ghost, Act. XXVIII. 25. The THREE, who said,
"Let US make Man in OUR Image," Genesis I. 26. Whose Name was pronounced three
Times in the Old-TestamentBlessing. Number. VI. 24, 25, 26. As the three Persons
are distinctly mentioned in the New-Testament-Baptism. Mat. XXVIII. 19. And in
the New-Testament-Blessing. 2 Cor. XIII. 14. -- And it is observed by an
ancient Jewish Writer, that in several Texts in the Hebrew Bible God is called
by three Names. His Words are as follows. Thus it is said, Exodus XX. 5. I am
the Lord thy God, a jealous God. [JEHOVAH, ELOHIM, EL, are the Words used.]
Three, answering to the Three by which the World was made. And thus the
Children of God, and the Children of Reuben say, Josh. XXII. 22. EL, ELOHIM,
JEHOVAH: EL, ELOHIM, JEHOVAH, he knows. And why are these mentioned twice?
Because by them the World was made, and because by them the Law was given. Thus
far the Author of Midrash Tillim. See Bp. Kid^ler's Demonstration of the
Messiah. Part III. Page 84.
-- And then turn to the XIIth Chapter of John, 41st Verse, and we shall find,
that this God was JESUS CHRIST. "These Things" [ viz. the Things contained in
Isai. VI. 9, 10.] "said Esaias, when he saw his Glory, and spoke of him."

AND if we would see the same Thing confirmed over again, let us read the XLVth
Chapter of Isaiah throughout, where we have the SUPREME God, the God of Israel,
saying, ver. 5. I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides
me. -- ver. 6. There is none besides me: I am the Lord, and there is none else.
-- ver. 11. Thus faith the Lord, the HOLY ONE of Israel. -- ver. 12. I have
made the Earth, and created Man upon it; I, even my Hands have stretched out
the Heavens. -- ver. 18. Thus faith the Lord, that created the Heavens; God
Himself, that formed the Earth and made it; I am the Lord, and there is none
else. -- ver. 21. There is no God else besides me. -- ver. 22. Look unto me,
and be ye saved, all the Ends of the Earth: for I am God, and there is none
else. -- And if after all this God-like Language, this was Jesus Christ, St.
Paul might well say, "Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be
equal with God;" (nor can we have a plainer Comment on his Words, nor can we be
at a Loss for their true Meaning) for he could not have appeared more as
SUPREME GOD, nor possibly spoken in more decisive Language than this. The GOD
that speaks in this Chapter, is -- The God, who created the Universe, ver. 18.
-- The God, who was known by the Name of "the God of Israel," ver. 3. that is,
the God who brought Israel out of Egypt, and led them through the Wilderness --
And the God who delivered the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, ver. 13. --
And he affirms over and over, I am the Lord, and there is none else; there is
none besides me, there is none besides me. -- Of this very same God, we read
Isai. XL. 3. applied to Christ. Matt. III. 3. -- And Isai. LII. 7. applied to
Christ, Romans X. 15. -- And Isai. XL. 10, 11. applied to Christ, Joh. X. 11. --
And Isai. XLI. 4. and XLIV. 6. and XLVIII. 12. applied to Christ, Rev. I. 17.
and XXII. 13.
-- And yet nothing can be plainer than that St. Paul understood, the GOD
speaking through the whole Chapter, to be Jesus Christ. For those concluding
Words in the 23d. Verse, I have sworn by my self, -- that unto me every Knee
shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear, he twice expressly applies to Jesus
Christ. Once in Romans XIV. 10, 11. "It is written, -- Every Knee shall bow to
me." And again in Phil. II. 10, 11. "At the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow."

YEA, the inspired Writers of the New Testament seem constantly to consider the
God and King of Israel, who in the beginning created the Heavens and the Earth,
as the very same Being, who afterward dwelt in Flesh, and was called Jesus
Christ, from the Liberty they take to apply to Jesus Christ, in their Writings,
what was so evidently spoken of the God and King of Israel, in the sacred
Writings of the Old Testament. -- To mention but two instances more. In all the
150 Psalms, there are none, which seem more plainly to speak of the SUPREME GOD
than the 97th and 102nd -- And yet both these are considered in the
New Testament as speaking of Christ, and accordingly are applied to him. -- The
97th Psalm begins with, The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice: and an
inspired Writer considers it as a Representation of the glorious Reign of the
Messiah. For says he, ( Heb. 1. 6.) When he brings the first begotten into
the World, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him: referring to
the 7th Vase of the 97th Psalm, Worship him, all ye Gods. -- And in the 102d
Psalm, speaking of the SUPREME GOD, the Psalmist says, (ver. 25, 26, 27.) Of
old had thou laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Work of
thy Hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure: yea, all of them shall wax
old like a Garment, as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed: but thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no End. Which is
expressly applied to Jesus Christ in Heb. I. 10, 11, 12. There are comparatively
but few Passages in the Old Testament, in which are may be certain, that it is
God the Father, who speaks, or is spoken of. There are but few Passages which
could not have been applied to Christ, with as much apparent Justice, as these
already applied to him by the inspired Writers of the New Testament. If Christ
was not the God and King of Israel, how can they be justified in what they have
done? But if he was, the Consequence is plain.


WHEREFORE, from what has been said, it is natural to observe, --

1. THAT the GOD and KING of Israel we read, of in the Old Testament, is the
very same Being who afterward became incarnate, and is called by the Name of
JESUS CHRIST in the New Testament. But what Difference is there then between
God the Father and God the Son? -- I answer, They are one God, the same in
Substance, equal in Power and Glory. Joh X. 30. "I and my Father are one."
Compared with Joh. XIV. 7, 8, 9, 10. -- And yet when we are baptized in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt. XXVIII. 19.)
and observe how in the Gospel Dispensation the Father sustains the Dignity, and
stands for the Rights of the Godhead, (Romans III. 25.) the Son becomes incarnate
and is set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, and the Holy Spirit inlightens
and sanctifies Sinners: I say, when we observe these Representations in the
sacred Records, it becomes evident, that Father, Son and Holy Ghost, although
they are but one God, (1 John v. 7.) plainly act as though they were three
distinct Persons. -- And if our Reason cannot find out how they are three, and
yet but one; and if God has not thought it needful to instruct us in this
Point: yet so far as is revealed, so far we may believe; and that with a Faith
sufficiently distinct to lay a Foundation for Practice. The Believer may now,
through the Mediation of the Son, have Access, by the Assistance of the Spirit,
to the Father. Ephesians. II. 18.
i. e. JESUS OF NAZARETH was really THE KING OF THE JEWS. -- So certain as the
Writers of the NewTestament were divinely inspired, so certainly may this be
depended upon. -- Therefore,

2. IT is beyond us to imagine any Evidences of the Divinity of Christ, which
could possibly have been given, more clear and striking than those which have
been already given. -- In the Beginning he created the Heaven and the Earth,
even all Things were created by him and for him. And he was the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of (...) whom they worshipped, and to whom they
built Altars. He appeared to Moses in the burning Bush as the supreme God, and
spoke the Language of supreme Deity from Mount Sinai. In the Tabernacle and
Temple he dwelt in the Form of God, and always spoke as thinking it no Robbery
to be equal with God. To Isaiah he appeared as the Monarch of the Universe, and
was worshipped by the heavenly Hosts as such. And often he repeats it, I am the
Lord, and there is none else, and beside me there is no God. And therefore
swears by himself, there being no greater to swear by ( Heb. VI. 13.) that
every Knee shall bow to him. -- Had he been truly and indeed by Nature SUPREME
GOD, what could be have done, or what could he have said, to have it made more
manifest?

3. IF after all, he was not by Nature God, but a Being infinitely inferior;
not the CREATOR, but a Creature; the Jewish Dispensation, which was professedly
designed to establish the Worship of the ONE TRUE GOD, in Opposition to all
others, was really calculated to establish Idolatry (for aught I can see) and
that forever. For he appeared in the Form of God, and was taken to be supreme
God, and enacted it as the first and chief of all his Laws, that no God should
be worshipped but Himself. So that to deny his Divinity, is to say, that the
God of the Hebrews was an Impostor, and to declare Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Moses, and all their Prophets, to be deluded Idolaters: for him they all
believed to be supreme God, and him they worshipped as such.

4. BUT on the other Hand, granting the Old and New Testaments to be divinely
inspired, we may behold the manifold Wisdom of God in laying out his grand Plan
as he has done. -- To God all his Works were known long before the Foundation
of the World. -- And among other Things, the Incarnation, and the Death of
Christ as a propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin, were full in the divine View. --
Now what Methods should be taken to render Mankind, and the whole intellectual
System, sensible of the infinite Dignity of him who died on the Cross? -- "Go,"
says the eternal FATHER to his SON, Go, first create the World for which thou
art to die, and the whole System over which thou art to reign, that how deep
soever thine Abasement may be, thine eternal Power and Godhead may be to be
clearly seen by the Things thou have made. -- Go, appear to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the Form of God, and speak to Moses, and on Mount Sinai, as plainly
thinking it to be no Robbery to be equal with God, and dwell in their
Tabernacle and Temple, and reign as God and King among them; that when in the
Fullness of Time thou shall appear in the Form of a Servant and in the Likeness
of a Man, and bleed and die on the Cross, thy true Character may still be
known. That when I come to perform this greatest of all my Works, to give my
only begotten Son to die for the World, it may be understood by frail Mortals,
what it is I have done. That the Son was employed by the FATHER as his Agent to
create the Universe, seems to be implied in that Manner of speaking in Ephesians.
III. 9. Who created all Things by Jesus Christ, and in Heb. I. 2. By whom he
made the Worlds. -- And that his creating the World manifests him to be
possessed of ETERNAL POWER and GODHEAD, is plain from Romans I. 20. -- And that
the Work of Creation, and his other Works recorded in the Old Testament, were
designed to ascertain his true Character, as being by Nature GOD, in the View
of frail Mortals, notwithstanding the Greatness of his intended Abasement, is
evident from the inspired Writings of the New Testament; as they abundantly
improve them to this Purpose. -- Other Kinds of Beings God has employed in his
Dealings with a fallen World, viz. Angels and Men. And proper Care has always
been taken to ascertain their true Character, as mere Creatures, in the sacred
Writings. So Moses appears but a mere Man, whatever high Titles he had
sometimes given him. And the Angel employed by Christ, to communicate to St.
John the wonderful and glorious Visions and Revelations he had in the Isle of
Patm^s, appears to be but a mere Creature, (Rev. XXII. 9) and he made
Conscience of informing St. John in his true Character. But Christ appears in
the Form of God, and speaks and acts as thinking himself supreme God, through a
long Period of three or four Thousand Years. And granting him to be really
such, there could not have been a better Method to determine his true Character
to our View, and prevent our entertaining too low Thoughts of him, on Account
of his appearing in the Form of a Servant, and in the Likeness of a Man. If now
we cannot give Credit to his Words, when he says, I and my Father are one: yet
surely we may to his Works, while we view him as the Creator of the Universe,
and as the GOD and KING of the Jews.


GOD foresaw, his appearing in the Form of a Servant, and in the Likeness of
Men, would, unless there was some Method taken to hinder it, induce Mankind to
think him but a mere Man; and so prevent their seeing into the sublime Nature
and Glory of the Christian Dispensation. In his infinite Wisdom, therefore, he
appointed him such Works to do, previous to his Incarnation, as might
effectually determine his true Character. -- At first, his Disciples themselves
hardly believed him to be supreme God, or that he was to die, to make Atonement
for the Sins of the World: for their Eyes were not yet opened to understand the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, in which, both these Points were set in the
strongest Light. The very Night before He suffered, it is plain, his Disciples
had but a feeble Sense of his supreme Godhead. He had before said, that he and
his Father were one: ( Joh. X. 30.) but they did not fully understand him. He
now says, If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also; and from
henceforth ye know him and have seen him. ( Joh. XIV. 7.) But they hardly knew
what he meant. Therefore Philip, being one of them, says, Lord, show us the
FATHER, and it suffices us. (ver. 8.) Jesus says unto him, Have I been so
long with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? He that has seen me,
has seen the Father: and how say thou, show us the Father? (ver. 10.)
Believe thou not, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. But when
afterward their Eyes were opened to understand the Scriptures of the
OldTestament, and in all those sacred Pages to behold him in the Form of God,
speaking and acting as supreme Deity, now their Faith was fully confirmed.
Indeed in the Days of his Abasement, while his Divinity was so much concealed,
his divine Glory at Times shone into their Hearts, and they beheld his Glory,
[for Instance on the Mount, Mat. XVII.] as the Glory of the only begotten Son
of God. ( Joh. 1. 14.) And sometimes under a divine Influence they cried out,
Thou art the Son of the living God. ( Mat. XVI. 16.) But in general their Sense
of his Divinity was but feeble; so that after his Death they even doubted his
being the true Messiah. ( Mar. XVI. 14.) They knew not what to make of Things.
( Luke XXIV.) But after the Days of Pentecost, when the holy Spirit, who
inspired the Writings of the Old Testament, was so plentifully poured out upon
them, they never appear to doubt again; but as in their Writings, so no doubt
in their Preachings, they take the utmost Liberty to apply Passages in the
Old Testament, evidently spoken of the supreme God, the Creator of the
Universe, the King of Israel, to Jesus Christ; and without Scruple call him,
Immanuel, God, the true God, God manifest in the Flesh, yea, God over all
blessed for ever. And if his Disciples had so little Sense of his true
Character, as supreme God, is it in the least credible, that the Man spoken of
in Mat. XIX. 16. who called him good Master, had so much as one Thought of his
supreme Godhead? far from it, no doubt. It does not appear that he thought him
to be the Messiah. But our Savior knew what he himself was, and pitied the
Man, and said, Why call thou me good? there is none good, but one God. As if
he had said, You call me Good: Do you know who I be, or what you say? there is
none Good, but God; do you think I am God? Words well contrived to put him on a
farther Enquiry into our Savior's true Character.


IT is written in Isai. IX. 6. His Name shall be called WONDERFUL. And indeed,
of all Things that ever happened in the whole intelligent System, this is the
most astonishing, that the ETERNAL GOD who created the Universe should become
incarnate and die on the Cross. That the Babe in the Manger was the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth! -- He looked like
another Child; He grew in Stature like another Child; and when grown, he
appeared in Fashion as a Man: his ancient Glory all laid aside: to Appearance,
a Man of Sorrow, despised, condemned, hated, ridiculed, the laughing stock of
many in Town and Country, and those the most rich and honorable: at last,
crucified as a Malefactor. And was this the ETERNAL JEHOVAH! -- THE GOD OF THE
WHOLE UNIVERSE! -- this mean Man! -- this crucified Criminal! -- Well might his
Name be called WONDERFUL. -- O the manifold Wisdom of God, in appointing his
SON, previous to his Incarnation, to appear in the Form of God, and speak and
act as thinking it no Robbery to be SUPREME GOD, through a Period of three or
four Thousand Years, as preparatory and introductory to this astonishing
Abasement; that there might be sufficient external Evidence, with Certainty, to
determine his true Character, when appearing in Circumstances so infinitely
below his real Dignity! -- But it is Time to proceed, as was proposed,

II. To take a View of our blessed Savior in the Form of a Servant, in the
Likeness of Men.

As MAN, He had an human Body, which, from the Smallness of an Infant, grew up
into the Stature of a Man. -- And an human Soul, in all Respects like ours, Sin
only excepted. ( Heb. II. 16, 17.) -- As Man, God was his Father; even as he is
the Father of the whole Creation in general, and as he is the Father of all
good Men in particular: and in a still more eminent Sense. And God was his God.
As he said, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God and your God. (
Joh. XX. 17.) As Man, he was dependent on God, and prayed to him, and praised
him. As Man, he had no Ability to work Miracles: but, the Father, says he,
that dwells in me, he does the Works. ( Joh. XX. 10.) -- As Man, he loved the
young Man in the Gospel for his humane Disposition and respectful Behavior: --
He groaned at his Friend Lazaru^'s Grave -- He wept over Jerusalem -- and was
in an Agony and prayed in the Garden -- and cried on the Cross, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me! --

As Man, He grew in Knowledge and Wisdom, and in Favor with God and Man ( Luke
II. 52.) and yet was at an infinite Remove from absolute Omniscience: yea, he
did not so much as know when the Day of Judgment would be. ( Mar. XIII. 22.)
The DEITY, who was the FATHER By the FATHER is sometimes meant the first Person
in the Trinity, as in Mat. XXVIII. 19. 1 John V. 7. -- But at other Times, is
plainly meant the DEITY, without Reference to any Distinction of Persons, as in
Joh. IV. 23, 24. 1 John II. 15, etc.

OBJEC. "BUT if Jesus Christ was God and Man, in one Person, how could that one
Person say, that he knew not the Day of Judgment? for if he did not know, as
Man, yet he did, as he was God."

ANSW. IT was usual for our Savior to speak after this Manner. Joh. X. 15. "I
lay down my Life for the Sheep." Now how could that one Person say, "I lay down
my Life"? Was the divine Nature to die? and yet was not that Nature, Himself?
Certainly it was. For he adds, ver. 18. "I have Power to lay it down, and I
have Power to take it again." Certainly the human Nature had not Power to raise
it self from the Dead. -- So Joh. VIII. 58. "Before Abraham was, I am." But how
could that be true? for, as Man, he was short of 50 Years old. -- So again,
Joh. III. 13. "Even the Son of Man, which is in Heaven." Certainly the human
Nature of Christ was not then, nor ever had been in Heaven. And if, consistent
with Truth, he might say, that the Son of Man is in Heaven, although the human
Nature never was there; he might as well say, the Son knows not, although the
divine Nature did know. -- The Manner of speaking, when honestly attended to,
instead of tending to mislead us, tends to set the very Truth in a striking
Light, viz. that he was very God, and very Man. -- And agreeable hereto we may
observe, that the same Person that says, not the Son, but the Father only, in
Mar. XIII. 32. says also, I and my Father are one. Joh. X. 30. And, he that
has seen me, has seen the Father. Joh. XIV. 9. The Father that dwells in
me, he does the Works. (ver. 10.) N. B. In this last Text, he, distinguishing
between his human and divine Natures, calls his divine Nature the Father.
Therefore, when he says ( Mar. XIII. 32.) Not the Son, but the Father only, the
Sense is plain. -- Nor is it any Objection against this, that Christ speaks of
the Father as distinct from himself in both these Instances. For in the same
Discourse ( Mar. XIII. 19.) he speaks of God the Creator as one distinct from
himself. Yet himself was the God that created all Things. However, himself was
a Creature too. See also Joh. VI. 42.


of the Man Christ Jesus, how intimately soever united to him, had never
imparted to him the Knowledge of this Thing. The Union was such, as that he
might justly be named IMMANU^L ( Mat. I. 23.) yet though Natures remained
distinct. And the human Nature was not conscious to the Ideas of the divine,
only as they were imparted. This was the Case when he dwelt on Earth,
notwithstanding his personal Union to the second Person in the Trinity; and it
is still the Case now he is in Heaven, notwithstanding his Exaltation and
Glory; He knows not the Secrets of the Divinity any farther then they are
communicated to him. Therefore we have that Expression in Rev. I. 1. The
Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him. And doubtless, it is
simply impossible, that any Creature should be conscious to the Ideas of the
DIVINITY, as a Man is conscious to the Thoughts of his own Heart, by immediate
Intuition. -- But he was not only a Man, but also took on him --

THE Form of a Servant. -- And as such, He received all his Power and Authority
from his Father, as he constantly declares, and all his Instructions. For he
came not of himself, nor to do his own Will, nor to seek his own Glory; but his
Father sent him; and he spoke and acted altogether as his Servant. And as such,
"his Father was greater than he." Mat. XXVIII. 18. Joh. VII. 16, 17, 18. and
XII. 49, 50. and XIV. 28. ALL the Power and Authority, by which the Mediator
acts, in the whole of his Mediatoral Work is derived, from the Father. He acts
wholly as his Father's Vicegerent, and by his Commission. "He can do nothing
of himself." Joh. V. 19. He gives Gifts to his Church, (Ephesians. IV. 8. Psalm.
LXVIII. 18.) Sends the Holy Spirit. (Joh. XIV. 16, 26. XV. 26.) Subducs all
Enemies (Rev. XIX. 11 -- 21. 1 Cor. XV. 27.) raises the Dead, (Joh. V. 21. 25,
26.) and judges the World, (Ver. 27.) wholly by this derived Authority. And it
has pleased the Father, that all Fullness should dwell in him. Col. I. 19. --
And these Texts here referred to, instead of proving, that he is not by Nature
God, (as the Arians suppose) do only prove, that, he, who was in the Form of
God, and thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, really took on him the
Form of a Servant. -- All more Creatures are (like those born in a State of
Servitude) God's Servants from their very first Existence. But he originally
was not God's Servant. He was at his own Disposal, and became a Servant by a
voluntary Act. He took on him the Form of a Servant. It is no Condescension for
the most exalted Angel in Heaven to be God's Servant; but it was infinite
Condescension for the Son of God to become a Servant to his Father.


AND a principal Command he had received of his Father, was to "lay down his
Life for his Sheep." ( Joh. X. 15 -- 18.) And such was his Regard to his
Father's Honor, and to the Salvation of Sinners, that he was obedient, even to
the Death of the Cross. Wherefore his Father loved him, and in Testimony of his
Love, highly exalted him, and, as Mediator, set him at the Head of the
Universe, and made him Heir of all Things, (for, as God, he was, by an
underived Right, Lord of all Things before, Isai. VI. 1.) and gave him a Name
above every Name, that to the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, and every
Tongue confess, that Jesus is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father: -- Nothing
being more to the Glory of God the Father, than so highly to exalt a Servant,
who had shown so great Regard to his Honor, and to the Honor of his Law and
Government and sacred Authority; -- And nothing being more to the Glory of God
the Father, than that the whole Universe should bow to the Name of his great
Vicegerent, exalted to sit at his own right Hand, as a Reward of his Fidelity
to his Father, while acting in the Form of a Servant. NONE will think, that it
would be to the Honor of the supreme God, to give too high a Seat and too much
Honor to any of his Servants. But methinks this was too much Honor to be paid
to a mere Creature: for it is the very Honor, which the supreme God swears
shall be paid to himself. (Isa. XLV. 23.) And it is a Maxim with the supreme
God, Not to give his Glory to another. (Isa. XLII. 8. and XLVIII. 11) But that
Saying of our blessed Savior in Joh. X. 30. removes the Difficulty at once. "I
and my Father are one." So now we may honor the Son even as we honor the
Father. (Joh. V. 23.) And it is as God would have it. It is to "the Glory of
God the Father."


AMONG all the Servants of God, none ever did so much to the Glory of God, nor
ever showed such a Love to Righteousness and Hatred of Iniquity, as he, and
none ever received so great a Reward. He was "anointed with Oil of Gladness
above his Fellows" ( Heb. I. 9.) Above all his Fellow Servants, whether Angels
or Men, and however faithful to him that appointed them: none ever were, or
ever will be exalted to so great Glory.

FOR He sits at the Head of the Universe, even at the Father's right Hand, far
above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion. ( Ephesians. I. 20, 21.)
And here, as his Father's Vicegerent, GodMan-Mediator-King, He is to reign
till all his Enemies are put under his Feet, till the final Judgment is over,
and all the Affairs of an apostate World are settled. And then he will, in
Testimony that he has acted all as his Father's Servant, resign this delegated
Authority. And God shall be all in all. -- As his Father's Servant, He received
this Authority, to destroy the Works of the Devil, to bring Good out of all the
Evil Sin had introduced, and put an End to all the Disorder and Confusion in
the intellectual System, consequent on the Apostasy of Angels and Men: and
having finished his Work, he resigns the Kingdom to the Father, the first
Person in the ever-blessed Trinity, to whom, as such, the Government of the
World properly belongs, and He shall take the Kingdom, and reign over the
Universe for ever and ever. And Jesus Christ himself, as Mediator, shall be
subject to him, as is suitable, that the God head only may be exalted, and as
it really is, so it may appear to be, all in all. -- For while the Father
reigns, the whole Godhead reigns in him. So that, while the SON, as Mediator,
resigns the Kingdom to him; yet, as GOD, He reigns in Him, and forever will.
But his mediatorial Government he resigns, (even that delegated Authority,
whereby, as his Father's Servant, he had ruled the Universe, in the Capacity of
God-Man-MediatorKing;) having finished the Work which he was empowered and
authorized to do. OBJECT. 'BUT it is written, that Christ shall reign over the
House of Jacob for ever. Luke I. 33. His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom.
Dan. VIII. 27. 'His "Throne is for ever and ever." Heb. I. 8. And "he shall
reign for ever and ever." Rev. XI. 15.' Answer. CHRIST, at present, as
Mediator, reigns over the whole Universe. All Beings, the Father only excepted,
are under his Authority. 1 Cor. XV. 27. But when he has finished the Work, for
which he is invested with this universal Authority, he will resign this
universal Commission, and the Father take the Government of the Universe,
However, he will, as Mediator, still reign over the House of Jacob [his
redeemed once] for ever. It is needful now, that Angels should be under him, to
be his ministering Spirits; and that he should have full Authority over Earth
and Hell, for the Good and Safety of his Church: But then the Mediator will
need the Angels no longer for ministering Spirits, to minister to the Heirs of
Salvation, who will be all safe in Heaven. Nor will be have any Thing more to
do with wicked Men and Devils. As for the Wicked, their Day of Grace will be
over; and neither they, nor the Devils can do any more Mischief. Having that
them up in Hell, he will give up the Keys to his Father.




As God-Man-Mediator, in two distinct Natures, yet but one Person, He was his
Father's Servant. -- As such, he became obedient unto the Death: Therefore the
Church is said to be redeemed with the Blood of God. ( Act XX. 28.) And God is
said to have laid down his Life for us. 1 John III. 16. -- And, as such, he
ascended to Heaven and led Captivity captive; and therefore St. Paul applies
what is spoken of God in Psalm. LXVIII. 18. to Him, in Ephesians. IV. 8. -- And, as
such, He was exalted to the highest Glory in Heaven, and every Knee ordered to
bow to him; and so what is spoken of God in Isai. XLV. 23. is applied to him,
in Phil. II. 10. -- For He was GOD as well as MAN, God-Man, one Person; and as
God's Servant, in the great Work of Redemption, he was obedient unto Death, and
as God's Servant was rewarded with this high Exaltation --

THUS stands the Character of Jesus Christ in the sacred Writings of the Old
and New-Testaments: all which cannot be better summed up than in the Words of
the Apostle, who seems to have had all these Things in his View. -- Who being
in the Form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with God: but made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made
in the Likeness of Men: and being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Wherefore
God has also highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every
Name: that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of Things in Heaven, and
Things in Earth, and Things under the Earth; and that every Tongue should
confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father; in whose
Name he administers his mediatorial Kingdom, and to whose Honor he professedly
refers it.

AND thus we have, as was proposed, taken a View a Jesus Christ; first, as
being in the Form of God, and speaking and acting as thinking it no Robbery to
be equal with God; and then, as having taken upon him the Form of a Servant,
appearing in the Likeness of Men. And have seen the Method infinite Wisdom took
to ascertain his true Character, that the Greatness of his Abasement might not
mislead trail Mortals, nor raise one suspicious Thought of the infinite Dignity
of his Person, as our GREAT IMMANUEL. -- And now therefore,

1. WHAT an infinite Condescension was it in the eternal God, the Creator of
the Universe, who had appeared in the Form of God, and spoke and acted as
thinking it no Robbery to be equal with God, through a long Period of three or
four Thousand Years, to lay aside all his Glory, and from being worshipped as
supreme God, to become of no Reputation, and even take upon him the Form of a
Servant and the Likeness of Men! Well might St. Paul urge this Example, as a
powerful Inducement, on all the Disciples of Christ, to be full of Love and
Condescension toward one another. Phil. II. 1 -- 5. BUT how does his Argument
lose all its Force, as the Arians interpret and understand the Apostle's Words!
-- Who being in the Form of God, by being his Minister and Representative, did
not proudly and vainly assume to be equal with God, etc. (thus Chubb) For what
Condescension was it, for a mere Creature, as they say he was, not to aspire
after supreme God head? Can a mere Creature be looked upon as very
condescending, because he is not as proud as Satan himself? And can we suppose
the inspired Apostle would argue thus, Ver. 8. Let this Mind be in you, which
was also in Jesus Christ, -- who being but a mere Creature, was so very
condescending, as not to pretend to be equal with God. -- And yet this must be
his Argument, as they interpret his Words.


But,

2. How ungrateful, yea how impious would it be in us, to take Occasion from
his appearing in the Form of a Servant, and in the Likeness of Men, which was
for our Sakes, to take Occasion (I say) from this, to call his DIVINITY into
Question. -- Especially, now since we are so plainly informed, by the Holy
Ghost, who inspired the Writers of the New Testament, that he is the very same
God who in the Beginning created the Heavens and the Earth, and appeared to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to Moses and Isaiah, and who was believed to be the
supreme God, and worshipped as such by all the Patriarchs and Prophets: -- Only
because he has laid aside his Godlike Form, and taken the Form of a Servant;
and instead of speaking like a GOD from Mount Sinai, appears and speaks like a
Man; -- That we should immediately doubt his Divinity, and look upon him as a
mere Man, when yet all this Abasement was for our Sakes! -- How must HE look
upon it! -- How must HE resent it!

JUST thus did the wicked Jews (yet we are more to blame than they; because we
have more Light, and better Advantages to form a right Judgment of his true
Character) I say, just thus did the wicked Jews, when they charged Him with
Blasphemy, for saying, "I and my Father are one." "Thou" (say they) "being a
Man, make thy self God." Here was his Crime, and here was their Proof. (Joh.
X. 33.) -- He had, upon a like Occasion, some time ago, referred them to the
Scriptures of the Old Testament in general, to decide his true Character; (Joh.
V. 18, 39.) but to little Purpose. -- He now therefore only refers them to a
particular Passage in the LXXXIId Psalm, the 6th Verse, saying, Is it not
written in your Law, I said, Ye are Gods? And if he called them Gods, etc. i.
e. If the Types, which were Shadows, were called Gods; the Antitype, which is
the Substance, must be real God. If they had the Name, He must have the Thing.
For the Scripture cannot, in any Particular, be broken. Not only all the
Prophecies, but also all the Types of the Messiah must be verified in him. You
have no Reason therefore to charge the Messiah with Blasphemy, for claiming to
be the Son of God. It is worthy our Attention, that, in the sacred Writings of
the Old Testament, the chief Rulers in Israel are called Gods, ( Exodus XXVIII.
28.) and Children of the MOST HIGH. ( Psalm. LXXXII. 6.) Which doubtless was,
because they were designed to be Types of Christ, who was by Nature God, and
the very Son of God.

FOR, as has been before observed, God himself was the King of the Jews. As it
is written, "The Lord your God was your King." 1 Samuel XII. 12. And this God was
Jesus Christ, as has been before proved. -- Then he appeared in the Form of
God. -- And that there might be a Shadow of the State he was afterward to be
in, when in the Form of a Servant, acting as his Father's Delegate, he
constituted the Jewish Rulers to be his Delegates then. He anointed and
authorized them (1 Samuel X. 1. and XVI. 12, 13.) as he was to be anointed by his
Fathers, and sanctified and sent into the World, and to receive all his
Authority from him. -- They were called the Lord's Anointed, the Lord's
Messiah, (as it is in the Original) as that was the Name by which he was to be
known. He was to be called the Christ, i. e. the Anointed, the Messiah: for all
are the same Name, and mean the same Thing. Joh. I. 41. -- And they were
directed from Time to Time by the Word of the Lord, which came to them when
they went to enquire of the Lord. (1 Samuel XIV. 18, 19. and XXVIII. 6. and XXX.
7, 8. 2 Samuel II. 1.) And as Gods they sat upon the Throne of the Lord, and
reigned over the Kingdom of the Lord. (1 Chronicles. XXIX. 23. 2 Chronicles. XIII. 8.) --
In all which, they were Types of the Messiah, who in the Fullness of Time was to
become incarnate, to be anointed, sanctified, and sent into the World, to act
in all Things according to his Father's Commandment, as his Father's Delegate,
and as such to be exalted to sit on his Throne in Heaven, at the Head of the
Creation, to govern the Church and the World. -- And these Types were named
Gods, and called the Children of the most High; as the great Antitype was the
Son of God, and one with his Father. -- They were Shadows; he is the Substance.
They were called Gods: he is really God. -- So that this is the Force of our
Savior's Argument; What the Types were in Name and Shadow, that the Antitype
must be in Reality and substance; for the Scriptures cannot be broken: But
these Types were Gods in Name and Shadow: Therefore the Messiah, who is the
Antitype, must be God in Reality and Substance. -- Thus in the Jewish
Sacrifices there was a Shadow of Substitution, and they were called Atonements;
so in Jesus Christ there was a real Substitution, and a real Atonement. (See my
(...) Gal. 3. 24.) And indeed, the Messiah and (...) all that which the Types
were in Name and (...) otherwise the Scripture would not be accomplished and
verified.

IF any therefore should say, that as the Jewish King were Gods by Office, so
Christ was only a God by Office; as they only had the Shadow of Divinity. so He
only has the Shadow Divinity; -- I answer, Then the Scripture is broken: The
Types are not accomplished in the Antitype. It is all a Shadow still. The
Substance is not come. And the prophetic Prayer, with which the LXXXIId Psalm
concludes, is never to be answered. Arise, O God, judge the Earth: for thou
shall inherit all Nations. For it is not a GOD, but a mere Creature, that is to
have the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for his
Possession. Psalm. II. 8. -- And if his Divinity is but a Shadow, so is his
Atonement. The true Atonement is not come. The Types are not fulfilled. The
Scripture is broken. And we are yet in our Sins. For the Blood of one mere
creature can no more make a real Atonement than the Blood of another mere
creature. The Blood of a Bull or a Goat, and the Blood of a mere Man, are
equally at an infinite Remove from any Virtue to make a proper Atonement for
Sin. All that has been done is a mere Shadow. There is no Substance in it. And
so the Scripture is broken: and the Truth of divine Revelation, in general,
overthrown. For if any one Thing, held forth in a Type or a Prophecy, should
fail of Accomplishment, the Truth of that whole Revelation, in which that Type
of Prophecy is contained, would be overthrown. -- So that granting the
Old Testament to be divinely inspired, our Savior's Argument amounts to a
strict Demonstration.

THE Sense the Arians give to the Words, is this, I and my Father are one, i.
e. engaged in the same Design. And when the Jews through Mistake thought he
meant, that he was one with God: He answers, I do not mean, I am God by Nature,
but only God by Office. -- Query I. What was this Answer to the Purpose? --
Query II. Why did not he expressly tell them, that he only meant he was engaged
in the same Design with his Father, as all other good Men are? This would have
cleared him from the odious Character of a Blasphemer, and prevented their
taking up Stones again to stone him. And if indeed he was but a Man, all must
own, it was his Duty to have spoken out, in as plain a Manner as Paul and
Barnabas did, when the People of Lystra took them for Gods, and were about to
offer Sacrifice to them. ( Act. XIV. 15.) But to suffer himself to pass for a
Blasphemer now, and soon after to be pronounced worthy of Death for Blasphemy;
and yet never clear up the Matter; but leave his Disciples after him, to follow
his Example and call him God, the true God, God blessed for every by whom and
for whom all Things were created, when (...) as really a mere Creature as you
and I, is what (...) be accounted for.


And indeed notwithstanding the Meanness of my Appearance in your Eyes, while
you behold me in the Likeness of Men, yet my Works, which you also see,
evidence my Divinity. If you cannot give Credit to my Words, yet surely you may
to the Works wrought by me; which evidently are not the Works of a mere Man.
And they are a sufficient Proof that the Father is in me, and I in him, i. e.
that I and my Father are one. ( Joh. X. 34 -- 38.) So spoke the incarnate God,
who of old dwelt in their Tabernacle, from whence the Word of God used to come
forth to their chief Rulers, when they came to enquire of the Lord. Then He was
their GOD, and KING, and ORACLE. Now all his Glory is laid (...). He is of no
Reputation. Nor can any Thing he says, nor all the mighty Works he had wrought,
as swage their Anger, or keep their Hands from Violence. He is obliged to leave
the Temple, where he was, and be gone. -- However, the Matter did not end here.
For when they arraigned Him before the High Priest, they renew the Charge of
Blasphemy, and pronounce him worthy of Death. ( Mat. XXVI. 63 -- 66.) Nor did
Pilate know how to express the Crime, for which he was put to Death, better
than in this Title put on the Cross, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. So
that his claiming to be the SON OF GOD and KING OF THE JEWS, cost him his LIFE.

AND shall we crucify Him afresh, and put him to open Shame, and justify all
the Conduct of the Jews toward him, by saying, He was indeed but a Man! -- For
if so, it was Blasphemy indeed to pretend to be supreme God. And we know, the
Blasphemer deserved to die, according to the Law of Moses.

AND what is there to tempt us to this impious and ungrateful Deed? Not any
Thing our blessed Savior ever said, or ever did: for he always spoke and acted
in Character. -- As GOD, when in the Form of God -- As MAN, when in the
Likeness of Men -- As a Servant, when in the Form of a Servant -- As our
exalted Mediator, now at the right Hand of the Father; from whom, He, as
Mediator, has received all his Power: and to whom, when he has finished his
Work, he will, as Mediator, resign his delegated Authority. Nor can any Thing
he ever said, or any Thing he ever did, fairly construed, once tempt us to
doubt his being by Nature supreme God, after such clear Evidences of his
Divinity have been given us. Nor can I think what should induce us to doubt his
Divinity, -- unless we secretly imagine, there was no Need, that the Creator of
the Universe should become incarnate and die on the Cross for us: We were not
so bad, nor was Sin so great an Evil, as to make such an Atonement needful. --
And if this be at the Bottom, let us honestly say so, that the World may know
the true Ground of our Infidelity, and see it all summed up in a few Words, The
whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.

THIS was the very Case with the unbelieving Jews, and the chief Reason of
their rejecting Christianity. They had an high Opinion of their own Goodness;
nor could they conceive why they might not be accepted with God on the Foot of
their own Righteousness. And therefore the Gospel-Way of Salvation, through the
Mediation and Death of the Son of God, appeared needless in their View, and was
therefore absolutely incredible in their Sight. This they stumbled at, as the
great stumbling-Stone, as St. Paul tells us, who was intimately acquainted with
the whole Affair. ( Romans IX. 30 -- 33.) It did bear too hard upon their moral
Character, as it supposed them so infinitely odious and Hell-deserving in the
Sight of God, that nothing short of the Interposition of his own Son, as an
Expiatory Sacrifice, could open a Door for him, in Justice and Honor, to
pardon and save them -- But how exceeding-unreasonable was this their Conduct,
as their own Law so painly held forth the infinite Evil of Sin, in threatening
eternal Damnation for the least Transgression? ( Gal. III. 10.) Which might
easily have led them to a Sense of their Need of an Atonement, of infinite
Value, had their Hearts honestly lain open to Conviction.

AND is it not worthy our Observation, that those among professed Christians,
who have denied the Divinity of Christ, have been wont generally also to deny
-- our natural Depravity -- he infinite Evil of Sin -- the Eternity of
Hell Torments -- the Necessity of any proper Satisfaction for Sin -- the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone? -- And perhaps, to he a little more
consistent with themselves, they ought to deny the Inspiration of the Old and
New-Testaments, in which the Divinity of Christ, and these other Doctrines, are
set in so strong a Light. -- And indeed Deism has been for some Time growing to
be the most fashionable Scheme among the polite and genteel Part of the Nation.
-- And loose Principles and loose Practices are preparing us apace for all
those heavy Judgments, which seem to be coming on our Nation and Land. SALMON,
speaking of the present State of Religion in England, says, Vice and
Profaneness reign triumphant; the sacred Truths of Christianity are questioned
and disputed; and a Man that is not an Infidel, is scarce allowed to have
common Sense, among those that look upon themselves to be the polite World.

SALMON'S Geog. and Hist. Gram. Page 24^.


( Judge. II. 11 -- 15. Jer. XVIII. 9, 10.)

3. IF Jesus Christ be in very Deed the God that created the Universe, we may
be assured, He is in every Respect fit and sufficient for the whole Work he
undertook; nor will he, nor can he, fail to accomplish the whole Design he had
in view. He was originally unobliged to do a Creature's Duty, ^^ing by Nature
God; and so at Liberty to undertake, and had where-with-all to pay our Debt,
infinite as it was: whereas, the whole Creation had not a Farthing to spare for
us, owing all they had done, or could do, to God, on their own Account. -- It
was honorable to God, to appoint such a Surety for us; he was one, God might
honorably trust and deal with, as he was equal with God, and FELLOW to the Lord
of Hosts. ( Zech. XIII. 7.) -- He was worthy the Regard of the infinite
Majesty, able to secure the Honor of his Law, establish his Authority, and
answer all the Ends of Government. He was fit to be admitted, as Mediator, into
his Presence Chamber; to be exalted to sit at his right Hand, -- a very unmeet
Place for a mere Creature; and to be worshipped by all the heavenly Hosts, in
his Father's Presence; the very Thought of which, I am persuaded, no mere
Creature in that World could possibly endure, but rather with the Angel in Rev.
XXII. 9. would say, See thou do it not; for I am but a mere Creature; worship
God. ( Luke IV. 18.) -- And fit to sit at the Head of the Universe, to be made
Head over all Things, to govern the World and the Church; a Place too high for
a mere Creature, a Trust too great to be reposed in one by Nature mutable,
fallible, short-sighted; and meet only for Immutability, Infallibility, and
Omniscience. -- And fit finally to judge the World, and as the great Arbitrator
between God and his rebellious Creatures, to see Right done, and cause Justice
to take Place: an Honor too great for a mere Creature, and a Work too
difficult for any but the Omniscient, who "only knows the Hearts of all the
Children of Men." -- But IMMANUEL is fit for all this, worthy the Honor, and
qualified for the Work; and may be thus employed, thus exalted, thus
worshipped, -- not inconsistent with, but to the Glory of God the Father. --
Nor can we doubt but that he is able to save to the uttermost all that come to
God by him, nor fear but that he will accomplish all his Designs of Grace. How
beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings,
etc. that says unto Zion, THY GOD REIGNS! Isai. LII. 7. applied to Christ.
Romans X. 15.

4. BUT if indeed He was the GOD that created the Universe; Oh, how awful and
solemn the Though It! If indeed He was the GOD that created the Universe, who hung
incarnate on the Cross, set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, that God might
be just! What shall we say! What shall we think!

LET us look up, and behold him -- surrounded by Thousands of Spectators,
insulting -- "If he be the KING OF ISRAEL" [indeed he was, but they knew it
not; for had they known it, they would not have crucified the LORD OF GLORY] If
he be the KING OF ISRAEL, they say, let him come down from the Cross, and we
will believe Him. -- They insult; -- He prays, "Father, forgive them, they know
not what they do." And with all his Divinity concealed, as one forsaken of
Heaven, and cast out from the Earth, there he hangs, and bleeds, and dies!

FOR as our Rebellion, with all its Circumstances, had been public, as it were
in the Presence of the whole intelligent System; ^o now the Satisfaction must
be as publicly made. -- Satan, God's Enemy, and our inveterate Foe, had
seduced our first Parents, and in them virtually the whole human Race, to
transgress the divine Law, and cast off the divine Authority, and join with
him. -- And here on Earth Satan had set up his Kingdom, in the Sight of Heaven,
and in Defiance of the MOST HIGH. -- And exulting in all his Mischief, he was
ready impiously to say, In Spite of God, and his Son, the Day is my own. For if
God pardons an apostate World, doomed to Death, then will it appear, that he
has no Regard to his Law, or to his Threatening, or to impartial Justice; which,
when I was driven out of Heaven, he pretended, was the Motive. Nor can it fail
to be Matter of eternal Triumph to us, to see the Honor of his Law and
Government and Authority given up, to save his Creature, Man. -- Or if he
resigns the whole human Race to Destruction, as he certainly will, if he deals
by them as he did by us, it will be Matter of eternal Consolation and Joy, to
see, we can ruin Worlds, as fast as he can make them. That, let him take what
Course he will, we are sure of an eternal Triumph. -- So stood the Case. -- And
all the Inhabitants of Heaven looked on, no doubt, to see the Event.

"THE Honor of the divine Government," said the ETERNAL SON, I call Him, the
ETERNAL SON, because he was not only "made of the Seed of David, according to
the Flesh;" but also declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the
Spirit of Holiness, i. e. as to his divine Nature, "by the Resurrection from
the Dead." Romans 1. 3. 4. Agreeable to those Words in Mic. V. 2. Thou Bethlehem
Ephratah, though thou be little among the Thousands of Judah, yet out of Thee
shall be COME FORTH (i. e. be born) "that is to be Ruler in Israel: whose
GOINGS FORTH" (the same Word in the Original, before translated come forth)
"have been of old, even FROM EVERLASTING." i. e. As he was the Son of David
according to the Flesh, in Time; so from eternal Ages he was the Son of God, as
to his divine Nature. Therefore called, by Way of Eminence, God's own Son, and
his only begotten Son. Joh. III. 16. Romans VIII. 32.

Quest. 1. How then is Christ "the firstborn of every Creature"? or as it
ought rather to be rendered, "the firstborn of the whole Creation." Col. I.
15. -- I answer, 1. Not as to his human Nature; for that was born not two
Thousand Years ago. 2. Nor as to his divine Nature; for that, instead of being
the firstborn of every Creature, was the Creator of the whole Universe. 3. But
with Respect to the Privileges of the Birthright, (Psalm. LXXXIX. 27.) he being
appointed "Heir of all Things." Heb. I. 2. In which Isaac was a Type of him.
See Genesis XXV. 5. -- All Things were created by him and FOR him, originally; and
now, as Mediator, he is put into Possession of all Things, as the great Heir of
the whole Universe. And having thus the Birthright, he is with Propriety
called, the firstborn of the whole Creation.

Quest. 2. How is Christ the "Beginning of the Creation of God"? Rev. III. 14.
-- I answer, The Word in the Original signifies, The Beginning, the Chief,
Principality, Dominion. And the Meaning is, that Christ, as Mediator, is the
Head and Ruler of the Universe, and the great CHIEF of the Creation of God.
Ephesians. I. 21.


must and shall be secured. The Law is holy, just and good; and must and shall
be magnified and made honorable. Sin is as great an Evil as my Father's Law
speaks it; and must and shall be considered and treated as such; and that in
the Sight of the whole System. For my Father's Authority must and shall be
publicly maintained. -- And yet Satan may be disappointed of his expected
Triumph: For the human Race need not be resigned to Ruin: for lo, I am willing
to become incarnate, and die in their Room. -- Behold, here I am! Psalm. XL. 7.

THOU art my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased; thou love Righteousness
and hate Iniquity, and art MY EXPRESS IMAGE; said the eternal Father; and
even as thou have said, so shall it be. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpent's Head. Genesis III. 15. Thy dying Love shall defeat the Designs of his
infernal Malice.

WHEREFORE see him now on the Cross, set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, to
declare the Righteousness of God, that God might be just, and yet justify the
Sinner that believes in Jesus. Romans III. 25, 26. And there he spoils
Principalities and Powers, saps the Foundation of Satan's Kingdom, and even
triumphs over him on the Cross. Col. II. 15. And all in Sight, as it were, of
the whole intelligent Creation. 1 Pet. I. 12. And suited to give universal
Instruction. Ephesians. III. 10.

Look up, and stand astonished at this greatest of all God's Works. The CREATOR
of the Universe on the Cross! dying as a propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin!
offering up Himself to his Father, as a Sacrifice of Atonement for the Sins of
the World! -- That by Faith in his Blood we might be justified and saved.

AND was there indeed such infinite Goodness in the divine Nature, that God
could find it in his Heart to do this Thing! a Thing, of a Nature superior,
infinitely superior to the Creation of Thousands and Millions of such Worlds as
this! And was Sin indeed such an infinite Evil, that nothing could expiate it,
but such a Sacrifice as this! Sin, which we, stupid Mortals, see so little Evil
in! And did the eternal Father value the Honor of his Law and Government more
than the Life of his Son! And if these Things were done in the green Tree, what
will be done in the dry! Where will the unrighteous and ungodly appear, when
this Jesus comes in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on them that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel! How vain will it be to cry for Mercy! how vain to hope
that impartial Justice will relent! The Son of God prayed, O my Father, if it
be possible, let this Cup pass from me; and even agonized in Blood! -- But it
was not possible: Justice must be satisfied: the Son of God himself must die:
therefore impenitent, Christless Sinners cannot escape: nor can they ever be
released: But "the Smoke of their Torment will ascend for ever and ever."

THAT God is in Earnest, when he threatens to punish impenitent Sinners with
eternal Damnation, cannot be made more evident, than it is by the Cross of
Christ. However, it may be more attended to, and so work a more universal
Coviction. Yet their eternal Damnation, it self, will not be a greater Proof,
that God was in earnest, than the Death of his Son on the Cross. -- The whole
intelligent System have here the strongest Evidence of the impartial Rectitude
of the divine Nature, and of the Inflexibility of the divine Justice, that can
possibly be given. And at the same Time, the boundless Goodness of the divine
Nature set in the clearest Point of Light. -- Wherefore, to conclude, let us
here behold the "Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ;" that beholding in
this Glass, the Glory of the Lord, we may be changed into the same Image, from
Glory to Glory. That so the Gospel may become the Power of God to our
Salvation. That while Christ crucified is to some a Stumbling Block, and to
others Foolishness, He may be to us the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.

Now to him who loved us and gave himself for us, be Glory, Honor and Praise
for ever and ever. Amen. -- Even

To HIM, who is the Alpha and the Omega, the Almighty, the same Yesterday, to
Day, and forever, who is God, the true God, the mighty God, the holy one of
Israel, sitting on a Throne high and lifted up, God over all blessed for ever,
by whom and for whom all Things were created -- even to HIM let "every Knee bow
in Heaven and on Earth:" -- and it will be so far from derogating or detracting
from the Honor, that it will be "to the Glory of God the Father." For, "he and
his Father are ONE." -- Yea, there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are ONE. And to this ONE
GOD in three Persons, to whom we were dedicated in Baptism, and from whom all
Blessings flow to us, even to HIM, be ascribed "the Kingdom, Power, and Glory
for ever." Amen.

The MILLENNIUM.
REVELATION, XX. 1, 2, 3. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the
Key of the bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his Hand And he laid hold on
the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a
Thousand Years. And cast him into the bottomless Pit, and shut him up, and set
a Seal upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the Thousand
Years should be fulfilled.


IN a great Variety of Respects, the BIBLE is the most remarkable Book in the
World. In it we have God's moral Character clearly exhibited to View, by a
History of his Conduct, as moral Governor of the World from the beginning: and
the Nature of fallen Man painted to the Life, by a History of their Behavior
for four Thousand Years. In it we have opened the glorious and astonishing
Method, that has been entered upon, to disappoint all Satan's Designs, by the
Interposition of the Son of God; and are informed of his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Exaltation, and of the glorious Designs he has in
View. And the whole is so contrived as to be admirably suited to all the
Circumstances and Needs of a good Man; That, as it was designed to be the good
Man's Book, in a peculiar Sense, so it is perfectly suited to his Case. It is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good Works. (2 Timothy III. 16, 17.)

THAT sincere Concern for the Cause of Truth and Virtue, for the Honor of God
and Interest of true Religion, which is peculiar to a good Man, whose Character
it is to love Christ above Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Houses and
Lands, yea, better than his own Life, must naturally subject him to a peculiar
Kind of Solicitude. Even as a Child, of a truly filial Spirit, is pained when
it goes ill with his Father's Family, to whose Interest he is closely attached;
and has a whole System of inward Sensations, that a Stranger intermeddles not
with. -- The BIBLE, the good Man's Book, is, therefore, wisely adapted to case
the good Man's pained Heart, and afford Consolation in this interesting and
most important Point; as it gives the strongest Assurances that the Cause of
Virtue shall finally prevail.

How insupportable must the Grief of the pious Jews have been, sitting on the
Sides of the Rivers of Babylon! "There we sat down," say they, "yea, we wept
when we remembered Zion." And "on the Willows they hung their Harps," nor could
any Thing divert their Minds. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right Hand
forget her Cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof
of my Mouth. ( Psalm. CXXXVII.) -- How insupportable, I say, must their Grief
have been, while their glorious holy Temple, and their holy City, the Place of
all their sacred Solemnities, were lying desolate, and God's People in
Captivity, had it not been for that Promise, so often repeated, that after
seventy Years God would visit them, and cause them to return to their own Land.
God knew beforehand the Anguish, which would be apt to (...) their Hearts, the
sinking Discouragements, and all the Train of dark and gloomy Thoughts, they
would be incident to; and beforehand provided a Remedy. Yea, no sooner had he
denounced their Doom in the XXXIXth Chapter of Isaiah, but immediately in the
next Chapter, and for ten or twenty Chapters together, does he provide for
their Support. Comfort ye, comfort ye, my People; speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, etc. etc.

So, how insupportable would have been the Grief of the Church of Christ, through
the long, dark, cruel Reign of mystical Babylon, while they beheld Error and
Wickedness universally prevail, Satan getting his Will in almost every Thing,
and to Appearance no Signs of better Times, but all Things wearing a dreadful
Aspect before their Eyes; how great their Grief; how sinking their
Discouragements, how almost insuperable their Temptations to apostatize, and
forsake a Cause that Heaven seemed to forsake, had not the Day of Deliverance
been expressly foretold, and the Glory that should follow opened to View, by the
Spirit of Prophecy! But in a firm Belief that the Cause they were engaged in,
and for which they spilt their Blood, would finally prevail; and prevail in
this World, where they then beheld Satan reigning and triumphing, I say, in a
firm Belief of this, the whole Army of Martyrs could march on to Battle
courageously, willing to sacrifice their Lives in the Cause, not doubting of
final Victory, although they themselves must fall in the Field.

INDEED, were the Salvation of his own Soul the only Thing the good Man had in
View, he would naturally be quite easy upon a full Assurance that this was
secured. So, had Moses cared for nothing but the Welfare of himself and of his
Posterity, he might have been satisfied, while the whole Congregation of Israel
were destroyed, if he might become a great Nation, and that without any
Solicitude for the Honor of the GREAT NAME of the GOD of Israel: Yea, although
the Idolatrous Nations round about were fully established in the Belief of the
Divinity of their Idols, and brought to look upon the GOD of the Hebrews with
ever so great Contempt by the Means. But, attached as he was to the Honor of
the God of Israel, nothing could give him Satisfaction, but a Prospect that
that would be secured. The Welfare of himself and of his Family was of no
Importance in his Esteem, compared with this. (See Exodus XXXII.)

IT must, therefore, be remembered, that, as the SON of God left his Father's
Bosom, and the Realms of Light and Glory, and expired on the Cross in the
utmost visible Contempt, that he might spoil Principalities and Powers, bruise
the Serpent's Head, destroy the Works of the Devil; so his true Disciples have
imbibed a Measure of the same Spirit; and, as Volunteers enlisted under his
Banner, have the same Thing in View: they long for the Destruction of Satan's
Kingdom: and these Petitions are the genuine Language of their Hearts, Our
Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be
done on Earth as it is in Heaven. Nor can the Salvation of their own Souls,
although ever so safely secured, satisfy their Minds, without a clear View and
fair Prospect of Christ's final Victory over all his Enemies. But if our great
GENERAL, who has sacrificed his Life in the Cause, may but at last obtain a
complete Victory, notwithstanding all the present dark Appearances; This is
enough, says the Christian Soldier: I am willing to risque all in his Service,
and die in the Battle too. But if Satan were always to carry the Day, Oh who
could live under the Thought!

THIS having been the Temper of good Men, more or less, even from the early
Ages of the World, and through all successive Generations to this Day, they have
evidently wanted a peculiar Support, which the Rest of Mankind stood in no Need
of, to carry them comfortably through such a long Scene of Darkness; Wickedness
prevailing, God dishonored, Satan triumphing, the World perishing, the true
Church of God more generally in Sackcloth. And accordingly the final Victory of
the Cause of Truth and Virtue was intimated in the very-first Promise made to
fallen Man. And from Time to Time God repeated this comfortable Prediction to
his Church and People; and finally made it the chief Subject of the last Book
of holy Scripture, he ordered to be wrote for the Use of his Church.

Now let us take a brief View of the whole Series of these divine Predictions,
from the Beginning of the World, even down to this in our Text, contained in
one of the last Chapters in the Bible; that we may see what full Evidence there
is of this Truth; and so, what abundant Cause for Consolation to all the People
of God.

I. IMMEDIATELY after the Fall, when the Serpent, even that old Serpent the
Devil, had just seduced Mankind to revolt from God, and had, to all Appearance,
laid this whole World in perpetual Ruin, even in the Depths of this
Midnight-Darkness, a Ray of Light shone down from Heaven -- The Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head. ( Genesis III. 15.) As if God had said, I
see the Scheme that Satan has laid to ruin the World, and establish his
impious, malicious Cause: I see it, and I am determined to defeat it. The
feebler Woman he has over-matched, but her almighty Seed shall conquer him, and
as effectually subdue him, and prevent all future Mischief by him, as a Serpent
is subdued and incapacitated for further Mischief, when his Head is crushed to
Pieces, under the indignant Heel of one determined on his Death. This was a
complete Doom indeed denounced against Satan, at the Head of the Kingdom of
Darkness. And it fully implied, that the Cause of Light, Truth and
Righteousness should finally obtain a complete Victory.

II. AFTER this gracious and glorious Promise had been the chief Foundation of
all the Hopes of God's People for two Thousand Years, God was pleased to point
out the particular Family from whence this mighty Deliverer should spring, and
to intimate what a universal Blessing he should be to all the Nations of the
Earth. And in thy SEED shall ALL the Families of the Earth be blessed, said God
to Abraham. ( Genesis XII. 3.) Which again plainly supposed, that the Cause of
Truth and Righteousness, notwithstanding the dark State the World then was in,
all sinking last into Idolatry, and would for many Ages be in, buried in
heathenish Darkness, should yet in due Time universally prevail over the whole
Earth. For in thy Seed shall ALL the Families of the Earth be blessed. This
same Promise was repeated again and and again to Abraham, and afterward to
Isaac and to Jacob.

III. HITHERTO God had supported his People's Hopes chiefly with Promises, with
verbal Predictions; but from the Days of Moses to the Days of Solomon King of
Israel, to assist his People's Faith, God did, besides repeated Promises of the
same Thing, by a great Variety of wonderful Works shadow forth the glorious
Day: And at the same Time show, that he had sufficient Wisdom and Power to
accomplish the greatest Designs. That his People might be convinced, that he
could easily bring to pass, for the Good of his Church, whatsoever seemed Good
in his Sight.

ISRAEL in the Egyptian Bondage were a designed Type of a fallen World under
the Dominion and Tyranny of Satan. Nor was Pharaoh more loath to let Israel go,
than Satan is to have his Subjects desert him, and his Kingdom go to Ruin. But
notwithstanding all the seeming Impossibilities in the Way of Israel's
Deliverance, infinite Wisdom knew how to accomplish the divine Designs. God
could even cause a Member of Pharoah's Family to educate one to be an
Instrument of this designed Deliverance. And in due Time, behold, all the
Armies of Israel march forth from the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
Bondage; and Pharaoh, and his Chariots, and all his Host, lie buried in the Red
Sea! So easily can God bring forth his People even out of the Antichristian
Kingdom, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. And, if he pleases, raise
up the Instruments of this glorious Work, even in the Court of Rome.

AND when the Name of the true God was almost forgotten through all the Earth,
and the Devil worshipped in his Room, in Idols of various Names, through all the
Nations, God knew how to make his Name known, and to cause his Fame to spread
abroad, and fill the whole Earth with his Glory, by Wonders wrought in the Land
of Ham, by descending on Mount Sinai, by leading the Armies of Israel forty
Years in the Wilderness in a Pillar of Cloud by Day, and of Fire by Night,
giving them Bread from Heaven and Water out of the flinty Rock, dividing for
(...) delivering up one and thirty Idolatrous Kings to the Sword of Joshua,
raising up Judges one after another in a miraculous Manner to deliver his
People, until the Days of David and Solomon, Types of Christ. Of David, who
Messiah-like subdued the Enemies of Israel all around: of Solomon, who built
the holy Temple and filled Jerusalem with Riches and Glory. -- He, who has
done all these Things, can easily accomplish all the Designs of his Heart,
preserve his Church, raise up Deliverance, break to Pieces the Kingdoms of the
Earth for her Sake, make Truth victorious, and set up the new Jerusalem in all
her spiritual Glory, build up his Church as a glorious holy Temple, and set the
Son of David upon the Throne; by whose Hands, Satan and all the Powers of
Darkness shall be subdued, chained, sealed up in the bottomless Pit, as much
afraid, and as much unable to attempt any Mischief, as the subdued Nations
around Israel were in the very Height of David's Power.

BUT when shall the Son of David reign, and the Church have Rest? When shall
the Cause of Truth and Righteousness thus prevail? Perhaps the very Time was
designed to be shadowed forth in the Law of Moses, in the Institution of their
holy Days. The seventh Day, said God, who always had this glorious Season of
Rest in View, The seventh Day shall be a Sabbath of Rest, the seventh Month
shall be full of holy Days, the seventh Year shall be a Year of Rest: So,
perhaps, after six Thousand Years are spent in Labor and Sorrow by the Church
of God, the seven Thousandth shall be a Season of spiritual Rest and Joy, and
holy Sabbath to the Lord. -- And as God the Creator was six Days in forming a
confused Chaos into a beautiful World, and rested the seventh; so God the
Redeemer, after six Thousand Years Labor in the Work of the new Creation, may
rest on the seventh. -- And then proclaim a general Liberty to an enslaved
World, and grant a general Pardon to a guilty Race; as in the Year of Jubilee,
among the Jews, every enslaved Jew was set at Liberty, and the Debts of all the
indebted were cancelled.

IV. THESE Things, thus shadowed forth in Types, were also expressly declared by
the Mouths of the ancient Prophets, from the Days of David and forward to the
End of that Dispensation: and the same Things are hinted here and there in the
New Testament, and largely opened to View in the Revelation of St. John. So
that both the Old and New Testaments join to raise in us, who live in these
Ages, the highest Assurance, that it is God's Design to give to his Son the
Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for his
Possession. ( Psalm. II. 8.) For all Kings shall bow down before him, and all
Nations shall serve him. ( Psalm. LXXII. 11.) And the Mountain of the Lord's
House shall be established in the Top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted
above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. ( Isai. II. 2.) They shall
beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into pruning Hooks, and
learn War no more. ( ver. 4.) For the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of
the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. ( Isai. XI. 9.) A Nation shall be born
in a Day. ( Isai. LXVI. 8.) All thy People shall be righteous. ( Isai. LX. 21.)
They shall all know the Lord, from the least to the greatest. ( Jer. XXXI. 24.)
And Holiness to the Lord shall be written on every Thing, ( Zech. XIV. 20, 21.)
Kings shall become nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers ( Isai. XLIX.
23.) and there shall be nothing to hurt or offend. ( Isai. XI. 9.) The
Inhabitant shall not [so much as] say, I am sick. ( Jer. XXXIII. 24.) And this
Kingdom shall fill the whole Earth. ( Dan. II. 35.) And all Nations and
Languages shall serve him. ( Dan. VII. 14.) And the Kingdom and Dominion, and
the Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the
People of the Saints of the most high God. ( Dan. VII. 27.) and the Jews shall
be called in, and the Fullness of the Gentiles. ( Romans XI. 12 -- 32.) For the
Gospel shall be preached to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People.
( Rev. XIV. 6.) And Satan shall be bound, and Christ shall reign on Earth a
Thousand Years. Satan shall be bound. etc. The Church of Christ shall enjoy
Purity of Religion in Peace, without any Disturbance from those old Enemies of
Mankind, working in the Children of Disobedience.

Daubuz on the Place.

And this seems to imply, that all shall be converted -- However, if there be
any that remain unconverted, they will, during the Imprisonment of Satan, be in
so small a Number, and so feeble in Comparison of the true Christians, that
they shall neither dare, nor be able to disturb the Peace of Christ's Kingdom.

Lowman on the Place.

A Spirit of strict Piety shall rise so high, and so universally prevail, that
it shall be as though all the Martyrs of former Ages were risen from the Dead,
and appeared upon the Stage all at once. This seems to be the Sense of those
Words in Rev. XX. 4. The Martyrs are said to rise from the Dead, and reign with
Christ a Thousand Years, much in the same Sense as John the Baptist is called
(...), viz. because he was a Man so nearly resembling that celebrated Prophet.
See Lowman on the Place.


And as surely as the Jews were delivered out of the Babylonish Captivity, and
Babylon 'itself destroyed; even so surely shall all these Things be
accomplished in their Time. And mystical Babylon shall sink as a Millstone
into the Sea, and shall be found no more at all. ( Rev. XVIII. 21.)

V. BUT when shall these Things be? -- I answer, in the first Place, it is
plain, as yet they have not been, these great Things have not been
accomplished. They were not accomplished when the Jews were brought out of
their babylonish Captivity: for, from thence to the Coming of Christ, they
never were in so flourishing a State as they had been before. They were not
accomplished in the apostolic Age: For, St. John, when most, if not all, of
the other Apostles were dead, spoke of these Things (in the Revolution) as yet
to come to pass. They were not accomplished in the three first Centuries: for,
that was almost one continued Scene of Blood. They were not accomplished in the
Days of Constantine the Great: for, it is since then that the Man of Sin has
been revealed. Nor are they accomplished to this Day: for, Satan is still
walking to and fro through the Earth, and going up and down therein; Babylon is
not fallen; the Jews are not called; nor is the Fullness of the Gentiles come
in; but the greatest Part of the Earth to this Day fit in heathenish Darkness.

WHEN then shall they be acomplished? -- Not till the holy City has been trodden
under Foot forty two Months -- Not till the Witnesses have prophesied a
Thousand, two Hundred and Threescore Days, clothed in Sackcloth. ( Rev. XI. 2,
3.) -- And not till the Woman has been in the Wilderness a Time and Times and
half a Time. ( Rev. XII. 14.) Now a Time and Times and half a Time, i. e. three
Years and a half, is equal to forty two Months; which is equal to one Thousand
two Hundred and sixty Days; which doubtless means 1260 Years, a Day for a Year:
As the Event has proved was the Case in the Prophecy of Daniel, who declared it
to be 70 Weeks, from the going forth of the Commandment to build Jerusalem, to
the Death of Christ. For it proved to be 490 Years, which is 7 Times 70, a Day
for a Year. ( Dan. IX. 24.)

So that there is no Difficulty in determining the Downfall of Antichrist, but
what arises from the Uncertainty we are at when to date the Beginning of his
Rise and Reign. The Bishops of Rome were some Hundred Years rising gradually
from the honest Character of a Scripture-Bishop to the Grand Title of universal
Pope, which was obtained, A. D. 606. -- And it was a long Time from this,
before they got to the Height of their Grandeur, and the Pope was constituted a
temporal Prince, which was not till A. D. 756. See BOW^^S History of the POPES.
-- And perhaps he may fall as gradually as he rose. And as now he has been
falling 240 Years, even ever since the Beginning of the Reformation; so we may
rationally expect he will continue to fall, till Babylon sinks as a Millstone
into the Sea. And then the Mountains and the Hills shall break forth into
singing, and all the Trees of the Field shall clap their Hands. ( Isai. LV.
12.) And all the Hosts of Heaven as loud as Thunder, shall say, Hallelujah! For
the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give Honor
to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wise has made herself
ready. ( Rev. XIX. 6, 7.)

AND thus we have taken a brief View of the Scripture Evidence, that the Cause
of Truth and Righteousness will finally become gloriously victorious.

VI. NOR is there the least Reason to doubt the Accomplishment of these Things.
For, -- God in all Times past has been faithful to his Word, -- and is
evidently sufficiently engaged, in this Affair -- knows how, and can vastly
accomplish it -- and it will be much to the Honor of his great Name to do it.

GOD has been faithful to his Promises to his Church from the Beginning of the
World. To all human Appearance, it was a very unlikely Thing, that the Hebrews,
inslaved in Egypt, under Pharaoh, a very powerful Monarch, and sunk down into
Idolatry, and very low-spirited, should arise, and go forth with all their
Flocks and Herds, and march through the Wilderness, and conquer the seven Nations
of Canaan, and possess their Land, And so it was to all human Appearance
equally unlikely, that the Jews in Babylon should ever return to their own
Land. But God had promised in both Cases, and God performed. And an Event more
surprising than either of these, yea, the most astonishing that could have
happened, has also come to pass, just as God had said. The promised SEED has
been born, and the Serpent has bruised his Heel; and methinks now not only
God's Faithfulness, but even the Nature of the Case itself, should lead us to
believe, that the SEED shall bruise his Head.

FOR, after God has appeared to be so infinitely engaged to destroy the Works
of the Devil, as to give his only begotten Son, it can surely never once be
imagined, that he wants sufficient Resolution to carry him through what yet
remains to be done.

AND He, who could send Pharaoh's Daughter to take up Moses, when an Infant,
out of his Basket of Bulrushes, and educate him in Pharaoh's Court, that he
might be skilled in all the Arts of Government; and when he had spent forty
years in this Situation, banish him into the Land of Mid^an, that in the
solitary Life of Shepherd for another forty (...) for the Work designed him: --
And He, who could take David from feeding his Father's Sheep, and, after a
Course of Trials, so exceeding necessary to prepare frail Man for high Honors
and great Usefulness, exalt him to the Throne of Israel, so thoroughly
furnished to head their Armies and subdue their Foes, advance their external
Grandeur, and put great Honor upon their Religion: -- And He, who could take
Daniel, one of the Jewish Captives in Babylon, and raise him to such high
Honor and great Authority, to be a Father to his People through their seventy
Years Captivity, and by his Means (perhaps) influence Cyrus so generously to
release them, and assist them in their Return: As Daniel understood the
Prophecies of Jeremiah, which had determined the Time of the Captivity to be 70
Years ( Dan. IX. 2.) and had his Heart so much in the Affair of their Return,
as to set his Face to seek the Lord by Fasting and Prayer; ( ver. 3.) and being
the chief Man in the Kingdom must have free Access, to Cyrus; ( Dan. VI.) so
nothing could be more natural than to show him an ancient Jewish Prophecy,
wherein he was mentioned by Name, near 200 Years ago, and pointed out as the
Person who was to let go the Jewish Captives, build Jerusalem, and lay the
Foundation of the Temple. Isal. XLIV. 28. and Chap. XLV. 1 -- 3. To which Cyrus
no doubt refers in his Proclamation. Ezr. I. 2, 3, 4. Thus says Cyrus King of
Persia, The Lord God of Heaven has given are all the Kingdom of the Earth, and
he has CHARGED me to build him an House at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who
is there among you, (...).
-- And finally, He, who could take a Number of poor illiterate Fishermen, and
the persecuting Saul, and by them lay the Foundation of the Christian Church,
in Spite of the united Opposition of Earth and Hell; and after their Death
cause the Christian Church to live through, yea, at last to triumph over, the ten
bloody Persecutions, and even conquer the Roman Empire; and that which is still
more wonderful, to subsist to this Day, notwithstanding all the subtle and
cruel Methods; which have for so many Hundred Years been taken by Antichrist to
extirpate Christianity out of the World: -- I say, He who could do these
Things, cannot be at at a Loss for Means, or want Power, to effect the glorious
Things foretold, which yet remain to be accomplished.

AND, what if Mankind are ever so estranged from God? And what if they are ever
so averse to a Reconciliation? And what if Satan reigns in the Courts of
Princes, in the Councils of the Clergy, as well as in the Cottages of the Poor?
And what if even the whole World in a Manner lies in Wickedness? So that a
general Conflagration might rather be expected, as it is so eminently deserved;
-- are these Things any Bar in the Way?

WHAT if Mankind have abused divine Grace from the Beginning of the World? What
if they have murdered his Prophets, his Son, and his Apostles? What if they
have resisted and grieved the Holy Spirit, and perverted the Doctrines, and
gone counter to the Precepts of his holy Word? Yea, what if it appears that
Mankind are really on Satan's Side? And this after all the kind Methods God has
taken to reclaim a guilty World? so that even the best Man on Earth, or the
kindest Angel in Heaven might be discouraged, totally and finally discouraged,
and think it never worth while to take any more Pains with such a perverse
Race, but that it were more suitable to the Rules of good Government to resign
them to Destruction? Are any, or all these Things together, a sufficient Bar to
the Accomplishment of God's Designs, whose Goodness is absolutely infinite?

WHAT! After the Son of God has been offered as a Sacrifice of Atonement, to
secure the Honor of the divine Government, and open a Way for the honorable
Exercise of his Grace! What, after the Messiah has been exalted to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins! And after all Power
and Authority in Heaven and Earth is given into his Hands, on Purpose to
destroy the Kingdom of Satan, and bring every Nation, Kindred and Tongue, to
bow the Knee to God! yea, when the infinitely wise Governor of the World has
before determined to permit the Wickedness of Mankind to come out and stand in
so glaring a Light, and to suffer Satan so long to Practice and prosper; to
this very Purpose, that his Power, Wisdom and Grace might be the more
effectually and the more gloriously displayed, in the Accomplishment of all his
glorious Designs!

INSTEAD of being discouraged, from a View of the past or the present State of
the World, as without the Light of divine Revelation we should naturally have
been; methinks now, viewing all Things in the Light of holy Scripture, it must
be perfectly rational to conclude, that all these Things are only preparatory,
as an Introduction to the glorious Day; even, as all the cruel Bondage of
Israel in Egypt, and all the haughty Conduct of Pharaoh, were but preparatory,
as an Introduction to the glorious Event that God had then in his Eye. -- And
what unspeakable. Honor will redound to God most High, if after all the vile
Conduct of this apostate World, and notwithstanding all their Ill-desert, and
after all the subtle Methods Satan has taken to make his Kingdom strong; I say,
what unspeakable Honor will redound to God most High, if after all this he
should accomplish his glorious Designs? -- And when Things have been ripening
these five or six Thousand Years, and are now so nearly every Way prepared for
God to get himself a great Name in the total Destruction of Satan's Kingdom,
can we once imagine that God will let the Opportunity slip? Or rather, ought we
not firmly to believe that when every Thing is quite ripe, then, God will
arise, make bare his Arm, and fill the whole World with his Glory?

ESPECIALLY, considering, that as Things stand, the Honor of all his glorious
Perfections lies at Stake. -- For, ever since the ALMIGHTY gave out the Word,
that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head, even from that
very Day, that old Serpent, with all his Subtilty, has employed his whole Power
to defeat the divine Designs, maintain his Kingdom in the World, and escape the
dreadful Blow. -- He stirred up Cain to kill his Brother, and never left till
the whole Earth was filled with Violence, which brought on the general Deluge.
-- And after the Flood he was industrious to divert Mankind from the Knowledge
and Worship of the true God, and to establish Idolatry and the Worship of
Devil, in all the Kingdoms of the Earth. And since Christianity appeared, he
has turned himself into every Shape to defeat the gracious Designs of the
Gospel, and has prevailed and reigned above a Thousand Years, at the Head of
the grand Antichristian Apostasy. And should the Almighty suffer him to go
(...) and prosper, and finally prevail, what would become of his own great
Name? And how great would be their Triumph in the infernal Regions, to think,
that in Spite of God and of his Son, from the Beginning to the End of the
World, they have held out in a constant War, kept the Field, and at last come
off victorious? -- Wherefore, as when God repeats the wonderful Works, which he
had done for Israel in the Days of old, in the XXth. Chapter of Ezekiel, he
constantly says, I wrought for mine own great Name, so here, in this Case will
he do it again, and that in the most eminent Manner. As it is written, The ZEAL
of the Lord of Hosts (...) perform this. Isai. IX. 7.

So that, in a Word, if almighty Power and infinite Wisdom, at the Head of the
Universe, infinitely engaged, are a sufficient Match for the Guilty, impotent
Powers of Darkness, then we may depend upon it, Satan will meet with an
Overthrow, as notable as did Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea. And as proud
Babylon, once the Mistress of Kingdoms, is now no more; so mystical Babylon
shall sink as a Millstone in the Sea, and rise no more for ever. And

VII. WHATEVER Mistakes the Jewish Rabbis might fall into, in their
Interpretation of Daniel's 70 Weeks, and in their Attempts to six the precise
Time of the Messiah's coming; and whatever mistaken Notions any of them had
about the Nature of his Kingdom, as though it was to be of this World, and He to
appear in all earthly Grandeur; and although his Coming, to some might seem to be
so long delayed, that they began to give up all Hopes of it, and to contrive
some other Meaning to all the ancient Prophecies, or even to call in Question
the Inspiration of the Prophets: yet neither the Mistakes of some, nor the
Infidelity of others, at all altered the Case. Days and Months and Years
hastened along, and one Revolution among the Kingdoms of the Earth followed
upon another, till the Fullness of Time was come, till all Things were ripe; and
then, Behold, the MESSIAH was born. Even so it shall be now.

WHATEVER Mistakes Christian Divines may fall into, in their Interpretation of
666, the Number of the Beast, or in their Endeavors to fix the precise Time
when the 1260 Years of Antichrist's Reign shall begin and end; or whatever
wrong Notions some have had, or may have about the Nature of the Millennium, as
though Christ was to reign personally on Earth; and if some, mean while, begin to
think, that all Things will go on as they have done, and to conclude, that the
the Expectation of these glorious Days, which has prevailed in the Christian
Church from the Beginning, is merely a groundless Fancy: Yet none of these
Things will at all alter the Case. Days and Months and Years will hasten along,
and one Revolution among the Kingdoms of the Earth follow upon another, until
the Fullness of Time is come, till all things are ripe for the Event; and then
the Ministers of Christ will accomplish in Reality, what St. John saw in his
Visions: -- I saw an Angel fly in the Midst of Heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation and
Kindred, and Tongue and People. ( Rev. XIV. 6.) And then shall it come to pass,
that the Vail of Ignorance, which has so long spread over all Nations, shall
be destroyed ( Isai XXV. 7.) and Knowledge shall so greatly increase, that it
shall be as though the Light of the Moon were as the Light of the Sun, and the
Light of the Sun seven fold ( Isai. XXX. 26.) until the Knowledge of the Lord
cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea. ( Isai. XI. 9.) And then there shall
be nothing to hurt or offend in all God's holy Mountain. For Babylon shall
fall, Satan be bound, and Christ will reign, and Truth and Righteousness
universally prevail, a Thousand Years.

REMARKS and INFERENCES.
I. WHEN, therefore, our Savior in the Days of his Flesh, denominated his
Followers a little Flock, front the Smallness of their Number, he had no Design
to teach us, that this would always be the Case. For although it was very true,
that his (...) at that Time a little Flock; yet the Day was coming, when that
little Leaven should leaven the whole Lump ( Mat. XIII. 33.) and the Stone cut
out without Hands should become a great Mountain, and fill the whole Earth. (
Dan. II. 25.) So, although it was a Saying very applicable not only to our
Savior's Day, but to most other Periods of the Church, that many are called
and few are chosen; yet it does not hence follow, that this will be the Case
when a Nation shall be born in a Day, and all the People shall be righteous.
And although it has commonly been so, that of the Many who have sought to enter
in at the strait Gate, but Few have been able, and the Generality have from Age
to Age gone in the broad Way, which leads down to Destruction: yet it shall be
quite otherwise, when Satan is bound, that he may deceive the Nations no more;
and when all shall know the Lord from the least to the greatest, when the
Kingdom and the Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heavens, shall be
given to the People of the Saints of the Most High. -- For it is very plain,
that these and such like Expressions used by our Savior, which were applicable
to the then-times, and to most other Periods, when the Number of true Conver's
has been comparatively very small, were never designed to be applicable to
that glorious Period yet to come, which is to be the grand Harvest-Time, when
the Jews (who are to this Day for that very Purpose, no doubt, by divine
Providence preserved a distinct People) and the Fullness of the Gentiles shall
come in. Nor can it be right to interpret such Expressions in such a Sense, as
to render them inconsistent with what the Scriptures so plainly teach shall be
the Case in the latter Days. -- Therefore,

2. NOTWITHSTANDING hitherto but few have been saved, there is no Evidence but
that yet the greater Part of Mankind may be saved. Nothing can be argued
against this from such Expressions as have been just mentioned, for the Reason
already suggested. Nor can any Thing be argued from any other Passages of
Scripture; for the Scripture no where teaches, that the greatest Part of the
whole had an Race will finally perish. I am sensible, many seem to take this
for granted, and they are greatly strengthened in this Belief, from a View of
the awful State Mankind have been in from the Beginning of the World to this
Day. But if we should even grant, that hitherto not One in ten. Thousand have
been saved, yet it may come to pass (there may be Time enough for it, and Men
enough yet born) I say, it may yet come to pass, that by far the greatest Part
of Mankind may be saved.

FOR, as the Scriptures constantly teach, that in these glorious Days,
universal Peace shall prevail; and instead of War, the Nations shall employ
their Time in useful, Labor, shall beat their Swords into pl^^shares, and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks; so it will naturally come to pass, that
Mankind, who are now in vast Multitudes destroyed in the Wars from one
Generation to another, will be greatly increased in Numbers, and plentifully
provided for. Only remove Wars, Famines, and all those desolating Judgments,
which the Sins of Mankind have from Age to Age brought down on a guilty World,
and let that universal Peace and Prosperity take Place, which indeed will
naturally result from the sincere Practice of pure Christianity, and Mankind
will naturally increase, and spread, and fill all the Earth. And while every
one improves his Time well, and is diligent in his Calling, according to the
Rules of our holy Religion, and all Luxury, Intemperance and Extravagance are
banished from the Nations of the Earth, it is certain that this Globe will be
able to sustain with Food and Raiment, a Number of Inhabitants immensely
greater than ever yet dwelt on it at a Time. And now if all these shall know
the Lord from the least to the greatest, as the Scripture asserts, so that the
Knowledge of the Lord shall fill the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea, for a
Thousand Years together, it may easily, yea, it will naturally come to pass,
that there will be more saved in these Thousand Years, then ever before dwelt
upon the Face of the Earth from the Foundation of the World.

SOME indeed understand the Thousand Years in the Revelation agreeable to other
prophetical Numbers in that Book, a Day for a Year. So the Time, and Times, and
half a Time, i. e. three Years and an half, and the forty two Months, and the
1260 Days, are no doubt to be reckoned. And if the dark Period is to be
reckoned by this Rule, it should seem that the light Period should likewise.
For otherwise the dark Period, which in that Book is represented to be the
shortest, will indeed be the longest. The 1260 Days longer then the 1000 Years,
-- and if the 1000 Years is reckoned a Day a Year, as the Scripture-Year
contains 360 Days, so the 1000 Years will amount to 360, 000 Years. In which,
there might be Millions saved, to One that has been lost. -- But not to insist
upon this, If this glorious Period is to last only a Thousand Years literally,
there may be many more saved than lost.

IF it be granted, that it is difficult to compute with any Exactness in such a
Case as this, yet it is easy to make such a Computation as may satisfy us in
the Point before us. For in Egypt the Hebrews doubled at the Rate of about once
in 14 Years; in New England the Inhabitants double in less than 25 Years; it
will be moderate therefore to suppose, Mankind in the Millennium, when all the
Earth is full of Peace and Prosperity, will double every 50 Years. But at this
Rate, there will be Time enough in a Thousand Years to double twenty Times.
Which would produce such a Multitude of People, as that although we should
suppose all who live before the Millennium begins, to be lost; yet if all those
should be saved, there would be above seventeen Thousand saved, to One that
would be lost. As may appear from the Table below. 1 2 2 4 3 8 4 16 5 32 6 64 7
128 8 256 9 512 10 1024 11 2048 12 4096 13 8192 14 16384 15 32768 16 65536 17
131072 18 262144 19 524288 20 1048576 Sum total. 2, 097, 150

IN the first Column, we have the 20 Periods, which 1000 years will make, at 50
years to a Period. -- In the second Column, we see in what Proportion Mankind
will increase, if they are supposed to double in every 50 Years. -- At the End
of the first Fifty Years, there will be two for one. -- And so on -- At the End
of the 20th period, there will be above a Million for one. -- Now suppose the
World to stand 6000 Years before the Millennium -- and suppose it in every Age
to be as full of Inhabitants as it will be when the Millennium begins -- And
suppose, through all the 6000 Years, all the Inhabitants of the Earth to have
died off and new ones come in their Room, at the R^^e of once in 50 Years --
6000 Years, at 50 Years to a period, will be 120 Periods -- 120 Worlds full --
all lost, suppose -- yet by the Table we see, that the 7th Period alone (which
is 128) would more than counter balance the Whole --

Suppose all before the Millennium lost = 120

Suppose all in the Millennium saved = 2097150

Then 120: 2097150 ^^^^ 17456 Q. E. D.

That is, above 17000 would be saved, to One lost, which was the point to be
proved. -- Therefore nothing hinders, but that the greatest Part of Mankind may
yet be saved, if God so pleases. There is Time enough for it, and may be Men
enough yet born. And if these Calculations may serve to clear up this, they
answer the End proposed. What Proportion of Mankind will finally be saved, and
what (...) alone can tell. It is no where revealed. God was not obliged to save
One out of all this guilty lost World. Hither to the Generality may have
perished: and the Lord is Righteous. -- But who can tell to what a Degree God
may yet glorify (...) Grace? The holy Scriptures encourage us to look for
Things exceeding great and glorious (...); even for such (...) may put a new
Face on all God's past Dispensations. ((...) the following Sermons on the
Wisdom of God in the (...) of Sin.)




3. THE Periods past, that have been so dark, ought to be considered as
introductory to this (...) and glorious Scene, and in various Respects as
preparatory thereto.

AN apostate Race, who had joined with the fallen Angels in a Course of
Rebellion against the Governor of the Universe, might justly have been forsaken
of God, and given up to a State of perfect Darkness and Woe, from Generation to
Generation, entirely under the Power of the Prince of Darkness. What has
happened, in dark Ages past, may help us a-little to realize what might justly
always have been the woeful State of a fallen World. We have had a Specimen of
the dreadful Nature and Tendency of Satan's Government, in all the Idolatry,
Wickedness and Woe, which have filled the World. And we have seen a-little what
is in the Heart of fallen Man, who have slain the Lord's Prophets, crucified
his Son, and shed the Blood of Thousands, yea of Millions of his Servants. And
what has happened may help us to realize a-little what must have been the State
of a fallen World, if Grace had never interposed. At the same Time it has
appeared, after the best contrived Experiments have been sufficiently tried,
that it is not in the Heart of fallen Man to repent, nor can he be brought to
it by any external Means whatsoever; whereby the absolute Necessity of the
interposition of supernatural Grace has been set in the most glaring Light. --
And now, if after all God should effectually interpose, destroy the Influence
of Satan, scatter the Darkness which fills the World, recover Mankind to God,
and cause Truth and Righteousness at last to prevail; it would appear to be
altogether of God, of his own mere self-moving Goodness and sovereign Grace.
And after so long and fore a Bondage, Mankind will be the more sensible of the
Greatness of the Deliverance. -- Nor can it ever be said by a proud and haughty
World, We did not Need the Influences of divine Grace to bring us right; When
as all other Methods had been sufficiently tried, and tried in vain. But God
may justly say, What could have been done more to reclaim Mankind, that I have
not done? And to what Purpose would it have been, to have taken one Step
further? I tried them enough. There was no Hope. Their Heart was a Heart of
Stone. -- Therefore, behold, I, (...) I will take away the Heart of Stone, and
give an Heart of Flesh; and an apostate World shall be ashamed and confounded,
and shall never open their Mouth, when I shall do all these Things for them.

WE are apt to wonder why these glorious Days should be so long delayed, if God
indeed intends such Mercy to Men. -- But God infinitely wise, knows what is
best; -- knows how to conduct the Affairs of the Universe; knows when is the
fittest Time to introduce this glorious State of Things; knows when Matters
will be all ripened, and every Thing in the moral World prepared; so that this
glorious Day may be ushered in to the best Advantage, in a Manner most suited
to honor God and his Son, to humble a haughty World, and to disappoint Satan
most grievously, after all his wily Schemes, great Success, and high
Expectations: -- I say, God knows when this will be: And this is the very Time
he has fixed upon for this glorious Work.

4. IT therefore becomes all the Followers of Christ, in their several Spheres,
in under firm Belief of these Things, to be of good Courage, and exert
themselves to the utmost, in the Use of all proper Means, to suppress Error and
Vice of every Kind, and promote the Cause of Truth and Righteousness in the
World; and so be Workers together with God.

IF one stood at the Head of this glorious Army, which has been in the Wars
above these five Thousand Years, and has lived through many a dreadful Campaign,
and were allowed to make a Speech to these veteran Troops upon this glorious
Theme, he might lift up his Voice, and say, Hail, noble Heroes! brave Followers
of the Lamb! Your General has sacrificed his Life in this glorious Cause, and
spoiled Principalities and Powers on the Cross! and now he lives and reigns. He
reigns on high, with all Power in Heaven and Earth in his Hands. Your
Predecessors, the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, with undaunted Courage have
marched into the Field of Battle, and conquered dying! and now reign in Heaven!
Behold, ye are risen up in their Room, are engaged in the same Cause, and the
Time of the last general Battle draws on, when a glorious Victory is to be won.
And although many a valiant Soldier may be slain in the Field; yet the Army shall
drive all before them at last. And Satan being conquered, and all the Powers of
Darkness driven out of the Field, and confined to the bottomless Pit, ye shall
reign with Christ a thousand Years, reign in Love and Peace, while Truth and
Righteousness ride triumphant through the Earth. -- Wherefore lay aside every
Weight, and, with your Hearts wholly intent on this grand Affair, gird up your
Loins, and with all the spiritual Weapons of Faith, Prayer, Meditation,
Watchfulness, etc. with redoubled Zeal and Courage fall on your spiritual
Enemies. Slay every Lust that yet lurks within, as knowing your domestic Foes
are the most dangerous. And with Gentleness, Meekness and Wisdom, by your holy
Conduct, your pious Examples, your kind Instructions, your friendly
Admonitions, spread the Savor of divine Knowledge all around you, as ye are
scattered here and there through a benighted World; laboring to win Souls to
Christ, to induce the deluded Followers of Satan to desert his Comp, and insist
as Volunteers under your Prince MESSIAH. -- And if the Powers of Darkness
should rally all their Forces, and a general Battle through all the Crhistian
World come on; O, love not your Lives to the Death! Sacrifice every earthly
Comfort in the glorious Cause! Sing the Triumphs of your victorious General, in
Prisons and at the Stake! And die courageously, firmly believing the Cause of
Truth and Righteousness will finally prevail.

SURELY it is infinitely unbecoming the Followers of him who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, to turn aside to earthly Pursuits, or to sink down in
unmanly Discouragements, or to give Way to Sloth and Effeminacy, when there is
so much to be done, and the glorious Day is coming on. How should those who
handle the Pen of the Writer, exert themselves to explain and vindicate divine
Truths, and paint the Christian Religion in all its native Glories? How should
the Pulpit be animated, from Sabbath to Sabbath, with Sermons full of Knowledge
and Light, full of Spirit and Life, full of Zeal for God, and Love to Men, and
tender Pity to infatuated Sinners? Christ loves to have his Ministers faithful,
whether the Wicked will hear or not. -- And let pious Parents be unwearied in
their Prayers for, and Instructions of their Children, and never saint under
any Discouragements; as knowing, that Christ is exalted to give Repentance and
Remission of Sins, and can do it for whom he will. Bring your Children and
Friends, with all their spiritual Diseases, and lay them at his Feet; as once
they did their Sick, when this kind Savior dwelt on Earth. -- Let pious
Persons of every Age, and in every Capacity, awake from Sleep, and arise from
the Dead, and live and act worthy their glorious Character and high
Expectations; and in their several Stations exert themselves to the utmost to
promote the Redeemer's glorious Cause. -- Let this Age do their Share, at
David, although the Temple was not to be built in his Day, yet exerted himself to
lay up Materials for that magnificent Edifice, on which his Heart was intently
set; as knowing, that in his Son's Day it would be set up in all its Glory. So
let us rise up, and with the greatest Alacrity contribute our utmost toward
this Building, this living Temple, this Temple all made of lively Stones, of
Stones alive, in which God is to dwell, and which will infinitely exceed in
Glory the Temple of Solomon, that was built of dead Timber and lifeless Stones.
-- And let this be our daily Prayer, an Answer to which we may be assured of,
whatever other Requests are denied us, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. --
for thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever. AMEN.

The WISDOM of God in the Permission of SIN.
SERMON I.
GENESIS. L. 20. -- YE thought Evil against Me; but God meant it unto Good. --


JACOB being dead and buried; and Joseph still Governor over all the Land of
Egypt, his guilty Brethren began to be afraid, that Joseph, in whose Power they
now were, and at whose Mercy they now lay, would requite them Evil, for the
inhuman, barbarous Deed they had formerly committed, in selling him, for a
Slave, notwithstanding all his Cries and Tears, and the Anguish of his Soul.
Wherefore having first sent Messengers to him, topacify him, and beg his
Pardon; they venture at last into his Presence, and fall down before his Face,
and resign to his Mercy, saying, Behold we be thy Servants. i. e. We have
nothing to say for ourselves; we are verily guilty: we are in thy Power; we
surrender ourselves to thy Disposal, Upon which, Joseph said unto them, "Fear
not" any Harm from me. "For am I in the Place of GOD," the righteous Judge of
the World, to whom Vengeance belongs, and with whom you had Need make your
Peace! It Is true indeed, ye acted a barbarous and cruel Part, "Ye though it Evil
against me: but God," who had the ordering of the whole Affair, meant it for
Good, to bring to pass as it is this Day, to save much People alive. And while
I behold the Wisdom and Goodness of God, so conspicuous in this Dispensation, I
have no Disposition to revenge the Injury you did me. Therefore fear not: for
instead of requlting you the Evil, you are sensible you deserve, for your ill
Treatment of me, I will rather, in Imitation of God, who has been so kind to
me in all my Distresses, treat you with all Goodness. I will nourish you and
your little Ones. Thus he comforted them, and spoke kindly to them.

AT the same Time Joseph viewed the Conduct of his Brethren, and considered
their Temper and Designs, and the Heinousness of their Crime; he also behold
(...) Hand of God, which he as plainly saw in the (...) Affair, permitting and
overruling his Brethren's Sin, to answer good noble Ends: And (...) indisposed
him to any angry Resentments, and framed his Soul only to Gratitude to God, and
Love and Kindness to his Brethren. His seeing the Hand of God in it, or to use
his own Language, his seeing that "God meant" he should be sold, and that it
was "God who sent him thither," together with the happy Experience he had had
of the Wisdom and Goodness of God in the Affair, not only prepared him to
forgive his Brethren; but to treat them with all possible Tenderness, and
fraternal Goodness. So that he was not only fully satisfied in the Wisdom of
God in the Permission of that Sin; but was thereby the better prepared to do
his Duty.

DOCTRINE. "A Sight of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin, is very
useful to promote Holiness of Heart and Life: It has a great Tendency to make
us feel right, and behave well."

THUS it was with Joseph, as we have see n. And thus it was with Job, who,
while the Sabeans wickedly robbed him, eyed the Hand of God, and said, "The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord."
Job. 1. --
And thus it was with David, while Shimei wickedly abused him, going along on
the Hill over against him, as he was fleeing out of Jerusalem from the Hands of
Absalom his Son, and cursed him as he went, saying, "Come out, come out, thou
bloody Man." -- "Let him Curse" says David, "for the Lord has bidden him." 2 Samuel XVI.
'I justly deserve it at the Hands of the Majesty of Heaven, against whom I
have grievously sinned. -- A bloody Man indeed I am! -- O Uriah! Uriah! -- I
shall never forget the Blood of the valiant Uriah!'

BUT it is needless to multiply Instances. For nothing is plainer, than that it
must tend to bring us to a right Temper of Mind, in every Circumstance of Life,
to view infinite Wisdom, as ordering all Things which concern us, in the wisest
and best Manner. Nor could any Though It be more shocking to a pious Mind, than to
conceive the DEITY as unconcerned in human Affairs, -- the Devil ruling in the
Children of Disobedience without Control, and all Things jumbling along in
this wicked World, without the least Prospect of any good End ever to be
answered. But if all Things, good and bad, are under the Government of infinite
Wisdom; this affords a sure Prospect of a happy Issue. And under such a wise
and perfect Government, we have the greatest Inducement to go on cheerfully in
the Ways of our Duty; having always an implicit Faith in the supreme Ruler of
the Universe. -- Wherefore, the Truth of the Doctrine being thus plain and
evident, I shall only attempt to show,

I. WHAT we are to understand by God's permitting Sin. And,

II. THE Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin. And then,

III. CONCLUDE with a practical Improvement.

I. WHAT are we to understand by God's permitting Sin?

1. NOT that He loves Sin, or that there is any Thing in the Nature of Sin that
he approves of. For it is the abominable Thing, which his Soul hates. When he
viewed the Temper, Conduct and Design of Joseph's Brethren, they each of them
appeared perfectly odious in his Eyes. Their Envy and Malice he abhorred: their
cruel and barbarous Deed he detested: their Design intimated in that Saying,
And then shall we see what will become of his Dreams, Genesis XXXVII. 20.
he perfectly disapproved.

2. MUCH less are we to imagine, that God in permitting Sin deprives the Sinner
of the Freedom of his Wills. Joseph's Brethren felt themselves at Liberty; and
in the whole Affair acted according to their own Inclinations, -- just as they
pleased.

3. GOD's permitting Sin consists merely in not hindering of it. He saw, that
Joseph's Brethrent, considering their Temper, and how they had their Brother
out in the Field, and how that the Ishmaelitish Merchants would soon come by,
etc. etc. would certainly sell him, unless he interposed to hinder it. And He
could have hindered their felling, as easily as he hindered their murdering
(...) But he did not. He let them take their (...)

4. AND yet it is self-evident, God never permits Sin, in the Character of an
unconcerned Spectator, as not caring how Affairs go; but as having weighed all
Circumstances and Consequences. -- Therefore,

5. GOD never permits Sin, but only then, when, on the whole, all Things
considered, he judges it best not to hinder it. And therefore,

6. AT whatever Time God forbears to interpose, to hinder the Commission of any
Act of Sin, he is not only justifiable in his Conduct, but even commendable and
praiseworthy; because he has chosen to act in the wisest and best Manner. --
But this leads me,

II. To show the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin. And I will in the
first Place begin with some Instances that are more plain and easy, and
afterward proceed to what is more intricate and difficult.

1st INSTANCE. And to begin with the Affair of of Joseph -- There needs little
to be said, to show the manifold Wisdom of God in it. -- For it does not
appear, that God could, as Things were circumstanced, have taken a better
Method for the Advancement of Joseph to be Governor over all the Land of Egypt,
than this. It was a Method suited to humble Joseph, and wean him from the
World, and bring him to an entire Resignation to God, and Dependence upon, and
Devotedness to him; and to prepare him for so high a Station, that in it he
might conduct with all Fidelity to Pharaoh, and Humility, Goodness and
Condescension to all around him; to the Honor of the God of Israel, and to the
Reputation of true Religion, in the midst of a People sinking down fast into
Idolatry and Wickedness. It was a Method suited to give him a little Character
in the Eyes of Pharaoh, and in the Eyes of all Egypt; as one dear to the great
God, full of Wisdom and Benevolence, and the fittest Man in Egypt to be so
highly advanced and so far be trusted. From a poor Prisoner, he rose soon to so
high a Character, and was so highly esteemed, as to become a FATHER to Pharaoh,
and to all Egypt.

NOR does it appear, that, as Things were circumstanced, God could have taken a
better Method than this, to provide for the Sustenance of Jacob's Family, of
the Egyptians, and of the Nations throughout the Land of Canaan, through a Famine
of seven Years Continuance. It was a Method suited to dispose Pharaoh, and all
Egypt, to receive Jacob's Family kindly, and give them a hearty Welcome; as
they were the Kindred of Joseph, their great Benefactor. It was a Method suited
to humble Joseph's Brethren, and not only to bring them to Repentance for their
Sin, but to a better Temper in general. And, as the selling of Joseph had been
Matter of severe Trial to Jacob, who verily thought him dead, and expected to
go down to the Grave sorrowing; so, in the Issue, the whole was suited
abundantly to establish him in the Belief of the Being and Perfections of God,
and of his Government of the World; and to give him an affecting, ravishing
Sense of the Holiness, Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Faithfulness of the God of
Abraham, his Father; and to confirm him in the Expectation of the
Accomplishment of all God's Promises. And, in the mean Time, the Egyptians, and
all the Nations inhabiting the Land of Canaan, were provided for with Food
through a long and sore Famine, in a Manner suited to convince them of the Vanity
of their Idols, and to bring them to an high Esteem of the God of the Hebrews,
to whose kind Interposition their whole Support was owing. And thus God left
not himself without Witness, in that dark and benighted Age of the World, when
all the Nations were sinking fast down into Idolatry. For the whole Affair of
the selling of Joseph, of the Conduct of his Mistress, of his unshaken Virtue,
of his Imprisonment, of his interpreting the Dreams of his Fellowprisoners, of
his being bro't to Pharaoh's Court and interpreting his Dreams, of his
Advancement, and of all his Conduct in that high Station, would naturally be
noised abroad, not only throughout all Egypt, but also through all the Land of
Canaan, from whence they daily came into Egypt for Bread; yea, the News of
these Things would be apt to fly far and wide among all the Nations round
about, to the Glory of the true God, and to the Honor of the true Religion,
and to the Condemnation of an idolatrous World, who had forsaken the Lord
Jehovah, and gone after Idols, that could neither see, nor hear, nor help. --
All which good Ends, and many more, God had in View. Wherefore,

ALTHOUGH Joseph's Brethren acted a very wicked, cruel, God-provoking Part, in
selling their Brother, notwithstanding all his Cries and Tears and the Anguish
of his Soul, with an envious, malicious and impious Intention to prevent the
Accomplishment of his divine Dreams, scoffingly saying among themselves, "And
then we shall see what will become of his Dreams:" Yet, at the same Time, the
God of Abraham acted truly like himself, a noble, a God-like Part, in letting
them take their Course, with a Design to overruled it as he did, to accomplish
his Dreams; and that in a Way so much to his own Glory, and so much to the
general Good. -- And how know we, but that, the infinitely wise Governor of the
Universe, when he permitted Angels and Man to fall, and Things in the
intelligent System to take such a Course as they have, designed to overruled
the Whole so (according to a Plan he then had in View) as that in the Issue,
God should be more exalted, and the System more holy and happy, than if Sin and
Misery had never entered?

But to proceed to a

2d. INSTANCE of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin. Sometime after
Joseph's Death, when the Children of Israel were greatly multiplied, there
arose another King in Egypt, who knew not Joseph, nor paid the least Regard to
his Memory; who, to enrich himself, attempted to bring the Israelites into a
perpetual Bondage: and to that End set Taskmasters over them, who made them
serve with Rigor. And, observing how exceedingly they multiplied, left they
should become too numerous and potent, and get themselves up out of a Land in
which they were so abused, Pharaoh ordered the Midwives to kill their Male
Children. But the Midwives proving unfaithful to his Injunctions, he laid his
Commands on all his People in general, to take every Male Child, and cast them
into the River. Exodus 1.
All which was inhuman and barbarous to the last Degree.

As God had provided for the kind Entertainment of the Israelites by the Means
of Joseph, whom he sent before them; so he could have provided for the
Continuation of their Tranquillity, and restrained Pharaoh from this Tyrannical
Conduct: But he chose to bring all these Distresses upon them, to wean them
from the Idols and Pleasures of Egypt, to make them mindful of the promised
Land, and to prepare them for their approaching Deliverance, and for their
Wilderness-Travels. Therefore he wisely let Pharaoh take his Course. For the
Israelites were so kindly received in Joseph's Day, and so generously provided
for, that they began after a While to forget the Land of Canaan, and feel
themselves at Home, and fall in Love with the Customs and Idolatries of Egypt:
And had it not been that Pharaoh attempted their Slavery, and treated them with
so great Severity, there would have been Danger of their forgetting the God of
their Fathers totally, and incorporating at length with the Egyptians. 'So that
they greatly needed these Distresses, to make them willing to leave Egypt, and
discern the Goodness of God in their Deliverance, and to awaken them and their
Posterity in Ages then to come, to a Sense of their great Obligations to God,
who brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the House of Bondage.'
Exodus XX. 2.


BESIDES, at the same Time that God, by the cruel Tyranny of Pharaoh, was
preparing the Israelites for their Deliverance, he also overruled his
Barbarity to give an Occasion of raising them up a Deliverer. For Pharaoh
having ordered all the Male Children to be cast into the River, Moses's Mother,
after having concealed him three Months, durst keep him no longer, and so left
him in an Art of Bulrushes, at the Side of the River, to the Mercy of the cruel
Egyptians. Here Pharaoh's Daughter finds him -- is touched with Compassion --
relieves the poor weeping Infant. -- And now Moses is called the "Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter," and is educated in Pharaoh's Court, and instructed in all
the Learning of Egypt; and finally, completely furnished for the glorious Work
designed him. For Pharaoh seeking Moses his Life, he was obliged to flee to the
Land of Midian; where, in the solitary Life of a Shepherd, he spent 40 Years,
until he became the meekest Man on Earth. And being thus endowed with an
extraordinary Measure of human Learning and of divine Grace, God sends him to
deliver his People, who had been groaning under-their sore Bondage above an 100
Years. "O the Depth of the Knowledge and Wisdom of God"!

THE very Methods, which Pharaoh, in his great Policy, takes to bind down the
Hebrews in perpetual Slavery, God overrules, to prepare them for, and to bring
about their Deliverance. And while Pharaoh is hurried on in his Schemes, by his
insatiable Avarice, and indulges to barbarous Cruelty, God, the infinitely wise
Superintendent, calmly looks on, and lets him take his Course, conscious to his
own Almightiness, and having his own glorious Plan all before him. -- And how
know we, but that this same infinitely wise Being, who has had the Government
of the Universe in his Hands from the Beginning, had some noble, God-like
Design in View, when he first permitted Sin and Misery to enter into the World
which he had made?

But to proceed to a

3d. INSTANCE of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin.

PHARAOH, full of a Sense of his own Greatness and Power, and of the Advantages
which would accrue to him from the Labors of so many Servants, no sooner
perceived Moses's Design, but he firmly resolved never to let Israel go. And
when Moses assured him that the God of the Hebrews had appeared to him, he bid
Defiance, not only to Moses, but to his God. "I know not the Lord, nor will I
let Israel go." And the more Moses insisted upon their Release, the more his
Pride and Covetousness wrought. For his Honor's sake he scorned to yield: and
for his Interest's sake he many a Time resolved he never would.

FOR the supreme Monarch of the Universe, who does according to his Pleasure in
the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, had looked on the
bold, the daring, the haughty Wretch, and determined to leave him to his own
Heart, to take his own Way, and do as he pleased; foreseeing just how he would
conduct, and how the Affair would finally issue.

Go, says God to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh, and say, "Thus says the Lord, let
Israel go, that they may serve me: But I am sure, that the King of Egypt will
not let you go: no, not by a mighty Hand. And I will stretch out my Hand, and
smite Egypt with all my Wonders which I will do in the Midst thereof. And
Pharaoh shall know, that I am the Lord: and the Egyptians shall know, that I am
the Lord: Yea, my Name shall be declared throughout all the Earth. And thus do
I order the Affair, that thou also may tell in the Ears of thy Son, and of
thy Son's Son, what Things I have wrought in Egypt, and my Signs that I have
done amongst them: that ye may know, that I am the LORD."

MOSES goes, and delivers his Message to Pharaoh, saying, "Thus says the Lord
God of the Hebrews, Let my People go, that they may serve me." -- "Be gone to
your Burdens" says Pharaoh to the Israelites. "And you Moses, do you hinder the
People no longer from their Labor. And you TaskMasters, give them no Straw.
For they are idle and wanton, and full of Notions: but I will tame these
Hebrews, and make them know, they had better been content where they were." So
the Taskmasters with Rigor drive on the Israelites, to perform their
impossible Tasks -- and beat them for Nonperformance. They cry to Pharaoh, but
cry in vain. "Ye are idle, ye are idle," says he, and full of Notions. Be gone!
No Mercy shall be shown you. I will make you repent your new Scheme, before I
have done with you. -- Thus Pharaoh storms, drives, sets up himself, hardens
his Heart, resolved ^^ey shall never go.

WHEREUPON the God of Israel wrought (...) Signs in Egypt, and his Wonders in
the Field of Zoan. He turned their Rivers into Blood; and their Floods, that
they could not drink. He sent diverse Sorts of Flies among them, which devoured
them, and Frogs which destroyed them. He gave also their Increase unto the
Caterpillar, and their Labor unto the Locust. He devoured their Vines with
Hail, and their Sycomore. Trees with Frost. He gave up their Cattle also to the
Hail, and their Flocks to hot Thunderbolts. He cast upon them the Fierceness
of his Anger, Wrath and Indignation, and Trouble by sending evil Angels among
them. He made a Way to his Anger; he spared not their Soul from Death: but gave
their Life over to the Pestilence. And smote all the Firstborn in Egypt; the
chief of their Strength, in the Tabernacles of Ham. But made his own People go
forth like Sheep. He led them on safely: but the Sea overwhelmed their Enemies.

PHARAOH'S Design was, if possible, to prevent the Egress of the Hebrews; that
he might keep them for his Slaves: and that they, and all the World might know,
that he was too potent and mighty a Prince to be subdued and conquered by the
God of the Hebrews, to whom from the Beginning he had bid Defiance.

GOD'S Designs were, by severe and cruel Bondage, to wean the Israelites from
Egypt; or at least, to force them, weaned, or not, to leave the Country, and be
gone. Therefore he let Pharaoh loose, so unmercifully to oppress them. And as
for Pharaoh, God let him lift up himself, harden his Heart, be as stout and
haughty as he pleased: That as he was desirous, so he might have full
Opportunity to try his Strength with the God of the Hebrews. That in the Issue,
He might know, and the Egyptians might know, to their Shame and Confusion, --
That he was the Lord, the only true and living God, infinitely superior to all
their Idols. And in the mean Time he designed to give a lively Picture of
himself, as of one infinitely too wise, great and powerful, for feeble Mortals
to contend with; Resolved to vindicate his own Honor, at all Events; and
revenge Affronts offered his Majesty; and carry on his own Designs in Spite of
all Opposition. That the Israelites might see it, and know it for their Good:
That all the Inhabitants of Canaan might be struck into a Panick: and indeed,
that his Name might be declared throughout all the Earth. For he intended, that
these his mighty Works should never be forgotten among Men, so long as the Sun
and Moon should endure.

METHINKS, I behold Moses, on the other Side of the Red Sea, standing safe on
the Shore, while the Carcases of the Egyptians, their broken Chariots, their
drowned Horses, Part sunk to the Bottom, and Part floating upon the Sea, and
scattered along the Coasts. -- There He stands -- He looks back -- He surveys
the gracious, the dreadful, the glorious Works of the God of Abraham, from the
Day he saw the Burning Bush in the Wilderness of Horeb, and received his
Commission to act in this grand Affair. -- Pharaoh's haughty Temper, his
impious, covetous, tyrannical, deceitful Conduct, all rise clear to his View --
The astonishing Works of the God of Israel, His righteous Vengeance on his
Foes, His self-moving Goodness and sovereign Grace to the Israelites, torn away
from their Idols, and delivered out of the House of Bondage, all fill his
astonished Soul; and the powerful Impressions penetrate the Center of his
Heart. -- He looks forward too to the promised Canaan, to which the Almighty
had now undertaken to lead them, and imagines what Terror the News of all these
Things would spread through all the Land. -- Inspired with these Views,
ravished with the Glory of the God of Israel, charmed with the Majesty and
Beauty of the divine Conduct, He spoke, saying,

I will sing unto the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously; the Horse and his
Rider (...) thrown into the Sea. The LORD is my Strength and Song, and he is
become my Salvation: He is my GOD, and I will prepare him an Habitation; my
Father's God, and I will exalt him. -- Thy right Hand, O LORD, is become
glorious in Power: thy right Hand, O LORD, has dashed in Pieces the Enemy. And
in the Greatness of thine Excellency thou have overthrown them that rose up
against thee. Thou sentest forth thy Wrath, which consumed them as Stubble. --
Who is like unto thee, O LORD, amongst the Gods? Who is like unto thee,
glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders* -- Thou in thy Mercy
have led forth the People which thou have redeemed. -- The People shall hear,
and be afraid: Sorrow shall take hold on the Inhabitants of Palestine. -- All
the Inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away. Fear and Dread shall fall upon them;
by the Greatness of thine Arm they shall be as still as a Stone: till thy
People pass over, O LORD, till the People pass over, which thou have purchased.
-- The LORD shall reign for ever and ever. Exodus XV.


AND while Moses thus sang the Praises of God, the supreme Monarch of the
Universe, and celebrated his glorious Triumph over Pharaoh and all his
Idol-Gods; so ravished with the Wisdom, Glory and Beauty of the divine Conduct,
as to be even more attached to (...) Honor and Interest than ever, and even
the better prepared to conduct with that steady Fidelity through all the future
Trials of his Life, always true to God, and heartily concerned to see the
Honor of his great Name secured; I say, while Moses was full of these divine
Views and Tempers on this grand Occasion, all Egypt were in profound Darkness:
and these Dispensations, so bright and glorious in the View of Moses, to them
appeared gloomy as Death.

AND if these Dispensations of divine Providence, which to the Egyptians
appeared so dark and gloomy, to Moses appeared so full of divine Wisdom, Beauty
and Glory; how know we, but that God's whole Plan of Government, how dark,
soever it may now appear to a revolted World, under God's Displeasure, may to
Saints and Angels, after the general Judgment, appear perfect in Wisdom, Glory
and Beauty, and be Matter of their eternal Delight and Praise. But to proceed,

4. To other Instances of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin.

THE Israelites, having thus escaped the Hands of Pharaoh, and recovered their
Liberty, had it been left to them to direct their March, and point out their
future Fortunes, they might perhaps have thought it best, that being led on
directly to the Land of Canaan, they should by the mighty Power of God have
been put into an immediate Possession, to be followed with Scenes of Feasting,
Joy and Mirth, never to be interrupted.

BUT God, who knew their Hearts, who knew how deeply tainted they were with the
Idolatries and Manners of Egypt, and how high a Relish they had to sensual
Pleasures, might easily foresee how all Sense of the true God would soon be
lost in the midst of such Prosperity, and they become no better than the
ejected Canaanies. Besides, he saw that in almost every Respect they were as
yet unprepared to enter the promised Land. And also he designed them for our
Ensamples, and his Dispensations toward them for the Instruction of Mankind to
the End of the World. -- Wherefore let us attend to the divine Conduct, and
behold the manifold Wisdom of God.

HE had torn them away from their Idols, their Leeks, their Onions, and their
Fleshpots; to which they were stupidly attached. He had sent to them by Moses,
and commanded, that they should cast away every Man the Abominations of his
Eyes, and not defile themselves with the Idols of Egypt any more; for that he,
himself, was the LORD their GOD. -- But although the Thunder of divine Wrath, so
dreadfully roared throughout all the Land of Egypt among the Egyptians, and God
was now in a miraculous Manner working their Deliverance; yet, even now they
rebelled against the Lord, and would not hearken unto him. They did not every
Man cast away the Abominations of their Eyes, neither did they forsake the
Idols of Egypt. Wherefore God said, I will pour out my Fury upon them, to
accomplish mine Anger upon them in the midst of the Land of Egypt. If when God
met with such infinite Provocations at the Hands of the Hebrews, he could yet
find in his Heart to prosecute his Design, and accomplish his Promise to
Abraham, that to his Seed he would give the Land of Canaan; we cannot have the
least Reason to doubt, but that, notwithstanding all the present Wickedness of
his professing People in the World, whereby he is infinitely provoked to resign
all Christendom to Destruction, he will yet prosecute his Designs, and
accomplish all his Promises -- "Give to his Son the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for his Possession; and bring
every People, Nation, Language and Tongue to serve him: and Satan shall be
bound, and Christ shall reign on Earth, for a Thousand Years." -- No Obstacles,
no Discouragements, no Pr^^^^ations, no Difficulties, of whatever Kind, or
however great, can hinder-God from the Accomplishment of the glorious Designs
of his Grade. -- He redeemed Israel out of Egypt, although he saw what they were
then, and what they would be in all (...) Times. -- Yea, he has given his SON,
and that to the Death of the Cross, in order to carry on his Designs. -- And
what will not GOD ALMIGHTY then do? -- ALMIGHTINESS, so INFINITELY engaged,
cannot, and will not be frustrated.
But then God considered what the Egyptians would say to such a Dispensation of
Providence, and how it would be misinterpreted through all Nations and Ages --
Wherefore he wrought for his great Name's sake, that it might not be polluted
before the Heathen, among whom they were, and in whose Sight, God intended to
make himself known to the Israelites, by bringing them out of the Land of
Egypt. Ezekiel. XX. 5, -- 9.
And therefore instead of the Destruction they deserved from his Hands for
their stupid Attachment to the Egyptian Abominations, God let loose Pharaoh to
increase their Burdens, to make their Bondage absolutely into ^rable, that he
might force them from their Idols, and drive them out of Egypt. -- And to bring
them still more to their Senses, God let Pharaoh loose to pursue them with
Chariots, and Horsemen, and a great Army; and contrived that he should
overtake them, shut in among the Mountains, unable to make their Escape; that
he might have Opportunity to let Israel see his mighty Power, in dividing the
Sea, and make them feel their Dependence upon, and Obligations to him: and that
having led them through the Sea, he might have them in a (...) Wilderness, where
there was neither Bread, nor (...) nor Water, as the fittest Stone for
those-Transactions and grand Events, belonging to the infinitely wise Plan,
which God had laid out.

ISRAEL had been in Egypt 215 Years. From the Covenant with Abram, to the
giving of the Law, was (as St. Paul asserts, Gal. III. 17.) 430 Years. And this
will give Light to Genesis XV. 13. and to Exodus XII. 40, 41. For the Law was given
soon after they came out of Egypt.

JOSEPH was 17 Years old, when he was sold, and it is supposed he was soon
imprisoned, perhaps the very same Year, and so that he lay in Prison about 13
Years: for he was 30 at his Advancement. After which, in about 9 Years, Jacob
and all his Family came down into Egypt. After which, Joseph lived 71 Years.
And so in all, was in the greatest Honor 80 Years, to counterbalance 13 Years
of Sorrow. -- Israel came out of Egypt 144 Years after Joseph's Death; the
greatest Part of which Time they were under Oppression. -- Moses was born 64
Years after Joseph's Death -- spent 40 in Pharaoh's Court -- and 40 in the Land
of Midian.


And the latter Part of the Time, for above an Hundred Years, in a State of
Bondage and Slavery. -- They had almost forgotten the true God, and the true
Religion, were habituated to the Idolatry and Manners of Egypt, well pleased
with the Country; and, but for their Oppressions, would never have entertained
any Tho'ts of leaving it. Yea, notwithstanding their severe Bondage, were
hardly prevailed upon to hearken to Moses, to whom they said, "Let us alone,
that we may serve the Egyptians," as they afterward upbraided him in their
Distress at the Red Sea. Exodus XIV. 12.
-- And they were of so mean and dastardly a Spirit, as to be unfit to march
against their Enemies. -- God, who knew their Temper, judged, that if he had
led them from Egypt strait to Canaan, which was not an hundred Miles distant,
the Approach of their Enemies, prepared for War, would have frighted them back
again to Egypt. Exodus XIII. 17.
-- Yea, such was their Attachment to Egypt, their Coldness to Canaan, their
Cowardice, and their stupid Infidelity, even after a Year's Discipline in the
Wilderness, and notwithstanding their solemn Profession and Promises to God at
Mount Sinai, that upon the ill Tidings of the Spies, they were for stoning
Caleb and Joshua, and making to themselves a Captain, and returning to their
beloved Egypt.

NOW such were the People God had to manage, so every Way distempered, that
they needed all their old Notions, Tastes and Tempers to be eradicated; and to
have their Minds wholly framed anew, in order to be fit Inhabitants for the
holy Land.

THEY must be thoroughly weaned from Egypt, from their Idolatry and their
Manners; and be bro't to know the true God, and to be sensible of his infinite
Abhorrence of their Tempers and Ways; and have their Hearts effectually broken
under a Sense of their Vileness: that they might loath themselves, and turn to
the Lord, and love him, and be prepared to understand and fall in with the
Religion he gave them from Mount Sinai, that they might be an holy People to
the Lord, a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation; that they might be (...)
his Praise and Glory, in the midst of an Idolatries benighted World; and that
they might receive the promised Land, not as a Reward of their Righteousness,
-- for they were a stiff-necked People; but as a mere free Gift from the God of
Abraham, their Father; and feel themselves, by the Means, laid under the
strongest Obligations to love him, and fear him, and walk in all his Ways, and
keep all his Commands: And at the same Time, be so inured to Hardship, and so
thoro'ly confirmed in the Belief of the Being and Perfections of God, as that,
in an entire Dependence on the Lord, they might march into the promised Land,
and behave like valiant Soldiers, and execute God's Vengeance on those
idolatrous Nations, whom he had doomed to Destruction; break down their Altars,
cut down their Groves, burn their Gods, and extirpate both them and their
Religion from off the Face of the Earth.

AND what Method, better suited to answer these noble Ends, could possibly have
been devised, than that which the Lord their God took, for the Space of forty
Years in the Wilderness: Wherein he humbled them, and proved them, and tried
them, that it might appear what was in their Hearts: and he left them to hunger
and to thirst, and to murmur and rebel, and to commit Idolatry, that their
Hearts might be turned inside out before their Eyes: and by a long Course of
Discipline, he trained them up to a Sense of his Being, and Perfections, and
Government, and to feel their Dependence on him, and Obligations to him, and by
Experience learn the dreadful Nature of Sin. He fed them with Angels Food, and
gave them Water out of the flinty Rock: he led them by Day in a Cloud, and in
the Night by a Pillar of Fire: but when they rebelled, the Earth opened its
Mouth, and swallowed up Hundreds, and the Plague swept away Thousands at a
Stroke; (...) at last, the whole Congregation of Six Hundred Thousand were
doomed to fall in the Wilderness.

NOTHING impresses the Heart of a human Creature like FACTS. Nor could any
Series of Facts have been better contrived than these, to reach their Hearts,
and make them feel what they were in the Sight of infinite Holiness, and to
bring them to fear the glorious and fearful Name of the Lord their God.

AT the Side of the Red Sea, they were, to Appearance, full of Love to God, and
there they sang his Praise: And had Things gone to their Minds, they might
never have suspected the secret Hypocrisy of their Hearts. -- But as God had
contrived the Plan, in three Days their religious Affections were gone, and
their corrupt Hearts, like the troubled Sea, cast up Mire and D^rt. -- God knew
what they were before: and it was wise in him, to take this Method, to bring
them to know it too.

AT Mount Sinai, they were again deeply affected, when the Law was given, in a
Manner so solemn and divine: and there they promised, that whatsoever the Lord
their God should command them, that would they do. -- But in less than forty
Days, they made them a Calf after the Manner of Egypt, and eat and drank, and
rose up to Play, after the Egyptian Mode. -- God knew before, that all this was
in their Hearts: and now he wisely permitted it to break out, that they might
know it too: and that he might have a good Opportunity to let them see how
exceedingly he hated their Ways. -- He had tried WORDS, but these would not do.
He had used the plainest and strongest Expressions in the first and second
Commandments, but they were not effectual. -- Now he proceeds to FACTS -- Three
Thousand are slain by the Sword at his Command, to let the whole Congregation
KNOW how detestable their Conduct was in his Eyes. Exodus XXXII. 28.


AND so again, while the Tabernacle was building, and at the Time of its
Dedication, they appeared very forward in Religion, as though they loved God, and
loved his Worship, and were determined for the future to be an obedient People:
And this lasted for about a Year. And doubtless they thought themselves
sincere, and always might have thought for had no new Trials come on. -- But no
sooner did the Spies return from viewing the Land of Canaan, and bring ill
Tidings, but their old Egyptian Temper all revived. -- Now Joshua and Caleb
must be stoned for pleading the Lord's Cause, and a new Captain chosen to
conduct them back to Egypt, which they left with Reluctance about a Year ago:
willing, it seems, for ever to part with their God, their Tabernacle, and their
Religion; and turn back to the Idols, and Manners, and Looks, and Onions of
Egypt; and make their Peace with the Egyptians as they could. And had not the
ALMIGHTY suddenly interposed, no doubt, dreadful Deeds would soon have been
done. -- God knew, all this was in their Hearts before: and now he wisely
permitted it to break out, that they might know it too: and that by his future
Conduct toward that People, he might let them know it too: and that by his
future Conduct toward that People, he might let them know that he was the Lord,
and fill the whole Earth with his Glory. Number. XIV.


AND while that Generation was doomed to wander Forty Years in the Wilderness,
and their Carcases there to fall, as the just Punishment of their Crimes; their
Posterity, by the Means, had their Egyptian Notions and Tempers eradicated, and
were trained up in the Knowledge of God, and of the true Religion; and prepared
to enter, conquer, and possess the holy Land. Nor could they ever, to their
dying Day, forget the Works of the Lord their God, which they had seen in Egypt
at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness, etc. Nor could they have had stronger
inducements to tell these Things to their Sons, and Sons Sons. Nor could a
better Method have been taken to lay a lasting Foundation for a firm Belief,
and steady Practice of the true Religion.

IT was most for the Honor of God, and most for the Interest of Religion; and
so really for the best Good of the Israelites, that they should be thus tried,
left to act out their Hearts, and then punished, subdued, humbled and bro't
into Subjection to the divine Authority, before they entered into Possession of
the promised Land; although it cost them Six Hundred Thousand Lives, and many a
dreadful Day. -- For, to what Purpose had it been, for God to have brought them
straight from Egypt, with all their Egyptian Notions and Tempers, into the holy
Land, there to have polluted it, and to have dishonored him with their
Abominations? IF it was wise in God so to order, that the Israelites should be
oppressed above an hundred Years before their Deliverance, and then pass through
such great Trials forty Years more, before their Entrance into the holy Land;
how know we but it may be wise, that the Christian Church in general, and we in
New England in particular, should pass through very dark and trying Times, for a
long Season, before God begins to work Deliverance, in that remarkable Manner,
which may be expected at the ushering in of the glorious Days. To be sure,
there seems to be a Foundation laid for great Distresses, and of long
Continuance, for our sinful Land. Better so, than to be left to sleep on,
secure in Sin. Nothing so dreadful, as to be given up to (...) Security, and
suffered to go on in Wickedness and prosper.


BESIDES, from the Murmurings and Rebellions of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, there was the fullest Demonstration of the Divinity of the Jewish
Religion. For, had not Moses been sent of God, and supported too by the
Interposition of ALMIGHTY Power, it had been impossible he should have
accomplished the Design. -- They would surely have deserted him, and returned
to Egypt again. -- Nor could the Children of Israel, how degenerate soever they
were, and how apt soever to fall into Idolatry, in afterAges, ever once scruple
whether Moses were indeed sent of God, after such a Scene of Wonders for forty
Years together. Nor does it appear, that the divine Legation of Moses was ever
called in Question by that People.

AND whenever they read over the Law of Moses, together with the History
interspersed in those sacred Books, they might not only learn the Nature of God
and Man, and see God's Right to command, their Obligations to obey, and the
great Evil of Sin, from the Law of Moses, as being therein held forth; but
might behold all these exemplified, in a most striking Manner, in a Series of
FACTS. -- Let them but view the divine Conduct in Egypt, at the Red Sea, in the
Wilderness, etc. and it would give them a most lively Picture of the the DIVINE
NATURE, for here they had the HISTORY of the DEITY. -- And let them view the
Conduct of the Israelites, from first to last, and it would give them a most
lively Picture of human Nature: for here they had it acted out to the Life. --
And God's Right to command, their Obligations to obey, and the great Evil of
Sin are set in the strongest Light. -- Nor were the Advantages of these
Transactions confined to those Ages: for all these Things happened and were
written for our Instruction, on whom the Ends of the World are come. God is
still the same: and so is human Nature too. For as Face answers to Face in a
Glass, so does the Heart of Man to Man. -- O the Depth of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! Of whom, and by whom, and to whom are all Things; to whom
belongs Glory for ever! -- And how know we but that the grand Affairs of the
Universe are all conducted as wisely, as were these now in our View.

To Conclude, let these four Remarks be well attended to, and remembered.

1. THAT in all these Instances of God's permitting Sin, he had a View, to the
Manifestation of Himself. They gave him Opportunities to act out his Heart; and
so to show what he was, and how he stood affected: and he intended by his
Conduct to set himself, i. e. all his Perfections, in a full, clear, strong
Point of Light: that it might be known that he was the LORD, and that the whole
Earth might be filled with his Glory.

2. AND he intended to let his Creatures give a true Specimen of themselves:
that it might be known what was in their Hearts. But

3. THE Advantages of Acquaintance with God and ourselves are innumerable. --
We can be neither humble, holy, nor happy without it. -- So that

4. IT may easily be seen, how that God in the Permission of Sin, may design to
advance his own Glory, and the Good of his Creatures. -- And that this was
really God's Design, in the Instances which have been under Consideration, is
manifest from the five Books of Moses, in which the History of these Things is
recorded at large. -- Particularly, I desire the VIIIth, IXth, Xth, and XIth
Chapters of Deuteronomy may be read in this View.

The WISDOM of God in the Permission of SIN.
SERMON II.
GENESIS L. 20. -- YE thought Evil against Me; but God meant it unto Good --


WISDOM consists in choosing the best End, and contriving the most proper Means
to attain it.

THE MESSIAH had been promised to our first Parents, about Two Thousand Years
ago; and the appointed Time of his Advent was approaching: But the World were
greatly unprepared for such an Event. They did not know, that they were in a
fallen State, and that they needed a Redeemer and a Sanctifier. They neither
knew God, nor themselves -- what they were -- nor what they ought to be -- nor
what they needed to bring them right: and were sinking by swift Degrees into
still grosser Ignorance, and the most stupid Idolatry. And had God suffered
them all to have taken their own Course, till the MESSIAH'S Birth, Ignorance
and Depravity would have risen to such a Height, as to have rendered Mankind
wholly unprepared for the GospelDispensation.

WHEREFORE God must interpose, and some Method must be taken to check the
universal Spread of Idolatry and Ignorance, and to revive the Knowledge of the
true God, and of the Law of Nature; and to make Mankind sensible of their
Depravity, of their Guilt and Ill-desert, and Need of a Redeemer and
Sanctifier; and so prepare the Way for the Coming of Christ, and the Erection
of his spiritual Kingdom.

WITH these Views, about two Thousand Years before the Birth of the MESSIAH,
God called Abram from Ur of the Chaldees, and separated him from an idolatrous
World, and chose his Seed to be his People; that in his Dealings with them, he
might bear a public Testimony against Idolatry, in the Sight of all the
Nations of the Earth; and at the same Time exhibit a most exact Picture of
himself (...) his Conduct, and set his Character in the most glaring, striking,
affecting Light; that, stupid as they were, they should be, as it were, forced
to see and understand what he was. And, at the same Time, he would let them
know, what they ought to be, and the Greatness of their Obligations to the
Deity; and turn their Hearts inside out, that they might see themselves, and
discern their true Character, and so feel their Need of a Redeemer and
Sanctifier. And then he would exhibit in Types and Shadows, i. e. by Sacrifices
of Atonement, and Purifications for Uncleanness, the Nature of the Atonement of
Christ, and of the sanctifying Influences of the holy Spirit. And thus prepare
the Way for the Coming of the Messiah, and the Erection of his spiritual
Kingdom in the World: and that not only among Jews, thus trained up, but also
among Gentiles; who, in after Ages, should be let into these divine
Dispensations and Designs, and reap the Benefit of all these preparatory and
introductory Steps.

HAD Joseph not been sold, and had Jacob continued to live in the Land of
Canaan, with his Family, and had his Posterity there gradually increased, until
they had filled all the Land (the Canaanites mean while dying off, as the
Indians have done in N. E. these 130 Years past) I say, had his Posterity
gradually increased until they had filled all the Land, without any uncommon
Changes, or any extraordinary Interpositions of Providence, none of the
forementioned Ends could have been answered. Yea, there would apparently have
been the utmost Danger, that the Israelites would have been no better than the
Canaanites had been: and God might foresee, that this would infallibly be the
Case; and so all his Ends in separating Abraham and his Seed wholly frustrated.

(...) other Hand, if Joseph is sold; if Jacob and his Family move down and
settle in Egypt, the chief Seat of Idolatry; a proper Scene opens in the View
of infinite Wisdom, where all his Wonders might be wrought: and fit
Opportunities, he foresaw, would present, for the Accomplishment of all the
Purposes of his Heart.

NOTHING further was needful, than for God not to hinder Joseph's Brethren, and
they would sell him -- Not to hinder Potiphar's Wife, and she would get him
cast into Prison; where he might be prepared for, and from whence he might be
raised to, the highest Advancement, by which many noble and God-like Ends might
be answered. -- Nothing further was needful, than for God not to hinder the
King of Egypt, and he would oppress the Israelites, till they were prepared for
their Egression. -- Not to hinder Pharaoh, and he would harden his Heart, and
refuse to let them go, until Egypt was filled with the wonderful Works of God
-- Yea, if God hindered him not, into the Red Sea he would drive headlong,
hurried on by the Corruptions of his Heart; that, in his Destruction, God might
show his Power, and cause his Name to be declared throout all the Earth. -- And
now the Hebrews, rescued from Pharaoh's destroying Sword by almighty Power,
would be in the Hands of God their Deliverer, to be disciplined, to be humbled
and proved and tried, that it might be known what was in their Hearts; and
that, finally, they might be prepared to enter the promised Land, and execute
the Vengeance of the ALMIGHTY on those idolatrous Nations; and be God's
peculiar People, till the MESSIAH'S Coming, and the Erection of his spiritual
Kingdom. -- I say, be God's peculiar People, to receive the LAW from Sinai, to
be under God's immediate Government, to keep the holy Oracles, to preserve the
Predictions of the Messiah, and to answer many other noble and divine Ends God
had in View.

A PLAN, in which so much Sin was to be permitted, and so much Misery endured,
might, by short-sighted Mortals, have been thought dishonorable to God, and
unhappy for the Israelites; but under the Management of infinite Wisdom, it
proves the direct contrary. Yea, for aught that appears, God could not have
taken a better Method, as Things then stood in the World, to make himself
known, and get Honor to his great Name, and make the Israelites sensible of
their Dependence upon him, and Obligations to him, and engage them to perpetual
Obedience, than that. As it is written, What could have been done more to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it?

YEA, It was a Plan not only suited to be beneficial in that Age; but in all
succeeding Generations: and that in more Instances than can well be enumerated.
Particularly, it has furnished us with a HISTORY of the DEITY, and with a
HISTORY of HUMAN NATURE: Such a History as is indeed of infinite Value. For
every Thing is exemplified in FACTS; by which, the Mind is instructed more
clearly, and the Heart reached more effectually, than in any other Way.

THE invisible God, whom no Eye has seen, or can see, and of whom it is to
difficult for us in this benighted World to frame just Conceptions, is brought
upon the Stage; and he (...) out his Nature before our Eyes, with a Design to
set his true Character in a clear and striking (...). -- Here we see, as it
were with our (...) how he foreordained whatsoever came to pass; (...) laid out
the whole Plan, from the selling of (...) Advancement, and to Jacob's going
(...) Egypt; and how they should be oppressed and bro't into Bondage, and how
they should finally be brought forth, and led in the Wilderness, and prepared
for Canaan, etc. And we see the Wisdom, Glory and Beauty of his Plan. -- Here
we see what a Regard he has for his own Honor, and how his whole Plan is
suited to set him in that infinitely honorable Point of Light, which so
exactly becomes him, as he is by Nature God, and by original-Right the supreme
Lord and Governor of the World. -- Here we see his Resolution to maintain his
Authority, in his Conduct to Pharaoh, that haughty Rebel, who bid him Defiance,
and stoutly refused to let Israel go. -- Here we see his sovereign Grace and
self-moving Goodness, as it were, forcing the infatuated Israelites from their
beloved Egypt, and their beloved Idols: and when he had the highest
Provocations to destroy them, how he wrought for his great Name's sake, until
he had prepared them for, and brought them in to the promised Land. -- And how,
in the mean Time, he set his Hatred of their Sins in the clearest and strongest
Light; commanding the Earth to open its Mouth and swallow up Hundreds, and the
Plague to go forth, from Time to Time, and cut down Thousands in a Moment, yea,
dooming that whole Generation to wander and fall in the Wilderness for their
Crimes, reserving the good Land for their Posterity. -- Here we see him
exercising his Sovereignty, when the Israelites and the Egyptians both deserved
Destruction, and to have been buried alive in the RedSea together; he had Mercy
on whom he would have Mercy, and whom he would, he gave up to Hardness of
Heart, and to Ruin. And after the Israelites had been in the Wilderness above a
Year, and had sufficiently shown what they were, and carried their Provocations
so high, that divine Justice said, Let me alone, that I may destroy them in a
Moment, still he wrought for his great Name's sake: and had Mercy on them,
because he would have Mercy on them, and was gracious to them, because he would
be gracious to them: i. e. from his self-moving Goodness and sovereign Grace.
Exodus XXXIII. ^9. Number. XIV. From these Dispensations, which were acknowledged
to be right by the Jews, St. Paul was able to justify the divine Conduct in his
Day, in casting off the Jews, and calling the Gentiles. Romans IX. If God had a
Right to give up Pharaoh to Hardness of Heart and to Destruction in the Days of
old, as ye jews own; why not you now? -- If the Exercises of God's Grace were
sovereign then, to your Fathers, who deserved, God being Judge, to be all
consumed in a Moment; why may not the Gentiles, notwithstanding their ill
Deserts, be now called and saved, from the same sovereign Grace? God used to
act as a Sovereign; why may be not still? And if in one Instance; why not in
another, altogether similar? Nor could the Jew fairly evade the Force of this
Reasoning. -- And if we should only suppose, that Pharaoh, after he was
drowned, went to Hell, and that the unbelieving Jews of that Age, who were cast
off by God for their Infidelity, were eternally lost, then we have the Doctrine
of Reprobation, which has been so much misunderstood and misrepresented,
exemplified in FACTS. For, whatsoever God does in Time, That, He from all
Eternity, intended to do. -- Yea, and that, which is right for God to do in
Time, He had a Right from Eternity to determine to do. -- Yea, if God, in FACT,
governs the World WELL, then he did WELL to determine to govern it as he does
-- Reasonable Creatures would never object against God's laying out a universal
Plan, if the Plan did but suit their Taste.
-- And by all, we see, that not any Thing, whatsoever, is able to frustrate
God's Designs, or hinder the faithful Accomplishment of his Promise to Abraham,
That to his Seed he would give the Land of Canaan.

AT the same Time, we have HUMAN NATURE brought upon the Stage, and Experiments
made upon the Heart of Man, in a great Variety; whereby its true Temper is as
certainly determined, as was ever the Nature of any Thing in the natural World,
by the great Sir Isaac Newton. OBJECTION. BUT it can never be supposed, that
the true Character of human Nature, in general, can be decided from the
perverse Conduct of the Israelites in the Wilderness.

ANSWER. WAS not their Conduct, then, of a Piece with the general Tenor of
their Conduct, from that Time and forward, for fifteen Hundred Years, when they
flew their Prophets, yea, and crucified the Son of God? Acts VII. 51, 52.

OBJ. IF it was; yet it is not to be supposed, that every Nation would have
been so wicked and perverse, as the Jews were, if under like Circumstances.

ANS. BUT it is the common Character of an apostate fallen World, that they are
"dead in Sin." Ephesians. II. 1, 2, 3.

OBJ. THESE Words were spoken of the Gentiles, and so are nothing to the
Purpose.

ANS. SEEING then (according to these Men) the Character of Mankind cannot be
learned from what is said in the old or new Testament, of Jews, or Gentiles;
but we, in this Age and Nation, are quite another Kind of Creatures, so
benevolent, so good, so virtuous; methinks the Old and New Testaments are
Writings not suited to our Case; as they are not adapted to Men of our
Character. And perhaps this is one Reason, those ancient Writings are in so low
Credit with many in the British Dominions: -- and Plato begins to be more
admired than Moses, or St. Paul.




So that, on these, as well as many other Accounts, that Plan was not only for
the Honor of God, and Good of the Israelites; but for the Benefit of Mankind
in all succeeding Generations.

AND how know we but that it was designed by the infinitely wise God, as a
little Kind of PICTURE, in which we might see, in Miniature, the Nature of
God's Government of the whole moral System, and the Reasons of his permitting
Sin and Misery to enter into the World he had made? -- Which brings me --

SECONDLY, After having viewed the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin, in
various plain Instances, to proceed humbly to search into the Wisdom of God, in
EVER permitting Sin and Misery to enter into World. And

1. As all God's Works are uniform, so we may justly argue from the Wisdom and
Beauty of particular Parts, to the Wisdom and Beauty of the Whole. As God's
Nature is always the same, and as he always ways acts like himself; so
therefore his Works are always harmonious and consistent. So that if we can see
the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin in some Instances, we may justly
argue to his Wisdom in his whole grand Scheme. -- Yea, and from the Wisdom,
Glory and Beauty of particular Parts, we may be rationally convinced, that
God's grand Scheme is perfect in Wisdom, Glory and Beauty, although it be so
incomprehensibly great, as to confound our Understandings. If we certainly know
that God's Works are all uniform, and if there is one small Part that we can
understand and comprehend, and if we see this is perfectly wise, we may be
assured the whole is so too; although when we try to look into it, we feel our
Minds quite overwhelmed with its incomprehensible Greatness.

2. YEA, were there no particular Instance, in which we could see the Wisdom of
God in the Permission of Sin, yet from the Perfections of the divine Nature
alone, we have such full Evidence, that He must always act in the wisest and
best Manner, as that we ought not in the least to doubt it.

IN the Days of Eternity, long before the Foundation of the World, this System
now in Existence, and this Plan which now takes place, and all other possible
Systems, and all other possible Plans, more in Number perhaps than the very
Sands on the Sea Shore, all equally lay open to the divine View, and one as
easy to Almightiness as another. He had his Choice: He had none to please, but
himself: besides him there was no Being: He had a perfectly good Taste, and
nothing to bias his Judgment, and was infinite in Wisdom: this he chose: and
this of all possible Systems, therefore, was the best, infinite Wisdom and
perfect Rectitude being Judges. If therefore the Whole were as absolutely
incomprehensible by us, as it is by Children of Four Years old, yet we ought
firmly to believe the whole to be perfect in Wisdom, Glory and Beauty.

3. BUT if all God's Works are uniform, as has been said, we may not only argue
from the Wisdom of particular Parts, to the Wisdom of the Whole; but also from
the special Nature of particular Parts, to the special Nature of the Whole; and
so from a right Idea of particular Parts, which we are able to comprehend, we
may have some right Conceptions of the Whole, although the Whole is too great for
our Comprehension. And so here is a Clue, which will lead us into a right View
of the true Nature of the whole moral System, and help us, at least, to some
partial View of the Wisdom, Glory and Beauty of the Whole.

4. AND indeed, it seems to have been God's Design, in this State of
Instruction and Discipline, where we first come into Existence, and, from small
Beginnings, are to grow up to a more full Knowledge of God and Insight into his
moral Government of the World, the Contemplation of which will afford the most
intense Delight to all holy Beings, throughout eternal Ages; I say, it seems to
have been God's Design, to suit Things to the present Weakness of our
Capacities, by representing the general Nature of the whole moral System in
some select Parts of it, giving us a Kind of a PICTURE of the Whole in
Miniature, to lead us to some right Notions of the Nature of the Whole.

IT IS certain, that, as all God's Works are uniform, amidst all their infinite
Variety, so it has been his Method, in his lesser Works in the moral World,
designedly to give a faint-Image of his greater, and hereby prepare the Way for
their being the more easily understood. So the Redemption of Israel out of
Egypt was designed as a Shadow of our spiritual Redemption by Christ: and the
Deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon was designed as a Resemblance of the
Deliverance of the Christian Church out of mystical Babylon. And there are
almost innumerable Instances of the like Nature in Scripture. Yea, the whole
Jewish Dispensation was evidently designed to be emblematical. So indeed was
every Thing in the natural World, from which Metaphors and Allusions are
constantly brought by Christ and his Apostles, to represent and illustrate
spiritual and divine Things; as well as from the Jewish Dispensation.

AND indeed this was Workman-like, and becoming the infinite Wisdom of the
great CONTRIVER and FORMER of all Things, to whom all his Works were known from
the Beginning, and who designed this lower World, as the grand Stage of Action
for moral Agents, so to order Things in all his Works, and in all his
Dispensations, as that one Thing should give Light to another; Things in the
natural World, to Things in the moral; Things in the Jewish Dispensation, to
Things in the Christian.

IT would, therefore, be perfectly analogous to the rest of God's Works, if he
had designed some eminent Parts of his grand Plan of moral Government to
contain in Miniature the Nature of the Whole, and contrived them to represent,
and suited them to point out to us the Wisdom and Beauty of his grand and
glorious Sheme, which is too large for our present Comprehension; and too
difficult to be understood, but by the Help of little Pictures, where the Whole
is contained in Miniature.

5. YEA, We may venture to affirm, that of Necessity it must be the Case, that
the Nature of the Parts will certainly show the Nature of the Whole, in a moral
System, under the Government of him who is the same Yesterday, to Day, and
forever. For, while he constantly acts like himself, his whole Conduct will be
of a Piece, always like itself; and so one Part of it will illustrate the
Nature of another: and so from the Knowledge of the Nature of various Parts, we
may certainly argue to the Nature of the Whole. As, let us but diligently
observe a wise and good Man, who is uniform and steady in his Ways; and from
repeated Instances of his Conduct, we shall enter into the Knowledge of his
Temper in general, and perceive the Views and Designs which govern him. So let
us but attend to the divine Conduct, as recorded in that Book, which may justly
be denominated the History of the Deity, and enter into his Views and Designs,
in particular Instances of his Conduct, as there intimated; and we may with
sufficient Certainty determine his moral Character, and the general Nature and
Design of his whole Plan.

SHOW me, therefore, his Views and Designs in suffering Joseph to be sold,
Israel to be oppressed, Pharaoh to harden his Heart, Israel to murmur and rebel
and fall in the Wilderness; and let me into the Wisdom of his Conduct, in these
particular Parts of his grand Scheme; and then assure me that the whole System
is governed by the same infinitely wise Being; and how can I doubt the Wisdom
of the Whole, while I behold the Wisdom of these particular Parts? Or how can I
be at a Loss for the general Nature of the Whole, while I behold the Nature of
these particular Parts, and firmly believe that God always acts like himself,
and keeps up a constant Uniformity through all the infinite Varieties of Cases
and Circumstances, that ever occur in his moral Government of the World?

6. IF, therefore, the Plan which infinite Wisdom contrived to bring Jacob's
Family into Egypt, and from thence through the Red Sea and Wilderness into
Canaan, in which so much Sin was permitted, and so much Misery endured, was,
all Things considered, the wisest and best; as being so exactly suited to set
all the Perfections of God in the fullest and strongest Point of Light, and at
the same Time to unmask their Hearts, and set their absolute Dependence on God,
and great Obligations to him, and the infinite Evil of Sin, in such a Light, as
had the most powerful Tendency to induce them, with penitent, humble, broken
Hearts, in an entire Self-diffidence, to put their Trust only in God, and be
wholly devoted to him, to fear him, and love him, and walk in all his Ways, and
keep all his Commands, seeking his Glory: I say, if that Plan was the wisest,
that could have been contrived to answer these Ends; and so the best suited to
promote the Glory of God, and the best Good of the Israelites; and to answer
many noble Ends in that Age, and in all succeeding Generations: -- Such, no
Doubt, must be the Whole of God's moral Government of the World; in which
immensely great Plan, so much Sin is permitted, and so much Misery endured. i.
e. It must be the best contrived Scheme possible, to advance the Glory of God,
and the best Good of the moral System.

I AM sensible, there are many OBJECTIONS, which will be apt to arise in the
Reader's Mind, and which are capable of being put into a very plausible Dress,
and which, at first Sight, may seem to appear quite unanswerable. Nor am I
unwilling they should be set in their strongest Light. It Is best to look on all
Sides, and that with the utmost Care and Impartiality. And every honest Reader,
who sincerely desires to know the Truth, to understand the Reasons of the
divine Conduct, and to see the Wisdom, Glory and Beauty of his universal Plan,
will be natura'ly disposed to look up to Heaven, and say, O thou Father of
Lights, thou Fountain of all Knowledge, sensible that we lack Wisdom, and
encouraged by thy gracious Invitation, we come to Thee, who give liberally to
all that ask, nor upbraidest, nor deniest the most unworthy, who ask in the
Name of Christ -- Open thou our Eyes, that we may see the Wisdom of thy
Government; and behold the Beauty of thy Conduct, that we may not only justify
thy Ways to Men; but still, more than ever, love and fear that fearful and
glorious Name of thine, The LORD our GOD! -- For, there is not one Point, in
natural or revealed Religion, attended with so great Difficulties as THIS.
Therefore we greatly need to have our Hearts purified, and our Minds
enlightened by divine Grace; that, with a good Taste, and an unbiased
Judgment, we may search into the hidden Mysteries of God's great and eternal
Kingdom.

-- The Objections are as follow --

1. How could it be for the Honor of the supreme Lord and Governor of the
Universe, to suffer Satan, his Enemy, by his Lies, to deceive, seduce and
persuade innocent Man to rebel against his sacred Majesty, and subject himself
and all his Race to Death and Ruin?

2. How could it be to the best Good of the moral System, that this lower
World, instead of being inhabited by a Race of incarnate Angels, ever
celebrating the Praises of their great Creator, perfectly happy in his Image
and Favor, should (...) down into so near a Resemblance to Hell, in Wickedness
and Woe? O how infinitely better would it have been, if in Stead of Sin and
Misery here, and eternal Pains of Hell hereafter, to be suffered by such
innumerable Multitudes, all had been for ever holy and happy!

3. How can it be made to appear, that Sin and Misery were at all needful, much
less absolutely necessary, in a System originally holy and happy, to answer any
valuable Ends? Would it not be to limit the holy ONE of Israel, to say. That he
could find out no other Way, so good as this, to exalt God, and render the
System holy and happy?

Besides,

4. IF God wills Sin, then it seems, Sin is agreeable to his Will: And if from
all Eternity he decreed the Misery of his Creatures, then it seems their Misery
suits him. Both which, as is granted on all Hands, are directly contrary to
Reason and to Scripture.

BEFORE we attempt a direct Answer to these Objections, let three or four
Things be premised.

1. BE it so, that God's permitting Sin and Misery to enter into the World,
appears to us ever so dark; yet this is no Argument at all against the Wisdom,
Glory and Beauty of the divine Conduct in this Affair. For, there have been
Instances of the divine Conduct, in all Appearance dark to Perfection, which,
in the Result, have proved perfect in Wisdom and Beauty. When Jacob saw his
Son's Coat all stained with Blood, he had nothing but Darkness and Death before
his Eyes. An evil Beast, said he, has devoured him: Joseph is without doubt
rent in Pieces. Wherefore he rent his Clothes, and put on Sackcloth, and
mourned for his Son, and refused to be comforted. Nor had he the least (...) of
Light, for above 20 Years, in this dark Affair. Yea, it grew darker, when
Simeon was left bound in Egypt, never to be released, unless Benjamin went
also. "Joseph is not," says he, and Simeon is not! And ye will take Benjamin
away! All these Things are against me. -- So he spoke, and so he thought; for
so Things appeared. -- But yet afterward he viewed the whole Plan in a very
different Light, as being contrived and brought about by infinite Wisdom and
Goodness. And doubtless he was ready to say, Never let me, a poor short-sighted
Creature, venture again to call in Question the Wisdom of the supreme Governor
of the World, all whose Ways are perfect. Remember it, O my Soul, from this
Time forward. And for the future, let me learn to do my Duty, and cheerfully
leave God to order all Things as he pleases: firmly believing all his Conduct
to be wise, whether I can see through it, or no.

AND how dark to Moses, fled into the Land of Midian to save his Life, must the
divine Conduct appear, in suffering his Brethren, the Children of Israel to be
so cruelly used by Pharaoh? Nor had he the least Gleam of Light, in this dark
Affair, for forty Years. Yet it afterward appeared to be full of the wonderful
Wisdom of God, as we have before observed. And no doubt, Moses saw it, to his
abundant Satisfaction.

BUT as for the Inhabitants of Egypt, when they heard that Pharaoh, their grand
Monarch, and all his Hosts were drowned in the Red Sea -- And as for the
Israelites whose Carcases were doomed to fall in the Wilderness -- these
Dispensations were to them so dark, and they in such a Temper, that it was near
or quite impossible, they should see the Wisdom of God in them. -- Nor was it
strange, they could not see. -- But this leads me to add,

2. THAT it is not at all strange, that God's Conduct in the Permission of Sin
should appear exceeding dark to us, how wise, glorious and beautiful soever it
is in itself, and in the Eyes of God. -- (1.) Because our Views of God's grand
Plan are so very imperfect. When God has finished his Scheme, all holy Beings
will easily see the Beauty of it. For then it will appear, what he had in View,
and how wisely every Thing was ordered to answer the noblest and best Ends. It
was easy, when Jacob beheld Joseph Governor over all the Land of Egypt, for him
to see through an Affair, which before, for a long Course of Years, had been
absolutely inexplicable. Besides -- (2.) It is not strange, that God's present
Plan of Government appears so dark to us, however divine and glorious it is in
it self, considering how ill a Taste we have. It is not to be expected, that
fallen Creatures, greatly alienated from the Deity, and of a Temper quite
contrary to his, should be suited with his Plans of Government. If wicked Men
are Enemies to God, and Enemies to his Law, as the Scriptures teach; Romans VIII.
7.
they are not in a Capacity to discern the Beauty of a Plan all over divine. It
was not strange, that the Egyptians could not see the Wisdom of God in the
Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Hosts. Nor was it strange, that the wicked
Israelites were so far from seeing the Wisdom of God in dooming their Carcases
to fall in the Wilderness, that they were rather disposed to blaspheme his
Name. Yea, they began their Blasphemy before they received their Doom. And when
they might have gone right on to Canaan, had is not been their own Fault, they
began to say, that God had brought them out of Egypt on Purpose to destroy
them. Number. XIV.
Just as some desperate Sinners, who are deaf to all the Calls of the Gospel,
and refuse to march for the heavenly Canaan, sometimes in Fits of Horror, are
ready to think, that God made them on Purpose to (...) them. It is easy for us
to see the Unreasonableness and Perverseness of the Children of Israel, and
impenitent, obstinate Sinners are evidently quite as much to Blame: but you
cannot make them see it; nor could Moses make the Israelites see it in their
Case. Nor is it to be expected, that Creatures, so far sunk into Depravity and
Guilt, will be disposed to justify God and his Ways, although all his
Dispensations are ever so wise and just. But then their Dislike to the divine
Government, be it ever so great, is no Sign but that it is perfectly wise,
holy, just and good. Moses thought not the less honorably of God's Conduct in
the Overthrow of Pharaoh, because it looked so dark to the Egyptians. Nor do
the Inhabitants of Heaven think the less honorably of God's Conduct in the
Permission and Punishment of Sin in general, because it looks so dark to
obstinate Sinners. -- God has given us an Instance --

ABOUT 168 Years before the Babylonish Captivity, after the Israelites had been
in the promised Land 693 Years, and by their Perverseness had wearied out God's
Patience, so that God was provoked to give them up to their Hearts Lusts,
Isaiah was sent with this awful Message to them, Go and tell this People, Hear
ye indeed; but understand not: see ye indeed; but perceive not: make the Heart
of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes etc. Then
said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the Cities be wasted, without
Inhabitant, and the Houses without Man, and the Land be utterly desolate. Isai.
VI.
Than which nothing could look more dark to the guilty Jews, thus doomed to
Destruction. Yet, to the Inhabitants of Heaven, God's Conduct, in all this,
appeared to be unutterably glorious. So that upon the Occasion (...) even
"cried," as under the deepest Impressions. Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of
Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. Isai. VI.
So again in the nineteenth Chapter of the Revelation, we have the heavenly
Hosts represented as in the highest Exstacy of Joy, on Occasion of the
Destruction of mystical Babylon; which, yet, no doubt, when it comes to pass,
will appear inexpressibly dark and glorious to the POEE, and his Party; although
the Poor persecuted Saints in Popish Countries will be ready to join the
heavenly Hosts in their Songs of Praise. Yea,

3. WHEN I think over former Dispensations of Providence, -- Joseph's Affair,
and how dark it appeared to Jacob -- the Case of the Israelites in fore Bondage
in Egypt, and how dark it appeared to Moses fled into Midian -- And that this
Jacob, and this Moses, were the best of Men, and the Favorites of Heaven; and
yet the divine Conduct to them was absolutely unaccountable -- And as I look
along through the Bible, I can think of other Instances of the like Nature, one
after another, till I come to the Crucifixion of Christ; the most horrid Sin,
that ever was committed: an Affair exceeding dark to the Disciples, the best of
Men then in the World, and who were even ready, Things looked so dark, to give
up all Hopes of his being the Messiah: I say, when I^ consider these, I cannot
but conclude, that if the most holy and knowing Men on Earth were entirely
unable to solve the forementioned (...) relative to the Permission of Sin, yet
it would be no just Inducement to doubt of the divine Wisdom. Yea,

4. HOWEVER dark the Affair appears, or however unanswerable the Objections may
seem to be, yet we have strict Demonstration, that, of all possible (...) is
the best. For, before the Foundation (...) World, it was at God's Election, to
create, or not to create: And of all possible Systems, he had his Choice: nor
was there any Thing to bias his Judgment: nor was it possible he should make a
Mistake: all Things were open and naked before him: he knew which was the best:
and he chose this: and therefore, this, to him appeared preferable to any
other: and therefore it was really the best.

AND what then if we are not able fully to solve the Difficulties? Is it not
altogether reasonable to conclude, that it is owing to our not seeing the whole
Plan, or to our Want of a good Taste, or both? It is certain, that we are very
far from a full View of the whole Plan. We came into Existence, as it were, but
Yesterday. We are just emerging out of Nonentity. We still border on
Nonexistence. We are but half awake, if so much. When we enter into the
eternal World, if this short Period is well spent, we may hope to have our
intellectual Powers quite awake, and to be in a better Capacity to search into
the Nature, and discern the Beauties of God's eternal Kingdom. -- And besides
the Narrowness of our present Views, our Taste too, is at present much
vitiated. The best of Men in this World, are far from that high Relish for
moral Beauty, which is needful to render them good Judges, on a Plan so
altogether holy and divine, as this must certainly be. And while we are are
conscious to our selves, that, with Peter, we are apt to savor, not the Things
which be of God; but the Things which be of Men: and that our Minds lie under
many Byasses and Prejudices; too strongly attached to our private Interest, but
little concerned for the Honor of the divine Majesty, or for the Honor of his
Government, and the Welfare of his everlasting Kingdom. -- little caring for
any Thing, farther than our own Interest is concerned, -- Too much like the
Israelites in the Wilderness, who were always murmuring against God and against
Moses; although God was all the while taking the wisest Methods with them, and
Moses was faithful to him that appointed him: but if their Appetites and
Desires were crossed, and they disappointed in their narrow selfish Schemes,
they could see no Beauty in God's Conduct, nor Glory in his grand Designs; but
wished themselves back again to Egypt: not caring what became of the Honor of
God's great Name, and quite stupid to all the noble Ends God had in View, in
their Separation from the Rest of the World, to be his peculiar People: -- I
say, while we are conscious to this Low-spiritedness, to this mean, narrow,
selfish Temper, and feel our selves so much untouched with the infinite
Greatness and Glory of the Deity, and so little interested in, and concerned
for the Honor of his great Name, and the everlasting Establishment of his
Authority, and general Good of the moral System, we cannot but be sensible,
that we are very unfit Judges on the Beauty and Goodness of his Plan: as it is
easy to see, the Israelites were, on the Wisdom and Beauty of God's Conduct
with them in the Wilderness. They were too low-spirited, and of too mean and
selfish Views, to be struck with the Beauty of those noble and God-like
Designs, God had in View, in their Separation from the Rest of the World. To
God it appeared of vast Importance, as Things were then situate in the World,
to give a Check to the universal Spread of Idolatry and Ignorance, and to
revive the Knowledge of the true God, and of the true Religion. And in a View
to these noble Ends, all his Conduct in Egypt, at the Redsea, and in the
Wilderness, appeared to him perfectly wise and beautiful. To the Israelites,
nothing appeared of Importance, but that their Interest, Ease and Comfort
should be consulted, and provided for: Which not being done to their Minds in
the Wilderness, they heartily repented they ever hearkened to Moses, or ever
left Egypt, and would have deserted Moses, made a Captain, and returned, had
not Almightiness interposed: And the Idols, Leaks, Onions and Fleshpots of
Egypt, would have given them Content ^ while the Name of the God of Abraham
sunk into universal Contempt by the Means, among all Nations, and Idolatry
became more established than ever; as it would have done, had they deserted
Moses, and returned, as was by them proposed. -- Now it is plain, this people
were no proper Judges of the Wisdom and Beauty of God's Conduct. They were of
so ill a Taste, and their Temper was so different from God's, that they would
naturally Be blind to the Beauty of his Ways, and always stand ready to quarrel
with him.

HAD their Temper from the very first been right, and their Taste good, they
might have had a sufficient Insight into G0od's Designs, although very far from a
full View: I say, a sufficient Insight into God's Designs, to have discovered a
great Deal of Wisdom in his Conduct, in suffering Pharaoh to exalt himself and
bid Defiance, till all God's Wonders were wrought in Egypt; and afterward to
harden his Heart, and pursue Israel, and drive into the Midst of the Red Sea;
that there God might show his Power, and cause his Name to be declared
throughout all the Earth; that Israel might know, that he was the LORD, and
might in Ages to come tell their Children, and their Childrens Children, of all
these mighty Works; that they might know, that the Gods of the Heathen were no
Gods, and might for ever cleave to the GOD of their Fathers.

NOR had they the least Reason at any one Time, from the Day they passed through
the Red Sea, to dislike one Step which God took: nor would they have done it,
had they had a right Disposition. Yea, a good Taste would have enabled them to
have seen much Wisdom in all God's Ways. Here in this Wilderness, where there
is neither Bread, nor Water, nor Flesh, even here is a good Place for the God
of Abraham, our Father, to show his Wisdom, Power and Goodness, and ^rain us up
to a Sense of his All sufficiency, and bring us to live wholly upon him, as
Children upon a Father, and to be wholly devoted to him. Thus might they have
thought. -- And in stead of murmuring at every new Difficulty, and then falling
under the Frowns of the Almighty, they might have spent their whole Time in
Prayer and Praise -- till they arrived at Mount Sinai -- And while they were
setting up the Tabernacle -- And while the Spies were gone to search out the
Land. -- And had they done so, had they been of such a Temper, and spent their
Time thus, those 14 or 15 Months, all in Prayer and Praise, the whole
Congregation would have been prepared to have disregarded the ten Spies, and
cheerfully to have joined with Caleb and Joshua, saving, If the Lord is with
us, there is no Danger. Have not we all seen what he did in Egypt, at the
RedSea, and since? And he that has done these Things, cannot want Power, or
Willingness to do what remains, unless by our Unbelief and Perverseness we
should provoke him to cast us off. And so they might have marched right on to
Canaan, driven out the Inhabitants, and taken Possession. -- But they were of a
Temper every Way the Reverse. And they acted as they felt. And it happened to
them accordingly. -- Their Carcases were doomed to fall in the Wilderness --
they behaved like wild Bulls in a Net upon the Occasion -- blasphemed God --
stormed at Moses -- till God was obliged to strike them dead by Hundreds, and
by Thousands, from Time to Time, before he could subdue them.

Now they were our Ensamples, and these Things were written for our
Instruction. 1 Cor. X. 2.
Let us take Heed therefore, that we do not murmur at the divine Conduct in the
Government of the World, as they did. Nor venture blasphemously to say, He has
brought us out of Egypt into this Wilderness, on Purpose to destroy us -- He
has suffered Mankind to fall into a State of Sin and Misery, that he might
delight himself in the eternal Torments of the damned. Whenas, the Israelites
would not have fallen in the Wilderness, had they not perversely despised the
good Land, which flowed with Milk and Honey; and refused to give Credit to the
Revelation they had of God's Readiness to lead them into Canaan. [And let it be
remembered, that it was not God's Decree, but their own dearly beloved Lusts and
Corruptions, which influenced them to conduct as they did.] Nor shall we ever
be sentenced to Hell, unless we despise the Glories of Heaven, and prefer the
Leeks and Onions of Egypt, the Pleasures of Sin and of this World; and so turn
our Backs upon God, and refuse to give Credit to the Revelation made to us in
the Gospel, of God's Readiness to be reconciled through Christ, and to grant us
his holy Spirit to lead us on to the heavenly Canaan; and refuse to comply with
the Gospel-Way of Life. And if we do act thus wickedly, it is as reasonable we
should perish, as it was, that the Carcases of the wicked Israelites should
fall in the Wilderness. And as their Carcases falling in the Wilderness was
overruled by infinite Wisdom for the general Good of that Community, and to
fill the whole Earth with his Glory: So will the righteous Punishment of the
Wicked eternally in Hell be overruled to the Good of the intelligent System,
and God will be exalted throughout all his Dominions. Read Rev. XIX. 1, -- 6.

THE wicked Israelites did not feel themselves to Blame, to be sure, not much
to Blame, for all their Murmurings and Rebellions. "Who among Mortals," they
were ready to say, would conduct otherwise than we do, under the like
Circumstances! We were always against leaving Egypt, and entering on so wild an
Expedition. God has contrived it on Purpose for our Destruction! Fools that we
were, ever to leave the FleshPots of Egypt! Would to God we had lived and died
there! This had been our highest Interest. Therefore let us make a Captain, and
return, and make our Peace with the Egyptians as well as we can, and submit to
our Bondage for ever. When therefore the Judgments of God came upon them in
such a dreadful Manner, they would naturally be so far from seeing the Justice
or Wisdom of the divine Conduct, that their Hearts would be full of blasphemous
Thoughts against God and Moses; and the whole divine Conduct would appear dark
and unaccountable, to the highest Degree. -- And in all this they show the very
Spirit of unhumbled obstinate Sinners, who are insensible of their Sin and
Guilt, and Desert of eternal Damnation, and are ready, to say, God brought us
into Being on Purpose to damn us: We had no Hand in it. We would not have chose
it. Would to God we had never been born! Oh that we could return to (...) That
would be our true Interest. And instead of seeing the Wisdom and Justice of God
in his Dispensations toward them, they are full of blasphemous Thoughts, and
the whole of the divine Conduct appears to them dark and unaccountable, to the
highest Degree.

HAD the Israelites been thoroughly sensible how hateful their Egyptian Temper,
their carnal Disposition, their Infidelity, and their continual Murmurings
were; and how much to blame they appeared in the Sight of God; the Justice of
the divine Conduct would, by them, have been easily seen. And that would have
prepared them to have seen the Wisdom of his Ways too. It Is fit, such Wretches
as we, should be shut out of the promised Land, and that our Carcases should
fall in this Wilderness. And righteous art thou, O Lord, in our Doom. We have
but our just Deserts. No Wonder the Earth swallows up such Monsters, and that
Thousands are struck dead in a Moment, who are guilty of such Crimes. The
Honor of the divine Majesty requires this Severity. And even the Good of our
Posterity makes it necessary. Thus would they have thought. -- Nor can
unhumbled, obstinate Sinners ever discern the Wisdom and Beauty of the divine
Government in general, until first their uncircumcised Hearts are humbled, and
they cordially approve of the Justice of God's Law, by which they stand
condemned -- And are "born again" -- As it is written, Except a Man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. For it is the "pure in Heart," and
they only, that "shall SEE God." For "the natural Man," who is destitute of a
spiritual, holy, divine Taste, "discerns not the Things of the Spirit of God"
-- sees not the divine Beauty of the Law, or of the Gospel -- and for the same
Reason is blind to the Wisdom, Glory and Beauty of God's universal Plan. -- So
very blind, that the full and clear Revelation to be made of it at the Day of
Judgment, how convincing soever it may be to their Reason and Conscience, will
be far from suiting their Hearts. Nor will the Beauty and Amiableness of it be
by them ever discerned. For as the obstinate Israelites, whose Carcases fell in
the Wilderness, never saw the Beauty of God's Conduct toward that
Congregation; so neither will those, who die impenitent, ever see the Beauty
and Glory of God's universal Plan. -- But in Heaven it will be seen.

To conclude, As all the hard Thoughts of the divine Conduct, which are to be
found in the Hearts of Mankind, through a fallen, depraved, guilty World, arise
entirely from our partial Views and bad Taste; so there is no other Remedy,
but, first of all, to have our Hearts renewed and sanctified by divine Grace;
and then to endeavor to enlarge our Views of God's universal Plan, and search
into the Nature of the divine Government, and the glorious Designs and noble
Ends which infinite Wisdom has in View, and will at last accomplish.

AND as the BIBLE contains an authentic History of the Conduct of the Deity,
for a long Series of many hundred Years; and by prophetic Representations,
opens to our View Things yet to come to pass, as far down as to the End of the
World, and the general Judgment, and the Consummation of all Things; so hither
should we come, with honest Minds and pure Hearts, and form all our Notions of
God's moral Perfections, the Nature of his moral Government, and of his Views,
Ends and Designs in all his Works, from what we find here written. Nor ought
any Solutions of Difficulties to be accounted right, but such as quadrate
exactly with, yea are the natural Result of, Scripture-Representations.

SOME of the Heathen Philosophers, who knew no better, imagined there were two
Gods. A good God, the Author of all Good in the System, whom they called
OROMASDES: and an evil God, the Author of all Evil in the System, whom they
called ARIMANIUS. But it is enough for us, to confute this Hypothesis, that the
BIBLE teaches us, that there is but ONE GOD; and that he is absolutely supreme;
and does according to his Pleasure in the Armies of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth; and that his Providence extends to every Thing, both
good and bad. -- And it is supposed, that those remarkable Words, in Isai. XLV.
6, 7. directed to Cyrus, King of Persia, where the forementioned Notion, of two
Gods, anciently prevailed, were designed in express Contradiction to that
Doctrine. I am the LORD, and there is none else. I form Light, and create
Darkness: I make Peace, and create Evil: I the LORD do all these Things.

SOME, who profess to adhere to divine Revelation, in order to solve the
Difficulties relative to God's Permission of Sin, affirm, it came to pass
unexpectedly to the divine Being; as he was not capable of foreseeing what
would be the Conduct of free Agents. But it is enough for us to confute this
Hypothesis, that we have Hundreds of Instances in Scripture, of God's
Foreknowledge of the Conduct of free Agents, and that it is a Doctrine
constantly taught, and inculcated in the Bible. See this proved at large in Mr.
Edwards on Liberty, Page 98 -- 116.


OTHERS, to solve the Difficulties, have asserted, that it was not in the Power
of God to prevent the Fall of Free-Agents, without destroying their FreeAgency,
and turning them into intelligent Machines, incapable of Virtue, as well as of
Vice. But it is enough for us, to confute this Hypothesis, that it is contrary
to plain Scripture Representations, which teach us, that the Man Christ Jesus,
our second Adam, was a free Agent, capable of the highest Virtue, and yet in a
confirmed State, so that he could not sin; as are also all the Saints and
Angels now in Heaven. From whence it appears, that it was in God's Power to
have confirmed all Intelligences at first; and left them moral Agents
notwithstanding.

OTHERS, to solve the Difficulties still more fully, have not only asserted as
above, but also denied the Eternity of Hell Torments, and affirmed the
universal Salvation of Men and Devils. But it is eno' for us, to confute this
Hypothesis, that instead of its being taught in Scripture, it is contrary to
what those infallible Writings affirm, in Language, as plain, and express, and
repeated, as could have been expected, if God had intended to establish us ever
so fully in the Belief of the Eternity of Hell Torments. Of which, more
afterward.

BUT it will be said, If God certainly foreknew that Man would fall, unless he
interposed, and undertook for their Safety: and if it was in his Power to have
done it: and if Millions would be eternally miserable in Hell, if he did it
not: why did not he interpose and undertake? -- Not, I dare say, for want of
Forethought, or of a thorough weighing of the Affair, with all its
Consequences: for he had had the whole in full View, from eternal Ages. -- Nor
will any pretend, it was absolutely without any End at all: for an infinitely
wise Being always acts upon Design.

Now God of his infinite Mercy grant, that by a diligent Attention to the
divine Oracles, and through the Illumination of the holy Spirit, we may come to
such an Understanding of this Dispensation of his Providence, as may tend to
create in us the greatest Dread of Sin, and the highest Veneration for the
divine Majesty; and show us our entire absolute Dependence on God, and infinite
Obligations to him; that we may learn to be perfectly self-diffident, to trust
wholly in God, and live wholly to him, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory in
the Church, World without End. AMEN.

The WISDOM of God in the Permission of SIN.
SERMON III.
GENESIS L. 20. -- YE thought Evil against Me; but God meant it unto Good --


WERE the supreme Monarch of the Universe an arbitrary, despotic Being,
conducting without any Regard to what is fitting and best, having no Reason or
Motive for what he does, nor any End in View; all our Enquiries and Researches
into the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin, must be for ever in vain. If
he makes his Will his only Rule of Action: and wills as he does, without any
Reason or Motive; a Stop, an eternal Stop, ought to be put to all Enquiries.
For, no Reason is to be sought for a Thing, which is done absolutely without
any Reason at all. -- But if the supreme Monarch of the Universe is a Being of
infinite Wisdom, and always chooses what is best, and does what is most
fitting, working all Things according to the COUNSEL of his own Will ( Ephesians. I.
11.) then his universal Plan must be, yea, we may be quite certain that it
actually is, perfect in Wisdom, Glory and Beauty. -- And now it becomes us to
awaken all the Powers of our Souls to Attention: and it is worth our while to
dwell whole Days and Months and Years, on this greatest and noblest of all
Themes. And if we feel that the immense Greatness of the Plan confounds us, and
find our selves still at a Loss, yet being assured, the whole is perfect in
Beauty, we will look into it, as far as we can; and hasten to prepare for the
World of Light above, where the Glories of this grand Scheme will open to our
View, and afford Matter of the sweetest Contemplation, and most divine Delight
through eternal Ages. -- Since we are but just emerged out of Nonexistence, have
so very small an Acquaintance with God's World, and so feeble and weak a Taste,
so poor a Discernment of what is most beautiful and best, it must not seem
strange to us, if we can see but a little Way into the Glories of the divine
Plan. Yet knowing that it is so very exceeding glorious, being chosen by
infinite Wisdom before all other possible Plans, although infinite in Number and
Variety in the View of Omniscience, we may ardently long to look into it, and
search the Scriptures daily, study the Nature of the Deity, and lift up our
Eyes to Heaven for divine Light and Instruction.

ALL that has been said in the foregoing Sermons, being kept in Mind, that we
may now enter directly into a View of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of
Sin, and lay a Foundation for the Solution of all Objections, we must look back
to the Beginning of God's Works, and view his Conduct from Step to Step, and
enquire into the Reasons of each as we go along. And God grant us attentive
Minds, and right and enlarged Views, and a good Taste to discern the Beauty and
Glory of his universal Plan! -- And let us begin as the Bible begins. For that
best of Books is to be our constant Guide, the Man of our Counsel, a Light to
our Feet, and a Lamp to our Paths, in all the Way we go.

1. A GRAND and noble THEATER was erected by GOD; a standing, visible Evidence
of his eternal Power and Godhead; completely furnished out, as a Place of
Habitation for Man; and as the grand Stage of Action, and Scene of all God's
wonderful Works, till the Day of Judgment. -- What Use is to be made of the
material System after the Day of Judgment, shall be considered in its Place.

WHEN we read the first Verse in Genesis, -- In the Beginning God created the
Heaven and the Earth -- with what follows in that Chapter -- We behold the
whole material System arising out of Nothing into Being, by God's almighty
Power. -- First, it exists a CHAOS, without Form and void, buried in profound
Darkness; but, in six Days, the whole is set in a most harmonious and beautiful
Order; a visible and noble Specimen of the infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness
of the GREAT ETERNAL. -- And how know we but that the intellectual System,
reduced to so near a Resemblance of a Chaos, by the Revolt and prevailing
Influence of the Angels who left their first Estate, will yet under the Conduct
of infinite Wisdom, even under the Conduct of Messiah the Prince, stand forth
in perfect Order, and the most beautiful Harmony, a bright and noble Image of
all the glorious Perfections of the invisible God?

2. A THEATER being erected, proper to raise in intelligent Creatures, sublime
and exalted Thoughts of God, in the next Place, MAN, a noble Creature, an
intelligent-free-Agent, capable of moral Action, and a proper Subject of moral
Government, is formed by God, and placed upon the Stage, as Head of a numerous
Race, and made Lord of this lower World. God created Man in his own Image, in
the Image of God created be him: Male and Female created he them. And God
blessed them, and God said unto them, Be (...) and multiply, and replenish the
Earth, and subdue it: and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Fowl of the Air, and over every living Thing that moves upon the Face of the
Earth. Genesis I. 27, 28.

AND here it ought to be observed, and it ought never to be forgotten by us,
that God, in the Capacity of Creator, did well by his Creature, Man. He was
made capable of knowing, loving, obeying and enjoying God; as also of seeing
the Beauty and tasting the Sweetness of the Fruits of Paradise: and he had a
high Relish for Knowledge and Happiness. -- Besides, he was formed for Society,
and had an agreeable Companion, and the Prospect of a happy Posterity, who would
grow up and honor and love him as their common Father, through all Generations.
And he had open to his View all the Glories of the visible Creation, to inspire
him with sublime and exalted Thoughts of God, who had brought him into
Existence, and made him Lord of all here below. Surely, God, the Creator, dealt
well by his Creature, Man, whom he thus made but a-little lower than the
Angels, and crowned with Glory and Honor. And God saw every Thing that he
made, and behold it was very Good. Genesis I. 31.

And therefore,

3. MAN was under the greatest Obligations to love the infinitely glorious God,
his Maker, with all his Heart, and to be for ever in Subjection to his
Authority, and obedient to his Will. And this was not only his Duty, but such
was his Make, that it would have afforded him the most refined Pleasure and
Delight. Therefore let it be repeated again, that God, his Creator, had done
well by his Creature, Man. Question. How was it possible for Man, created in
such holy and happy Circumstances, eve. to sin?

Answer. IT is thought by some very difficult, to answer this Question. And had
neither Angels nor Men ever sinned, perhaps it might have been thought an
impossible Thing* that they ever should have sinned. Which View of the Case, I
desire the Reader to keep in Mind* and mean while wait a little for a Solution
of the Difficulty proposed.


And if after all this, he should fall from God, it must be his own Fault; nor
could he any longer deserve the Favor of his Maker, but to sink under his
everlasting Displeasure. Therefore,

OF Course his everlasting Welfare must depend on his good Behavior. And had
there been no Covenant or Constitution at all, only the mere Law of Nature; yet
according to that, it would have become the most High, as moral Governor and
Judge of the World, in Case of the Rebellion of his Creature Man, to have
testified his high Displeasure against his Crime, in his everlasting
Destruction. For the Wages of Sin is Death. The Honor of the Deity would have
called for such a Punishment, as well as the Good of the intelligent System,
that all might hear and fear and do no more so Wickedly. Wherefore God as the
holy and good Governor of the World, expressly assures his Creature, Man, what
he might depend upon in Case of Disobedience. In the Day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely die. Genesis II. 17.

AND thus also God did well by his Creature, Man, in the Capacity of his moral
Governor. He let him know his great Obligations to Obedience: how much he
insisted upon it: how highly he should resent his Disobedience: That he would
cast him, not only out of his Favor, and out of Paradise, but out of his
World: Would even put him to Death, and send his guilty Soul, under the divine
Displeasure naked, forlorn, undone, to everlasting Despair and Woe, no Hope
being given of any Relief. THOU SHALL SURELY DIE. -- And what more could God
have done, as his moral Governor, to have prevented his Apostasy and Ruin. --
If after all this he would venture to disobey, must he not be for ever
inexcusable?

4. GOD took it for granted, that he had now done enough, and said enough; and
might, becoming his Character, as his Lord and King, not only demand, but
reasonably expect Obedience, and justly suspend his everlasting Welfare on that
Condition. Yea, he judged, that as Governor of the World, it became him to do
so, that he might secure his own Rights, and maintain the Honor of his
Authority. Nor did he look upon himself obliged to be his Keeper, and become
Surety for him, and undertake to preserve him from Son, by his constant
Interposition: But judged, he might, having done enough and said enough, now
leave him to his own Choice, as having all needful Qualifications to render him
a proper Subject of moral Government, having sufficient internal Abilities, and
sufficient outward Advantages to know and do his Duty. And accordingly God did
leave him to his Choice. -- He was deceived by Satan's Lies, -- broke the
divine Law, and fell into Ruin. As the Event, recorded in the third Chapter of
Genesis, sufficiently proves. -- But God and his Throne were guiltless.

5. OUR first Parents Design in eating of the forbidden Fruit, was, to make a
surprising Advance in Knowledge and Happiness; not by such slow Degrees as they
had before expected, but at once to become as Gods. Deceived by Satan's Lies,
captivated by this Temptation, the Fruit also appearing pleasant to the Eye,
and good for Food, they took and eat.

SATAN'S Design was to bring Dishonor upon God, Ruin upon Man, and then to
lift up himself, exult and triumph in his Deed. Being an inveterate Enemy to
God, and to all Good; and having a peculiar Spite at Man, THE Angels are (...)
Spirits, to minister to those who are the Heirs of Salvation. (Heb. I. 14.)
And, perhaps, as soon as Man was created, it was revealed to all the Hosts of
Heaven, that it should be their Employment, to attend upon Adam and his
numerous Race. Perhaps Satan might think this too degrading, for one so so
superior to Man, as he perceived himself to be, to be thus employed. And so
Pride, his first Sin, might take Occasion to rise in his Heart. And to be
revenged on God and Man, both at once, he laid a Scheme for Man's Seduction and
Ruin. And from that Day to this, has never ceased to study our Mischief. -- If
this Occasion of the Fall of Angels is a mere Conjecture, yet it is the most
probable I know of: And what makes it the more probable, it will account for
Satan's great Zeal for the Destruction of Mankind.
nothing could give him greater Joy, than to ruin a new-made World, which, as
it appeared to him, God had created for the Honor of his great Name, and as a
Place of happy Abode for his Creature, Man; -- to see God's Creature give more
Credit to him, than to his Maker; to see God's Subject desert his rightful
Sovereign and Lord, and join with him; to see God's Authority disregarded, and
himself obeyed; I say, to see God thus disobeyed, disappointed, dishonored,
Man ruined, this lower Creation spoilt, while he himself is believed, obeyed,
honored, would perfectly suit the Devil's Heart, so full of Pride, of Enmity
against God, and Ill Will to Man.

GOD'S Design, in permitting Satan so far to succeed in this most Hellish
Attempt, was, that he might take Occasion to bring more Honor to God, and to
make the good Part of the Creation more humble, holy and happy. And finally, as
effectually to disappoint Satan in all his Schemes, as was Pharaoh, when he and
his Army lay overwhelmed in the Bottom of the Red Sea. Which Design, for the
the Encouragement of our first Parents, was hinted to them soon after the Fall.
The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head. Genesis III. 1^.

WHEN the great OMNISCIENT saw, that Rebellion would break out in Heaven, and
the Infection reach down to this lower World, and spread all over the Earth, he
practically said -- After all I have done for them as their Creator, and said
to them as their moral Governor, I and my Throne are guiltless, -- to
themselves I leave them -- and now will it be known, what is in their Hearts;
and I also will take Occasion to show what is in my Heart: and they shall know
that I am the LORD, and the whole intelligent System shall be filled with my
Glory. (analogous to what is written in 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 31. Deuteronomy. VIII. 2.
Exodus X. 2.)

1. God knew that it belonged to the Nature of all finite Beings, to be mutable
and peccable; and that the best might degenerate so far as to become the worst:
no Being in the System being by Nature immutable, but God alone. As it is
written, I am the LORD, I change not. Mal. III. 6.

To be by Nature immutable, is peculiar to the Deity, and cannot be
communicated to a Creature; because it implies Infinity. God only is capable of
such a complete View of all Things, past, present, and to come, at once, as
leaves no Room for any new Views. And his Views being for ever exactly the
same, there is in his Nature a fixed Foundation for Immutability in all his
Purposes and Determinations. Whereas, the most exalted of all finite Beings,
being capable of only partial Views of Things, are constantly enlarging and
varying their Views and Prospects, and are liable to have a Set of Thoug^^^
wholly new, which may lead on to new Determinations and Purposes. And amidst an
infinite Variety of new Views and new Determinations, Things may possibly so
appear, as that the most exalted of mere Creatures may make a wrong Judgment,
and take a wrong Turn, and so fall into Sin and under the divine Displeasure.

WHEREFORE to God, who saw the finite Capacities of finite Intelligences, and
their consequent Liableness, as Things might happen, to Deception and Apostasy,
it plainly appeared, that he could not safely depend upon their Stability. He
knew himself to be the only immutable Being in the System, the same Yesterday,
to Day and forever; but he put no Trust in his Servants, and his Angels he
charged with Folly ( Job. IV. 18.) or as it is elsewhere expressed, ( Job. XV.
15.) He puts no Trust in his Saints; yea, the Heavens are not clean in his
Sight.

AND yet, for Things to continue for ever in such an uncertain, unsettled
State, must have been undesirable to the immutable Being, who loves
Immutability in himself, and the Image of it in his Creatures; and loves to see
his Authority established, and his Kingdom settled in Peace and everlasting
Order and Harmony; and loves to see the eternal Welfare of his Creatures on a
safe Footing, and clear out of the Reach of any possible Danger.

BUT how much soever to the Honor of God, and to the Good of the System; and
how desirable soever in these two Respects, it might appear in the Sight of
God, that the intelligent System should unanimously adhere and cleave for ever
to the Lord; yet, in the Nature of Things, there could be no certain Security
for this, unless he himself, the only immutable Being, should undertake and
become Surety for all his Creatures. There should be no certain Dependence upon
n Creatures, left to themselves, how great and excellent soever their original
Powers: because, after all, they were finite; and therefore must have new
Views, and so were liable to wrong Determinations. God, who was perfectly
acquainted with the Nature of himself, and o fall created Beings, plainly saw,
that himself alone was by Nature absolutely immutable, and that all created
Intelligences must, after all their noble Endowments and exalted Stations, be
absolutely dependent on him, not only for the Continuation of their Beings and
original Powers; but also for their Preservation from Sin and Apostasy. As it
is written, There is none good, but One, (...) is God. Mar. X. 18.

2. HOWEVER, innocent holy Beings, who as yet never felt the least Inclination
to swerve from God, but on the contrary were entirely wrapped up in him, could
not easily perceive how it should be possible for them to turn away from the
Deity, and become Apostate. Yea, such a Thing would naturally appear to be
impossible, as they felt no Inclination that Way, nor had in View any Thing
which seemed to be of the Nature of a Temptation to it. Nor was it possible,
they should feel as Inclination to sin, while innocent: for the least Motion of
their Hearts toward Sin, would constitute them Sinners, in the Eyes of perfect
Purity. Nor was it possible they should feel any Force in any Temptation to
Sin, unless the Temptation excited in them some Inclination that Way: for if
they felt no Inclination that Way, then the Temptation would appear to have no
Weight in it. If it weighed nothing with them, it would appear to have no
Weight in itself. So that, as long as they remained innocent, they could
neither feel any Inclination to Sin, nor perceive any Force in any Temptation.
-- Wherefore it must be very unnatural to an innocent holy Being, to apprehend
any Danger of his ever turning from God. Nor could he easily be brought to know
the Mutability of his Nature, or ever to imagine it could be in his Heart to
sin against God, unless left to find out the Truth by his own sad Experience.

LET any Man attend to the Constitution of his own Mind, and he will soon
perceive how unnatural it is, to think our selves in Danger of a Crime, to
which we never felt the least Inclination, nor ever once thought of any Thing
in Nature, that could be a Temptation; yea, to which, whenever we think of it,
we feel the greatest Aversion. As, what dutiful (...) ever thought himself in
Danger of murdering his Father, whom he greatly loves and honors? And if a
divinely inspired Prophet should tell him, that he, one Day, should be guilty
of such a shocking Crime, he could hardly believe it. This naturally brings to
mind the Story of Hazael (in 2 King. VIII. 11 -- 13.) who, when the Prophet
told him, how he should burn the strong Holds of Israel, slay their young Men
with the Sword, and dash their Children, and rip up their Women with Child,
having never felt any Inclination to such Barbarities toward them, and not
foreseeing any Temptation he should ever have to commit such Things, so
shocking to human Nature, readily answered, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he
should do this great Thing! -- So when our blessed Savior told Peter, that he
should deny him that very Night, he was far from thinking it was in his Heart
to do so. Nor could the Prediction of Christ induce him to believe, that it
would come to pass. Yea, it did not seem to him, there was really any Danger of
it, as he had no Inclination that Way; yea, felt the greatest Aversion to it.
And it did not seem, that any Thing could tempt him to it; No, not even (...)
itself. For he felt, he had rather die, than do (...) Mar. XIV. 29. Although all
should be offended, yet will (...) I. Ver. 31. If I should die with thee, I
will not deny thee in any wise. And this was the Voice of them all, though Christ
had expressly told them, All ye shall be offended because of me this Night; and
even confirmed his Prediction by an ancient Prophecy, -- For it is written, I
will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered. Ver. 27. -- Much
less would innocent, holy Beings, who had never heard that any one Intelligence
had ever fallen, or ever discerned any Thing in the State of their Minds
within, or in the Situation of Things without, that had the least Tendency that
Way, but every Thing to the contrary, -- I say, much less would such Beings be
apt to suspect (...) anger of their forsaking the Fountain of all Good, and
turning Enemies to the God that made them. Nay, rather, I imagine, they would
be apt to look upon it, as a Thing, in its own Nature, near or quite
impossible. OBJECT. THE Disciples were guilty of Self-Confidence, and were to
blame. Surely holy Beings have no blame able Self-Confidence.

ANSW. THEY have not. -- The Disciples might have known better. They had heard
of the Angels Fall, of Adam's Fall, and of the Falls of Noah, Lot, David, and
other most eminent Men; and had had abundant Experience of the Wickedness and
Deceitfulness of their own Hearts, all which, together with Christ's express
Prediction, rendered them to blame. Yet it will not follow, that an innocent
holy Being, just come into Existence, full of Love to God, having never heard
of the Fall of any, nor ever thought of any Temptation to Sin, is to blame,
because it seems to him impossible, that ever he should turn Enemy to the God
that made him, or (...) go contrary to his Will. "How can I do it?" (...) he be
ready to say. In all Nature there is nothing (...) tempt me: But every, Thing
to the contrary. (...) the more he loved God, the meet impossible would it
seem, that he should ever revolt.


Therefore,

3. IF God, in a Sense of their Mutability, out of his own mere Goodness and
sovereign Grace, to prevent their Apostasy, and the infinitely dreadful
Consequences, which, in a Government so perfectly holy as his, Sin must expose
them to, all which lay open to his View: -- I say, if God had become Surety for
all Intellig^nces, if the only immutable Being had, in such Circumstances,
undertaken by his ever watchful Eve, and the constant Influences of his Spirit,
to have rendered all Intelligences immutably Good; although the Kindness done
them, in God's Account, had been full infinitely Great, yet not so (...) for
they would not have been in a Capacity to have discerned the Kindness, scarce
at all: Much less, to have been so thoro'ly sensible of their absolute
Dependence on God, and infinite Obligations to him, as now, according to the
present Plan, the saved will for ever be.

HAD all Intelligences been preserved in their original Rectitude, and so never
felt in themselves the least Inclination to Sin, but always perfectly to the
contrary, they would have been apt to have thought it impossible, that any holy
Being should ever depart from God; and so would not have been apt to have
attributed their Immutability to God, their Preserver, but rather to their own
inherent Goodness. And so their absolute Dependence on God, the only immutable
Being, and their infinite Obligations to him, for interposing to prevent their
Apostasy, would not have been seen. Nor could they have had any proper Sense of
the self-moving Goodness and sovereign Grace of God, exercised toward them in
this Affair. In a Word, God would not have been exalted so highly, nor would
these Intelligences have looked on themselves so infinitely (...) him, so
dependent, so much obliged; nor (...) divine sovereign Grace have stood in such
a (...) and striking Point of Light, as was really desir^^ (...) The Truth
would have lain, in a Measure, concealed, beyond the Reach of finite
Capacities, there being in Nature no Means provided, whereby they could have
come to the clear and full Knowledge of it. Therefore,

4. THEY were not fit to be confirmed; nor would it have been to the Honor of
God, to have confirmed them, as Things stood. -- They were not prepared to
feel, that they stood in Need of this Super-Creation-Grace, (if I may so call
it) not as yet knowing, nor, for ought appears, so much as suspecting, that
they were in any Danger. (...) stood firm within themselves, nor was there any
Thing in universal Nature to draw them aside from God, as it seemed to them.
And had God then interposed, it must have been to them an insensible
Interposition; of which they felt no Need, and for which they were unprepared
to be thankful.

IF God had constantly preserved them from the first Stirrings of an
Inclination to Apostasy, as they had never heard of such a Thing in all the
System, or felt any Tendency of Heart that Way, his Interposition must have
been undiscerned by them; nor could they have come to the Knowledge of it,
unless by immediate Revelation from God; which, as the Case stood, they were
unprepared to understand, or attend to, as not feeling any Need of it. A
Revelation in such a Situation would not have produced the desired Effects.
Nothing could teach them like Experience. And indeed this is evidently the Case
so universally, that it is even become a Proverb, that Experience is the best
Schoolmaster. -- So that it seems plain, that Intelligences, as they were at
first created, were not in proper Circumstances to be confirmed; nor could God
have confirmed them, with that honor to himself that was desirable and fit.

FOR, if God, the only immutable Being, (...) own infinite Goodness and
sovereign Grace, (...) show such a Kindness to any of his Creatures, it was fit
and desirable, that they should be thoroughly sensible of the Greatness and
Freeness of his Grace. The Kindness done to a mutable, p^^cable Creature in
such a Case, as to the Matter of it, must be of infinite Worth: it being a
Confirmation in everlasting Happiness. And as the Kindness in confirming a
peccable Creature, must be infinitely great, so the Grace must be absolutely
free. God had done so much for all Intelligences in their first Creation, that
he was under no Obligations to do any more. He was absolutely at Liberty. He
looked upon it in this Light. And had he, to what he had originally done for
them as their Creator, super-added confirming Grace, i. e. undertaken, as their
Guardian, to have been their constant Keeper, and engaged his own Immutability
to have rendered them immutably good, the Favor had been quite over and above
what was due from the Creator to his Creature; and so, had been in a peculiar
Sense free. Now for a Favor, infinitely great, and so absolutely free, to be
conferred in such a Manner, as that the Greatness and Freeness of it should
never have been seen by Intelligences, was neither for the Honor of God, nor
for the best Good of his Creatures. And,

5. IT was but paying proper Honor to the (...) for God, as moral Governor of
the World, to take State to himself, and in the Sight of all created
intelligences, to seat himself upon his Throne, and proclaim his own infinite
Supremacy, and cloth himself with his proper Authority, and let all know their
infinite Obligations to love, and honor and obey Him, on Pain of his
everlasting Displeasure, (...) their everlasting Banishment from his glorious
(...). -- To have concerned himself only for (...) Creature's Good,
unsolicitous for the Rights of (...) God head, in the very Beginning of his
(...) and when the first Foundations of his everlasting Kingdom were laying,
had been to counteract his own Nature, and his chief Maxims of Government. And
indeed, as he is the GREAT BEING, and in a Sense the only Being, all the
Creation being nothing compared with him, yea, less than nothing and Vanity; So
it was fit, all Intelligences should early be taught to view him in that Light.
And what Method could be better suited to this End, than to let all the
intelligent System know, that their everlasting Welfare was suspended on the
Condition of their paying supreme Honor, and yielding constant Obedience to
this glorious Monarch of the Universe: in the mean Time leaving them to their
own Reflections, and to their own Choice; as being conscious to himself of
their infinite Obligations to yield everlasting Obedience to his Law?

AND if, in this State of Things, any of his Creatures should venture to rise
in Rebellion against his glorious Majesty, the Way would be open for him to
take such Steps as would have the most effectual Tendency to discountenance
Sin, to exalt God, to humble the Sinner, and glorify Grace; and to prepare the
Way for the Confirmation of innumerable Multitudes of Intelligences, in
Holiness and Happiness, to the best Advantage. -- All his gracious Plan lay
open before him. He knew, from Step to Step, how Intelligences would conduct,
and how he himself would interpose and overruled, and how the Whole would
finally issue. And he practically said, Now shall it be known, what is in their
Hearts. And Occasion shall be given to show, what is in my Heart. And it shall
be known, that I am the LORD. And the whole intelligent System shall be filled
with my Glory. And,

6. THE State of Things in the moral System (...) not such, immediately after
the Creation, (...) was (...) to the Confirmation of Intelligences, in a Way
agreeable to the Ends of moral Government. God must have done all immediately,
and without their so much as discerning their Need of it. For there were as
yet, comparatively speaking, no Means of Confirmation. They had not had
Opportunity, in any Instance, to see the infinitely evil Nature and dreadful
Consequences of Sin. Nor did it yet appear what infinite Abhorrence the
Almighty had of Iniquity, by any Thing he had done. Nor did they so much as
know their Danger, and their Need of the divine Interposition. Things,
therefore, were by no Means ripe for a general Confirmation.

INDEED God could have confirmed created Intelligences then, but not in a Way
so agreeable to the Ends of moral Government, as afterward, i. e. not so much
to the Honor of the moral Governor, and to the spiritual Advantage of his
Creatures. -- When Satan, a glorious Archangel, revolted, and drew off a third
Part (perhaps) of the Inhabitants of Heaven, and when, for their Sin, they were
driven out from the Presence of God, down to act eternal Hell: and when the
elect Angels had stood by, and with a perfect Astonishment beheld this
unexpected Revolt of their Companions; and with sacred Dread seen divine Wrath
blaze out from the eternal Throne of Heaven's almighty Monarch, driving the
Rebel-Host from those celestial Regions, down to Darkness and endless Woes: and
when the elect Angels, soon after, saw our first Parents turn away from God,
and for their Sin driven out of Paradise, and all this lower World doomed to
Death: and when they had stood by 3 or 4000 Years, and been spectators of the
Judgments inflicted by God on a (...) World, seen the general Deluge, the
miraculous Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by Fire from Heaven, the ten
Plagues of Egypt, the Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea, the
Carcases of six hundred Thousand Israelites fall in (...) Wilderness, and the
long Series of Calamities which God sent upon his People in the Times of their
Judges, and in the Reigns of their Kings, till Israel and Judah were both
carried away captive for their Sins, and the glorious holy Temple laid in
Ashes: and viewed all God's Ways, even down to the Birth and Death of the
MESSIAH, the most astonishing Event that ever did, for ever will happen, through
out eternal Ages; and beheld their sovereign Lord, who in the Beginning had
created the Heaven and the Earth, and whom, from their first Existence, they
had worshipped as the supreme God, as God over all blessed for ever, even him
stepping into the Room of (...) Man, and dying in his Stead to make Atonement
for his Sin: I say, when the elect Angels had stood by for 4000 Years, and seen
all these Things, and had full Time for Consideration; their Thoughts of God,
of themselves, of Sin, would be almost infinitely different from what they were
immediately after their Creation. And now, if God should see Cause to confirm
them, that they might never fall, it would appear to them, a Kindness quite
infinitely great, and infinitely free. Their absolute Dependence on God, and
infinite Obligations to him, and the infinite Malignity of Sin, would naturally
be so deeply impressed on their Hearts, by an attentive View of all these
Things, as would greatly tend to their everlasting Confirmation; and prepare
them to receive, with suitable Gratitude, a Kindness of such infinite Value, at
the Hands of God.

THE Fall of their Companions in Holiness and Happiness, and then of innocent
Man, would naturally lead them to se^ their own Mutability, and (...) them feel
their Need of being held up by him, who is alone by Nature unchangeable, and
bring them (...) absolute Dependence on him. God's permitting others to fall,
as great and good as themselves, would naturally lead them to see, that God was
under no Obligations to keep them through their Time of Trial: which would
induce them to have Recourse to sovereign Grace, and be always on their Watch.
A Sight of the infinitely dreadful State of Satan and his Host, once their
Fellow-Citizens, now bound in Chains, of Guilt and Despair, to the Judgment of
the great Day, then before all Worlds to be bro't forth, judged, condemned and
doomed to the most intolerable Pains of Hell, never to end; would naturally
tend to realize to them the horrible Wickedness and dreadful Nature of rising
in Rebellion against God, and make them tremble at the Though It. And while they
behold all God's Conduct toward Mankind, from the Fall of Adam, to the Death,
Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ, and looked forward to the final
Conflagration, and Consummation of all Things, it would give them such a View
of all God's moral Perfections, shining forth in his moral Government of the
World, and set the infinitely evil Nature and dreadful Consequences of Sin in
such a Light, as would have the strongest Tendency to confirm them in
everlasting Love and Obedience to the supreme Being, and dispose them to
receive at God's Hands a Promise of their everlasting Establishment, with the
utmost Gratitude.

THE Angels, who stood, being no where in Scripture denominated ELECT, until
after the Exaltation of Christ, some have thought they were held in a State of
Trial till then; when by their Confirmation, God's eternal Designs of Love
toward them were manifested. And it is certain, that when they had been
Spectators of all God's Works in Heaven, Earth and Hell, through so long a
Period, they must be in almost an infinitely better Capacity to receive
Confirmation, than immediately after their Creation. And their Confirmation now
would be infinitely more to God's Honor, than if it had been granted at their
first Existence; and their own Humility, Holiness and Happiness be increased an
Hundred, or a Thousand, or perhaps ten Thousand fold.

Therefore,

7. ON Supposition that a third Part were fallen and lost, yet it is easy to
see how there may be eternally more Holiness and Happiness in the angelic
World, than if Sin and Misery had been for ever unknown. For if their Holiness
and Happiness be only an Hundred Times greater now, on the present Plan, than
otherwise it would have been, and if we allow for the Happiness Satan and his
Adherents lost, and for the Misery which they undergo, yet what remains must be
many Millions more in the whole, than it otherwise would have been. The Truth
of this may be easily seen, thus -- Suppose the Number of Angels to be 3. --
and all remaining innocent to have one Degree of Holiness and Happiness
a-piece; the Sum total would be 3 Degrees of Holiness and Happiness. -- But if
one falls, and the other two increase in Holiness and Happiness an hundred
Fold, then the Sum total of Holiness and Happiness will be 200 Degrees -- But
if the Misery of the Damned is augmented in the same Proportion as the
Happiness of the Blessed, then the Misery of one lost Angel will be 100 Degrees
-- besides the Happiness he lost, which was supposed to be 1 Degree -- Now
therefore substract 101, from 200, and the Remainder will be 99; that is, there
will be 99 Degrees of Happiness left. -- And if this will be the Case, were the
Number of the Angels supposed to be 3. it will also proportionably in any given
Number -- So that if there are but half so many good Angels, as there are now
supposed to be of Mankind inhabiting the Earth, yet the clear Gain will be
above 96 Hundred Millions of Degrees of Happiness, more than if all had stood:
as will appear from the following Table

. N. B. The Number of the present Inhabitants of the Earth is supposed to be
729 Millions -- I will suppose the Number of good Angels to be only 300
Millions, which is less than Half.

If all had stood. On the present Plan. Number of Angels supposed.
Proportionable Degrees of Happiness. Number of Angels supposed. Proportionable
Degrees of Happiness. 3 3 3 99 30 30 30 990 300 300 300 9900 300 Millions 300
Millions 300 Millions 9900 Millions From 9900 Millions substract 300 Millions
Remainder 9600 Millions (...)
And only let us realize what must have been the Reflections of the holy
Angels, from Time to Time, as new Scenes have opened to their (...) and what
their Reflections must eternally ^e, when they have seen God's grand Plan (...)
at the Day of Judgment; and we cannot doubt out that (...) Humility, Holiness
and Happiness will (...) augmented at least an Hundred fold.

1. REFLECTIONS of the elect Angels on the unreasonable Rebellion, the
unexpected Fall, the everlasting Punishment of Satan and his (...), (...) their
Companions in Bliss.

How art thou fallen, O (...), Son of the Morning! From standing near the
Throne of God, into an eternal Hell! Yesterday joining with us in the Songs of
Heaven; now under the everlasting Displeasure of God, banished to endless Woe!

How durst you rise in Rebellion against Heaven's glorious Monarch! And how
infinitely vile the shocking Deed! What more reasonable than to pay supreme
Honor to the supreme Being, and to be in Subjection to the Author and Lord of
all Things, to whom the Throne belongs, and exult in his Supremacy, and rejoice
in Him and in his Government! Or what more vile and ungrateful, than to turn
Enemies to the great Being, the Author, Proprietor and Governor of all created
Intelligences, and to attempt to overturn all Order and Harmony in the System!
-- For such exalted Intelligences, in such a happy Situation, under such great
Obligations to the Deity for Bounties already received, attended with the
Prospect of endless Joys in his Presence, to rise in Rebellion thus! No wonder,
Heaven's almighty Monarch, in Regard to his own Honor and the Good of his
Kingdom, has banished them from his Presence, and destined them to be
everlasting Monuments of his Wrath.

BUT, Oh how unexpected, surprising and shocking are these dreadful Scenes! And
is it so? And are they fallen? Who could have thought it! -- Such holy Beings,
to rise in Rebellion against INFINITE HOLINESS! -- So good a Taste for Order
and Harmony, and yet have broke the Orders of Heaven! So strong Inducements,
from Duty and Interest to persevere, that one would have thought such an
Apostasy quite impossible! And are they fallen? For ever fallen and lost!

AND what are we! Were we better than they? Or did we stand firmer? Or were we
more out of Danger? Or more on our Watch? No, in no wise. -- It once seemed
impossible we should fall. But now we are surprised to see we stand. -- And, Oh
who knows what another Day may bring forth! -- We are as likely to be in Hell
tomorrow, as they were Yesterday! -- God is no more obliged to keep us, than
he was them. -- And what if we should fall! Oh how dreadful, how infinitely
dreadful the Thought! -- We will all go and fall prostrate before the Throne of
the great IMMUTABLE; and cry, O Father of our Spirits, of thy sovereign Grace,
keep us, we humbly pray thee. -- Nor will we ever forget what we have seen. Nor
will we ever cease to watch and pray.

2. REFLECTIONS of the Elect Angels on the Temptation of Satan, and Fall of Man.

OH the hellish Pride and Spite and Malice of Satan, once our Companion in
Bliss! How gladly would he ruin the whole System, were it in his Power, and
even overturn the Throne of Heaven's eternal King! -- How wicked a Deed has
Man committed! and how righteous the Doom of our glorious Monarch! All who
rebel against him, deserve to be turned out of his World, and lie under his
everlasting Displeasure. -- But what an infinite Weight of Vengeance does Satan
deserve! We rejoice, the Almighty has decreed to bruise his Head, and
frustrate all his Schemes, and bring Salvation to Man. We rejoice, that the
Lord God omnipotent reigns, and will for ever reign.

OH THOU, who only art immutable, behold, Man is fallen! We prostrate ourselves
at thy Feet. O help us, of thy mere sovereign Goodness, we most earnestly and
humbly do beseech thee! We claim no Right to such a Favor. Our
Fellow Creatures in Heaven, and now on Earth, are fallen. Thy Throne is
guiltless. But, O thou Father of Spirits, keep us, of thy more sovereign Grace,
through our State of Trial, to the everlasting Honor of thy great Name: that,
through eternal Ages, we may celebrate thy Praises. -- In the Revelation of thy
Designs of Mercy toward fallen Man, we see the infinite Goodness of thy
Nature, and that thou can have Mercy on whom thou will have Mercy, and at the
same Time secure the Honor of thy Government. We flee to thy sovereign
Goodness for preserving Grace, nor will we ever forget what we have seen, nor
will we cease to watch and pray.

3. REFLECTIONS of the elect Angels on the Death of Christ. -- Attentive
Spectators on this solemn Occasion, no doubt, although invisible to the
surrounding, insulting Multitude.

THIS is he, who brought the Universe into Existence, and is worshipped by all
the Hosts of Heaven! This is he, who appeared to Abraham and to Moses, gave the
Law on Mount Sinai, and dwelt in the Jewish Temple; then in the Form of God,
now in the Form of a Servant: Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews! And this
gives us higher Conceptions of the divine Goodness, than ever before entered
into our Hearts. That after Mankind had continued 4000 Years in obstinate
Rebellion, and given Millions of Instances of an inveterate Enemity against our
almighty Sovereign, yet he can thus freely give his Son to die for them! --
But, Oh the Hellish Temper of the surrounding Crowds, insulting the Son of God
in his last Agonies! Pushed on by Satan, who knows what they are doing, although
they do not. And thus Satan will treat the God who made him: This is his Heart.
Oh what is there he would not do, had he Power on his Side! No Wonder he is
doomed to eternal Woes. Hell is his proper Place. -- And such might we now have
been, if God had left us to fall when they did. Oh the sovereign Grace of God
to us! Preserved to this Day in our Integrity! Oh the dreadful Nature of Sin!
Oh the ruined State of a guilty World, seduced by Satan, should Justice take
Place! But here hangs their expiatory Sacrifice: the Son of God dying in their
Room! The whole intelligent System now sees how God hates Sin: and how resolved
he is, as Governor of the Universe, to bear ample Testimony against it. Not
one of the guilty Race of Adam will he pardon, unless his Son die in their
Stead. The Greatness of the Atonement shows how great He thinks the Crime. If
all the angelic World had been offered as a Sacrifice of Atonement, it had been
infinitely beneath this. Yea, compared with this, it had been Nothing, and less
than Nothing and Vanity. Oh the infinite Evil of Sin! O the infinite Greatness
of God! How does the Death of his Son show him to be infinitely exalted! None
fit to mediate between Him and sinful Men, but his Son! Nor any Blood precious
enough to make Atonement but his! -- Nor can Satan, under all his Woes, through
eternal Ages, ever once think, that he is punished in a sovereign, despotic,
arbitrary Manner: much less can such a Thought ever enter into our Hearts in
Heaven, while we behold the Lamb in the midst of the Throne, and remember how
he was treated by his Father, when once he stood in the Room of Sinners. Nay,
now we are more fully convinced than ever, that Sin really deserves the eternal
Punishment, which God will inflict. Oh the infinite Evil of rising in Rebellion
against the infinitely glorious and almighty Monarch of the Universe, the Maker
and Lord of all! Oh what an infinite Kindness, that God has kept us from this
infinite Evil! Our Obligations to him, how are they infinitely increased! And
after all for us ever to turn Apostates, Oh how unutterably dreadful, quite
infinitely dreadful the Thought! -- If when the Son of God arises from the
Dead, ascends to Heaven, and sits down on the right Hand of the Majesty on
high, and becomes Head over all the Saved from among Men, in whom they will be
for ever safe, whose Immutability will render them immutable in Goodness
forever, O if he might become our Head too! How infinitely great would be the
Favor of God in this, nor should we ever forget the Freeness of God's Grace.
AND if on the Exaltation of Christ, the Elect Angels were confirmed, it is easy
to see, how they would naturally be a Thousand (if not a Million) Times more
sensible of the Greatness and Freeness of the Goodness and Grace of God
exercised toward them, than if they and all others had been immediately
confirmed at their first Existence. -- That Christ is to be Head of Angels, as
well as of Saints, seems to be intimated in Ephesians. 1. 10. That in the
Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, be might gather together in one all
Things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in
him. And perhaps the Confirmation of the Elect Angels is what the Apostle
refers to in Col. I. 19, 20. For it pleased the Father, that in him all Fullness
should dwell, and by him to reconcile all Things to himself, by him, I say,
whether they be Things in Earth, or Things in Heaven. -- And it is certain, that
they receive great Instruction from God's words here on Earth. They behold the
whole Earth full of the Glory of the Lord, Isai. VI. 3. And it is certain, God
designed they should. And that he has ordered Things as he has, to the Intent,
that unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly Places might be known by the
Church the manifold Wisdom of God. Ephesians. III. 10. And it is equally certain, they
are very attentive. For these are Things, which the Angels desire to look
(...). 1 Pet. I. 12. And they have the best Advantages for a large Acquaintance
with these Things, as they are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to
those who shall be Heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1. 14. And they deeply interest
themselves in all God's Dispensations toward the Church on Earth, as is
evident from the Book of the Revelation through out. -- And they will attend
Jesus Christ when he comes to judge the World, and see God's grand Plan
finished, and Things in God's Kingdom brought to a final Settlement. Mat. XXV.
31, -- 46.


4. REFLECTIONS of the elect Angels on the Destruction of Antichrist, and on
the Millennium.

Now at Length an End is come to the long Series of Mischief, which has been
wrought by that furious Dragon, that subtle old Serpent, once a glorious Angel,
now of a long Time a DevilBehold, he is bound, and shut up, and can deceive the
Nations no more! Behold, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen! Hallelujah!
Salvation and Glory, and Honor, and Power, unto the Lord our God; for true and
righteous are his Judgments. Hallelujah! for the Lord God omnipotent reigns.
And, lo, all his Foes fall before him, unable to resist: and the Marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his Wise has made herself ready. And now Christ shall
reign on Earth a thousand Years, and all Nations shall serve him, and all the
People shall be holy, and all shall know him, from the least to the greatest,
and the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters fill
the Seas, till the saved of the Lord be as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand
on the Seashore, innumerable. Hallelujah!

THIS grand Event, which to Satan is Matter of so great Confusion and Anguish,
is to us Matter of the greatest Joy. And yet once Satan and his Hosts were all
of our Number, and we sang the Praises of God together. -- Oh the surprising
Change Sin has wrought! -- Oh the distinguishing Grace of God, which kept us
from falling too, on that dreadful Day of Satan's Revolt! A Day by us never to
be forgotten. -- Now Satan lies chained in the bottomless Pit. And we are in
Triumph, on the Occasion, around the Throne.

5. ON Christ's second Coming. -- Behold, he comes in the Clouds of Heaven,
and every Eye shall see him, and they that pierced him shall mourn; and the
bold and haughty, who once bid him Defiance, shall call to the Mountains and
Rocks to fall on them and cover them; the Crush of Mountains being less
dreadful, than the Wrath of the Lamb. And now shall the Scene close, and the
Ways of God to Men and Angels be all justified: And God shall receive Glory
from all his Works.

SEE, yonder comes Satan, with all his guilty Host, trembling, to appear
before the Bar. -- Oh never let us forget the Day, when they sang the Praises
of God with us before the Throne! How surprised were we at their unexpected
Revolt! We then little though it what was before us: little guessed what was in the
Creature's Heart, or in God's Heart. But now we have seen both: And now we see
the Result. God is exalted, his Authority established; Satan and his Host are
conquered, and are now to be sent away into everlasting Punishment. -- And, but
for the distinguishing Grace of God, which has always held us up, we might now
have been as they now are. No Heart can conceive, no Tongue can express, the
infinite Obligations we are under to God. Of whom, and by whom, and to whom are
all Things: to whom belongs Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Now, therefore, let eternal Ages be by us all employed in contemplating God's
glorious Works, in admiring the Wisdom of all his Ways, revering the dread
Majesty of the Universe, magnifying and extolling his great Name, exulting in
his Supremacy, and celebrating the Praises of his free and boundless Goodness.

IT is easy to see, how natural it must be for the Elect Angels to make these
and suchlike Reflections on these Occasions. And it is as easy to see how the
Knowledge of God and of themselves increases their Humility, their Dependence
on God, their Reverence, Love, Gratitude, and Joy, i. e. their Holiness and
Happiness. And it is easy to see, how the Fall of Angels and Men, and God's
Conduct on these Occasions, gives them these new Idea's of themselves and of
God. Had Sin and Misery never entered into God's World, they could never have
had these Idea's of themselves, or of God. -- And if what has been said of the
Angels, may be applied to Mankind, as for Substance we see it may, and that too
with some additional Circumstances of great Weight, as will appear in the next
Sermon, then this will be the Sum of the Argument --

So clear and so adequate an Idea of God and themselves could not have been
obtained by finite Intelligences, through eternal Ages, had Sin and Misery never
entered into God's World.

BUT the more clear and adequate their Idea of God and themselves, the more
humble, holy and happy will the Inhabitants of Heaven be, and the more will God
be exalted. -- And that, in such a superior Degree, as that more Honor will
redound to God, and more Humility, Holiness and Happiness be in the System,
than if Sin and Misery had been forever unknown.

Now, if God's present Plan is in the best Manner f^ited to honor God, and to
increase the Humility, Holiness and Happiness of the System, then is his Wisdom
vindicated. -- For Wisdom consists in proposing the best Ends, and choosing the
best Means for their Accomplishment. -- And thus God's Conduct in his grand
Plan is analogous to his Conduct in the four Instances mentioned in the first
Sermon: and the same Reasons which vindicate his Wisdom in them, vindicate him
in this.

The WISDOM of God in the Permission of SIN.
SERMON IV.
GENESIS L. 20. -- YE thought Evil against Me; but God ^ meant it unto Good --


IF the holy Scriptures are read over, and viewed in the Character of a
Narrative, we shall find the History of the Deity, and the History ^f human
Nature inter woven throughout, from the Beginning of Genesis to the End of the
Revelation, filling up by far the greatest Part of those sacred Pages. Here we
shall see the bright and glorious Character of the Deity, drawn in a most
lively and striking Manner, in an authentic Account, written by God's own
Direction, of his Conduct from the Beginning of the World: And at the same
Time, human Nature painted to the Life, in the Behavior of Mankind, through a
long Succession of Ages. -- And this Book God puts into our Hands, as the best
Means to form us to Views and Tempers suitable to the heavenly World. -- And
why -- Why such a Book, for such an END? -- Plainly, because the Knowledge of
God and of our selves is of the last Importance to the Holiness and Happiness
of that World -- And indeed, on our strictest Researches into Things, we shall
find, that our highest moral Rectitude, Perfection and Happiness, must arise
from, and consist in an enlarged, clear, lively View of God and our selves, and
an answerable Frame of Heart. Let us view God as he is, and ourselves as we be,
as nearly in the same Light that God does, as our finite Capacities will admit,
and have an answerable Frame of Heart; and we are at the Top of that moral
Perfection and Happiness we are capable of. -- And if therefore God's great and
universal Plan is so contrived, as to put Intelligences under the best possible
Advantages for this, then it is the best possible. We have before entered on
this glorious Theme. And let these Things be now considered, for the further
Illustration of the Subject.

1. NOTHING can be known of God, by created Intelligences, be their Taste for
divine Knowledge ever so good, and their Capacities ever so great, any further
than God manifests himself. For it is beyond the Power of any finite
Intelligence to look immediately into God's Heart, as we can into our own, and
view and contemplate the divine Perfections as they are in the divine Essence.
Yea, we can have no Idea at all of the divine Essence. Yea, we can have no Idea
even of the Essence of our own Souls. The utmost we can do, by Way of immediate
Intuition, is to perceive our Thoughts, and thence discern the habitual
Inclinations of our Hearts. And if we could look into God's Essence, and see
all his Thoughts, we might thence learn his Nature, without any Manifestation
whatsoever. We might know God's Heart, by immediate Intuition, as we can our
own. But this is absolutely impossible. We cannot look into the Hearts of our
Fellow Creatures: much less can we into God's Heart. Neither God's Thoughts,
nor any of his Views, nor any of his Designs could ever have been known, had he
given no Manner of Manifestation of himself. Those Thoughts and Purposes in his
Heart which he has not manifested, cannot be found out. Greatness of Genius is
no Help in this Case. Sir Isaac Newton could not tell when the Day of Judgment
would be, sooner than the greatest Idiot. Yea, as God had not revealed it, so
of that Day and Hour knew no Man; no, not the Angels, neither the Son, but the
Father only. Mar. XII. 32. Even the Man Christ Jesus, now in his exalted State
in Heaven, cannot look into the divine Essence, and see the secret Thoughts in
God's Heart. If he comes to the Knowledge of these Secrets, it is by divine
Communication: as is plain from Rev. I. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ,
which God GAVE unto Him. And if the most exalted Creature, by immediate
Intuition, cannot look into God's Heart, so much as to discern one single
Thought, then nothing can be known of God this Way. -- In a Word, neither the
Being of God, nor more nor less of any of his Perfections, could ever have been
known, had there been absolutely no Evidence at all of his Being, or of any of
his Perfections: but no Evidence ever was had, or ever can be had in this Case,
but what originally comes from him: therefore nothing can be known of God, any
further than he, some how or other, makes it evident to his Creatures. Which is
what I mean, by his manifesting himself, Therefore,

2. As all the Idea's of God, which are according to Truth, in the whole
intelligent System, originally flow from the Manifestation which he makes of
himself; so the more clearly and fully he manifests himself, the greater
Advantages will there eternally be, to make swift Progress in Knowledge,
Humility, Holiness and Happiness. Intelligences, who are finite, can never have
an adequate Idea of him who is infinite. Their Knowledge may increase, and
their Views brighten eternally. And the greater their Advantages are, the
swifter will be their Progress; supposing their Taste for divine Knowledge to
be good. He that is now the lowest, may, Millions of Ages hence, be much higher
in Seize, than he that is now the highest, among all the heavenly Hosts.
Mean while, those glorious CHIEFS may be still advanced, almost infinitely,
before them. But while all Ranks in Heaven are thus rising in the Knowledge of
God, and in all divine Seize, eternally rising; yet they can never
comprehend him who is absolutely INFINITE. He is still infinitely above them:
and they are as Nothing and Vanity, compared with him. Their Conviction of this
will eternally increase: and so their Humility eternally grow: and God be for
ever exalted higher and higher in their View. Which will cause their Love to
his glorious Majesty, Joy in his Supremacy, and Happiness in him and in his
Government, for ever to augment. -- And if their Progress will be in Proportion
to their Advantages, i. e. in Proportion to the Manifestations God makes of
himself, then the fuller and brighter the divine Manifestations, the swifter
their Progress. -- Of two Intelligences, of equal Taste and Capacity, it is
possible, that one, by having a thousand Times greater Advantages, may make a
thousand Times greater Proficiency than the other, in the same Time. -- Let an
Intelligence, of equal Taste and Capacity with the Angel Gabriel, be created on
the Morning of the Day of Judgment, and be placed in some remote Parts of
infinite Space, at a Distance from the whole present Creation, and spend that
Day in solitary Contemplation, without any Advantage to gain the Knowledge of
God, but what must necessarily result from its own Existence and Powers; and
let Gabriel the same Day descend from Heaven with Christ, and be a Spectator of
all the Transactions of that solemn Season; and it is easy to see, that Gabriel
must gain a Thousand, or ten Thousand, or rather perhaps a Million Times more
Knowledge of the Nature of God, the moral Governor of the World, than that
solitary Spirit. -- So Moses, in about six Months ( viz. from the Time he saw
the burning Bush, to the (...) of the twice forty Days he was on Mount Sinai)
doubtless gained more Knowledge of God, than he had all his Life long before,
i. e. more in six Months, than in eighty Years.

As God has formed finite Intelligences capable of Improvements through eternal
Ages; so it is reasonable to expect, that he will provide those who shall be
the Objects of his everlasting Favor, with the best Advantages to make a swift
Progress. And that Plan will in this Respect be judged the best, that is most
suited to this End. That Plan, therefore, of all possible Plans, must in this
Respect be the best, in which is given the fullest and the brightest
Manifestation of all the divine Perfections.

But,

3. THE Apostasy of Angels and Men has given the moral Governor of the Universe
an Opportunity to set all his moral Perfections in the clearest and most
striking Point of Light; and, as it were, to open all his Heart, to the View of
finite Intelligences.

THE whole intelligent System now may see, what God thinks to be his Due from
his Creatures, and how jealous he is of the Rights of the Godhead, and how
resolved to maintain the Honor of his Authority and Government. -- And now the
whole System may see too, that, as he is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, the
original Proprietor of all Things, so he thinks it belongs to him, without the
Advice or Leave of his Creatures, according to the Counsel of his own Will, to
lay out that Plan which seems best in his own Eyes; and to do what he thinks
best to do; and to forbear what he thinks best to forbear; to bring such
Intelligences into Being as he thinks best; and having said and done what he
thinks best, to forbear to say or do any more and stand by and let them take
their Course: practically saying, They owe themselves to me: I owe them
nothing. And if they fall, he hold^ himself at Liberty to proceed with, and
punish them strictly according to Law, without any Mitigation, the Law being
exactly right: so that it is Matter of mere sovereign Grace, to grant Relief to
any; a Thing he may do, or not do, as he pleases, for aught he owes to them.
Yea, he holds himself bound to do nothing for their Relief, but in a Way that,
shall be honorable to his Law. -- Nevertheless, while he shows such a steady
Regard to his own Honor, and so inflexibly adheres to the Rights of the
Godhead, as by Office he is bound, being moral Governor of the Universe; at the
same Time, the whole System may see too, that his Goodness (...) boundless as
his Nature. But then he loves his Creatures should know how the Case really
stands; that the Rights of the Godhead ought not to be given up, and that the
Exercises of his Goodness are absolutely free: That while they view Things in
the same Light he does, they may feel, as he thinks it is fit they should, in
such a Case. UNLESS Property be known and acknowledged between Man and Man, and
the Boundaries fixed there can be no Room for the Exercise of Generosity. If my
Estate is none of mine, then it is not mine to give. It my Neighbor (...) come
and take, what, and when, he pleases; then (...) have no Right to withhold any
Thing. My Neighbor may justly think hardly of me, if I do: And will not thank
me, if I do not. -- But if I have any Thing, which I may call my own, and to
which my Neighbor has no Right, then he must acknowledge, notwithstanding any
Claim he has to make, I may do what I will with that, As the Householder in the
Parable ( Mat. XX. 15.) said, It is not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? -- And if my Neighbor views my Property in the same Light that I do,
then he will be apt to view my Generosity in the same Light too. And what I
offer as a free Gift, he will receive and acknowledge as such: and feel as is
sit. -- And it was absolutely necessary, that Property should be known and
acknowledged, and the Boundaries fixed between God and his Creatures. And God,
by the Law he gave to his Creatures, as soon as created, and by his Conduct
since, has effectually done it: Has plainly said, what was due from them to
him: and as plainly declared, that he owed them nothing. -- And these
Boundaries, set up by God, were they but acceded to, and acquiesced in by Man,
the chief Matters of Controversy between God and Man would be removed, and
Things would look fair for a reconciliation: But while Man denies his Debt to
God, and makes large Demands on the Deity, there is no Hope of an
Accommodation. For God will demolish the Universe, sooner than give up (...)
Rights, in Favor of his rebellious Creatures. (...) 17.
-- But Time would fail, to hint at the various Idea's of himself, which he has
communicated in Consequence of the grand Apostasy of Angels and Men. Indeed, he
has given Materials for Contemplation, that an whole Eternity cannot exhaust.

THE Picture of himself, which God has given and will give, in his Conduct,
from the Fall of Angels, to the final Consummation of all Things, is gloriously
full (...) complete. He has been called to act in an infinite Variety of Cases;
and, to speak of him according to the Language of Scripture, in the most trying
Circumstances, (Read Exek. XX. 5, -- 22.) he has been tempted and tried, not
merely 40 Years in the Wilderness by the Israelites; but from the Beginning of
the World to this Day, by every Nation, Kindred, Language and Tongue. And has
had Opportunity to show his Heart, by his Conduct, in all the infinite Variety
of Cases which have ever (...), among the Millions, and Millions of (...) of
Subjects, which he had to deal with. All which, together with all that remains
to be accomplished in the End of the World, will be brought into View another
Day, and serve to make the Picture of himself, which he has given, very full
and gloriously complete, in the Eyes of all holy Intelligences.

BESIDES, his GREAT WORK, to which all his other Works bear some Respect, is so
much like himself, that, in a Manner, it gives his whole Picture at once. -- An
incarnate God on the Cross, if the divine Views, Motives and Ends are all
considered, is a Piece of Conduct, of which it may be said, as it was of him
that was chief Actor in this Affair -- It is the Brightness of God's Glory, and
the express Image of his Person. To create a World, was but a small Matter with
the ALMIGHTY. With a Word he could bring System after System into Being, with
infinite Ease. But the Work of Redemption by the Death of his SON, seems to be
a Work equal with himself, and in which he has expressed all his Heart. THE
Scripture informs us of no created Intelligence, besides Angels and Men: much
less does it attempt to raise our Devotion by a Contemplation of Millions of
Glories inhabited besides this our Earth. But according to Scripture, the Work
of Redemption is God's great Work; and from this, chiefly, we are to learn his
moral Character; and this are we to contemplate, with the other Branches of his
moral Government, as revealed in the Bible. And that Love and Devotion, which
arises from these scriptural Views of God and his Works, is the scriptural
Devotion, and infinitely preferable to imaginary Transports. If our Views of
the Works of Creation, Providence and Redemption, are according to Scripture,
we need not raise Millions of imaginary Systems of intelligences, to inflame
out (...) with a divine Fervor, nor have we the Example of our (...) is the
Bible to justify such as Attempt.


(...) speak louder than Words. The divine (...) sets his Picture in a more
striking, affecting (...) of Light, than any mere verbal Descriptions (...)
have done, had there been no Opportunity (...) Conduct. When the ALMIGHTY
actually (...) the sinning Angels, from his Presence, (...) eternal Darkness
and Woe, it set his Character (...) much stronger Light, in the Eyes of the
(...), than his previous Threatening had (...) when the Day of Judgment actually
(...) the whole System are assembled to see (...), and give up their Account,
and receive (...) Sentence, it will be much more real than ever it (...) before
made to any of God's Creatures, by any Descriptions, or Imaginations they ever
had. And it will set the divine Perfections in a Light proportionably clear,
striking and affecting.

HAD all Things gone on still and quiet in God's Kingdom, there had been no
Occasion or Opportunity for these Works, by which all will know that he is the
LORD, and the whole System he filled with his Glory.

HAD the Posterity of Abraham lived quietly in the Land of Canaan, and
multiplied there, for 470 Years, the Canaanites dying off mean while, as the
Indians do in America, they might have filled the Land with a much greater
Number of Inhabitants, than when Joshua brought them in, and no Joseph (...),
no Infants drowned, no making Bricks, no (...) left in the Wilderness, and they
Strangers (...) great Changes, Trials and Sorrows; but (...) God would not have
had an Opportunity for any of those wonderful Works which he wrought, (...) it
was known that he was the LORD, and the (...) was filled with his Glory, and a
Foundation said for much Good to that People, then, and in (...) Generations.
Yea, to this Day, (...) Church of God reap the Benefit of those (...) Works,
which were recorded for our Instruction (...) whom the Ends of the World are
come.

So, had Sin been for ever unknown in the System, there would have been no
Opportunity for the mighty Works which God has wrought, since the Day he drove
the apostate Angels out of Heaven, and our first Parents out of Paradise, and
will yet work to the End of Time, and final Consummation of all Things. All
which put together, will give the most full and complete, the most clear and
striking Picture of the divine Nature, for the Contemplation and Instruction of
the Inhabitants of Heaven, through eternal Ages.

4. WHILE God forbears to interpose and hinder the Apostasy of finite
Intelligences, being absolutely unobliged to say or do any more than he had
said and done; and while, being left to their own free Choice, a Number of the
Angels in Heaven, and Man upon Earth, rebel; and being left to themselves, all
the fallen Angels, and great Numbers of fallen Men, go on in their Rebellion,
acting out their Hearts, and exhibiting their Picture in their Conduct, through a
long Succession of Ages; they plainly show what all finite Intelligences in
Heaven and on Earth might have come to, if they had not been prevented by the
more free Grace of the only immutable Being. Mean while, God, as has been said,
(...) Conduct, sets his own Character in the (...) and fullest Light. And so
all holy Intelligences will, through eternal Ages, have the Advantages of these
two complete Pictures; the Picture that God (...) exhibited of himself, and the
Picture which fallen Creatures have exhibited of themselves, to assist (...) to
a clear View and realizing Sense of (...) is, and of what they might have been.
Just (...) pious Jews in the earthly Canaan, when (...) the Conduct of God
toward their (...) Fathers, and their Conduct toward him, had the Picture of
each before their Eyes, for their Instruction from Age to Age. Which leads me
to another Thought.

5. AT the End of these forty Years, Moses assembles the whole Congregation of
Israel in the Plains of Moab; and, that they might be under the better
Advantages to reap the Benefit of all past Transactions, now just as they are
entering into the holy Land, he rehearses all God's Conduct toward them, and
all their Conduct toward him, and labors deeply to impress a Sense of both on
their Hearts: So at the final Consummation of all Things, the whole intelligent
System will be assembled, and all past Things be opened, all God's Conduct
toward his Creatures, and all their Conduct toward him; and that in such a
Manner, as will make the deepest Impressions on all that great Assembly.

BUT as this will be a most solemn Day, and perhaps the most important Day that
ever did or ever will happen, and a Day on which great Light will be given to
God's universal Plan; so it may not be amiss to stop here a while, and
consider, Who is to be the Judge -- and who shall be present in that great
Assembly -- and what will be brought into View -- and what will be the final
Sentence pronounced on the Wicked -- and what will be (...) Consequence -- and
what the State of the (...) when all is over -- and what must be their (...)
upon the whole.

1. THE MESSIAH, the Son of God, the (...) of the Woman, will be the Judge. So
great (...) his Zeal for the Honor of God, and (...) the Salvation of lost
Sinners, that he offered (...) to frustrate Satan's Scheme; and (...) at the
Expense of his Life, he entirely (...) the Plan the Devil had laid, and sapped
(...) of his Kingdom; opening a Way, in (...) Glory might come to God, and
Salvation to (...) Man. Which so pleased the eternal Father, that (...) gave
him, for his Reward, the very Thing his Heart was chiefly set upon; even, full
Power and Authority, completely to accomplish his Design. Messiah took the
Throne, and, at the Head of the Universe, conducted all Things from that Day
and forward, with his End in constant View, till Satan's Kingdom was destroyed,
and he had reigned on Earth a thousand Years. And having seen of the Travail of
his Soul to his Satisfaction, in the Recovery of a great Multitude of the human
Race, a Multitude like the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sands on the Seashore
innumerable; now he comes to cause strict Justice to take Place on all the
obstinate Adherents to Satan's Interest. Behold, he comes in the Clouds of
Heaven, and every Eye shall see him, and the fatal, the finishing Stroke shall
be laid full on the old Serpent's Head. -- Which shall be done in the most
public Manner. -- For

2. THE whole intelligent System shall be present. The holy Angels, once
Satan's Companions in Heaven, shall now descend in Glory and Joy, attending the
righteous Judge. And with them the Saints shall come from the upper World, and
receive their bodies, glorious and immortal, raised by their almighty Savior.
Mean while, the Saints on Earth shall be changed, and caught up to meet the
Lord in the Air. Then Earth and Sea, Death and Hell shall give up their Dead;
and all Kindreds, Nations, Languages and Tongues, shall be gathered to the Bar.
And Satan and his Hosts, who of a long Time have been in Chains, reserved to
the Judgment of the (...) Day, shall be forced, guilty and trembling, to (...)
forth in the Sight of the whole Creation.

And now,

3. THE History of the grand Rebellion shall be opened to the View of the whole
intelligent Creation: from the Day of Satan's first Revolt, his Expulsion from
Heaven, and Seduction of the human Kind, with all his Views and Motives, Ends
and Designs, and the Methods by him taken from the Foundation of his Kingdom on
Earth, to its final Destruction: And how apostate Men have heartily joined in
his Interest; and both, as it were, combined together to defeat the Designs of
the Redeemer.

THE Blood of the Martyrs will be brought into the Account, from the Blood of
righteous Abel, to the Blood of the last Martyr that shall be slain, to
evidence the obstinate Malice of Satan and his Adherents: Who, rather than that
the Redeemer's Kingdom should be set up, have shed Rivers of human Blood. --
Yea, the Son of God himself has been put to Death in this apostate World.

ALL the Conduct of the human Race before the Flood, and how their Wickedness
brought on the general Deluge: and all the Conduct of Mankind since; together
with the Methods of divine Grace from the Beginning of the World: --
particularly, the Calling of Abraham, and all the glorious Methods of divine
Grace with his Seed, from Age to Age, till the Coming of the Messiah: together
(...) their perverse Conduct in Egypt, in the (...) and in the holy Land: their
killing the (...) and stoning those who were sent unto them, and finally
crucifying the Son of God, and (...) rejecting his glorious Gospel: -- And
(...) of the Gentiles into the Christian Church. (...) Lothness to leave their
Idols, the blood (...) they made among the primitive Professors (...); --
together with a History of the (...) progress and dreadful Deeds of the grand
(...) Apostasy, -- will all be laid open to public View on the Sight of the
Creation.

AND not only these great Affairs, but also in the Conduct of particular
Sinners, in every Age, with every secret Thing, shall be brought to Light on
that great Day.

AND while Messiah appears in all his Father's Glory, the Reasonableness of
God's Law and the infinite Grace of the Gospel will, by his very Presence, be
brought into such a clear View, in the Eyes of all that great Assembly, as will
not only strike the fallen Angels, who have been inveterate Enemies to the
righteous Government of God, and constant Opposers of the gracious Designs of
the Redeemer, into the utmost Guilt and Confusion; but also overwhelm with
inexcusable Guilt and self-condemning Reproaches, all the lost Sons of Adam, of
every Nation under Heaven. The Gentile will now feel himself without Excuse,
for breaking the Law of Nature ( Romans I. 20.) and the Jew and the Christian
much more, who have sinned against greater Light and despised infinite Grace.
So that every Mouth will be stopped, and all Satan's Adherents from among the
human Race, will stand guilty before God. ( Romans III. 19.) For, when the Lord
comes with all his heavenly Attendants, to execute Judgment upon obstinate
Enemies, he will convince all, and silence (...), who have justified
themselves, and spoken many hard Speeches against him. ( Jude 14, 15.) For that
shall not only be a Day of Wrath, but of the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God. ( Romans II. 5.) -- (...) while, all holy Intelligences will be
fully prepared, cordially to approve, yea, heartily to rejoice in the final
Sentence of the Judge. -- The (...) of which dreadful Sentence will fill (...)
and all his mighty Potentates with Terror (...). -- And the Kings of the Earth,
and the (...) Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men who had met
Armies in the Field of Battle, and looked Death in the Face undaunted, and
every Bondman, and every Freeman shall wish to hide themselves in the Dens,
and in the Rocks of the Mountains: yea, they will wish the Mountains and the
Rocks to fall on them, and hide them from the Wrath of the Lamb. ( Rev. VI. 15.
16.)

4. HE shall pronounce the Sentence, DEPART, ye cursed. To which, all the holy
Angels and Saints, with divine and sacred Fervor, will say, AMEN. HALLELUJAH.
And,

5. No sooner will the Sentence be pronounced, but they shall visibly go away
into everlasting Punishment. -- For God, who foresaw their Apostasy and final
Wickedness, before the Creation of the World, did in the Creation provide
proper Materials by which to show his Wrath, and make his Power known, and give
an eternal Image of his infinite Hatred of Sin, in the Sight of the whole
intelligent System. For all the starry Heavens, and this Earth, are reserved to
that Purpose, laid up in Store as Fuel, reserved unto Fire, against the Day of
Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men. And the Heavens shall then pass away
with a great Noise, rushing together into one general Heap; for the Heavens
being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements, of which they are (...),
shall melt with fervent Heat, and the (...) involved in the general Ruin, and
the Works (...) therein shall be burnt up. And so the whole material System
shall form one immense Lake (...) Brimstone, where the Heat shall be almost
(...) intense, in which the Damned shall weep and (...) and gnash their Teeth
for ever. For th^^ (...) shall never die, and the Fire shall never be (...) (2
Pet. III. 7 -- 12. Mar. IX. 44.) -- And (...) open to the View, eternally open
to the View (...) the Inhabitants of Heaven. For they shall be tormented with
Fire and Brimstone, in the Presence of the (...) Angels, and in the Presence of
the Lamb. ( Rev. XIV.10, 11.) -- And this great Fire will eternally be a
visible Emblem of the Fierceness' and Wrath of almighty God, to show his Wrath,
and make his Power known. As when Pharaoh and his Host were overwhelmed in the
Red Sea, in Sight of all the Israelites, the God of the Hebrews showed his
Power, and caused his Name to be declared throughout all the Earth: ( Exodus IX.
16.) So now, when Satan and all his Adherents from an apostate World are cast
into this Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to be tormented Day and Night, for ever
and ever, ( Rev. XX. 10.) it will show God's Wrath, and make his Power known,
in the Sight of the whole intelligent System. ( Romans IX. 22.)

6. THE grand Rebellion in the intellectual System being brought to this Issue
by MESSIAH, the Prince, whose Name is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and an
End put to this visible Creation, in which so much Sin has been committed, now
doomed to eternal Fire; MESSIAH, with the Angels, his Attendants, and with the
Saved from among Men, in Number like the Sands on the Seashore, shall ascend
to the heavenly Zion with Singing, and enter into everlasting Joys.

(...) as the Messiah loved his Church, when she (...) in her Blood, and gave
himself for her, and (...) her from the Earth, and washed her in his own Blood,
and made her a glorious Church, and adorned her as a Bride is adorned for her
Husband (...) now the Marriage of the Lamb shall be (...) before all the
Inhabitants of Heaven; and (...) all be called The Bride, the Lamb's Wife. (
Rev. XXI. 9.) The saved shall be taken into the (...), and most beatific
Communion with (...) Christ. Who will rejoice over them, as the (...) of his
Labors, as the Travail of his Soul, as (...) Joy that was set before him. Even
as a Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride; so will he rejoice over them. (Isa.
LXII. 5.) And he will rejoice and joy in them. (Isai. LXV. 19.) And rest in his
Love. (Zeph. III. 17.) And thus they shall be for ever with the Lord, shall be
where he is, and behold his Glory. And God will be their God, and wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes; and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor
Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain; for the former Things are passed
away. All Temptations and Trials are at an End: for ever out of the Reach of
Satan, Sin and Danger. All Things are made new, are put upon a new Foot; not as
in the first Creation, when all finite Intelligences were put on Trial, and
left to stand or fall for themselves, God unobliged to hold them up, in
Consequence whereof Sin entered into Heaven and Earth; whereas in this new
Heaven and Earth, there shall be no Sin; but in them dwells Righteousness. (2
Pet. III. 13.) Christ will eternally be the Head of all holy Intelligences, and
his Immutability be their eternal Security. (Ephesians. I. 10.) So they shall possess
this good Land, which flows with Milk and Honey, which is the Glory of all
Lands, of which the earthly Canaan was a Type; I say, they shall possess it for
ever.

7. AND upon the whole, what must be (...) ^^flections of Angels and Saints, in
those (...) of Light, Love, Peace, and eternal (...)? What must the elect
Angels think, (...) recollect the Day of their Creation; (...) Satan and all
his Hosts stood with them, and (...) worshipped before the Throne; and (...)
soul Revolt, his Expulsion from Heaven, his (...) to dishonor God, and get
himself adored (...) state World; and now view his eternal (...) chained to the
burning Lake for ever and (...)

AND what must be the Reflections of (...) Abel, Enoch and Noah; of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob; of Moses, Joshua, Samuel, and of all the Prophets, Apostles
and Martyrs; and of all the Saved, in every Age of the World, and from every
Nation, Language and Tongue under Heaven? while they recollect the original
Apostasy of Mankind, and the whole History of all the Conduct of an apostate
World, from the Fall of Adam to the Day of Judgment, as lately laid before the
Tribunal of Christ: And remember their own former awful Temper and dreadful
State while secure in Sin, running in full Career to Hell: And consider how
they were pitied and redeemed by an incarnate God, and stopped and reclaimed by
sovereign Grace, and kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation; but
for which, they not only might, but certainly would have been, in the same
infinitely dreadful Condition they now behold others in, once their Neighbors
and Companions, chained among Devils to the burning Lake.

As the pious Israelites, when quietly settled in the earthly Canaan, would
naturally call to mind the Day, when they were Bondmen in the Land of Egypt,
and the Egyptian Manners, and the idolatrous Customs in which they were
educated: And how they had forgotten the God of Abraham, and the promised Land,
until the Arrival of Moses from the Land of Midian, with the Rod of God in his
Hand: And how they felt in the Time of the Plagues, and at their Egression, and
when pursued by Pharaoh, and when passing through the Sea on dry Grounds and when
they found themselves safe on the other Shore, while Pharaoh and his Hosts were
(...) like lead in the mighty Waters: -- And talk (...) their
Wilderness-Travels, and all God's (...) Works: And how they sinned at Massah,
(...), and Kibroth-hattaavah, and were always (...) the Lord to Wrath: And how
the (...) of six hundred Thousand fell in the Wilderness. Yea, and we should
all have been cut off and destroyed, had not the Lord wrought for his great
Name's sake. It was not for our Righteousness, nor for the Uprightness of our
Hearts, that he brought us into this good Land: but from his own sovereign,
self-moving Goodness, and that he might fill the whole Earth with his Glory.
Wherefore we will tell our Sons, and our Sons Sons, what God has wrought; that
we and they may fear and reverence that fearful and glorious Name, THE LORD OUR
GOD, and adore his distinguishing Goodness, and walk in all his Ways, and keep
all his Commands for ever. -- So it will be just as natural for those, who are
saved from among Men, when the Day of Judgment is past, and they safe in the
heavenly Canaan, from thence to look back, and survey, and talk over all the
Ways of God to Men, and all the Ways of Man to God, from the Creation to the
final Conflagration. And while they behold the divine Nature set in so clear,
strong and striking a Light; and the Picture still brightened by a View of the
shocking Conduct of the human Race toward (...) -- how will they feel, and
what will they say?

LET us but imagine our selves in the Company of the Saved, and attend to the
Conversation of Heaven. Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, and Angels
mixed in the same Assembly all join to carry on the Conversation, each filled
(...) Delight, while the Ways of God to Mankind the Ways of Man to God, are all
the Theme.

ADAM begins. -- How surprising (...) my self and so many of my Posterity in
the (...) World, happier a thousand Times than the (...) I lost! Indeed, I was
happy then, but the Scenes of Darkness, Guilt and Woe I passed through after my
Revolt from God, and all I have seen and heard from that Day to this, Things
never to be forgotten, will for ever heighten the Joys of this blessed Place.
But, Oh, my soul Revolt! How infinitely heinous was the Crime! How just, if God
had left me and all my Race to have gone on in Rebellion, died in Despair, and
spent eternal Ages with Satan and his Hosts, in yonder Lake of Fire and
Brimstone! But sovereign Grace interposed! And now I see the Promise
accomplished; The Seed of the Woman has bruised the Serpent's Head. Know it
then, you are happy, not by me. Not to me therefore, but to God, and God alone,
is all the Glory due.

GABRIEL next -- Indeed, ye Sons of Men, is all the Glory due to God. He only
is Immutable. See in yon Lake, Satan and all his Hosts for ever lost. Once this
was their Abode. With us they worshipped before the Throne. But they fell. And
so might we have done, but for the Grace of God. And so might all Mankind have
fallen too, had they been created at once, as we in Heaven were; and each set
to act for himself, as many of Adam's conceited Sons have often foolishly
wished had been the Case. From the Day that Satan fell, to this very Hour,
every Thing we have observed, has joined to establish us in this, that there is
no Safety for finite Intelligences, but in God alone. He only is by Nature
immutable. Nor can a Creature, how exalted soever, arrive so near to a State of
Independence, as to be in himself immutably good. God is our Strength and
Refuge, and the only Source of our eternal Stability. Of whom, and by whom, and
to whom are all Things, to whom belongs Glory for ever!

St. PAUL -- No doubt, the Interest of the human Race was as safe in Adam's
Hands, as it would have been in our own. And it being no Injury to us, God
might, without any Injustice to us, appoint him our public Head. And, indeed,
considering the Design God had in View, there was great Wisdom in that
Constitution. For Adam was suited, as a Type and Shadow, while we dwelt in that
World of Darkness, to assist us to right Conceptions of Christ, our second
Adam, our second public Head. The Omniscient, seeing no Trust could be put in
his Saints, and that even the Angels could not be depended upon, did, before
the Foundation of the World, design his own Son should become incarnate, and
stand forth as the firstborn of every Creature, the Head of the Creation of
God; that in him he might gather together, fix and establish all the Elect,
whether belonging to Heaven or Earth, as we see at this Day.

ADAM -- How glorious is the Exchange! Once I was your public Head: but in me
all was lost. God left me, that it might be seen what was in my Heart; that it
might appear, all Flesh is but Grass. And now, not I, (...) his own Son is your
Head. And your eternal Welfare is secured in the divine Immutability. This
Glory was due to God alone, who only is unchangeable. And this Glory, by Means
of my Fall, God has taken to himself in the Sight of the whole intellectual
System.

GABRIEL -- So Satan once stood at the Head of all the angelic Hosts, who
revolved with him, a mighty CHIEF. And like (...) Morning Star, excelled in
Luster all (...) of Heaven. But how art thou fallen, O (...), Son of the
Morning! And how have (...) drawn off a third Part of the Stars of Heaven, to
join in thy Revolt! WE read of Principalities and Powers among the evil Angels
(Col. II. 15.) as well as among the Good. (Ephesians. I. 21.) And one of their Number
is called a Prince. (Ephesians. II. 2.) And doubtless he was Prince before he fell,
as well as since. See Rev, XIV. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9.


ST. PAUL -- BUT now, not an Archangel, nor the Father of Mankind, but God's
dear Son, is, in this new State of Things, at the Head of all holy
Intelligences. Both Angels and Men are gathered together in One; even in him,
who is the Image of the invisible God, and has exhibited the sublimest Picture
of the Deity in all his Works, but chiefly in the Work of our Redemption.

ADAM -- AND all is free sovereign Grace! -- His giving Being, natural Powers,
and moral Excellencies to his Creatures in their first Creation, brought them
into Debt to him; but not him to them. They owed themselves to him: he owed
them nothing. He was unobliged to become their Surety. I ought to have been
obedient to the God that made me. But I fell. And the Throne of the Almighty
was guiltless. Destruction was our due. Oh, how free and sovereign is the Grace
that has saved us!

MOSES -- WHAT must have been the Consequence, had Mankind in their fallen
State been merely under the Law of Nature, which required sinless Perfection,
cursing the Man who continued not in all Things! And yet this Law was strictly
righteous. And as such, was it republished from Mount Sinai, by the holy ONE of
Israel. But although our Depravity did not free us from the Government and
Authority of God, yet it laid a sure Foundation for our breaking the Law. And
so, had mere Law taken Place, we should all have been for ever lost. -- And
this had been but strictly just. -- But Oh, the free and boundless Grace of
God! -- His own Son became a Curse for us, that all these Blessings we now
enjoy, in this happy World, might come upon us.

St. PAUL -- CREATURES becoming apostate, and turning Enemies and Rebels to the
God that made them, this did not in the least disannul God's Right to them, and
Authority over them; but they still remained by Right his Subjects, and under
his Government, and accountable at his Tribunal. And accordingly we have lately
seen wicked Men and Devils brought to the Bar, and there stand without Excuse,
every Mouth stopped, all of them guilty before God. -- On the Foot of mere Law,
therefore, God might justly have dealt with us after our Apostasy; and by Law
might have judged and condemned us all to yonder Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to
welter out eternal Ages. -- O the Height, and Depth, and Length, and Breadth of
the Love of Christ, which passes all Understanding! -- The Law was holy, just
and good -- He judged it so -- he died to answer its Demands. Nor did he ask
our Pardon at his Father's Hands, on cheaper Terms. How infinitely shocking, to
the Inhabitants of Heaven, would the Work of our Redemption appear, had Christ
died to answer the Demands of an unjust and wicked Law! If the Law, which
requires sinless Perfection on Pain of eternal Damnation (Gal. III. 10.) was a
cruel, unjust and wicked Law (as some, who pretend to trust in the Blood of
Christ for Salvation, are so inconsistent with themselves as to affirm) it was
infinitely wicked, the Son of God should die to answer its Demands. On this
Hypothesis, the Work of Redemption, instead of being the most glorious, would
be infinitely the most shocking Affair that ever happened.


GABRIEL -- How had it gratified the infernal Hosts, lately banished the
heavenly World, by Law, to have seen LAW set aside in Favor of a fallen Race!
And how would they have triumphed, to see the Judge of the whole System respect
Persons, and have no Regard to Right! -- Better, infinitely better, all the
human Race had been for ever lost.

St. PAUL -- You speak the Sentiments of all the Saved. Had we been pardoned to
God's Dishonor, it would have sapped the Foundation of all our Joys. -- How
much soever you pitied our Case, you never desired our Relief in such a Way.

GABRIEL -- I remember well the Day, the News of your Revolt first reached the
heavenly World. -- We thought you all for ever lost -- and approved the Thing
as just -- We saw no Way for your Relief -- nor shall we ever forget how Things
appeared -- God's new Creation all in Ruins: and Satan triumphing in his Deed.
-- But, O the Love of God to you! And O the boundless Wisdom of him who sits
upon the Throne!

MOSES -- So Israel once, for their Idolatry, stood all condemned to Death --
Let me alone, the Almighty said, that in a Moment I may destroy them -- I knew,
the Cause was just. And never shall forget how he wrought for his GREAT NAME'S
SAKE.

GABRIEL -- That was but a faint Image of this. For now a whole World lay in
Ruins -- and Satan and all his Hosts in Triumph were ready to say, It Is beyond
the ALMIGHTY himself to disconcert our Plan. His Honor, Law and Truth oblige
him to accomplish the Thing we would -- Devote the World to Death.

ADAM -- Now the full Purport of those mysterious Words, The Seed of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpent's Head, once the Foundation of all my Hopes, although
but little understood, now their full Purport all opens to View. -- On the
Cross, he spoiled Principalities and Powers, sapped the Foundation of Satan's
Hopes, and ruined all his hellish Scheme -- Since his Exaltation, he has
completed his whole Design -- Yonder now lies the old Serpent, his Head,
although so replete with Craft and Poison, thoro'ly bruised, and himself chained
in the burning Lake. -- But why am I among the Saved! Never was there such an
Instance of free sovereign Grace! Satan began Rebellion in Heaven, and I began
Rebellion on Earth: and why are we not now both together, in the same burning
Lake?

ABEL -- THERE is my Brother Cain, for ever lost. -- O the sovereign Grace of
God to me!

NOAH -- THERE are the Inhabitants of the old World. -- They filled the Earth
with Violence -- were deaf to all the Warnings of a long-suffering God -- were
destroyed in the general Deluge -- now weltring in the burning Lake. -- O the
sovereign Grace of God to me! Saved then in the Ark: Safe now in Christ.

ABRAHAM -- SUCH a universal Deluge, such a dreadful Destruction, one would
have though it, would never have been forgotten. But no sooner did Mankind
increase, but they turned their Backs on God: and in a few Ages, all began to
sink into Idolatry. Then was I born in Ur of the Chaldees, where I might have
lived and died estranged from God, and been now among the Damned, had not God
of his sovereign Grace visited my Soul, and called me from the Idols of my
native Land. But behold, now here I am, and here is Isaac my Son, and Jacob my
Grandson, and Thousands of my Posterity, in Glory! Everlasting Praise is due to
free and sovereign Grace.

St. PETER -- YONDER, in that Lake of Fire and Brimstone, is Judas the Traitor,
once a Follower of Christ, now doomed to endless Woe. Oh never shall I forget
the black and gloomy Night, when I cursed and wore, I know not the Man, my
blessed Master! Nor shall I ever forget the kind Look, which bro't me to
Repentance. Nor shall I ever cease to adore sovereign distinguishing Grace, but
for which I had now been with Judas in the burning Lake.

St. PAUL -- BUT of all the Saved, no Instance of sovereign Grace, like me!
Sovereign; not because God acted absolutely without any Reason at all, in
converting a persecuting Saul, who was the worst of the two, and passing by the
young Man in the Gospel: for infinite Wisdom always acts on the highest and
best Reason. But because Saul was not chosen for his Goodness, being the chief
of Sinners. 1. Tim. 1. 15. Yet God had wise Ends in his Choice. (See ver. 10.)
As no Doubt he always has, although in innumerable Cases they are absolutely
beyond our Reach. God has a Right in this Case, as the great Sovereign of the
Universe, to do ^s he pleases. But he always does what is wisest to be done.
His Sovereignty is a wise and holy Sovereignty, and an infinitely amiable Part
of his moral Character. It is God's Glory. Exodus XXXIII. 18, 19.
Once a Persecutor, and a Blasphemer. Never shall I forget the Day I set out
for Damascus, breathing forth Threatenings and Slaughter against the Disciples
of the holy Jesus. But, O the Grace, the sovereign Grace of God, that stopped
me in my Career -- sent me to carry the glad Tidings of Salvation to the
Gentiles, -- and gave me Thousands to be my Joy and Crown of Rejoicing; as it
is this Day!

St. PAUL'S CONVERTS -- Once we were dead in Trespasses and Sins, buried in
heathenish Darkness; and even under the full Power of the Prince of Darkness;
and might now have been with him in Woe. But, O the sovereign Grace of God to
us, who sent his chosen Vessel, and called us out of Darkness into mavelous
Light, and now has brought us to this World of Joy! -- Eternal Praises to the
Lord.

[THOUSANDS and Millions will speak the same Language, and all join to
prostrate themselves before the Throne, and give all the Glory and Praise of
their Salvation to God and to the Lamb: and with the most fervent Love and
Gratitude, attended with the deepest Humility and Reverence, devote themselves
to God through Jesus Christ for ever and ever. -- And while all this is observed,
very natural must the following Reflections be.]

GABRIEL -- How is Satan disappointed in every Respect! And Heaven become a
more glorious and happy Place, than ever it was! -- I remember, when there was
nothing but Love, Order and Harmony in Heaven and Earth. I remember, when Satan
a glorious Archangel first broke Order in Heaven, rose up in Rebellion against
the ALMIGHTY; and how he carried the Infection down to Earth. And I remember
the horrible Tragedies he has acted over, from Age to Age, at the Head of the
Powers of Darkness, ruling in the Children of Disobedience, and filling the
World of Mankind with Sin and Woe: and the mighty Opposition he has constantly
made against the Interest and Kingdom of the Messiah; sometimes as a great Red
Dragon, thinking by Fire and Sword to bear down all before him; and then as an
Angel of Light, spreading Delusions far and wide; not caring what Shapes he put
on, if by any Means he might attain his Ends. -- But now his Day is over. His
Designs are frustrated: His Expectations disappointed, and his Kingdom ruined.
And behold, Yonder lies the Monster, chained in that burning Lake; now the only
Place of his everlasting Abode; weltring in Horror, Rage and dreadful Despair!

IF he hoped to bring our glorious Monarch into Contempt in his Dominions,
among his Creatures; he is disappointed. For God is more loved, honored,
revered, extolled and praised, than if these Things had never happened. -- If
he hoped to lessen his Authority, and bring his Law into Contempt, that it
should be looked upon a light Matter to transgress; he is in this also
disappointed. For never would it have appeared so infinitely heinous, and so
shockingly dreadful a Thing, to transgress, if these Things had never happened.
-- Or if he hoped, at least, that the Execution of divine Vengeance would
lessen the Manifestations of divine Goodness, and diminish the Happiness of the
intellectual System; he is also disappointed (...) this. For God has shown his
Wrath in such a Manner, as to render the Riches of his glorious Grace
infinitely the more conspicuous, in the Sight of all the Inhabitants of Heaven;
and their Love and Joy arise unspeakably higher, than if these Things had never
happened. -- Yea, all Things have worked for Good, and turned out well. His
Pride has been the Means of a great Increase of Humility among finite
Intelligences; as it has led them to see what they might have come to, if left
of God. His Fall has been the Means of our Confirmation. His Ingratitude, of
our being for ever the more sensible of the rich Goodness of God. His setting
up to be independent, the Means to bring us to a more absolute and entire
Dependence on God, the only immutable Being. And his aiming at Supremacy,
seducing, Mankind, and raising all this Confusion in the System, has occasioned
the ALMIGHTY to assert his own Supremacy, and set his own SON at the Head of
the Creation, and in him to bring all Things to an everlasting Establishment,
in a Way most honorable to God, and most advantageous to the System. -- So
that he is disappointed in every Respect. -- He meant all for Evil: but lo, God
meant all for Good, to bring to pass as it is this Day.

So all his Successes have now at last ended in the eternal Ruin of his Cause:
And his Triumphs, in eternal Despair of ever again lifting up his Head. And all
the Mischief he has wrought, has in Fact brought down a ten-fold Vengeance on
himself, in yon Lake of Fire and Brimstone; where he is doomed to he, weltring
under divine Wrath, through endless Ages, to exhibit to the View of all
Intelligences, the evil Nature and dreadful Consequences of Rebellion. -- Mean
while, GOD and his MESSIAH reign, and will for ever reign -- And thus the Seed
of the Woman has bruised the Serpent's Head. AMEN. HALLELUJAH.

SUCH will be the Reflections of Angels and Saints after the Day of Judgment,
when they have seen God's grand Plan finished, and from those celestial Regions
look back and review the Whole.

AND now, who can doubt, but that the Humility, Holiness and Happiness of the
Saved will be much greater, perhaps a Thousand Times, perhaps Ten Thousand
Times greater, than if these Things had never happened? And how know we,
therefore, but that there may, on the present Plan, more Honor redound to God,
and more Good to the System, on the whole, than if Sin and Misery had been for
ever unknown; yea, almost infinitely more? The Computations in Page 65, 66.
Sermon. on the Millennium, and in Page 144. 145. on the Wisdom of God, etc. are
sufficient to clear the Point. If but two Thirds of Mankind should be saved and
their Happiness be increased but an Hundred Fold, considering the Greatness of
their Number the Overplus-Happiness in the whole must be Millions of Millions
of Millions of Degrees; as any may see by Calculation.


Objection. BUT was there no other Way, in which God could have made Angels and
Men as holy and happy without the Permission of Sin?

Answer. No. Not if there were no other Way, in which he could so clearly and
full manifest, and so advantageously communicate himself to his Creatures as
this. -- For his Creatures can neither be holy nor happy, but in the Knowledge
and Enjoyment of him. Now, if I am not able to prove there was no Way, yet the
Objector cannot possibly contrive a Way, in which God could have given such
clear and full Manifestations of himself, and communicate Good to his
Creatures, in every Respect so advantageously, Sin and Misery being for ever
unknown, as he has, and will, upon the present Plan. So that, for aught the
Objector, or I, know, this, of all possible Plans, may be the best contrived,
to give a full and clear Manifestation of the Deity, and raise Intelligences to
the highest Pitch of moral Perfection and Happiness. And its being chosen by
infinite Wisdom before all others, demonstrates, that this is actually the Case.

THUS then stands the Argument. God's permitting Joseph to be sold into Egypt
in the Manner he was, of all other Methods was, as Things were circumstanced,
the best calculated to answer the noble Ends God had in View; at least, so far
as we can see: and God's actually choosing that Method, demonstrates, it was
actually the best; infinite Wisdom being Judge. -- So here -- God's laying out
the present Plan is, of all possible Methods, the best to answer the noble Ends
God has in View; at least, so far as we can see: and God's choosing this,
before all others, demonstrates, that this is actually the Case; infinite
Wisdom being Judge.

Obj. BUT if we grant this to be the best Method to accomplish the Ends God had
in View, and grant his Ends are ever so noble and glorious; yet how could it be
right, for him to do Evil, that Good might come?

Answ. 1. As God was not obliged to interpose and hinder Joseph's being sold,
so his not interposing, cannot be called, doing Evil. -- And God's not
hindering the Apostasy of Angels and Men, can in no Sense be called, doing Evil
that Good might come; unless we can first prove, that he was bound to hinder
them. And let this once be proved, the Consequence will be, if any of God's
Creatures and Subjects, at any Time sin, then God must bear the Blame. And so,
not the Creature, but the Creator, will be under Bonds.

2. IN some Cases, even we our selves have a Right, in a Sense to permit Sin,
and may act wisely in doing so, as common Sense teaches all Mankind^ Thus, a
wise and good Master, who has a very lazy, unfaithful, deceitful Servant, whom
he often catches at Play, when he ought to be at his Work, and whose Manner is
to he himself clear, if he possibly can, may, upon a Time, if he pleases,
unseen by his Servant, stand an Hour, and let him take his Course, with a View
more thoro'ly to convict him, and reform him. And this is not doing Evil, that
Good may come, but acting wisely, in Order to reclaim a lazy, deceitful Servant.

3. GOD was at the Head of the System, which was all his own; and it belonged
to him, to lay out a universal Plan, if I may compare great Things with small,
just as it belongs to the Head of a Family, to lay out Family-Schemes. And he
knew perfectly well, what would be most to his own Honor, and to the general
Good of the System, whether to become Surety for all Intelligences at their
first Creation, before they had learnt their Need of his Interposition -- or,
rather, to let them take their Course, and learn by Experience, what was no
other Way so well to be learnt, that they might be the better prepared to
acknowledge him as the only Being by Nature immutably good, and to receive with
suitable Gratitude, this Super-Creation-Grace, and give him Opportunity, mean
while, to show that he was the LORD, and fill the whole System with his Glory,
to the great Increase of the Holiness and Happiness of his Creatures. -- And he
had a Right to conduct according to his own Wisdom, and to do what he knew
would best to be done. See Mr. EDWARDS on Liberty, etc. Page 260 -- 267.


Object. WELL, if God wills Sin, then it seems Sin is agreeable to his Will. And
if from all Eternity he decreed the Misery of his Creatures, then it seems,
their Misery suits him. Besides, what is decreed must necessarily come to pass,
and so our Freedom is destroyed. All which are contrary to Scripture, and to
common Sense.

Answ. "Well," says the idle deceitful Servant, who was catched at his Play,
and suffered to take his own Course for an whole Hour, -- Well, Master, now I
see you love I should be lazy, and play; for otherwise you would have hindered
me. And now I see you love to whip me, for the Sake of Whipping; for otherwise
you would not have suffered me to have deserved it. Besides, you decreed to
permit me to play on, that whole Hour; and so I could not possibly help it. --
All which would not only be contrary to common Sense, but appear to savor of
so great Perverseness, and be so very saucy and provoking, that his Master
would not think it needful to give any particular Answer, but rather proper to
punish him according to his Deserts. -- For it must be plain to the Servant at
the same Time, that Idleness and Deceitfulness were the Things his Master hated
in him. And he must know, he acted freely and deserved the Whip: and that it
became his Master to punish such a Villain, not only because he deserved it,
but also that his other Servants might hear and fear, and do no more so
wickedly. -- Nothing can be plainer, than that the Jews acted freely in
bringing about the Death of Christ. And it was one of the greatest Crimes that
ever was committed. And yet it came to pass according to the divine Decree.
Act. II. 23. and IV. 28. And (...) ever thought, because from all Eternity God
decreed the Death of his Son, that therefore his Agonies on the Cross were
pleasing to his Father, as one that loves to see others in Misery merely for
Misery's Sake.

Obj. BUT yet, -- Is it not a Pity, any are finally lost? -- Would it not have
been better, if all had been saved?

Answ. IT would, no doubt, be better for their own Interest, if the Rebels in
any earthly Kingdom would all come in, and submit: and they would in such a
Conduct show more Respect to their lawful Sovereign. On which Accounts their
Sovereign may send and sincerely invite and command them to return and submit,
although he knows, they will not, and is at the same Time determined to do no
more, but upon their obstinate Refusal [as the best Thing that can be done] to
make them Examples of his Wrath, in the Sight and for the Instruction of all
his Dominions. Nor can any justly say, it is a Pity he did not take more Pains
with them, or that it is a Pity he punished them at last. And might not such an
earth (...) Monarch send to such Rebels, and say, As I live, I have no Pleasure
in your Death. ( Ezekiel. XXXIII. 11.) I am long-suffering toward you, not
willing any of you should be put to Death, but that all should come to
Repentance. (2 Pet. III. 9.) And that with the utmost Sincerity, -- although he
know their Obstinacy was so great, that they would not (...); and although he was
before determined to do no more, but (as the best Thing that could be done) to
proceed to their Execution, for the Vindication of his Honor and Instruction
of all his Dominions! -- Surely none ever thought but that an earthly Sovereign
may in such a Case have a real and sincere Regard to the Welfare of his
Subject, considered as Men; although he is determined as a wise Governor, to
show his Wrath in their Destruction, considered as obstinate Rebels, after
having endured with much Long-suffering. ( Romans IX. 22.) Nor did ever any doubt
but that he has Right to sea Bounds to his Endeavors and to his Patience, or
that it becomes him to do so. ( Psalm. LXXXI. 8 -- 13.) And if God's Conduct in
giving up obstinate Sinners is consistent with all the tender Concern he
expresses for them, his decreeing to conduct so is consistent too. If he acts
consistently, it was consistent to determine to act so. -- It may be observed,
that as the Scriptures take it for granted, Mankind are moral Agents, and
proper Subjects of moral Government; so do I in all the above Reasonings. Nor
is it needful I should enter particularly into this Point again, after what has
been already published. (See my True Religion delineated, and Sermon on Gal.
III. 24.)


PHARAOH had shown more Respect to God, and it had been more for his Interest,
had he repented of his Oppressions, and without Delay yielded Obedience to the
divine Command, and let Israel go. But no Man has Reason to think, it had been
better if God had said or done more to make him obedient, or that it was a
Pity, God punished him at last as he did. [It was the best Thing that could be
done.]

MOSES had beheld all his Conduct. And Moses beheld the Punishment the ALMIGHTY
inflicted on him and on his Army. And what did Moses think? Did he think, it
was a Pity, that proud and haughty Monarch was so bro't down? -- a Pity, the
cruel Egyptians were thus drowned? Or did not the divine Conduct appear perfect
in Wisdom, Glory and Beauty? -- Now if none are finally lost, but those who
deserve eternal Damnation, as really as Pharaoh and his Host did to perish in
the Red Sea; and whose eternal Damnation will turn as much to the Honor of God
and general Good of God's chosen People, as did the Destruction of Pharaoh and
his Host, and as much more as perfectly to answer to the greater Importance of
the Case; it is not at all strange if their eternal Damnation should appear in
the Eyes of God, Angels, and Saints through eternal Ages, in as beautiful and
glorious a Light, as did the Destruction of Pharaoh and his Host, to Moses,
when he composed and sang that Song recorded in XVth. Chapter of Exodus. -- The
Egyptians thought it a Pity, their Monarch and his Army were lost. Yea, to them
is appeared a dreadfully shocking Affair. -- But Moses sang, The LORD has
triumphed GLORIOUSLY. And was exceedingly rejoiced, to see that he had thus
shown his Power, and laid a Foundation to have his Name declared throughout all
the Earth.

AND thus will it appear to all the Inhabitants of Heaven, when Satan and all
his Adherents lie overwhelmed in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone. And therefore
the heavenly Hosts are represented in Scripture, as singing the Song of Moses;
triumphing in the Destruction of Satan and his Adherents, as Moses did in the
Destruction of Pharaoh and his Army! ( Rev. XV. 3.) And as repeating their
HALLELUJAHS, exulting and rejoicing while they see the Smoke of their Torment
ascending for ever and ever! ( Rev. XIX. 1, -- 6.)

NOR need it seem strange, that the Inhabitants of Heaven, who have so great a
Respect to God, and are such hearty Friends to his Interest and to the Honor
of his Government, should so entirely acquiesce in the righteous Punishment of
his inveterate, obstinate Enemies. If vindictive Wrath were nothing but
groundless, arbitrary Vengeance, it would be quite another Thing: but as it is
(in the Governor of the World) nothing but Love, to God, to Virtue, to the best
Good of the System, bearing down in a wise and righteous Manner the Enemies of
God, of Virtue, and of the System, it cannot but appear infinitely amiable in
the Eyes of the Inhabitants of (...) VINDICTIVE Justice, if I mistake not
arises wholly from Love, and is always under the Direction of infinite Wisdom.
And if so, it is an amiable Perfection in the Deity, Love is the Sum of the
Moral Law, which is a (...) of the moral Perfections of God: Therefore Love is
the Sum of God's moral Perfections. Love to God, to Virtue, and to the System,
will naturally induce the Governor of the World to punish those who are
obstinate Enemies to God, to Virtue, and to the System, according to their
Deserts.
It is much more strange, that any who heartily acquiesce in the Gospel-Way of
Salvation; should be stumbled at the final Punishment of the Wicked. It must be
strange Partiality in us; indeed, to acquiesce in the Death of God's own son,
when standing in the Room of Sinners, and yet to object against the Punishment
of Sinners themselves. It argues either that we are very selfish, or else that
we love the Son of God less than we do God's obstinate Enemies, to be content
that he should bear the Curse of the Law, but loath that they should. The same
Views which cause the Saints in Heaven to acquiesce in God's setting forth his
own Son to be a Propitiation for Sin, to secure the Honor of the divine
Justice, at the same Time Head their cordially to approve of the eternal
Damnation of obstinate Sinners themselves.

BESIDES, to use the Apostle's own Words, who was inspired by him who has a
perfect View of all Things, and knows what is best in so important a Case,
(Romans IX. 22.) What if God, willing to show his Wrath, and make his Power
known, endured with much Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted for
Destruction? What if God, who doubtless is the fittest Judge, and to whom alone
the Decision of this Affair belonged, what if God though it it best to single out
some of his apostate Creatures, some of his obstinate Enemies, who inveterately
hate him and his Government, and Pharaoh-like, bid him Defiance; I say, What if
God though it it best to single out some of these, to be Examples of his Wrath, to
be visible Monuments of his Justice and Power, that the whole System might
eternally see how infinitely he hates Sin, and how easily he can subdue his
Enemies, and what a fearful Thing it is to rise in Rebellion against him: --
(Ver. 23.) and that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels
of Mercy, which he had a-fore prepared unto Glory: That, by the Means, he might
set the infinite Freeness and Greatness of his Grace, exercised toward the
Saved, in the most conspicuous Point of Light, who in their Destruction will
eternally see what they deserved, and must certainly have endured, but for the
dying Love of Christ, and sovereign Grace of God? -- What if infinite Wisdom
has judged this the best Plan? Who is there among all finite Intelligences,
that has Right or Reason to object?

Obj. BUT if this Plan was really the best, Why do not Mankind now prefer it
above all others, and heartily rejoice in it? Why so much Murmuring around the
World?

Ans. IT was but about an hundred Miles from Egypt to Canaan, and in forty
Days, conducted by ALMIGHTINESS, the Israelites might have marched from Egypt
thither; and the Canaanites being all struck dead in one Night, as an hundred
and eightyfive Thousand once were in the Assyrian Camp; (2 Kings. XIX. 35.) the
Israelites might have taken immediate Possession, and spent their Days in
Feasting and Joy. And had they been offered their Choice, no doubt they would
have preferred this Scheme, before their forty Years March in the Wilderness;
where the Lord led them through a Land of Deserts and of Pits, through a Land of
Drought, and of the Shadow of Death, through a Land that no Man passed through, and
where no Man dwelt; and suffered them to hunger and to thirst, and for their
Murmurings under their Trials, struck them dead by Hundreds and Thousands. For
they generally cared only for their own present carnal Interest, Ease and
Comfort. They had no Relish to those Things which God's Heart was chiefly set
upon -- Did not want to see God exalted, his Authority established, or to be
trained up to a Life of entire Dependence on God, to have their Hearts humbled
and broken, and be made to know that not for their Righteousness were they
brought into that good Land; nor did they care any Thing about that Instruction
which succeeding Generations might obtain from their Trials, and from God's
Conduct toward them those 40 Years in the Wilderness. And had Moses been able
to open to their View the great and glorious Ends which were likely to be
answered, they soon would have replied, And what Good will it do us, if all the
Earth is filled with his Glory, and if all these Ends are accomplished, and if
it will be better for the Nation in the long Run? What Good will all this do
us, so long as our Carcases fall here in the Wilderness? It had been better for
us to have lived and died in Egypt. Yea, we had rather never have been born,
than to undergo what we undergo, and die here at last. Nor had it been in the
Power of Moses to have stopped their Mouths, unless he could have changed their
Hearts. Yea, notwithstanding all that God himself said to them, they continued
murmuring in their Tents, till he was obliged to execute terrible Vengeance
upon them. Fourteen Thousand and seven Hundred were struck dead at one Time.
(Number. XVI. 49.) Now all these Things happened to them for our Examples, and
they are written for our Admonition. (1 Cor. X. 11.) -- It were better,
therefore, if Mankind would leave murmuring at God's Ways, which are
undoubtedly all Wise; whether any Mortal in this present dark and imperfect
State is able to show the Wisdom of them, or not. If all that has been said,
appears to have no Weight, and we give up God's Plan as being at present
absolutely inexplicable; yet, from the infinite Wisdom of the Deity, it is
capable of strict Demonstration, that of all possible Plans he has chose the
(...). Therefore, the Fault is not in him, but in us. That there were none to
be blamed in the Case of the Israelites but themselves, we now can plainly see:
so will it appear at the Day of Judgment, that God always did Right, and acted
wisely. And then every Mouth will be stopped. And since we are certain, this will
finally be the Case, it infinitely better becomes us to cease our Murmurings,
and learn to justify God, and take all the Blame to our selves: and as we are
invited, so without Delay to cast away the Weapons of our Rebellion, return and
submit to our rightful Sovereign, through Jesus Christ, now while Mercy is
offered to us.

BUT if any haughty Sinner, Pharaoh-like, says, Who is the Lord? I know not the
Lord, nor care for his Authority; or Government, nor will I humble my self
before him: -- let such a haughty Wretch know, that the ALMIGHTY is above him,
and can accomplish all his Schemes without his Consent. For having endured with
all proper Long-suffering such impudent Sinners, he can show his Wrath and make
his Power known in their eternal Destruction, to the Honor of his Name, and to
the eternal Instruction of the Saved.

As for those who leave the Honor of God, the infinitely great and glorious
God, the Author, Proprietor and King of the whole System, absolutely out of the
Account, as a Thing of no Importance, and what the Governor of the World is not
at all concerned about, and imagine that the Good of God's Creatures and
Subjects is the only Thing to be attended unto, in all the divine Conduct, as
moral Governor of the World; -- as for such, I say, it is impossible to
reconcile any Part of God's Plan to their fundamental Maxim. For if nothing was
of Importance but the Creatures Good, why was not that solely attended to? Why
were all put on Trial? And why eternal Destruction threatened for the first
Offense? Or ever threatened at all? Or the sinning Angels expelled the heavenly
World, and the human Race all doomed to Death for the first Transgression? And
if our Good is all that God now has in View, why have not more Pains been taken
for our Recovery, from Age to Age, from the Beginning of the World? Yea, why
are not infinite Wisdom and almighty Power effectually exerted to render all
eternally happy? For the Saved, if this Principle is true, will be eternally
grieved to see any of their Fellow Creatures for ever in HellTorments. Nor can
the eternal Torments of the Damned answer any valuable End, on this Hypothesis.

STRANGE are the Positions, which the Chevalier RAMSEY has laid down in Order
to reconcile the divine Conduct to this Notion. He maintains, that God did not
certainly know that his Creatures would fall -- And if he had known it, he
could not have hindered it, consistently with their free Agency -- He has been
trying ever since to reclaim them -- Intends to continue in the Use of Means
till he has reclaimed them all -- The Torments of Hell being the most powerful
Means of Grace, are finally to be used, with such as cannot otherwise be
reclaimed, merely out of pure Love to the Damned, to purify and bring them to a
better Mind -- So all at last shall be recovered and made for ever happy! -- --
But if God meant to use the most powerful Means with a fallen World he possibly
could, and that in every Age, as upon that Hypothesis it must be supposed, Why
did he send but one NOAH to the old World? Why not 2 or 3000? Why did he raise
up but one MOSES, and but one ELIJAH, and send them only to the Israelites? Why
did he not raise up Thousands in every Age and Nation under Heaven, and make
thoro' Work? And why does he not take more Pains with us of this Age? Raise up
Thousands as well qualified to preach as St. Paul? And pour out his Spirit on
all Flesh, as he did on the 3000 on the Day of Pentecost? -- If our Good was
all he had in View, and he really intended to save us all, one would think he
would now use the most powerful Means to reclaim us, and not stay till the Day
of Judgment, and then doom us to Hell, in order to fit us for Heaven! --
Besides, at that great Day, a guilty World will find, that Christ does not come
to enter upon the Use of farther Means to recover the Wicked, but to give them
their final Doom. Christ will not come to save a guilty World, but to judge
them. Not clothed with Love, but in flaming Fire. Not to do them Good, but to
take Vengeance. (2 These. I. 8.) Not out of Love to them, but to show his Wrath.
(Romans IX. 22.) Not to purify them, but to cast them, like worthless Chaff, into
unquenchable Fire. (Matt. III. 12.) Not to fit them for, and finally to bring
them to Heaven, with the good Wheat, but as Tares to burn them up. (Matt. XIII.
30.) Not aiming at their Good, as Vessels of Mercy, but aiming at their
Destruction as Vessels of Wrath. (Romans IX. 22.) Not to discipline them for a
Season, but to punish them with everlasting Destruction. (2 These. I. 9.) Send
them into everlasting Fire (Matt. XXV. 41.) into everlasting Punishment (Ver.
46.) where the Worm never dies, and the Fire is not quenched (Mar. IX. 44, 46,
48.) but the Smoke of their Torment shall ascend for ever and ever. (Rev. XIX.
3.) -- And the Eternity of Hell Torments will effectually convince the whole
System, that God has an infinite Regard to something else besides merely the
Good of his Creatures; as it is meet and fit he should. (See Mal. I. 6, -- 14.)
And this Part of his Conduct will help to complete his Picture, and finish his
true Character, in the Eyes of all Intelligences. As yet Mankind hardly believe
him in earnest. Words do not answer the End. But Actions speak louder than
Words, and will work a thoro' Conviction.

As for the common Plea, that God needs nothing from his Creatures, and so can
only aim at their Good: It is a Way of Reasoning contrary to the universal
Sense of Mankind, in (...) Cases in any Measure analogous. The Father does not
require Honor from his Son, merely because he needs it; but because he
deserves it. The Master does not require Reverence from his Servant, merely
because he needs it; but because he deserves it. And if the one should despise
his Father, and the other treat his Master with Contempt, they would soon feel
the Force of that Reasoning, in Mal. I. 6. A Son honors his Father, and a
Servant his Master: If then I be a Father, where is mine Honor? And if I be a
Master, where is my Fear? says the Lord of Hosts. Ver. 8. And if ye offer the
Blind for Sacrifice, is it not Evil? And if ye offer the Lame and Sick, is it
not Evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or
accept thy Person? says the Lord of Hosts. Ver. 14. Cursed be the Deceiver,
which has in his Flock a Male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a
corrupt Thing: For I am a GREAT KING, says the Lord of Hosts.

NOR is there any Way to establish that Maxim, which yet lies at the Foundation
of almost all the modern Schemes of Religion, but to prove, either that the
Deity does not deserve supreme Honor, or that the moral Governor of the World
is not just. For if he deserves it, he ought to have it. And it belongs to the
moral Governor of the World to see Justice done, i. e. to see that every one
has his due.

AND indeed it is the chief Happiness of the Inhabitants of Heaven, to see God
universally honored, and each one to join to give him the Glory that is his
due. They incessantly cry, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole
Earth is full of thy Glory. (Isai. VI. 3.) They fall down before the Throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne, saying, Thou art worthy to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: for
thou have created all Things; and for thy Pleasure they are and were created. (
Rev. IV. 10, 11.)

IF the Honor of God is of infinite Importance in it self -- then it is
infinitely desirable for it self -- and then to see God honored and exalted,
will be of all Things most happifying to holy Intelligences -- And that Plan
which is suited to this, will be the most happifying Plan -- And there may be
the greatest Degree of Happiness on such a Plan, and yet all Things be so
contrived as that it may eternally appear in the most striking Light, that
there was something God had an infinite Regard to, besides the Happiness of his
Creatures -- On this Hypothesis all the Parts of God's present Plan may be
accounted for.

BUT if the Honor of God is of no Importance in it self -- then it is not
desirable for it self -- nor will it be a happifying Sight, to see God exalted
-- nor that Plan that is suited to exalt God, a happifying Plan -- yea, no good
End can be answered by such a Plan -- and so no Part of God's present Plan can
be accounted for.

IF the Creature's Happiness is the only Thing of Worth -- then infinite Wisdom
and almighty Power should be employed only to promote it -- and the everlasting
Punishment of the Damned can answer no good End: as, on this Hypothesis, none
can deserve it, nor can God desire it, or any holy Being acquiesce in it, or
receive any Instruction from it. (See this proved in my True Religion
delineated. P. 215.)
-- And why God ever permitted Sin or Misery to enter into his World, will be
absolutely unaccountable: as will every Step God has taken with fallen
Intelligences ever since Satan's Apostasy. For why did not God instantly
restore fallen Angels and fallen Man, and immediately confirm them, if their
Welfare was the only Thing of Worth?

IN a Word I humbly conceive this Position, that the Welfare of Creatures is
the only Thing of Worth, and the only Thing to be regarded by the moral
Governor of the Universe, is one of the most groundless, irrational,
unscriptural Positions, that ever was laid down; little, if any Thing short of,
nay, worse than the grossest Absurdities practiced by the Heathen. For what did
they worse than worship and serve the Creature more than the Creator? ( Romans I.
25.) But on this Hypothesis, the Creature alone is to be served; and God
himself, the glorious Creator is to become his almighty Servant; and to be
loved only and merely for his Faithfulness in the Creature's Service; -- The
Creature has taken the Throne, and the Creator is become his Servant -- No
Wonder, such a Scheme suits the Heart of fallen Creatures. And its being ever
broached, OF ever received, in God's Dominions, by any of his Creatures, is a
full Demonstration, that they are fallen indeed. Yea, not only fallen, but sunk
into so great Degeneracy and Delusion, as to think, that God himself is fallen
too, and quite turned to be of their Side. -- And now they love him, and think
all is well! Psalm. (...) Thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy
self. --

BUT it is Time to proceed, as was proposed,

III. To make some practical Improvement of the whole. And,

1. WHAT has been said may be of use to assist us to form right Ideas of God.
The Law gives us a true Picture of the moral Perfections of the divine Nature.
God is exactly what the Law speaks him to be. -- Yet the Gospel sets his moral
Perfections in a still clearer Light: the Glory of God shines exceeding
brightly in the Face of Jesus Christ. -- But God's universal Plan comprehending
Law and Gospel, and all God's Dispensations from the Foundations of the World
to the final Consummation of all Things, sets his moral Character in the
compleatest and most striking Point of Light; and puts us under vast
Advantages, even in this present State, to make a swift Progress in the
Knowledge of the Deity. -- Indeed, had we that high Relish for divine
Knowledge, that good Taste for divine Beauty, which they in Heaven have, our
Proficiency might bear a great Resemblance to theirs. -- But, Oh how stupid are
we to divine Things! Having Eyes to see, and see not: Ears to hear, and hear
not; neither do we understand: Hearts of Stone, that have no Feeling. We are
even as Beasts before him. So that while his Glory shines all around us, we are
in profound Darkness. -- O for the Influences of the blessed Spirit, to awaken
our Attention to the Manifestations he makes of himself, and to give us a true
Taste and Relish to the Beauty of divine Things! Then would our Hearts be
enlarged, to love the Lord our God, and to fear him, and to walk in all his
Ways, and to rejoice in the Wisdom of his universal Government. O for that
blessed Day, when we shall receive the holy Spirit in a full and perfect
Measure! Then shall we see no longer in this dark Manner, but as it were Face
to Face. Shall in a Measure, at once, take in the Idea which God has exhibited
of himself, and be ravished with the Wisdom, Glory and Beauty of his universal
Plan.

2. WHAT has been said may be of use to assist us not only to form right
Notions of all finite Intelligences, as being in their best Estate at an
infinite Remove from Self-sufficiency and absolute Independence, the peculiar
Prerogatives of him who alone is by Nature Immutable; but it may also be of
special use to assist us to just Notions of the true Character of Mankind now
in their fallen State. Facts are stubborn Things. The steady Conduct of
Mankind, from the Fall to this Day, gives their true Character beyond Dispute.
Only think what they ought to be, perfectly in Love with God, and full of Love
to one another; and see what their Conduct has always been toward God, and
toward one another. -- Toward God, Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost (...)
as your Fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers
persecuted? And they have slain them which showed before of the Coming of (...)
ONE; of whom ye have been now the Betrayers and Murderers. ( Act. VII. 51, 52.)
-- Toward one another. Living in Malice and Envy, hateful and hating one
another. ( Tit. III. 3.)

Who live in Hatred, Enmity and Strife
Among themselves; and levy cruel Wars,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish Foes enough besides,
That Day and Night for his Destruction wait.
MILTON
AND so obstinate in their sinful Ways, that in Fact no external Means have
ever been able to reclaim them. So alienated from God, that no Arguments can
persuade them to be reconciled. So that notwithstanding all the outward Means
which have been used, yet still the World is as it was. The Christian Nations
very little better, if so good, as some Heathen have been. ( Mat. XII. 41.)

3. WHAT has been said may be of use to realize to us the infinitely evil
Nature and dreadful Consequences of Sin. Let us view the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, and sea what will be the (...) of the grand Rebellion. Bin has
turned Angels into Devils, and banished them from Heaven, and will confine them
for ever to the burning Lake, with all their Adherents from this apostate
World. Let us view God's Conduct toward Sin from the beginning of the World to
the Consummation of all Things, and we may see how infinitely lie hates it, and
how resolved he is to suppress in -- Oh, how infinitely dreadful had both our
Case in this fallen World, had a Savior never been provided!

4. WHAT has been said tends to give us the sublimest Ideas of the divine
Interposition on the Fall of Man, to defeat Satan's Designs, and bring infinite
Good out of all the Evil that Satan intended. -- O the Depth of the Knowledge,
Wisdom and Grace of God! Glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders! This Theme is worthy of eternal Contemplation, and will appear new and
fresh and ravishing through eternal Ages, to all the blessed Inhabitants of the
upper World: Especially, to the BRIDE, the LAMB'S WIFE. The Saved from among
Men will have some Ideas and Joys quite peculiar to themselves, that even the
Elect Angels will not intermeddle with: and sing a new Song, that none can
learn, but those who were redeemed from the Earth. ( Rev. XIV. 3.)

5. WHAT infinite Madness are the Sons of Men guilty of, that they can be
inattentive to all this glorious Grace, go on secure in Sin, and persist in
their Adherence to Satan's Interest, although they know that Satan and his Hosts,
and all his Adherents, are destined to the Lake of Fire and Brimstone? O poor,
blind, infatuated Creatures! to adhere to Satan, our first Enemy, who so
maliciously sought our total Ruin, deceived the happy Pair, and plunged all
this World in Woe! to adhere to him when he still designs your Ruin! to be deaf
to the kind Calls of the Son of God, who means to defeat Satan's Designs, and
has died in the Cause, and now reigns in Heaven with the same Views, and
invites us all to submit to his Government and trust in his Blood! And can you
still go on in bold Defiance of almighty Vengeance? and make a Jest of eternal
Burnings! -- Oh, how horrid the Thought! infinitely horrid the Thought, that so
many of the human Race are daily imprecating Damnation upon themselves, calling
upon God to damn their Souls to Hell! Poor Creatures, they little think what
Damnation means! they little think what it is to fall into the Hands of the
living God! -- Who that loves God, or has any Compassion for immortal Souls,
can think of the present blind and miserable State of a fallen World, and not
long for the blessed Day, when Satan shall be bound, and the Messiah reign on
Earth?

6. BUT let me conclude the whole with an Address to the spiritual Seed of
Jacob.

As Jacob was in great Distress, when his Son's Coat, all besmeared with Blood,
was brought into his Presence, and said, Surely he is rent in Pieces, and I
shall see him no more! and afterward when Simeon was left in Egypt, Things
looked darker still, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and now will ye take
away Benjamin also! all these Things are against me! and yet in the End, he saw
the Wisdom, Beauty and Glory of the whole Plan which God had laid: so shall it
be here. How dark soever the present State of the World is, and how dark soever
it has been for long Ages past, that it has hardly looked like God's World, but
rather like a World where Satan reigns; and how impossible soever it may seem,
that all should issue well; yet we have the greatest Reason to believe it will,
and to rejoice in the Prospect of that blessed Day.

FOR this is the very Plan which infinite Wisdom chose before all other
possible Plans: the very Plan which God himself laid out -- all the Parts laid
out upon Design -- every Thing adjusted by infinite Wisdom. The Whole,
therefore, must be perfect in Wisdom, Glory and Beauty; and will appear so,
when once it is finished.

LOOK through the lesser Parts of God's great and universal Plan, his
Dispensations to Jacob and Joseph, to Moses and the Israelites of old; these,
although once very dark, are (...) of Light, and easy to be understood. And it
God's Works are wise and beautiful, so far as we can understand them, this
argues the whole are so. For doubtless all are of a Piece, the Author being the
same, and always acting like himself.

BESIDES, notwithstanding the dreadful State of the World in our Day, and in
all Ages past, there may be Time enough yet, before the Day of Judgment, for
such great Events as may put quite a new Face upon the whole. Nor (...) we
doubt the Accomplishment of these great Events, because they have been so long
delayed. It is God's Way to promise, and make his People wait; but he was never
known to disappoint their Expectations. To Adam he said, The Seed of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpent's Head. Adam lived above nine Hundred Years, and
looked, and waited, and died. But it was above eleven Hundred Years after his
Death before God even so much as mentioned his ancient Promise. All his
Posterity on Earth, eight only excepted, destroyed, mean while, in the general
Deluge. That some perhaps were ready to think, God had quite forgot his
Promise. -- Till in the Days of Abraham it was renewed. -- Again they look, but
still it does not come -- but long dark Ages (...), and his People are put to
wait about two Thousand Years more. -- And then behold, it is come! the joyful
Day is come! I bring you good (...) of great Joy, said the Angel, for this Day
the Savior is born!

I SEE not why the Predictions of the glorious Days are not as full and plain,
as were the Predictions of the Messiah: nor why we may not as firmly believe
the setting up of his Kingdom, as of old they believed his coming in the Flesh.
It is certain, this is a great Objection of the Jews against our Jesus being
the true Messiah, that the Things prophesied of the Messiah have never been
fulfilled in him. That the Nations should beat their Swords into Plow-shares,
and their Spears into Pruning-books, and learn War no more. And that there
should be nothing to (...) nor offend; the Knowledge of the Lord filling the
Earth as the Waters do the Seas. etc. etc. Nor do I see any possible Way to
answer their Objection, but to say, These Things are still to be accomplished.

AND if they should be accomplished in all that GLORY, in which they are
painted in the prophetic Descriptions, nothing hinders but that this Plan, of
all possible Plans, may at last actually prove to be the best, in all Respects
the best. Most for God's Glory, and most for the Good of the System too. (...)
we are able to see, it seems, as if this must be the Case.

IT is Matter of the greatest Joy, that all the Affairs of the Universe are
conducted by infinite Wisdom. It is an Honor that belongs to God, to govern
the World which he has made; to govern his own World; to lay out and order the
Affairs of his own Family. -- We think, we have a Right to lay out Schemes for
our own Families, and should take it ill if our Children or Servants should
dispute our Right. Sovereign Monarchs in Time of War think they have a Right to
lay out a Plan of Operation for an ensuing Campaign, and would take it ill if
their Right should be disputed by a private Soldier. Much more has God a Right
to lay out a universal Plan, for the Conduct of all Things in a World to which
he has an original, underived, absolute Right; nor can he look upon the Worm
that dares dispute his Right, but with infinite Contempt and Detestation. --
And, O what Matter of infinite Joy it is, that he has taken this Work upon
himself! Not left Things to the Devil's Control, nor to be decided by the
Lusts of an apostate World, nor left all Things to mere Chance; but himself in
infinite Wisdom has laid out a universal Plan, a Plan perfect in Glory and
Beauty. -- No Mortal, that loves his Plan, will think of disputing his Right to
lay it. And no Mortal, that loves God himself, that loves his Law, and loves
his Gospel, can be an Enemy to his universal Plan. For they all partake of the
same Nature, and shine forth in the same Kind of Beauty, Holy, Just and Good.

O YE Seed of Jacob, Joseph is safe, and Benjamin is safe: -- the Honor of God
is safe, and the Good of the System is safe; all is in good Hands, and under
the Conduct of infinite Wisdom. For the Counsel of the Lord shall stand, and he
will do all his Pleasure. (Isai. XLVI. 10.) Wherefore set your Hearts at Rest.
For let the State of the World and of the Church look ever so dark, you may
safely trust in the Lord, and stay your selves upon your God, who is engaged in
Honor to conduct all well. And for his GREAT NAME'S SAKE, he will not fail to
do it. (See Ezekiel. XX.) You, therefore, may with the utmost Serenity leave the
Government of the World with him, and put an implicit Faith in his Wisdom and
Fidelity, and have nothing to do, but your Duty. Nothing, but to attend upon
the Business he has marked out for you. Like a faithful Soldier in an Army, who
trusts his General to conduct Affairs, while he devotes himself to mind the
Business he is set about: And the more he rejoices in the Wisdom of his
General, the more alert will he be in discharging the Duties of a Soldier.
Wherefore, Rejoice in the Lord always. Again I say, Rejoice. -- Let this be
your first Maxim, The Lord reigns: and this your Practice, Let the Earth
rejoice, (Psalm. XCVII. 1.)

BUT it must be with an holy Joy. With such a Joy as results from a supreme
Love to God, and Hatred of Sin, as an infinite Evil. With such a Joy as St.
Paul describes, 1. Cor. XIII. 6. Charity rejoiceth not in Iniquity, but in the
Truth. For no other Joy will answer to the Nature of God's universal Plan,
which is altogether suited to exalt the Deity, and set Sin in an infinitely
odious Point of Light, and to cause Truth and Right universally to take Place.

THERE are some who say they are Jews, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of
Satan; who say, they trust in the Lord, while at the same Time, the Name of God
is blasphemed through their unrighteous and ungodly Lives. So once there was a
mixed Multitude came out of Egypt, and joined in the general Joy at the Side of
the Red Sea, merely from selfish Views; But the Lord knew how to try them; and
their Joy (...) long was turned to Murmuring. For their Hearts were not right
with God: and their Carcases fell in the Wilderness.

O YE Seed of Jacob, Trials, many Trials are yet to be expected, dark and
gloomy Days, while the dawning Light of the glorious Morning comes gradually
on. Get ready therefore for Trials. Be willing, that all Flesh should be
brought low, and that the Lord alone should be exalted. (Isa. II. 17.) Seek
Meekness, ye Meek of the Earth, for it may be, ye may be bid in the Day of the
Lord's Anger. (Zeph. II. 3.) For, beheld, the Day comes that shall burn as an
Oven, and all the Proud, yea, all that do wickedly shall be Stubble; and the
Day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall
leave neither Root nor Branch: But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of
Righteousness arise with healing in his Wings, (Mal. IV. 1, 2.) Many shall run
to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased, (Dan. XII. 4.) Many shall be
purified and made white, and tried: but the Wicked shall do wickedly; and none
of the Wicked shall understand, but the Wise shall understand. (Ver. 10.)
Blessed is that Man, who shall overcome all Trials, and be true to the
Messiah's Interest through all Changes, for he shall stand in his Lot at the End
of the Days, in the general Assembly of the Just in Heaven. (Ver. 13.) Watch,
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those
Things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. (Luke XXI.
36.)

HUMILITY, Self-Diffidence, entire Dependence on God, the inward Source of
constant Watchfulness and Prayer, perfectly become us,and are exactly suited to
the State of Things in the intellectual System. Satan a glorious Archangel
fell -- Adam the Father of the human Race-fell -- all Mankind now in a fallen
State -- the Powers of Darkness determined on our Ruin. No Room, therefore is
left for Pride, Self-Confidence, Self-Dependence. Hell is our proper Due: and
free Grace through Jesus Christ, our only Hope. Snares and Dangers are all
around us. Watch and Pray, therefore, that ye enter not into Temptation.

GOD is the only Being by Nature immutably (...). Were we Innocent, we might
possibly fall; and God would be unobliged to hold us up. Now we are Sinners,
now we are already, fallen Creatures, there is no Hope in our Case, but we
shall totally and finally fall if left to ourselves, and as certainly perish as
we now exist. And whither shall we look for Help? but to the only immutable
Being. And how? but through the Merits and Mediation of Christ; being infinitely
unworthy that God should hold us up. And yet our eternal Interest lies all at
Stake.

O THOU FATHER of our Spirits, amidst ten Thousand Dangers, apostate,
self-ruined, selfdestroyed, helpless, Hell our Due, we look to Thee! O help us!
O hold us up! O keep us by thy Power, through Faith unto Salvation; to the Glory
of thy free Grace through Jesus Christ! Amen.

NOW to him, who loved us and gave himself for us, to him be Glory, Honor and
Praise, for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Preface, Page 1. Line 4 from the Bottom, for accountable, Read
unaccountable.

The CONTENTS.
The DIVINITY of CHRIST.
IS it reasonable, to believe a Doctrine we cannot fully, understand? Page 1.
-- Was Christ the Creator, or only an Instrument in Creation? p. 4. -- Was be
the God who appeared to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, on Mount Sinai? p. 5. --
The King of Israel? p. 7. -- Who dwelt in their Tabernacle, p. 8. And Temple,
p. 9. -- Appeared to Isaiah on a Throne high and listed up, p. 10. -- To whom
every Knee shall how, p. 11. -- Spoken of as supreme God in the XCVIIth and
CIInd Psalms? p. 12. -- What Right had New-Testament-Writers to apply to Christ
Passages out of the Old Testament, plainly spoken of the God of Israel? p. 6.
-- Why did Christ claim to be the King of Israel, and suffer himself to be put
to Death as a Blasphemer? p. 6. and 25. -- Was he indeed the very God and King
of Israel? p. 13. -- What greater Evidence of his Divinity could have been
given? p. 14. -- Whence arise our Doubts? p. 16. and 24. -- He appeared as a
Man. p. 18 -- In the Form of a Servant. p. 20. -- Received his Authority from
his Father. p. 20. -- And will resign his Kingdom to, him. p. 21. -- Infinite
Wisdom has taken the best Method to determine his true Character. p. 15. --
Texts, the Arians build their Scheme upon, explained. Matt. XIX. 16. p. 17. --
Mark XIII. 32. p. 19. -- Joh. V. 30. p. 20. -- Joh. X. 34. p. 25. -- 1 Cor. XV.
28. p. 21. -- Col. I. 15. p. 31. -- Rev. III. 14. p. 31. etc. etc.

The MILLENNIUM.
THE good Man, attached to the Interest of the (...) (p 44.) would be
overwhelmed with Grief, (p ^^.) (...) his Cause finally to prevail. (p 46.) --
For their (...) was foretold to Adam (p 47.) to Abraham (p 48.) was (...) (p
48.) and plainly declared by the Prophets. (p 51.) -- (...) Time fixed. (p 53.)
-- Not the least Reason to doubt the accomplishment of the Things which are
written. (p 54.) -- (...) will the Mistakes of some, or Infidelity of others,
also the Case. (p. 60.) -- The Number of the Saved will be (...) the Sands on
the Seashore. (p 63.) -- And all the Glory will redound to God. (p 67.) -- An
Assurance of this may support the good Man, let Things now appear ever so dark.
(p 68.)

The WISDOM of GOD in the Permission of SIN.
WHAT is implied in God's permitting Sin? p. 74. -- Wherein appears the Wisdom
of God in permitting Joseph to be sold? p. 75. -- Israel to be oppressed? p.
78. -- Pharaoh to harden his Heart? p. 80. -- Israel to sin and fall in the
Wilderness? p. 85. -- God's Conduct in these Instances a Clue to lead us into a
View of the Reasons of his permitting the original Apostasy of finite
Intelligences. p 103. and teaches how to solve all Difficulties. p 109. -- Did
God foresee the Fall of finite Intelligences? Could he have hindered it? Did he
stand by as an unconcerned Spectator? p 128. -- What was the original State of
Man? p 127. -- How was it possible, so holy a Creature could fall? p 128. --
What induced him? p 130. -- The good Ends God designed to be answered by it. p
131. -- Humility, Holiness and Happiness increased, and God exalted. p 132. --
The Inhabitants of Heaven receive great Instruction from all God's Works here
below. p 141. -- What Plan, of all possible Plans, ought to be esteemed the
best? p 155. -- Such is the present Plan. p 156, -- 184. -- Objections
answered. p 185. -- Ramsay's Scheme confuted. p 195. -- A right Idea of God,
how obtained? p 200. -- It is Matter of great Joy, the Universe is under the
Government of infinite Wisdom. p 206.


