Mr. Barnard's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON Preached to the Ancient and Honorable ARTILLERY COMPANY IN BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, June 5, 1758. Being the Anniversary of their ELECTION of OFFICERS.
BY THOMAS BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in SALEM.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, at their Printing-Office, next to
the Prison in Queen Street, 1758.

ISAIAH LIVE. 16, 17. Behold I have created the Smith that blows the Coals,
and that brings forth an Instrument for his Work; and I have created the
Waster to destroy; No Weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper. --


TRUE Sobriety of Mind aims at seeing God and his Glories, in the whole Frame
and Course of Nature, as well as in the Wonders of his Grace. It leads
Individuals to sanctify their secular Business, by ever considering themselves
as his Servants; and Numbers combined in any Profession, to recognize their
Dependence on him, at the more solemn Periods of their exerting, their natural
and artificial Improvements in such Professions, by accompanying them with Acts
of Devotion.

THE sacred Offices we are now engaged in, are therefore founded in Wisdom, in
that Fear of the Lord which is the Beginning of Wisdom.

MANY are the religious Reflections relative to the Occasion of this Day, of
which Times of Tranquillity give us a Choice indifferently; but when we are
surrounded with all the Horrors of War, and dejected by a Train of past ill
Successes in it; when we are apparently at the Eve of those important Events,
whereon our Peace, our Liberty our Being depend: We have Need to arm our selves
with those divine Principles, which shall prevent an anxious Gloom of Mind from
degenerating into repining Doubts of the Rectitude or Kindness of the
Administrations of Heaven, and shall cheer our Spirits with the Hopes of
happier Days, and fix our Trust on a sure Foundation.

TO this End I have chosen the Part of Holy Scripture now read; wherein the
Prophet rapt into future Time, comforts the People he wrote to, yea and Mankind
in general, subjected to various Miseries through Ignorance and Vice;
represented as an undutiful Wife, removed from the Bed and Board of her Lord,
deserted, afflicted, tossed with Tempests, etc. as in our Context, afterward
restored to Favor, becoming the Mother of a numerous Offspring, having the
Pleasure of seeing them established in a noble Habitation, surrounded with
every Blessing which can render Life comfortable or desirable. Under which
Allegory is designed, the unhappy State of Mankind in general for many Ages,
and the glorious Effect of the Advent of the Son of God, and of the Propagation
of his Religion.

TO confirm Faith, and inspire Hope of these happy Futurities, it was needful
that Men should renounce the absurd Principle, which anciently much prevailed,
and seems to be diverse Times pointed at by the Prophets, viz. Of two
independent Principles, or first Causes, of Good and Evil in the Fates of Men.
Which the Prophet here does, when he asserts the supreme Dominion of God, in
those Events, which used to be attributed to the evil Power. Behold I have
created, etc. Instruments of War, their Fabric, Use and Success, and the Hands
they are put into, are all under my Inspection and Direction, you may therefore
confide in my Promise of Deliverance from Evil, and of every Blessing in due
Time.

OUR Text then may be esteemed a Description of the Administrations of Him,
whose Throne is established in the Heavens, and whose Kingdom rules over All;
and in Consequence a Vindication of the Ways of God to Men, and an Intimation
of that extensive Plan of the most High, the Parts of which shall gradually
take Place, improving in or tending toward Perfection, 'till the Consummation
of all Things; after which Period, the Review of them, shall fix the Attention,
and raise the Admiration and Praises of Saints and Angels in that blessed State,
where they shall sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God and the Song of the
Lamb; saying, Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints; Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name, for Thou only art Holy?

IN the following Discourse we may, I. REFLECT upon the present State of
Mankind respecting Wars, by itself considered. II. AS Part of a Plan, or
connected Series of the divine Proceedure, tending gradually to a Perfection
worthy of its Author.


FIRST, Let us consider the present Condition of Mankind respecting Wars, by
itself considered, as of the Constitution of God, answering Purposes worthy of
his Government.

I SAY by itself considered; because we are not to suppose that infinite Power
and Wisdom, can be reduced to a Necessity of using Means, unjust or cruel in
their Nature, to bring about Ends of Good. The Judge of all the Earth will do
Right.

THERE have been in all Ages, those who desired to be Atheists. Men, who when
the Terrors of divine Justice attacked them, have applied to Infidelity, to get
rid of the Fears of the Reward due to their evil Deeds. In St. Peter's Days
there were Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts, who tauntingly said, Where
is the Promise of his Coming? Others since that Time, have from the same
Motive, viewed the Works of God in an untoward Light, and insolently said,
Where is the righteous and good Government of God? while Man his Creature, his
Offspring, is doomed from a weak and helpless Infancy, to a Series of Vexation,
to all the Miseries which unhallowed Violence can inflict? Is this his World?
this Aceldama, covered with Garments rolled in Blood, filled with the Cries of
murdered Innocents, the Plaints of ravished Virgins.

OR if such Charges have been too unpopular for Reputation, or too hard of
Digestion even for themselves, the same Motives have put them upon Endeavors
to confound their own and others Conceptions of God and his Attributes; for if
this can be done, the same End is answered. That God, whose Attributes Men have
no Idea of, is neither an Object of their Hopes nor Fears. Hence adopting the
abovementioned exaggerated Descriptions, they have said, Disorder and Misery
are propagated through all the Creation; and yet, All that is, is Right. God
governs the World. The Inference therefore is, That Wisdom, Goodness, Justice,
are quite different Properties when attributed to God, from what they are in
Men. We know not what to expect from him, Soul take thine Ease.

VICIOUS Men make the most of these Difficulties* sober Minds have been
perplexed about them, and ready to say with one of the Ancients, When I though it
to know this, it was too hard for me, but as he adds, till I went into the
Sanctuary of God, so they have found Retirement for religious Meditation and
Application to the Word of God, the best Relief.

INDEED that future World which the human Soul perceives itself to be made for,
and in which the Oracles of Truth assure us, all present Inequalities shall be
adjusted, the Sufferings of the innocent and pious infinitely more than made
up, vindicates the Character of Equity and Goodness in the Supreme. But yet as
we are to judge, that all his Perfections are exerted in a Consistency with
each other at all Times, it is a noble Improvement of the Mind, tending to the
Honor of God, and our Advantage, to examine, what Proportion appears to us in
the divine Conduct here, what Ends worthy of him are answered in the Course of
Things, how false the Suggestions abovementioned are.

A SHORT Answer has been given to them by some: that the first Man by his first
Sin, put himself out of the Protection of God, so that the World was justly
de^^^ted by him, to be a confused State of Woe, which beginning here, shall be
continued for ever, except so far as Grace relieves a happy few.

BUT Others have thought this to be rather a cutting the Knot than untying it.
For besides the Impropriety of Language, in speaking of Beings coming into
Existence in a State of Punishment, which State implies previous Ill-desert,
and to which Condition of Ill-desert none can be reduced by Causes with Respect
to which they are purely passive, (so that all Expressions of that Sort must
have a liberal Construction;) besides this I say they observe that it is more
agreeable to the Word of God, as they think it more honorable to him to
conceive of him as the universal Father, who in this World tempers the Severity
of a Judge, with the Tenderness of a Parent.

AND in such a Light, however vain Men may imagine, that this Part of the
System of the Universe, is not arranged in such a Manner as they should have
disposed of it; yet humble Observers will see enough to glorify and adore him,
who is glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders.

THAT Men are free and voluntary Agents, conscious of Right and Wrong in their
Temper and Conduct, the Subjects of moral Government, our own Experience and
inward Sensation so convince us, that all metaphysical Arguments to the
contrary, must appear to the Tho'tful, but idle and ridiculous Sophisms. Now
it is incident to such Beings of limited Capacities, to fall into Imprudence and
Vice. What then is it to be expected, will be the Course of the Care and
Government of God respecting such? Surely that while faithful to God, they
shall in general enjoy his Smiles. (I say in general, because there may be
Exceptions, among other wise Reasons, to convince us of the Certainty of the
future World) Such, Revelation informs us, was the State of Innocence in the
Garden of Eden, and such shall be that of the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of
the great King. And on the other Hand, that when they offend, they shall find
it an evil Thing and a bitter; That Departure from God, is Departure from all
Good.

IN such a State of Things, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, illustriously appear. If
the Effect of different Conduct be proportionable, if Misery follow Wickedness
as its Shadow, or rather as it is evil Genius* and if the Work of Righteousness
be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever.

THE Almighty Possessor of these Perfections, is yet more glorious, if these
Troubles, these natural Punishments, which end in the Ruin of the obstinate and
abandoned, prove the Medicine and Cure of those who are meet for such a Favor,
moving them to return to due Obedience; and so all Events of the natural and
moral Kind unite in a Tendency to Good, by Way of Motive or Example.

See here then the Finger of God in the Fate of Societies, (for I shall confine
myself to them, though the Case of particular Persons be nearly the same)
according to their Conduct.

WHEN a Community in general, forsakes God and Virtue, they fall into those
Errors and Sins, which either draw upon them the just Resentments of their
Neighbors, or invite some hardy Invader to attack them. The Alarm is given,
but what is to be expected, from a People enervated by Luxury, or drenched in
sensual Defilements, equally lost to public Spirit and the Fear of God? What I
say is to be expected but -- base Terror -- Feebleness and Disunion in public
Councils -- sordid Venality in those entrusted with the Execution of them -- In
the Camp abandoned Profligacy, which takes away the Heart -- in the Field
dastardly Cowardice? Despairing of themselves, not daring to look up to God; if
they call, who will answer them, and to which of the Saints will they turn?
They must shamefully disgorge ill-gotten Possessions, or bow their Necks to the
Yoke. The same evil Temper which affronts God, disregards the Rights of Men. If
what they feel amends them not, they go on to new Acts of Injustice, Breaches
of Treaties or other Outrages, which provoke their Neighbors to the utmost
Extremities, the most shocking Desolations follow, 'till their Names be no more
on Earth.

HERE is the righteous Severity of God. For who will blame Heaven for those
Sufferings, which Men by forsaking the natural Means of Prosperity, bring on
themselves? God is glorified, when all about them are delivered from the
Contagion of their evil Example, and warned by their Fate to abandon Iniquity;
thus Sin is the Reproach and Ruin of any People. And if wise Ends are served by
such general Calamities, the few innocent Individuals may be safely left in his
Hands, most able to cause them soon to forget the Troubles, of this small Part
of their Existence.

THIS is one Issue of such Distresses. Let us take another View.

IF a People thus visited, open their Eyes and Ears to Discipline, if they
return to him that smites them; every Step of their Return to Virtue,
furnishes them with Principles of successful Resistance; human and divine Aids
flow in, for the Restoration of their Tranquillity.

For a religious Nation, have their Portion in this World of Imperfection and
Sin, are sometimes called to defend themselves against the Sons of Violence, or
ward off their ill Designs. The Fear of the Lord will be their strong Tower.
The Spirit of Piety will spread its Influence, on all Orders and Degrees.

THE governing Part of such a Society, considering themselves as under the
Inspection of the one Judge, and his Ministers for Good to the People, will not
wantonly or unjustly rush into Quarrels. The Governed having Confidence in
their Rulers, and their common Sense approving their Conduct, will with a
cheerful and vigorous Spirit, render their necessary Measures of this Sort
effectual, by contributing freely of their Estates, or by personal Services.
Public Measures will be founded in Justice, and be the Result of Deliberation,
such as they can commend to God, and their Dependence on God will limit them to
such as will in the long Run be most effectual.

ESPECIALLY will such a People, have a high Advantage, as the same Spirit of
Religion will possess their Soldiery.

THE religious Soldier, is inspired to Diligence in accomplishing himself in
the Art of War, not by the Hope of a Plume of Feathers, not by the tinsel
Ambition of wearing a Commission; much less by the sordid Prospect of six Pence
a Day, or the brutal Love of Plunder and Blood: But that he may be an
Instrument in the Hand of God, of breaking the Teeth of the Oppressor, and
plucking the Spoil out of his Mouth, of maintaining Right, restoring Peace and
spreading Happiness all around him.

THIS Spirit of Religion will render a Camp, a well ordered Family, a House of
God formed for his Praise. Officers will imitate the supreme Ruler in Justice
tempered with Meekness and Benignity, attracting the Love and Confidence of all
under Command, so that they will dare and choose to die with them, and for
them. Councils of War, will be managed, with Dependence on the Source of Wisdom
and Courage, at whose Tribunal every Vote is to be accounted for. Neither their
Troops nor Country, will be sacrificed to the gay Humors of a Bottle; much
less will they wast away the Property, and sell the Lives and Liberties of
their Brethren, for the paltry Consideration of keeping themselves in Pay; the
Consequence of which will be, slow Motions -- inactive Campaigns -- Surprises
and Disgrace. The Ancients placed Men of such a Cast, deep in Hell. Vendidit
hic Auro Patriam.

PRIVATE Men, under the Influence of a Spirit of Piety, will be submissive to
Superiors, not only for Wrath, but Conscience Sake; they will apply themselves
to every Part of Duty, as called thereto by God; they will amidst the Duty of
their Place, still remember that there is One higher than the Highest on Earth,
to whom they are at the same Time to be faithful; and therefore by devout
Meditation, and living as under the Inspection of Heaven, they will be spirited
to Care and Diligence, and when summoned to Arms will have no dead Weight to
depress them. Religious Temperance strings the Nerves; gives Strength and
Firmness to the Body, and maintains an equal uniform Presence of Mind, in every
Emergency.

BUT never is this divine Principle of all that is good, more necessary or more
advantageous, than in the Field of Battle, when Death presents itself in all
its Terrors; then to be able to say, my Cause is good, approved of Heaven; in
hazarding my Life for the present Happiness of my Friends and Country, I follow
him, who gave up his precious Life for the future Happiness of all Mankind: Nor
am I going to contend with giddy Chance or sullen Fate; the Ruler of the World
is the Arbiter, he presides over the Field of Battle; The Eyes of the Lord run
to and fro throughout the Earth, to show himself strong in Behalf of them whose
Heart is perfect toward him; the Fate of Armies is decided by infinite Wisdom;
if I die, it is to lie down in the Bed of Honor, and my Flesh shall rest in
Hope; And what is Death, but a Step into the calm Regions of everlasting Peace?
God is my Friend, Jesus my Savior was made perfect through Sufferings, and I
press on with Confidence, that if I breath my last in the Field, this Day my
Soul shall be with him in Paradise.

WITH what a different Spirit will such an One fight, from those abandoned
Souls, who shall be alarmed, in the Revels of a drunken Debauch; summoned from
the unmanly Pollutions of a Harlot's Lap; or while blasphemous Oaths are on
their Tongues; to face an Enemy, yea the last Enemy; with what Stupidity, or
Dread of falling into the Hands of the living God?

NOR am I describing an imaginary Influence, but what the Experience of all
Ages may testify. For if Enthusiasm, a supposed Cause of God, or feigned
Stories of Intercourse with him, have rendered Armies, irresistible; if vague
and unmeaning Prodigies, fancied Symptoms of divine Displeasure, have palled
the Courage: How much more shall substantial Guilt, disarm the Soul, and Hope
toward God, raise the Spirits, and pave the Way to Victory?

THUS the Spirit of Religion and Virtue, in its Effects, naturally tends to
Success; to make a People respected and feared; and so to settle their Security
on a stable Foundation, except Imprudence, Rashness or Want of Care, (which
natural Infirmities of Men, even Religion does not entirely cure,) prevent.

THERE is one Case more remains to be considered; and that is, where contending
Parties are in moral Regards on a Par, alike earthly, sensual, destitute of the
Principles of Religion.

AND who shall find Fault, if a righteous God has so ordered Things, as that by
ungodly Passions, they plague and harrass each other; and bite and devour 'till
they waste their Treasures and Strength, mutually spreading Poverty and
Desolation, 'till they be consumed of one another, and become public Examples,
of the destructive Tendency of ungoverned Passions, or being worn out, at last
give Peace, to the quiet in the Earth, or are by Distresses led to a better
Mind. Or if one Party should much prevail, yet the Spirit of Impiety will carry
them on, either to those Acts of Inhumanity, which might stir up a conquered
Enemy, to that Rage of Despair, which sometimes carries all before it; or
Power, Plenty and Peace will lead them to that Licentiousness and vicious
Indulgence, which prepares them for a Reverse of Condition, and carries them on
swift to Destruction.

Such as I have pointed out, is in general the Condition of human Affairs, as
the wise God has been pleased to establish the Series of Causes and Effects.
And if to this be added, that special Interposition of his Providence in great
Exigencies, which Reason and Revelation teach us to expect, and which many
memorable Events of past Times are hardly otherwise to be accounted for; in
bringing formidable deep-laid Designs to naught, in Ways unlooked for; in the
prosperous Successes of Handfulls of Men, when contending under his Auspices,
and animated by the Principles of Godliness; if a careful Observer should
collect instances of this Sort, from the Conquest of Canaan, to Facts of a
recent Date; I say if we take such special Appearances into the Account; we
shall see Reason to praise, extol and honor the King of Heaven, all whose
Works are Truth, and his Ways Judgment; and those that walk in Pride he is able
to abase.

WHEN therefore such is the State of Things, that in the general, Vice shall
bring its own Punishment, Virtue its own Reward; Afflictions shall soften the
Heart, and mend the Manners, or obstinate Wickedness shall exterminate itself,
and free the World from its Contagion; when Examples shall be set up from Time
to Time, of these different Kinds, for the Caution or Encouragement of those
that come after; every one must own that the present Condition of Men is so
proportioned, as to be productive of Good and Happiness on the Whole: Nor could
any Man say, were he not taught it from above, that this Discipline, these
Corrections of a heavenly Father, these Sentences of a righteous Judge thus
executed, were not formed to produce the highest possible Good.

BUT how glorious does the Fountain of Wisdom and Benevolence appear, if the
present State of Things be but one Step in the progressive Scheme of Happiness,
for which he has designed this World, in its various Ages? And to this we
proceed now to apply our Thoughts. I say,

II. WE are to reflect on the present State of Mankind respecting War, as Part
of a Plan, or connected Series of the Administrations of God, tending gradually
to a Perfection, worthy of its Author.

A THOUGHTFUL Mind will have a proper Sense of his own Imperfection, especially
how soon and utterly he is lost, when he contemplates Infinity, and the Works
of the incomprehensible God. And yet as the Psalmist says, Whosoever is wise and
observant, will see the Perfections of God, though he cannot comprehend them.
When the Question is started, Why if God be infinitely Good, are there Degrees
of Perfection in his Works? Why did not omnipotent Benevolence make all his
Works, in the most perfect State of Happiness, and at all Times invariably
fixed in it? Beyond the Answer, which Modesty and Humility are content with,
viz. That the Wisdom of God is unsearchable; besides this it may not be
irreverent to observe, That we may be mistaken in supposing that the greatest
Quantity of Happiness, would be enjoyed in the Universe collectively, if the
Creatures of God were so created and confirmed.

FOR as to the diverse Ranks of created Beings, our Speculations may be in some
Measure just, when we conceive, that as in Philosophy, one infinite Solid is
infinitely greater than another; so the whole Sum of Happiness, communicated to
Angels, Men and all the Creatures of God, is infinitely greater, than could
possibly have been possessed, by an infinite Number of the highest Seraphim
which surround the Throne of God, had all Degrees of Perfection below them been
left a Blank. This Though It abstruse indeed and inconclusive, I mention, only for
the Sake of inferring, that when Men give themselves License, to accuse the
Creator of penuriously dispensing Happiness, they go upon uncertain Grounds,
and are very incompetent Judges, in the Matter.

IN like Manner, if curious Minds, when they hear of a Gradation of the same
Species of Works of God, at different Times toward Perfection, of the same or
different Individuals, wonder why immense Love did not put them (Men for
Instance) at once into that State of Happiness which they hope to arrive to:
It Is sufficient to say, that we cannot tell that the whole Sum of the Happiness
of our Race had been increased thereby* Nor can we affirm, but that every
finite reasonable Nature, is made happy, by Activity, and that Activity
preserved by having Objects in View to pursue, by Hope, by the Approach of
joyful Scenes, by surmounting Difficulties, by escaping Dangers, by possessing
Happiness as the Prize of Labor, by comparing their different Situations at
different Times, and the Consciousness that they have something further to
attain.

THESE Things being premised, let it be observed, That from what was said under
the former Head, it may appear, that there is a Tendency in Religion (though
there may be accidental Obstructions) to Success in Wars, by Means of that
public Spirit, Union in Councils, due Subordination and its Duties, Temperance,
Prudence, Courage, which it lays the Foundation of. Now if such a righteous
Nation in their necessary Self-defence, should conquer and extend themselves,
obstinate Enemies would be exterminated, their conspicuous Victories would
attract the Eyes of all around them, convince them that God was with them; lead
them through Fear or Love to be at Peace with them. Their Moderation in
Successes, their Justice and Humanity, would conciliate Friends, strengthen
Alliances, and propagate the Spirit of Religion. I with Pleasure add here the
Words of one of the greatest Divines, and truest Thinkers of the present Age,
the late Bishop of Durham, View this Earth our Habitation, says he, Butler's
Analogy, p. 93.
and we shall see this happy Tendency of Virtue, by imagining an Instance not
so vast or remote; by supposing a Kingdom or Society of Men upon it, perfectly
virtuous, for a Succession of many Ages; to which, if you please, may be given
a Situation advantageous for universal Monarchy. In such a State, there would
be no such Thing as Faction: but Men of the greatest Capacity would of Course,
all along, have the chief Direction of Affairs willingly yielded unto them; and
they would share it among themselves without Envy. Each of these would have the
Part assigned him, to which his Genius was peculiarly adapted: and others, who
had not any distinguished Genius, would be safe, and think themselves very
happy, by being under the Protection and Guidance of those who had. Public
Determinations would be really the Result of the united Wisdom of the
Community: and they would faithfully be executed by the united Strength of it.
Some would in an higher Way contribute, but all would in some Way contribute,
to the public Prosperity: and in it, each would enjoy the Fruits of his own
Virtue. And as Injustice, whether by Fraud or Force, would be unknown among
themselves; so they would be sufficiently secured from it in their Neighbors.
For Cunning and false Self-interest, Confederacies in Injustice, ever slight,
and accompanied with Faction and intestine Treachery; these on one Hand would
be found mere childish Folly and Wickedness, when set in Opposition against
Wisdom, public Spirit, Union inviolable, and Fidelity, on the other: allowing
both a sufficient Length of Years to try their Force. Add the general
Influence, which such a Kingdom would have over the Face of the Earth, by Way
of Example particularly, and the Reverence which would be paid it. It would
plainly be superior to all others, and the World must gradually come under its
Empire: not by Means of lawless Violence; but partly by what must be allowed to
be just Conquest; and partly by other Kingdoms submitting themselves
voluntarily to it, throughout a Course of Ages, and claiming its Protection,
one after another, in successive Exigencies. The Head of it would be an
universal Monarch, in another Sense than any Mortal has yet been; and the
eastern Style would be literally applicable to him, that all People, Nations
and Languages should serve him.

DIVINE Revelation, designed to inspire the best Hopes, teaches us, that what
is the genuine Tendency of Religion shall be in due Time, its Effect. That true
Goodness shall prevail, and triumph, and establish it self, and bring with it
the amiable Train of Blessings, which are its Offspring, its Attendants.

FROM the unhappy Time, when the World became corrupt and wicked, Hopes were
given by the Father of Mercies, to those who mourned their Fall, of
Deliverance, from the present as well as future, evil Consequences of Sin. As
the present Sufferings of Life, Contentions and Wars in particular, are not
only the natural Punishment, but Remedy and Cure of Vice, so every
Interposition of God, in the Way of granting Knowledge of Truth or Motives to
Goodness, have been supernatural Methods, of lessening these Evils, and
bringing on happier Scenes. The Son of God from Heaven especially, bro't to
Light such a System of practical Religion in all its Parts, as if lived up to,
would establish universal Peace on Earth, and Good Will among Men. And to the
Times of his Appearance, above all the Times, when his Gospel shall be
generally known, and embraced, it is probable many sublime Parts of Prophecy,
both of the old and new Testament belong; which carry us forward to the Days,
when the Son of God shall judge among the Nations, and rebuke many People, and
they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks, Nation shall not rise against Nation, neither shall they learn
War any more. When the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion
shall eat Straw like the Bullock. When the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People
of the Saints of the most High: whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominion and Rulers shall serve and obey him.

To Men, who have perhaps too hastily concluded, that the Consummation of all
Things is at Hand, and therefore that if such a tranquil State should arrive,
its Continuance would be short, and no Way proportionable to the Length of
Time, spent in introducing it; to such, the Prospect may not appear, very
interesting and important. But to those, who think, that the Oracles of Truth
intimate to us, a long Tract of Time, wherein the Inhabitants of that Earth
wherein dwells Righteousness, shall enjoy the substantial Pleasures of Peace
and Love, arising from Truth and Sanctity; such a Length of Time, as the
preparatory Scene shall bear no more Proportion to, than three or four Years to
a Thousand: What a Relief does such a View give under present Darkness! What a
reviving Prospect of the Happiness of Posterity! what an amiable Image of
divine Benevolence!

BUT as to the Questions How and When; It is not for us to know the Times and
Seasons, which the Father has put in his own Power. That Christianity has had
in some Degree such an Effect, historic Truth might justify. It might I believe
be affirmed, that those who have changed the Truth of God into a Lie, buried
the Doctrine of Christ, under a Load of detestable Superstitions, have
abundantly most often, been unjust Aggressors, in the Wars of Christendom. By
spiriting to and supporting in cruel Persecutions, by stirring up Rebellion
against lawful Rulers, by forging Wills of Princes, by Plots, by Murders and
Massacres. But scarce any of these, much less of reformed Princes, have engaged
in Wars, without at least avowing just and necessary Causes; always excepting
the late Louis the XIVth of France, who could Robber like, in Time of profound
Peace, overrun whole Provinces which owed him no Subjection, and fill them
with Blood and Ruin, and his Motive, forsooth, was his Glory; Tyrant, what was
thy Idea of Glory! Though the Dictates of Religion are not always observed, yet
flagrant Breaches of them are so justly odious, as that those are restrained in
some Measure by Sense of Reputation, and Fear of general Resentment, whom the
Ties of Conscience will not hold. And though it has been often said by
Libertines, that Religion has occasioned more Bloodshed, than any other Cause,
yet sober Minds will always examine the Evidence of such undistinguishing
Assertions. Temperance, Justice, Truth, Love, certainly lead to Victory,
Prosperity, and general Peace; but great Oppressors have never wanted Pretenses
to gain Abettors in their Designs. The Corruptions of Christianity especially,
have been called in Aid of villainous Purposes. The Founder of our Religion who
knew what was in Man, was aware it would be so; and therefore said, he came not
to send Peace, but a Sword; but it is nevertheless true, that the Wisdom which
is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy and good Fruits; and Societies as well as Individuals, partake of
its benign Influence, in Proportion as they possess its Spirit.

AND when it shall please God, by such Means as are always in his Hand, whether
the triumphant Arms, (...) triumphant Virtues of such whom he employs, to purge
away Corruption, and to propagate the Spirit of the Gospel of his Son
universally, in Governors and Subjects, when its Tendency to Success and
Victory to Peace and Tranquillity, to every present and future Good, are
realised; when Friendship, Justice and Love, shall be the Cement of allied
Republics, or the Principle of Obedience to some one great and good Prince, or
a Succession of them; when the few Enemies to the Welfare of Mankind shall be
restrained, and find that no Weapon formed against the general Good shall
prosper: What a Seat of serene and pleasurable Enjoyment will this World be,
compared with its present Condition? And if God shall continue this State for
Ages and Generations; how may we congratulate Posterity on their distinguished
Privilege, only to be exceeded by the Joys of the World above.

IF I have not already tired the Patience of my Hearers, I will endeavor not
to do it, by being brief in my REFLECTIONS on this Subject, which might
otherwise be copious.

MY principle Intention in what I have said (may it be its Effect) has been to
set the Course of Nature respecting public Confusions and Contests in such a
Light, as shall lead to high and honorable Conceptions of God, to a religious
Dependence upon him, quiet us under Disappointments, and animate our Hopes,
point out our Duty and the Way to Prosperity.

And,

I. IF I have in any good Degree executed this Design, we shall be now led to
contemplate, with profound Veneration, the Most High God, who styles himself
the Lord of Hosts and God of Armies, who superintends all Nature, who rides in
the Whirlwind and directs the Storm, who calms the Raging of the Sea, and the
Tumult of the People, we shall think of him as unsearchable in Wisdom, choosing
to bring about Events merciful or corrective, not by his immediate Energy, but
as setting to work, all the Wheels as I may say of an immense Machine,
directing them so as every Part shall answer his Ends; we shall see all the
Convulsions among the Nations, as Parts of his Plan, who is excellent in
Council, and wonderful in Working.

WHEN we consider the Operation of second Causes, the Effects of military
Skill, of Wisdom and Courage* especially of true Goodness, their Tendency to
Victory and Prosperity, we shall carry our Views to him, who teaches our Hands
to war and our Fingers to fight* whose is the Greatness and the Power and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty.

PARTICULARLY; when we think of the Nation, which has been our ancient and
constant Enemy, no sooner ratifying a Treaty of Peace, but insidiously
attempting to elude and break it, invading our Territories, meditating our
Destruction, hemming us in with Fortresses, pouring the barbarous Salvages on
the innocent and defenseless: And not only aiming at these comparatively little
Things, but disturbing the Peace of Europe, threatening to swallow up all that
should dare to maintain the common Rights of Society: After these mighty
Strides yet gaining Advantages, but small, when set against their immense
Expense of Blood and Treasure, ingloriously quitting a Country they had treated
as conquered; baffled, pursued, threatened on all Sides, nearly reduced to the
defensive. -- We may esteem the next Causes, of such Events to be, The
immeasurable Grasp of Ambition, which sometimes over-reaches itself -- That
Unsteadiness in Design, and Feebleness in Execution, which the Want of Justice
tends to produce -- The Weakness or Wickedness of Commanders, or want of Spirit
in an Army of Slaves; but all these are Means, which supreme Wisdom for the
Peace and Welfare of the World, has ordained to lead to such Events. Religion
teaches us so to esteem them, and on the View of them, to adore and glorify
him, who makes a Way in the Sea, and a Path in the mighty Waters, which
brings forth the Chariot and Horse, the Army and the Power; when he pleases
they shall lie down together, they shall not rise, they are extinct, they are
quenched as Tow.

WHEN it pleases God to raise up a Hero, at the very Crisis of the Fate of the
public Liberty, capable of penetrating the Recesses of the Conclaves of
Oppression, of Wisdom and Resolution sufficient to defeat its best laid
Measures; If we follow him with his faithful Troops traversing whole Countries
like the Lightning, which comes from the East and shines even unto the West,
or rushing on these Banditti, like an impetuous Torrent; we admire the Man, but
we adore the God, in whose Hands the Hearts of Kings are; we as it were hear
his Voice, as he uttered it of old, I have raised up One from the North and he
shall come, from the Rising of the Sun he shall call upon my Name; and he shall
come upon Princes as upon Mortar, and as the Potter treads Clay.

IF we return Home, however we may resolve the calamitous Events our Nation and
Land have experienced, into the Effects of Cowardice, Negligence, Stupidity or
worse Causes; however we may wonder at the Conduct of Men in important Trusts;
yet Religion teaches us to look higher, to esteem these but Means and
Instruments of divine Chastisements; to the End that we may be led to
Amendment, or if we are incorrigible, be plagued till our Place be left to us
desolate. Future Events remain with God. A Series of such as we have seen and
felt, would reduce us to such a Situation, as is painful even to imagine. But
suppose this Year's Campaign to be as successful as the most sanguine Hopes can
paint it out; yet if we have left God and his Ways, such Successes may be in
the End the greatest Misfortunes, giving Scope to all Vice, taking off all
Restraint, and so only serving to the putting off the evil Day, which will come
in its Time with sevenfold Vengeance. For in the Nature of Things, The
Prosperity of Fools will destroy them.

THE proper Use of such Meditations, on the Supremacy and Providence of God,
is, to engage us to depend upon him for every Blessing by fervent Prayer, to
cast our Cares upon him, and especially to engage us to our best Endeavors,
that We, the Land and Nation we are Part of, may become a People prepared for
divine Mercy.

II. UPON what has been said, I would remark, that every one ought carefully to
perform present Duty.

IN common Life, Men's fixing their Attention on visionary Prospects, so as to
neglect the ordinary Business of the Day, is imprudent and ruinous. So would it
be, for us to adopt Maxims of Conduct, suited only to the golden Age of Truth
and Peace. The Principles therefore of that meek Sect among us, which admit not
of Self-defence, as they are not the Principles of Revelation, so neither are
they agreeable to the present State of Things; and were they generally embraced,
their Absurdity would be soon felt, or Nature would rebel against Principle.

WITH Reverence and Gratitude, we think of the Constitution of God, in which
natural Evil lessens the Quantity of moral, Adversity purges away Sin. With joy
we receive the glad Tidings of what shall be. We hope that the Calamities of
this Day, shall bring on happier Times. But our Lot is not cast in those calm
Seasons. We have Injustice, Fraud and Violence to conflict with. The divine
Blessing on the vast Armaments now entering on Action, may indeed open to us
more pleasing Prospects. But it seems as though America was destined to be the
Seat of frequent Wars. This at last is a Day of Darkness. What is Wisdom? What
is Duty? It Is to employ every Measure wherein we may depend on God for the
Settlement of our Safety.

A MILITARY Spirit ought to be cultivated. Our Rulers are sensible of it. They
have amended our Laws in this Respect. If Persons of Weight and Figure would
countenance Exercises of this Sort, they would be much better attended to, and
esteemed a setious Business. Whereas while our Militia consists chiefly of
Children, Apprentices, and Men of the lowest Rank, as in some Towns it does,
and every one, who can pay a small Fine, thinks it beneath him to appear on a
Muster, we shall never make a respectable Figure, in that Way.

ESPECIALLY should we take Care, to educate our Youth in Temperance and Virtue,
to inspire them with public Spirit, with that Fear of God and Sense of
Religion, which is the only solid Principle of Obedience, Patience, Courage,
Moderation, Compassion, Honor, and every Quality, becoming of a Soldier, a
Defender of his Country, a Chastiser of Oppressors.

THESE are general Duties; every Order of Men have their own, are called of God
to the Offices of their respective Departments.

HOW does the Heart of a Briton, glow with grateful Resentment, when he sees
our venerable Sovereign the Father of his People, burdened with the Infirmities
of Age, yet supporting himself under the additional Burden of repeated
Disappointments, arising from -- I know not what -- steadily opposing the
common Enemy on every Quarter; anxious for the Welfare of the most distant
Corners of his Dominions, vigilant, resolute. God grant he may live to see the
happy Effect of his paternal Care and vigorous Measures, that his People being
restored to their Rights and Quiet, he may say, Now Lord, let thou thy
Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Your Excellency His Excellency THOMAS POWNALL, Esquire.
will permit me, according to the Custom of this Day, to say on this first
Occasion, of properly addressing you from the Desk, in your Capacity of Captain
General of this Province, that though God be Lord of all, yet such is his
Appointment, that the Fate of Societies, much depends on the Conduct of
subordinate Rulers. You have been entrusted with the Government of this
Province, at a Time when your Attention, is to be peculiarly fixed on military
Affairs, and all your Wisdom and Fidelity needed. We receive as an Omen of
Good, what has been heard without Doors, of your Excellency's Zeal for the
Perfection and due Execution of our military Laws; your Adherence to the Maxim
of giving none Commissions in the Service of this Year's Campaign, but those
who could be recommended by Men of Worth; the Quiet and Silence with which so
very large a Body of Troops has been raised in the Government, under your
Influence, this Season. Your public Speeches show your just and extensive Views
of the evil Designs of our inveterate Enemies, and your Resolution to do your
Part, and direct us to ours, for our Protection and Defense.

MAY you see a happy Effect of these First Fruits of your Care for the Public,
here. Whatever be the Event now, yet you are, Sir, in the prime of Life, and
should God continue you in this Post, till old Age, till you shall see another
Generation risen, formed by your civil as well as military Influence, to that
manly Temperance, which you yourself feel the Benefit of; to that Virtue and
Piety, which even bad Rulers find the Necessity of cultivating as an Engine of
Policy, and which we are convinced you will promote, from an inward Sense of
its Operation on the present and future Good of the People you govern; you will
then resign your Trust, with that Pleasure, which a benevolent Heart feels, on
having done great and lasting Good, sure that in these Attempts for promoting
permanent Happiness, in your Sphere, you will meet with the Approbation of that
gracious Being, who is good to all, and whose tender Mercies are over all his
Works.

It remains, that you Gentlemen of the Artillery, be exhorted to profit by the
Doctrine of our Text. In aiming at superior military Accomplishments, you act a
Part suitable to the present State of the World, and wherein you may be Workers
together with God, whose Judgments are a great Deep, for the bringing on, a
better. It has been suggested, that our Enemies have of late been supplied with
gallant Officers, by Means of their Academies of War, and such other
Encouragements, as have excited them by every Motive of Hoour and Profit, to be
expert in their Profession. So far as your Example and Influence extend, we
follow them. It were to be wished, a Spirit of Emulation more prevailed, and
that in every Town, small Companies of Men of such a Genius were formed, and
your Pattern followed. For if New England would be safe, her Children must be a
Band of hardy Soldiors, for Generations to come, till the Nations of the World
shall learn War no more. The Scene too, is changed since the last Age, and
indeed since the last War. It Is no longer the only Thing needful to ferret out a
skulking Enemy from their Recesses; We have to contend with disciplined Troops,
and cannot be always sure of Assistance from Abroad.

Go on then and prosper, Gentlemen, only add to every other Qualification, that
most important one of solid Religion, the Influence of which I have attempted
to describe. Let me add, that as you are Gentlemen of superior Figure, should
you be called to active Service, you will probably be honored with
Commissions; and here your Sobriety and Virtue, will have an Influence you can
scarcely now conceive of, on those under your Command. The Manners of Superiors
have been found so to descend. Real Religion will not only qualify you for
personal Service, but give you Weight, attract Respect and Obedience, and if it
infuse not the same Spirit into all who behold it, yet awes them to that
outward Decorum, which is a high Advantage in an Army. Above all it will carry
You above the Fear of Death, and Armies have seldom been beat, under intrepid
Officers.

TO CONCLUDE, Let us all be inspired to present Duty, by a firm Persuasion that
right Conduct, true Goodness especially, always tends to the general Good, and
that the more the Spirit of Religion prevails, the nearer we are to those happy
Days, when God shall dwell with Men. Every private Man, who fears God and works
Righteousness, lessens the Proportion of Sin, increases and diffuses that
Temper which is productive of all Good. Men in distinguished Stations, whether
civil or military, do so yet more, by the Conspicuity and happy Influence of
their Virtues. Princes are indeed the Sons of the most High, when they follow
God, in exerting their Power, for the resisting the proud, and promoting the
Peace and Prosperity of their Subjects. Angels which are greater in Power and
Might, rejoice to do God's Will even when they destroy Thousands in a Night,
for the Peace and Safety of those whom God delights to bless. Jesus the
Mediator who is higher than the Kings of the Earth, sits enthroned on the right
Hand of God, there exerting his exalted Power, in subduing his and our Enemies,
by the Sword of the Spirit the Word of Truth, accompanied with his almighty
Energy; promoting that inward Disposition to Love and Peace, which establishes
these Blessings on a better Foundation than Terror or Policy. This Design he
will carry on, till he has made all his Enemies his Footstool. The last Enemy
that is to be destroyed is Death. This he suffers to remain, and this is
likewise in due Time to be swallowed up in Victory, at that solemn Period, when
the Purposes of God having been answered, by all the Vicissitudes of earthly
Things, a yet more stable State of Blessedness shall be the Portion of those
who have overcome in the Christian Conflict; then Jesus the Mediator shall also
deliver up the Kingdom to him that appointed him; that God may be all, and in
all.

FINIS.

