M. Adamson's FRIENDLY EPISTLE TO Neighbor JOHN TAILOR, OF The CITY of NORWICH.

A FRIENDLY EPISTLE TO Neighbor JOHN TAILOR, OF The CITY of NORWICH;
Occasioned by looking over his SERMON preached at the opening of his NEW
CHAPEL: CONTAINING An earnest Invitation to him to join the QUAKERS, and not
to attempt to raise up a NEW SECT, when there are so many already in the World:
By M. ADAMSON: An ENGLISH PROTESTANT.

The Third Edition. To which it added by way of Postscript, A SHORT DIALOGUE
BETWEEN Mr. Timothy Tell-truth and Obadiah Friendly.

Elijah mocked them, and said Cry aloud, for he is a God: Either he is talking;
or he is pursuing; or he is on a Journey: or peradventure he sleeps and must
be awaked. Kings.

-- Riden^em dicere verum Quid vetat? HOR.

LONDON, Printed: BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in
Queen Street, opposite to the Probate-Office. 1758.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS it has been industriously reported, that this and the other Person is
the Author of this Performance; these are to certify, that it matters not who
is the Author; the great Question is, whether there is any Foundation for what
is here suggested, and if there be, whether the Doctor would not do well either
to alter his Conduct, or to vindicate the Practice of double-dealing and
double-speaking. Else to show Canse why he may not be regarded as a Popish
Priest in Disguise, especially if it can be proved that his Writings contain
the very worst Errors of Popery, even the rankest Poison in all their corrupt
System. For what consistent Protestant does not see that the absurd Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is an innocent Mistake, a childish Foible, an intellectual
Folly, compared with discarding the Righteousness of the great Mediator, and
introducing a Man's own Righteousness as the Matter and Cause of his
Justification in the Sight of God. This is the Masterwheel of the Popish
Machine, the (...) of the grand Apostasy.

July 1757. ADAMSON.

FRIEND TAILOR,
I Have read over thy Sermon, which thou did preach, or read, to thy people,
at the opening thy New Place, which, thou have named by the name of CHAPEL:
doubtless to remind all men, that the doctrine commonly taught there; is Popish
Doctrine: I do not mean, that thou teach Transubstantiation; or Obedience to
the Pope of Rome; for thou art evidently, too much a Pope thy self, to be
subject to another; and art too much devoted to the Goddess Reason, to admit of
any mystery, much less absurdity into thy Creed. It was in thy heart, to read a
Sermon to thy people, on the occasion; it was not well, it was in thy heart to
do so; for I am afraid, it was the pride of thy heart to do so; to choose to do
it thy self, rather than employ any one of thy friends, in such a service;
which thou know, is the usual custom, amongst thy fraternity. Indeed friend
John, though thy principles are pretty much the same with ours, I am surpised
at thy vanity in being so taken with a gaudy, showy, costly building: this is
quite inconsistent with thy other pretensions. Thou may talk of humility,
'till thy tongue aches, no body can or will think thee to be in earnest, while
thy priestly robes and costly temple do evidently so much ingross thy thots. Be
advised by me neighbor John and pull off thy mask; lay aside thy priestly
garments; put on a plain Lay-dress, and come among us; we will receive thee:
thy reason and our Light within will very well agree. I am a little afraid thou will make poor work of the Spirit and his operations, but if thou will but be
teachable, we will soon put thee into the way of it. Pray friend John how
came thou to choose to be called Christian? or what right have thou to that
name any more than we? Thou deniest original sin, so do we: thou deniest
imputed righteousness, so do we; thou deniest Christ's satisfaction, so do we:
thou expectest to be saved by thy own righteousness, and for thy own good
deeds, so do we. In short thou deniest almost all the doctrines which are well
known among Protestants by the name of the great doctrines of the reformation
from Popery; so do we; because they are contrary to our Light within; and thou
deniest them because they are contrary to thy reason: so then our Light within
and thy Reason seem to be much the same. Why then do thou not come among us,
to whom thou do evidently so naturally belong? Or art thou determined to
increase the number of sectaries, and to the Episcoparians, Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Calvinists, Arians, Trinitarians, Whitfilites,
Westleites, add the venerable name of Talorians: Tailor! a most respectable
name; the most ancient name in the world; our father Adam being by trade a
Tailor, which by the way, is the most reputable business with all rational
beings, because entirely natural. Happy man therefore art thou in this thy
name, and art evidently as much designed to be the head of a party, as ever
Adam was to be the father of posterity: and certainly more fit for it,
forasmuch as thou art wiser than Adam; for without flattery, I think it more
reasonable to suppose thee as wise as Sir Isaac Newton, than it was for thee to
suppose him wiser than Adam; and to be plain with thee, and convince thee that
I flatter thee not, I should be of the same mind if I knew thee to be a fool.

But I say to thee again; pull off thy mask and be not ashamed to declare thy
self either a Quaker or a Romish priest. How do thou dare to call thy self
Christian, when thou know in thy own heart that thou believe not the
peculiar doctrines of christianity? which we also believe not, and for this
plain reason as I said before, because our Light within, as thy Reason
comprehends them not.

Thou did publish as I am told, some years ago, The Assembly's Catechism
revised and rendered fitter for General Use; by what authority thou did do
it, no body knows but thy self, though any body may suppose by the contents of
that performance, it was done by the command of the Pope of Rome; it being
directly contrary to reformation-principles.

Thou art now publishing a very Great Work, and as thou would have the world
believe, a very learned work, A Hebrew Bible Dictionary; I will recommend to
thee as the last work of thy life, and to complete all thy works, to publish
The Holy Bible revised and made more fit for General Use: As it now stands it
is by no means fit for thy purpose; witness the dreadful havoc thou have made
with Psalm, li. ver. 5.

But I forget my self: thou art an oracle, and as such, to be consulted by all
thy votaries, tho they may all spare their pains, for two words are the sum of
all thou have to say. Reason and Candor; Reason and Candor; Reason and
Candor; and the mischief of all is thou meanest no more by them than the
mad-brain'd Ephesian mob did by Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

Be honest, open and free then my dear friend, tell the world what thou art,
but for shame call not thy self Christian: for why should thou arrogate this
name to thy self any more than we? we do not profess our selves Christians; we
believe Jesus of Nazareth to have been a very good man, to have set a noble
example of patience, humility, obedience, etc. but we have no dependence on
him, we put no trust in him any more than thou do. Poor Paul indeed in an
enthusiastical fit, cries out: I know whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded
he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. And
Isaiah in the same sort of paroxism, cries out, Trust ye in the Lord for ever;
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. But then you know Paul was a
Christian professed, a rank one, ready to sacrifice every thing to the cause of
Christianity: declared its doctrines disagreable as they were to the prejudiced
reason of men of corrupt minds: owned himself a believer of them, though they
were to the foolish infidel Jews a stumbling block, and to the wise rational
Greeks foolishness. So they were in the apostolic age: so they still are to you
and me; and to all in our way; nor can I see any help for it; since it is
evident beyond all contradiction that Christianity proposes such principles
which thy Reason and my Light within can never admit. That Jesus Christ is
truly God, the creator of all things visible and invisible, is plainly enough
taught in the old and new testament, but neither our Light within, nor thy
Reason can comprehend how this can be; and therefore we leave it to the faith
of men, who believe any thing that God declares, however mysterious and
incomprehensible, to credit what we can give no credit to; our Light within and
thy Reason are both superior to any revelation, just as a judge is superior to
the counselors, to the lawyers, yea to the poor criminals he is to try.
Indeed, there is this difference between thee and us: we have tried revelation,
and find it contains such principles as our Light within calls absurd,
therefore like honest men we gravely discard it. But thou and those in thy way
have the impudence of ten thousand harlots, while with brows of brass ye hold
the Bible in your hands, tell the world that contains your religion; and at the
same time deny all its peculiar, and distinguishing doctrines. This! this! is
that which has filled this land with Atheists; this is the cursed root of that
infidelity now prevailing in the world: this! this! is the masterpiece of the
old serpent's subtilty, who has been for a long time let loose to deceive the
nations.

Surely, friend John, it is time to lay these things to heart, to think
seriously what the issue of these practices will be: thou have the art of
writing very solemnly, and if thou art not sincere in what thou writest, thou
art a very bad man indeed: but thou know thy self to mean as thou say;
and this is to be thy excuse, how wrong soever thou art.

But pray, neighbor John, was not Paul, whom thou have lucubrated on, sincere
when a persecutor? Yea, thou will say, and a good man too; those in thy way say
so; but pray now, are we to credit thee and them, or the apostle himself? I
suppose thou think it was his modesty that made him say, I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief; but let me tell thee, thy thinking,
and the thinking of those in thy way is no rule, or standard of truth. And
unless truth and falsehood, good and evil be the same, it is my opinion, Paul
was not a good man, 'till he was converted; and I am sure he himself thought
so. But thou art a very wise man, and have gotten a key, a well wro't one too,
to the apostolic writings: thou wast, doubtless, brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, a cotemporary with the apostle Paul; or like him have been caught up
to heaven, and there conversed with Paul, who, has told thee how to explain the
gospel scheme, and the principal words and phrases, the apostles have used in
describing it. I wish then thou would be so honest as to use words and
phrases as they are commonly understood, and do not any longer be so wicked as
to use words and phrases with thy own meaning affixed to them; which meaning,
no body thinks of but thy self, and those in thy way, nor ever thought of 'till
thou Great Genius arose to enlighten the dark and benighted world.

Take heed, neighbor John, thou art upon a dangerous pinnacle, the pinnacle of
pride; thou boastest thy self to be somebody, and thou and thy admirers are
great folks in your own opinions; but great as thou art, thy pride may be soon
abased: and thy scheme, fond as thou art of it, may be brought to naught. Some
people think, fine as it is, and pleasing to the pride and flattery of human
nature, that it is built on the sand, and therefore cannot stand, when ever a
storm comes, but will certainly fall, and great will be the fall thereof. --
Do thou really think that thou understandest the Greek language better than
any one else? or that none read the Greek Testament but thee and thy friends,
that thou take upon thee to be such a dictator, and to write all that thou
writest in such a magisterial strain? Surely more humble and candid language
would better correspond with thy pretensions; especially as thou art aiming to
introduce an ^^ion, and such a one as was scarce ever heard of before, which
yet will not be complete if thou leavest the Atheist and the devil out of it.

I cannot conceive, friend John, why thou and thy friends have been at so great
expense in procuring the noblest place of the kind, for thee and those in thy
way to speak in: this could not proceed from such a spirit and temper as thy
master possessed. I suppose in the city where thou dwell, a place good
enough for thee to speak in and for thy friends to hear, might have been well
finished for fifteen hundred pounds, what account then will ye give to your
Great Lord and final Judge for two thousand pounds and upwards, sunk and
wasted, which might have been a noble generous fund for the poor? Or may be ye
are all rich; have no poor among you, yet as the whole world are God's
offspring and we are all one common fraternity, I think it would have been a
noble, generous, disinterested scheme to have two thousand pounds or more, as a
fund, raised by a few professed christians at Norwich, on purpose to relieve
any distressed among mankind all the world over. By this means thy name would
found to the ends of the earth, and thy remembrance last from generation to
generation: but thy humanity and universal love does not yet extend it self so
far: may be ye will do this also, and verily if what I write should put it into
your heads, for without doubt ye have it in your hearts naturally; generosity,
humanity, benevolence, boundless and universal love growing in their native
soil. I say, if what I write should put it into your head to raise a fund for
the purpose abovementioned, I shall think my self amply rewarded for my
trouble, in having the blessings of the poor so long as the world endures. --

As thy principles are so diametrically opposite to the articles of the
established Creed, it was very politic in thee to declare thy respect for king
GEORGE, whose mild and merciful government gives thee liberty to be any thing
but a professed Atheist, and to write any thing except direct Infidelity. But
give me leave to tell thee that thou art quite mistaken in thinking that what
thou have written is generally approved, for bad as this kingdom is, there are
thousands and ten thousands in it who hate thy principles almost as they hate
Atheism it self, and Great as thou think thy self to be, regard thee in this
very disagreeable view, as fatan himself transformed into an angel of light:
When thou publishest again I would like to see thy paraphrase on this passage,
and that thou would tell the world what sort of Being the devil is when so
transformed; and whether this respects his intellectual or practical conduct.
Thy key will undoubtedly do here, being a key of the most excellent
temperature, and workmanship, so admirably contrived, as to be able to unlock
every hard and difficult passage, however hampered, or covered over with
Calvinian superstition or Reformation rust. Thy key of knowledge will do
wonderful things, it would if possible make light darkness, good evil, truth
error; at least it will do its utmost to confound these things to blend them
together, and so make it still more difficult to the human mind to distinguish
one from the other. No man talks more of truth than thou do, and no man seems
to understand what truth is, less than thy self: I mean, if Revelation be the
standard of truth; but if thy Reason and the Reason of the men in thy way, as
our inward Light, be the standard, then for ought I know thou may understand
what truth is as well as any since the days of Lock and Newton: but then thou
know these men's Light, like thine and ours, was superior to that of
Revelation, so not to be regulated by it. It is by thy Reason that thou judge
of Revelation and all the doctrines therein contained: what thou find there
which thy Reason can take up and account for rationally, that thou give
credit to, but wherever Revelation forsakes thy Reason, or soars above it,
there thou forsakest that and gettest above it too; so art even. This is thy
manner, and this ours, and surely this is the right way of proceeding: for any
doctrine which we cannot clearly take in, or which reason, every man's reason
cannot as clearly and as rationally understand as that two and two are equal to
four, can be no doctrine for rational Beings to give credit to.

This then at one happy stroke cuts off the commonly received doctrines of the
Trinity, the true and proper Diety of the Son and Spirit two natures in Christ:
original sin, imputed righteousness, justification by faith; particular
election; efficacious grace; regeneration and conversion; sanctification by the
Spirit's influences; and final perseverance; and having stripped Christianity of
these exeressences, which like Wens on the body have been long a most grievous
encumbrance, it leaves it a most delightful system of Paganism improved.

My mentioning this, puts me in mind of a name which thou and we, and all in
thy way ought to go by, and that is improved Pagans; that of Quakers for us,
and New-Light Men for you, does not sound half so pretty, nor is it half so
just as improved Pagans. Hail! then ye wise Men of the East, who have been
conducted by some auspicious Star to these Climes of Darkness, to give
knowledge to the ignorant, to knock of the setters of superstition and bigotry,
and to administer such instructions as never entered into the human heart,
'till ye great men arose, and with a courage and resolution superior to all
that ever went before you, have adventured to take such liberties with the
sacred volume, which were you to take with Virgil or Homer, you would run the
risk of being hooted through the streets for a company of owls. -- But thou art a
very wise man, so wise that wisdom is to die with thee, and therefore no wonder
that thou have found out the grand secret which has been hid from all the
world, 'till thou by thy great sagacity and penetrating eye, have discovered
it. That we are all Christians, and only Christians, Christians and only
Christians, though both practically and doctrinally we know nothing of Christ,
nor desire it: Christians though nothing that is purely christian be any part of
our creed: Christians though nothing of christianity be believed by us; for I
would ask thee what do thou believe concerning Jesus Christ, which we do not
believe? and yet did thou ever know that we have even coveted the christian
name? What thou meanest by it then thou would do well to explain, and let
the world know why thou chusest to be called Christian rather than
Antichristian, and why thou art not content with calling thy self a Man, or a
Creature, for as such thou know that thou stand in the same relation to
the universal Parent, as the Turk or Jew, and they are equally God's offspring
as thy self, thou being of the same family, of the same fraternity, all
brethren.

I find I must call back one sentiment expressed in the beginning of this my
Epistle: namely that the Goddess Reason will not suffer thee to admit any
absurdity into thy Creed. Now on second thoughts I find thou have admitted an
absurdity as great as can be invented: and this thy boasted reason can admit,
which like the reason of a Roman Catholic, can admit of any thing but truth
and found divinity. But what is this absurdity thou will say? why truly nothing
less than this, that the Creator is a Creature, that he that made the worlds
was made himself; in short, that Jesus Christ is an inferior God: now I defy
thee and all the men in thy way to produce a greater absurdity than this. Thou
had much better with us, be consistent with reason, and declare he is no God
at all, for nothing is more plain than this, that Revelation declares for one
God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Indeed this is not rational according as
reason is now in man; but that it is scriptural is as plain as that there is
any such book called the Bible.

Pray now my friend, think of this a little more, and consider what thou
meanest by calling thy self Christian, and at the same time betraying thy
master's cause; calling thy self Christian, and at the same time discarding
from thy Creed, (for a Creed thou have as well as other men), almost every
Notion, almost every Principle that is properly Christian. I wonder what thy
friends Owen, How, Charnock or Flavel, would say to thee, if they were now in
our world: they were Christians and only Christians as well as thee, but I
suppose thy vanity prompts thee to suspect that they understood nothing of
Christianity comparatively with thee. This I am sure of, if they were in the
main Right, thou art in the main Wrong, unless right and wrong be synonimous
terms, and I almost think they are so with thee; for if thou live a little
longer, and writest a little more, I shall expect to see a pamphlet entitled,
John against Tailor, for great as thy genius is, thou sometimes forgettest what
thou have said heretofore, as I may acquaint thee soon if thou do not prevent
me by taking more care what thou say.

Indeed, friend John, though I respect thee as a moralist and philosopher, yet
as a Christian divine, though a doctor, I must tell thee thou art an object of
the greatest pity or contempt among all parties but thy own. As a divine thou
art a Don Quixote all over, and wilt as soon bring thy divinity to be credited,
and received as truth, as that romantic history. Spare thy pains, my friend,
spare thy pains, unless thou will embark in a better cause. What cause would I
have thee to embark in, thou will say? alas, I fear thou have that cause to
learn yet, notwithstanding all thy learning, I mean the cause of experimental
religion. Experimental religion, what is that? is there any thing of it in the
Bible? if there be, strange I should not know of it! Say thou so my Friend.
Pray have thou carefully read over the book of Psalms? if thou have, and
find not experimental religion there, it is a dead letter to thee I am sure,
whatever it be to us. Experimental religion, I am told, is only to be known by
experience, and take my word for it, all barely rational men can know no more
of it than a blind man, one born so, knows of colors; and that is little
enough to be sure; since there certainly is as much need of the divine sun as
the natural to enable us to see things aright: but what am I saying, when it is
well known thou and I are both persuaded that this divine sun we have both been
blessed with all our days, thou with the divine sun of natural Reason, and I
with the same intellectual luminary the Light within? Be not affronted my
friend John, at my still claiming so near a relation; for I assure thee in my
opinion, the cathedral of Paul at London, and that of Peter at Rome, are not so
alike, nor the church of England, and the church of Rome so near akin as thou
and I are. I will therefore claim relation, for I shall like thee well if thou will but appear as a man, and lay aside all apish airs. I mean airs of
imitation: for why do thou wear the black gown rather than the white? Surely
it thou designedst it as emblematical, the white would be much more agreeable
to thy pretensions of absolute innocence, and native purity, more especially as
these have been preserved by thee in so extraordinary a manner that thou
certainly, yea infallibly art the greatest pattern of innocence and purity
which has appeared in our world these many years, and therefore the most fit of
all poor, weak, silly Adam's offspring to be at the head of old Heresies new
vamp'd: for I am ready to think all thou have said or can say against old
truth and old ways, may be found in substance a among the old Heretics
mentioned by father Austin; namely, the Simonians, Mena^drians, Saturnilians,
Basilidians, Nicolaitans, Gnostics, Carpocratians, Cerenthians, Nazaraeans and
Hebionites. It is proper for thee to consider whether thou do well in sowing
such tares afresh, which grow so naturally in the human soil, and are like to
bring forth a plentiful harvest, to thy great joy no doubt, on supposition the
enemy of souls, the Pope of Rome, and thou art joined in league and
confederacy: but if this is not to be supposed, what can thou mean in doing
the devil's and the Pope's work for them, for that thy sentiments are popish
and diabolical will be evident so long as pride, superstition and bigotry are
so. And as much as thou professest to hate bigotry, there is not perhaps a
greater bigot in the three kingdoms than thou art, so great a proficient art
thou in calling things by wrong names: but thou have been a long while learning
this art, and it must be said, thou art at length a complete master of it, at
least more so than any one else of the human race. What! neighbor John Tailor
of the city of Norwich, a Bigot! the very last man surely that should be
mentioned as being of such a character! does he not recommend himself as the
most catholic man of the age? has he not formed and is he not promoting the
most extensively catholic scheme that was ever invented! and what! after all a
Bigot! what a deceitful, treacherous creature then is man! His writings prove
him so, as any one may see who will read them. Pretenses and reality are quite
different things; facts are stubborn things. Pretensions quite yielding, will
admit of almost any impression; and this accounts for it that bigotry and
prejudice should reign in the mind that pretends to the highest degrees of
Charity, Catholicism and Candor.

Indeed neighbor, I would gladly excuse thee, and think the best of thee I
possibly can; but thou art verily too guilty in this respect and very often, in
the course of thy lucubrations, when thy argument runs sadly low, thy
astonishment, surprise and wonder, thy censure, reproach and ridicule run much
too high: I do not say too high for thy Subject, but too high for thy
pretensions; thy pretensions I mean, to candor, softness and moderation. But
possibly these and suchlike words were the first words that thou did learn to
speak, and as thou had no ideas connected with them in thy infant state, so
thou have forgotten all thy life long to mean any thing by them, or possibly
they are words used by thee, as many other words are both in conversation and
writing, as expletives, and so are designed for sound, or to fill up a
sentence, rather than to convey any sense or meaning: Be this as it will, I
would advise thee for the future, in all thy publications, to put at the
beginning or end of thy performance, an alphabet of all dubious or equivocal
words thou usest; that so thyreader may certainly and infallibly know what thou
meanest by what thou say, for hitherto many, very many of those who read thy
lucubrations are greatly in the dark as to this: in my opinion thou do not
use thy friends well in treating them in this manner: And if I am not
misinformed, some of the most eminent of thy speaking brethren have hinted so
much to thee. It is time for thee to come out of the mist and declare thyself.
And be thou as honest in thy way as we are in ours, so thou will deserve the
respect of all, however they may differ from thee in religious opinions.

There is one thing more I must not forget to hint to thee, and to the men in
thy way. I observe with what peremptoriness ye assert that God is by no means
an arbitrary Being, without declaring what ye mean by arbitrary: now in my
apprehension, and if I know what the word arbitrary does certainly and
infallibly mean, no other being is arbitrary, absolutely so, but God, as it is
held forth and declared in the scriptures: nay, I find a Pagan prince, the
proudest man the sun ever saw asserting so much. And at the end of the days, I
Nebuchadnezzer listed up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned
unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and honored him that
lives for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is
from generation to generation. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed
as nothing: and he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among
the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? Dan. iv. 34, 35. But perhaps thou think this language of his was
the effect of his phrenzy, and therefore wild visionary and enthusiastic, and I
know thou art terribly afraid of Enthusiasm: Well, should this be granted thee,
what will thou say to the words of Jesus Christ: At that time Jesus answered
and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy fight. Mat. xi. 25, 26. To get
over this thou must strain every nerve of thy reasoning powers, thou must twist
and turn about every word, and then put the whole passage into thy theological
mould, and it shall turn our with an impression of thy own forming; exactly
suited to thy scheme however contrary to the genuine design of Christ Jesus.
Yet after all: Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy fight, is all the
reason God will give in a thousand and ten thousand instances, in the kingdoms
of nature, providence and grace: whether thy Reason, and our Light within will
approve thereof or not. Thou know best what end thou have in what thou
do, but if thou really think that the truth of God will more abound through
thy lie, let me tell thee thou art greatly mistaken, for truth needs no
covering, no deceit, no fraud to recommend it. Thou have the more reason to be
open, honest and free, because thy king and country give thee leave to be so.
In some former reigns the case was otherwise, but thou have no temptation now,
to write or speak aenigmatically. We may speak what we will, and thou may
write what thou please without being persecuted for so doing, unless thou
think animadversions on thy Lucubrations, a species of persecution: but this
thou can not think without acknowledging thy self a persecutor. On the whole
then let me advise thee to speak out plainly, and tell the world what benefit
Christianity is of, according to thy scheme, if there is so much truth,
honesty, goodness and sobriety among the heathen, as thou supposest, and that
all things considered they are better than the christian world in general.
Surely if thy suppositions be true, it had been better for the world to have
remained Heathens, and to have continued in their Idolatry and Superstition,
than that Christianity should ever have been introduced, especially as
according to thy notion of things the generality of christians have been the
most wicked, lewd, bloody and treacherous of all mankind. I am ready to
apprehend those lewd, wicked, bloody, treacherous men, if the matter be looked
into closely, were no Christians at all, any more than Judas was a Christian,
or those who are involved in the grand Apostasy. These may indeed make
pretensions to the Name, as a lunatic may to royalty; but no more to do with
the thing than he is heir to a crown: nevertheless they may say it, and repeat
it too as often as thee; we are Christians and only Christians: we are
Christians and only Christians: But ask them, what a man should be in order to
have a Right to that name, and see if the answer will tally with the fact.

Every one knows a Christian should be humble, benevolent, teachable, ready to
submit to the authority of divine revelation; and to credit what God declares,
however superior to human reason, however above man's comprehension. But if
this is what a Christian should be, if this be what every real Christian is, it
is plain beyond all contradiction, that neither thee nor I, nor Any in our way,
have any thing to do with the Christian name. I would therefore advise thee for
the future to lay no claim to it, unless thy design be to s;peak it fair and
smoothly in the ear, while thou art wounding it under the fifth rib, and
striking a dagger into its very vitals: if this be thy design it must be owned
thy path is plain before thee, and thou have made a considerable progress
therein: and was I an absolute enemy to Christianity. I would say, In the name
of Lucifer go on and prosper. But it is almost time for me to draw to a close,
which I shall soon do, after having offered thee a few hints more.

Do not be displeased at my thus addressing thee: if thou art the honest man
thou would have the world believe thee to be, lay aside Esau's raiment, pull
off the goat-skin gloves, do not try to alter the voice, but speak and act as
thou art, be thou whatever thou will. Do not flatter thy friends, and yet I
would have thee be thankful that they have settled so peaceably in their new
place, and in their new seats: a very extraordinary circumstance I do assure
thee, and what has scarce ever happened among the people of thy denomination;
never where such a temple was erected: the greatest quarrels subsisting among
them very often notoriously arising from a thirst after superiority or some
family whim respecting seats, and sitting in their synagogues. Happy art thou,
and happy are thy people in this particular; and it would be a piece of cruelty
not to congratulate ye all, on this account, since it is almost the only thing,
which is like Christianity, which is to be found amongst you.

I say again, my friend do not be angry, I wish better things could be said of
thee, and of others too, but the Truth, and nothing but the Truth will take
place some time, and the sooner the better. If these things are so, or if there
be a tincture of Truth in what I have been briefly hinting, it is time for thee
to think of altering thy course, and either to come among us, or go where thou
most belongest to; but prithee do not attempt to increase the number of Sects,
of which there are too many already in our land; enough indeed to employ one had
he the wisdom of Solomon, and did he live to the age of Methuselah, to judge
and determine what is right and what is wrong, among the numerous and jarring
opinions invented by enterprizing men, the Don Quixots of their respective
ages, from Dr. Simon Magus down to Doctor Ta^alttbob the Author of Great is
Diana at Ephesus.

I am just ready to finish, but only must beg thy patience a little longer, by
asking thee what thou meanest by so unscriptural and therefore, in speaking
concerning God, so irrational a phrase as the supreme father? why will thou
choose to be wise above what is written, when thou professest the written word
to be thy rule and standard: what warrant have thou to call the father supreme,
any more than to call the son so? or do thou choose in direct contempt of
what is commanded, and in opposition thereto, to honor the son less than the
father? I pray thee now, as thou will call thyself a Christian, what has the
Father done for thee and others, which the Son and Spirit have no hand in? what
has the Son done for thee and others which the Father and Holy Ghost have
nothing to do with? or what has the Spirit of God done for thee and others
which ye are no ways indebted to the Father and Son for? and if thou can not
conceive how Father, Son and Spirit are one God, the only living and true God,
the great and only object of religious worship; does it from hence follow that
the written word has not declared that it is so? as well may thou suppose
there is no such thing as the light of the Sun, because when it shines the owl
cannot see to fly. Is thy understanding the measure what deity is, or can be,
or do? so far from it that it is very plain it is not sufficient at all times
to give the true sense and meaning of a passage of the written word. Strange
indeed! that a doctor of divinity should overlook the primary genuine obvious
sense of the text he discourses from: and yet apprehend thou must own that this
is thy case, if thou will compare Micah v. 5. and Ephesians. ii 14. with the text.
Is it not plain as any thing can possibly be that the prophet by peace has a
view to the person of the Messiah, and intends to put them in mind of this:
that this illustrious and truly divine personage would give a glory, an
ornament, a splendour to the second temple, or latter house incomparably
superior to all the magnificence and grandeur of the former house. As to the
truth and propriety of this I leave. But that this is the intention of Haggai
is as evident as the meridian sun. How astonishing then that this should escape
thy penetrating eye: that the streams should engage all thy attention and the
fountain be wholly ever-look'd.

I would advise thee whenever thou publishest again to follow the example of
honest George Whitfield: look back on what thou have written, and own and
acknowledge thy mistakes, be as frank, open and explicit in thy retractions, as
thou have been rash in thy reflections on men much better than thy self. Carry
lower sail, or old and artful as thou art, thou will certainly split against a
rock, and so make a dreadful shipwreck of Faith whatever becomes of thy
conscience. Let modesty, honesty, sincerity be of thy council, and let craft,
design, and guile be banished by thee for ever. But if thou and thy friends are
really determined to keep your selves clear from all principles and tenets
whatsoever, for so you must if you will have no party principles or tenets,
then let me advise thee to lay aside thy pen and write no more: perplex thy
self and distress others no longer, but come into our fold to which thou so
rationally belongest: and where thou may often be in the most pleasing and
rapturous manner, entertained with the most profound silence. In the mean while
farewell and show thy candid, catholic, charitable spirit, by loving and
esteeming

Thy unknown Friend, M. ADAMSON.

POSTSCRIPT. A SHORT DIALOGUE between Mr. TIMOTHY TELL-TRUTH and OBADIAH
FRIENDLY.
Obadiah. PRAY Neighbor Timothy have thou seen the friendly Epistle to
Neighbor John Tailor, in which he is invited to come among us Quakers?


Timothy. I have just been reading it over, and an odd Medley it is; for the
Man is sometimes so low and grovelling, so mean and weak in his Sense and
Sentiments, that one can scarce have Patience to read any further: At other
Times he is so severely satirical, that one cannot help going through with it,
because Partiality itself must confess that the Satyr is as just as it is
poinant.


Obad. Thou say just; but I hope thou do not mean that his Satyr on us
Quakers is as just as on our worthy Friend J. Tailor; for have we ever refused
to be called Christians, or do we disclaim a Right to the Christian Name, as he
seems to insinuate? Surely if we believe in the Christ within, the Light which
has lightened every Man that has come into the World, from Adam the first Man
down to the present Day, we may call our selves Christians, and be deemed so by
others as well as any People whatsoever.


Tim. I will promise you that I will not dispute that Matter with you, yet I
think it is very plain your Friend Adamson regards himself and his Friends as
Deists, and his Neighbor Tailor as little otherwise, and I will freely declare
to you, as you put me on this Conversation, that I have long thought that your
Principles and his equally deistical and popish.


Obad. Prithee now, Friend Timothy, do not call M. Adamson my Friend, he is no
more my Friend than he is thine, for it is very plain he is no Quaker, nor does
he seem to understand either our Scheme or Friend Taylor's.


Tim. Whether he is a Quaker or no I think he has said nothing but what many
Quakers, if they would speak out, and speak honestly, would say too; and, if I
guess right, he knows your Scheme and your Friend Taylor's too, rather better
than you choose he should, if you have any Scheme at all.


Obad. Any Scheme at all, Neighbor! Why what do mean by that? Do
question whether we have any Scheme? Whether Friend Tailor has any Scheme too?
Why thee talk strangely now! Why every body has got some Scheme; even Satan
has his Scheme both of Principles and Conduct; but why do thou question
whether we have any Scheme?


Tim. I will tell you very plainly my Thoughts of this. When the ancient
approved Scheme is cast off, there are such a Multiplicity of others invented,
that the feeble Mind is presently confused among the senseless Jargon; yet
determined at all Events the old one shall not do, for no other Reason but
because it is old, therefore antiquated, unfit for Use; in this Situation the
Man casts in his Mind what is best to be done, and that he may appear somebody,
he consults every Scheme he can happen on; he takes a Piece here and a Piece
there, some of this, some of that, and some of the other; he compounds them
together, and a glorious Mixture he has got; it is neither one thing nor
another, while aiming at every Thing it is nothing; a Compound of every Thing,
yet nothing to any Purpose; a scanty Linsey-woolsey Garment, which will scarce
cover the Nakedness of the Wearer.


Obad. I am sorry, Neighbor Timothy, to hear thee talk at this rate, thou do
not use to be so censorious; and I am afraid, as thou have been reading the
friendly Epistle, thou art somewhat leavened with the same Leaven which runs
through that unintelligible Medley.


Tim. Indeed you are quite mistaken; for I was of the same Mind long before I
saw that; yet I am free to own to you that has abundantly confirmed to me what
I thought before; and I fully believe that you and the new-scheme Men have no
Scheme at all, or such as is just like none.


Obad. New-scheme-men! Pray who or what are they? that thou conectest them and
us together! I have often heard of them and heartily wish I knew what Account
to make of them. As thou have mentioned them, I wish thou would satisfy me
about them.


Tim. Depend on it my good Neighbor, any Thing I can give you Intelligence of,
or acquaint you with, I shall be very ready to do to the utmost of my Power,
and I expect the same from you.


Obad. On this Condition all is well, we are agreed, therefore pray go on.


Tim. You want to know who or what the new Schememen are: As to who, I am not
so well acquainted with the Inhabitants of the Earth as to point out one in a
Thousand: Doubtless your Friend Tailor is one of the chief; at least he would
have it thought that what he has advanced is new: Witness what he says in the
6th Page of one of his Pamphlets, viz. When I first saw these Things I did not
know that any one Person in the World had discovered them beside myself. And
lest any body else in his way should be wiser than himself, if I am not
misinformed, it has been his Advice to young Ministers not to consult the old
Divines, but rather the Moderns. And indeed had he consulted the old Writers,
he must have found those very Things solidly confuted which he has the Vanity
to palm upon the World as quite new: And thus his Ignorance or want of reading
must be his Apology for troubling the World with his Dreams.


Obad. Why Timothy, if thou do not take Care, thou will be as unmannerly and
scurrilous as M. Adamson: Surely thee should consider that our Friend Tailor
in a worthy Citizen, a venerable old Man, and therefore not to be treated with
Contempt.


Tim. I have often heard this remarked, and possibly there may be some Justice
in it; but then I think your Friend Tailor himself has paved the Way for it, in
treating the venerable Assembly of Divines in the manner he has done; so that
he is only served as he has served others by far his Superiors.


Obad. But what are the new Scheme-men there is so much talk about? What are
they doing of? What are they after?


Tim. I believe they don't know themselves, therefore I can give you but a very
imperfect Account of them: I know but of one thing wherein they are all agreed;
and that is, to treat with Contempt and Disgrace the Great Author of the
Christian Religion; to blaspheme the holy Name whereby Christians are called.
The Monthly Reviewers are notorious Instances of this sort. With them, who ever
writes any thing against Jesus Christ, is a most accomplished, accurate Writer,
a Man of very great Sagacity and deep Learning, of incomparable Abilities and
refined Sense, extremely judicious and precisely discerning: While whoever
writes any thing in Honor of the divine Savior, is with them an
enthusiastical Idiot, a stupid, dull Drone, or a pious Fool: Witness their
unparralel'd prejudiced bigoted Accounts of the Writings of the judicious
Messrs. Brine and Wilson; of honest John (...); the (...) Whitfield, Roman
and Jones, and the justly admired Mr. (...) Hervey: And the Writings of that
(...) Soldier (...) R -- d B -- r -- n; that Linsey-woolsey-Weaver Mr. (...) ^
-- g, and the accomplished Orator Mr. Charles B -- (...), and all the
new-Scheme-writers, from your old arch Friend Dr. John Tailor of Norwich, down
to Monsieur Taoalttbob of precious Memory.


Obad. Worse and worse still, Friend Timothy, I cannot bear to hear thee rail
on in this manner, against the greatest Writers of the Age; Men, whose every
Page is filled with Wisdom, Morals, Candor, Virtue and Sense.


Tim. I cannot help that my good Neighbor; if you cannot bear to hear the
Truth, that is no Reason why I should not tell you the Truth, especially when
you asked me.


Obad. Well! If I had thought thee wouldedst have talked in this manner, I am
sure I never had asked thee after these Men or their Scheme.


Tim. And if you had not asked me I had been silent enough about the Matter I
do assure you: But I hate Flattery and always did.


Obad. Flattery! Friend Timothy; it is well known thou art no Flatterer any
more than M. Adamson; but nevertheless ye ought to treat People with Good
manners and not to abuse them; therefore farewell.


Tim. O good bye t'e Neighbor, for I find you cannot bear plain dealing; nor
to have the Truth told you when it touches thy self or any of those you have so
great a Regard for.


Obad. Fare thee well I say, and I wish thee more Candor.


Tim. Stupidity, Ignorance, you mean, only you have learned to call things by
wrong Names.


FINIS.

