THE Great Christian Doctrine OF ORIGINAL SIN defended; Evidences of it is Truth
produced, AND Arguments to the Contrary answered.

Containing, in particular, A Reply to the Objections and Arguings of Dr. JOHN
TAILOR, in his Book, Entitled, The Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin proposed
to free and candid Examination, etc.

By the late Reverend and Learned JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. President of the
College of New Jersey.

MATTHEW. ix. 12. They that be whole, need not a Physician; but they that are
sick.

-- Et haec non tantum ad Peccatores referenda est; quia in omnibus
Maledictionibus primi Hominis, omnes ejus Generationes convenient. --

R. SAL. JARCHI. Propter Concupiscentiam, innatam Cordi humano, dicitur, In
Iniquitate genitus sum; atque Sensus est, quod a Nativitate implantatum sit
Cordi humano Jetzer harang, Figmentum malum. --

ABEN-EZRA. -- Ad Mores Natura recurrit damnatos, fixa et mutari nescia. --
Dociles imitandis turpibus et pravis omnes sumus. --
JUV. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND:

Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite to the ProbateOffice in
Queen Street. 1758.

A brief ACCOUNT of the Book and it is AUTHOR.
AS the Rev. Author of the following Piece has been removed by Death, before
its coming into public View, Custom has made it decent to introduce it with a
prefatory Page.

The Copy he brought to the Press sometime the last Year, and a Number of
Sheets passed his own Review. But a Variety of Incidents retarded finishing the
Work till now. -- It is hoped, no material Mistakes of the Printer have escaped
Correction, besides what are noticed in the Table of Errata.

They that were acquainted with the Author, or know his just Character, and
have any Taste for the serious Theme, will want Nothing to be said in
Recommendation of the ensuing Tract, but only that Mr. EDWARDS wrote it.

Several valuable Pieces on this Subject have lately been published, upon the
same Side of the Question. But he had no Notice of so much as the very first of
them, till he had wholly concluded what he had in View: nor has it been
thought, any Thing already printed should supersede this Work of his; being
designed on a more extensive Plan; comprising a Variety of Arguments, and
Answers to many Objections, that fell not in the Way of the other worthy
Writers; and the Whole done with a Care of familiar Method and Language, as
well as clear Reasoning, in general accommodated very much to common Capacities.

It must be a sensible Pleasure to every Friend of Truth, that so masterly a
Hand undertook a Reply to Dr. TAILOR; notwithstanding the various Answers
already given him, both at home and abroad. -- And should the said Dr. or any
other in his behalf, attempt to vindicate his Book, though our Author being
dead, this his Work will have the Disadvantage of wanting his Pen to defend it,
yet it is not doubted but other sufficient Hands will be found to engage in the
Cause, and support laboring Truth.

As it has been thought unfit, this Posthumous Book should go unattended with a
respectful Memorial of the Author, it is hoped, the Reader will heartily accept
the following Minutes of his Life and Character; chiefly extracted from
Accounts given of him in the public Prints, upon Occasion of his Decease.

Mr. EDWARDS was the only Son of the late Rev. Mr. TIMOTHY EDWARDS, long a
faithful Pastor of a Church in Winsor, in Connecticut; who (together with his
Wife, our Author's pious Mother) was living, in a very advanced Age, till
a-little before the Death of this his excellent Son, who had for many Years
been his Parents Joy and Crown.

He had his Education in YALE COLLEGE. -- At the Age of about Eighteen,
commenced Bachelor of Arts, Anno 1720. -- Afterward resided at College for
some Time, pursuing his Studies with (...) laudable Diligence. -- Took the
Degree of Master, at the usual Time: and for a while served the College in the
Station of a Tutor.

He soon entered into the Ministry, and was settled at Northampton, in
Massachusetts, as Colleague with his aged Grandfather, the Rev. and famous Mr.
SOLOMON STODDARD; with whom, indeed, as a S^n with the Father, he served in the
Gospel, till Death divided them. -- There he continued his Labors for many
Years, in high Esteem at home, as well as abroad; till uncomfortable Debates
arising about a Right to Sacraments, and after his best Attempts finding no
rational Prospect of any safe and speedy Issue of them, he at length amicably
resigned his Pastoral Relation, and had an honorable Quietus, Anno 1750.

Soon after this, there being a Vacancy in the Mission at Stockbridge, by the
Death of the Rev. and learned Mr. JOHN SERGEANT, the Board of Commissioners at
Boston, who act under the Society in London, for propagating the Gospel among
the Indians in and about New England, turned their Eyes to Mr. EDWARDS, for a
Supply of that Mission. And upon their unanimous Invitation, in Concurrence
with the Call of the Church (consisting of Indians and English) at Stockbridge,
he removed thither, and was regularly re-instated in the Pastoral Office.

He continued his Ministry there, until on Occasion of the Death of his worthy
Son-in-law, the Rev. and Learned Mr. AARON BURR, who had succeeded the Rev. and
Learned Mr* JONATHAN DICKINSON (so memorable as an Author) in the Station of
President of the College of NEW JERSEY, he was by the Hon. and Rev. TRUSTEES of
that Society chosen to be his Successor. The Commissioners at Boston having
received a Motion from them for his Translation, did in Deference to the
Judgment of so respectable a Body, as well as from an Esteem for Mr. EDWARDS,
and a View to his more extensive Usefulness, generously consent to his Removal:
and the venerable Council, to whom he finally referred himself for Advice on
this important Occasion, giving their unanimous Opinion for the Clearness of
his Call to the President's Place, he at Length (tho with much Reluctance and
Self-diffidence) relinquished his Pastoral Charge and Ministerial Mission at
Stockbridge, and removed to Prince-Town in New Jersey, where NASSAU-HALL
stands, lately erected.

But that fatal Distemper, the Smallpox, which has in former Days been so much
the Scourge and Terror of AMERICA, breaking out, in or near the College, about
that Time, and Inoculation being favored with great Success, Mr. EDWARDS, upon
mature Thought and Consultation, judged it advisable to go into this Method.
Accordingly he was inoculated on the 23d of February 1758. And tho his Disease
was comparatively light, the Pock of a milder Sort, and few, yet such a Number
happened to be seated in his Throat and Mouth, as prevented his receiving the
necessary cooling and diluting Draughts; and so, upon the Turn of the Pock, a
secondary Fever came on, which prevailed to the putting an END (on March 22d)
to the important Life of this good and great Man. -- As be lived cheerfully
resigned in all Things to the Will of Heaven, so he died, or rather, as the
Scripture emphatically expresses it, in relation to the Saint in Christ Jesus,
he fell asleep, without the least Appearance of Pain, and with great Calm of
Mind. Indeed, when he first perceived the Symptoms upon him to be mortal, he is
said to have been a-little perplexed for a while, about the Meaning of this
mysterious Conduct of Providence, in calling him out from his beloved Privacy,
to a public Scene of Action and Influence; and then so suddenly, just upon his
Entrance into it, translating him from thence, in such a Way, by Mortality!
However, he quickly got believing and composing Views of the Wisdom and
Goodness of God in this surprising Event: and readily yielded to the sovereign
Disposal of Heaven, with the most placid Submission. Amidst the Joy of Faith,
he departed this World, to go and see JESUS, whom his Soul loved; to be with
him, to behold his Glory, and rejoice in his Kingdom above.

But he left a bereaved Family (his beloved and amiable Spouse, with Ten
desirable Children One of them, his pious and lovely Daughter, Mrs. BURR, soon
followed him: only leaving two agreeable Children; for whom there can scarce be
a better or greater Wish, than that they may live, and shine in the Image of
their excellent Parents and Grand-parents.
) and a bereaved young Seminary of Learning, to sit in the Dust, and mourn the
unspeakable, yea, in some obvious Respects, irreparable Loss, of a most
affectionate, wise and faithful Head! And this, in a Season of general
Calamity, and threatening Danger to Church and State. Oh, when a holy God takes
away such righteous Persons, such invaluable Jewels, in repeated Instances and
in quick Succession, from our guilty Land and Nation, and that in the Beginning
of a dark gathering Tempest, big with the Fate of Nations, surely it is an
awful Omen, claiming our serious Attention and Regard. -- May we not justly
lament over this excellent Man, in Language like that of David over his Royal
Father, and his Brother JONATHAN; "Oh, the BEAUTY of Israel is slain"! -- Or,
as he mourned over a brave Warrior, "Know ye not, that a GREAT Man is fallen
this Day in Israel!" Or, 'in the pensive Strains of Elisha, lamenting after
Elijah, that eminent Prophet, and Head of the Schools, as he saw him ascending
from Earth to Heaven; "My Father, my Father, the CHARIOTS of Israel, and the
HORSE MEN thereof!"

Though, by the preceding Account of Mr. EDWARDS, the Reader may form a
general Idea of his Character; yet doubtless a more particular Description will
be expected.

In Person, he was tall of Stature, and of a slender Make. -- There was
something extreme delicate in his Constitution; which always obliged him to the
exactest Observation of the Rules of Temperance, and every Method of cautious
and prudent living. He experienced very signally the Benefit hereof, as by such
Means he was helped to go through incessant Labors, and to bear up under much
Study, which, Solomon observes, is a Weariness to the Flesh. -- Perhaps, never
was a Man more constantly retired from the World; giving himself to Reading,
and Contemplation. And a Wonder it was, that his feeble Frame could subsist
under such Fatigues, daily repeated and so long continued. Yet upon Occasion of
some Remark upon it by a Friend, which was only a few Months before his Death,
he told him, "He did not find but he was then as well able to bear the closest
Study, as he was 30 Years before; and could go through the Exercises of the
Pulpit with as little Weariness or Difficulty." -- In his Youth, he appeared
healthy, and with a good Degree of Vivacity; but was never robust. -- In middle
Life, he appeared very much emaciated (I had almost said, mortified) by severe
Studies, and intense Applications of Thought. -- Hence his Voice was a-little
languid, and too low for a large Assembly; though much relieved and advantaged
by a proper Emphasis, just Cadence, well-placed Pauses, and great Distinctness
in Pronunciation. -- He had a piercing Eye, the truest Index of the Mind. --
His Aspect and Mein had a Mixture of Severity and Pleasancy. He had a natural
Turn for Gravity and Sedateness; ever contemplative; and in Conversation
usually reserved, but always observant of a genuine Decorum, in his Deportment
^ free from sullen, supercilious and contemptuous Airs, and without any
Appearance of Ostentation, Levity, or Vanity. -- As to Imagination, he had
Enough of it for a great and good Man: but the Gaieties of a luxuriant Fancy,
so captivating to many, were what he neither affected himself, nor was much
delighted with in others. -- He had a natural Steadiness of Temper, and
Fortitude of Mind; which, being sanctified by the Spirit of God, was ever of
vast Advantage to him, to carry him through difficult Services, and support him
under trying Afflictions, in the Course of his Life. -- Personal Injuries he
bore with a becoming Meekness and Patience, and a Disposition to Forgiveness.
-- The Humility, Modesty, and Serenity of his Behavior, much endeared him to
his Acquaintance; and made him appear amiable in the Eyes of such as had the
Privilege of conversing with him. -- He was a true and faithful Friend; and
showed much of a disinterested Benevolence to his Neighbor. -- The several
Relations sustained by him, he adorned with an exemplary Conduct; and was
solicitous to fill every Station with its proper Duty. -- He kept up an
extensive Correspondence, with Ministers and others, in various Parts; and his
Letters always contained some significant and valuable Communications. -- In
his private Walk, as a Christian, he appeared an Example of truly rational,
consistent, uniform Religion and Virtue: a shining Instance of the Power and
Efficacy of that holy Faith, which he was so firmly attached to, and so
strenuous a Defender of. He exhibited much of Spirituality, and a heavenly Bent
of Soul. In him one saw the loveliest Appearance, -- a rare Assemblage of
Christian Graces, united with the richest Gifts, and mutually subserving and
recommending one another.

As a Scholar, his intellectual Furniture exceeded what is common, under the
Disadvantages we labor of in this remote Corner of the World. He very early
discovered a Genius, above the ordinary Size: which gradually ripened and
expanded, by daily Exertment and Application. He was remarkable for the
Penetration and Extent of his Understanding, for his Powers of Criticism and
accurate Distinction, Quickness of Thought, Solidity of Judgment, and Force of
Reasoning; which made him an acute and strong Disputant. By Nature he was
formed for a Logician, and a Metaphysician; but by Speculation, Observation,
and Converse, greatly improved. He had a good Insight into the whole Circle of
liberal Arts and Sciences: possessed a very valuable Stock of Classick
Learning, Philosophy, Mathematics, History, Chronology, etc. By the Blessing
of God on his indefatigable Studiousness, to the last, he was constantly
treasuring up useful Knowledge, both human and divine.

Thus he appears uncommonly accomplished for the arduous and momentous
Province, to which he was finally called. And had Heaven indulged us with the
Continuance of his precious Life, we ^^ve Reason to think, he would have graced
his new Station, and been a signal Blessing to the College, and therein
extensively served his Generation, according to the Will of God.

After all, it must be owned, Divinity was his FavoriteStudy; and the Ministry,
his most delightful Employment. Among the Luminaries of the Church, in these
American Regions, he was justly reputed a Star of the first Magnitude.
Thoroughly versed in all the Branches of Theology, didactic, polemic, casuistic,
experimental, and practical. In Point of divine Knowledge and Skill, had few
Equals, and perhaps no Superior, at least in these foreign Parts. On the
maturest Examination of the different Schemes of Principles, obtaining in the
World,and on comparing them with the sacred Scriptures, the Oracles of God, and
the great Standard of Truth, he was a Protestant and a Calvinist in Judgment;
adhering to the main Articles of the Reformed Religion with an unshaken
Firmness, and with a fervent Zeal, but tempered with Charity and Cand^^r, and
governed by Discretion. He seemed as little as most Men under the Bias of
Education, or the Possession of Bigotry. -- As to practical and vital
Christianity, no Man appeared to have a better Acquaintance with its Nature and
Importance; or to understand true Religion, and feel it is Power, more than he:
which made him an excellently fit Guide to inquiring Souls, and qualified him
to guard them against all false Religion. His internal Sense of the Intercourse
between God and Souls, being brought by him to the severe Test of Reason and
Revelation, preserved him, both in Sentiment and Conduct, from the least
Tincture of Enthusiasm. -- The accomplished Divine enters deep into his
Character.

As a Preacher, he was judicious, solid, and instructive. Seldom was he known
to bring Controversy into the Pulpit; or to handle any Subject in the nicer
Modes and Forms of scholastic Dissertation. His Sermons, in general, seemed
exceedingly to vary from his controversial Compositions. In his Preaching,
usually all was plain, familiar, sententious, practical; and very distant from
any Affectation of appearing the great Man, or displaying his extraordinary
Abilities as a Scholar. But still he ever preserved the Character of a skilful
and thorough Divine. The common Themes of his Ministry were the most weighty
and profitable; and in special, the great Truths of the Gospel of Christ, on
which he himself lived by Faith. His Method in preaching was, first to apply to
the Understanding and Judgment, laboring to enlighten and convince them; and
then to persuade the Will, engage the Affections, and excite the active Powers
of the Soul. -- His Language was with Propriety* and Purity, but with a noble
Negligence; nothing ornamented. Florid Diction was not the Beauty he preferred.
His Talents were of a superior Kind. He regarded Thoughts, rather than Words.
Precision of Sentiment and Clearness of Expression are the principal
Characteristicks of his Pulpit-Stile. Neither quick nor slow of Speech, there
was a certain Pathos in his Utterance, and such Skill of Address, as seldom
failed to draw the Attention, warm the Hearts, and stimulate the Consciences of
the Auditory. He studied to show himself approved unto God, a Workman that
needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. -- And he was one
that gave himself to Prayer, as well as to the Ministry of the Word. Agreably
it pleased God to put great Honor upon him, by crowning his Labors with
surprising Successes, in the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of
Saints, to the Advancement of the Kingdom and Glory of God our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Mr. EDWARDS distinguished himself as a Writer, especially in Controversy,
which he was called to on a Variety of Occasions. Here the Superiority of his
Genius eminently appeared. He knew to arrange his Ideas in an exact Method: and
close Application of Mind, with the uncommon Strength of his intellectual
Powers, enabled him in a Manner to exhaust every Subject he took under
Consideration. He diligently employed the latter Part of his Life in defending
Christianity, both in its doctrinal and practical Views, against the Errors of
the Times. Besides his excellent Writings in Behalf of the Power of Godliness,
which some Years ago happily prevailed in many Parts of the British America; he
also made a noble Stand against Enthusiasm and false Religion, when it
threatened to spread, by his incomparable Treatise upon religious Affections.
And more lately in Opposition to Pelagian, Arminian, and other false
Principles, he published a very elaborate Treatise upon the Liberty of the
human Will. A Volume, that has procured him the Elogy of eminent Divines
abroad. Several Professors of Divinity in the Dutch Universities very lately
sent him their Thanks, for the Assistance he had given them in their Inquiry
into some controverted Points; having carried his own further than any Author
they had ever seen. -- And now this Volume of his, on the great Christian
Doctrine of Original Sin, is presented to public View. Which, tho studiously
adapted to lower Capacities, yet carries in it the evident Traces of his great
Genius, and seems with superior Force of Argument to have entirely baffled the
Opponent.

Besides numerous other fair Manuscripts, he has a Volume on the NATURE of
VIRTUE; which he designed should follow the present one into the public Light.
It is hoped, that we shall yet see it; and that they who have the Care of his
Papers, will consult the common Benefit, by publishing more of the valuable
Remains of this great Man: by which, he being dead, may still speak, for the
Instruction of Survivors.

His Writings will perpetuate his Memory, and make his Name blossom in the
Dust. And the Blessing of Heaven attending the Perusal of them, will make them
effectually conducive to the Glory of God, and the Good of Souls; which will
brighten the Author's Crown, and add to his Joy, in the Day of future
Retribution.

In fine, the candid Reader will excuse the Imperfections in this Sketch of a
Character and Account of the deceased Man of God. It is hoped, some good Hand
will give us the Memoirs of his LIFE at large, and do greater Justice to his
Merits.

Some Lines in Verse, published on Occasion of his Death, deserve a Place here.

Great EDWARDS dead! how doleful is the Sound?
How vast the Stroke! how piercing is the Wound?
Heaven now impatient of our numerous Crimes,
Scourges the bold Rebellion of the Times:
The fatal Messenger, commissioned first
To bring the learned and pious BURR to Dust,
Scarce gave us Leave to dry our weeping Eyes,
And bid the Dawn of glimmering Hopes arise,
When lo! with dreadful Aim and pointed Dart,
The Arrow flies, and pierces EDWARDS' Heart.
Oh painful Stroke! distressing Hand of Death!
No vulgar Mortal then resigned his Breath;
Nor can the Muse in deepest Numbers tell,
"How Zion trembled, when this Pillar fell.
"Sure Nature's self, with all her ample Store,
"Can furnish such a Pomp for Death no more!
The Author's PREFACE.
THE following Discourse is intended, not merely as an Answer to any particular
Book written against the Doctrine of original Sin, but as a general Defense of
that great important Doctrine. Nevertheless, I have in this Defense taken
Notice of the main Things said against this Doctrine, by such of the more noted
Opposers of it, as I have had Opportunity to read; particularly those two late
Writers, Dr. TURNBULL, and Dr. TAILOR of Norwich; but especially the latter, in
what he has published in those two Books of his, the first entitled, The
Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin proposed to free and candid Examination; The
other, his Key to the Apostolic Writings, with a Paraphrase and Notes on the
Epistle to the Romans. According to my Observation, no one Book has done so
much toward rooting out of these Western Parts of New England, the Principles
and Scheme of Religion maintained by our pious and excellent Forefathers, the
Divines and Christians who first settled this Country, and alienating the Minds
of many from what I think are evidently some of the main Doctrines of the
Gospel, as that which Dr. TAILOR has published against the Doctrine of Original
Sin. This Book has now for many Years been spread abroad in the Land, without
any Answer to it, as an Antidote; and so has gone on to prevail with little
Control. I have indeed heard, that an Answer to it has been published by Dr.
JENNINGS of London: but never saw it, nor heard of its being in these American
Parts: So that, however sufficient it may be, it has been of no Service to that
Purpose here. And in as much as about fifteen Years (if I mistake not) have
elapsed, since Dr. TAYLOR'S Piece has been in the Hands of some, there is
manifest Need of some other Antidote, for the sake of such as dwell in this
Part of the World. The providing one is what I have attempted in the following
Work; wherein I have closely attended to that Piece, in all it is Parts, and
have endeavored that no one Thing there said, of any Consequence in this
Controversy, should pass unnoticed, or that any Thing which has the Appearance
of an Argument, in Opposition to this Doctrine, should be left unanswered. I
look on the Doctrine as of great Importance; which every Body will doubtless
own it is, if it be true. For, if the Case be such indeed, that all Mankind are
by Nature in a State of total Ruin, both with respect to the moral Evil they
are the Subjects of, and the afflictive Evil they are exposed to, the one as
the Consequence and Punishment of the other, then doubtless the great Salvation
by CHRIST stands in direct Relation to this Ruin, as the Remedy to the Disease;
and the whole Gospel, or Doctrine of Salvation, must suppose it; and all real
Belief, or true Notion of that Gospel, must be built upon it. Therefore, as I
think the Doctrine is most certainly both true and important, I hope, my
attempting a Vindication of it, will be heartily interpreted; and that what I
have done toward it is Defense, will be impartially considered, by all that
will give themselves the Trouble to read the ensuing Discourse.

N. B. I had finished my Defense of the Doctrine of Original Sin, and prepared
the Copy (as here you have it) for the Press, and had wrote the preceding Part
of this Preface, before I had received the least Intimation of any Thing
written or intended to be written by the Rev. Mr. NILES, in Answer to Dr.
TAILOR. -- But having heard, that his Answer is chiefly confined to two Parts
of Dr. TAYLOR'S Scripture-Doctrine, -- without so particularly replying to the
third Part of that Book, or the large Supplement; and it being the Design of
the following Discourse to examine every Thing material throughout the whole
Book, and many Things in that other Book of Dr. T -- r's, containing his Key
and Exposition on Romans; as also many Things written in Opposition to this
Doctrine by some other modern Authors; and moreover, my Discourse being not
only intended for an Answer to Dr. TAILOR, and other Opposers of the Doctrine
of Original Sin, but (as was observed above) for a general Defense of that
Doctrine; producing the Evidence of the Truth of the Doctrine, as well as
answering Objections made against it: -- considering these Things, I say, I
hope this Attempt of mine will not be thought needless, nor be altogether
useless. And possibly, even in those Parts, where the same Subjects and
Arguments are handled by us both, the two Books may receive Light from each
other, and may confirm one another; and so the common Design be the better
subserved.

I would also hope, that the Extensiveness of the Plan of the following
Treatise will excuse the Length of it. And that when it is considered, how much
was absolutely requisite to the full executing of a Design formed on such a
Plan; how much has been written against the Doctrine of Original Sin, and with
what Plausibility; and how strong the Prejudices of many are in Favor of what
is said in Opposition to this Doctrine; and that it cannot be expected, any
Thing short of a full Consideration of almost every Argument advanced by the
main Opposers, especially by this late and specious Writer, Dr. TAILOR, will
satisfy many Readers; and also, how much must unavoidably be said in Order to a
full handling of the Arguments in Defense of the Doctrine; and how important
the Doctrine must be, if true; I say, when such Circumstances as these are
considered, I trust, the Length of the following Discourse will not be thought
to exceed what the Case really required. However, this must be left to the
Judgment of the intelligent and candid Reader.

Stockbridge, May 26. 1757.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHen the Page is referred to in this Manner [ P. 40. P. 50] without mentioning
the Book, thereby is to be understood such a Page in Dr. TAYLOR'S
Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin. When the Word, Key, is used to signify the
Book referred to, thereby is to be understood Dr. Taylor's KEY to the Apostolic
Writings. This Mark [] with Figures or a Number annexed, signifies such a
Section or Paragraph in his Key. -- The Letter T. alone, is used to signify Dr.
TAYLOR'S Name, and no other. -- The Edition of Dr. T -- r's Scripture-Doctrine
etc. which I possess and have made Use of, is the THIRD Edition, printed at
Belfast* containing 452 Pages. The Impression of the other Book, namely the Key
and Exposition on Romans, which I have used, is that of Dublin; containing 460
Pages.

The CONTENTS.
PART I. WHerein are considered some Evidences of original Sin from Facts and
Events, as found by Observation and Experience: together with Representations
and Testimonies of holy Scripture, and the Confession and Assertions of
Opposers. CHAP. I. The Evidence of Original Sin from what appears in Fact of
the Sinfulness of Mankind. SECT. I. All Mankind do constantly, in all Ages,
without Fail in any one Instance, run into that moral Evil, which is in Effect
their own utter and eternal Perdition, in a total Privation of God's Favor,
and suffering of his Vengeance and Wrath. Page 1, -- 17. SECT. II. It follows
from the Proposition proved in the foregoing Section, that all Mankind are
under the Influence of a prevailing effectual Tendency in their Nature, to that
Sin and Wickedness, which implies their utter and eternal Ruin. Page 17, -- 26.
SECT. III. That Propensity, which has been proved to be in the Nature of all
Mankind, must be a very evil, depraved, and pernicious Propensity; making it
manifest, that the Soul of Man, as it is by Nature, is in a corrupt, fallen and
ruined State: Which is the other Part of the Consequence, drawn from the
Proposition laid down in the first Section. Page 27, -- 33. SECT. IV. The
Depravity of Nature appears by a Propensity in all, to sin immediately, as soon
as they are capable of it, and to sin continually and progressively; and also
by the Remains of Sin in the best of Men. Page 33, -- 3^. SECT. V. The
Depravity of Nature appears, in that the general Consequence of the State and
Tendency of Man's Nature is a much greater Degree of Sin, than Righteousness;
not only with Respect to Value and Demerit, but likewise Matter and Quantity.
Page 39, -- 49. SECT. VI. The Corruption of Man's Nature appears by it is
Tendency, in it is present State, to an extreme Degree of Folly and Stupidity in
Matters of Religion. Page 49, -- 62. SECT. VII. That Man's Nature is corrupt,
appears, in that vastly the greater Part of Mankind, in all Ages, have been
wicked Men. Page 62, -- 76. SECT. VIII. The native Depravity of Mankind
appears, in that there has been so little good Effect of so manifold and great
Means used to promote Virtue in the World. Page 76, -- 100. SECT. IX. Several
Evasions of the Arguments for Depravity of Nature, from Trial and Events,
considered. Evasion I. Adam's Nature, and the Nature of the Angels that fell,
was not sinful, yet they sinned: and all Mankind may, without a sinful Nature,
sin as well as they. Page 100, -- 106. Evasion II. Man's own Free Will is a
Cause sufficient to account for the general Wickedness of the World. Page 106,
-- 108. Evasion III. The Corruption of the World, may be owing, not to a
depraved Nature, but to bad Example. Page 108, -- 115. Evasion IV. The general
Prevalence of Wickedness may without supposing a corrupt Nature, be accounted
for by our Senses being first in Exercise, and our animal Passions getting the
Start of Reason. Page 115, -- 118. Evasion V. Men in this World are in a State
of Trial; it is therefore fit, that their Virtue should be tried by Opposition,
both from without and from within. Page 118, -- 121.

CHAP. II. Universal Mortality proves original Sin; particularly the Death of
Infants, with its various Circumstances. Page 121, -- 138.
PART II. Containing Observations on particular Parts of the holy Scriptur^s,
which prove the Doctrine of original Sin. Page 139. CHAP. I. Observations
relating to Things contained in the three first Chapters of GENESIS, with
Reference to the Doctrine of Original Sin. SECT. I. Concerning original
Righteousness; and whether our first Parents were created with Righteousness or
moral Rectitude of Heart? Page 139, -- 155. SECT. II. Concerning the Kind of
Death, threatened to our first Parents, in Case they should eat of the forbidden
Fruit. Page 155, -- 164. SECT. III. Wherein it is enquired, whether there be
any thing in the History in the three first Chapters of Genesis, which should
lead us to suppose, that God, in his Constitution with ADAM, dealt with Mankind
in general, as included in their first Father; and that the Threatening of
Death, in Case he should eat the forbidden Fruit, had Respect, not only to him,
but to his Posterity? Page 164, -- 184.
CHAP. II. Observations on other Parts of the holy Scriptures, chiefly in the
Old Testament, that prove original Sin. Page 185, -- 199. CHAP. III.
Observations on various other Places of Scripture, principally in the
New Testament, proving the Doctrine of Original Sin. SECT. I. Observations on
Job. iii. 6. in Connection with some other Passages in the New Testament;
showing all to be Flesh, by natural Birth. Page 199, -- 209. SECT. II.
Observations on Romans iii. 9, -- 24. showing, that All in their first State are
Wicked. Page 209, -- 220. SECT. III. Observations on Romans v. 6, -- 10. Ephesians. ii.
3. with the Context; and Romans vii. confirming it, that All in their first State
are Wicked. Page 220, -- 237.
CHAP. IV. Containing Observations on Romans v. 12, to the End. SECT. I. Remarks
on Dr. T -- r's Way of explaining this Paragraph. Page 238, -- 271. SECT. II.
Observations, showing the true Connection, Scope and Sense of this remarkable
Paragraph; with some Reflections on the Evidence, which we here have, of the
Doctrine of original Sin. Page 271, -- 289.

PART III. Observing the Evidence given us, relative to the Doctrine of
Original Sin, in what the Scriptures reveal concerning the Redemption by
CHRIST. Page 289. CHAP. I. The Evidence of Original Sin from the Nature of
Redemption, in the Procurement of it; which is superseded by Dr. T mdash;r's
Scheme. Page 289, -- 298. CHAP. II. The Evidence of the Doctrine of Original
Sin from what the Scripture teaches concerning the Application of Redemption.
Page 298, -- 311.
PART IV. Containing Answers to OBJECTIONS. Page 311. CHAP. I. Concerning that
Objection, That to suppose Men to be BORN in Sin, without their Choice; ^r any
previous Act of their own, is to suppose what is inconsistent with the Nature
of SIN. And Reflections showing the Inconsistence of Dr. T -- r's Arguings from
this Topic. Page 311, -- 316. CHAP. II. Concerning that Objection against the
Doctrine of native Corruption, That to suppose, Men receive their first
Existence in Sin, is to make Him who is the Author of their Being, also the
Author of their Depravity. Page 316, -- 326. CHAP. III. That great Objection
against the Imputation of Adam's Sin to his Posterity considered, That such
Imputation is unjust and unreasonable, in as much as Adam and his Posterity are
not One and the same. With a brief Reflection subjoined, on what some have
supposed, of God's imputing the Guilt of Adam's Sin to his Posterity, but in an
infinitely less Degree, than to Adam himself. Page 326 -- 355. CHAP. IV.
Wherein several other Objections are considered. -- Viz. That at the
Restoration of the World after the Flood, God pronounced equivalent, or greater
Blessings on NOAH and his Sons, than he did on Adam at his Creation. Page 356,
-- 359. That the Doctrine of Original Sin disparages the divine Goodness in
giving us our Being, and leaves us no Reason to thank God for it, as a Gift of
his Beneficence. Page 359, -- 363. That at the Day of Judgment, the Judge will
deal with every Man singly and separately, rendering to every Man according to
his own Works, and his Improvement of personal Talents. Page 363, -- 365. That
the Word, Impute, is never used in Scripture, but with Respect to Men's own
personal Acts. Page 365, -- 367. That little Children are proposed as Patterns
of Humility, Meekness, and Innocence. Page 368. That the Doctrine of Original
Sin pours Contempt upon the human Nature. Page 369. That it tends to beget in
us an ill Opinion of our Fellow Creatures, and to promote Ill Will and mutual
Hatred. Page 369. That it hinders our Comfort, and promotes Gloominess of Mind.
Page 370. That it tends to encourage Men in Sin, and leads to all Manner of
Iniquity. P. 371. That if this Doctrine be true, it must be unlawful to beget
Children. Page 371, 372. That it is strange, this Doctrine should be no oftener,
and not more plainly, spoken of in Scripture; it being, if true, a very
important Doctrine. Page 373, 374. That Christ says not one Word of this
Doctrine throughout the four Gospels. Page 374, -- 382.
The CONCLUSION. Containing some brief Observations on certain artful Methods,
used by Writers who are Adversaries of this Doctrine, in order to prejudice
their Readers against it. Page 382, etc.
The great Christian Doctrine of ORIGINAL SIN defended.
PART I.
Wherein are considered some Evidences of Original Sin from Facts and Events,
as found by Observation and Experience, together with Representations and
Testimonies of holy Scripture, and the Confession and Assertions of Opposers.
CHAP. I.
The Evidence of Original Sin from what appears in Fact of the Sinfulness of
Mankind.
SECT. I.
All Mankind do constantly in all Ages, without Fail in any one Instance, run
into that moral Evil, which is in Effect their own utter and eternal Perdition,
in a total Privation of GOD's Favor, and suffering of his Vengeance and Wrath.
BY Original Sin, as the Phrase has been most commonly used by Divines, is
meant the innate sinful Depravity of the Heart. But yet when the Doctrine of
original Sin is spoken of, it is vulgarly understood in that Latitude, as to
include not only the Depravity of Nature, but the Imputation of Adam's first
Sin; or in other Words, the Liableness or Exposedness of Adam's Posterity, in
the divine Judgment, to partake of the Punishment of that Sin. So far as I
know, most of those who have held one of these, have maintained the other; and
most of those who have opposed one have opposed the other: both are opposed by
the Author chiefly attended to in the following Discourse in his Book against
original Sin: And it may perhaps appear in our future Consideration of the
Subject; that they are closely connected, and that the Arguments which prove
the one establish the other, and that these are no more Difficulties attending
the allowing of one than the other.

I shall in the first Place consider this Doctrine more especially with regard
to the Corruption of Nature: and as we treat of this, the other will naturally
come into Consideration, in the Prosecution of the Discourse, as connected with
it.

As all moral Qualities, all Principles either of Virtue or Vice lie in the
Disposition of the Heart, I shall consider whether we have any Evidence, that
the Heart of Man is naturally of a corrupt and evil Disposition. This is
strenuously denied by many late Writers, who are Enemies to the Doctrine of
original Sin; and particularly by Dr. Tailor.

The Way we come by the Idea of any such Thing as Disposition or Tendency, is
by observing what is constant or general in Event; especially under a great
Variety of Circumstances; and above all, when the Effect or Event continues the
same through great and various Opposition, much and manifold Force and Means used
to the contrary not prevailing to hinder the Effect. -- I don't know that such
a Prevalence of Effects is denied to be an Evidence of prevailing Tendency in
Causes and Agents; or that it is expressly denied by the Opposers of the
Doctrine of original Sin, that if, in the Course of Events, it universally or
generally proves that Mankind are actually corrupt, this would be an Evidence
of a prior corrupt Propensity in the World of Mankind; whatever may be said by
some, which, if taken with it is plain Consequences, may seem to imply a Denial
of this; which may be considered afterward. -- But by many the Fact is denied
^ That is, it is denied, that Corruption and moral Evil is commonly prevalent
in the World. On the contrary, it is insisted on, that Good pr^ponderates, and
that Virtue has the Ascendant.

To this Purpose Dr. Turnbull says, Moral P^il* P* 289, 290.
With regard to the Prevalence of Vice in the World, Men are apt to let their
Imagination run out upon all the Robberies, Pyracies, Murders, Perjuries,
Frauds, Massacres, Assassinations they have either heard of, or read in
History; thence concluding all Mankind to be very Wicked. As if a Court of
Justice were a proper Place to make an Estimate of the Morals of Mankind, or an
Hospital of the Healthfulness of a Climate. But ought they not to consider,
that the Number of honest Citizens and Farmers far surpasses that of all Sorts
of Criminals in any State, and that the innocent and kind Actions of even
Criminals themselves surpass their Crimes in Numbers; that it is the Rarity of
Crimes, in Comparison of innocent or good Actions, which engages our Attention
to them, and makes them to be recorded in History, while honest, generous
domestic Actions are overlooked, only because they are so common? As one great
Danger, or one Month's Sickness shall become a frequently repeated Story during
a long Life of Health and Safety. -- Let not the Vices of Mankind be multiplied
or magnified. Let us make a fair Estimate of human Life, and set over against
the shocking, the astonishing Instances of Barbarity and Wickedness that have
been perpetrated in any Age, not only the exceeding generous and brave Actions
with which History shines, but the prevailing Innocence. Goodnature, Industry,
Felicity and Cheerfulness of the greater Part of Mankind at all Times; and we
shall not find Reason to cry out, as Objectors against Providence do on this
Occasion, that all Men are vastly corrupt, and that there is hardly any such
Thing as Virtue in the World. Upon a fair Computation, the Fact does indeed
come out, that very great Villainies have been very uncommon in all Ages, and
looked upon as monstrous; so general is the Sense and Esteem of Virtue. -- It
seems to be with a like View that Dr. T. says, We must not take the Measure of
our Health and Enjoyments from a Lazar-House, nor of our Understanding from
Bedlam, nor of our Morals from a Goal, (P. 353.)

With respect to the Propriety and Pertinence of such a Representation of
Things, and its Force as to the Consequence designed, I hope we shall be better
able to judge, and in some Measure to determine whether the natural Disposition
of the Hearts of Mankind be corrupt or not, when the Things which follow have
been considered.

But for the greater Clearness, it may be proper here to premise one
Consideration, that is of great Importance in this Controversy, and is very
much overlooked by the Opposers of the Doctrine of original Sin in their
disputing against it; which is this --

That is to be looked upon as the true Tendency of the natural or innate
Disposition of Man's Heart, which appears to be it is Tendency when we consider
Things as they are in themselves, or in their own Nature, without the
Interposition of divine Grace. Thus, that State of Man's Nature, that
Disposition of the Mind, is to be looked upon as evil and pernicious, which, as
it is in it self, tends to extremely pernicious Consequences. and would
certainly end therein, were it not that the free Mercy and Kindness of God
interposes to prevent that Issue. It would be very strange if any should argue
that there is no evil Tendency in the Case, because the mere Favor and
Compassion of the most High may step in and oppose the Tendency, and prevent
the sad Effect-tended to. Particularly, if there be any Thing in the Nature of
Man, whereby he has an universal, unfailing Tend^ncy to that moral Evil, which
according to the real Nature and true Demerit of Things, as they are in
themselves, implies his utter Ruin, That must be looked upon as an evil
Tendency or Propensity; however divine Grace may interpose, to save him from
deserved Ruin, and to overruled Things to an Issue contrary to that which they
tend to of themselves. Grace is a sovereign Thing, exercised according to the
good Pleasure of God, bringing Good out of Evil; The Effect of it belongs not
to the Nature of Things themselves, that otherwise have an ill Tendency, any
more than the Remedy belongs to the Disease; but is something altogether
independent on it, introduced to oppose the natural Tendency, and reverse the
Course of Things. But the Event that Things tend to, according to their own
Demerit, and according to divine Justice, That is the Event which they tend to
in their own Nature; as Dr. T -- r's own Words fully imply ( Pref. to Par. on
Romans p. 187.) God alone (says he) can declare whether he will pardon on punish
the Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Mankind, which is in IT IS OWN NATURE
punishable. Nothing is more precisely according to the Truth of Things, than
divine Justice: It weighs Things in an even Balance; it views and estimates
Things no otherwise than they are truly in their own Nature. Therefore
undoubtedly that which implies a Tendency to Ruin according to the Estimate of
divine Justice, does indeed imply such a Tendency in it is own Nature.

And then it must be remembered, that it is a moral Depravity we are speaking
of; and therefore when we are considering whether such Depravity don't appear
by a Tendency to a bad Effect or Issue, it is a moral Tendency to such an Issue,
that is what is to be taken into the Account. A moral Tendency or Influence is
by Desert. Then may it be said, Man ^ Nature or State is attended with a
pernicious or destructive Tendency, in a moral Sense, when it tends to that
which deserves Misery and Destruction. And therefore it equally shows the moral
Depravity of the Nature of Mankind in their present State, whether that Nature
be universally attended with an effectual Tendency to destructive Vengeance
actually executed, or to their deserving Misery and Ruin, or their just
Exposedness to Destruction, however that fatal Consequence may be prevented by
Grace, or whatever the actual Event be.

One Thing more is to be observed here, viz. That the Topic mainly insisted on
by the Opposers of the Doctrine of Original Sin, is the Justice of God; both in
their Objections against the Imputation of Adam's Sin, and also against it is
being so ordered that Men should come into the World with a corrupt and ruined
Nature, without having merited the Displeasure of their Creator by any personal
Fault. But the latter is not repugnant to God's Justice, if Men can be, and
actually are, born into the World with a Tendency to Sin, and to Misery and
Ruin for their Sin, which actually will be the Consequence, unless mere Grace
steps in and prevents it. If this be allowed, the Argument from Justice is
given up: For it is to suppose that their Liableness to Misery and Ruin comes
in a Way of Justice; otherwise there would be no Need of the Interposition of
divine Grace to save 'em; Justice alone would be sufficient Security, if
exercised, without Grace. It Is all one in this Dispute about what is just and
righteous, whether Men are born in a miserable State, by a Tendency to Ruin,
which actually follows, and that justly; or whether they are born in such a
State as tends to a Desert of Ruin, which might justly follow, and would
actually follow, did not Grace prevent. For the Controversy is not, what Grace
will do, but what Justice might do.

I have been the more particular on this Head, because it enervates many of the
Reasonings and Conclusions by which Dr. T. makes out his Scheme; in which, he
argues from that State which Mankind are in by divine Grace, yea, which he
himself supposes to be by divine Grace; and yet not making any Allowance for
this, he from hence draws Conclusions against what others suppose of the
deplorable and ruined State, Mankind are in by the Fall. He often speaks of
Death and Affliction as coming on Adam's Posterity in Consequence of his Sin;
and in P. 20,21. and many other Places, he supposes that these Things come in
Consequence of his Sin, not as a Punishment or a Calamity, but as a Benefit:
But in P. 23. He supposes, these Things would be a great Calamity and Misery,
if it were not for the Resurrection; which Resurrection he there, and in the
following Pages, and many other Places, speaks of as being by Christ; and often
speaks of it as being by the Grace of God in Christ.

P. 63, 64. speaking of our being subjected to Sorrow, Labor and Death, in
Consequence of Adam's Sin; He represents these as Evils that are reversed, and
turned into Advantages, and that we are delivered from through Grace in Christ.
And in P. 65, 66, 67. He speaks of God's thus turning Death into an Advantage
through Grace in Christ, as what vindicates the Justice of God in bringing
Death by Adam.

P. 152, 156. It Is one Thing which he alleges against this Proposition of the
Assembly of Divines, That we are by Nature Bondslaves to Satan; That God has
been providing, from the Beginning of the World to this Day, various Means and
Dispensations, to preserve and rescue Mankind from the Devil.

P. 168, 169, 170. One Thing alleged, in Answer to that Objection against his
Doctrine, That we are in worse Circumstances than Adam, is the Happy
Circumstances we are under by the Provision and Means furnished, through free
Grace in Christ.

P. 228. Among other Things which he says, in answering that Argument against
his Doctrine, and bro't to show Men have Corruption by Nature, viz. That there
is a Law in our Members, -- bringing us into Captivity to the Law of Sin and
Death, spoken of Romans vii. He allows that the Case of those who are under a Law
threatening Death for every Sin (which Law he elsewhere says, shows us the
natural and proper Demerit of Sin, and is perfectly consonant to everlasting
Truth and Righteousness) must be quite deplorable, if they have no Relief from
the Mercy of the Lawgiver.

P. 367, -- 370. In Opposition to what is supposed of the miserable State
Mankind are brought into by Adam's Sin, one Thing he alleges, is, The noble
Designs of Love, manif^sted by advancing a new and happy Dispensation, founded
on the Obedience and Righteousness of the Son of God; and that although by Adam
we are subjected to Death, yet in this Dispensation a Resurrection is provided;
And that Adam's Posterity are under a mild Dispensation of Grace etc.

P, 388, 389. He vindicates God's Dealings with Adam, in placing him at first
under the Rigor of Law, Transgress and die (which, as he expresses it, was
putting his Happiness on a Feet extremely dangerous) by saying, that as God had
before determined in his own Breast, so he immediately established his C^ven^nt
upon a quite different-Bottom, namely, upon Grace.

P. 398, 399. against what R. R. says, That God forsook Man when he fell, and
that Mankind after Adams's Sin were born without the divine Favor etc. He
alleges among other Things, Christ's coming to be the Propitiation of the Sins
of the whole World -- And the Riches of God's Mercy in giving the Promise of a
Redeemer to destroy the Works of the Devil, -- that He caught his sunning
falling Creatures in the Arms of his Grace*


Some of his Arguments and Conclusions to this Effect, in order to be made
good, must depend on such a Supposition as this; That God's Dispensations of
Grace are Rectifications or Amendments of his foregoing Constitutions and
Proceedings, which were merely legal; as though the Dispensations of Grace, which
succeed those of mere Law, implied an Acknowledgement, that the preceding
Legal Constitution would be unjust, if left as it was, or at least very hard
Dealing with Mankind; and that the other were of the Nature of a Satisfaction
to his Creatures, for former Injuries, or hard Treatment: so that put together,
the Injury with the Satisfaction, the legal and injurious Dispensation taken
with the following good Dispensation, which our Author calls Grace, and the
Unfairness or improper Severity of the former amended by the Goodness of the
latter, both together made up one Righteous Dispensation.

The Reader is desired to bear this in Mind, which I have said concerning the
Interposition of divine Grace, it is not altering the Nature of Things, as they
are in themselves; and accordingly, when I speak of such and such an evil
Tendency of Things, belonging to the present Nature and State of Mankind,
understand Me to mean their Tendency as they are in themselves, abstracted from
any Consideration of that Remedy the sovereign and infinite Grace of God has
provided.

Having premised these Things, I now proceed to say,

That Mankind are all naturally in such a State, as is attended, without Fail,
with this Consequence or Issue; that they universally run themselves into that
which is, in Effect, their own utter eternal Perdition, as being finally
accursed of God, and the Subjects of his remediless Wrath, through Sin.

From which I infer, that the natural State of the Mind of Man is attended with
a Propensity of Nature, which is prevalent and effectual, to such an Issue; and
that therefore their Nature is corrupt and depraved with a moral Depravity,
that amounts to and implies their utter undoing.

Here I would first consider the Truth of the Proposition; and then would show
the Certainty of the Consequences which I infer from it. If both can be clearly
and certainly proved, then I trust, none will deny but that the Doctrine of
original Depravity is evident, and so the Falseness of Dr. T -- r's Scheme
demonstrated; the greatest Part of whose Book, that he calls the Scripture
Doctrine of Original Sin etc. is against the Doctrine of innate Depravity. In
P. 383. He speaks of the Conveyance of a corrupt and sinful Nature to Adam's
Posterity as the grand Point to be proved by the Maintainers of the Doctrine of
original Sin.

In order to demonstrate what is asserted in the Proposition laid down, there
is Need only that these two Things should be made manifest: One is this Fact,
that all Mankind come into the World in such a State, as without fail comes to
this Issue, namely, the universal Commission of Sin; or that every One who
comes to act in the World as a moral Agent, is, in a greater or lesser Degree,
guilty of Sin. The Other is, that all Sin deserves and exposes (...) utter and
eternal Destruction, under God's Wrath and Curse; and would end in it, were it
not for the Interposition of divine Grace to prevent the Effect. Both which can
be abundantly demonstrated to be agre^^ble to the Word of God, and to Dr. T --
r's own Doctrine. In his Note on Romans v.20. P.379. He says as follows? The Law,
I conceive, is not a Dispensation suitable to the Infirmity of the human Nature
in our present State; Or it does not seem congruous to the Goodness of God, to
afford us no other Way of Salvation but by Law, which if we once transgress we
are ruined for ever. For who then from the Beginning of the World could be
saved? And therefore it seems to me, that the Law was not absolutely intended
to be a Rule for obtaining Life, even to Adam in Paradise: Grace was the
Dispensation God intended Mankind should be under: And therefore Christ was
foreordained before the Foundation of the World. There are various other
Passages in this Author's Writings, of the like Kind.


That every one of Mankind, at least of them that are capable of acting as
moral Agents, are guilty of Sin (not now taking it for granted that they come
guilty into the World) is a Thing most clearly and abundantly evident from the
holy Scriptures; 1 Kings viii. 46. If any Man sin against thee, for there is no
Man that sins not. Eccl. vii. 20. There is not a just Man upon Earth that
does Good, and sins not. Job* ix.2,3. I know it is so of a Truth, (i. e as
Bildad had just before said, That God would not ^ast away a perfect Man etc.)
but how should Man be just with God? If he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a Thousand. To the like Purpose, Psalm. cxliii. 2. Enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant; for in thy Sight shall no Man living be
justified. So the Words of the Apostle (in which he has apparent Reference to
those Words of the Psalmist) Romans iii. 19, 20. That every Mouth may be stopped,
and all the World become guilty before God. Therefore by the Deeds of the Law
there shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight: for by the Law is the Knowledge
of Sin. So Gal. ii. 16. 1 John i. 7, -- 10. If we walk in the Light, the Blood
of Christ cleanses us from all Sin. If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive
our selves, and the Truth is not in us. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. If
we say that we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in us.
As in this Place, so in innumerable other Places, Confession and Repentance of
Sin are spoken of as Duties proper for all; as also Prayer to God for Pardon of
Sin; and Forgiveness of those that injure us, from that Motive, that we hope to
be forgiven of God. Universal Guilt of Sin might also be demonstrated from the
Appointment, and the declared. Use and End of the ancient Sacrifices; and also
from the Ransom, which every one that was numbered in Israel, was directed to
pay, to make Ato^^ment for his Soul, Exodus xxx. 11 -- 16. All are represented,
not only as being sinful, but as having great and manifold Iniquity, Job ix. 2,
3. Jam. iii. 1, 2.

There are many Scriptures which both declare, the universal Sinfulness of
Mankind, and also that all Sin deserves and justly exposes to everlasting
Destruction, under the Wrath and Curse of God; and so demonstrate both Parts of
the Proposition I have laid down. To which Purpose, that in Gal. iii. 10. is
exceeding full. For as many as are of the Works of the Law are under the Curse;
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all Things which
are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. How manifestly is it implied in
the Apostle's Meaning here, that there is no Man but what fails in some
Instances of doing all Things that are written in the Book of the Law, and
therefore as many as have their Dependence on their fulfilling the Law, are
under that Curse which is pronounced on them that do fail of it? And hence the
Apostle infers in the next Verse, that NO MAN is justified by the Law in the
Sight of God: as he had said before in the preceding Chapter, ver. 16, 17. By
the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified; and that all that seek to be
justified by the Works of the Law, are found Sinners. The Apostle shows us that
he understands, that by this Place which he cites from Deuteronomy, the
Scripture has concluded, or shut up, all under Sin; as in Chap. iii. 22. So
that here we are plainly taught, both that every one of Mankind is a Sinner,
and that every Sinner is under the Curse of God.

To the like Purpose is that, Romans iv. 14. and also 2 Cor. iii. 6, 7, 9. where
the Law is called the Letter that: ills, the Ministration of Death, and the
Ministration of Condemnation. The Wrath, Condemnation and Death which is
threatened in the Law to all its Transgressors, is final Perdition, the second
Death, eternal Ruin; as is very plain, and is confessed. And this Punishment
which the Law threatens for every Sin, is a just Punishment; being what every
Sin truly deserves; God ^ Law being a righteous Law, and the Sentence of it a
righteous Sentence.

All these Things are what Dr. T. himself confesses and asserts. He says, that
the Law of God requires perfect Obedience. ( Note on Romans vii. 6. P. 391, 392.)
God can never require imperfect Obedience, or by his holy Law allow us to be
guilty of any one Sin, how small soever. And if the Law as a Rule of Duty were
in any Respect abolished, then we might in some Respects transgress the Law,
and yet not be guilty of Sin. The moral Law, or Law of Nature, is the Truth,
everlasting, unchangeable; and therefore, as such, can never be abrogated. On
the contrary, our Lord Jesus Christ has promulgated it a new under the Gospel,
fuller and clearer than it was in the Mosaical Constitution, or any where else;
-- having added to its Precepts the Sanction of his own divine Authority. And
many Things which he says, imply that all Mankind do in some Degree transgress
the Law. In P. 228. speaking of what may be gathered from Romans vii. and viii.
he says, We are very apt, in a World full of Temptation, to be deceived, and
drawn into Sin by bodily Appetites etc. And the Case of those who are under a
Law threatening Death to every Sin, must be quite deplorable, if they have no
Relief from the Mercy of the Lawgiver. But this is very fully declared in what
he says in his Note on Romans v. 20. P. 378, 379. His Words are as follows;
Indeed, as a Rule of Action prescribing our Duty, it (the Law) always was, and
always must be a Rule ordained for obtaining Life; but not as a Rule of
Justification, not as it subjects to Death for every Transgression. For if it
COULD in it is utmost Rigor have given us Life, then, as the Apostle argues, it
would have been against the Promises of God.mdash;For if there had been a Law,
in the strict and rigorous Sense of Law, WHICH COULD HAVE MADE US LIVE, verily
Justification should have been by the Law. But he supposes, no such Law was
ever given: and therefore there is Need and Room enough for the Promises of
Grace; Or as he argues, Gal. ii. 21. It would have frustrated, or rendered
useless the Grace of God. For if Justification came by the Law, then truly
Christ is dead in vain, then he died to accomplish what was, or MIGHT HAVE BEEN
EFFECTED by Law it self, without his Death. Certainly the Law was not brought
in among the Jews to be a Rule of Justification, or to recover 'em out of a
State of Death, and to procure Life by their sinless Obedience to it: for in
this, as well as in another Respect, it was WEAK; not in it self, but through
the WEAKNESS of our Flesh, Romans viii. 3. The Law, I conceive, is not a
Dispensation suitable to the Infirmity of the human Nature in our present
State; or it does not seem congruous to the Goodness of God to afford us no
other Way of Salvation, but by LAW; WHICH IF WE ONCE TRANSGRESS, WE ARE RUINED
FOR EVER. FOR WHO THEN FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD COULD BE SAVED? How
clear and express are these Things, that no one of Mankind from the Beginning
of the World can ever be justified by Law, because every one transgresses it? I
am sensible, these Things are quite inconsistent with what he says elsewhere,
of sufficient Power in all Mankind constantly to do the whole Duty which God
requires of 'em, without a Necessity of breaking God's Law in any Degree. (P.
339, 340, 344, 348.) But I hope, the Reader will not think me accountable for
his Inconsistences.


And here also we see, Dr. T. declares, that by the Law Men are sentenced to
everlasting Ruin for one Transgression. To the like Purpose he often expresses
himself. So, P. 207. The Law requires the most extensive Obedience,
discovering Sin in all it is Branches. -- It gives Sin a deadly Force,
subjecting every Transgression to the Penalty of Death; and yet supplieth
neither Help nor Hope to the Sinner; but leaves him under the Power of Sin,
and Sentence of Death. In P. 213. He speaks of the Law as extending to Lust and
irregular Desires, and to every Branch and Principle of Sin; and even to its
latent Principles, and minutest Branches. Again ( Note on Romans vii. 6. P. 391.)
to every Sin, how small soever. And when he speaks of the Law subjecting every
Transgression to the Penalty of Death, he means eternal Death, as he from Time
to Time explains the Matter. In P. 212. He speaks of the Law in the condemning
Power of it, as binding us in everlasting Chains. In P. 396. He says, that
Death which is the Wages of Sin, is the second Death: And this P. 78. he
explains of final Perdition. In his Key, P. 155. 264. he says, The Curse of the
Law subjected Men for every Transgression to eternal Death. So in Note on Romans
v. 20. P. 371. The Law of Moses subjected those who were under it to Death,
meaning by Death eternal Death. These are his Words.

He also supposes, that this Sentence of the Law, thus subjecting Men for
every, even the least (...), and every minutest Branch, and latent Principle of
Sin, to so dreadful a Punishment, is just and righteous, agreeable to Truth and
the Nature of Things, or to the natural and proper Demerits of Sin. This he is
very full in. Thus in P. 21. It was Sin (says he) which subjected to Death by
the Law, JUSTLY threatening Sin with Death. Which Law was given us, that Sin
might appear; might be set forth IN IT IS PROPER COLORS; when we saw it
subjected us to Death by a Law PERFECTLY HOLY, JUST, AND GOOD; That Sin by the
Commandment, by the Law, might be represented WHAT IT REALLY IS, an exceeding
great and deadly Evil. So in Note on Romans v. 20. P. 380. The Law or
Ministration of Death, as it subjects to Death for every Transgression, is
still of Use to show THE NATURAL AND PROPER DEMERIT OF SIN. Ibid. P. 371, 372.
The Language of the Law, Dying thou shall die, is to be understood of the
Demerit of the Transgression, that which it deserves. Ibid. P. 379. The Law was
added, says Mr. Lock on the Place, because the Israelites, the Posterity of
Abraham, were Transgressors as well as other Men, to show them their Sins, and
the Punishment and Death, which in STRICT JUSTICE they incurred by them. And
this appears to be a true Comment on Romans vii. 13. -- Sin, by Virtue of the
Law, subjected you to Death for this End, that Sin, working Death in us by that
which is holy, just and good, PERFECTLY CONSONANT TO EVERLASTING TRUTH AND
RIGHTEOUSNESS -- Consequently every Sin is in strict Justice deserving of Wrath
and Punishment; and the Law in its Rigor was given to the Jews, to set home
this awful Truth upon their Consciences, to show them the evil and pernicious
NATURE of Sin; And that being conscious they had broke the Law of God, this
might convince them of the great Need they had of the FAVOR of the Lawgiver,
and oblige them, by Faith in his GOODNESS, to fly to his MERCY for Pardon and
Salvation.

If the Law be holy, just and good, a Constitution perfectly agreeable to God's
Holiness, Justice and Goodness; then he might have put it exactly in Execution,
agreably to all these his Perfections. Our Author himself says, P. 409. How
that Constitution, which establishes a Law, the making of which is inconsistent
with the Justice and Goodness of God, and the Executing of it inconsistent with
his Holiness, can be a righteous Constitution, I confess, is quite beyond my
Comprehension.

Now the Reader is left to judge whether it ben't most plainly and fully
agreeable to Dr. T -- r's own Doctrine, that there never was any one Person
from the Beginning of the World, who came to act in the World as a moral Agent,
and that it is not to be hoped there ever will be any, but what is a Sinner or
Transgressor of the Law of God; and that therefore this proves to be the Issue
and Event of Things, with respect to all Mankind in all Ages, that, by the
natural and proper Demerit of their own Sinfulness, and in the Judgment of the
Law of God, which is perfectly consonant to Truth, and exhibits Things in their
true Colors, they are the proper Subjects of the Curse of God, eternal Death,
and everlasting Ruin; which must be the actual Consequence, unless the Grace or
Favor of the Lawgiver interpose, and Mercy prevail for their Pardon and
Salvation. The Reader has seen also how agreeable this is to the Doctrine of
the holy Scripture.

And if so, and what has been observed concerning the Interposition of divine
Grace be remembered, namely, that this alters not the Nature of Things as they
are in themselves, and that it don't in the least affect the State of the
Controversy we are upon, concerning the true Nature and Tendency of the State
that Mankind come into the World in, whether Grace prevents the fatal Effect or
no; I say, if these Things are considered, I trust, none will deny, that the
Proposition that was laid down, is fully proved, as agreeable to the Word of
God, and Dr. T -- r's own Words; viz. That Mankind are all naturally in such a
State, as is attended, without fail, with this Consequence or Issue, that they
universally are the Subjects of, that Guilt and Sinfulness, which is, in
Effect, their utter and eternal Ruin, being cast wholly out of the Favor of
God, and subjected to his everlasting Wrath and Curse.

SECT. II.
It follows from the Proposition proved in the foregoing Section, that all
Mankind are under the Influence of a prevailing effectual Tendency in their
Nature, to that Sin and Wickedness, which implies their utter and eternal Ruin.
THE Proposition laid down being proved, the Consequence of it remains to be
made out, viz. That the Mind of Man has a natural Tendency or Propensity to
that Event, which has been shown universally and infallibly to take Place; (if
this ben't sufficiently evident of it self, without Proof;) and that this is a
corrupt or depraved Propensity.

I shall here consider the former Part of this Consequence, namely, whether
such an universal, constant, infallible Event is truly a Proof of the Being of
any Tendency or Propensity to that Event; leaving the evil and corrupt Nature
of such a Propensity to be considered afterward.

If any shall say, they don't think that it is being a thing universal and
infallible in Event, that Mankind commit some Sin, is a Proof of a prevailing
Tendency to Sin; because they don't only sin, but also do Good, and perhaps
more Good than Evil: Let them remember, that the Question at present is not,
How much Sin there is a Tendency to; but, Whether there be a prevailing
Propensity to that Issue, which it is allowed all Men do actually come to, that
all fail of keeping the Law perfectly; -- Whether there ben't a Tendency to
such Imperfection of Obedience, as always without fail comes to pass; to that
Degree of Sinfulness, at least, which all fall into; and so to that utter Ruin,
which that Sinfulness implies and infers. Whether an effectual Propensity to
this be worth the Name of Depravity, because of the Good that may be supposed
to balance it, shall be considered by and by. If it were so, that all Mankind,
in all Nations and Ages, were at least one Day in their Lives deprived of the
Use of their Reason, and run raving mad; or that all even every individual
Person, once cut their own Throats, or put out their own Eyes; it might be an
Evidence of some Tendency in the Nature or natural State of Mankind to such an
Event; though they might exercise Reason many more Days than they were
distracted, and were kind to and tender of themselves oftener than they
mortally and cruelly wounded themselves.

To determine whether the unfailing Constancy of the abovenamed Event be an
Evidence of Tendency, let it be considered, -- What can be meant by Tendency,
but a prevailing Liableness or Exposedness to such or such an Event? Wherein
consists the Notion of any such thing, but some stated Prevalence or
Preponderation in the Nature or State of Causes or Occasions, that is followed
by, and so proves to be effectual to, a stated Prevalence or Commonness of any
particular Kind of Effect? Or, something in the permanent State of Things,
concerned in bringing a certain Sort of Event to pass, which is a Foundation
for the Constancy, or strongly prevailing Probability, of such an Event? If we
mean this by Tendency (as I know not what else can be meant by it, but this, or
something like this) then it is manifest, that where we see a stated Prevalence
of any Kind of Effect or Event, there is a Tendency to that Effect in the
Nature and State of it is Causes. A common and steady Effect shows, that there
is some-where a Preponderation, a prevailing Exposedness or Liableness in the
State of Things, to what comes so steadily to pass. The natural Dictate of
Reason sh^ws, that where there is an Effect, there is a Cause, and a Cause
sufficient for the Effect; because, if it were not sufficient, it would not be
effectual: and that therefore, where there is a stated Prevalence of the
Effect, there is a stated Pr^valence in the Cause: A steady Effect argues a
steady Cause. We obtain a Notion of such a Thing as Tendency, no other Way than
by Observation: And we can observe nothing but Events: And it is the Commonness
or Constancy of Events, that gives us a Notion of Tendency in all Cases. Thus
we judge of Tendencies in the natural World. Thus we judge of the Tendencies or
Propensities of Nature in Minerals, Vegetables, Animals, rational and
irrational Creatures. A Notion of a stated Tendency or fixed Propensity is not
obtained by observing only a single Event. A stated Preponderation in the Cause
or Occasion, is argued only by a stated Prevalence of the Effect. If a Die be
once thrown, and it falls on a particular Side, we don't argue from hence, that
that Side is the heaviest; but if it be thrown without Skill or Care, many
Thousands or Millions of Times going, and constantly fails on the same Side, we
have not the least Doubt in our Minds, but that there is something of
Propensity in the Case, by superior Weight of that Side, or in some other
respect. How ridiculous would he make himself, who should earnestly dispute
against any Tendency in the State of Things to Cold in the Winter, or Heat in
the Summer; or should stand to it, that although it often happened that Water
quenched Fire, yet there was no Tendency in it to such an Effect?

In the Case we are upon, the human Nature, as existing in such an immense
Diversity of Persons and Circumstances, and never failing in any one Instance,
of coming to that Issue, viz. that Sinfulness which implies extreme Misery and
eternal Ruin, is as the Die often cast. For it alters not the Case, in the
least, as to the Evidence of Tendency, whether the Subject of the constant
Event be an Individual, or a Nature and Kind. Thus, if there be a Succession of
Trees of the same Sort, proceeding one from another, from the Beginning of the
World, growing in all Countries, Soils and Climates, and otherwise in (as it
were) an infinite Variety of Circumstances, all bearing ill Fruit; it as much
proves the Nature and Tendency of the Kind* as if it were only one Individual
Tree* that had remained from the Beginning of the World, had often been
transplanted into different Soils etc. and had continued to bear only bad
Fruit. So, if there were a particular Family, which, from Generation to
Generation, and through every Remove to innumerable different Countries and
Places of Abode, all died of a Consumption, or all run distracted, or all
murdered themselves, it would be as much an Evidence of the Tendency of
something in the Nature or Constitution of that Race, as it would be of the
Tendency of something in the Nature or State of an Individual, if some one
Person had lived all that Time, and some remarkable Event had often appeared in
him, which he had been the Agent or Subject of, from Year to Year, and from Age
to Age, continually and without Fail. Here may be observed the Weakness of that
Objection, made against the Validity of the Argument for a fixed Propensity to
Sin, from the Constancy and Universality of the Event, That Adam sinned in one
Instance, without a fixed Propensity. Without Doubt a single Event is an
Evidence, that there was some Cause or Occasion of that Event: But the thing we
are speaking of, is a fixed Cause: Propensity is a stated continued thing. We
justly argue, that a stated Effect must have a stated Cause; and truly observe,
that we obtain the Notion of Tendency, or stated Preponderation in Causes, no
other Way than by observing a stated Prevalence of a particular Kind of Effect.
But who ever argues a fixed Propensity from a single Effect? And is it not
strange arguing, that because an Event which once comes to pass, don't prove
any stated Tendency, therefore the unfailing Constancy of an Event is an
Evidence of no such thing? -- But because Dr. T. makes so much of this
Objection, from Adam's sinning without a Propensity, I shall hereafter consider
it more particularly, in the Beginning of the 9th Section of this Chapter;
where will also be considered what is objected from the Fall of the Angels.


Thus a Propensity attending the present Nature or natural State of Mankind,
eternally to ruin themselves by Sin, may certainly be inferred from apparent and
acknowledged Fact. -- And I would now observe further, that not only does this
follow from Facts that are acknowledged by Dr. T. but the Things he asserts,
the Expressions and Words which he uses, do plainly imply that all Mankind have
such a Propensity; yea, one of the highest Kind, a Propensity that is
invincible, or a Tendency which really amounts to a fixed constant unfailing
Necessity. There is a plain Confession of a Propensity or Proneness to Sin, P.
143. -- "Man, who drinks in Iniquity like Water; who is attended with so many
sensual Appetites, and so APT to indulge them -- " And again P. 228. "WE ARE
VERY APT, in a World full of Temptation, to be deceived, and drawn into Sin by
bodily Appetites." -- If we are very apt or prone to be drawn into Sin by
bodily Appetites, and sinfully to indulge them, and very apt or prone to yield
to Temptation to Sin, then we are prone to Sin: for to yield to Temptation to
Sin, is sinful. -- In the same Page he represents, that on this Account, and on
Account of the Consequences of this, the Case of those who are under a Law
threatening Death for every Sin, must be quite deplorable, if they have no
Relief from the Mercy of the Lawgiver. Which implies, that their Case is
hopeless, as to an escape from Death, the Punishment of Sin, by any other Means
than God's Mercy. And that implies, that there is such an Aptness to yield to
Temptation to Sin, that it is hopeless that any of Mankind should wholly avoid
it. But he speaks of it elsewhere, over and over, as truly impossible, or what
cannot be; as in the Words which were cited in the last Section, from his Note
on Romans v. 20. where he repeatedly speaks of the Law, which subjects us to
Death for every Transgression, as what CANNOT GIVE LIFE; and represents, that
if God offered us no other Way of Salvation, no Man from the Beginning of the
World COULD be saved. In the same Place he with Approbation cites Mr. Locke's
Words, in which, speaking of the Israelites, he says, All Endeavors after
Righteousness was LOST LABOR, since any one Slip forfeited Life, and it was
IMPOSSIBLE for them to expect ought but Death. Our Author speaks of it as
impossible for the Law requiring sinless Obedience, to give Life, not that the
Law was weak in it self, but through the Weakness of our Flesh. Therefore, he
says, he conceives the Law not to be a Dispensation suitable to the Infirmity
of the human Nature in its present State. These Things amount to a full
Confession, that the Proneness in Men to Sin, and to a Demerit of and just
Exposedness to eternal Ruin by Sin, is universally invincible, or, which is the
same Thing, amounts to absolute invincible Necessity; which surely is the
highest Kind of Tendency, or Propensity: and that not the less for his laying
this Propensity to our Infirmity or Weakness, which may seem to intimate some
Defect, rather than any Thing positive: And it is agreeable to the Sentiments of
the best Divines, that all Sin originally comes from a defective or privative
Cause. But Sin don't cease to be Sin, or a Thing not justly exposing to eternal
Ruin (as is implied in Dr. T -- r's own Words) for arising from Infirmity or
Defect; nor does an invincible Propensity to Sin cease to be a Propensity to
such Demerit of eternal Ruin, because the Proneness arises from such a Cause.

It is manifest, that this Tendency which has been proved, don't consist in any
particular external Circumstances, that some or many are in, peculiarly
tempting and influencing their Minds; but is inherent, and is seated in that
Nature which is common to all Mankind, which they carry with them wherever they
go, and still remains the same, however Circumstances may differ. For it is
implied in what has been proved, and shown to be confessed, that the same Event
comes to pass in all Circumstances, that any of Mankind ever are or can be
under in the World. In God's Sight no Man living can be justified; but all are
Sinners, and exposed to Condemnation. This is true of Persons of all
Constitutions, Capacities, Conditions, Manners, Opinions and Educations; in all
Countries, Climates, Nations and Ages; and through all the mighty Changes and
Revolutions, which have come to pass in the habitable World.

We have the same Evidence, that the Propensity in this Case lies in the Nature
of the Subject, and don't arise from any particular Circumstances, as we have
in any Case whatsoever; which is only by the Effects appearing to be the same
in all Changes of Time and Place, and under all Varieties of Circumstances. It
is in this Way only we judge, that any Propensities, which we observe in
Mankind, are such as are seated in their Nature, in all other Cases. It Is thus
we judge of the mutual Propensity betwixt the Sexes, or of the Dispositions
which are exercised in any of the natural Passions or Appetites, that they
truly belong to the Nature of Man; because they are observed in Mankind in
general, through all Countries, Nations and Ages, and in all Conditions.

If any should say, Though it be evident that there is a Tendency in the State of
Things to this general Event, that all Mankind should fail of perfect
Obedience, and should sin, and incur a Demerit of eternal Ruin; and also that
this Tendency don't lie in any distinguishing Circumstances of any particular
People, Person or Age: yet it may not lie in Man's Nature, but in the general
Constitution and Frame of this World, into which Men are born: Though the Nature
of Man may be good, without any evil Propensity inherent in it; yet the Nature
and universal State of this earthly World may be such as to be full of so many
and strong Temptations every where, and of such a powerful Influence on such a
Creature as Man, dwelling in so infirm a Body etc. that the Result of the whole
may be, a strong and infallible Tendency in such a State of Things, to the Sin
and eternal Ruin of every one of Mankind.

To this I would reply, that such an Evasion will not at all avail to the
Purpose of those whom I oppose in this Controversy. It alters not the Case as
to this Question, Whether Man is not a Creature that in his present State is
depraved and ruined by Propensities to Sin. If any Creature be of such a Nature
that it proves evil in it is proper Place, or in the Situation which God has
assigned it in the Universe, it is of an evil Nature. That Part of the System
is not good, which is not good in it is Place in the System; and those inherent
Qualities of that Part of the System, which are not good, but corrupt, in that
Place, are justly looked upon as evil inherent Qualities. That Propensity is
truly esteemed to belong to the Nature of any Being, or to be inherent in it,
that is the necessary Consequence of it is Nature, considered together with it is
proper Situation in the universal System of Existence, whether that Propensity
be good or bad. It Is the Nature of a Stone, to be heavy; but yet, if it were
placed, as it might be, at a Distance from this World, it would have no such
Quality. But seeing a Stone is of such a Nature, that it will have this Quality
or Tendency, in it is proper Place, here in this World, where God has made it,
it is properly looked upon as a Propensity belonging to it is Nature: And if it
be a good Propensity here in it is proper Place, then it is a good Quality of
it is Nature; But if it be contrariwise, it is an evil natural Quality. So, if
Mankind are of such a Nature, that they have an universal effectual Tendency to
Sin and Ruin, in this World, where God has made and placed them, this is to be
looked upon as a pernicious Tendency belonging to their Nature. There is,
perhaps, scarce any such thing in Beings not independent and self-existent, as
any Power or Tendency, but what has some Dependence on other Beings, which they
stand in some Connection with, in the universal System of Existence:
Propensities are no Propensities, any otherwise, than as taken with their
Objects. Thus it is with the Tendencies observed in natural Bodies, such as
Gravity, Magnetism, Electricity etc. And thus it is with the Propensities
observed in the various Kinds of Animals; and thus it is with most of the
Propensities in created Spirits.

It may further be observed, that it is exactly the same thing, as to the
Controversy concerning an Agreeableness with God's moral Perfections of such a
Disposal of Things, that Man should come into the World in a depraved ruined
State, by a Propensity to Sin and Ruin; whether God has so ordered it, that
this Propensity should lie in his Nature considered alone, or with Relation to
it is Situation in the Universe, and it is Connection with other Parts of the
System to which the Creator has united it; which is as much of God's ordering,
as Man's Nature it self, most simply considered.

Dr. T. (P. 188, 189.) speaking of the Attempt of Some to solve the Difficulty
of God's being the Author of our Nature, and yet that our Nature is polluted,
by supposing that God makes the Soul pure, but unites it to a polluted Body [or
a Body so made, as tends to pollute the Soul;] He cries out of it as weak and
insufficient, and too gross to be admitted: For, says he, Who infused the Soul
into the Body? And if it is polluted by being infused into the Body, who is the
Author and Cause of it is Pollution? And who created the Body etc? -- But is not
the Case just the same, as to those who suppose that God made the Soul pure,
and places it in a polluted World, or a World tending by it is natural State in
which it is made, to pollute the Soul, or to have such an Influence upon it,
that it shall without fail be polluted with Sin, and eternally ruined? Here,
may not I also cry out, on as good Grounds as Dr. T. -- Who placed the Soul here
in this World? And if the World be polluted, or so constituted as naturally and
infallibly to pollute the Soul with Sin, who is the Cause of this Pollution?
And, who created the World --?

Though in the Place now cited, Dr. T. so insists upon it, that God must be
answerable for the Pollution of the Soul, if he has infused or put the Soul
into a Body that tends to pollute it; yet this is the very Thing which he
himself supposes to be Fact, with respect to the Soul's being created by God,
in such a Body as it is, and in such a World as it is; in a Place which I have
already had Occasion to observe, where he says, We are apt, in a World full of
Temptation, to be drawn into Sin by bodily Appetites. And if so, according to
his Way of Reasoning, God must be the Author and Cause of this Aptness to be
drawn into Sin. Again P. 143. we have these Words, Who drinks in Iniquity
like Water; who is attended with so many sensual Appetites, and so apt to
indulge them. In these Words our Author in Effect says the individual thing
that he cries out of as so gross, viz. The Tendency of the Body, as God has
made it, to pollute the Soul, which he has infused into it. These sensual
Appetites, which incline the Soul, or make it apt to a sinful Indulgence, are
either from the Body which God has made, or otherwise a Proneness to sinful
Indulgence is immediately and originally seated in the Soul it self, which will
not mend the Matter, for Dr. Tailor.

I would here lastly observe, that our Author insists upon it, P. 317, 318.
That this lower World where we dwell, in its present State, Is as it was, when,
upon a Review, God pronounced it, and all it is Furniture, very good. -- And
that the present Form and Furniture of the Earth is full of God's Riches, Mercy
and Goodness, and of the most evident Tokens of his Love and Bounty to the
Inhabitants. If so, there can be no Room for such an Evasion of the Evidences
from Fact, of the universal infallible Tendency of Man's Nature to Sin and
eternal Perdition, as, that the Tendency there is to this Issue, don't lie in
Man's Nature, but in the general Constitution and Frame of this earthly World,
which God has made to be the Habitation of Mankind.

SECT. III.
That Propensity which has been proved to be in the Nature of all Mankind, must
be a very evil, depraved and pernicious Propensity; making it manifest that the
Soul of Man, as it is by Nature, is in a corrupt, fallen and ruined State:
which is the other Part of the Consequence, drawn from the Proposition laid
down in the first Section.
THE Question to be considered, in Order to determine whether Man's Nature is
not depraved and ruined, is not, Whether he is not inclined to perform as many
good Deeds as bad ones? But, Which of these two he preponderates to, in the
Frame of his Heart, and State of his Nature, a State of Innocence and
Righteousness, and Favor with God; or a State of Sin, Guiltiness and
Abhorrence in the Sight of God? -- Persevering sinless Righteousness, or else
the Guilt of Sin, is the Alternative, the Decision of which depends (as is
confessed) according to the Nature and Truth of Things, as they are in
themselves, and according to the Rule of Right and of perfect Justice, Man's
being approved and accepted of his Maker, and eternally blessed as good; or his
being rejected, thrown away and cursed as bad. And therefore the Determination
of the Tendency of Man's Heart and Nature with respect to these Terms, is that
which is to be looked at, in Order to determine whether his Nature is good or
evil, pure or corrupt, sound or ruined. If such be Man's Nature, and state of
his Heart, that he has an infallibly effectual Propensity to the latter of
those Terms; then it is wholly impertinent, to talk of the innocent and kind
Actions, even of Criminals themselves, surpassing their Crimes in Numbers; and
of the prevailing Innocence, good Nature, Industry, Felicity and Cheerfulness
of the greater Part of Mankind. Let never so many Thousands, or Millions of
Acts of Honesty, good Nature etc. be supposed; yet, by the Supposition, there
is an unfailing Propensity to such moral Evil, as in it is dreadful Consequences
infinitely out-weighs all Effects or Consequences of any supposed Good. Surely
that Tendency, which, in Effect, is an infallible Tendency to eternal
Destruction, is an infinitely dreadful and pernicious Tendency: And that Nature
and Frame of Mind, which implies such a Tendency, must be an infinitely
dreadful and pernicious Frame of Mind. It would be much more absurd, to
suppose, that such a State of Nature is good, or not bad, under a Notion of
Men's doing more honest and kind things, than evil ones; than to say, the State
of that Ship is good, to cross the Atlantic Ocean in, that is such as cannot
hold together through the Voyage, but will infallibly founder and sink by the
Way; under a Notion that it may probably go great Part of the Way before it
sinks, or that it will proceed and sail above Water more Hours than it will be
in sinking: -- Or, to pronounce thatRoad a good Road to go to such a Place, the
greater Part of which is plain and safe, though some Parts of it are dangerous,
and certainly fatal to them that travel in it; or to call that a good
Propensity, which is an inflexible Inclination to travel in such a Way.

A Propensity to that Sin which brings God's eternal Wrath and Curse (which has
been proved to belong to the Nature of Man) is not evil, only as it is
calamitous and sorrowful, ending in great natural Evil; but it is odious too,
and detestable; as, by the Supposition, it tends to that moral Evil, by which
the Subject becomes odious in the Sight of God, and liable, as such, to be
condemned, and utterly rejected and cursed by him. This also makes it evident,
that the State which it has been proved Mankind are in, is a corrupt State in a
moral Sense, that it is inconsistent with the Fulfillment of the Law of God,
which is the Rule of moral Rectitude and Goodness. That Tendency, which is
opposite to that which the moral Law requires and insists upon, and prone to
that which the moral Law utterly forbids, and eternally condemns the Subject
for, is doubtless a corrupt Tendency, in a moral Sense.

So that this Depravity is both odious, and also pernicious, fatal and
destructive, in the highest Sense, as inevitably tending to that which implies
Man's eternal Ruin; it shows, that Man, as he is by Nature, is in a deplorable
and undone State, in the highest Sense. And this proves that Men don't come
into the World perfectly innocent in the Sight of God, and without any just
Exposedness to his Displeasure. For the being by Nature in a lost and ruined
State, in the highest Sense, is not consistent with being by Nature in a State
of Favor with God.

But if any should still insist on a Notion of Men's good Deeds exceeding their
bad ones, and that seeing the good that is in Men more than countervails the
Evil, they cannot be properly denominated evil; All Persons and Things being
most properly denominated from that which prevails, and has the Ascendant in
them: I would say further, That

I presume it will be allowed, that if there is in Man's Nature a Tendency to
Guilt and Ill-Desert, in a vast Over-balance to Virtue and Merit; or a
Propensity to that Sin, the Evil and Demerit of which is so great, that the
Value and Merit that is in him, or in all the virtuous Acts that ever he
performs, are as Nothing to it; then truly the Nature of Man may be said to be
corrupt and evil.

That this is the true Case, may be demonstrated by what is evident of the
infinite Heinousness of Sin against God, from the Nature of things. The
Heinousness of this must rise in some Proportion to the Obligation we are under
to regard the divine Being; and that must be in some Proportion to his
Worthiness of Regard; which doubtless is infinitely beyond the Worthiness of
any of our FellowCreatures. But the Merit of our Respect or Obedience to God is
not infinite. The Merit of Respect to any Being don't increase, but is rather
diminished in Prop^rtion to the Obligations we are under in strict Justice to
pay him that Respect. There is no great Merit in paying a Debt we owe, and by
the highest possible Obligations in strict Justice are ^bliged to pay; but
there is great Demerit in refusing to pay it. That on such Accounts as those
there is an infinite Demerit in all Sin against God, which must therefore
immensely outweigh all the Merit which can be supposed to be in our Virtue, I
think, is capable of full Demonstration; and that the Futility of the
Objection. which some have made against the Argument, might most plainly be
demonstrated. But I shall omit a particular Consideration of the Evidence of
this Matter from the Nature of Things, as I study Brevity, and left any should
cry out, Metaphysics! as the Manner of some is, when any Argument is handled,
against any Tenet they are fond of, with a close and exact Consideration of the
Nature of Things. And this is not so necessary in the present Case, in as much
as the Point asserted, namely, that he who commits any one Sin, has Guilt and
Ill-Desert which is so great, that the Value and Merit of all the Good which it
is possible he should do in his whole Life, is as Nothing to it; I say, this
Point is not only evident by Metaphysics, but is plainly demonstrated by what
has been shown to be Fact, with respect to God's own Constitutions and
Dispensations toward Mankind: As particularly by this, that whatever Acts of
Virtue and Obedience a Man performs, yet if he tresp^sses in one Point, is
guilty of any the least Sin, He, according to the Law of God, and so according
to the exact Truth of Things and the proper Demerit of Sin, is exposed to be
wholly cast out of Favor with God, and subjected to his Curse, to be utterly
and eternally destroyed. This has been proved; and shown to be the Doctrine
which Dr. T. abundantly teaches. But how can it be agreeable to the Nature of
Things, and exactly consonant to everlasting Truth and Righteousness, thus to
deal with a Creature for the least sinful Act, though he should perform ever so
many Thousands of honest and virtuous Acts, to countervail the evil of that
Sin? Or how can it be agreeable to the exact Truth and real Demerit of Things,
thus wholly to cast off the deficient Creature, without any Regard to the Merit
of all his good Deeds, unless that be in Truth the Case, that the Value and
Merit of all those good Actions bear no Proportion to the Heinousness of the
least Sin? If it were not so, one would think, that however the offending
Person might have some proper Punishment, yet seeing there is so much Virtue to
lay in the Balance against the Guilt, it would be agreeable to the Nature of
Things, that he should find some Favor, and not be altogether rejected, and
made the Subject of perfect and eternal Destruction; and thus no Account at all
be made of all his Virtue, so much as to procure him the least Relief or Hope.
How can such a Constitution represent Sin in its proper Colors, and according
to its true Nature and Desert (as Dr. T. says it does) unless this be it is true
Nature, that it is so bad, that even in the least Instance it perfectly
swallows up all the Value of the Sinner's supposed good Deeds, let 'em be ever
so many. So that this Matter is not left to our Metaphysics, or Philosophy;
the great Lawgiver, and infallible Judge of the Universe, has clearly decided
it, in the Revelation he has made of what is agreeable to exact Truth, Justice
and the Nature of Things, in his revealed Law or Rule of Righteousness.

He that in any Respect or Degree is a Transgressour of God's Law, is a wicked
Man, yea, wholly Wicked in the Eye of the Law; all his Goodness being esteemed
Nothing, having no Account made of it, when taken together with his Wickedness.
And therefore, without any regard to his Righteousness, he is, by the Sentence
of the Law, and so by the Voice of Truth and Justice, to be treated as worthy
to be rejected, abhorred and cursed forever; and must be so, unless Grace
interposes, to cover his Transgression. But Men are really, in Themselves, what
they are in the Eye of the Law, and by the Voice of strict Equity and Justice;
however they may be looked upon, and treated by infinite and unmerited Mercy.

So that, on the whole, it appears, all Mankind have an infallibly effectual
Propensity to that moral Evil, which infinitely out-weighs the Value of all the
Good that can be in them; and have such a Disposition of Heart, that the
certain Consequence of it is, their being, in the Eye of perfect Truth and
Righteousness, Wicked Men. And I leave all to judge, whether such a Disposition
be not in the Eye of Truth a depraved Disposition.

Agreeable to these Things, the Scripture represents all Mankind, not only as
having Guilt, but immense Guilt, which they can have no Merit or Worthiness to
countervail. Such is the Representation we have in Matthew. xviii. 21, to the
End. There, on Peter's enquiring how often his Brother should trespass against
him and he forgive him, whether until seven Times? Christ replies, I say not
unto thee, until seven Times, but until seventy Times seven; apparently
meaning, that he should esteem no Number of Offenses too many, and no Degree of
Injury it is possible our Neighbor should be guilty of toward us, too great
to be forgiven. For which this Reason is given in the Parable there following,
that if ever we obtain Forgiveness and Favor with God, He must pardon that
Guilt and Injury toward his Majesty, which is immensely greater than the
greatest Injuries that ever Men are guilty one toward another, yea, than the
Sum of all their Injuries put together; let 'em be ever so many, and ever so
great: so that the latter would be but as an hundred Pence to ten Thousand
Talents: which immense Debt we owe to God, and have Nothing to pay; which
implies that we have no Merit, to countervail any Part of our Guilt. And this
must be because, if all that may be called Virtue in us, be compared with our
Ill-desert, it is in the Sight of God as Nothing to it. The Parable is not to
represent Peter's Case in particular, but that of all who then were, or ever
should be Christ's Disciples. It appears by the Conclusion of the Discourse; So
likewise shall my heavenly Father do, if ye, from your Hearts, forgive not
every one his Brother their Trespasses.

Therefore how absurd must it be for Christians to object, against the
Depravity of Man's Nature, a greater Number of innocent and kind Actions, than
of Crimes; and to talk of a prevailing Innocence, good Nature, Industry, and
Cheerfulness of the greater Part of Mankind? Infinitely more absurd, than it
would be to insist, that the Domestic of a Prince was not a bad Servant,
because though sometimes he contemned and affronted his Master to a great Degree,
yet he did not spit in his Master's Face so often as he performed Acts of
Service; Or, than it would be to affirm, that his Spouse was a good Wife to
him, because, although she committed Adultery, and that with the Slaves and
Scoundrels sometimes, yet she did not do this so often as she did the Duties of
a Wife. These Notions would be absurd, because the Crimes are too heinous to be
atoned for, by many honest Actions of the Servant or Spouse of the Prince;
there being a vast Disproportion between the Merit of the one, and the
Ill-desert of the other; but in no Measure so great, nay infinitely less than
that between the Demerit of our Offenses against God, and the Value of our Acts
of Obedience.

Thus I have gone through with my first Argument; having shown the Evidence of
the Truth of the Proposition I laid down at first, and proved it is Consequence.
But there are many other things, that manifest a very corrupt Tendency or
Disposition in Man's Nature in his present State, which I shall take Notice of
in the following Sections.

SECT. IV.
The Depravity of Nature appears by a Propensity in all to sin immediately, as
soon as they are capable of it, and to sin continually and progressively; and
also by the Remains of Sin in the best of Men.
THE great Depravity of Man's Nature appears, not only in that they universally
commit Sin, who spend any long Time in the World, but in that Men are naturally
so prone to Sin, that none ever fail of immediately transgressing God's Law,
and so of bringing infinite Guilt on themselves, and exposing themselves to
eternal Perdition, as soon as they are capable of it.

The Scriptures are so very express in it, that all Mankind, all Flesh, all the
World, every Man living, are guilty of Sin; that it must at least be
understood, every one that is come to be capable of being active, in Duty to
God, or Sin against him, is guilty of Sin. There are Multitudes in the World,
who have but very lately begun to exert their Faculties, as moral Agents; and
so are but just entered on their State of Trial, as acting for themselves. There
are many Thousands constantly in the World, who have not lived one Month, or
Week, or Day, since they have arrived to any Period that can be assigned from
their Birth to Twenty Years of Age. And if there be not a strong Propensity in
Man's Nature to Sin, that should as it were hurry them on to speedy
Transgression,and they have no Guilt previous to their personal Sinning, what
should hinder but that there might always be a greater Number of such as act
for themselves on the Stage of the World, and are answerable for themselves to
God, who have hitherto kept themselves free from Sin, and have perfectly obeyed
God's Law, and so are righteous in God's Sight with the Righteousness of the
Law; and if they should be called out of the World without any longer Trial (as
innumerable die at all Periods of Life) would be justified by the Deeds of the
Law? And how then can it be true, that in God's Sight no Man living can be
justified, that no Man can be just with God, and that by the Deeds of the Law
no Flesh can be justified, because by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin? And what
should hinder but that there may always be many in the World, who are capable
Subjects of Instruction and Counsel, and of Prayer to God, for whom the Calls
of God's Word to Repentance, and to seek Pardon through the Blood of Christ, and
to forgive others their Injuries, because they need that God should forgive
them, would not be proper; and for whom the Lord's Prayer (...) ^^t suitable,
wherein Christ directs all his Followers to pray, that God would forgive their
Sins, as they forgive those that trespass against them?

If there are any in the World, though but lately become capable of acting for
themselves, as Subjects of the Law of God, who are perfectly free from Sin,
such are most likely to be found among the Children of Christian Parents, who
give 'em the most pious Education, and set them the best Examples: And
therefore such would never be so likely to be found in any Part or Age of the
World, as in the primitive Christian Church, in the first Age of Christianity
(the Age of the Church's greatest Purity) so long after Christianity had been
established, that there had been Time for great Numbers of Children to be born,
and educated by those primitive Christians. It was in that Age, and in such a
Part of that Age, that the Apostle John wrote his first Epistle to the
Christians that then were. But if there was then a Number of them, come to
Understanding, who were perfectly free from Sin, why does he write as he does?
1 John 1. 8, 9, 10. If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. If we say that
we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and the Truth is not in us. If any
should object, that this is an overstraining of Things; and that it supposes a
greater Niceness and Exactness, than is observed in Scripture-Representations
and Expressions, to infer from these Expressions, that all Men sin immediately,
as soon as ever they are capable of it: To this I would say, that I think the
Arguments used are truly solid, and do really and justly conclude, either that
Men are born guilty, and so are chargeable with Sin before they come to act for
themselves, or else commit Sin immediately, without the least Time
intermitting, after they are capable of understanding their Obligations to God,
and reflecting on themselves; and that the Scripture clearly determines, there
is not one such Person in the World, free from Sin. But whether this be a
straining things up to too great an Exactness, or not; yet I suppose, None that
don't entirely set aside the Sense of such Scriptures as have been mentioned,
and deny those Propositions which Dr. T. himself allows to be contained in some
of 'em will deny they prove, that no considerable Time passes after Men are
capable of acting for themselves, as the Subjects of God's Law, before they are
guilty of Sin; because if the Time were considerable, it would be great enough
to deserve to be taken Notice of, as an Exception to such universal
Propositions, as, In thy Sight shall no Man living be justified, etc. And if
this be allowed, that Men are so prone to Sin, that in Fact all Mankind do sin,
as it were, immediately, after they come to be capable of it, or fail not to
sin so soon, that no considerable Time passes before they run into
Transgression against God; It don't much alter the Case, as to the present
Argument. If the Time of Freedom from Sin to be so small, as not to be worthy
of Notice in the forementioned universal Propositions of Scripture, it is also
so small, as not to be worthy of Noti^e in the present Argument.


Again, the Reality and Greatness of the Depravity of Man's Nature appears in
this, That he has a prevailing Propensity to be continually sinning against
God. What has been observed above, will clearly prove this. That same
Disposition of Nature, which is an effectual Propensity to immediate Sin
amounts to a Propensity to continual Sin. For a being prone to continual
sinning is nothing but a Proneness to immediate Sin continued. Such appears to
be the Tendency of Nature to Sin, that as soon as ever Man is capable, it
causes him immediately to sin, without suffering any considerable Time to pass
without Sin. And therefore, if the same Propensity be continued undiminish'd,
there will be an equal Tendency to immediate sinning again, without any
considerable Time passing. And so the same will always be a Disposition still
immediately to sin, with as little Time passing without Sin afterward, as at
first. The only Reason that can be given why Sinning must be immediate at
first, is that the Disposition is so great, that it will not suffer any
considerable Time to pass without Sin: and therefore, the same Disposition
being continued in equal Degree, without some new Restraint, or contrary
Tendency, it will still equally tend to the same Effect. And though it is true,
the Propensity may be diminished, or have Restraints laid upon it, by gracious
Disposals of Providence, or merciful Influences of God's Spirit; yet this is
not owing to Nature. That strong Propensity of Nature, by which Men are so
prone to immediate Sinning at first, has no Tendency in it self to a
Diminution; but rather to an Increase; as the continued Exercise of an evil
Disposition, in repeated actual Sins, tends to strengthen it more and more:
agreeable to that Observation of Dr. T -- r's, p. 228. We are apt to be drawn
into Sin by bodily Appetites, and when once we are under the Government of
these Appetites, it is at least exceeding difficult, if not impracticable, to
recover our selves, by the mere Force of Reason. The Increase of Strength of
Disposition in such a Case, is as in a falling Body, the Strength of it is
Tendency to descend is continually increased, so long as it is Motion is
continued. Not only a constant Commission of Sin, but a constant Increase in
the Habits and Practice of Wickedness, is the true Tendency of Man's depraved
Nature, if unrestrained by divine Grace; as the true Tendency of the Nature of
an heavy Body, if Obstacles are removed, is not only to fall with a continual
Motion, but with a constantly increasing Motion. And we see, that increasing
Iniquity is actually the Consequence of natural Depravity, in most Men,
notwithstanding all the Restraints they have. Dispositions to Evil are commonly
much stronger in adult Persons, than in Children, when they first begin to act
in the World as rational Creatures.

If Sin be such a Thing as Dr. T. himself represents it, P. 69. A Thing of an
odious and destructive Nature, the Corruption and Ruin of our Nature, and
infinitely hateful to God; then such a Propensity to continual and increasing
Sin, must be a very evil Disposition. And if we may judge of the Perniciousness
of an Inclination of Nature, by the Evil of the Effect it naturally tends to,
the Propensity of Man's Nature must be evil indeed: For the Soul being
immortal, as Dr. T. acknowleges, P. 370. it will follow from what has been
observed above, that Man has a natural Disposition to one of these two Things;
either to an Increase of Wickedness without End, or 'till Wickedness comes to
be so great, that the Capacity of his Nature will not allow it to be greater.
This being what his Wickedness will come to by it is natural Tendency, if divine
Grace don't prevent, it may as truly be said to be the Effect which Man's
Natural Corruption tends to, as that an Acorn in a proper Soil truly tends by
it is Nature to become a great Tree.

Again, That Sin which is remaining in the Hearts of the best Men on Earth,
makes it evident, that Man's Nature is corrupt, as he comes into the World. A
remaining Depravity of Heart in the greatest Saints, may be argued from the
Sins of most of those who are set forth in Scripture as the most eminent
Instances and Examples of Virtue and Piety: And is also manifest from this,
That the Scripture represents all God's Children as standing in Need of
Chastisement. Heb. xii. 6, 7, 8. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth; and
scourges every Son whom he receives. -- What Son is he, whom the Father
chastneth not? -- If ye are without Chastisement, -- then, are ye Bastards, and
not Sons. But this is directly and fully asserted in some Places; as in that
forementioned Eccles. vii. 20. There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does
Good and sins not. Which is as much as to say, There is no Man on Earth,
that is so just, as to have attained to such a Degree of Righteousness, as not
to commit any Sin. Yea, the Apostle speaks of all Christians as often sinning,
or committing many Sins; even in that primitive Age of the Christian Church, an
Age distinguished from all others by eminent Seize in Holiness; Jam. iii.
^. In many Things we all offend. And that there is Pollution in the Hearts of
all, as the Remainder of moral Filth that was there antecedent to all Attempts
or Means forPurification, is very plainly declared in Prove. xx. 9. Who can say,
I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin?

According to Dr. T. Men come into the World wholly free from sinful
Propensities. And if so, it appears from what has been already said, there
would be Nothing to hinder, but that many, without being better than they are
by Nature, might perfectly avoid the Commission of Sin. But much more might
this be the Case with Men after they had, by Care, Diligence and good Practice,
attained those positive Habits of Virtue, where by they are at a much greater
Distance from Sin, than they were naturally: -- which this Writer supposes to
be the Case with many good Men. But since the Scripture teaches us, that the
best Men in the World do often commit Sin, and have remaining Pollution of
Heart, this makes it abundantly evident, that Men, when they are no otherwise
than they were by Nature, without any of those virtuous Seize, have a
sinful Depravity; yea, must have great Corruption of Nature.

SECT. V.
The Depravity of Nature appears, in that the generalConsequence of the State
and Tendency of Man's Nature is a much greater Degree of Sin, than
Righteousness; not only with respect to Value and Demerit, but Matter and
Quantity.
I Have before shown, that there is a Propensity in Man's Nature to that Sin,
which in Heinousness and Ill-desert immensely outweighs all the Value and Merit
of any supposed Good, that may be in him, or that he can do. I now proceed to
say further, that such is Man's Nature, in his present State, that it tends to
this lamentable Effect, That there should at all Times, through the Course of his
Life, be at least, much more Sin, than Righteousness; not only as to Weight and
(...), but as to Matter and Measure; more Disagreement of Heart and Practice
from the Law of God, and from the Law of Nature and Reason, than Agreement and
Conformity.

The Law of God is the Rule of Right, as Dr. T. often calls it: It is the
Measure of Virtue and Sin: So much Agreement as there is with this Rule, so
much is there of Rectitude, Righteousness, or true Virtue, and no more; and so
much Disagreement as there is with this Rule, so much Sin is there.

Having premised this, the following Things may be here observed.

I. The Degree of Disagreement from this Rule of Right is to be determined, not
only by the Degree of Distance from it in Excess, but also in Defect; or in
other Words, not only in positive Transgression, or doing what is forbidden,
but also in witholding what is required. The divine Lawgiver does as much
prohibit the one as the other, and does as much charge the latter as a sinful
Breach of his Law, exposing to his eternal Wrath and Curse, as the f^^mer. Thus
at the Day of Judgment, as described Matthew. xxv. The Wicked are condemned, as
cursed, to everlasting Fire, for their Sin in Defect and Omission: I was on
hungered, and ye gave me no Meat, etc. And the Case is thus, not only when the
Defect is in Word or Behavior, but in the inward Temper and ^xercise of the
Mind. 1 Cor. xvi. 22. If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha. Dr. T. speaking of the Sentence and Punishment of the
Wicked ( Matthew.xxv.41, 46.) says, It was manifestly for WANT of Benevolence,
Love and Compassion to their FellowCreatures, that they were ^ondemned. And
elsewhere, as was observed before, he says, that the Law of God extends to the
latent Principles of Sin, to forbid them, and to condemn to eternal Destruction
for them. And if so, it doubtless also extends to the inward Principles of
Holiness to require them, and in like manner to cond^^^ for the Want of them.

II. The Sum of our Duty to God, required in his Law, is Love to God; taking
Love in a large Sense, for the true Regard of our Hearts to God, implying
Esteem, Honor, Benevolence, Gratitude, Complacence etc. This is not only very
plain by the Scripture, but it is evident in it self. The Sum of what the Law
of God requires, is doubtless Obedience to that Law: No Law can require more
than that it be obeyed. But it is manifest, that Obedience to God is Nothing,
any otherwise than (...) a Testimony of the Respect of our Hearts to God:
Without the Heart, Man's external Acts are no more than the Motions of the
Limbs of a wooden Image; have no more of the Nature of either Sin or
Righteousness. It must therefore needs be so, that Love to God, or the Respect
of the Heart, must be the Sum of the Duty required toward God in his Law.

III. It therefore appears from the Premises, that whosoever withholds more of
that Love or Respect of Heart from God which his Law requires, than he affords,
has more Sin, than Righteousness. Not only he that has left divine Love, than
Passions and Affections which are opposite; but also he that don't love God
half so much as he ought, or has Reason to do, has justly more Wrong, than
Right, imputed to him, according to the Law of God, and the Law of Reason; he
has more Irregularity, than Rectitude, with Regard to the Law of Love. The
sinful Disrespect or Unrespectfulness of his Heart to God, is greater than his
Respect to him.

But what considerate Person is there, even among the more virtuous Part of
Mankind, but what would be ashamed to say, and profess before God or Men, that
he loves God half so much as he ought to do; or that he exercises one half of
that Esteem, Honor and Gratitude toward God, which would be altogether
becoming Him; considering what God is, and what great Manifestations he has
made of his transcendent Excellency and Goodness, and what Benefits he receives
from him? And if few or none of the best of Men can with Reason and Truth make
even such a Profession, how far from it must the Generality of Mankind be?

The chief and most fundamental of all the Commands of the moral Law, requires
us to love the Lord our God, with all our Hearts, and with all our Souls, with
all our Strength, and all our Mind: that is plainly, with all that is within
us, or to the utmost Capacity of our Nature: all that belongs it, or is
comprehended within the utmost Extent or Capacity of our Heart and Soul, and
Mind and Strength, is required. God is in Himself worthy of infinitely greater
Love, than any Creature can exercise toward him: He is worthy of Love equal to
his ^^^fections, which are infinite: God loves Himself with no greater Love
than he is worthy of, when he loves himself infinitely: But we can give God no
more than we have. Therefore, if we give him so much, if we love him to the
utmost Extent of the Faculties of our Nature, we are exc^sed: But when what is
proposed, is only that we should love him as much as our Capacity will allow,
this Excuse of Want of Capacity ceases, and Obligation takes hold of us; and we
are doubtless obliged to love God to the utmost of what is possible for us,
with such Faculties, and such Opportunities and Advantages to know God, as we
have. And it is evidently implied in this great Commandment of the Law, that our
Love to God should be so great, as to have the most absolute Possession of all
the Soul, and the perfect Government of all the Principles and Springs of
Action that are in our Nature.

Though it is not easy, precisely to fix the Limits of Man's Capacity, as to Love
to God; yet in general we may determine, that his Capacity of Love is
coextended with his Capacity of Knowledge: The Exercise of the Understanding
opens the Way for the Exercise of the other Faculty. Now, though we cannot have
any proper positive Understanding of God's infinite Excellency; yet the
Capacity of the human Understanding is very great, and may be extended far.
It Is needless to dispute, how far Man's Knowledge may be said to be strictly
comprehensive of Things that are very great, as of the Extent of the Expanse of
the Heavens, or of the Dimensions of the Globe of the Earth; and of such a
great Number, as of the many Millions of it is Inhabitants. The Word,
Comprehensive, seems to be ambiguous. But doubtless we are capable of some
proper positive Understanding of the Greatness of these Things, in Comparison
of other Things that we know, as unspeakably exceeding them. We are capable of
some clear Understanding of the Greatness or Considerableness of a whole
Nation, or of the whole World of Mankind, as vastly exceeding that of a
particular Person or Family. We can positively understand, that the whole Globe
of the Earth is vastly greater, than a particular Hill or Mountain. And can
have some good positive Apprehension of the starry Heavens, as so greatly
exceeding the Globe of the Earth, that the latter is as it were Nothing to it.
So the human Faculties are capable of a real and clear Understanding of the
Greatness, Glory and Goodness of God, and of our Dependence upon him, from the
Manifestations which God has made of himself to Mankind, as being beyond all
Expression above that of the most excellent human Friend, or earthly Object.
And so we are capable of an Esteem and Love to God, which shall be
proportionable, and as much exceeding that which we have to any Creature.

These things may help us to form some Judgment, how vastly the Generality of
Mankind fall below their Duty, with respect to Love to God; yea, how far they
are from coming halfway to that Height of Love, which is agreeable to the Rule
of Right. Surely if our Esteem of God, Desires after him, and Delight in him
were such as become us, considering the Things forementioned, they would exceed
our Regard to other Things, as the Heavens are high above the Earth, and would
swallow up all other Affections, like a Deluge. But how far, how exceeding far,
are the Generality of the World from any Appearance of being influenced and
governed by such a Degree of divine Love as this!

If we consider the Love of God with respect to that one Kind of Exercise of
it, namely, Gratitude, how far indeed do the Generality of Mankind come short
of the Rule of Right and Reason in this! If we consider how various,
innumerable and vast the Benefits are we receive from God, and how infinitely
great and wonderful that Grace of his is, which is revealed and offered to them
that live under the Gospel, in that eternal Salvation which is procured by
God's giving his only begotten Son to die for Sinners; and also how unworthy we
are all, deserving (as Dr. T. confesses) eternal Perdition under God's Wrath
and Curse, how great is the Gratitude, that would become us, who are the
Subjects of so many and great Benef^^^, and have such Grace toward poor sinful
lost Mankind set before us in so affecting a Manner, as in the extreme
Sufferings of the Son of God, being carried through those Pains by a Love
stronger than Death, a Love that conquered those mighty Agonies a Love whose
Length and Breadth and Depth and Height passes Knowledge? But oh, what poor
Returns --! How little the Gratit^de! How low, how cold and inconstant the
Affection is the best, compared with the Obligation! And what then shall be
said of the Gratitude of the Generality? Or rather, who can express the
Ingratitude?

If it were so, that the greater Part of them that are called, Christians, were
no Enemies to Christ in Heart and Practice, were not governed by Principles
opposite to him and his Gospel, but had some real Love and Gratitude; yet if
their Love falls vastly short of the Obligation or Occasion given, they are
guilty of shameful and odious Ingratitude. As, when a Man has been the Subject
of some Instance of transcendent Generosity, whereby he has been relieved from
the most extreme Calamity, and brought into very opulent, honorable and happy
Circumstances, by a Benefactor, of excellent Character; and yet expresses no
more Gratitude on such an Occasion, than would be requisite for some Kindness
comparatively infinitely small, he may justly fall under the Imputation of vile
Unthankfulness, and of much more Ingratitude, than Gratitude; though he may have
no Ill Will to his Benefactor, or no positive Affection of Mind contrary to
Thankfulness and Benevolence: What is odious in him is his Defect, whereby he
falls so vastly below his Duty.

Dr. Turnbull abundantly insists, that the Forces of the Affections naturally
in Man are well proportioned; and often puts a Question to this Purpose, -- How
Man's Nature could have been better constituted in this respect? How the
Affections of his Heart could have been better proportioned? -- I will now
mention one Instance, out of many that might be mentioned. Man, if his Heart
were not depraved, might have had a Disposition to Gratitude to God for his
Goodness, in Proportion to his Disposition to Anger toward Men for their
Injuries. When I say, in Proportion, I mean considering the Greatness and
Number of Favors and Injuries, and the Degree in which the one and the other
are unmerited, and the Benefit received by the former, and the Damage sustained
by the latter. Is there not an apparent and vast Difference and Inequality in
the Dispositions to these two Kinds of Affection, in the Generality of both old
and young, adult Persons and little Children? How ready is Resentment for
Injuries received from Men? and how easily is it raised in most, at best, to an
Equality with the Desert? And is it so with respect to Gratitude for Benefits
received from God, in any Degree of Comparison? Dr. Turnbull pleads for the
natural Disposition to Anger for Injuries, as being good and useful: But surely
Gratitude to God, if we were inclined to it, would be at least as good and
useful as the other.

How far the Generality of Mankind are from their Duty with respect to Love to
God, will further appear, if we consider, that we are obliged not only to love
him with a Love of Gratitude for Benefits received; but true Love to God
primarily consists in a supreme Regard to him for what he is in himself. The
Tendency of true Virtue is to treat every thing as it is, and according to it is
Nature. And if we regard the most High according to the infinite Dignity and
Glory of his Nature, we shall esteem and love him with all our Heart and Soul,
and to the utmost of the Capacity of our Nature, on this Account; and not
primarily because he has promoted our Interest. If God be infinitely excellent
in Himself, then He is infinitely lovely on that Account; or in other Words,
infinitely worthy to be loved. And doubtless, if he be worthy to be loved for
this, then he ought to be loved for this. And it is manifest, there can be no
true Love to Him, if he be not loved for what he is in himself. For if we love
him not for his own Sake, but for something else, then our Love is not
terminated on him, but on something else, as it is ultimate Object. That is no
true Value for infinite Worth, which implies no Value for that Worthiness in
itself considered, but only on the Account of something foreign. Our Esteem of
God is fundamentally defective, if it be not primarily for the Excellency of
his Nature, which is the Foundation of all that is valuable in him in any
Respect. If we love not God because he is what he is, but only because he is
profitable to us, in Truth we love him not at all: If we seem to love him, our
Love is not to him, but to something else.

And now I must leave it to every one to judge for himself, from his own
Opportunities of Observation and Information concerning Mankind, how little
there is of this disinterested Love to God, this pure divine Affection, in the
World. How very little indeed in Comparison of other Affections altogether
diverse, which perpetually urge, actuate and govern Mankind, and keep the
World, through all Nations and Ages, in a continual Agitation and Commotion!
This is an Evidence of an horrid Contempt of God, reigning in the World of
Mankind. It would be justly esteemed a great Instance of Disrespect and
Contempt of a Prince, if one of his Subjects, when he came in to his House,
should set him below his meanest Slave. But in setting the infinite JEHOVAH
below earthly Objects and Enjoyments, Men degrade him below those Things,
between which and him there is an infinitely greater Distance, then between the
highest earthly Potentate and the most abject of Mortals. Such a Conduct as the
Generality of Men are guilty of toward God, continually and through all Ages, in
innumerable Respects, would be accounted the most vile contemptuous Treatment
of a Fellow Creature, of distinguished Dignity. Particularly Men's Treatment of
the Offers God makes of Himself to them as their Friend, their Father, their
God and everlasting Portion; their Treatment of the Exhibitions he has made of
his unmeasurable Love, and the boundless Riches of his Grace in Christ,
attended with earnest repeated Calls, Counsels, Expostulations, and Entreaties;
as also of the most dreadful Threatenings of his eternal Displeasure and
Vengeance.

Before I finish this Section, it may be proper to say something in Reply to an
Objection, -- some may be ready to make against the Force of that Argument,
which has been used to prove, that Men in general have more Sin than
Righteousness, namely, That they don't come half way to that Degree of Love to
God, which becomes them, and is their Duty.

The Objection is this: That the Argument seems to prove too much, in that it
will prove, that even good Men themselves have more Sin than Holiness; which
also has been supposed. But if this were true, it would follow, that Sin is the
prevalent Principle even in good Men, and that it is the Principle which has
the Predominancy in the Heart and Practice of the truly pious; which is plainly
contrary to the Word of God.

I answer; If it be indeed so, that there is more Sin, consisting in Defect of
required Holiness, than there is of Holiness in good Men in this World; yet it
will not follow, that Sin has the chief Government of their Heart and Practice;
for two Reasons.

1. They may love God more than other Things, and yet there may not be so much
Love, as there is Want of due Love; or in other Words, they may love God more
than the World, and therefore the Love of God may be predominant, and yet may
not love God near half so much as they ought to do. This need not be esteemed a
Paradox: A Person may love a Father, or some great Friend and Benefactor, of a
very excellent Character, more than some other Object, a thousand Times less
worthy of his Esteem and Affection, and yet love him ten Times less than he
ought; and so be chargeable, all Things considered, with a Deficiency in
Respect and Gratitude, that is very unbecoming and hateful. If Love to God
prevails above the Love of other Things, then Virtue will prevail above evil
Affections, or positive Principles of Sin; by which Principles it is, that Sin
has a positive Power and Influence. For evil Affections radically consist in
inordinate Love to other Things besides God. And therefore, Virtue prevailing
beyond these, will have the governing Influence. The Predominance of the Love
of God in the Hearts of good Men is more from the Nature of the Object loved,
and the Nature of the Principle of true Love, than the Degree of the Principle.
The Object is One of supreme Loveliness; immensely above all other Objects in
Worthiness of Regard; And it is by such a transcendent Excellency, that he is
God, and worthy to be regarded and adored as God: And he that truly loves God,
loves him as God: True Love acknowledges him to be God, or to be divinely and
supremely Excellent; And must arise from some Knowledge, Sense and Conviction
of his Worthiness of supreme Respect: And though the Sense and View of it may be
very imperfect, and the Love that arises from it in like Manner imperfect; Yet
if there be any realising View of such divine Excellency, it must cause the
Heart to respect God above all.

2. Another Reason, why a Principle of Holiness maintains the Dominion in the
Hearts of good Men, is the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, and the Promises of
that Covenant, on which true Christian Virtue relies, and which engage God's
Strength and Assistance to be on it is Side, and to help it against it is Enemy,
that it may not be overcome. The Just live by Faith. Holiness in the Christian,
or his spiritual Life, is maintained, as it has Respect by Faith to it is Author
and Finisher, and derives Strength and Efficacy from the divine Fountain, and
by this Means overcomes. For, as the Apostle says, This is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. It Is our Faith in him who has promised,
never to leave nor forsake his People, and not to forsake the Work of his own
Hands, nor suffer his People to be tempted above their Ability, and that his
Grace shall be sufficient for them, and that his Strength shall be made perfect
in Weakness, and that where he has begun a good Work he will carry it on to the
Day of Christ.

SECT. VI.
The Corruption of Man's Nature appears by it is Tendency, in it is present
State, to an extreme Degree of Folly and Stupidity in Matters of Religion.
IT appears, that Man's Nature is greatly depraved, by an apparent Proneness to
an exceeding Stupidity and Sottishness in those Things wherein his Duty and
main Interest are chiefly concerned.

I shall instance in two Things; viz. Men's Proneness to Idolatry; and so
general and great a Disregard of eternal Things, as appears in them that live
under the Light of the Gospel.

It Is manifest, that Man's Nature in it is present State is attended with a
great Propensity to forsake the Acknowledgment and Worship of the true God, and
to fall into the most stupid Idolatry. This has been sufficiently proved by
known Fact, on abundant Trial: Inasmuch as the World of Mankind in general
(excepting one small People, miraculouslly delivered and preserved) through all
Nations, in all Parts of the World, Ages after Ages, continued without the
Knowledge and Worship of the true God, and overwhelmed in gross Idolatry,
without the least Appearance or Prospect of it is recovering it self from so
great Blindness, or returning from it is brutish Principles and Customs, 'till
delivered by divine Grace.

In Order to the most just arguing from Fact, concerning the Tendency of Man's
Nature, as that is in it self, it should be enquired what the Event has been,
where Nature has been left to it self, to operate according to it is own
Tendency, with least Opposition made to it by any thing supernatural; rather
than in exempt Places, where the infinite Power and Grace of God have
interposed, and extraordinary Means have been used to stem the Current, and
bring Men to true Religion and Virtue. As to the Means by which God's People of
old, in the Line of Abraham, were delivered and preserved from Idolatry, they
were miraculous, and of mere Grace: Notwithstanding which, they were often
relapsing into the Notions and Ways of the Heathen: and when they had
backslidden, never were recovered, but by divine gracious Interposition. And as
to the Means by which many Gentile Nations have been delivered, since the Days
of the Gospel, they are such as have been wholly owing to most wonderful,
miraculous and infinite Grace. God was under no Obligation to bestow on the
heathen World greater Advantages than they had in the Ages of their gross
Darkness; as appears by the Fact, that God actually did not, for so long a
Time, bestow greater Advantages.

Dr. T. himself observes ( Key P. 1.) That in about 400 Years after the Flood,
the Generality of Mankind were fallen into Idolatry. And thus it was every
where through the World, excepting among that People that was saved, and
preserved by a constant Series of Miracles, through a Variety of Countries,
Nations and Climates, great enough, -- and through successive Changes,
Revolutions and Ages numerous enough, to be a sufficient Trial of what Mankind
are prone to; if there be any such thing as a sufficient Trial.

That Men should forsake the true God for Idols, in an Evidence of the most
astonishing Folly and Stupidity, by God's own Testimony. Jer. ii. 13. Be
astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord: For my People have committed two Evils; They have
forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, and have hewed out to themselves
Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water. And that Mankind in general
did thus, so soon after the Flood, was from the evil Propensity of their
Hearts, and because they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge; as is
evident by Romans i. 28. -- And the Universality of the Effect shows that the
Cause was universal, and not any Thing belonging to the particular
Circumstances of one, or only some Nations or Ages, but something belonging to
that Nature that is common to all Nations, and that remains the same through all
Ages. And what other Cause could this great Effect possibly arise from, but a
depraved Disposition, natural to all Mankind? It could not arise from Want of a
sufficient Capacity or Means of Knowledge. This is in Effect confessed on all
Hands. Dr. Turnbull, ( Chris. Phil. P. 21.) says as follows; The Existence of
one infinitely powerful, wise and good Mind, the Author, Creator, Upholder and
Governor of all Things, is a Truth that lies plain and obvious to all that
will but think. And (Ibid. P. 245.) Moral Knowledge, which is the most
important of all Knowledge, may easily be acquired by all Men. And again,
(Ibid. P. 292.) Every Man by himself, if he would duly employ his Mind, in the
Contemplation of the Works of God about him, or in the Examination of his own
Frame, -- might make very great Progress in the Knowledge of the Wisdom and
Goodness of God. This all Men, generally speaking, might do, with very little
Assistance; for they have all sufficient Abilities for thus employing their
Minds, and have all sufficient Time for it. Mr. Lock says, ( Hum. Und. B. IV.
Chap. iv. P. 242. Edit. 11.) Our own Existence, and the sensible Parts of the
Universe, offer the Proofs of a Deity so clearly and cogently to our Thoughts,
that I deem it impossible for a considerate Man to withstand them. For I judge
it as certain and clear a Truth, as can any where be delivered, that the
invisible Things of God are clearly seen from the Creation of the World, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. And
Dr. T. himself, (in P. 78.) says, The Light given to all Ages and Nations of
the World, is sufficient for the Knowledge and Practice of their Duty. And in
P. 111, 112. citing those Words of the Apostle, Romans ii. 14, 15, says, This
clearly supposes that the Gentiles, who were then in the World, might have done
the Things contained in the Law by Nature, or their natural Power. And in one
of the next Sentences, he says, The Apostle in Romans i. 19, 20, 21. affirms that
the Gentiles had Light sufficient to have seen God's eternal Power and Godhead,
in the Works of Creation; and that the Reason why they did not glorify him as
God, was because they became vain in their Imaginations, and had darkened their
foolish Heart; so that they were without Excuse. And in his Paraphrase on those
Verses in the 1st of Romans he speaks of the very Heathens, that were without a
written Revelation, as having that clear and evident Discovery of God's Being
and Perfections, that they are inexcusable in not glorifying him, suitably to
his excellent Nature, and as the Author of their Being and Enjoyments. And in
P. 422, he says, God affords every Man sufficient Light to know his Duty. If
all Ages and Nations of the World have sufficient Light for the Knowledge of
God, and their Duty to him, then even such Nations and Ages, in which the most
brutish Ignorance and Barbarity prevailed, had sufficient Light, if they had
had but a Disposition to improve it; and then much more those of the Heathen,
which were more knowing and polished, and in Ages wherein Arts and Learning had
made greatest Advances. But even in such Nations and Ages* there was no Advance
made toward true Religion; as Dr. Winder observes, ( Hist. of Knowl. Vol. II.
P. 336.) in the following Words; The Pagan Religion degenerated into greater
Absurdity, the further it proceeded; and it prevailed in all it is Height of
Absurdity, when the Pagan Nations were polished to the Height. Though they set
out with the Talents of Reason, and had solid Foundations of Information to
build upon, it in Fact proved, that with all their strengthened Faculties, and
growing Powers of Reason, the Edifice of Religion rose in the most absurd
Deformities and Disproportions, and gradually went on in the most irrational,
disproportioned, incongruous Systems, of which the most easy Dictates of Reason
would have demonstrated the Absurdity. They were contrary to all just
Calculations in moral Mathematics. He observes, That their grossest
Abominations first began in Egypt, where was an Ostentation of the greatest
Progress in Learning and Science: and they never renounced clearly any of their
Abominations, or openly returned to the Worship of the one true God, the
Creator of all things, and to the original, genuine Sentiments of the highest,
and most venerable Antiquity. The Pagan Religion continued in this deep State
of Corruption to the last. The Pagan Philosophers, and inquisitive Men, made
great Improvements in many Sciences, and even in Morality it self; yet the
inveterate Absurdities of Pagan Idolatry, remained without Remedy. Every Temple
smoked with Incense to the Sun and Moon, and other inanimate, material
Luminaries, and earthly Elements, to Jupiter, Juno, Mars and Venus, etc. the
Patrons and Examples of almost every Vice. Hecatombs bled on the Altars of a
Thousand Gods; as mad Superstition inspired. And this was not the Disgrace of
our ignorant, untaught Northern Countries only; but even at Athens itself, the
Infamy reigned, and circulated through all Greece: And finally prevailed, amidst
all their Learning and Politeness, under the Ptol^my's in Egypt, and the C^sars
at Rome. Now if the Knowledge of the Pagan World, in Religion, proceeded no
further than this; if they retained all their Deities, even the most absurd of
them all, their deified Beasts, and deified Men, even to the last Breath of
Pagan Power; We may justly ascribe the great Improvements in the World on the
Subject of Religion, to divine Revelation; either vouchsafed in the Beginning,
when this Knowledge was competently clear and copious; or at the Death of
Paganism, when this Light shone forth in it is consumate Luster, at the Coming
of Christ.

Dr. T. often speaks of the Idolatry of the Heathen World, as great Wickedness,
in which they were wholly inexcusable: and yet often speaks of their Case as
remediless, as being dead in Sin, and unable to recover themselves. And if so,
and yet, according to his own Doctrine* every Age, and every Nation, and every
Man, had sufficient Light afforded, to know God, and to know and do their whole
Duty to him; then their Inability to deliver themselves must be a moral
Inability, consisting in a desperate Depravity, and most evil Disposition of
Heart.

And if there had not been sufficient Trial of the Propensity of the Hearts of
Mankind, through all those Ages that passed from Abraham to Christ, the Trial has
been continued down to this Day, in all those vast Regions of the Face of the
Earth, that have remained without any Effects of the Light of the Gospel; and
the dismal Effect continues every where unvaried. How was it with that
Multitude of Nations inhabiting South and North America? What Appearance was
there, when the Europeans first came hither, of their being recovered, or
recovering, in any Degree from the grossest Ignorance, Delusions, and most
stupid Paganism? And how is it at this Day, in those Parts of Africa and Asia,
into which the Light of the Gospel has not penetrated?

This strong and universally prevalent Disposition of Mankind to Idolatry, of
which there has been such great Trial, and so notorious and vast Proof, in
Fact, is a most glaring Evidence of the exceeding Depravity of the human
Nature; as it is a Propensity, in the utmost Degree, contrary to the highest
End, the main Business, and chief Happiness of Mankind, consisting in the
Knowledge, Service and Enjoyment of the living God, the Creator and Governor
of the World; -- in the highest Degree contrary to that for which mainly God
gave Mankind more Understanding than the Beasts of the Earth, and made them
wiser than the Fowls of Heaven; which was, that they might be capable of the
Knowledge of God; -- And in the highest Degree contrary to the first and
greatest Commandment of the moral Law, That we should have no other Gods before
JEHOVAH, and that we should love and adore him with all our Heart, Soul, Mind
and Strength. The Scriptures are abundant in representing the Idolatry of the
Heathen World as their exceeding Wickedness, and their most brutish Stupidity.
They that worship and trust in Idols, are said themselves to be like the
lifeless Statues they worship, like mere senseless Stocks and Stones, Psalm.
exv. 4 -- ^. and cxxxv. 15 -- 18.

A Second Instance of the natural Stupidity of the Minds of Mankind, that I
shall observe, is that great Disregard of their own eternal Interest; which
appears so remarkably, so generally, among them that live under the Gospel.

As Mr. Lock observes, ( Hum. Und. Vol. I. P. 207.) Were the Will determined
by the Views of Good, as it appears in Contemplation, greater or less to the
Understanding, it could never get loose from the infinite eternal Joys of
Heaven, once proposed, and considered as possible; the eternal Condition of a
future State infinitely out weighing the Expectation of Riches or Honor, or
any other worldly Pleasure, which we can propose to our selves; though we should
grant these the more probable to be obtained. Again (P. 228, 229.) He that will
not be so far a rational Creature, as to reflect seriously upon infinite
Happiness and Misery, must needs condemn himself, as not making that Use of his
Understanding he should. The Rewards and Punishments of another Life, which the
Almighty has established, as the Enforcements of his Laws, are of Weight enough
to determine the Choice, against whatsoever Pleasure or Pain this Life can
show. When the eternal State is considered but in it is bare Possibility, which
no Body can make any Doubt of, he that will allow exquisite and endless
Happiness to be but the possible Consequence of a good Life here, and the
contrary State the possible Reward of a bad one, must own himself to judge very
much amiss, if he does not conclude that a virtuous Life, with the certain
Expectation of everlasting Bliss, which may come, is to be preferred to a
vicious one, with the Fear of that dreadful State of Misery, which it is very
possible may overtake the guilty, or at least the terrible uncertain Hope of
Annihilation. This is so evidently so; though the virtuous Life here had Nothing
but Pain, and the vicious continual Pleasure; which yet is for the most Part
quite otherwise, and wicked Men have not much the Odds to bragg of, even in
their present Possession; Nay, all things rightly considered, have I think even
the worst Part here. But when infinite Happiness is put in one Scale, against
infinite Misery in the other; if the worst that comes to the pious Man, if he
mistakes, be the best that the wicked Man can attain to, if he be in the right;
who can, without Madness, run the Venture? Who in his Wits would choose to come
within a Possibility of infinite Misery? which if he miss, there is yet Nothing
to be got by that Hazard: Whereas, on the other Side, the sober Man ventures
Nothing, against infinite Happiness to be got, if his Expectation comes to pass.

That Disposition of Mind which is a Propensity to act contrary to Reason, is a
depraved Disposition. It Is not because the Faculty of Reason, which God has
given to Mankind, is not sufficient fully to discover to 'em that forty, sixty,
or an hundred Years, is as Nothing in Comparison of Eternity, infinitely less
than a second of Time to an hundred Years, that the greatest worldly Prosperity
and Pleasure is not treated with most perfect Disregard, in all Cases where
there is any Degree of Competition of earthly Things, with Salvation from
exquisite eternal Misery, and the Enjoyment of everlasting Glory and Felicity;
as certainly it would be, if Men acted according to Reason. But is it a Matter
of Doubt or Controversy, whether Men in general don't show a strong Disposition
to act far otherwise, from their Infancy, 'till Death is in a sensible
Approach? In things that concern Men's temporal Interest, they easily discern
the Difference between Things of a long and short Continuance. It Is no hard
Matter to convince Men of the Difference between a being admitted to the
Accommodations, and Entertainments of a convenient, beautiful, well-furnished
Habitation, and to partake of the Provisions and Produce of a plentiful Estate,
for a Day, or a Night; and having all given to them, and settled upon them, as
their own, to possess as long as they live, and to be their's, and their Heirs
for ever: There would be no Need of Men's preaching Sermons, and spending their
Strength and Life, to convince Men of the Difference. Men know how to adjust
Things in their Dealings and Contracts one with another, according to the
Length of Time in which any thing agreed for is to be used or enjoyed. In
temporal Affairs, Men are sensible that it concerns 'em to provide for future
Time, as well as for the present. Thus common Prudence teaches 'em to take Care
in Summer to lay up for Winter; yea, to provide a Fund, and get a solid Estate,
whence they may be supplied for a long Time to come. And not only so, but they
are willing and forward to spend and be spent, to provide that which will stand
their Children in Stead, after they are dead; though it be quite uncertain, who
shall use and enjoy what they lay up, after they have left the World; and if
their Children should have the Comfort of it, as they desire, they will not
partake with them in that Comfort, or have any more a Portion in any thing
under the Sun. In things which relate to Men's temporal Interest, they seem
very sensible of the Uncertainty of Life, especially of the Lives of others;
and to make answerable Provision for the Security of their worldly Interest,
that no considerable Part of it may rest only on so uncertain a Foundation, as
the Life of a Neighbor or Friend. Common Discretion leads Men to take good
Care, that their outward Possessions be well secured, by a good and firm Title.
In worldly Concerns, Men are discerning of their Opportunities, and careful to
improve 'em before they are passed. The Husbandman is careful to plow his
Ground, and sow his Seed, in the proper Season; otherwise he knows he cannot
expect a Crop: and when the Harvest is come, he will not sleep away the Time;
for he knows, if he does so, the Crop will soon be lost. How careful and
eagle-eyed is the Merchant to observe and improve his Opportunities and
Advantages, to enrich himself? How apt are Men to be alarmed at the Appearance
of Danger to their worldly Estate, or any thing that remarkably threatens great
Loss or Damage to their outward Interest? and how will they bestir themselves
in such a Case, if possible to avoid the threatened Calamity? In things purely
secular, and not of a moral or spiritual Nature, Men easily receive Conviction
by past Experience, when any thing, on repeated Trial, proves unprofitable or
prejudicial; and are ready to take Warning by what they have found themselves,
and also by the Experience of their Neighbors, and Forefathers.

But if we consider how Men generally conduct themselves in things on which
their Well-being does infinitely more depend, how vast is the Diversity? In
these things, how cold, lifeless and dilatory? With what Difficulty are a Few
of Multitudes excited to any tolerable Degree of Care and Diligence, by the
innumerable Means used with Men to make 'em wise for themselves? And when some
Vigilance and Activity is excited, how apt is it to die away, like a mere Force
against a natural Tendency? What Need of a constant Repetition of Admonitions
and Counsels, to keep the Heart from failing asleep? How many Objections are
made? And how are Difficulties magnified? And how soon is the Mind discouraged?
How many Arguments, and often renewed, and variously and elaborately enforced,
do Men stand in Need of, to convince 'em of things that are self-evident? As
that things which are eternal, are infinitely more important than things
temporal, and the like. And after all, how very few convinced effectually, or
in such a Manner as to induce to a practical Preference of eternal Things? How
senseless are Men of the Necessity of improving their Time to provide for
Futurity, as to their spiritual Interest, and their Welfare in another World?
Though it be an endless Futurity, and though it be their own personal, infinitely
important Good, after they are dead, that is to be cared for, and not the Good
of their Children, which they shall have no Share in. -- Though Men are so
sensible of the Uncertainty of their Neighbors Lives, when any considerable
Part of their Estates depends on the Continuance of them; how stupidly
senseless do they seem to be of the Uncertainty of their own Lives, when their
Preservation from immensely great, remediless and endless Misery, is risqu^d by
a present Delay, through a Dependence on future Opportunity? What a dreadful
Venture will Men carelessly and boldly run, and repeat and multiply, with Regard
to their eternal Salvation, who are very careful to have every Thing in a Deed
or Bond firm, and without a Flaw? How negligent are they of their special
Advantages and Opportunities for their Soul's Good? How hardly awakened by the
most evident and imminent Dangers, threatening eternal Destruction, yea, though
put in Mind of 'em, and much Pains taken to point them forth* show them
plainly, and fully to represent them, if possible to engage their Attention to
'em? How are they like the Horse, that boldly rushes into the Battle? How
hardly are Men convinced by their own frequent and abundant Experience, of the
unsatisfactory Nature of earthly Things, and the Instability of their own
Hearts in their good Frames and Intentions? And how hardly convinced by their
own Observation, and the Experience of all past Generations, of the Uncertainty
of Life, and it is Enjoyments? Psalm. xlix. 11, etc. Their inward Thought is,
that their Houses shall continue forever. -- Nevertheless, Man being in Honor,
^bideth not; he is like the Beasts that perish. This their Way is their Folly:
yet their Posterity approve their Sayings. Like Sheep are they laid in the
Grave.

In these Things, Men that are prudent for their temporal Interest, act as if
they were bereft of Reason: They have Eyes, and see not; Ears, and hear not;
neither do they understand: They are like the Horse and Mul^, that have (...)
Understanding. -- Jer. viii. 7. The Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed
Times; and the Turtl^, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the Time of
their Coming: But my People know not the Judgment of the Lord.

These things are often mentioned in Scripture as Evidences of extreme Folly
and Stupidity, wherein Men act as great Enemies to themselves, as though they
loved their own Ruin; Prove. viii. 36. Laying wait for their own Blood* Prove. 1.
18. And how can these things be accounted for, but by supposing a most wretched
Depravity of Nature? Why otherwise should not Men be as wise for themselves in
spiritual and eternal Things, as in temporal? All Christians will confess, that
Man's Faculty of Reason was given him chiefly to enable him to understand the
former, wherein his main Interest, and true Happiness consists. This Faculty
would therefore undoubtedly be every Way as fit for the understanding of them,
as the latter, if not depraved. The Reason why these are understood and not the
other, is not that such things as have been mentioned, belonging to Men's
spiritual and eternal Interest, are more obscure and abstruse in their own
Nature. For Instance, the Difference between long and short, the Need of
providing for Futurity, the Importance of improving proper Opportunities, and
of having good Security, and a sure Foundation, in Affairs wherein our Interest
is greatly concerned, etc. these things are as plain in themselves in religious
Matters, as in other Matters. And we have far greater Means to assist us to be
wise for our selves in eternal, than in temporal Things. We have the abundant
Instruction of perfect and infinite Wisdom it self, to lead and conduct us in
the Paths of Righteousness, so that we may not err. And the Reasons of Things
are most clearly, variously and abundantly set before us in the Word of God;
which is adapted to the Faculties of Mankind, tending greatly to enlighten and
convince the Mind: Whereas, we have no such excellent and perfect Rules to
instruct and direct us in Things pertaining to our temporal Interest, nor any
thing to be compared to it.

If any should say, It Is true, if Men gave full Credit to what they are told
concerning eternal Things, and these appeared to 'em as real and certain
Things, it would be an Evidence of a sort of Madness in them, that they show no
greater Regard to 'em in Practice: But there is Reason to think, this is not
the Case; the Things of another World, being unseen things, appear to Men as
things of a very doubtful Nature, and attended with great Uncertainty. -- In
Answer, I would observe, agreeable to what has been cited from Mr. Lock,
Though eternal things were considered in their bare Possibility, if Men acted
rationally, they would infinitely outweigh all temporal Things in their
Influence on their Hearts. And I would also observe, that the supposing eternal
Things not to be fully believed, at least by them who enjoy the Light of the
Gospel, does not weaken, but rather strengthen the Argument for the Depravity
of Nature. For the eternal World being what God had chiefly in View in the
Creation of Men, and the Things of this World being made to be wholly
subordinate to the other, Man's State here being only a State of Probation,
Preparation and Progression, with respect to the future State, and so eternal
Things being in Effect Men's All, their whole Concern: to understand and know
which, it chiefly was, that they had Understanding given 'em; and it concerning
them infinitely more to know the Truth of eternal Things than any other, as all
that are not Infidels will own; Therefore, we may undoubtedly conclude, that if
Men have not Respect to 'em as real and certain Things, it cannot be for Want
of sufficient Evidence of their Truth, to induce 'em so to regard them;
especially as to them that live under that Light, which God has appointed as
the most proper Exhibition of the Nature and Evidence of these Things: But it
must be from a dreadful Stupidity of Mind, occasioning a sottish Insensibility
of their Truth and Importance, when manifested by the clearest Evidence.

SECT. VII.
That Man's Nature is corrupt, appears, in that vastly the greater Part of
Mankind, in all Ages, have been wicked Men.
THE Depravity of Man's Nature appears, not only in it is Propensity to Sin in
some Degree, which renders a Man an evil or wicked Man an evil or wicked Man in
the Eye of the Law, and strict Justice, as was before shown; but it is so
corrupt, that it is Depravity, either shows that Men are, or tends to make them
to be, of such an evil Character, as shall denominate them wicked Men,
according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace.

This may be argued from several Things which have been already observed: as
from a Tendency to continual Sin; a Tendency to much greater Degrees of Sin
than Righteousness, and from the general extreme Stupidity of Mankind. But yet
the present State of Man's Nature, as implying, or tending to a wicked
Character, may be worthy to be more particularly considered, and directly
proved. And in general, this appears, in that there have been so very Few in
the World, from Age to Age, ever since the World has stood, that have been of
any other Character.

It Is abundantly evident in Scripture, and is what I suppose none that call
themselves Christians will deny, that the whole World is divided into Good and
Bad, and that all Mankind at the Day of Judgment will either be approved as
righteous, or condemned as wicked; either glorified, as Children of the
Kingdom, or cast into a Furnace of Fire, as Children of the wicked One.

I need not stand to show what Things belong to the Character of such as shall
hereafter be accepted as Righteous, according to the Word of God. It may be
sufficient for my present Purpose, to observe what Dr. T. himself speaks of as
belonging essentially to the Character of such. In P. 203. He says, This is
infallibly the Character of true Christians, and what is essential to such,
that they have really mortified the Flesh, with it is Lusts; -- They are dead to
Sin, and live no longer therein; The old Man is crucified, and the Body of Sin
destroyed: They yield themselves to God, as those that are alive from the Dead,
and their Members as Instruments of Righteousness to God, and as Servants of
Righteousness to Ho^^ness. -- There is more to the like Purpose in the two next
Pages. In P. 228. He says, Whatsoever is evil and corrupt in us, we ought to
condemn; not so, as it shall still remain in us, that we may always be
condemning it, but that we may speedily reform, and be effectually delivered
from it; otherwise certainly we do not come up to the Character of the true
Disciples of Christ.

In P. 248. He says, Unless God's Favor be preferred before all other
Enjoyments whatsoever, unless there be a Delight in the Worship of God, and in
Converse with Him, unless every Appetite be brought into Subjection to Reason
and Truth, and unless there be a kind and benevolent Disposition toward our
Fellow Creatures, how can the Mind be fit to dwell with God, in his House and
Family, to do him Service in his Kingdom, and to promote the Happiness of any
Part of his Creation? -- And in his Key, 255. P. 145. etc. showing there, what
it is to be a true Christian, He says, among other Things, That he is one who
has such a Sense and Persuasion of the Love of God in Christ, that he devotes
his Life to the Honor and Service of God, in Hope of eternal Glory. And that
to the Character of a true Christian, it is absolutely necessary, that he
diligently study the Things that are freely given him of God, viz. his
Election, Regeneration, etc. that he may gain a just Knowledge of those
inestimable Privileges, may taste that the Lord is gracious, and rejoice in the
Gospel-Salvation, as his greatest Happiness and Glory. -- It Is necessary, that
he work these Blessings on his Heart, 'till they become a vital Principle,
producing in him the Love of God, engaging him to all cheerful Obedience to his
Will, giving him a proper Dignity and Elevation of Soul, raising him above the
best and worst of this World, carrying his Heart into Heaven, and fixing his
Affections and Regards upon his everlasting Inheritance, and the Crown of Glory
laid up for him there. -- Thus he is armed against all the Temptations and
Trials, resulting from any Pleasure or Pain, Hopes or Fears, Gain or Loss, in
the present World. None of these things move him, from a faithful Discharge of
any Part of his Duty, or from a firm Attachment to Truth and Righteousness:
neither counts he his very Life dear to him, that he may do the Will of God,
and finish his Course with Joy, in a Sense of the Love of God and Christ. He
maintains daily Communion with God, by reading and meditating on his Word. In a
Sense of his own Infirmity, and the Readiness of the divine Favor to succor
him, he daily addresses the Throne of Grace, for the Renewal of spiritual
Strength; and in Assurance of obtaining it, through one Mediator Christ Jesus,
enlightened and directed by the heavenly Doctrine of the Gospel, etc. What Dr.
Turnbull says of the Character of a good Man, is also worthy to be observed,
Chris. Phil. P. 86, 258, 259, 288, 375, 376, 409, 410.


Now I leave it to be judged by every One that has any Degree of Impartiality,
whether there be not sufficient Grounds to think, from what appears every
where, that it is but a very small Part indeed, of the many Myriads and
Millions which overspread this Globe, who are of a Character that in any wise
answers these Descriptions. However, Dr. T. insists, that all Nations, and
every Man on the Face of the Earth, have Light and Means sufficient to do the
whole Will of God, even they that live in the grossest Darkness of Paganism.

Dr. T. in Answer to Arguments of this Kind, very impertinently from Time to
Time objects, P. 327, 339, 340, 343, 344, 348.
That we are no Judges of the Viciousness of Men's Character, nor are able to
decide in what Degree they are virtuous or vicious. As though we could have no
good Grounds to judge, that any thing, appertaining to the Qualities or
Properties of the Mind, which is invisible, is general or prevailing among a
Multitude or collective Body, unless we can determine how it is with each
Individual. I think, I have sufficient Reason, from what I know and have heard
of the American Indians, to judge, that there are not many good Philosophers
among them; though the Thoughts of their Hearts, and the Ideas and Knowledge they
have in their Minds, are Things invisible; and though I have never seen so much
as the thousandth Part of the Indians; and with respect to most of them, should
not be able to pronounce peremptorily, concerning any one, that he was not very
knowing in the Nature of Things, if all should singly pass before me. And Dr.
T. himself seems to be sensible of the Falseness of his own Conclusions, that
he so often urges against others; if we may judge by his Practice, and the
Liberties he takes, in judging of a Multitude himself. He, it seems, is
sensible that a Man may have good Grounds to judge, that Wickedness of
Character is general in a collective Body; because he openly does it Himself. (
Key, P. 147.) After declaring the Things which belong to the Character of a
true Christian, he judges of the Generality of Christians, that they have cast
off these Things, that they are a People that do err in their Hearts, and have
not known God's Ways. P. 259, he judges, that the Generality of Christians are
the most Wicked of all Mankind, -- when he thinks it will throw some Disgrace
on the Opinion of such as he opposes. The like we have from Time to Time in
other Places, as P. 268. P. 258. Key, P. 182.

But if Men are not sufficient Judges, whether there are Few of the World of
Mankind but what are Wicked, yet doubtless God is sufficient, and his Judgment,
often declared in his Word, determines the Matter. Matthew. vii. 13, 14. Enter ye
in at the strait Gate: For wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that leads
to Destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; Because strait is the
Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and few there be that find
it. It Is manifest, that here Christ is not only describing the State of things,
as it was at that Day, and don't mention the comparative Smallness of the
Number of them that are saved, as a Consequence of the peculiar Perverseness of
that People, and of that Generation; but as a Consequence of the general
Circumstances of the Way to Life, and the Way to Destruction, the Broadness of
the one, and Narrowness of the other. In the Straitness of the Gate, etc. I
suppose none will deny, that Christ has Respect to the Strictness of those
Rules, which he had insisted on in the preceding Sermon, and, which render the
Way to Life very difficult to Mankind. But certainly these amiable Rules would
not be difficult, were they not contrary to the natural Inclinations of Men's
Hearts; and they would not be contrary to those Inclinations, were these not
depraved. Consequently the Wideness of the Gate. and Broadness of the Way that
leads to Destruction, in Consequence of which many go in thereat, must imply
the Agreeableness of this Way to Men's natural Inclinations. The like Reason is
given by Christ, why few are saved. Luke xiii. 23, 24. Then said one unto him,
Lord, are there few saved? And he said unto them; Strive to enter in at the
strait Gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. That there are generally but few good Men in the World, even among them
that have those most distinguishing and glorious Advantages for it, which they
are favored with that live under the Gospel, is evident by that Saying of our
Lord, from Time to Time in his Mouth, Many are called, but few are chosen. And
if there are but few among these, how few, how very few indeed, must Persons of
this Character be, compared with the whole World of Mankind? The exceeding
Smallness of the Number of true Saints, compared with the whole World, appears
by the Representations often made of them as distinguished from the World; in
which they are spoken of as called and chosen out of the World, redeemed from
the Earth, redeemed from among Men; as being those that are of God, while the
whole World lies in Wickedness, and the like. And if we look into the Old
Testament, we shall find the same Testimony given. Prove. xx. 6. Most Men will
proclaim every Man his own Goodness: but a faithful Man who can find? By a
faithful Man, as the Phrase is used in Scripture, is intended much the same as
a sincere, upright or truly good Man; as in Psalm. xii. 1. and xxxi. 23. and ci.
6. and other Places. Again, Eccl. vii. 25, -- 29. I applied mine Heart to know,
and to search, and to find out Wisdom, and the Reason of Things, and to know
the Wickedness of Folly, even of Foolishness and Madness: And I find more
bitter than Death, the Woman whose Heart is Snares, etc. -- Behold, this have I
found, says the Preacher, counting one by one, to find out the Account, which
yet my Soul seeks, but I find not: One Man among a Thousand have I found; but
a Woman among all these have I not found. Lo, this only have I found, that God
made Man upright; but they have sought out many Inventions. Solomon here
signifies, that when he set himself diligently to find out the Account or
Proportion of true Wisdom, or thorough Uprightness among Men, the Result was,
that he found it to be but as one to a Thousand* etc. Dr. T. on this Place, P.
184. says, The wise Man in the Context is inquiring into the Corruption and
Depravity of Mankind, of the Men and Women, THAT LIVED IN HIS TIME. As though
what He said represented Nothing of the State of Things in the World in
general, but only in his Time. But does Dr. T. or any Body else suppose this
only to be the Design of that Book, to represent the Vanity and Evil of the
World in that Time, and to show that all was Vanity and Vexation of Spirit in
Solomon's Day? (Which Day truly we have Reason to think, was a Day of the
greatest Smiles of Heaven on that Nation, that ever had been on any Nation from
the Foundation of the World.) Not only does the Subject and Argument of the
whole Book show it to be otherwise; but also the declared Design of the Book in
the first Chapter; where the World is represented as very much the same, as to
the Vanity and Evil it is full of, from Age to Age, making little or no
Progress, after all it is Revolutions and restless Motions, Labors and
Pursuits, like the Sea, that has all the Rivers constantly emptying themselves
into-it, from Age to Age, and yet is never the fuller. As to that Place, Prove.
xx. 6. A faithful Man who can find? there is no more Reason to suppose, that
the wise Man has respect only to his Time, in these Words, than in those
immediately preceding, Counsel in the Heart of a Man is like deep Waters; but
a Man of Understanding will draw it out. Or in the Words next following, The
just Man walks in his Integrity: his Children are blessed after him. Or, in
any other Proverb in the whole Book. And if it were so, that Solomon in these
things meant only to describe his own Times, it would not at all weaken the
Argument. For, if we observe the History of the Old Testament, there is Reason
to think there never was any Time from Joshua to the Captivity, wherein
Wickedness was more restrained, and Virtue and Religion more encouraged and
promoted, than in David's and Solomon's Times. And if there was so little true
Piety in that Nation that was the only People of God under Heaven, even in
their very best Times, what may we suppose concerning the World in general,
take one Time with another?

Notwithstanding what some Authors advance concerning the Prevalence of Virtue,
Honesty, good Neighborhood, Cheerfulness, etc. in the World, Solomon, whom we
may justly esteem as wise and just an Observer of human Nature, and the State
of the World of Mankind, as most in these Days (besides, Christians ought to
remember, that he wrote by divine Inspiration) judged the World to be so full
of Wickedness, that it was better never to be born, than to be born to live
only in such a World. Eccl. iv. at the Beginning, So I returned and considered
all the Oppressions that are done under the Sun; and behold, the Tears of such
as were oppressed, and they had no Comforter: and on the Side of their
Oppressors there was Power; but they had no Comforter. Wherefore, I praised the
dead, which were already dead, more than the living which are yet alive. Yea,
better is he than both they, which has not yet been; WHO HAS NOT SEEN THE
EVIL WORK THAT IS DONE UNDER THE SUN. Surely it will not be said, that Solomon
has only respect to his Times here too, when he speaks of the Oppressions of
them that were in Power; since He himself, and others appointed by him, and
wholly under his Control, were the Men that were in Power, in that Land, and
in almost all neighboring Countries.

The same inspired Writer says, Eccle^. ix. 3. The Heart of the Sons of Men is
full of Evil; and Madness is in their Heart while they live; and after that
they go to the dead. If these general Expressions are to be understood only of
some, and those the lesser Part, when in general, Truth, Honesty, Goodnature,
etc. govern the World, why are such general Expressions from Time to Time used?
Why don't this wise and noble, and greatsoul'd Prince express himself in a more
generous and benevolent Strain, as well as more agreeable to Truth, and say,
Wisdom is in the Hearts of the Sons of Men while they live, etc. -- in Stead of
leaving in his Writings so many sly, ill-natured Suggestions, which pour such
Contempt on the human Nature, and tend so much to excite mutual Jealousy and
Malevolence, to taint the Minds of Mankind through all Generations after him?

If we consider the various successive Parts and Periods of the Duration of the
World, it will, if possible, be yet more evident, that vastly the greater Part
of Mankind have in all Ages been of a wicked Character. The short Accounts we
have of Adam and his Family are such as lead us to suppose, that far the
greater Part of his Posterity, in his Lifetime, yea, in the former Part of his
Life, were Wicked. It appears, that his eldest Son, Cain, was a very wicked
Man, who slew his righteous Brother Abel. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty
Years before Seth was born: And by that Time, we may suppose, his Posterity
began to be considerably numerous: When he was born, his Mother called his Name
Seth; for God, said She, has appointed me another Seed, in Stead of Abel.
Which naturally suggests this to our Thoughts; That of all her Seed now
existing, none were of any such Note for Religion and Virtue, as that their
Parents could have any great Comfort in them, or Expectation from 'em on that
Account. And by the brief History we have, it looks as if (however there might
be some Intervals of a Revival of Religion, yet) in the general, Mankind grew
more and more corrupt till the Flood. It Is signified, that when Men began to
multiply on the Face of the Earth, Wickedness prevailed exceedingly, Genesis vi.
at the Beginning. And that before God appeared to Noah, to command him to build
the Ark, 120 Years before the Flood, the World had long continued obstinate in
great and general Wickedness, and the Disease was become inveterate. The
Expressions we have in the 3* 5, and 6 Verses of that Chap. suggest as much:
And the Lord said, My spirit shall not ALWAYS strive with Man. -- And God saw,
that the Wickedness of Man was great on the Earth, and that every Imagin^tion
of the Thoughts of his Heart was evil, only evil CONTINUALLY; and it repented
the Lord, that he had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart.
And by that Time all Flesh had corrupted his Way upon the Earth, v. 12. And as
Dr. T. himself observes, P. 122. Mankind were universally debauched into Lust,
Sensuality, Rapine and Injustice.

And with respect to the Period after the Flood, to the Calling of Abraham; Dr.
T. says, as has been already observed, that in about 400 Years after the Flood,
the Generality of Mankind were fallen into Idolatry. Which was before the
passing away of one Generation; or before all they were dead, that came out of
the Ark. And it cannot be thought, the World jumpt into that so general and
extreme Degree of Corruption, all at once; but that they had been gradually
growing more and more corrupt; though it is true, it must be by very swift
Degrees, (however soon we may suppose they began) -- to get to that Pass in one
Age.

And as to the Period from the Calling of Abraham to the Coming of Christ, Dr.
T. justly observes as follows ( Key P. 190.) If we reckon from the Call of
Abraham to the Coming of Christ, the Jewish Dispensation continued One Thousand
nine Hundred and twenty-one Years: during which Period, the other Families and
Nations of the Earth, not only lay out of God's peculiar Kingdom, but also
lived in Idolatry, great Ignorance, and Wickedness. And with Regard to that one
only exempt Family or Nation of the Israelites, it is evident that Wickedness
was the generally prevailing Character among them, from Age to Age. If we
consider how it was with Jacob's Family, the Behavior of Reuben with his
Father's Concubine, the Behavior of Judah with Tamar, the Conduct of Jacob's
Sons in general (though Sim^on and Levi were leading) toward the Shechemites,
the Behavior of Joseph's ten Brethren in their cruel Treatment of him; we
cannot think, that the Character of true Piety belonged to many of them,
according to Dr. T -- r's own Notion of such a Character; though it be true, they
might afterward repent. -- And with respect to the Time the Children of Israel
were in Egypt; the Scripture, speaking of them in general, or as a collective
Body, often represents them as complying with the abominable Idolatries of the
Country. Levit. xvii. 7. Josh. v. 9. and xxiv. 14. Ezekiel. xx. 7, 8. and xxiii. 3.
And as to that Generation which went out of Egypt, and wandered in the
Wilderness; they are abundantly represented as extremely and almost universally
wicked, perverse, and Children of divine Wrath. -- And after Joshua's Death,
the Scripture is very express, that Wickedness was the prevailing Character in
the Nation, from Age to Age. So it was till Samuel's Time. 1 Samuel viii. 7, 8.
They have rejected me, that I should not reign over them; according to all
their Works which they have done, since the Day that I brought them out of
Egypt, unto this Day. Yes, so it was till Jeremiah's and Ezekiel's Time. Jer.
xxxii. 30, 31. For the Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah, have only
done Evil before me from their Youth: for the Children of Israel have only
provoked me to Anger with the Work of their Hands, says the Lord: For this
City *has been to me a Provocation of mine Anger, and of my Fury, from the Day
they built it, even unto this Day. (Compare Chap. v. 21, and 23. and Chap. vii.
25, 26, 27.) So, Ezekiel. ii. 3, 4. I send thee to the Children of Israel, to a
rebellious Nation, that has rebelled against me, they and their Fathers have
transgressed against me even unto this very Day: for they are impudent
Children, and stiff-hearted. -- And it appears by the Discourse of Stephen
(Acts vii.) that this was generally the Case with that Nation, from their first
Rise, even to the Days of the Apostles. After his summary Rehearsal of the
Instances of their Perverseness from the very Time of their selling Joseph into
Egypt, he concludes(v. 51, 52, 53.) Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Heart
and Ears, ye d^ ALWAYS resist the Holy Ghost. As your Fathers did, so do ye.
Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And they have stain
them which showed before of the Coming of that just One, of whom Ye have been
now the Betrayers and Murderers: Who have received the Law by the Disposition
of Angels, and have not kept it.

Thus it appears, that Wickedness was the generally prevailing Character in all
the Nations of Mankind, till Christ came. And so also it appears to have been
since his Coming, to this Day. So in the Age of the Apostles: though then, among
those that were converted to Christianity, were great Numbers of Persons
eminent for Piety; yet this was not the Case with the greater Part of the
World, or the greater Part of any one Nation in it. There was a great Number of
Persons of a truly pious Character in the latter Part of the apostoli^k Age,
when Multitudes of Converts had been made, and Christianity was as yet in it is
primitive Purity. But what says the Apostle John of the Church of God at that
Time, as compared with the Rest of the World? 1 John v. 19. We know that we are
of God, an the whole World lies in Wickedness. And after Christianity came to
prevail, to that Degree, that Christians had the upper Hand in Nations and
civil Communities, still the greater Part of Mankind remained in their old
Heathen State; which Dr. T. speaks of as a State of great Ignorance and
Wickedness. And besides, this is noted in all Ecclesiastical History, that as
the Christians gained in Power and secular Advantages, true Piety declined, and
Corruption and Wickedness prevailed among them. -- And as to the State of the
Christian World, since Christianity began to be established by human Laws,
Wickedness for the most Part has greatly prevailed; as is very notorious, and
is implied in what Dr. T. himself says: He, in giving an Account how the
Doctrine of Original Sin came to prevail among Christians, says, P. 443. That
the Christian Religion was very early and grievously corrupted, by dreaming,
ignorant, superstitious Monks. In P. 259. he says, The Generality of Christians
have embraced this Persuasion concerning Original Sin; and the Consequence has
been, that the Generality of Christians have been the most wicked, lewd, bloody
and treacherous of all Mankind.

Thus, a View of the several successive Periods of the past Duration of the
World, from the Beginning to this Day, shows, that Wickedness has ever been
exceeding prevalent, and has had vastly the Superiority in the World. And Dr.
T. himself in Effect owns, that it has been so ever since Adam first turned
into the Way of Transgression. P. 168. It is certain (says he) the moral
Circumstances of Mankind, since the Time Adam first turned into the Way of
Transgression, have been very different from a State of Innocence. So far as we
can judge from History, or what we know at present, the greatest Part of
Mankind, have been, and still are very corrupt; though not equally so in every
Age and Place. And lower in the same Page, he speaks of Adam's Posterity, as
having sunk themselves into the most lamentable Degrees of Ignorance,
Superstition, Idolatry, Injustice, Debauchery, etc.

These Things clearly determine the Point, concerning the Tendency of Man's
Nature to Wickedness, if we may be allowed to proceed according to such Rules
and Methods of Reasoning, as are universally made use of, and never denied, or
doubted to be good and sure, in experimental Philosophy; Dr. Turnbull, though so
great an Enemy to the Doctrine of the Depravity of Nature, yet greatly insists
upon it, that the experimental Method of Reasoning ought to be gone into in
moral Matters, and Things pertaining to the human Nature; and should chiefly be
relied upon, in moral, as well as natural Philosophy. See Introduc. to M^r.
Phil.
or may reason from Experience and Facts, in that Manner which common Sense
leads all Mankind to in other Cases. If Experience and Trial will evince any
thing at all concerning the natural Disposition of the Hearts of Mankind, one
would think the Experience of so many Ages as have elapsed since the Beginning
of the World, and the Trial as it were made by Hundreds of different Nations
together, for so long a Time, should be sufficient to convince all, that
Wickedness is agreeable to the Nature of Mankind in it is present State.

Here, to strengthen the Argument, if there were any Need of it, I might
observe some further Evidences than those which have been already mentioned,
not only of the Extent and Generality of the Prevalence of Wickedness in the
World, but of the Height to which it has risen, and the Degree in which it has
reigned. Among innumerable Things which show this, I shall now only observe
this, viz. the Degree in which Mankind have from Age to Age been hurtful one to
another. Many Kinds of brute Animals are esteemed very noxious and destructive,
many of 'em very fierce, voracious,and many very poisonous, and the destroying
of 'em has always been looked upon as a public Benefit: but have not Mankind
been a Thousand Times as hurtful and destructive as any one of them, yea, as
all the noyous Beasts, Birds, Fishes and Reptiles in the Earth, Air and Water,
put together, at least, of all Kinds of Animals that are visible? And no
Creature can be found any where so destructive of it is own Kind, as Mankind
are. All others for the most Part are harmless and peaceable, with regard to
their own Species. Where one Wolf is destroyed by another Wolf, one Viper by
another, probably a Thousand of Mankind are destroyed by those of their own
Species. Well therefore might our blessed Lord say, when sending forth his
Disciples into the World, Matthew. x. 16, 17. Behold, I send you forth as Sheep
in the Midst of Wolves; -- BUT BEWARE OF MEN. As much to say, I send you forth
as Sheep among Wolves. -- But why do I say, Wolves? I send you forth into the
wide World of Men, that are far more hurtful and pernicious, and that you had
much more Need to beware of, than Wolves.

It would be strange indeed, that this should be the State of the World of
Mankind, the chief of the lower Creation, distinguished above all by Reason, to
that End that they might be capable of Religion, which summarily consists in
Love, if Men, as they come into the World, are in their Nature innocent and
harmless, undepraved and perfectly free from all evil Propensities.

SECT. VIII.
The native Depravity of Mankind appears, in that there has been so little good
Effect of so manifold and great Means, used to promote Virtue in the World.
THE Evidence of the native Corruption of Mankind appears much more glaring,
when it is considered that the World has been so generally, so constantly, and
so exceedingly corrupt, notwithstanding the various, great and continual Means,
that have been used to restrain Men from Sin, and promote Virtue and true
Religion among them.

Dr. T. supposes, all that Sorrow and Death, which came on Mankind, in
Consequence of Adam's Sin, was brought on them by God, in great Favor to them;
as a benevolent Father exercising an wholesome Discipline toward his Children;
to restrain 'em from Sin, by increasing the Vanity of all earthly Things, to
abate their Force to tempt and delude; to induce 'em to be moderate in
gratifying the Appetites of the Body; to mortify Pride and Ambition; and that
Men might always have before their Eyes a striking Demonstration, that Sin is
infinitely hateful to God, by a Sight of That, than which Nothing is more
proper to give them the utmost Abhorrence of Iniquity, and to fix in their
Minds a Sense of the dreadful Consequences of Sin, etc. etc. And in general,
that they don't come as Punishments, but purely as Means to keep Men from Vice,
and to make them better. -- If it be so, surely they are great Means indeed.
Here is a mighty Alteration: Mankind, once so easy and happy, healthful,
vigorous and beautiful, rich in all the pleasant and abundant Blessings of
Paradise, now turned out, destitute, weak and decaying, into a wide barren
World, yielding Briars and Thorns, in Stead of the delightful Growth and sweet
Fruit of the Garden of Eden, to wear out Life in Sorrow and Toil, on the Ground
cursed for his Sake; and at last, either through long Languishing and lingering
Decay, or severe Pain and acute Disease, to expire and turn to Putrefaction and
Dust. If these are only used as Medicines, to prevent and to cure the Diseases
of the Mind, they are sharp Medicines indeed; especially Death; which, to use
Hezekiah's Representation, is as it were breaking all his Bones: And one would
think, should be very effectual, if the Subject had no Depravity, no evil and
contrary Biass, to resist and hinder a proper Effect; especially in the old
World, when the Thing which was the first Occasion of this terrible Alteration,
this severity of Means, was fresh in Memory; Adam continuing alive near two
Thirds of the Time that passed before the Flood; so that a very great Part of
those that were alive till the Flood, might have Opportunity of seeing and
conversing with him, and hearing from his Mouth, not only an Account of his
Fall, and the Introduction of the awful Consequences of it, but also of his
first finding Himself in Existence in the newcreated World, and of the Creation
of Eve, and the Things which passed between him and his Creator in Paradise.

But what was the Success of these great Means, to restrain Men from Sin, and
to induce them to Virtue? Did they prove sufficient? -- In Stead of this, the
World soon grew exceeding corrupt; till it came to that, to use our Author's
own Words, That Mankind were universally d^bauch'd into Lust, Sensuality,
Rapine and Injustice.

Then God used further Means: He sent Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, to
warn the World, of the universal Destruction which would come upon them by a
Flood of Waters, if they went on in Sin. Which Warning he delivered with these
Circumstances, tending to strike their Minds, and command their Attention; that
he immediately went about building that vast Structure of the Ark; in which he
must employ a great Number of Hands, and probably spent all he had in the World
to save himself and his Family. And under these uncommon Means, God waited upon
them 120 Years. -- But all to no Effect. The whole World, for ought appears,
continued obstinate, and absolutely incorrigible: So that Nothing remained to
be done with them, but utterly to destroy the Inhabitants of the Earth; and to
begin a new World, from that single Family who had distinguished themselves by
their Virtue; that from them might be propagated a new and purer Race. --
Accordingly this was done: And the Inhabitants of the new World, of Noah's
Posterity, had these new and extraordinary Means to restrain Sin and excite
Virtue, in Addition to the Toil, Sorrow, and common Mortality, which the World
had been subjected to before in Consequence of Adam's Sin; viz. that God had
newly testified his dreadful Displeasure for Sin, in destroying the many
Millions of Mankind, all at one blow, old and young, Men, Women and Children,
without Pity on any for all the dismal Shrieks and Cries which the World was
filled with; when they themselves, the remaining Family, were so wonderfully
distinguished by God's preserving Goodness, that they might be a holy Seed,
being delivered from the corrupting Examples of the old World; and being all
the Offspring of a living Parent, whose pious Instructions and Counsels they
had, to enforce these Things upon them, to prevent Sin, and engage them to
their Duty. And these Inhabitants of the new Earth must, for a long Time, have
before their Eyes many evident, and as it were fresh and striking Effects and
Signs of that universal Destruction, to be a continual affecting Admonition to
'em. And besides all this, God now shortened the Life of Man, to about one half
of what it used to be. The shortning Man's Life, Dr. T. says, P. 68. Was, that
the wild Range of Ambition and Lust might be brought into narrower Bounds, and
have less Opportunity of doing Mischief; and that Death, being still nearer to
our View, might be a more powerful Motive to regard less the things of a
transitory World, and to attend to the Rules of Truth and Wisdom.

And now let us observe the Consequence. -- These new and extraordinary Means,
in Addition to the former, were so far from proving sufficient, that the new
World degenerated, and became corrupt, by such swift Degrees, that, as Dr. T.
observes, Mankind in general were sunk into Idolatry, in about 400 Years after
the Flood, and so in about 50 Years after Noah's Death: They became so wicked
and brutish, as to forsake the true God, and turn to the Worship of inanimate
Creatures.

When Things were come to this dreadful Pass, God was pleased, for a Remedy, to
introduce a new and wonderful Dispensation; separating a particular Family and
People, from all the rest of the World, by a Series of most astonishing
Miracles, done in the open View of the World; and fixing their Dwelling, as it
were in the Midst of the Earth, between Asia, Europe and Africa, and in the
Midst of those Nations which were most considerable and famous for Power,
Knowledge and Arts; that God might, in an extraordinary Manner, dwell amongst
that People, in visible Tokens of his Presence, manifesting himself there, and
from thence to the World, by a Course of great and miraculous Operations and
Effects, for many Ages: that that People might be holy to God, and as a Kingdom
of Priests, and might stand as a City on an Hill, to be a Light to the World:
withal gradually shortning Man's Life, till it was brought to be but about one
twelfth Part of what it used to be before the Flood; and so, according to Dr.
T. -- vastly cutting off and diminishing his Temptations to Sin, and increasing
his Excitements to Holiness. -- And now let us consider what the Success of
these Means was, both as to the Gentile World, and the Nation of Israel.

Dr. T. justly observes (Key, 50.) The Jewish Dispensation had Respect to the
Nations of the World, to spread the Knowledge and Obedience of God in the
Earth; and was established for the Benefit of all Mankind. -- But how
unsuccessful were these Means, and all other Means used with the Heathen
Nations, so long as this Dispensation lasted? Abraham was a Person noted in all
the principal Nations that were then in the World; as in Egypt, and the eastern
Monarchies: God made his Name famous by his wonderful distinguishing
Dispensations toward him, particularly by so miraculously subduing before him,
and his trained Servants, those Armies of the four eastern Kings. This great
Work of the most High God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, was greatly taken
Notice of by Melchizedeck; and one would think, should have been sufficient to
have awakened the Attention and Consideration of all the Nations in that Part
of the World, and to have led them to the Knowledge and Worship of the only
true God; especially if considered in Conjunction with that miraculous and most
terrible Destruction of Sodom, and all the Cities of the Plain, for their
Wickedness, with Lot's miraculous Deliverance; which doubtless were Facts, that
in their Day were much famed abroad in the World. But there is not the least
Appearance, in any Accounts we have, of any considerable good Effect. On the
contrary, those Nations which were most in the Way of observing and being
affected with these things, even the Nations of Canaan, grew worse and worse,
till their Iniquity came to the full, in Joshua's Time. And the Posterity of
Lot, that Saint so wonderfully distinguished, soon became some of the most
gross Idolaters; as they appear to have been in Moses's Time. (See Number. xxv.)
Yea, and the far greater Part even of Abraham's Posterity, the children of
Ishmael, Ziman, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Jshbak and Shuah, and Esau, soon forgot
the true God, and fell off to Heathenism

Great Things were done in the Sight of the Nations of the World, tending to
awaken them, and lead them to the Knowledge and Obedience of the true God, in
Jacob's and Joseph's Time; in that God did miraculously, by the Hand of Joseph,
preserve from perishing by Famine, as it were the whole World; as appears by
Genesis xli. 56, 57. Agreeably to which, the Name that Pharaoh gave to Joseph,
Zaphnath-Paaneah, as is said, in the Egyptian Language, signifies Savior of
the World. But there does not appear to have been any good abiding Effect of
this; no, not so much as in the Nation of the Egyptians (which seems to have
been the chief of all the heathen Nations at that Day) who had these great
Works of Jehovah in their most immediate View: on the contrary, they grew worse
and worse, and seem to be far more gross in their Idolatries, and Ignorance of
the true God, and every Way more wicked, and ripe for Ruin, when Moses was sent
to Pharaoh, than they were in Joseph's Time.

After this, in Moses and Joshua's Time, the great God was pleased to manifest
himself in a Series of the most astonishing Miracles, for about fifty Years
together, wrought in the most public Manner, in Egypt, in the Wilderness, and
in Canaan, in the View as it were of the whole World; Miracles by which the
World was shaken, the whole Frame of the visible Creation, Earth, Seas and
Rivers, the Atmosphere, the Clouds, Sun, Moon and Stars, were affected;
Miracles greatly tending to convince the Nations of the World, of the Vanity of
their false Gods, showing JEHOVAH to be infinitely above them, in the Thing
wherein they dealt most proudly, and exhibiting God's awful Displeasure at the
Wickedness of the heathen World. And these Things are expressly spoken of as
one End of these great Miracles, in Exodus ix. 15. Number. xiv. 21. Josh. xiv. 23,
24. and other Places. However, no Reformation followed these Things; but by the
Scripture-Account, the Nations which had them most in View, were dreadfully
hardened, stupidly refusing all Conviction and Reformation, and obstinately
went on in an Opposition to the living God, to their own Destruction.

After this, God did from time to time, very publicly manifest himself to the
Nations of the World, by wonderful Works wrought in the Time of the Judges, of
a like Tendency with those already mentioned. Particularly in so miraculously
destroying by the Hand of Gideon, almost the whole of that vast Army of the
Midianites, Amalekites, and all the Children of the East, consisting of about
135000 Men; Judge. vii. 12. and viii. 12. But no Reformation followed this or
the other great Works of God, wrought in the Times of Deborah and Barak,
J^phtha and Sampson.

After these Things, God used new, and in some Respects much greater Means with
the heathen World, to bring them to the Knowledge and Service of the true God,
in the Days of David and Solomon. He raised up David, a Man after his own
Heart, a most fervent Worshipper of the true God, and zealous Hater of Idols,
and subdued before him almost all the Nations, between Egypt and Euphrates;
often miraculously assisting him in his Battles with his Enemies: and he
confirmed Solomon his Son in the full and quiet Possession of that great
Empire, for about forty Years; and made him the wisest, richest, most
magnificent, and every Way the greatest Monarch that ever had been in the
World; and by far the most famous, and of greatest Name among the Nations;
especially for his Wisdom, and Things concerning the Name of his God;
particularly the Temple he built, which was exceeding magnificent, that it
might be of Fame and Glory throughout all Lands; 1 Chronicles. xxii. 5. And we are
told, that there came of all People to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, from all
Kings of the Earth; 1 King. iv. 34. and x. 24. And the Scripture informs us,
that these great Things were done, that the Nations in far Countries might hear
of God's great Name, and of his outstretched Arm; that all the People of the
Earth might fear him, as well as his People Israel; And that all the People of
the Earth might know, that the LORD was God, and that there was none else. 1
King. viii. 41, 42, 43, 60. But still there is no Appearance of any
considerable abiding Effect, with Regard to any one heathen Nation.

After this, before the Captivity into Babylon, many great Things were done in
the Sight of the Gentile Nations, very much tending to enlighten, affect and
persuade them. As, God's destroying the Army of the Ethiopians, of a Thousand
Thousand, before Asa; Elijah's and Elisha's Miracles; especially Elijah's
miraculously confounding Baal's Prophets and Worshippers; Elisha's healing
Naaman, the King of Syria's prime Minister, and the miraculous Victories
obtained through Elisha's Prayers, over the Dyrians, Moabites an^d Edomites; the
miraculous Destruction of the vast united Army of the Children of Moab, Ammon,
and Edom, at Jehoshaphat's Prayer. (2 Chronicles. xx.) Jonah's preaching at Nineveh,
together with the Miracle of his Deliverance from the Whale's Belly^ which was
published, and well attested, as a Sign to confirm his Preaching: But more
especially that great Work of God, in destroying Sennacherib's Army by an
Angel, for his Contempt of the God of Israel, as if he had been no more than
the Gods of the Heathen.

When all these Things proved ineffectual, God took a new Method with the
heathen World, and used, in some respects, much greater Means to convince and
reclaim them, than ever before. In the first Place, his People, the Jews, were
removed to Babylon, the Head and Heart of the heathen World ( Chaldea, having
been very much the Fountain of Idolatry) to carry thither the Revelations which
God had made of Himself, contained in the sacred Writings; and there to bear
their Testimony against Idolatry; as some of them, particularly Daniel,
Shadrach, Meshack and Abed-nego, did, in a very open Manner, before the King,
and the greatest Men of the Empire, with such Circumstances as made their
Testimony very famous in the World; God confirming it with great Miracles;
which were published through the Empire, by Order of it is Monarch, as the mighty
Works of the God of Israel, showing him to be above all Gods: Daniel, that
great Prophet, at the same time being exalted to be Governor of all the wise
Men of Babylon, and one of the chief Officers of Nebuchadnezzar's Court.

After this, God raised up Cyrus, to destroy Babylon, for it is obstinate
Contempt of the true God, and Injuriousness toward his People; according to
the Prophecies of Isaiah, speaking of him by Name, instructing him concerning
the Nature and Dominion of the true God. (Isai. xlv.) Which Prophecies were
probably shown to him, whereby he was induced to publish his Testimony
concerning the God of Israel, as THE GOD. (Ezra i. 2, 3.) Daniel, about the
same Time, being advanced to be prime Minister of State in the new Empire,
erected under Darius, and in that Place appeared openly as a Worshipper of the
God of Israel, and Him alone; God confirming his Testimony for Him, before the
King, and all the Grandees of his Kingdom, by preserving him in the Den of
Lions; where by Darius was induced to publish to all People, Nations and
Languages, that dwelt in all the Earth, his Testimony, that the God of Israel
was the living God, and steadfast for ever, etc.

When, after the Destruction of Babylon, some of the Jews returned to their own
Land, Multitudes never returned* but were dispersed abroad, through many Parts of
the vast Persian Empire; as appears by the Book of Esther. And many of 'em
afterward, as good Histories inform, were removed into the more western Parts
of the World: and so were dispersed as it were all over the heathen World,
having the holy Scriptures with them, and Synagogues every where, for the
Worship of the true God. And so it continued to be, to the Days of Christ and
his Apostles; as appears by the Acts of the Apostles. Thus that Light, which
God had given them, was in the Providence of God, carried abroad into all Parts
of the World: So that now they had far greater Advantages, to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, in Matters of Religion, if they had been disposed to
improve their Advan^ages.

And besides all these things, from about Cyrus's Time, Learning and Philosophy
increased, and was carried to a great Height. God raised up a Number of Men of
prodigious Genius, to instruct others, and improve their Reason and
Understanding, in the Nature of Things: And philosophic Knowledge having gone
on to increase for several Ages, seemed to be got to it is Height before Christ
came, or about that Time.

And now let it be considered what was the Effect of all these Things. -- In
Stead of a Reformation, or any Appearance or Prospect of it, the Heathen World
in general rather grew worse. As Dr. Winder observes, The inveterate
Absurdities of Pagan Idolatry continued without Remedy, and increased as Arts
and Learning increased; and Paganism prevailed in all it is Height of Absurdity,
when Pagan Nations were polished to the Height, and in the most polite Cities
and Countries; and thus continued to the last Breath of Pagan Power. And so it
was with respect to Wickedness in general, as well as idolatry; as appears by
what the Apostle Paul observes in Romans i. -- Dr. T. speaking of the Time when
the Gospel-Scheme was introduced ( Key, 257.) says* The moral and religious
State of the Heathen was very deplorable, being generally sunk into great
Ignorance, gross Idolatry, and abominable Vice. Abominable Vices prevailed, not
only among the common People, but even among their Philosophers themselves,
yea, some of the chief of them, and of greatest Genius; so Dr. T. himself
observes, as to that detestable Vice of Sodomy, which they commonly and openly
allowed and practiced without Shame. See Dr. T -- r's Note on Romans i. 27.

Having thus considered the State of the Heathen World, with regard to the
Effect of Means used for it is Reformation, during the Jewish Dispensation, from
the first Foundation of it in Abraham's Time; Let us now consider how it was
with that People themselves, that were distinguished with the peculiar
Privileges of that Dispensation. The Means used with the Heathen Nations, were
great; but they were small, if compared with those used with the Israelites.
The Advantages by which that People were distinguished, are r^presented in
Scripture as vastly above all parallel, in Passages which Dr. T. takes Notice
of. ( Key, 39.) And he reckons these Privileges among those which he calls
antecedent Blessings, consisting in Motives to Virtue and Obedience; and says (
Key, 51.) That this was the very End and Design of the Dispensation of God's
extraordinary Favors to the Jews, viz. to engage them to Duty and Obedience or
that it was a Scheme for promoting Virtue, is clear beyond Dispute, from every
Part of the Old Testament. Nevertheless, as has been already shown, the
Generality of that People, through all the successive Periods of that
Dispensation, were Men of a wicked Character. But it will be more abundantly
manifest, how strong the natural Biass to Iniquity appeared to be among that
People, by considering more particularly how things were with them from Time to
Time.

Notwithstanding the great things God had done in the Times of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, to separate them and their Posterity from the Idolatrous World, that
they might be a holy People to himself; yet in about 200 Years after Jacob's
Death, and in less than 150 Years after the Death of Joseph, and while some
were alive that had seen Joseph, the People had in a great Measure lost the
true Religion, and were apace conforming to the Heathen World: When, for a
Remedy, and the more effectually to alienate them from Idols, and engage them
to the God of their Fathers, God appeared to bring 'em out from among the
Egyptians, and separate them from the heathen World, and to reveal Himself in
his Glory and Majesty, in so affecting and astonishing a Manner, as tended most
deeply and durably to impress their Minds; that they might never forsake him
more. But so perverse were they, that they murmured even in the Midst of the
Miracles that God wrought for 'em in Egypt, and murmured at the Red Sea, in a
few Days after God had brought them out with such a mighty Hand. When he had
led them through the Sea, they sang his Praise, but soon forgot his Works. Before
they got to Mount Sinai, they openly manifested their Perverseness from Time to
Time; so that God says of 'em, Exodus xvi. 28. How long will ye refuse to keep
my Commandments, and my Laws? Afterward they murmured again at Rephedim.

In about two Months after they came out of Egypt, they came to Mount Sinai;
where God entered into a most solemn Covenant with the People, that they should
be an holy People unto him, with such astonishing Manifestations of his Power,
Majesty and Holiness, as were altogether unparalled: As God puts the People
in Mind, De^^* iv. 32, -- 34. For ask now of the Days that are past, which were
before thee, since the Day that God created Man upon the Earth; and ask from
one Side of Heaven unto the other, whether there has been any such thing as
this great Thing is, or has been heard like it. Did ever People hear the Voice
of God speaking out of the Midst of the Fire, as thou have heard, and live? Or
has God assayed to take him a Nation from the Midst of another Nation, etc?
And these great Things were to that End, to impress their Minds with such a
Conviction and Sense of divine Truth, and their Obligations to their Duty, that
they might never forget them: As God says, Exodus xix. 9. Lo, I come unto thee
in a thick Cloud, that the People may hear when I speak with thee, and believe
thee for ever. But what was the Effect of all? Why, it was not more than two or
three Months, before that People, there, under that very Mountain, returned to
their old Egyptian Idolatry, and were singing and dancing before a golden Calf,
which they had set up to worship. And after such awful Manifestations as there
were of God's Displeasure for that Sin, and so much done to bring 'em to
Repentance, and confirm 'em in Obedience, it was but a few Months before they
came to that Violence of Spirit, in open Rebellion against God, that with the
utmost Vehemence they declared their Resolution to follow God no longer, but to
make them a Captain to return into Egypt. And thus they went on in Ways of
perverse Opposition to the most High, from Time to Time, repeating their open
Acts of Rebellion, in the Midst of continued astonishing Miracles, till that
Generation was destroyed. And though the following Generation seems to have been
the best that ever was in Israel; yet notwithstanding their good Example, and
notwithstanding all the Wonders of God's Power and Love to that People, in
Joshua's Time, how soon did that People degenerate, and begin to forsake God,
and join with the Heathen in their Idolatries, till God by severe Means, and by
sending Prophets and Judges, extraordinarily influenced from above, reclaimed
them? But when they were brought to some Reformation by such Means, they soon
fell away again into the Practice of Idolatry; and so from Time to Time, from
one Age to another; and nothing proved effectual for any abiding Reformation.

After things had gone on thus for several hundred Years, God used new Methods
with his People, in two Respects; First, He raised up a great Prophet, under
whom a Number of young Men were trained up in Schools, that from among them
there might be a constant Succession of great Prophets in Israel, of such as
God should choose; which seems to have been continued for more than 500 Years.
Secondly, God raised up a great King, David, one eminent for Wisdom, Piety and
Fortitude, to subdue all their Heathen Neighbors, who used to be such a Snare
to 'em; and to confirm, adorn and perfect the Institutions of his public
Worship; and by him to make a more full Revelation of the great Salvation, and
future glorious Kingdom of the Messiah. And after him, raised up his Son
Solomon, the wisest and greatest Prince that ever was on Earth, more fully to
settle and establish those Things which his Father David had begun, concerning
the public Worship of God in Israel, and to build a glorious Temple for the
Honor of JEHOVAH, and the Institutions of his Worship, and to instruct the
neighbor Nations in true Wisdom and Religion. But as to the Success of these
new and extraordinary Means, if we take Dr. T. for our Expositor of Scripture,
the Nation must be extremely corrupt in David's Time: for he supposes, he has
respect to his own Times, in those Words, Psalm. xiv. 2. 3. The Lord looked down
from Heaven, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God: They
are all gone aside; They are together become filthy; There is none that does
Good; no, not one. But whether Dr. T. be in the right in this, or not, yet if
we consider what appeared in Israel, in Absolom's and Sheba's Rebellion, we
shall not see Cause to think, that the greater Part of the Nation at that Day
were Men of true Wisdom and Piety. As to Solomon's Time, Dr. T. supposes, as
has been already observed, that Solomon speaks of his own Times, when he says,
he had found but one in a Thousand that was a thoroughly upright Man. However,
it appears that all those great Means used to promote and establish Virtue and
true Religion, in Samuel's, David's and Solomon's Times, were so far from
having any general abiding good Effect in Israel, that Solomon himself, with
all his Wisdom, and notwithstanding the unparalled Favors of God to him, had
his Mind corrupted, so as openly to tolerate Idolatry in the Land, and greatly
to provoke God against him. And as soon as he was dead, ten Tribes of the
twelve forsook the true Worship of God, and in Stead of it, openly established
the like Idolatry, that the People fell into at Mount Sinai, when they made the
golden Calf; and continued finally obstinate in this Apostasy, notwithstanding
all Means that could be used with them by the Prophets, which God sent, one
after another, to reprove, counsel and warn them, for about 250 Years;
especially those two great Prophets, Elijah and Elisha. Of all the Kings that
reigned over them, there was not so much as one but what was of a wicked
Character. And at last it came to that, that their Case seemed utterly
desperate: So that Nothing remained to be done with them, but to remove 'em out
of God's Sight. Thus the Scripture represents the Matter, 2 Kings xvii.

And as to the other two Tribes; though their Kings were always of the Family of
David, and they were favored in many respects, far beyond their Brethren, yet
they were generally exceeding corrupt: their Kings were most of 'em wicked Men,
and their other Magistrates, and Priests and People, were generally agreed in
the Corruption. Thus the Matter is represented in the Scripture-History, and
the Books of the Prophets. And when they had seen how God had cast off the ten
Tribes, in Stead of taking Warning, they made themselves vas^ly more vile than
ever the other had done; as appears by 2 Kings xvii. 18, 19. Ezekiel. xvi. 46,47,
51. God indeed waited longer upon them, for his Servant David's Sake, and for
Jerusalem's Sake, that he had chosen; and used more extraordinary Means with
them; especially by those great Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah; but to no
Effect: So that at last it came to this, as the Prophets represent the Matter,
that they were like a Body universally and desperately diseased and corrupted,
that would admit of no Cure, the whole Head sick, and the whole Heart faint,
etc.

Things being come to that Pass, God took this Method with them* He utterly
destroyed their City and Land, and the Temple which he had among them, made
thorough Work in purging the Land of 'em; as when a Man empties a Dis^, wipes
it,and turns it upside down; or when a Vessel is cast into a fierce Fire, till
it is Filthiness is thoroughly burnt out. 2 Kings xxi. 13. ^zek. Chap. xxiv.
They were carried into Captivity, and there left till that wicked Generation
was dead, and those old Rebels were purged out; that afterward the Land might
be resettled with a more pure Generation.

After the Return from the Captivity, and God had built the Jewish Church again
in their own Land, by a series of wonderful Providence; yet they corrupted
themselves ^^^in, to so great a Degree, that the Transgressors were come the
full again in the Days of Antiochus Epiphanes; as the Matter is represented in
the Prophecy of Daniel, Dan. viii. 28. And then God made them the Subjects of a
Dispensation, little, if any Thing, less terrible, than that which had been in
Nebuchadnezzar's Days. And after God had again delivered 'em, and restored the
State of Religion among them, by the Instrumentality of the Maccabees, they
degenerated again; So that when Christ came, they were arrived to that extreme
Degree of Corruption, which is represented in the Accounts given by the
Evangelists.

It may be observed here in general, that the Jews, though so vastly
distinguished with Advantages, Means and Motives to Holiness, yet are
represented as coming, from Time to Time, to that Degree of Corruption and
Guilt, that they were more wicked, in the Sight of God, than the very worst of
the Heathen. As, of old, God swear by his Life, that the Wickedness of Sodom
was small, compared with that of the Jews. Ezekiel. xvi. 47, 48, etc. also Chap.
v. 5. -- 10. So, Christ speaking of the Jews, in his Time, represents 'em as
having much greater Guilt than the Inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, or even Sodom
and Gomorrah.

But we are now come to the Time when the grandest Scene was displayed, that
ever was opened on Earth. After all other Schemes had been so long and so
thoroughly tried, and had so greatly failed of Success, both among Jews and
Gentiles; that wonderful Dispensation was at length introduced, which was the
greatest Scheme for the suppressing and restraining Iniquity among Mankind,
that ever infinite Wisdom and Mercy contrived; even the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ. A new Dispensation of Grace was erected (to use Dr. T -- r's own
Words, P. 239, 240) for the more certain, and effectual Sanctification of
Mankind, into the Image of God; the delivering them from Sin and Wickedness,
into which they might fall, or were already fallen; to redeem 'em from all
Iniquity, and bring 'em to the Knowledge and Obedience of God. In whatever high
and exalted Terms the Scripture speaks of the Means and Motives which the Jews
enjoyed of old; yet their Privileges are represented as having no Glory, in
Comparison of the Advantages of the Gospel. Dr. T -- r's Words in P. 233. are
worthy to be here repeated. Even the Heathen (says he) knew God, and might have
glorified him as God; but under the glorious Light of the Gospel, we have very
clear Ideas of the divine Perfections, and particularly of the Love of God as
our Father, and as the God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We
see our Duty in the utmost Extent, and the most cogent Reasons to perform it:
We have Eternity opened to us, even an endless State of Honor and Felicity,
the Reward of virtuous Actions; and the Spirit of God promised for our
Direction and Assistance. And all this may and ought to be applied to the
purifying our Minds, and the perfecting of Holiness. And to these happy
Advantages, we are born: for which we are bound for ever to praise and magnify
the rich Grace of God in the Redeemer. And he elsewhere says, Key, 139.
The Gospel-Constitution is a Scheme the most perfect and effectual for
restoring-true Religion, and promoting Virtue and Happiness, that ever the
World has yet seen. And Note on Romans i. 16.
admirably adapted to enlighten our Minds, and sanctify our Hearts; And Prof.
to Per. on Romans P. 203.
never were Motives so divine and powerful proposed, to induce us to the
Practice of all Virtue and Goodness.

And yet even these Means have been ineffectual upon the far greater Part of
them with whom they have been used; of the many that have been called, few have
been chosen.

As to the Jews, God's ancient People, with whom they were used in the first
Place, and used long by Christ and his Apostles, the Generality of them
rejected Christ and his Gospel, with extreme Pertinaciousness of Spirit. They
not only went on still in that Career of Corruption, which had been increasing
from the Time of the Maccabees; but Christ's Coming, and his Doctrine and
Miracles, and the Preaching of his Followers, and the glorious Things that
attended the same, were the Occasion, through their perverse Improvement, of an
infinite Increase of their Wickedness. They crucified the Lord of Glory, with
the utmost Malice and Cruelty, and persecuted his Followers; they pleased not
God, and were contrary to all Men; and went on to grow worse and worse, till
they filled up the Measure of their Sin, and Wrath came upon them to the
uttermost; and they were destroyed, and cast out of God's Sight, with
unspeakably greater Tokens of the divine Abhorrence and Indignation, than in
the Days of Nebuchadnezzar. The bigger Part of the whole Nation were slain, and
the rest were scattered abroad through the Earth, in the most abject and forlorn
Circumstances. And in the same spirit of Unbelief and Malice against Christ and
the Gospel, and in their miserable dispersed Circumstances, do they remain to
this Day.

And as to the Gentile Nations, though there was a glorious Success of the Gospel
amongst them, in the Apostles Days; yet probably not one in ten of those that
had the Gospel preached to 'em, embraced it. The Powers of the World were set
against it, and persecuted it with insatiable Malignity. And among the
Professors of Christianity, there presently appeared in many a Disposition to
Corruption, and to abuse the Gospel unto the Service of Pride and
Licentiousness. And the Apostles in their Days foretold a grand Apostasy of the
Christian World, which should continue many Ages; and observed, that there
appeared a Disposition to such an Apostasy, among professing Christians, even
in that Day. ^ Thessalonians. ii. 7. And the greater Part of the Ages which have now
elapsed, have been spent in the Duration of that grand and general Apostasy,
under which the Christian World, as it is called, has been transformed into
that which has been vastly more deformed, more dishonorable and hateful to
God, and repugnant to true Virtue, than the State of the heathen World before:
Which is agreeable to the prophetical Descriptions given of it by the Holy
Spirit.

In these latter Ages of the Christian Church, God has raised up a Number of
great and good Men, to bear Testimony against the Corruptions of the Church of
Rome, and by their Means introduced that Light into the World, by which, in a
short Time, at least one Third Part of Europe were delivered from the more
gross Enormities of Antichrist: Which was attended at first with a great
Refor^^tion, as to vital and practical Religion. But how is the Gold soon
become dim! To what a Pass are things come in Protestant Countries at this Day,
and in our Nation in particular! To what a prodigious Height has a Deluge of
Infidelity, Profaneness, Luxury, Debauchery and Wickedness, of every Kind,
arisen! The poor savage Americans are mere Babes and Fools (if I may so speak)
as to Proficiency in Wickedness, in Comparison of Multitudes that the Christian
World throngs with. Dr. T. himself, as was before observed, represents, that
the Generosity of Christians have been the most wicked, lewd, bloody and
treacherous, of all Mankind, and says ( Key, 356.) The Wickedness of the
Christian World renders it so much like the Heathen, that the good Effects of
our Change to Christianity are but little seen.

And with respect to the dreadful Corruption of the present Day, it is to be
considered, besides the Advantages already mentioned, that great Advances in
Learning and philosophic Knowledge have been made in the present and past
Century, giving great Advantage for a proper and enlarged Exercise of our
rational Powers, and for our seeing the bright Manifestation of God's
Perfections in his Works. And it is to be observed, that the Means and
Inducements to Virtue, which this Age enjoys, are in Addition to most of those
which were mentioned before, as given of old; and among other Things, in
Addition to the shortening of Man's Life, to 70 or 80 Years, from near a
Thousand. And with regard to this, I would observe, that as the Case now is in
Christendom, take one with another of them that ever come to Years of
Discretion, their Life is not more than forty or forty-five Years; which is but
about the twentieth Parth of what it once was: And not so much in great Cities,
Places where Profaneness, Sensuality and Debauchery, commonly prevail to the
greatest Degree.

Dr. T. ( Key, 1.) truly observes, That God has from the Beginning exercised
wonderful and infinite Wisdom, in the Methods he has, from Age to Age, made use
of to oppose Vice, cure Corruption, and promote Virtue in the World; and
introduced several Schemes to that End. It Is indeed remarkable, how many
Schemes and Methods were tried of old, both before and after the Flood; how
many were used in the Times of the Old Testament, both with Jews and Heathens;
and how ineffectual all these ancient Methods proved, for 4000 Years together,
till God introduced that grand Dispensation, for the r^deeming Men from all
Iniquity, and purifying them so himself, a People zealous of good Works; which
the Scripture represents as the Subject of the Admiration of Angels. But even
this has; now so long, proved so ineffectual, with respect to the Generality,
that Dr. T. thinks there is Need of a new Dispensation; Christians being now,
as he says, in a Manner reduced to a State of Religion, as low as that of
Heathenism, and may be ranked among the Dead; the present Light of the Gospel
proving insufficient for the full Reformation of the Christian World. (Note on
Romans i. 27.) -- And yet all these Things, according to him, without any natural
B^a^s to the contrary; no Stream of natural Inclination or Propensity at all,
to oppose Inducements to Goodness; no native Opposition of Heart, to withstand
those gracious Means, which God has ever used with Mankind, from the Beginning
of the World to this Day; any more than there was in the Heart of Adam, the
Moment God created him in perfect Innocence.

Surely Dr. T -- r's Scheme is attended with strange Paradoxes. And that his
mysterious Toners may appear in a true Light, it must be observed, -- at the
same Time while he supposes these Means, even the very greatest and best of
'em, to have proved so ineffectual, that Help from them, as to any general
Reformation, is to be despaired of; yet he maintains, that all Mankind, even
the Heathen in all Parts of the World, yea, every single Person in it (which
must include every Indian in America, before the Europeans came hither; and
every Inhabitant of the unknown Parts of Africa, and Terra Australis) has
Ability, Light, and Means sufficient, to do their whole Duty* yet (as many
Passages in his Writings, plainly suppose) to perform perfect Obedience to
God's Law, without the least Degree of Vice or Iniquity. See P. 259, 339, 340,
348.


But I must not omit to observe, -- Dr. T. supposed, that the Reason why the
Gospel Dispensation has been so ineffectual, is, that it has been greatly
misunderstood and perverted. In P. 183. he says, Wrong Representations of the
Scheme of the Gospel have greatly obscured the Glory of divine Grace, and
contributed much to the Corruption of it is Professors. -- Such Doctrines have
been almost universally taught and received, as quite subvert it. Mistakes
Notions about Nature, Grace, Election and Reprobation, Justification,
Regeneration, Redemption, Calling, Adoption, etc. have quite taken away the
very Ground of the Christian Life.

But how came the Gospel to be so universally and exceedingly misunderstood? Is
it because it is in it self so very dark and unintelligible, and not adapted to
the Apprehension of the human Faculties? If so, how is the Possession of such
an obscure and unintelligible Thing, so unspeakable and glorious an Advantage?
-- Or is it because of the native Blindness, Corruption and Superstition of
Mankind? But this is giving up the Thing in Question, and allowing a great
Depravity of Nature. -- And Dr. T. speaks of the Gospel as far otherwise than
dark and unintelligible; he represents it as exhibiting the clearest and most
glorious Light, to deliver the World from Darkness, and bring 'em into
mavelous Light. He speaks of the Light which the Jews had, under the Mosaic
Dispensation, as vastly exceeding the Light of Nature, which the Heathen
enjoyed: And yet he supposes, that even the latter was so clear, as to be
sufficient to lead Men to the Knowledge of God, and their whole Duty to him.
And he speaks of the Light of the Gospel as vastly exceeding the Light of the
Old Testament. He says of the Apostle Paul in particular, That he wrote with
great Perspicuity; that he takes great Care to explain every Part of his
Subject; that he has left no Part of it unexplained and unguarded; and that
never was an Author more exact and cautious in this. Pref. ^0 Par. on Romans
-- Is it not strange therefore, that the Christian World, without any native
Depravity to prejudice and darken their Minds, should be so blind in the Midst
of such glaring Light, as to be all, or the Generality, agreed, from Age to
Age, so essentially to misunderstand that which is made so very plain?

Dr. T. says, P.443. It Is my Opinion, that the Christian Religion was very
early and grievously corrupted, by dreaming, ignorant, superstitious Monks, too
conceited to be satisfied with plain Gospel; and has long remained in that
deplorable State. -- But how came the whole Christian World, without any
blinding Depravity, to hearken to these ignorant foolish Men, rather than unto
wiser and better Teachers? Especially, when the latter had plain Gospel on
their Side, and the Doctrines of the other were(as our Author supposes) so very
contrary not only to the plain Gospel, but to Men's Reason and common Sense! Or
were all the Teachers of the Christian Church nothing but a Parcel of ignorant
Dreamers? If so, this is very strange indeed, unless Mankind naturally love
Darkness, rather than Light,; seeing in all Parts of the Christian World, there
was so great a Multitude of those in the Work of the Ministry, who had the
Gospel Gospel in their Hands, and whose whole Business it was to study and
teach it; and therefore had infinitely greater Advantages to become truly wise,
than the Heathen Philosophers. But if it did happen so, by some strange and
inconceivable Means, that notwithstanding all these glorious Advantages, all
the Teachers of the Christian Church through the World, without any native evil
Propensity, very early became silly Dreamers, and also in their dreaming,
generally stumbled on the same individual monstrous Opinions, and so the World
might be blinded for a while; yet why did not they hearken to that wise and
great Man, Pelagius, and others like Him, when he plainly held forth the Truth
to the Christian World? Especially seeing his Instructions were so agreeable to
the plain Doctrines, and the bright and clear Light of the Gospel of Christ,
and also so agreeable to the plainest Dictates of the common Sense and
Understanding of all Mankind; but the other so repugnant to it, that (according
to our Author) if they were true, it would prove Understand to be no
Understanding, and the Word of God to be no Rule of Truth, nor at all to be
relied upon, and God to be a Being worthy of no Regard!

And besides, if the Ineffectualness of the Gospel to restrain Sin and promote
Virtue, be owing to the general Prevalence of these Doctrines, which are
supposed to be so absurd and contrary to the Gospel, here is this further to be
accounted for; namely, Why, since there has been so great an Increase of Light
in religious Matters (as must be supposed on Dr. T -- r's Scheme) in this and
the last Age, and these monstrous Doctrines of Original Sin, Election,
Reprobation, Justification, Regeneration, etc. have been so much exploded,
especially in our Nation, there has been no Reformation attending this great
Advancement of Light and Truth: But on the contrary, Vice and every thing that
is opposite to practical Christianity, has gone on to increase, with such a
prodigious Celerity, as to become like an overflowing Deluge, threatening,
unless God mercifully interposes, speedily to swallow up all that is left of
what is virtuous and praiseworthy.

Many other Things might have been mentioned under this Head, of the Means
which Mankind have had to restrain Vice, and promote Virtue; such as --
Wickedness being many Ways contrary to Men's temporal Interest and Comfort in
this World, and their having continually before their Eyes so many instances of
Persons made miserable by their Vices; the Restraints of human Laws, without
which Men cannot live in Society; the Judgments of God brought on Men for their
Wickedness, with which History abounds, and the providential Rewards of Virtue;
and innumerable particular Means, that God has used from Age to Age, to curb
the Wickedness of Mankind, which I have omitted. But there would be no End of a
particular Enumeration of such Things. Enough has been said. They that will not
be convinced by the Instances which have been mentioned, probably would not be
convinced, if the World had stood a Thousand Times so long, and we had the most
authentic and certain Accounts of Means having been used from the Beginning,
in a Thousand Times greater Variety; and new Dispensations had been introduced,
after others had been tried in vain, ever so often, and still to little Effect.
He that will not be convinced by a Thousand good Witnesses, it is not likely that
he would be convinced by a Thousand Thousand. The Proofs that have been extant
in the World, from Trial and Fact, of the Depravity of Man's Nature, are
inexpressible, and as it were infinite, beyond the Representation of all
Comparison and Similitude. If there were a Piece of Ground, which abounded with
Briars and Thorns, or some poisonous Plant, and all Mankind had used their
Endeavors, for a Thousand Years together, to suppress that evil Growth, and to
bring that Ground by Manure and Cultivation, Planting and Sowing, to produce
better Fruit, but all in vain, it would still be overrun with the same noxious
Growth; it would not be a Proof, that such a Produce was agreeable to the
Nature of that Soil, in any wise to be compared to that which is given in
divine Providence, that Wickedness is a Produce agreeable to the Nature of the
Field of the World of Mankind; which has hand Means used with it, that have
been so various, great and wonderful, contrived by the unsearchable and
boundless Wisdom of God; Medicines procured with infinite Expense, exhibited
with so vast an Apparatus; so mavelous a Succession of Dispensations,
introduced one after another, displaying an incomprehensible Length and
Breadth, Depth and Height, of divine Wisdom, Love and Power, and every
Perfection of the Godhead, to the eternal Admiration of the Principalities and
Powers in heavenly Places.

SECT. IX.
Several Evasions of the Arguments for the Depravity of Nature, from Trial and
Events, considered.
E Vasion I. Dr. T. says, P. 231, 232. Adam's Nature, it is allowed, was very
far from being sinful; yet he sinned. And therefore, the common Doctrine of
Original Sin, is no more necessary to account for the Sin that has been in the
World, than it is to account for Adam's Sin. Again, P. 328, etc. If we allow
Mankind to be as wicked as R. R. has represented them to be; and suppose that
there is not one upon Earth that is truly righteous, and without Sin, and that
some are very enormous Sinners, yet it will not thence follow, that they are
naturally corrupt. -- For, if sinful Action infers a Nature originally corrupt,
then, whereas Adam (according to them that hold the Doctrine of Original Sin)
committed the most heinous and aggravated Sin, that ever was committed in the
World; for, according to them, he had greater Light than any other Man in the
World, to know his Duty, and greater Power than any other Man to fulfill it, and
was under greater Obligations than any other Men to Obedience; he sinned when
he knew he was the Representative of Millions, and that the happy or mise^able
State of all Mankind depended on his Conduct; which never was, nor can be, the
Case of any other Man in the World: -- then, I say, it will follow, that his
Nature was originally corrupt, etc. -- Thus, their Argument from the Wickedness
of Mankind, to prove a sinful and corrupt Nature, must inevitably and
irrecoverably fall to the Ground. -- Which will appear more abundantly, if we
take in the Case of the Angels; who in Numbers sinned and kept not their first
Estate, though created with a Nature superior to Adam's. Again, P. 421. When it
is enquired, how it comes to pass that our Appetites and Passions are now so
irregular and strong, as that not one Person has resisted them, so as to keep
himself pure and innocent? If this be the Case, if such as make the Enquiry
will tell the World, how it came to pass that Adam's Appetites and Passions
were so irregular and strong, that he did not resist them, so as to keep
himself pure and innocent, when upon their Principles he was far more able to
have resisted them; I also will tell them how it comes pass, that his Posterity
don't resist them. Sin does not alter it is Nature, by it is being general; and
therefore, how far soever it spreads, it must come upon all just as it came
upon Adam.

These Things are delivered with much Assurance. But is there any Reason in
such a Way of Talking? One Thing implied in it, and the main Thing, if any
Thing at all to the Purpose, is, that because an Effect's being general don't
alter the Nature of the Effect, therefore Nothing more can be argued concerning
the Cause, from it is happening constantly, and in the most steady Manner, than
from it is happening but once. But how contrary is this to Reason? If such a
Case should happen, that a Person, through the deceitful Persuasions of a
pretended Friend, once takes an unwholsom and poisonous Draught, of a Liquor
which he had no Inclination to before; but after he has once taken of it, he be
observed to act as one that has an insatiable, incurable Thirst after more of
the same, in his constant Practice, and Acts often repeated, and obstinately
continued in as long as he lives, against all possible Arguments and Endeavors
used to dissuade him from it; and we should from hence argue a fixed
Inclination, and begin to suspect that this is the Nature and Operation of the
Poison, to produce such an Inclination, or that this strong Propensity is some
Way the Consequence of the first Draught; in such a Case, could it be said with
good Reason, that a fixed Propensity can no more be argued from his consequent
constant Practice, than from his first Draught? Or, if we suppose a young Man,
no otherwise than soberly inclined, and enticed by wicked Companions, should
drink to Excess, until he had got a Habit of excessive Drinking, and should
come under the Power of a greedy Appetite after strong Drink, so that
Drunkenness should become a common and constant Practice with him: And some
Observer, arguing from this his general Practice, should say, 'It must needs
be, that this young Man has a fixed Inclination to that Sin; otherwise, how
should it come to pass that he should make such a Trade of it?' And another,
ridiculing the Weakness of his arguing, should reply, Do you tell me how it
came to pass, that he was guilty of that Sin the first Time without a fixed
Inclination, and I Will tell you how he is guilty of it so generally without a
fixed Inclination. Sin don't alter it is Nature by being general: And therefore,
how common soever it becomes, it must come at all Times by the same Means that
it came at first. I leave it to every one to judge, who would be chargeable
with weak arguing in such a Case.

It Is true, as was observed before, there is no Effect without some Cause,
Occasion, Ground or Reason of that Effect, and some Cause answerable to the
Effect. But certainly it will not follow from thence, that a transient Effect
requires a permanent Cause, or a fixed Influence or Propensity. An Effect's
happening once, though the Effect may be great, yea, though it may come to pass on
the same Occasion in many Subjects at the same Time, will not prove any fixed
Propensity, or permanent Influence. It Is true, it proves an Influence great and
extensive, answerable to the Effect, once exerted, or once effectual; but it
proves Nothing in the Cause fixed or constant. If a particular Tree, or a great
Number of Trees standing together, have blasted Fruit on their Branches at a
particular Season, yea if the Fruit be very much blasted, and entirely spoiled,
it is evident that something was the Occasion of such an Effect at that Time;
but this alone don't prove the Nature of the Tree to be bad. But if it be
observed, that those Trees, and all other Trees of the Kind, wherever planted,
and in all Soils, Countries, Climates and Seasons, and however cultivated and
managed, still bear ill Fruit, from Year to Year, and in all Ages, it is a good
Evidence of the evil Nature of the Tree: And if the Fruit, at all these Times,
and in all these Cases, be very bad, it proves the Nature of the Tree to be
very bad. And if we argue in like Manner from what appears among Men, it is easy
to determine, whether the universal Sinfulness of Mankind, and their all
sinning immediately, as soon as capable of it, and all sinning continually, and
generally being of a wicked Character, at all Times, in all Ages, and all
Places, and under all possible Circumstances, against Means and Motives
inexpressibly manifold and great, and in the utmost conceivable Variety, be
from a permanent internal great Cause.

If the Voice of common Sense were attended to, and heard, there would be no
Occasion for Labor in multiplying Arguments, and Instances, to show, that one
Act don't prove a fixed Inclination; but that constant Practice and Pursuit
does. We see that it is in Fact agreeable to the Reason of all Mankind, to
argue fixed Principles, Tempers and prevailing Inclinations, from repeated and
continued Actions, though the Actions are voluntary, and performed of Choice; and
thus to judge of the Tempers and Inclinations of Persons, Ages, Sexes, Tribes
and Nations. But is it the Manner of Men to conclude, that whatever they see
others once do, they have a fixed abiding Inclination to do? -- Yea, there may
be several Acts seen, and yet they not taken as good Evidence of an established
Propensity; nay, though attended with that Circumstance, that one Act, or those
several Acts are followed with such constant Practice, as afterward evidences
fixed Disposition. As for Example; there may be several Instances of a Man's
drinking some spirituous Liquor, and they be no Sign of a fixed Inclination to
that Liquor: But these Acts may be introductory to a settled Habit or
Propensity, which may be made very manifest afterward by constant Practice.

From these things it is plain, that what is alleged concerning the first Sin
of Adam, and of the Angels, without a previous fixed Disposition to Sin, cannot
in the least injure or weaken the Arguments which have been brought to prove a
fixed Propensity to Sin in Mankind in their present State. The Thing which the
Permanence of the Cause has been argued from, is the Permanence of the Effect.
And that the permanent Cause consists in an internal fixed Propensity, and not
any particular external Circumstances, has been argued from the Effect's being
the same, through a vast Variety and Change of Circumstances. Which Things don't
take Place with respect to the first Act of Sin that Adam or the Angels were
guilty of; which first Acts, considered in themselves, were no permanent
continued Effects. And though a great Number of the Angels sinned, and the Effect
on that Account was the greater, and more extensive; yet this Extent of the
Effect is a very different Thing from that Permanence, or settled Continuance
of the Effect, which is supposed to show a permanent Cause, or fixed Influence
or Propensity. Neither was there any Trial of a vast Variety of Circumstances
attending a permanent Effect, to show the fixed Cause to be internal,
consisting in a settled Disposition of Nature, in the Instances objected. And
however great the Sin of Adam, or of the Angels, was, and however great Means,
Motives and Obligations they sinned against; whatever may be thence argued
concerning the transient Cause, Occasion or Temptation, as being very subtle,
remarkably tending to deceive and seduce, or otherwise great; yet it argues
nothing of any settled Disposition, or fixed Course at all, either great or
small; the Effect both in the Angels, and our first Parents, being in it self
transient, and for ought appears, happening in each of them, under one System
or Coincidence of influential Circumstances.

The general continued Wickedness of Mankind, against such Means and Motives,
proves each of these Things, viz. that the Cause is fixed, and that the fixed
Cause is internal, in Man's Nature, and also that it is very powerful. It
proves the first, namely, that the Cause is fixed, because the Effect is so
abiding, through so many Changes. It proves the second, that is, that the fixed
Cause is internal, because the Circumstances are so various: The Variety of
Means and Motives is one Thing that is to be referred to the Head of Variety of
Circumstances; and they are that Kind of Circumstances, which above all others
proves this; for they are such Circumstances as cannot possibly cause the
Effect, being most opposite to the Effect in their Tendency. And it proves the
third, viz. the Greatness of the internal Cause, or the Powerfulness of the
Propensity; because the Means which have opposed it is Influence, have been so
great, and yet have been s^a^edly overcome.

But here I may observe by the Way, that with regard to the Motives and
Obligations which our first Father sinned against, it is not reasonably
alleged, that he sinned when he knew his Sin would have destructive
Consequences to all his Posterity, and might, in Process of Time, pave the
whole Globe with Skulls, etc. Seeing it is so evident, by the plain Account the
Scripture gives us of the Temptation which prevailed with our first Parents to
commit that Sin, that it was so contrived by the Subtilty of the Tempter, as
first to blind and deceive 'em as to that Matter, and to make them believe that
their Disobedience should be followed with no Destruction or Calamity at all to
themselves (and therefore not to their Posterity) but on the contrary, with a
great Increase and Advancement of Dignity and Happiness.

Evasion II. Let the Wickedness of the World be ever so general and great,
there is no Necessity of supposing any Depravity of Nature to be the Cause:
Man's own Free Will is Cause sufficient. Let Mankind be more or less corrupt,
they make themselves corrupt, by their own free Choice. This Dr. T. abundantly
insists upon, in many Parts of his Book. P. 257, 258, 328, 329, 344, 421, 422,
and many other Places.


But I would ask, how it comes to pass that Mankind so universally agree in
this evil Exercise of their Free Will? If their Wills are in the first Place as
free to Good as Evil, what is it to be ascribed to, that the World of Mankind
consisting of so many Millions, in so many successive Generations, without
Consultation, all agree to exercise their Freedom in Favor of Evil? If there
be no natural Tendency or Preponderation in the Case, then there is as good a
Chance for the Will's being determined to Good as Evil. If the Cause is
indifferent, why is not the Effect in some Measure indifferent? If the Balance
be no heavier at one End than the other, why does it perpetually and as it were
infinitely preponderate one Way? How comes it to pass, that the Free Will of
Mankind has been determined to Evil, in like Manner before the Flood, and after
the Flood; under the Law, and under the Gospel; among both Jews and Gentiles,
under the Old Testament; and since that, among Christians, Jews, Mahometans;
among Papists and Protestants; in those Nations where Civility, Politeness,
Arts and Learning most prevail, and among the Negroes and Hottentots in Africa,
the Tartars in Asia, and Indians in America, toward both the Poles, and on
every Side of the Globe; in greatest Cities, and obscurest Villages; in
Palaces, and in Hutts, Wigwams and Cells under Ground? Is it enough, to reply,
It happens so, that Men every where, and at all Times choose thus to determine
their own Wills, and so to make themselves sinful, as soon as ever they are
capable of it, and to sin constantly as long as they live, and universally to
choose never to come up half Way to their Duty?

As has been often observed, a steady Effect requires a steady Cause; but
Free Will, without any previous Propensity, to influence it is Determinations,
is no permanent Cause; Nothing can be conceived of, further from it: For the
very Notion of Freedom of Will consisting in self-determining Power, implies
Contingence: And if the Will is free in that Sense, that it is perfectly free
from any Government of previous Inclination, it is Freedom must imply the most
absolute and perfect Contingence: And surely Nothing can be conceived of, more
unfix'd than that. The Notion of Liberty of Will, in this Sense, implies
perfect Freedom from every Thing that should previously fix, bind or determine
it; that it may be left to be fixed and determined wholly by itself: Therefore,
it is Determinations must be previously altogether unfix'd. And can that which
is so unfixed, so contingent, be a Cause sufficient to account for an Effect,
in such a Manner, and to such a Degree, permanent, fixed and constant?

When Men see only one particular Person going on in a certain Course with
great Constancy, against all Manner of Means to dissuade him, do they judge
this to be no Argument of any fixed Disposition of Mind, because he being free
may determine to do so, if he will, without any such Disposition? Or if they
see a Nation or People that differ greatly from other Nations, in such and such
Instances of their constant Conduct, as though their Tempers and Inclinations
were very diverse, and any should deny it to be from any such Cause, and should
say, We cannot judge at all of the Temper or Disposition of any Nation or People
by any thing observable in their constant Practice or Behavior, because they
have all Free Will, and therefore may all choose to act so, if they please,
without any thing in their Temper or Inclination to biass 'em; would such an
Account of such Effects be satisfying to the Reason of Mankind? -- But
infinitely further would it be from satisfying a considerate Mind, to account
for the constant and universal Sinfulness of Mankind, by saying, that the Will
of all Mankind is free, and therefore all Mankind may, if they please, make
themselves Wicked: They are free when they first begin to act as moral Agents,
and therefore all may, if they please, begin to sin as soon as they begin to
act: They are free as long as they continue to act in the World; and therefore
they may all commit Sin continually, if they will: Men of all Nations are free,
and therefore all Nations may act alike in these Respects, if they please (though
some don't know how other Nations do act) -- Men of high and low Condition,
learned and ignorant, are free; and therefore they may agree in acting
Wickedly, if they please (though they don't consult together) -- Men in all Ages
are free, and therefore Men in one Age may all agree with Men in every other
Age in Wickedness, if they please (though they don't know how Men in other Ages
have acted) etc. etc. Let every one judge whether such an Account of Things can
satisfy Reason.

Evasion III. It Is said by many of the Opposers of the Doctrine of Original
Sin, that the Corruption of the World of Mankind may be owing, not to a
depraved Nature, but to bad Example. And I think we must understand Dr. T. as
having respect to the powerful Influence of bad Instruction and Example, when
he says, P. 118. The Gentiles in their Heathen State, when incorporated into
the Body of the Gentile World, were without Strength, unable to help or recover
themselves. And in several other Places to the like Purpose. If there was no
Depravity of Nature, what else could there be but bad Instruction and Example,
to hinder the Heathen World, as a collective Body, (for as such Dr. T. speaks
of 'em, as may be seen P. 117, 118.) from emerging out of their Corruption, on
the Rise of each new Generation? As to their bad Instruction, our Author
insists upon it, that the Heathen, notwithstanding all their Disadvantages, had
sufficient Light to know God, and do their whole Duty to him, as we have
observed from Time to Time. Therefore it must be chiefly bad Example, that we
must suppose, according to him, rendered their Case helpless.

Now concerning this Way of accounting for the Corruption of the World, by the
Influence of bad Example, I would observe the following Things:

1. It Is accounting for the Thing by the Thing itself. It is accounting for the
Corruption of the World by the Corruption of the World. For, that bad Examples
are general all over the World to be followed by others, and have been so from
the Beginning, is only an Instance, or rather a Description of that Corruption
of the World which is to be accounted for. If Mankind are naturally no more
inclined to Evil than Good, then how comes there to be so many more bad
Examples, than good ones, in all Ages? And if there are not, how come that bad
Examples that are set, to be so much more followed, than the good? If the
Propensity of Man's Nature be not to Evil, how comes the Current of general
Example, every where, and at all Times, to be so much to Evil? And when
Opposition has been made by good Examples, how comes it to pass that it has had
so little Effect to stem the Stream of general wicked Practice?

I think, from the brief Account the Scripture gives us of the Behavior of the
first Parents of Mankind, the Expressions of their Faith and Hope in God's
Mercy revealed to them, we have Reason to suppose, that before every they had
any Children, they repented, and were pardoned, and became truly pious. So that
God planted the World at first with a noble Vine; and at the Beginning of the
Generations of Mankind, he set the Stream of Example the right Way. And we see,
that Children are more apt to follow the Example of their Parents, than of any
others; especially in early Youth, their forming Time, when those Habits are
generally contracted, which abide by them all their Days. And besides, Adam's
Children had no other Examples to follow, but those of their Parents. How
therefore came the Stream so soon to turn, and to proceed the contrary Way,
with so violent a Current? Then, when Mankind became so universally and
desperately corrupt, as not to be fit to live on Earth any longer, and the
World was every where full of bad Examples, God destroyed 'em all at once, but
only righteous Noah, and his Family, to remove those bad Examples, and that the
World of Mankind might be planted again with good Example, and the Stream again
turned the right Way: How therefore came it to pass, that Noah's Posterity did
not follow his good Example, especially when they had such extraordinary Things
to enforce his Example, but so generally, even in his Lifetime, became so
exceeding Corrupt? One would think, the first Generations at least, while all
lived together as one Family, under Noah, their venerable Father, might have
followed his good Example: And if they had done so, then, when the Earth came
to be divided in P^l^g's Time, the Heads of the several Families would have set
out their particular Colonies with good Examples, and the Stream would have
been turned the right Way in all the various Divisions, Colonies and Nations of
the World. But we see verily the Fact was, that in about fifty Years after
Noah's Death the World in general was overrun with dreadful Corruption; so
that all Virtue and Goodness was like soon to perish from among Mankind, unless
something extraordinary should be done to prevent it.

Then, for a Remedy, God separated Abraham and his Family from all the rest of
the World, that they might be delivered from the Influence of bad Example, that
in his Posterity he might have a holy Seed. Thus God again planted a noble
Vin^; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, being eminently pious. But how soon did their
Posterity degenerate, till true Religion was like to be swallowed up? We see
how desperately, and almost universally corrupt they were, when God brought 'em
out of Egypt, and led them in the Wilderness.

Then God was pleased, before he planted his People Ca^naan, to destroy that
perverse Generation in the Wilderness, that he might plant 'em there a noble
Vine, wholly a right Seed, and set 'em out with good Example, in the Land where
they were to have their settled Abode. Jer. ii. 21. It is evident, that the
Generation which came with Joshua into Canaan, was an excellent Generation, by
innumerable Things said of 'em. See Jer. ii. 2, 3. Psalm. lxvili. 14. Josh.
xxil. 2. and xxii^. 8. Deuteronomy. iv. 3, 4. Hos. xi. 1. and ix. 10. Judge. ^i. 7, 17,
22. and many other Places.
But how soon did that People, nevertheless, become the degenerate Plant of a
strange Vine?

And when the Nation had a long Time proved themselves desperately and
incurably corrupt, God destroyed them, and sent 'em into Captivity, till the
old Rebels were dead and purged out, to deliver their Children from their evil
Example: And when the following Generation were purified as in a Furnace, God
planted 'em again, in the Land of Israel, a noble Vine, and set 'em out with
good Example; which yet was not followed by their Posterity.

When again the Corruption was become inveterate and desperate, the Christian
Church was planted by a glorious Out-pouring of the Spirit of God, causing true
Virtue and Piety to be exemplified in the first Age of the Church of Christ,
far beyond whatever had been on Earth before; and the Christian Church was
planted a noble Vine. But that primitive good Example has not prevailed, to
cause Virtue to be generally and steadfastly maintained in the Christian World:
To how great a Degree it has been otherwise, has already been observed.

After many Ages of general and dreadful Apostasy, God was pleased to erect the
Protestant Church, as separated from the more corrupt Part of Christendom; and
true Piety flourished very much in it at first; God planted it a noble Vine:
But notwithstanding the good Examples of the first Reformers, what a melancholy
Past is the Protestant World come to at this Day?

When England grew very corrupt, God brought over a Number of pious Persons,
and planted 'em in New England, and this Land was planted with a noble Vine.
But how is the Gold become dim! How greatly have we forsaken the pious Examples
of our Fathers!

So prone have Mankind always proved themselves to Degeneracy, and bent to
Backsliding. Which shows plainly their natural Propensity; and that when Good
had revived, and been promoted among Men, it has been by some divine
Interposition, to oppose the natural Current; the Fruit of some extraordinary
Means, the Efficacy of which has soon been overcome by constant natural Biass,
and the Effect of good Example presently lost, and Evil has regained and
maintained the Dominion: Like an heavy Body, which may by some great Power be
caused to asc^nd, against it is Nature, a little while, but soon goes back again
toward the Center, to which it naturally and constantly tends.

So that evil Example will in no wise account for the Corruption of Mankind,
without supposing a natural (...) to Sin. The Tendency of Example alone will
not account for general wicked Practice, as consequent on good Example. And if
the Influence of bad Example is a Reason of some of the Wickedness that is in
the World, that alone will not account for Men's becoming worse than the
Example set, and degenerating more and more, and growing worse and worse, which
has been the Manner of Mankind.

2. There has been given to the World an Example of Virtue, which, were it not
for a dreadful Depravity of Nature, would have Influence on them that live
under the Gospel, far beyond all other Examples; and that is the Example of
Jesus Christ.

God, who knew the human Nature, and how apt Men are to be influenced by
Example, has made answerable Provision. His infinite Wisdom has contrived that
we should have set before us the most amiable and perfect Example, in such
Circumstances as should have the greatest Tendency to influence all the
Principles of Man's Nature, but his Corruption. Men are apt to be moved by the
Example of others like themselves, or in their own Nature; therefore this
Example was given in our Nature. Men are ready (...) follow the Examples of the
great and honorable: and this Example, though it was of one in our Nature, yet
it was of one infinitely higher and more honorable than Kings or Angels. A
People are apt to follow the Example of their Prince: This is the Example of
that glorious Person, who stands in a peculiar Relation to Christians, as their
Lord and King, the supreme Head of the Church; and not only so but the King of
Kings, supreme Head of the Universe, and Head over all Things to the Church.
Children are apt to follow the Example of their Parents: This is the Example of
the Author of our Being, and one who is in a peculiar and extraordinary Manner
our Father, as he is the Author of our holy and happy Being; besides his being
the Creator of the World, and everlasting Father of the Universe. Men are very
apt to follow the Example of their Friends: The Example of Christ is of one
that is infinitely our greatest Friend, standing in the most endearing
Relations of our Brother, Redeemer, spiritual Head and Husband: whose Grace and
Love expressed to us, transcends all other Love and Friendship, as much as
Heaven is higher than the Earth. And the Virtues and Acts of his Example were
exhibited to us in the most endearing and engaging Circumstances that can
possibly be conceived of: His Obedience and Submission to God, his Humility.
M^^kness, Patience, Charity, Self-D^nial, etc. being exercised and expressed in
a Work of infinite Grace, Love, Condescension and Beneficence to us; and had
all their highest Expression in his laying down his Life for us, and meekly,
patiently and cheerfully undergoing such extreme and unutterable Suffering, for
our eternal Salvation. Men are peculiarly apt to follow the Example of such as
they have great Benefits from: But it is utterly impossible to conceive of
greater Benefits, that we could have by the Virtues of any Person, than we have
by the virtuous Acts of Christ; who depend upon being thereby saved from
eter^^l Destruction, and brought to inconceivable immortal Glory at God's right
Hand. Surely if it were not for an extreme Corruption of the Heart of Men, such
an Example would have that strong Influence on the Heart, that would as it were
swallow up the Power of all the evil and hateful Examples of a Generation of
Vipers.

3. The Influence of bad Example, without Corruption of Nature, will not
account for Children's universally committing Sin as soon as capable of it;
which, I think, is a Fact that has been made evident by the Scripture. It will
not account for this, in the Children of eminently pious Parents; the first
Examples, that are set in their View, being very good; which, as has been
observed, was especially the Case of many Children in Christian Families in the
Apostles Days, when the Apostle John supposes that every individual Person had
Sin to repent of, and confess to God.

4. What Dr. T. supposes to have been Fact with respect to great Part of
Mankind, cannot consistently be accounted for from the Influence of bad
Example, viz. the State of the Heathen World, which he supposes, considered as
a collective Body, was helpless, dead in Sin, and unable to recover it self.
Not evil Example alone, no, nor as united with evil Instruction, can be
supposed a sufficient Reason why every new Generation that arose among them,
should not be able to emerge from the Idolatry and Wickedness of their
Ancestors, in any Consistence with his Scheme. The ill Example of Ancestors
could have no Power to oblige them to sin, any other Way than as a strong
Temptation. But Dr. T. himself says, P. 348. To suppose Men's Temptations to be
superior to their Powers, will impeach the Goodness and Justice of God, who
appoints every Man's Trial. And as to bad Instructions, as was observed before,
he supposes that they all, yea every individual Person, had Light sufficient to
know God, and do their whole Duty. And if each one could do this for Himself,
then surely they might all be agreed in it through the Power of Free Will, as
well as the whole World be agreed in Corruption by the same Power.

Evasion IV. Some modern Opposers of the Doctrine of Original Sin do thus
account for the general Pr^valence of Wickedness, viz. that in a Course of
Nature our Senses grow up first, and the animal Passions get the Start of
Reason. So Dr. Turnbull says, See Mor. Phil. P. 270. and Chris. Phil. P. 274.
Sensitive Objects first affect us, and in as much as Reason is a Principle,
which, in the Nature of Things, must be advanced to Strength and Vigor, by
gradual Cultivation, and their Objects are continually assailing and soliciting
us; so that, unless a very happy Education prevents, our sensitive Appetites
must have become very Strong, before Reason can have Force enough to call them
to an Account, and assume Authority over them. From hence Dr. Turnbull supposes
it comes to pass, Chri^. Phil. P. 282, 283.
That though some few may, through the Influence of virtuous Example, be said to be
sanctified from the Womb, so liberal, so generous, so virtuous, so truly noble
is their Cast of Mind; yet, generally speaking, the whole World lies in such
Wickedness, that, with respect to the far greater Part of Mankind, the Study of
Virtue is beginning to reform, and is a severe Struggle against bad Habits,
early contracted, and deeply rooted; it is therefore putting off an old
inveterate corrupt Nature, and putting on a new Form and Temper; it is moulding
our selves anew; it is a being born again, and becoming as Children. -- And
how few are there in the World, who escape it is Pollutions, so as not to be
early in that Class, or to be among the Righteous that need no Repentance?

Dr. Tailor, though he is not so explicit, seems to hint at the same Thing, P.
192. It Is by slow Degrees (says he) that Children come to the Use of
Understanding; the animal Passions being for some Years the governing Part of
their Constitution. And therefore, though they may be froward and apt to
displease us, yet how far this is Sin in them, we are not capable of judging.
But it may suffice to say, that it is the Will of God that Children should have
Appetites and Passions to regulate and restrain, that he has given Patents
Instructions and Commands to discipline and inform their Minds, that if Parents
first learned true Wisdom for themselves, and then endeavored to bring up
their Children in the Way of Virtue, there would be less Wickedness in the
World.

Concerning these Things I would observe, that such a Scheme is attended with
the very same Difficulties, which they that advance it would avoid by it;
liable to the same Objections, which they make against God's ordering it so
that Men should be brought into Being with a prevailing Propensity to Sin. For
this Scheme supposes, the Author of Nature has so ordered Things, that Men
should come into Being as moral Agents, that is, should first have Existence in
a State and Capacity of mora Agency, under a prevailing Propensity to Sin. For
that Strength, which sensitive Appetites and animal Passions come to by their
habitual Exercise, before Persons come to the Exercise of their rational
Powers, amounts to a strong Propensity to Sin, when they first come to the
Exercise of those rational Powers, by the Supposition: because this is given as
a Reason why the Scale is turned for Sin among Mankind, and why, generally
speaking, the whole World lies in Wickedness, and the Study of Virtue is a
severe Struggle against bad Habits, early contracted, and deeply rooted. These
deeply rooted Habits must imply a Tendency to Sin; otherwise they could not
account for that which they are brought to account for, namely, prevailing
Wickedness in the World: For that Cause cannot account for an Effect, which is
supposed to have no Tendency to that Effect. And this Tendency which is
supposed, is altogether Equivalent to a natural Tendency: It Is as necessary to
the Subject. For it is supposed to be brought on the Person who is the Subject
of it, when he has no Power to withstand or oppose it: The Habit, as Dr.
Turnbull says, becoming very strong, before Reason can have Force enough to
call the Passions to Account, or assume Authority over them. And it is supposed,
that this Necessity, by which Men become subject to this Propensity to Sin, is
from the Ordering and Disposal of the Author of Nature; and therefore must be
as much from his Hand, and as much without the Hand of the Person himself, as
if he were first brought into Being with such a Propensity. Moreover, it is
supposed that the Effect, which the Tendency is to, is truly Wickedness. For
it is alleged as a Cause or Reason why the whole World lies in Wickedness, and
why all but a very few are first in the Class of the Wicked, and not among the
Righteous that need no Repentance. If they need Repentance, what they are
guilty of is truly and properly Wickedness, or moral Evil; for certainly Men
need no Repentance for that which is no Sin, or blameable Evil. If it be so,
that as a Consequence of this Propensity, the World lies in Wickedness, and the
far greater Part are of a wicked Character, without Doubt, the far greater Part
go to eternal Perdition: For Death don't pick and choose, only for Men of a
righteous Character. And certainly that is an evil corrupt State of Things,
which naturally tends to, and issues in that Consequence, that as it were the
whole World lies and lives in Wickedness, and dies in Wickedness, and perishes
eternally. And this by the Supposition is a State of Things wholly of the
Ordering of the Author of Nature, before Mankind are capable of having any Hand
in the Affair. And is this any Relief to the Difficulties, which these Writers
object against the Doctrine of natural Depravity?

And I might here also observe, that this Way of accounting for the Wickedness
of the World, amounts to just the same Thing with that Solution of Man's
Depravity, which was mentioned before, that Dr. T. cries out of as too gross to
be admitted, (P. 188, 189.) viz. God's creating the Soul pure, and putting it
into such a Body, as naturally tends to pollute it. For this Scheme supposes,
that God creates the Soul pure, and puts it into a Body, and into such a State
in that Body, that the natural Consequence is a strong Propensity to Sin, as
soon as the Soul is capable of sinning.

Dr. Turnbull seems to suppose, that the Matter could not have been ordered
otherwise, consistent with the Nature of Things, than that animal Passions
should be so aforehand with Reason, as that the Consequence should be that
which has been mentioned; because Reason is a Faculty of such a Nature, that it
can have Strength and Vigor no otherwise than by Exercise and Culture. Mor.
Phil. P. 311.
But can there be any Force in this? Is there any Thing in Nature, to make it
impossible, but that the superior Principles of Man's Nature should be so
proportioned to the inferior, as to prevent such a dreadful Consequence, as
the moral and natural Ruin, and eternal Perdition of the far greater Part of
Mankind? Could not those superior Principles be in vastly greater Strength at
first, and yet be capable of endless Improvement? And what should hinder it is
being so ordered by the Creator, that they should improve by vastly swifter
Degrees than they do? If we are Christians, we must be forced to allow it to be
possible in the Nature of Things, that the Principles of human Nature should be
so balanced, that the Consequence should be no Propensity to Sin, in the first
Beginning of a Capa^ity of moral Agency; because we must own, that it was so in
Fact in Adam, when first created, and also in the Man Christ Jesus; though the
Faculties of the latter were such as grew by Culture and Improvement, so that
he increased in Wisdom, as he grew in stature.

Evasion V. Seeing Men in this World are in a State of Trial, it is fit that
their Virtue should meet with Trials, and consequently that it should have
Opposition and Temptation to overcome; not only from without, but from within,
in the animal Passions and Appetites we have to struggle with; that by the
Conflict and Victory our Virtue may be refined and established. Agreeable to
this Dr. T. (P. 253.) says, Without a right Use and Application of our Powers,
were they naturally ever so perfect, we could not be judged fit to enter into
the Kingdom of God. -- This gives a good Reason why we are now in a State of
Trial and Temptation, viz. to prove and discipline our Minds, to season our
Virtue, and to fit us for the Kingdom of God; for which, in the Judgment of
infinite Wisdom, we cannot be qualified, but by overcoming our present
Temptations. And in P. 354. he says, We are upon Trial, and it is the Will of
our Father that our Constitution should be attended with various Passions and
Appetites, as well as our outward Condition with various Temptations. He says
the like in several other Places. To the same Purpose very often Dr. Turnbull:
particularly, Chris. Phil. P. 310. What Merit (says he) except from Combat?
What Virtue without the Encounter of such Enemies, such Temptations as arise
both from within, and from abroad? To be virtuous, is to prefer the Pleasures
of Virtue, to those which come into Competition with it, and Vice holds forth
to tempt us; and to dare to adhere to Truth and Goodness, whatever Pains and
Hardships it may cost. There must therefore, in Order to the Formation and
Trial, in Order to the very Being of Virtue, be Pleasures of a certain Kind to
make Temptations to Vice.

In Reply to these Things I would say, either the State of Temptation which is
supposed to be ordered for Men's Trial, amounts on the whole to a prevailing
Tendency to that State of general Wickedness and Ruin, which has been proved to
take Place, or it does not. If it does not amount to a Tendency to such an
Effect, then how does it account for it? When it is enquired, by what Cause
such an Effect should come to pass, is it not absurd to allege a Cause, which
is owned at the same Time to have no Tendency to such an Effect? Which is as
much as to confess, that it will not account for it. I think, it has been
demonstrated that this Effect must be owing to some prevailing Tendency. If the
other Part of the Dilemma be taken, and it be said, that this State of Things
does imply a prevailing Tendency to that Effect which has been proved, viz.
that all Mankind, without the Exception of so much as one, sin against God, to
their own deserved and just eternal Ruin; and not only so, but sin thus
immediately, as soon as capable of it, and sin continually, and have more Sin
than Virtue, and have Guilt that infinitely outweighs the Value of all the
Goodness any ever have, and that the Generality of the World in all Ages are
extremely stupid and foolish, and of a wicked Character, and actually perish
forever; I say, if the State of Temptation implies a natural Tendency to such
an Effect as this, it is a very evil, corrupt and dreadful State of Things, as
has been already largely shown.

Besides, such a State has a Tendency to defeat it is own supposed End, which is
to re^ine, ripen and perfect Virtue in Mankind, and so to fit Men for the
greater eternal Happiness and Glory: Whereas, the Effect it tends to, is the
Reverse of this, viz. general, eternal Infamy and Ruin, in all Generations.
It Is supposed, that Men's Virtue must have Passions and Appetites to struggle
with, in order to have the Glory and Reward of Victory: but the Consequence is,
a prevailing, continual, and generally effectual Tendency, not to Men's Victory
over evil Appetites and Passions, and the glorious Reward of that Victory, but
to the Victory of evil Appetites and Lusts over Men, and utte^ly and eternally
destroying them. If a Trial of Virtue be requisite, yet the Question is, Whence
comes so general a failing in the Trial, if there be no Depravity of Nature? If
Conflict and War be necessary, yet surely there is no Necessity that there
should be more Cowards than good Soldiers; unless it be necessary that Men
should be overcome and destroyed: Especially is it not necessary that the whole
World as it were should lie in Wickedness, and so lie and die in Cowardice.

I might also here observe, that Dr. Turnbull is not very consistent, in
supposing, that Combat with Temptation is requisite to the very Being of
Virtue. For I think it clearly follows from his own Notion of Virtue, that
Virtue must have a Being prior to any virtuous or praiseworthy Combat with
Temptation. For by his Principles, all Virtue lies in good Affection, and no
Actions can be virtuous, but what proceed from good Affection. Chris. Phil. P.
113, 114, 115.
Therefore, surely the Combat it self can have no Virtue in it, unless it
proceeds from virtuous Affection: And therefore Virtue must have an Existence
before the Combat, and be the Cause of it.

CHAP. II.
Universal Mortality proves Original Sin; particularly the Death of Infants,
with it is various Circumstances.
THE universal Reign of Death, over Persons of all Ages indiscriminately, with
the awful Circumstances and Attendants of Death, proves that Men come sinful
into the World.

It is needless here particularly to enquire, Whether God has not a sovereign
Right to set Bounds to the Lives of his own Creatures, be they sinful, or not;
and as he gives Life, so to take it away when he pleases? Or how far God has a
Right to bring extreme Suffering and Calamity on an innocent moral Agent? For
Death, with the Pains and Agonies with which it is usually brought on, is not
merely a limiting of Existence, but is a most terrible Calamity; and to such a
Creature as Man, capable of conceiving of Immortality, and made with so earnest
a Desire after it, and capable of Foresight and of Reflection on approaching
Death, and that has such an extreme Dre^d of it, is a Calamity above all others
terrible, to such as are able to reflect upon it. I say, it is needless,
elaborately to consider, whether God may not, consistent with his Perfections,
by absolute Sovereignty, bring so great a Calamity on Mankind when perfectly
innocent. It is sufficient, if we have good Evidence from Scripture, that it is
not agreeable to God's Manner of dealing with Mankind, so to do.

It Is manifest, that Mankind were not originally subjected to this Calamity:
God brought it on them afterward, on Occasion of Man's Sin, at a Time of the
Manifestation of God's great Displeasure for Sin, and by a Denunciation and
Sentence pronounced by him, as acting the Part of a Judge; as Dr. T. often
confesses. Sin entered into the World,andDeath by Sin, as the Apostle says.
Which certainly leads us to suppose, that this Affair was ordered of God, not
merely by the Sovereignty of a Creator, but by the Righteousness of a Judge.
And the Scripture every where speaks of all great Afflictions and Calamities,
which God in his Providence brings on Mankind, as Testimonies of his
Displeasure for Sin, in the Subject of those Calamities; excepting those
Sufferings which are to atone for the Sins of others. He ever taught his
People to look on such Calamities as his Rod, the Rod of his Anger, his Frowns,
the Hidings of his Face in Displeasure. Hence such Calamities are in Scripture
so often called by the Name of Judgments, being what God brings on Men as a
Judge, executing a righteous Sentence for Transgression: Yea, they are often
called by the Name of Wrath, especially Calamities consisting or issuing in
Death. See Levit. x. 6. Number. i. 53. and xviii. 5. Josh. ix. 20. 2 Chronicles. xxiv.
18. and xix. 2, 10. and xxviii. 13. and xxxii. 25. Ezra vii. 23. Neh. xiii. 18.
Zech* vii. 12. and many other Places.
And hence also is that which Dr. T. would have us take so much Notice of, that
sometimes in the Scripture, Calamity and Suffering is called by such Names as
Sin, Iniquity, being guilty, etc. which is evidently by a Metonymy of the Cause
for the Effect. It Is not likely, that in the Language in Use of old among God's
People, Calamity or Suffering would have been called even by the Names of Sin
and Guilt, if it had been so far from having any Connection with Sin, that even
Death itself, which is always spoken of as the most terrible of Calamities, is
not so much as any Sign of the Sinfulness of the Subject, or any Testimony of
God's Displeasure for any Guilt of his, as Dr. T. supposes.

Death is spoken of in Scripture as the chief of Calamities, the most extreme
and terrible of all those natural Evils, which come on Mankind in this World.
Deadly Destruction is spoken of as the most terrible Destruction. 1 Samuel v. 11.
Deadly Sorrow, as the most extreme Sorrow. Isai. xvii. 11. Matt. xxvi. 38. and
deadly Enemies, as the most bitter and terrible Enemies. Psalm. xvii. 9. The
Extremity of Christ's Sufferings is represented by his Suffering unto Death.
Philip. ii. 8. and other Places. Hence the greatest Testimonies of God's Anger
for the Sins of Men in this World, have been by inflicting Death: As on the
Sinners of the old World, on the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, on Onan,
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, Nadab and (...), Korah and his Company, and the rest
of the Rebels in the Wilderness, on the wicked Inhabitants of Canaan, on Hophni
and Phinebas, Ananias and Sapphira, the unbelieving Jews, upon whom Wrath came
to the uttermost in the Time of the last Destruction of Jerusalem. This
Calamity is often spoken of as in a peculiar Manner the Fruit of the Guilt of
Sin. Exodus xxviii. 43. That they bear not Iniquity and die. Levit. xxii. 9.
Lest they bear Sin for it and die. So Number. xviii. 22. compared with Levit. x.
1, 2. The very Light of Nature, or Tradition from ancient Revelation, led the
Heathen to conceive of Death as in a peculiar Manner an Evidence of divine
Vengeance. Thus we have an Account, Acts xxviii. 4. That when the Barbarians
saw the venomous Beast hang on Paul's Hand, they said among themselves, No
Doubt this Man is a Murderer, whom though he has escaped the Seas, yet Vengeance
suffers not to live.

Calamities that are very small in Comparison of the universal temporal
Destruction of the whole World of Mankind by Death, are spoken of as manifest
Indications of God's great Displeasure for the Sinfulness of the Subject; such
as the Destruction of particular Cities, Countries or Numbers of Men, by War or
Pestilence. Deuteronomy. xxix. 24. All Nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done
thus unto this Land? what means the Heat of this great Anger? Here compare
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 30. 1 Kings. ix. 8. and Jer. xxii. 8, 9. These Calamities, thus
spoken of as plain Testimonies of God's great Anger, consisted only in
hastening on that Death, which otherwise, by God's Disposal, would most
certainly come in a short Time. Now the taking off of 30 or 40 Years from 70 or
80 (if we should suppose it to be so much, one with another, in the Time of
these extraordinary Judgments) is but a small Matter, in Comparison of God's
first making Man mortal, cutting off his hoped for Immortality, subjecting him
to inevitable Death, which his Nature so exceedingly dreads; and afterward
shortening his Life further, by cutting off more than 800 Years of it: So
bringing it to be less than a twelfth Part of what it was in the first Ages of
the World. Besides that innumerable Multitudes in the common Course of Things,
without any extraordinary Judgment, die in Youth, in Childhood and Infancy.
Therefore how inconsiderable a Thing is the additional or hastened Destruction,
that is sometimes brought on a particular City or Country by War, compared with
that universal Havoc which Death makes of the whole Race of Mankind, from
Generation to Generation, without Distinction of Sex, Age, Quality or
Condition, with all the infinitely various dismal Circumstances, Torments and
Agonies which attend the Death of old and young, adult Persons and little
Infants? If those particular and comparatively trivial Calamities, extending
perhaps not to more than the thousandth Part of the Men of one Generation, are
clear Evidences of God's great Anger; certainly this universal vast
Destruction, by which the whole World in all Generations is swallowed up, as by
a Flood, that Nothing can resist, must be a most glaring Manifestation of God's
Anger for the Sinfulness of Mankind. Yea, the Scripture is express in it, that
it is so. Psalm. xc. 3, etc. Thou turnest Man to Destruction, and say, Return,
ye Children of Men. -- Thou carriest them away as with a Flood: They are as a
Sleep: In the Morning they are like Grass, which grows up; in the Morning it
flourishes and grows up; in the Evening it is cut down and withers. For we
are consumed by thine Anger, and by thy Wrath are we troubled. Thou have set
our Iniquities before he, our secret Sins in the Light of thy Countenance. For
all our Days are passed away in thy Wrath: We spend our Years as a Tale that is
told. The Days of our Years are Threescore Years and ten: and if by Reason of
Strength, they be Fourscore Years, yet is their Strength Labor and Sorrow; for
it is soon cut off, and we fly away. Who ^noweth the Power of thine Anger?
According to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. So teach us to number our Days, that we
may apply our Hearts to Wisdom. How plain and full is this Testimony, that the
general Mortality of Mankind is an Evidence of God's Anger for the Sin of those
who are the Subjects of such a Dispensation?

Abimelech speaks of it as a Thing which he had Reason to conclude from God's
Nature and Perfection, that he would not stay a righteous Nation. Genesis xx. 4.
By righteous, evidently meaning innocent. And if so, much less will God stay a
righteous World (consisting of so many Nations, -- repeating the great
Slaughter in every Generation) or subject the whole World of Mankind to Death,
when they are considered as innocent, as Dr. T. supposes. We have from Time to
Time in Scripture such Phrases as -- worthy of Death, and guilty of Death: But
certainly the righteous Judge of all the Earth will not bring Death on Thousands
of Millions, not only that are not worthy of Death, but are worthy of no
Punishment at all.

Dr. T. from Time to Time speaks of Affliction and Death as a great Benefit, as
they increase the Vanity of all earthly Things, and tend to excite sober
Reflections, and to induce us to be moderate in gratifying the Appetites of the
Body, and to mortify Pride and Ambition, etc. P. 21, 67, and other Places.
To this I would say.

1. It Is not denied but God may see it needful for Mankind in their present
State, that they should be mortal, and subject to outward Afflictions, to
restrain their Lusts, and mortify their Pride and Ambition, etc. But then is it
not an Evidence of Man's Depravity, that it is so? Is it not an Evidence of
Distemper of Mind, yea, strong Disease, when Man stands in Need of such sharp
Medicines, such severe and terrible Means to restrain his Lusts, keep down his
Pride, and make him willing to be obedient to God? It must be because of a
corrupt and ungrateful Heart, if the Riches of God's Bounty, in bestowing Life
and Prosperity, and Things comfortable and pleasant will not engage the Heart to
God, and to Virtue and child-like Love and Obedience, but that he must always
have the Rod held over him, and be often chastised, and held under the
Apprehensions of Death, to keep him from running wild, in Pride, Contempt and
Rebellion, ungratefully using the Blessings dealt forth from his Hand, in
sinning against him, and serving his Enemies. If Man has no natural
Disingenuity of Heart, it must be a mysterious Thing indeed, that the sweet
Blessings of God's Bounty have not as powerful an Influence to restrain him
from sinning against God, as terrible Afflictions. If any thing can be a Proof
of a perverse and vile Disposition, this must be a Proof of it, that Men should
be most apt to forget and despise God, when his Providence is most kind; and
that they should need to have God chastise them with great Severity, and even
to kill them, to keep them in Order. If we were as much disposed to Gratitude
to God for his Benefits, as we are to Anger at our Fellow Creatures for
Injuries, as we must be (so far as I can see) if we are not of a depraved
Heart, the Sweetness of the divine Bounty, if continued in Life, and the Height
of every Enjoyment that is pleasant to innocent human Nature, would be as
powerful Incentives to a proper Regard to God, tending as much to promote
Religion and Virtue, as to have the World filled with Calamity, and to have God
(to use the Language of Hezekiah, Isai. xxxviii. 13. describing Death and it is
Agonies) as a Lion, breaking all our Bones and from Day even to Night, making
an End of us.

Dr. T. himself P. 252. says, That our first Parents before the Fall were
placed in a Condition proper to engage their Gratitude, Love and Obedience.
Which is as much as to say, proper to engage them to the Exercise and Practice
of all Religion. And if the paradisaical State was proper to engage to all
Religion and Duty, and Men still come into the World with Hearts as good as the
two first of the Species, why is it not proper to engage 'em to it still? What
need of so vastly changing Man's State, depriving him of all those Blessings,
and in Stead of them allotting to him a World full of Briars and Thorns,
Affliction, Calamity and Death, to engage him to it? The taking away of Life,
and all those pleasant Enjoyments Man had at first, by a permanent
Constitution, would be no stated Benefit to Mankind, unless there were a stated
Disposition in them to abuse such Blessings. The taking them away is supposed
to be a Benefit under the Notion of their being Things that tend to lead Men to
Sin: but they would have no such Tendency, at least in a stated Manner, unless
there were in Men a fixed Tendency to make that unreasonable Improvement of
'em. Such a Temper of Mind as amounts to a Disposition to make such an
Improvement of Blessings of that Kind, is often spoken of in Scripture, as most
astonishingly vile and perverse. So concerning Israel's abusing the Blessings
of Canaan, that Land flowing with Milk and Honey; their Ingratitude in it is
spoken of by the Prophets, as enough to astonish all Heaven and Earth, and as
more than brutish Stupidity and Vileness. Jer. ii. 7. I brought 'em into a
plentiful Country, to eat the Fruit there of, and the Goodness thereof. But
when ye entered, ye defiled my L^^d, etc* See the following Verses, especially
v. 12. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this. -- So Isai. i. 1, -- 4. Hear, O
Heavens, and give Ear, O Earth; I have nourished and brought up Children, and
they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his Owner and the Ass his Master's
Crib; but my People does not know, Israel does not consider. Ah, sinful Nation!
a People laden with Iniquity, a Seed of Evildoers, Children that are
Corrupters -- Compare Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6, -- 19. If it showed so great Depravity,
to be disposed thus to abuse the Blessings of so fruitful and pleasant a Land
as Canaan, surely it would be an Evidence of a no less astonishing Corruption,
to be inclined to abuse the Blessings of Eden, and the Garden of God there.

2. If Death be brought on Mankind only as a Benefit, and in that Manner which
Dr. T. mentions, viz. to mortify, or moderate their carnal Appetites and
Affections, wean 'em from the World, excite 'em to sober Reflections, and lead
'em to the Fear and Obedience of God, etc. -- is it not strange, that it should
fall so heavy on Infants, who are not capable of making any such Improvement of
it; so that many more of Mankind suffer Death in Infancy, than in any other
equal Part of the Age of Man? Our Author sometimes hints, that the Death of
Infants may be for the good of Parents, and those that are adult, and may be
for the Correction and Punishment of the Sins of Parents: But has God any Need
of such Methods to add to Parents Afflictions? Are there not Ways enough that
he might increase their Trouble, without destroying the Lives of such
Multitudes of those that are perfectly innocent, and have in no respect any Sin
belonging to 'em; on whom Death comes, at an Age, when not only the Subjects
are not capable of any Reflection, or making any Improvement of it, either in
the Suffering, or Expectation of it; but also at an Age, when Parents and
Friends, who alone can make a good Improvement, and whom Dr. T. supposes alone
to be punished by it, suffer least by being bereaved of them; though the Infants
themselves sometimes suffer to great Extremity?

3. To suppose, as Dr. T. does, that Death is brought on Mankind in Consequence
of Adam's Sin, not at all as a Calamity, but only as a Favor and Benefit, is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel; which teaches, that when Christ, as the
second Adam, comes to remove and destroy that Death, which came by the first
Adam, he finds it not as a Friend, but an Enemy. 1 Cor. xv. 22. "For as in Adam
all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive:" with v. 25.and26. For he must
reign, till he has put all Enemies under his Feet. The last ENEMY that shall
be d^stoyed, is Death.

Dr. T. urges, that the Afflictions which Mankind are subjected to, and
particularly their common Mortality, are represented in Scripture as the
Chastisements of our heavenly Father; and therefore are designed for our
spiritual Good: and consequently are not of the Nature of Punishments. So in P.
68, 69, 314, 315.

Though I think the Thing asserted far from being true, viz. that the Scripture
represents the Afflictions of Mankind in general, and particularly their common
Mortality, as the Chastisements of an heavenly Father; yet it is needless to
stand to dispute that Matter: For if it be so, it will be no Argument that the
Afflictions and Death of Mankind are not Evidences of their Sinfulness. Those
would be strange Chastisements from the Hand of a wise and good Father, which
are wholly for Nothing; especially such severe Chastisements, as to break the
Child's Bones; when at the same Time the Father don't suppose any Guilt, Fault
or Offense, in any respect, belonging to the Child; but it is chastised in this
terrible Manner, only for fear that it will be faulty hereafter. I say, these
would be a strange Sort of Chastisements; yea, though he should be able to make
it up to the Child afterward. Dr. T. tells of Representations made by the
whole Current of Scripture: I am certain, it is not agreeable to the Currrent of
Scripture, to represent divine fatherly Chastisements after this Manner. It Is
true, that the Scripture supposes such Chastenings to be the Fruit of God's
Goodness; yet at the same Time it evermore represents them as being for the Sin
of the Subject, and as Evidences of the divine Displeasure for it is Sinfulness.
Thus the Apostle in 1 Cor. xi. 30, 31, 32. speaks of God's chastening his
People by mortal Sickness, for their Good, that they might not be condemned
with the World, and yet signifies that it was for their Sin; FOR THIS CAUSE
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep: that is, for the
Profaneness and sinful Disorder beforementioned. So Eli^u Job xxxiii. 16. etc.
speaks of the same Chastening by Sickness, as for Men's Good; to withdraw Man
from his sinful Purpose, and to hide Pride from Man, and keep back his Soul
from the Pit; that therefore God chastens Man with Pain on his Bed, and the
Multitude of his Bones with strong Pain. But these Chastenings are for his
Sins, as appears by what follows, v 28. Where 't^s observed, that when God by
this Means has brought Men to repent, and humbly confess their Sins, he
delivers them. Again, the same Eli^u, speaking of the unfailing Love of God to
the Righteous, even when he chastens them, and they are bound in Fetters, and
^olden in Cords of Affliction, Chap. xxxvi. 7, etc; yet speaks of these
Chastenings as being for their Sins, v 9. Then he shows them their Work, and
their Transgressions, that they have exceeded. So David, Psalm. xxx. speaks of
God's Chastening by sore Afflictions, as being for his Good, and issuing
joyfully; and yet being the Fruit of God's Anger for his Sin. (...) 5. God's
ANGER endures but for a Moment, etc. -- Compare Psalm cxix. 67, 71 75. God's
fatherly Chastisements are spoken of as being for Sin, 2 Samuel vii. 14, 15. I
will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. If he commit Iniquity, I will
chasten him with the Rod of Men, and with the Stripes of the Children of Men;
but my Mercy shall not depart away from him. So the Prophet Jeremiah speaks of
the great Affliction that God's People of the young Generation suffered in the
Time of the Captivity, as being for their Good. Lam. iii. 25, etc. But yet
these Chastisements are spoken of as being for their Sin; see especially v 39,
40. So Christ says, Rev. ii. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. But
the Words following show, that these Chastenings from Love are for Sin that
should be repented of: Be zealous therefore, and repent. And though Christ tells
us, they are blessed that are persecuted for Righteousness Sake, and have
Reason to rejoice and be exceeding glad; yet even the Persecutions of God's
People, as ordered in divine Providence, are spoken of as divine Chastenings
for Sin, like the just Corrections of a Father, when the Children deserve them,
Heb. xii. The Apostle there speaking to the Christians, concerning the
Persecutions which they suffered, calls their Sufferings by the Name of divine
Rebukes; which implies testifying against a Fault: And that they may not be
discouraged, puts them in Mind, that whom the Lord loves, he chastens, and
scourges every Son that he receives. It Is also very plain, that the
Persecutions of God's People, as they are from the disposing Hand of God, are
Chastisements for Sin, from 1 Pet. iv. 17, 18. compared with Prove. xi. 31. See
also Psalm. lxix. 4, -- 9.

If divine Chastisements in general are certain Evidences that the Subjects are
not wholly without Sin, some Way belonging to them, then in a peculiar Manner
is Death so; For these Reasons:

(1.) Because slaying, or delivering to Death, is often spoken of as in general
a more awful Thing than the Chastisements that are endured in this Life. So,
Psalm. cxviii. 17, 18. I shall not die, but live, and declare the Works of the
Lord. The Lord has ch^sten'd me sore; but he has not given me over unto
Death. So the Psalm^^ (...) Psalm. lxxxviii. 15. setting forth the Extremity of
his Affliction, represents it by this, that it was next to Death. I am
afflicted, andready to die, -- while I suffer thy Terrors, I am distracted. So
David, 1 Samuel xx. 3. So God's Tenderness toward Persons under Chastisement, is
from Time to Time set forth by that, that he did not proceed so far as to make
an End of 'em by Death; as in Psalm. lxxviii. 38, 39. and Psalm. ciii. 9. with v
14, 15. Psalm. xxx. 2, 3, 9. Job xxxiii* 22, 23, 24. So we have God's People
often praying, when under great Affliction, that God would not proceed to this,
as being the greatest Extremity. Psalm. xiii. 3. Consider, and hear me, O Lord
my God; lighten mine Eyes, lest I sleep the Sleep of Death. So Job x. 9. Psalm.
vi. 1, -- 5. and lxxxviii. 9, 10, 11. cxliii. 7.

Especially may Death be looked upon as the most extreme of all temporal
Sufferings, when attended with such dreadful Circumstances, and extreme Pains,
as those with which Providence sometimes brings it on Infants; as on the
Children that were offered up to Moloch, and some other Idols, who were
tormented to Death in burning Brass. Dr. T. says, P. 359, and 404. The Lord of
all Being can never want Time and Place and Power to compensate abundantly any
Sufferings Infants now undergo in Subserviency to his good Providence. But
there are no Bounds to such a License, in evading Evidences from Fact. It might
as well be said, that there is not and cannot be any such thing as Evidence,
from Events, of God's Displeasure; which is most contrary to the whole Current
of Scripture, as may appear in Part from Things which have been observed. This
Gentleman might as well go further still, and say, that God may cast guiltless
Persons into Hellfire, to remain there in the most unutterable Torments for
Ages of Ages (which bear no greater Proportion to Eternity than a Quarter of an
Hour) and if he does so, it is no Evidence of God's Displeasure; because he can
never want Time, Place and Power, abundantly to compensate their Sufferings
afterward. If it be so, it is not to the Purpose, as long as the Scripture
does so abundantly teach us to look on great Calamities and Sufferings which
God brings on Men, especially Death, as Marks of his Displeasure for Sin, and
for Sin belonging to them that suffer.

(2.) Another Thing, which may well lead us to suppose Death, in a peculiar
Manner, above other temporal Sufferings, intended as a Testimony of God's
Displeasure for Sin, is, that Death is a Thing attended with that awful
Appearance, that gloomy and terrible Aspect, that naturally suggests to our
Minds God's awful Displeasure. Which is a Thing that Dr. T. himself takes
particular Notice of, P. 69. Speaking of Death, Herein, says he, have we before
our Eyes a striking Demonstration, that Sin is infinitely hateful to God, and
the Corruption and Ruin of our Nature. -- Nothing is more proper than such a
Sight to give us the utmost Abhorrence of all Iniquity, etc. Now if Death be no
Testimony of God's Displeasure for Sin, no Evidence that the Subject is looked
upon, by him who inflicts it, as any other than perfectly innocent, free from
all Manner of Imputation of Guilt, and treated only as an Object of Favor, is
it not strange, that God should annex to it such affecting Appearances of his
Hatred and Anger for Sin, more than to other Chastisements? which yet the
Scripture teaches us are always for Sin. These gloomy and striking
Manifestations of God's Hatred of Sin attending Death, are equivalent to awful
Frowns of God attending the Stroke of his Hand. If we should see a wise and
just Father chastising his Child, mixing terrible Frowns with severe Strokes,
we should justly argue, that the Father considered his Child as having
something in him displeasing to him, and that he did not thus treat his Child
only under a Notion of mortifying him, and preventing his being faulty
hereafter, and making it up to him afterward, when he had been perfectly
innocent, and without Fault, either of Action or Disposition hitherto.

We may well argue from these Things, that Infants are not looked upon by God
as Sinless, but that they are by Nature Children of Wrath, seeing this terrible
Evil comes so heavily on Mankind in Infancy. But-besides these Things, which
are observable concerning the Mortality of Infants in general, there are some
particular Cases of the Death of Infants, which the Scripture sets before us,
that are attended with Circumstances, in a peculiar Manner, giving Evidences of
the Sinfulness of such, and their just Exposedness to divine Wrath. As
particularly,

The destroying the Infants in Sodom, and the neighboring Cities: which
Cities, destroyed in so extraordinary miraculous and awful a Manner, are set
forth as a signal ^xample of God's dreadful Vengeance for Sin to the World in
all Generations; agreeable to that of the Apostle, Jude v 7. God did not
reprove, but manifestly countenanced Abraham, when he said with Respect to the
Destruction of Sodom (Gen xviii. 23, 25.) Will thou destroy the Righteous with
the Wicked? -- That be far from thee, to do after this Manner, to slay the
Righteous with the Wicked, and that the Righteous should be as the Wicked, that
be far from thee. Shall not, the Judge of all the Earth do right? Abraham's
Words imply that God would not destroy the innocent with the guilty. We may
well understand innocent as included in the Word righteous, according to the
Language usual in Scripture, in speaking of such Cases of Judgment and
Punishment; as is plain in Genesis xx. 4. Exodus xxiii. 7. Deuteronomy. xxv. 1. 2 Samuel iv.
11. 2 Chronicles. vi. 23. and Prove. xviii. 5. Eliphaz says, Job iv. 7. Who ever
perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? We see what
great Care God took that Lot should not be involved in that Destruction. He was
miraculously rescued by Angels, sent on Purpose; who laid hold on him, and
bro't him, and set him without the Gates of the City; and told him that they
could do Nothing till he was out of the Way. Genesis xix. 22. And not only was he
thus miraculously delivered, but his two wicked Daughters for his Sake. The
whole Affair, both the Destruction, and the Rescue of them that escaped, was
miraculous: And God could as easily have delivered the Infants which were in
those Cities. And if they had been without Sin, their perfect Innocence, one
should think, would have pleaded much more strongly for them, than those lewd
Women's Relation to Lot pleaded for them. When in such a Case, we must suppose
these Infants much further from deserving to be involved in that Destruction,
than even Lot himself. To say here, that God could make it up to those Infants
in another World, must be an insufficient Reply. For so he could as easily have
made it up to Lot, or to ten or fifty righteous, if they had been destroyed in
the same Fire: Nevertheless it is plainly signified, that this would not have
been agreeable to the wise and holy Proceedings of the Judge of all the Earth.

Since God declared, that if there had been found but ten righteous in Sodom,
he would have spared the whole City for their Sake, may we not well suppose, if
Infants are perfectly innocent, that he would have spared the old World, in
which there were, without Doubt, many Hundred Thousand Infants, and in general,
one in every Family, whose perfect Innocence pleaded for it is Preservation?
Especially when such vast Care was taken to save Noah and his Family (some of
whom, one at least, seem to have been none of the best) that they might not be
involved in that Destruction. If the perfect Sinlesness of Infants had been a
Notion entertained among the People of God of old, in the Ages next following
the Flood, handed down from Noah and his Children, who well knew that vast
Multitudes of Infants perished in the Flood, is it likely that Eliphaz, who
lived within a few Generations of Shem and Noah, would have said to Job, as he
does in that forementioned Job iv. 7. Who ever perished, being innocent? and
when were the Righteous cut off? Especially since in the same Discourse (Chap.
v. 1.) he appeals to the Tradition of the Ancients for a Confirmation of this
very Point; as he also does in Chap. xv. 7, -- 10. and xxii. 15, 16. In which
last Place, he mentions that very Thing, the Destruction of the Wicked by the
Flood, as an Instance of that perishing of the Wicked, which he supposes to be
peculiar to them, for Job's Conviction; in which the Wicked were cut down out
of Time, their Foundation being overflown with a Flood. Where it is also
observable, that he speaks of such an Untimeliness of Death as they suffered by
the Flood, as one Evidence of Guilt; as he also does, Chap. xv. 32, 33. It
shall be accomplished before his Time; and his Branch shall not be green. But
those that were destroyed by the Flood in Infancy, above all the rest were cut
down out of Time; when in Stead of living above 900 Years, according to the
common Period of Man's Life, many were cut down before they were one Year old.

And when God executed Vengeance on the ancient Inhabitants of Canaan, not only
did he not spare their Cities and Families for the sake of the Infants that
were therein, nor take any Care that they should not be involved in the
Destruction; but often with particular Care repeated his express Commands, that
their Infants should not be spared, but should be utterly destroyed, without
any Pity; while Rahab the Harlot (who had been far from Innocence, though she
expressed her Faith in entertaining, and safely dismissing the Spies) was
preserved, and all her Friends for her sake. And when God executed his Wrath on
the Egyptians by slaying their first born, though the Children of Israel, who
were most of 'em wicked Men, as was before shown, were wonderfully spared by
the destroying Angel, yet such first born of the Egyptians as were Infants,
were not spared. They not only were not rescued by the Angel, and no Miracle
wrought to save 'em (as was observed in the Case of the Infants of Sodom) but
the Angel destroyed 'em by his own immediate Hand, and a Miracle was wro't to
kill them.

Here not to stay to be particular concerning the Command by Moses, concerning
the Destruction of the Infants of the Midianites, Number. xxxi. 17. And that given
to Saul to destroy all the Infants of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel xv. 3. and what is
said concerning Edom, Psalm. cxxxvii. 4. Happy shall he be that shall take thy
little ones, and dash them against the Stones. -- I proceed to take Notice of
something remarkable concerning the Destruction of Jerusalem, represented in
Ezekiel. ix. when Command was given to them that had Charge over the City, to
destroy the Inhabitants. v. 1, -- 8. And this Reason is given for it, that
their Iniquity required it, and it was a just Recompense of their Sin. v. 9,
10. And God at the same Time was most particular and exact in his Care that
such should by no Means be involved in the Slaughter, as had proved by their
Behavior, that they were not Partakers in the Abominations of the City.
Command was given to the Angel, to go through the City, and set a Mark upon
their Foreheads, and the destroying Angel had a strict Charge not to come near
any Man on whom was the Mark; yet the Infants were not marked, nor a Word said
of sparing them: On the contrary, Infants were expressly mentioned as those that
should be utterly (...), without Pity. v. 5, 6. Go through the City, and (...)
let not your Eye spare, neither have ye Pity. Slay utterly old and young, both
Maids and little Children: But come not near any Man upon whom is the Mark.

And if any should suspect that such Instances as these were peculiar to a more
severe Dispensation, under the old Testament, let us consider a remarkable
Instance in the Days of the glorious Gospel of the Grace of God; even the last
Destruction of Jerusalem; which was far more terrible, and with greater
Testimonies of God's Wrath and Indignation, than the Destruction of Sodom, or
of Jerusalem in Nebuchadnezzar's Time, or any thing that ever had happened to
any City or People, from the Beginning of the World to that Time: agreeable to
Matthew. xxiv. 21. and Luke xxi. 22, 23. But at that Time particular Care was
taken to distinguish and deliver God's People, as was foretold, Dan. xii. 1.
And we have in the New Testament a particular Account of the Care Christ took
for the Preservation of his Followers: He gave them a Sign, by which they might
know when the Desolation of the City was nigh, that they that were in Jerusalem
might flee to the Mountains, and escape. And as History gives Account, the
Christians followed the Directions given, and escaped to a Place in the
Mountains called Pella, and were preserved. Yet no Care was taken to preserve
the Infants of the City, in general; but according to the Predictions of that
Event, they were involved with others in that great Destruction: So heavily did
the Calamity fall upon them, that those Words were verified, Luke xxiii. 29.
Behold the Days are coming, in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren,
and the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps which never gave Suck. And that
Prophecy in Deuteronomy. xxxii. 21, -- 25. which has undoubtedly special Respect to
this very Time, and is so applied by the best Commentators. I will provoke them
to Jealousy, with those that are not a People: -- For a Fire is kindled in mine
Anger -- and it shall burn to the lowest Hell. I (...) heap Mischiefs upon
them: I will spend mine ^rrows upon them. They shall be burnt with Hunger, and
devoured with burning Heat, and bitter Destruction. -- The Sword without, and
Terror within, shall destroy both the young Man, and the Virgin, THE SUCKLING
also, with the Man of gray Hairs. And it appears by the History of that
Destruction, that at that Time was a remarkable Fulfillment of that in Deuteronomy.
xxviii. 53, -- 57. concerning Parents eating their Children in the Siege, --
and the tender and delicate Woman eating her Newborn Child. And here it must
be remembered, that these very Destructions of that City and Land are spoken of
in those Places forementioned, as clear Evidences of God's Wrath, to all
Nations, which shall behold them. And if so, they were Evidences of God's Wrath
toward Infants; who, equally with the rest, were the Subjects of the
Destruction. If a particular Kind or Rank of Persons, which made a very
considerable Part of the Inhabitants, were from Time to Time Partakers of the
Overthrow, without any Distinction made in divine Providence, and yet this was
no Evidence at all of God's Displeasure with any of 'em; then a being the
Subjects of such a Calamity could not be an Evidence of God's Wrath against any
of the Inhabitants, to the Reason of all Nations, or any Nation, or so much as
one Person.

PART II.
Containing Observations on particular Parts of the holy Scripture, which prove
the Doctrine of Original Sin.
CHAP. I.
Observations relating to Things contained in the three first Chapters of
Genesis, with Reference to the Doctrine of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
Concerning Original Righteousness; and whether our first Parents were created
with Righteousness or moral Rectitude of Heart?
THE Doctrine of Original Righteousness, or the Creation of our first Parents
with holy Principles and Dispositions, has a close Connection, in several
Respects, with the Doctrine of Original Sin. Dr. T. -- was sensible of this;
and accordingly he strenuously opposes this Doctrine, in his Book against
Original Sin. And therefore in handling the Subject, I would in the first Place
remove this Author's main Objection against this Doctrine; and then show how
the Doctrine may be inferred from the Account which Moses gives us, in the three
first Chapters of Genesis.

Dr. T -- r's grand Objection against this Doctrine, which he abundantly
insists on, is this: That it is utterly inconsistent with the Nature of Virtue,
that it should be concreated with any Person; because, if so, it must be by an
Act of God's absolute Power, without our Knowledge or Concurrence; and that
moral Virtue, in it is very Nature implies the Choice and Consent of the moral
Agent, without which it cannot be Virtue and Holiness: that a necessary
Holiness, is no Holiness. So P. 179, 180. Where he observes, That Adam must
exist, he must be created, yea he must exercise Thought and Reflection, before
he was righteous. See also P. 250, 251. In P. 437. he says, To say, that God
not only endowed Adam with a Capacity of being righteous, but moreover that
Righteousness and true Holiness were created with him, or wrought into his
Nature, at the same Time he was made, is to affirm a Contradiction, or what is
inconsistent with the very Nature of Righteousness. And in like Manner Dr.
Turnbull in many places insists upon it, that it is necessary to the very Being
of Virtue, that it be owing to our own Choice, and diligent Culture.

With respect to this, I would observe, that it consists in a Notion of Virtue
quite inconsistent with the Nature of Things, and the common Notions of
Mankind; and also inconsistent with Dr. T -- r's own Notions of Virtue.
Therefore, if it be truly so, that to affirm that to be Virtue or Holiness
which is not the Fruit of preceding Thought, Reflection and Choice, is to
affirm a Contradiction, I shall show plainly, that for him to affirm otherwise,
is a Contradiction to himself.

In the first Place, I think it a Contradiction to the Nature of Things, as
judged of by the common Sense of Mankind. It is agreeable to the Sense of the
Minds of Men in all Nations and Ages, not only that the Fruit or Effect of a
good Choice is virtuous, but the good Choice itself, from whence that Effect
proceeds; yea, and not only so, but also the antecedent good Disposition,
Temper or Affection of Mind, from whence proceeds that good Choice, is
virtuous. This is the general Notion, not that Principles derive their Goodness
from Actions, but that Actions derive their Goodness from the Principles whence
they proceed; and so that the Act of choosing that which is good, is no further
virtuous than it proceeds from a good Principle, or virtuous Disposition of
Mind. Which supposes, that a virtuous Disposition of Mind may be before a
virtu^us Act of Choice; and that therefore it is not necessary that there
should first be Thought, Reflection and Choice, before there can be any
virtuous Disposition. If the Choice be first, before the Existence of a good
Disposition of Heart, what signifies that Choice? There can, according to our
natural Notions, be no Virtue in a Choice which proceeds from no virtuous
Principle, but from me^r Selflove, Ambition, or some animal Appetite. And
therefore a virtuous Temper of Mind may be before a good Act of Choice, as a
Tree may be before the Fruit, and the Fountain before the Stream which proceeds
from it.

The following Things in Mr. Hutcheson's Enquiry concerning moral Good and
Evil, are evidently agreeable to the Nature of Things, and the Voice of human
Sense and Reason. Sect. II. P. 132, 133. Every Action which we apprehend as
either morally good or evil, is always supposed to FLOW FROM some Affections
toward sensitive Natures. And whatever we call Virtue or Vice, is either some
such Affection, or some Action CONSEQUENT UPON IT. -- All the Actions counted
religious in any Country, are supposed by those who count them so, to FLOW FROM
some Affections toward the Deity: and whatever we call social Virtue, we still
suppose to FLOW FROM Affections toward our Fellow Creatures. -- Prudence, if
it is only employed in promoting private Interest, is never imagined to be a
Virtue. In these Things Dr. Turnbull expressly agrees with Mr. Hutcheson, who is
his admired Author. M^r. Phil. P. 11^, -- 115. P. 142. (...)*


If a virtuous Disposition or Affection is before Acts that proceed from it,
then they are before those virtuous Acts of Choice which proceed from it. And
therefore there is no Necessity that all virtuous Dispositions or Affections
should be the Effect of Choice: and so no such supposed Necessity can be a good
Objection against such a Disposition's being natural, or from a Kind of
Instinct, implanted in the Mind in it is Creation. Agreeable to what Mr.
Hutcheson says ( Ibid. Sect. III. P. 196, 197.) I know not, says he, for what
Reason some will not allow that to be Virtue, which flows from Instinct or
Passions. But how do they help themselves? They say, Virtue arises from Reason.
What is Reason, but the Sagacity we have in prosecuting any End? The ultimate
End proposed by common Moralists, is the Happiness of the Agent himself. And
this certainly he is determined to pursue from Instinct. Now may not another
Instinct toward the Public, or the Good of others, be as proper a Principle
of Virtue, as the Instinct toward private Happiness? -- If it be said, that
Actions from Instinct are not the Effect of Prudence and Choice, this Objection
will hold full as strongly against the Actions which flow from Self-love.

And if we consider what Dr. T. declares as his own Notion of the Essence of
Virtue, we shall find, what he so confidently and often affirms, of it is being
essential to all Virtue that it should follow Choice and proceed from it, is no
less repugnant to that, than it is to the Nature of Things, and the general
Notions of Mankind. For it is his Notion, as well as Mr. Hutcheson's, that the
Essence of Virtue lies in good Affection, and particularly in Benevol^nce or
Love: as he very fully declares in these Words in his Key, Marginal Note
annexed to. 326.
That the Word that signifies Goodness and Mercy, should also signify moral
Rectitude in general, will not seem strange, if we consider that Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. Goodness according to the Sense of Scripture, and the
Nature of Things, includes all moral Rectitude; which, I reckon, may every Part
of it, where it is true and genuine, be resolved into this single Principle. If
it be so indeed, then certainly no Act whatsoever can have moral Rectitude, but
what proceeds from this Principle. And consequently no Act of Volition or
Choice can have any moral Rectitude, that takes Place before this Principles
exists. And yet he most confidently affirms, that Thought, Reflection and
Choice must go before Virtue, and that all Virtue or Right^ousness must be the
Fruit of preceding Choice. This brings his Scheme to an evident Contradiction.
For no Act of Choice can be virtuous but what proceeds from a Principle of
Benevolence or Love; for he insists that all genuine moral Rectitude, in every
Part of it, is resolved into this single Principle: And yet the Principle of
Benevolence is self, cannot be virtuous, unless it proceeds from Choice; for he
affirms that Nothing can have the Nature of Virtue but what comes from Choice.
So that virtuous Love, as the Principle of all Virtue, must go before virtuous
Choice, and be the Principle or Spring of it; and yet virtuous Choice must go
before virtuous Benevolence, and be the Spring of that. If a virtuous Act of
Choice goes before a Principle of Benevolence, and produces it, then this
virtuous Act is something distinct from that Principle which follows it, and is
it is Effect. So that here is at least one Part of Virtue, yea the Spring and
Source of all Virtue, viz. a virtuous Choice, that cannot be resolved into that
single Principle of Love.

Here also it is worthy to be observed, that Dr. T. P. 128. says, The Cause of
every Effect, alone, is chargeable with the Effect it produces, or which
proceeds from it: And so he argues that if the Effect be bad, the Cause alone
is sinful. According to which Reasoning, when the Effect is good, the Cause
alone is righteous or virtuous; to the Cause is to be ascribed all the Praise
of the good Effect it produces. And by the same Reasoning it will follow, that
if, as Dr. T. says, Adam must choose to be righteous, before he was righteous,
and if it be essential to the Nature of Righteousness or moral Rectitude, that
it be the Effect of Choice, and hence a Principle of Benevolence cannot have
moral Rectitude, unless it proceeds from Choice; then not to the Principle of
Benevolence, which is the Effect, but to the foregoing Choice alone, is to be
ascribed all the Virtue or Righteousness that is in the Case. And so in Stead
of all moral Rectitude, in every Part of it, being resolved into that single
Principle of Benevolence, no moral Rectitude, in any Part of it, is to be
resolved into that Principle: But all is to be resolved into the foregoing
Choice, which is the Cause.

But yet it follows from these inconsistent Principles, there is no moral
Rectitude or Virtue in the first Act of Choice, that is the Cause of all
consequent Virtue. This follows two Ways; 1. Because every Part of Virtue lies
in the benevolent Principle, which is the Effect; and therefore no Part of it
can lie in the Cause. 2. The Choice of Virtue, as to the first Act at least,
can have no Virtue or Righteousness at all, because it don't proceed from any
foregoing Choice. For Dr. T. insists, that a Man must first have Reflection and
Choice, before he can have Righteousness; and that it is essential to Holiness,
that it proceed from Choice. So that the first Choice of Holiness, which
Holiness proceeds from, can have no Virtue at all, because by the Supposition
it don't proceed from Choice, being the first Choice. Hence if it be essential
to Holiness, that it proceeds from Choice, it must proceed from an unholy
Choice; unless the first holy Choice can be before it self, or there be a
virtuous Act of Choice before that which is first of all.

And with respect to Adam, let us consider how upon Dr. T -- r's Principles, it
was possible he ever should have any such Thing as Righteousness, by any Means
at all. In the State wherein God created him, he could have no such thing as
Love to God, or any Love or Benevolence in his Heart. For if so, there would
have been Original Righteousness; there would have been genuine moral
Rectitude; Nothing would be wanting: For our Author says, True genuine moral
Rectitude, in every Part of it, is to be resolved into this single Principle.
But if he were wholly without any such thing as Love to God, or any virtuous
Love, how should he come by Virtue? The Answer doubtless will be, By Act of
Choice: he must first choose to be virtuous. But what if he did choose to be
virtuous? It could not be from Love to God, or any virtuous Principle, that he
chose it; for, by the Supposition, he has no such Principle in his Heart: And
if he chooses it without such a Principle, still, according to this Author,
there is no Virtue in his Choice; for all Virtue, he says, is to be resolved
into that single Principle of Love. Or will he say, there may be produced in
the Heart a virtuous Benevolence by an Act or Acts of Choice, that are not
virtuous? But this don't consist with what he implicitly asserts. That to the
Cause alone is to be ascribed what is in the Effect. So that there is no Way
can possibly be devised, in Consistence with Dr. T -- r's Scheme, in which Adam
ever could have any Righteousness, or could ever either obtain any Principle of
Virtue, or perform any one virtuous Act.

These confused inconsistent Assertions, concerning Virtue and moral Rectitude,
arise from the absurd Notions in Vogue, concerning Freedom of Will, as if it
consisted in the Will's Self-determining Power, supposed to be necessary to
moral Agency, Virtue and Vice. The Absurdities of which, with the Grounds of
these Errors, and what the Truth is respecting these Matters, with the
Evidences of it, I have, according to my Ability, fully and largely considered,
in my Enquiry on that Subject; to which I must refer the Reader, that desires
further Satisfaction, and is willing to give himself the Trouble of reading
that Discourse.

Having considered this great Argument, and pretended Demonstration of Dr. T --
r's against original Righteousness; I proceed to the Proofs of the Doctrine.
And in the first Place, I would consider, whether there be not Evidence of it
in the three first Chapters of Genesis: Or, whether the History there
delivered, don't lead us to suppose, that our first Parents were created in a
State of moral Rectitude and Holiness.

1. This History leads us to suppose, Adam's Sin, with Relation to the
forbidden Fruit, was the first Sin he committed. Which could not have been, had
he not always, till then, been perfectly righteous, righteous from the first
Moment of his Existence; and consequently, created or brought into Existence
righteous. In a moral Agent, subject to moral Obligations, it is the same
thing, to be perfectly innocent, as to be perfectly righteous. It must be the
same, because there can no more be any Medium between Sin and Righteousness, or
between being right and being wrong, in a moral Sense, than there can be a
Medium between straight and crooked, in a natural Sense. Adam was brought into
Existence capable of acting immediately, as a moral Agent: and therefore he was
immediately under a Rule of right Action: he was obliged as soon as he existed,
to act right. And if he was obliged to act right as soon as he existed, He was
obliged even then to be inclined to act right. Dr. T. says, P. 442. " Adam
could not sin without a sinful Inclination": This is doubtless true: for although
there was no natural sinful Inclination in Adam, yet an Inclination to that Sin
of eating the forbidden Fruit, was begotten in him by the Delusion and Error he
was led into; and this Inclination to eat the forbidden Fruit, must preceed his
actual Eating.
And, just for the same Reason, he could not do right, without an Inclination
to right Action. And as he was obliged to act right from the first Moment of
his Existence, and did do so, 'till he sinned in the Affair of the forbidden
Fruit, he must have an Inclination or Disposition of Heart to do right the
first Moment of his Existence; and that is the same as to be created, or
brought into Existence, with an Inclination to right Action, or, which is the
same Thing, a virtuous and holy Disposition of Heart.

Here it will be in vain to say, It Is true, that it was Adam's Duty to have a
good Disposition or Inclination as soon as it was possible to be obtained, in
the Nature of Things: but as it could not be without Time to establish such an
Habit, which requires antecedent Thought, Reflection, and repeated right Action;
therefore all that Adam could be obliged to in the first Place, was to reflect
and consider Things in a right Manner, and apply himself to right Action, in
order to obtain a right Disposition. For, this supposes, that even this
Reflection and Consideration, which he was obliged to, was right Action. Surely
he was obliged to it no otherwise than as a thing that was right: And therefore
he must have an Inclination to this right Action immediately, before he could
perform those first right Actions. And as the Inclination to them should be
right, the Principle or Disposition from which he performed even these Actions,
must be good. Otherwise, the Actions would not be right in the Sight of Him who
looks at the Heart; nor would they answer the Man's Obligations, or be a doing
his Duty, if he had done them for some sinister End, and not from a Regard to
God and his Duty. Therefore there must be a Regard to God and his Duty
implanted in him at his first Existence: Otherwise, it is certain, he would have
done Nothing from a Regard to God and his Duty; no, not so much as to reflect
and consider, and try to obtain such a Disposition. The very Supposition of a
Disposition to right Action being first obtained by repeated right Action, is
grossly inconsistent with it self: for it supposes a Course of right Action,
before there is a Disposition to perform any right Action.

These are no invented Quibbles, or Sophisms. If God expected of Adam any
Obedience or Duty to him at all, when he first made him, whether it was in
reflecting, considering, or any way exerting the Faculties he had given him,
then God expected he should immediately exercise Love and Regard to Him. For
how could it be expected, that Adam should have a strict and perfect Regard to
God's Commands and Authority, and his Duty to Him, when he had no Love nor
Regard to Him in his Heart, nor could it be expected he should have any? If
Adam from the Beginning did his Duty to God, and had more Respect to the Will
of his Creator, than to other Things, and as much Respect to him as he ought to
have; then from the Beginning he had a supreme and perfect Respect and Love to
God: And if so, he was created with such a Principle. There is no avoiding the
Consequence. Not only external Duties, but internal Duties, such as summarily
consist in Love, must be immediately required of Adam, as soon as he existed,
if any Duty at all was required. For it is most apparently absurd, to talk of a
spiritual Being, with the Faculties of Understanding and Will, being required
to perexternal Duties, without internal. Dr. T. himself, observes, that Love is
the fulfilling of the Law, and that all moral Rectitude, even every Part of it,
must be resolved into that single Principle. Therefore, if any morally right
Act at all, Reflection, Consideration, or any thing else, was required of Adam
immediately, on his first Existence, and was performed as required; then he
must, the first Moment of his Existence, have his Heart possessed of that
Principle of divine Love; which implies the whole of moral Rectitude in every
Part of it, according to our Author's own Doctrine; and so the whole of moral
Rectitude or Righteousness must begin with his Existence: which is the Thing
taught in the Doctrine of original Righteousness.

And let us consider how it could be otherwise, than that Adam was always, in
every Moment of his Existence, obliged to exercise such Regard or Respect of
Heart toward every Object or Thing, as was agreeable to the apparent Merit of
that Object. For Instance, would it not at any Time have been a becoming Thing
in Adam, on the Exhibition to his Mind of God's infinite Goodness to him, for
him to have exercised answerable Gratitude; and the contrary have been
unbecoming and odious? And if something had been presented to Adam's View,
transcendently amiable in it self, as for Instance, the glorious Perfection of
the divine Nature, would it not have become him to love, relish and delight in
it? Would not such an Object have merited this? And if the View of an Object so
amiable in it self did not affect his Mind with Complacence, would it not,
according to the plain Dictates of our Understanding, have shown an unbecoming
Temper of Mind? To say, that he had not had Time, by Culture, to form and
establish a good Disposition or Relish, is not what would have taken off the
Disagreableness and Odiousness of the Temper. And if there had been never so
much Time, I don't see, how it could be expected he should improve it aright,
in order to obtain a good Disposition, if he had not already some good
Disposition to engage him to it.

That belonging to the Will and Disposition of the Heart, which is in it self
either odious or amiable, unbecoming or decent, always would have been Adam's
Virtue or Sin, at any Moment of his Existence; if there be any such Thing as
Virtue or Vice; by which Nothing can be meant, but That in our moral
Disposition and Behavior, which is becoming or unbecoming, amiable or odious.

Human Nature must be created with some Dispositions; a Disposition to relish
some Things as good and amiable, and to be averse to other Things as odious and
disagreable. Otherwise, it must be without any such Thing as Inclination or
Will: It must be perfectly indifferent, without Preference, without Choice or
Aversion toward any Thing, as agreeable or disagreable. But if it had any
concreated Dispositions at all, they must be either right or wrong, either
agreeable or disagreable to the Nature of Things. If Man had at first the
highest Relish of those Things that were most excellent and beautiful, a
Disposition to have the quickest and highest Delight in those Things that were
most worthy of it, then his Dispositions were morally right and amiable, and
never can be decent and excellent in a higher Sense. But if he had a
Disposition to love most those things that were inferior and less worthy, then
his Dispositions were vicious. And it is evident there can be no Medium between
these.

II. This Notion of Adam's being created without a Principle of Holiness in his
Heart, taken with the rest of Dr. T -- r's Scheme, is inconsistent with what
the History in the Beginning of Genesis leads us to suppose of the great
Favors and Smiles of Heaven, which Adam enjoyed, while he remained in
Innocence. The Mosaic Account suggests to us, that till Adam sinned, he was in
happy Circumstances, surrounded with Testimonies and Fruits of God's Favor.
This is implicitly owned by Dr. T. when he says, P. 252. That in the
Dispensation our first Parents were under, before the Fall, they were placed in
a Condition proper to engage their Gratitude, Love and Obedience. But it will
follow on our Author's Principles, that Adam while in Innocence, was placed in
far worse Circumstances, than he was in after his Disobedience, and infinitely
worse than his Posterity are in; under unspeakably greater Disadvantages for
the avoiding Sin, and the Performance of Duty. For by his Doctrine Adam's
Posterity come into the World with their Hearts as free from any Propensity to
Sin as he, and he was made as destitute of any Propensity to Righteousness as
they: and yet God, in Favor to them, does great Things to restrain them from
Sin, and excit^ them to Virtue, which he never did for Adam in Innocence, but
laid him, in the highest Degree, under contrary Disadvantages. God, as an
Instance of his great Favor, and fatherly Love to Man, since the Fall, has
denied him the Ease and Pleasures of Paradise, which gratified and allured his
Senses, and bodily Appetites; that he might diminish his Temptations to Sin:
And as a still greater Means to restrain from Sin, and promote Virtue, has
subjected him to Labor, Toil and Sorrow in the World: And not only so, but as
a Means to promote his spiritual and eternal Good far beyond this, has doomed
him to Death: And when all this was found insufficient, he, in further
Prosecution of the Designs of his Love, shortened Men's Lives exceedingly, made
them twelve or thirteen times shorter than in the first Ages. And yet this,
with all the innumerable Calamities, which God in great Favor to Mankind has
brought on the World, whereby their Temptations are so vastly cut short, and
the Means and Inducements to Virtue heaped one upon another, to so great a
Degree, all have proved insufficient, now for so many Thousand Years together,
to restrain from Wickedness in any considerable Degree; innocent human Nature,
all along, coming into the World with the same Purity and harmless
Dispositions, that our first Parents had in Paradise. What vast Disadvantages
indeed then must Adam and Eve be in, that had no more in their Nature to keep
them from Sin, or incline 'em to Virtue, than their Posterity, and yet were
without all these additional and extraordinary Means! Not only without such
exceeding great Means as we now have, when our Lives are made so very short,
but having vastly less Advantages than their Antediluvian Posterity, who to
prevent their being wicked, and to make 'em good, had so much Labor and Toil,
Sweat and Sorrow, Briars and Thorns, with a Body gradually decaying and
returning to the Dust; when our first Parents had the extreme Disadvantage of
being placed in the midst of so many and exceeding great Temptations; not only
without Toil or Sorrow, Pain or Disease, to humble and mortify 'em, and a
Sentence of Death to wean 'em from the World, but in the midst of the most
exquisite and alluring sensitive Delights, the Reverse in every respect, and to
the highest Degree of that most gracious State of requisite Means, and great
Advantages, which Mankind now enjoy! If Mankind now under these vast
Restraints, and great Advantages, are not restrained from general, and as it
were universal Wickedness, how could it be expected that Adam and Eve, created
with no better Hearts than Men bring into the World now, and destitute of all
these Advantages, and in the midst of all contrary Disadvantages, should escape
it?

These Things are not agreeable to Moses's Account; which represents an happy
State of peculiar Favors and Blessings before the Fall, and the Curse coming
afterward: but according to this Scheme, the Curse was before the Fall, and
the great Favors and Testimonies of Love followed the Apostasy. And the Curse
before the Fall must be a Curse with a Witness, being to so high a Degree the
Reverse of such Means, Means so necessary for such a Creature as innocent Man,
and in all their Multitude and Fullness proving too little. Paradise therefore
must be a mere Delusion! There was indeed a great Show of Favor, in placing
Man in the midst of such Delights. But this delightful Garden, it seems, with
all it is Beauty and Sweetness, was in it is real Tendency worse than the Apples
of Sodom: It was but a mere Bait (God forbid the Blasphemy) the more
effectually enticing by it is Beauty and Deliciousness, to Adam's eternal Ruin:
which might be the more expected to be fatal to him, seeing that he was the
first Man that ever existed, having no Superiority of Capacity to his
Posterity, and wholly without the Advantage of the Observations, Experiences
and Improvements of preceding Generations; which his Posterity have.

I proceed now to take Notice of an Additional Proof of the Doctrine we are
upon, from another Part of the holy Scripture. A very clear Text for original
Righteousness is that in Eccles. vii. 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God
made Man upright; but they have sought out many Inventions.

It is an Observation of no Weight, which Dr. T. makes on this Text, that the
Word Man is commonly used to signify Mankind in general, or Mankind
collectively taken. It is true, it often signifies the Species of Mankind: but
then it is used to signify the Species with regard to it is Duration and
Succession from it is Beginning, as well as with regard to it is Extent. The
English Word Mankind is used to signify the Species: but what if it be so?
Would it be an improper or unintelligible way of Speaking, to say, that when
God first made Mankind, he placed them in a pleasant Paradise (meaning in (...)
first Parents) but now they live in the midst of Briars (...) Thorns? And it is
certain, that to speak of God's (...) Mankind in such a Meaning, viz. his
giving the Species an Existence in their first Parents, at the Creation of the
World, is agreeable to the Scripture-Use of such an Expression. As in Deuteronomy. iv.
32. Since the Day that God CREATED MAN upon the Earth. Job xx. 4. Know thou
not this of old, since MAN was placed upon the Earth. Isai. X^v. 12. I have
made the Earth, and CREATED MAN upon it: I, even my Hands, have stretched out
the Heavens. Jer. xxvii. 5. I HAVE MADE the Earth, the MAN and the Beast that
are upon the Ground, by my great Power. All these Texts speak of God's making
Man, by the Word, Man, signifying the Species of Mankind; and yet they all
plainly have Respect to God's making Man at first, when God made the Earth, and
stretched out the Heavens, and created the first Parents of Mankind. In all
these Places the same Word Adam is used, as here in Ecclesiastes; and in the
last of them, used with HE emphaticum, as it is here; though Dr. T. omits it,
when he tells us, he gives us a Catalogue of all the Places of Scripture, where
the Word is used. And it argues Nothing to the Doctor's Purpose, that the
Pronoun, They, is used. THEY have sought out many Inventions. Which is properly
applied to the Species, which God made at first upright: God having begun the
Species with more than one, and it being continued in a Multitude. As Christ
speaks of the two Sexes, in the Relation of Man and Wife, as continued in
successive Generations. Matthew. xix. 4. He that MADE THEM at the Beginning, made
them Male and Female; having Reference to Adam and Eve.

No less impertinent, and also very unfair is his Criticism on the Word Jashar,
translated Upright. Because the Word sometimes signifies Right, he would from
thence infer, that it don't properly signify a moral Rectitude, even when used
to express the Character of moral Agents. He might as well insist, that the
English Word Upright, sometimes, and in it is most original Meaning, signifying
right up, or in an erect Posture, therefore it don't properly signify any moral
Character, when applied to moral Agents: And indeed less unreasonably; for it is
known, that in the Hebrew Language, in a peculiar Manner, most Words used to
signify moral and spiritual Things, are taken from Things external and natural.
The Word Jashar is used, as applied to moral Agents, or to the Words and
Actions of such (if I have not mis-reckon'd Making Use of Buxtor^'s
Concordance, which according to the Author's professed Design, directs to all
the Places where the Word is used.
) about 110 Times in Scripture; and about an 100 of them, without all Dispute,
to signify Virtue, or moral Rectitude (though Dr. T. is pleased to say, the Word
don't generally signify a moral Character;) and for the most Part it signifies
true Virtue, or Virtue in such a Sense, as distinguishes it from all false
Appearances of Virtue, or what is only Virtue in some Respects, but not truly
so in the Sight of God. It is used at least 80 Times in this Sense. And scarce
any Word can be found in the Hebrew Language more significant of this. It is
thus used constantly in Solomon's Writings (where it is often found) when used
to express a Character or Property of moral Agents. And it is beyond all
Controversy that he uses it in this Place in the viith of Eccles. to signify a
moral Rectitude, or Character of real Virtue and Integrity. For the wise Man,
in this Context, is speaking of Men with respect to their moral Character,
enquiring into the Corruption and Depravity of Mankind (as is confessed P.
184.) and he here declares, he had not found more than one among a Thousand, of
the right Stamp, truly and thoroughly virtuous and upright: which appeared a
strange thing! But in this Text, he clears God, and lays the Blame to Man: Man
was not made thus at first. He was made of the right Stamp, altogether good in
his Kind (as all other things were) truly and thoroughly virtuous, as he ought
to be; But they have sought out many Inventions. Which last Expression
signifies things sinful, or morally evil; as is confessed, P. 185. And this
Expression, used to signify those moral Evils he found in Man, which he sets in
Opposition to the Uprightness Man was made in, shows, that by Uprightness he
means the most true and sincere Goodness. The Word rendered Inventions, most
naturally and aptly signifies the subtle Devices, and crooked deceitful Ways of
Hypocrites, wherein they are of a Character contrary to Men of Simplicity and
godly Sincerity; who, though wise in that which is good, are simple concerning
Evil. Thus the same wise Man in Prove. xii. 2. sets a truly good Man in
Opposition to a Man of wicked Devices, whom God will condemn. Solomon had
Occasion to observe many who put on an artful Disguise and fair Show of
Goodness; But on searching thoroughly, he found very few truly upright. As he
says, Prove. xx. 6. Most Men will proclaim every one his own Goodness: but a
faithful Man who can find? So that it is exceeding plain, that by Uprightness,
in this Place in Ecclesiastes, Solomon means true moral Goodness.

What our Author urges concerning many Inventions being spoken of, whereas
Adam's eating the forbidden Fruit was but one Invention, is of as little Weight
as the rest of what he says on this Text. For the many Lusts and Corruptions of
Mankind, appearing in innumerable Ways of sinning, are all the Consequence of
that Sin. The great Corruption Men are fallen into by the original Apostasy,
appears in the Multitude of wicked Ways they are inclined to. And therefore
these are properly mentioned as the Fruits and Evidences of the Greatness of
that Apostasy and Corruption.

SECT. II.
Concerning the Kind of Death, threatened to our first Parents, if they should
eat of the forbidden Fruit.
DR. T. in his Observations on the three first Chapters of Genesis, says, P. 7.
The Threatening to Man in Case of Transgression was, that he should surely die.
-- Death is the losing of Life. Death is opposed to Life, and must be
understood according to the Nature of that Life, to which it is opposed. Now
the Death here threatened can, with any Certainty, be opposed only to the Life
God gave, Adam, when he created him, ver. 7. Any thing besides this must be
pure Conjecture, without solid Foundation.

To this I would say; It Is true, Death is opposed to Life, and must be
understood according to the Nature of that Life, to which it is opposed: but
does it therefore follow, that Nothing can be meant by it but the Loss of Life?
Misery is opposed to Happiness, and Sorrow is in Scripture often opposed to
Joy: but can we conclude from thence, that Nothing is meant in Scripture by
Sorrow, but the Loss of Joy? Or that there is no more in Misery, than the Loss
or Absence of Happiness? And if it be so, that the Death threatened to Adam can,
with Certainty, be opposed only to the Life given to Adam, when God created
him; I think, a State of perfect, perpetual and hopeless Misery is properly
opposed to that State Adam was in, when God created him. For I suppose, it
will not be denied, that the Life Adam had, was truly a happy Life; happy
in-perfect Innocence, in the Favor of his Maker, surrounded with the happy
Fruits and Testimonies of his Love: and I think it has been proved, that he
also was happy in a State of perfect Righteousness. And Nothing is more
manifest, than that it is agreeable to a very common Acceptance of the Word,
Life, in Scripture, that it be understood as signifying a State of excellent
and happy Existence. Now that which is most opposite to that Life and State
Adam was created in, is a State of total confirmed Wickedness, and perfect
hopeless Misery, under the divine Displeasure and Curse; not excluding temporal
Death or the Destruction of the Body, as an Introduction to it.

And besides, that which is much more evident, than any Thing Dr. T. says on
this Head, is this, viz. That the Death, which was to come on Adam as the
Punishment of his Disobedience, was opposed to that Life which he would have
had as the Reward of his Obedience, in Case he had not sinned. Obedience and
Disobedience are Contraries: And the Threatenings and Promises, that are
Sanctions of a Law, are set in direct Opposition: and the promised Rewards, and
threatened Punishments, are what are most properly taken as each others
Opposites. But none will deny, that the Life which would have been Adam's
Reward, if he had persisted in Obedience, was eternal Life. And therefore we
argue justly, that the Death which stands opposed to that Life (Dr. T. himself
being Judge, P. 396.) is manifestly eternal Death, a Death widely different
from the Death we now die. -- to use his own Words. If Adam, for his
persevering Obedience, was to have had everlasting Life and Happiness, in
perfect Holiness, Union with his Maker, and Enjoyment of his Favor, and this
was the Life which was to be confirmed by the Tree of Life; then doubtless the
Death threatened in Case of Disobedience, which stands in direct Opposition to
this, was a being given over to everlasting Wickedness and Misery, in
Separation from God and in enduring his Wrath.

And it may with the greatest Reason be supposed, that when God first made
Mankind, and made known to them the Methods of his moral Government toward
them, in the Revelation he made of Himself to the natural Head of the whole
Species; and let him know, that Obedience to Him was expected as his Duty; and
enforced this Duty with the Sanction of a threatened Punishment, called by the
Name of Death; I say, we may with the greatest Reason suppose in such a Case,
that by Death was meant that same Death which God esteemed to be the most
proper Punishment of the Sin of Mankind, and which he speaks of under that
Name, throughout the Scripture, as the proper Wages of the Sin of Man, and was
always from the Beginning understood to be so in the Church of God. It would be
strange indeed, if it should be otherwise. It would have been strange, if when
the Law of God was first given, and enforced by the Threatening of a Punishment,
Nothing at all had been mentioned of that great Punishment, ever spoken of
under the Name of Death (in the Revelations which he has given to Mankind from
Age to Age) as the proper Punishment of the Sin of Mankind, And it would be no
less strange, if when the Punishment which was mentioned and threatened on that
Occasion, was called by the same Name, even Death, yet we must not understand
it to mean the same Thing, but something infinitely diverse, and infinitely
more inconsiderable.

But now, let us consider what that Death is, which the Scripture ever speaks
of as the proper Wages of the Sin of Mankind, and is spoken of as such by God's
Saints in all Ages of the Church, from the first Beginning of a written
Revelation, to the Conclusion of it. I Will begin with the New Testament. When
the Apostle Paul says, Romans vi. 23. The Wages of Sin is Death, Dr. T. tells us,
P. 396. that this means eternal Death, the second Death, a Death widely
different from the Death we now die. The same Apostle speaks of Death as the
proper Punishment due for Sin, in Romans vii. 5. and Chap. viii. 13, 2 Cor. iii.
7. 1 Cor. xv. 56. In all which Places, Dr. T. himself supposes the Apostle to
intend eternal Death. See P. 78. Note on Rom vii. 5. and Note on ver. 6. Note
on Romans v. 20. Note on Romans vii. 8.
And when the Apostle James speaks of Death, as the proper Reward, Fruit and
End of Sin, Jam. i. 15. Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death: it is
manifest, that our Author supposes eternal Destruction to be meant. By
comparing what he says P. 126. with what he often says of that Death and
Destruction which is the Demerit and End of personal Sin, which he says is the
second Death, or eternal Destruction.
And the Apostle John, agreeable to Dr. T -- r's Sense, speaks of the second
Death, as that which Sin unrepented of will bring all Men to at last. Rev. xx.
6, 14. and xxi. 8. and Chap. ii. 11. In the same Sense the Apostle John uses
the Word in his 1st Epistle, Chap. iii. 14. We know, that we have passed from
Death to Life, because we love the Brethren: He that ^ateth his Brother,
abides in Death. In the same Manner Christ used the Word from Time to Time,
when he was on Earth, and spoke concerning the Punishment and Issue of Sin.
Joh. v. 24. He that hears my Word, and believes, etc. has everlasting Life;
and shall not come into Condemnation; but is passed from Death to Life. Where,
according to Dr. T -- r's own Way of arguing, it cannot be the Death which we
now die, that Christ speaks of, but eternal Death, because it is set in
Opposition to everlasting Life. Joh. vi. 50. This is the Bread which comes
down from Heaven, that a Man may eat thereof, and not die. Chap. viii. 51.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a Man keep my Saying, he shall never see
Death. Chap. xi. 26. And whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die.
In which Places, it is plain, Christ don't mean that Believers shall never see
temporal Death. See also Matthew. x. 29. and Luke x. 28. In like Manner, the Word
was commonly used by the Prophets of old, when they spoke of Death as the
proper End and Recompense of Sin. So, abundantly by the Prophet Ezekiel. Ezekiel.
iii. 18. When I say unto the wicked Man, Thou shall surely die. In the
Original, Dying thou shall die. -- The same Form of Expression, which God used
in the Threatening to Adam. We have the same Words again, Chap. xxxiii. 18. --
In Chap. xviii. 4. it is said, The Soul that sins, it shall die. To the like
Purpose are Chap. iii. 19, 20. and xviii. 4, 5, 10, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24,
26, 28. Chap. xxxiii. 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20. And that temporal Death is not
meant in these Places, is plain, because it is promised most absolutely that
the Righteous shall not die the Death spoken of. Chap*xvii.21. He shall surely
live, he shall not die. So v. 9, 17, 19 and 22. and Chap. iii. 21. And it is
evident, the Prophet Jeremiah uses the Word in the same Sense; Jer. xxxi. 30.
Every one shall die for his own Iniquity. And the same Death is spoken of by
the Prophet Isaiah. Isai. xi. 4. With the Breath of his Lips shall be slay the
Wicked. See also Chap. lxi. 16. with v. 24. -- Solomon, who we must suppose was
thoroughly acquainted with the Sense in which the Word was used by the Wise,
and by the Ancients, continually speaks of Death as the proper Fruit, Issue and
R^compence of Sin, using the Word only in this Sense. Chap. xi. 19. As
Righteousness tends to Life, so he that pursues Evil, pursues it to his own
Death. So Chap. xviii. 32. x. 21. xiv. 12. xix. 16. i. 18, 32. i. 18. v. 5, 6,
23. vii. 22, 26, 27. ix. 18. xi. 19. xv. 10. xviii. 21. xxi. 16. and xxiii. 13,
14. In these Places, he cannot mean temporal Death; for he often speaks of it
as a Punishment of the Wicked, wherein the Righteous shall certainly be
distinguished from 'em: as in Prove. xii. 2^. In the Way of Righteousness is
Life, and in the Pathway thereof is no Death. So in Chap. x.2. -- xi.4. --
xiii. 14. -- xiv. 27. and many other Places. But we find, this same Wise man
observes, that as to temporal Death, and temporal Events in general, there is
no Distinction, but that they happen alike to good and bad. Eccl. ii. 14, 15,
16. -- viii. 14. and ix. 2,3. His Words are remarkable in Eccl. vii. 15. There
is a just Man that perishes in his Righteousness; and there is a wicked Man
that prolongeth his Life in his Wickedness. -- So we find, David in the Book of
Psalms uses the Word Death in the same Sense, when he speaks of it as the
proper Wages and Issue of Sin. Psalm. xxxiv. 21. Evil shall slay the Wicked. He
speaks of it as a certain Thing, Psalm. cxxxix. 19. Surely Thou will slay the
Wicked, O God. And he speaks of it as a Thing wherein the Wicked are
distinguished from the Righteous, Psalm. lxix. 28. Let them be blotted out of
the Book of the Living, and not be written with the Righteous. -- And thus we
find the Word Death used in the Pentateuch, or Books of Moses: in which Part of
the Scripture it is, that we have the Account of the Threatening of Death to
Adam. When Death, in these Books, is spoken of as the proper Fruit and
appointed Reward of Sin, it is to be understood of eternal Death. So Deuteronomy. xxx.
15. See, I have set before thee this Day, Life and Good, and Death and Evil.
Ver. 19. I call Heaven and Earth to Record this Day against you, that I have
set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing. The Life that is spoken of
here, is doubtless the same that is spoken of in Lev. xviii. 5. Ye shall
therefore keep my Statutes and my Judgments, which if a Man do, he shall live
in them. This the Apostle understands of eternal Life; as is plain by Romans x.
5. and Gal. iii. 12. -- But that the Death threatened for Sin in the Law of
Moses meant eternal Death, is what Dr. T abundantly declares. So in his Note on
Romans v. 20. Such a Constitution the Law of Moses was, subjecting those who were
under it to Death for every Transgression; meaning by Death ETERNAL DEATH.
These are his Words. The like he asserts in many other Places. When it is said,
in the Place now mentioned, I have set before thee Life and Death, Blessing and
Cursing, without doubt, the same Blessing and Cursing is meant which God had
already set before them with such Solemnity, in the 27th and 28th Chapters;
where we have the Sum of the Curses in those last Words of the 27th Chapter,
Cursed is every one, which confirms not all the Words of this Law to do them.
Which the Apostle speaks of as a Threatening of eternal Death; and with him Dr.
T. himself. Note on Romans v. 20. In his Exp. on Romans P. 371, 373, 374, 376.
There in P. 371, he says expressly, "The Law of Moses subjected those who were
under it to Death, meaning by Death, (...) Death."
In this Sense also Job and his Friends, spoke of Death, as the Wages and End
of Sin, who lived before any written Revelation, and had their Religion and
their Phraseology about the Things of Religion from the Ancients.

If any should insist upon it as an Objection against supposing that Death was
intended to signify eternal Death in the Threatening to Adam, that this Use of
the Word is figurative: though this should be allowed, yet it is by no Means so
figurative as many other Phrases used in the History contained in these three
Chapters: As when it is said, God said, Let there be Light; God said, Let there
be a Firmament, etc as though God spoke such Words with a Voice. So when it is
said, God called the Light, Day: God called the Firmament, Heaven, etc. God
rested on the seventh Day; as though he had been weary, and then rested. And when
it is said, They heard the Voice of God walking; as though the Deity had two
Feet, and took Steps on the Ground. Dr. T. supposes, that when it is said of
Adam and Eve, Their Eyes were opened, and they saw that they were naked; by the
Word naked, is meant a State of Guilt. (P. 12.) Which Sense of the Word, naked,
is much further from the common Use of the Word, than the supposed Sense of the
Word Death. So this Author supposes the Promise concerning the Seed of the
Woman's bruising the Serpent's Head, while the Serpent should bruise his Heel,
is to be understood of the Messiah's destroying the Power and Sovereignty of
the Devil, and receiving some slight Hurt from him. (P. 15, 16.) Which makes
the Sentence full of Figures, vastly more beside the common Use of Words. And
why might not God deliver Threatenings to our first Parents in figurative
Expressions, as well as Promises? -- Many other strong Figures are used in
these Chapters.

But indeed, there is no Necessity of supposing the Word Death, or the Hebrew
Word so translated, if used in the Manner that has been supposed, to have been
figurative at all. It does not appear but that this World, in it is true and
proper Meaning, might signify perfect Misery, and sensible Destruction; though
the Word was also applied to signify something more external and visible. There
are many Words in our Language, such as Heart, Sense, View, Discovery,
Conception, Light, and many others, which are applied to signify external
Things, as that muscular Part of the Body called Heart; external Feeling called
Sense; the Sight of the bodily Eye called View; the finding of a Thing by it is
being uncovered, called Discovery; the first Beginning of the Foetus in the
Womb, called Conception; and the Rays of the Sun, called Light: Yet these Words
do as truly and properly signify other Things of a more spiritual internal
Nature, as those: Such as the Disposition, Affection, Perception and Thought of
the Mind, and Manifestation and Evidence to the Soul. Common Use, which governs
the Propriety of Language, makes the latter Things to be as much signified by
those Words, in their proper Meaning, as the former. It Is especially common in
the Hebrew, and I suppose, other oriental Languages, that the same Word that
signifies something external, does no less properly and usually signify
something more spiritual. So the Hebrew Words used for Breath, have such a
double Signification; Neshama signifies both Breath, and the Soul; and the
latter as commonly as the former: Ruach is used for Breath or Wind, but yet
more commonly signifies Spirit. Nephesh is used for Breath, but yet more
commonly signifies Soul. So the Word L^bh, Heart, no less properly signifies
the Soul, especially with Regard to the Will and Affections, than that Part of
the Body so called. The Word Shalom, which we render Peace, no less properly
signifies Prosperity and Happiness, than mutual Agreement. The Word translated,
Life, signifies the natural Life of the Body, and also the perfect and happy
State of sensible active Being; and the latter as properly as the former. So
the Word, Death, signifies Destruction, as to outward Sensibility, Activity and
Enjoyment: But it has most evidently another Signification, which, in the
Hebrew Tongue, is no less proper, viz. perfect, sensible, hopeless Ruin and
Misery.

It Is therefore wholly without Reason urged, that Death properly signifies only
the Loss of this present Life: and that therefore Nothing else was meant by
that Death which was threatened for eating the forbidden Fruit. Nor does it at
all appear but that Adam, who from what God said concerning the Seed of the
Woman, that was so very figurative, could understand, that Relief was promised,
as to the Death which was threatened (as Dr. T. himself supposes, P. 18.)
understood the Death that was threatened, in the more important Sense;
especially seeing temporal Death, as it is originally, and in itself, and is
evermore, excepting as changed by divine Grace, an Introduction or Entrance
into that gloomy dismal State of Misery, which is shadowed forth by the dark
and awful Circumstances of this Death, naturally suggesting to the Mind the
most dreadful State of hopeless, sensible Ruin.

As to that Objection which some have made, that the Phrase, Dying thou shall
die, is several Times used in the Books of Moses to signify temporal Death, it
can be of no Force. For it has been shown already, that the same Phrase is
sometimes used in Scripture to signify eternal Death, in Instances much more
parallel with this. But indeed Nothing can be certainly argued concerning the
Nature of the Thing intended, from it is being expressed in such a Manner. For
it is evident, that such Repetitions of a Word in the Hebrew Language, are no
more than an Emphasis upon a Word in the more modern Languages, to signify the
great Degree of a Thing, the Importance of it, or the Certainty of it, etc.
When we would signify and impress these, we commonly put an Emphasis on our
Words: In Stead of this, the Hebrews, when they would express a Thing strongly,
repeated or doubled the Word, the more to impress the Mind of the Hearer; as
may be plain to every one in the least conversant with the Hebrew Bible. The
Repetition in the Threatening to Adam, therefore only implies the Solemnity, and
Importance of the Threatening. But God may denounce either eternal or temporal
Death with Peremptoriness and Solemnity, and Nothing can certainly be inferred
concerning the Nature of the Thing threatened, because it is threatened with
Emphasis, more than this, that the Threatening is much to be regarded. Though it
be true, that it might in an especial Manner be expected that a Threatening of
eternal Death, would be denounced with great Emphasis, such a Threatening being
infinitely important, and to be regarded above all others.

SECT. III.
Wherein it is enquired, whether there be any thing in the History of the three
first Chapters of Genesis, which should lead us to suppose, that God, in his
Constitution with Adam, dealt with Mankind in general, as included in their
first Father, and that the Threatening of Death, in Case he should eat the
forbidden Fruit, had Respect not only to him, but his Posterity?
Dr. T. rehearsing that Threatening to Adam, Thou shall surely die, and giving
us his Paraphrase of it, P. 7, 8. concludes thus; "Observe, here is not one
Word relating to Adam's Posterity." But it may be observed in Opposition to
this, that there is scarcely one Word that we have an Account of, which God
ever said to Adam or Eve, but what does manifestly include their Posterity in
the Meaning and Design of it. There is as much of a Word said about Adam's
Posterity in that Thr^^tning, as there is in those Words of God to Adam and
Eve, Genesis i. 28. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue
it; and as much in Events, to lead us to suppose Adam's Posterity to be
included. There is as much of a Word of his Posterity in that Threatening, as in
those Words, v. 29. Behold, I have given you every Herb bearing Seed -- and
every Tree in which is the Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, etc. Even when God
was about to create Adam, what he said on that Occasion, had not Respect only
to Adam, but to his Posterity. Genesis i. 26. Let us make Man in our Image, and
let them have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, etc. And, what is more
remarkable, there is as much of a Word said about Adam's Posterity in the
Threatening of Death, as there is in that Sentence, Genesis iii. 19. Unto Dust
shall thou return. Which Dr. T. himself supposes to be a Sentence pronoun^ed
for the Execution of that very Threatening, Thou shall surely die: And which
Sentence he himself also often speaks of as including Adam's Posterity. And,
what is much more remarkable still, is a Sentence which D. T. himself often
speaks of, as including his Posterity, as a SENTENCE OF CONDEMNATION, as a
JUDICIAL Sentence, and a Sentence which God pronounced with Regard to Adam's
POSTERITY, ACTING THE PART OF A JUDGE, and as such condemning them to temporal
Death. Though he is therein utterly inconsistent with himself, inasmuch as he at
the same Time abundantly insists, that Death is not brought on Adam's
Posterity, in Consequence of his Sin, at all as a Punishment; but merely by the
gracious Disposal of a Father, bestowing a Benefit of the highest Nature upon
them. P. 303.


But I shall show that I don't in any of these Things falsely charge, or
misrepresent Dr. T. -- He speaks of the Sentence in Chap. iii. 19. as
pronounced in Pursuance of the Threatening in the former Chapter, in these
Words, P. 17, 18. The Sentence upon the Man, v. 17, 18, 19. first affects the
Earth, upon which he was to subsist: The Ground should be encumbered with many
noxious Weeds, and the Tillage of it more toilsom: Which would oblige Man to
procure a Sustenance by hard Labor, till he should die, and drop into the
Ground, from whence he was taken. Thus Death entered by Sin into the World, and
Man became mortal, ACCORDING TO THE THREATENING IN THE FORMER CHAPTER. Now, if
Mankind becomes mortal, and must die, according to the Threatening in the former
Chapter, then doubtless the Threatening in the former Chapter, Thou shall die,
had Respect not only to Adam, but to Mankind, and included Adam's Posterity.
Yea, and Dr. T. is express in it, and very often so, that the Sentence
concerning dropping into the Ground, or returning to the Dust, did include
Adam's Posterity. So, P. 19, 20 speaking there of that Sentence, Observe (says
he) that we their Posterity are in Fact subjected to the same Affliction and
Mortality, here by Sentence inflicted upon our first Parents. -- P. 42. But yet
Men, through that long Tract, were all subject to Death, therefore they must be
included in the Sentence. The same he affirms in innumerable other Places, some
of which I shall have Occasion to mention presently.

The Sentence which is founded on the Threatening, and (as Dr. T. says)
according to the Threatening, extends to as many as were included in the
Threatening, and to no more. If the Sentence be upon a collective Subject,
infinitely (as it were) the greatest Part of which were not included in the
Threatening, nor were ever threatened at all by any Threatening whatsoever, then
certainly this Sentence is not according to the Threatening, nor built upon it.
If the Sentence be according to the Threatening, then we may justly explain the
Threatening by the Sentence: And if we find the Sentence spoken to the same
Person, to whom the Threatening was spoken, and spoken in the second Person
singular, in like Manner with the Threatening, and founded on the Threatening,
and according to the Threatening; and if we find the Sentence includes Adam's
Posterity; then we may certainly infer, that so did the Threatening: And hence,
that both the Threatening and Sentence were delivered to Adam as the public
Head and Representative of his Posterity.

And we may also further infer from it, in another Respect directly contrary to
Dr. T -- r's Doctrine, that the Sentence which included Adam's Posterity, was
to Death as a Punishment to that Posterity, as well as to Adam himself. For a
Sentence pronounced in Execution of a Threatening, is to a Punishment.
Threatenings are of Punishments. Neither God nor Man are wont to threaten others
with Favors and Benefits.

But lest any of this Author's Admirers should stand to it, that it may very
properly be said, God threatened Mankind with bestowing great Kindness upon
them, I would observe, that Dr. T. often speaks of this Sentence as pronounced
by God on all Mankind as condemning them, speaks of it as a Sentence of
Condemnation judicially pronounced, or a Sentence which God pronounced on all
Mankind acting as their Judge, and in a judicial Proceeding: Which he affirms
in Multitudes of Places. In P. 20. speaking of this Sentence, which, he there
says, subjects us, Adam's and Eve's Posterity, to Affliction and Mortality, he
calls it a judicial Act of Condemnation. The judicial Act of Condemnation (says
he) clearly implies, a taking him to Pieces, and turning him to the Ground,
from whence he was taken. And P. 28, 29. In all the Scripture, from one End to
the other, there is recorded but one Judgment to Condemnation, which came upon
all Men, and that is, Genesis iii. 17, 18, 19. Dust thou art, etc. P. 40. speaking
of the same, he says, "All Men are brought under Condemnation." In P. 27, 28.
By Judgment, Judgment of Condemnation, it appears evidently to me, he [ Paul]
means the being adjudged to the forementioned Death; he means the Sentence of
Death, of a general Mortality, pronounced upon Mankind, in Consequence of
Adam's first Transgression. And the Condemnation inflicted by the Judgment of
God, answers to, and is in Effect the same Thing with, being dead. P. 30. The
many, that is Mankind, were subject to Death by the judicial Act of God. P. 31.
Being made Sinners, may very well signify, being adjudged, or condemned to
Death. -- For the Hebrew Word, etc. signifies to make one a Sinner by a
judicial Sentence, or to condemn. -- Paraph. on Romans V. 19. in his Exp. of the
Epistle, Upon the Account of one Man's Disobedience, Mankind were judicially
constituted Sinners; that is, subjected to Death, by the Sentence of God the
Judge. And there are many other Places where he repeats the same Thing. And
it is pretty remarkable, that in P. 48, 49. immediately after citing Prove. xvii.
15. He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, are both an
Abomination to the Lord; And when he is careful in citing these Words, to put
us in Mind, that it is meant of a judicial Act; yet in the very next Words, he
supposes that God himself does so, since he constantly supposes that Adam's
Posterity whom God condemns, are innocent. His Words are these, From all which
it follows, that the Judgment that passed upon all Men to Condemnation, is
Death's coming upon all Men, by the judicial Act of God, upon Occasion of
Adam's Transgression. -- And it is very remarkable, that in P. 279, 280, and 283
he insists, That in Scripture no Action is said to be imputed, r^^kon'd or
accounted to any Person, either for Righteousness or CONDEMNATION, but the
proper Act and Deed of that Person. -- And yet he thus continually affirms,
that all Mankind are made Sinners by a judicial Act of God the Judge, even to
Condemnation, and judicially constituted Sinners, and so subjected to a
judicial Sentence of Condemnation, on Occasion of Adam's Sin; and all according
to the Threatening denounced to Adam, Thou shall surely die: Though he supposes
Adam's Posterity were not included in the Threatening, and are looked upon as
perfectly innocent, and treated wholly as such.

I am sensible, Dr. T. don't run into all this Inconsistence, only through
Oversight and Blundering; but that he is driven to it, to make out his Matters
in his Evasion of that noted Paragraph in the fifth Chapter of Romans;
especially those three Sentences, v. 16. The Judgment was by one to
Condemnation. v. 18. By the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation. and v. 19. By one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners. And
I am also sensible of what he offers to salve the Inconvenience, viz. (...) if
the Threatening had immediately been executed on Adam, he would have had no
Posterity; and that so far the possible Existence of Adam's Posterity fell
under the Threatening of the Law, and into the Hands of the Judge, to be
disposed of as he should think fit: And that this is the Ground of the Judgment
to Condemnation, coming upon all Men. P. 95. 366, 367.
But this is trifling, to a great Degree: For,

1. Suffering Death, and failing of possible Existence, are entirely different
Things. If there had never been any such Thing as Sin committed, there would
have been infinite Numbers of possible Beings, which would have failed of
Existence, by God's Appointment. God has appointed not to bring into Existence
numberless possible Worlds, each replenished with innumerable possible
Inhabitants. But is this equivalent to God's appointing them all to suffer
Death?

2. Our Author represents, that by Adam's Sin the Possible Existence of his
Posterity fell into the Hands of the Judge, to be disposed of as he should
think fit. But there was no Need of any Sin of Adam's, or any Body's else, in
order to their being brought into God's Hands in this Respect. The future
possible Existence of all created Beings, is in God*s Hands, antecedently to
the Existence of any Sin. And therefore by God's sovereign Appointment,
infinite Numbers of possible Beings, without any Relation to Adam, or any other
sinning Being, do fail of their possible Existence. And if Adam had never
sinned, yet it would be unreasonable to suppose, but that innumerable of his
possible Posterity, would have failed of Existence by God's Disposal. For will
any be so unreasonable as to imagine, that God would and must have brought into
Existence as many of his Posterity as it was possible should be, if he had not
sinned? Or that in that Case, it would not have been possible, any other Persons
of his Posterity should ever have existed, than those individual Persons, who
now actually fall under that Sentence of suffering Death, and returning to the
Dust?

3. We have many Accounts in Scripture, which imply the actual failing of the
possible Existence of innumerable Multitudes of Adam's Posterity, yea, of many
more than ever come into Existence. As, of the possible Posterity of Abel, the
possible Posterity of all them that were destroyed by the Flood, and the
possible Posterity of the innumerable Multitudes, which we read of in
Scripture, destroyed by Sword, Pestilence, etc. And if the Threatening to Adam
reached his Posterity, in no other respect than this, that they were liable to
be deprived by it of their possible Existence, then these Instances are much
more properly a Fulfillment of that Threatening, than the suffering of Death by
such as actually come into Existence; and so is that which is most properly the
Judgment to Condemnation, executed by the Sentence of the Judge, proceeding on
the Foot of that Threatening. But where do we ever find this so represented in
Scripture? We read of Multitudes cut off for their personal Sins, who thereby
failed of their possible Posterity. And these are mentioned as God's Judgments
on them, and Effects of God's Condemnation of them: but when are they ever
spoken of as God's judicially proceeding against, and condemning their possible
Posterity?

4. Dr. T. in what he says concerning this Matter, speaks of the Threatening of
the Law delivered to Adam, which the possible Existence of his Posterity fell
under, as the Ground of the Judgment to Condemnation coming upon all Men. But
herein he is exceeding inconsistent with himself: For he affirms in a Place
forecited, that the Scripture never speaks of any Sentence of Condemnation
coming upon all Men, but that Sentence in the third of Genesis, concerning
Man's turning to Dust. But according to him, the Threatening of the Law
delivered to Adam, could not be the Ground of that Sentence; for he greatly
insists upon it, that that Law was entirely abrogated before that Sentence was
pronounced, that this Law at that Time was not in Being, had no Existence to
have any such Influence, as might procure a Sentence of Death; and that
therefore this Sentence was introduced entirely on another Foot, viz. on the
Foot of a new Dispensation of Grace. The Reader may see this Matter strenuously
urged, and particularly argued by him, P. 389, -- 396. So that this Sentence
could not, according to him, have the Threatening of that Law for it is Ground,
as he supposes; for it never stood upon that Ground. It could not be called a
Judgment of Condemnation, under any such View; for it could not be viewed under
Circumstances, under which it never existed.

5. If it be as our Author supposes, that the Sentence of Death on all Men
comes under the Notion of a Judgment to Condemnation by this Means, viz. that
the Threatening to Adam was in some respect the Ground of it; then it also comes
under the Notion of a Punishment: For Threatenings annexed to Breaches of Laws,
are to Punishments; and a Judgment of Condemnation to the Thing threatened, must
be to Punishment; and the Thing condemned to, must have as much the Notion of a
Punishment, as the Sentence has the Notion of a Judgment to Condemnation. But
this Dr. T. wholly denies: he denies that the Death sentenced to, comes as any
Punishment at all; but insists that it comes only as a Favor and Benefit, and
a Fruit of fatherly Love to Adam's Posterity, respected not as guilty, but
wholly innocent. So that his Scheme will not admit of it is coming under the
Notion of a Sentence to Condemnation in any Respect whatsoever. Our Author's
Supposition, that the possible Existence of Adam's Posterity comes under the
Threatening of the Law, and into the Hands of the Judge, and is the Ground of
the Condemnation of all Men to Death, implies, that Death by this Sentence is
appointed to Mankind as an Evil, at least, negatively so; as it is a Privation
of Good: for he manifestly speaks of a Nonexistence as a negative Evil. But
herein he is inconsistent with himself: for he continually insists, that
Mankind are subjected to Death only as a Benefit, as has been before shown.
According to him, Death is not appointed to Mankind as a negative Evil, as any
Cessation of Existence, as any Cessation or even Diminution of Good; but on the
contrary, as a Means of a more happy Existence, and a great Increase of Good.

So that this Evasion, or Salvo of Dr. T -- r's is so far from helping the
Matter, or salving the Inconsistence, that it increases and multiplies it.

And that the Constitution or Law, with the Threatening of Death annexed, which
was given to Adam, was to him as the Head of Mankind, and to his Posterity as
included in him, not only follows from some of our Author's own Assertions, and
the plain and full Declarations of the Apostle in the fifth of Romans (of which
more afterward) which drove Dr. T. into such gross Inconsistencies. But the
Account given in the three first Chapters of Genesis, directly and inevitably
lead us to such a Conclusion.

Though the Sentence, Genesis iii. 19, -- Unto Dust thou shall return, be not of
equal Extent with the Threatening in the foregoing Chapter, or an Execution of
the main Curse of the Law therein denounced; for, that it should have been so,
would have been inconsistent with the Intimations of Mercy just before given:
yet it is plain, this Sentence is in Pursuance of that Threatening, being to
something that was included in it. The Words of the Sentence were delivered to
the same Person, with the Words of the Threatening, and in the same Manner, in
like singular Terms, as much without any express Mention of his Posterity: And
yet it manifestly appears by the Consequence, as well as all Circumstances,
that his Posterity were included in the Words of the Sentence; as is confessed
on all Hands. And as the Words were apparently delivered in the Form of the
Sentence of a Judge, condemning for something that he was displeased with, and
ought to be condemned, viz. Sin; and as the Sentence to him and his Posterity
was but one, dooming to the same Suffering, under the same Circumstances, both
the one and the other sentenced in the same Words, spoken but once, and
immediately to but one Person, we hence justly infer, that it was the same
Thing to both; and not as Dr. T. suggests, (P. 67.) a Sentence to a proper
Punishment to Adam, but a mere Promise of Favor to his Posterity.

Indeed, sometimes our Author seems to suppose, that God meant the Thing
denounced in this Sentence, as a Favor both to Adam and his Posterity. P. 301,
321, 322.
But to his Posterity, or Mankind in general, who are the main Subject, he ever
insists, that it was purely intended as a Favor. And therefore, one would have
thought, the Sentence should have been delivered, with Manifestations and
Appearances of Favor, and not of Anger. How could Adam understand it as a
Promise of great Favor, considering the Manner and Circumstances of the
Denunciation? How could he think, that God would go about to delude him, by
clothing himself with Garments of Vengeance, using Words of Displeasure and
Rebuke, setting forth the Heinousness of his Crime, attended with Cherubims and
a flaming Sword; when all that he meant was only higher Testimonies of Favor
than he had before in a State of Innocence, and to manifest fatherly Love and
Kindness, in Promises of great Blessings? If this was the Case, God's Words to
Adam must be understood thus: Because thou have done so wickedly, have
hearkened unto the Voice of thy Wise, and have eaten of the Tree of which I
commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it; therefore I will be more kind
to thee than I was in thy State of Innocence, and do now appoint for thee the
following great Favors: Cursed be the Ground for thy sake, etc. And thus Adam
must understand what was said; unless any will say (and God forbid that any
should be so blasphemous) that God clothed himself with Appearances of
Displeasure, to deceive Adam, and make him believe the contrary of what he
intended, and lead him to expect a dismal Train of Evils on his Posterity,
contrary to all Reason and Justice, implying the most horribly unrighteous
Treatment of Millions of perfectly innocent Creatures! It Is certain, there is
not the least Appearance in what God said, or the Manner of it, as Moses gives
us the Account, of any other, than that God was now testifying Displeasure,
condemning the Subject of the Sentence he was pronouncing, as justly exposed to
Punishment for Sin, and for that Sin which he mentions.

When God was pronouncing this Sentence, Adam doubtless understood, that God
had Respect to his Posterity, as well as Himself; though God spoke wholly in the
second Person singular, Because thou have eaten, -- In Sorrow shall thou eat,
-- Unto the Dust shall thou return. But he had as much Reason to understand God
as having Respect to his Posterity, when he directed his Speech to him in like
Manner in the Threatening, Thou shall surely die. The Sentence plainly refers to
the Threatening, and results from it. The Threatening says, If thou eat, thou
shall die: The Sentence says, Because thou have eaten, thou shall die. And
Moses, who wrote the Account, had no Reason to doubt but that the Affair would
be thus understood by his Readers; for such a Way of speaking was well
understood in those Days: The History he gives us of the Origin of Things,
abounds with it. Such a Manner of speaking to the first of the Kind, or Heads
of the Race, having Respect to the Progeny, is not only used in almost every
thing that God said to Adam and Eve, but even in what he said to the very Birds
and Fishes, Genesis i. 22. And also in what he said afterward to Noah, Genesis ix.
and to Shem, Ham and Japheth, and Canaan, Genesis ix. 25, 26, 27. So in Promises
made to Abraham, in which God directed his Speech to him, and spoke in he
second Person singular, from Time to Time, but meant chiefly his Posterity: To
thee will I give this Land. In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be
blessed,etc.etc. And in what is said of Ishmael, as of his Person, but meant
chiefly of his Posterity, Genesis vi. 12. and xvii. 20. And so in what Isaac said
to Esau and Jacob, in his Blessing; in which he spoke to them in the second
Person singular; but meant chiefly their Posterity. And so for the most Part in
the Promises made to Isaac and Jacob; and in Jacob's Blessing of Ephraim and
Manasseh, and of his twelve Sons.

But I shall take Notice of one or two Things further showing that Adam's
Posterity were included in God's Establishment with him, and the Threatening
denounced for his Sin; and that the Calamities which come upon them in
Consequence of his Sin, are brought on them as Punishments.

This is evident from the Curse on the Ground; which if it be any Curse at all,
comes equally on Adam's Posterity with himself. And if it be a Curse, then
against whomsoever it is designed, and on whomsoever it terminates, it comes as
a Punishment, and not as a Blessing, so far as it comes in Consequence of that
Sentence.

Dr. T. (P. 19.) says, A Curse is pronounced upon the Ground, but no Curse upon
the Woman and the Man. And in P. 321, 322. He insists, that the Ground only was
cursed, and not the Man: Just as though a Curse could terminate on lifeless,
senseless Earth! To understand this Curse otherwise than as terminating upon
Man, through the Ground, would be as senseless as to suppose the Meaning to be,
The Ground shall be punished, and shall be miserable for thy sake. Our Author
interprets the Curse on the Ground, of it is being encumbered with noxious Weeds:
But would these Weeds have been any Curse on the Ground, if there had been no
Inhabitants, or if the Inhabitants had been of such a Nature, that these Weeds
should not have been noxious, but useful to 'em? It is said, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 17.
Cursed shall be thy Basket and thy Store: And would he not be thought to talk
very ridiculously, who should say, 'Here is a Curse upon the Basket; but not a
Word of any Curse upon the Owner: And therefore we have no Reason at all to
look upon it as any Punishment upon him, or any Testimony of God's Displeasure
toward him!' How plain is it, that when lifeless Things, which are not capable
of either Benefit or Suffering, are said to be cursed or blessed with regard to
sensible Beings, that use or possess these Things, or have Connection with
them, the Meaning must be, that these sensible Beings are cursed or blessed in
the other, or with respect to them? In Exodus xxiii. 25. it is said, He shall
bless thy Bread and thy Water. And I suppose, never any Body yet proceeded to
such a Degree of Subtilty in distinguishing, as to say, 'Here is a Blessing on
the Bread and the Water, which went into the Possessors Mouths, but no Blessing
on them.' To make such a Distinction with regard to the Curse God pronounced on
the Ground, would in some Respects be more unreasonable, because God is express
in explaining the Matter, declaring that it was for Man's sake, expressly
referring this Curse to him, as being with Respect to him, and for the Sake of
his Guilt; and as consisting in the Sorrow and Suffering he should have from
it: In Sorrow shall THOU eat of it -- Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth
TO THEE. So that God's own Words tell us where the Curse terminates. The Words
are parallel with those in Deuteronomy. xxviii. 16. but only more plain and explicit,
Cursed shall THOU be in the Field, or in the Ground.

If this Part of the Sentence was pronounced under no Notion of any Curse (...)
punishment at all upon Mankind, but on the contrary, (...) an Alteration in the
Ground, that should be for the ^etter, as to them; that in Stead of the sweet,
but tempting, pernicious Fruits of Paradise, it might produce wholesome Fruits,
more for the Health of the Soul; that it might bring forth Thorns and Thistles,
as excellent Medicines, to prevent or cure mortal Distempers, Diseases which
would issue in eternal Death; I say, if what was pronounced was under this
Notion, then it was a Blessing on the Ground and not a Curse; and it might more
properly have been said, ' BLESSED shall the Ground be for thy sake, -- I will
make a happy Change in it, that it may be a Habitation more fit for a Creature
so infirm, and so apt to be overcome with Temptation, as thou art.'

The Event makes it evident, that in pronouncing this Curse, God had as much
Respect to Adam's Posterity, as to himself: And so it was understood by his
pious Posterity, before the Flood; as appears by what Lamech, the Father of
Noah, says, Genesis v. 29. And he called his Name Noah; saying, This same shall
comfort us concerning our Work, and the Toil of our Hands, "because of the
Ground which the Lord has cursed."

Another Thing which argues, that Adam's Posterity were included in the
Threatening of Death, and that our first Parents understood, when fallen, that
the Tempter, in persuading them to eat the forbidden Fruit, had aimed at the
Punishment and Ruin of both them and their Posterity, and had procured it, is
Adam's immediately giving his Wife that new Name, Eve, or Life, on the Promise
or Intimation of the Disappointment and Overthrow of the Tempter in that
Matter, by her Seed; which Adam understood to be by his procuring Life; not
only for themselves, but for many of their Posterity, and thereby delivering
them from that Death and Ruin which the Serpent had brought upon them. Those
that should be thus delivered, and obtain Life, Adam calls the Living: and
because he observed, by what God had said, that Deliverance and Life was to be
by the Seed of the Woman, he therefore remarks, that she is the Mother of all
Living, and thereupon gives her a new Name, calls her Chavah, LIFE, Genesis iii.
20.

There is a great deal of Evidence, that this is the Occasion of Adams giving
his Wife her new Name. This was her new Honor, and the greatest Honor, at
least in her present State, that the Redeemer was to be of her Seed. New Names
were wont to be given for something that was the Persons peculiar Honor. So it
was with regard to the new Names of Abraham, Sarah, and Israel. Dr. T. himself
( Key 255.) observes, that they who are saved by Christ, are called the Livers,
(...) (1 Cor. iv. 11.) The living, or, they that live. So we find in the old
Testament, the Righteous are called by the name of the Living. Psalm. lxix. 28.
Let them be blotted out of the Book of the Living, and not be written with the
Righteous. If what Adam meant by her being the Mother of all Living, was only
her being the Mother of Mankind, and gave her the Name Life upon that Account,
it were much the most likely that he would have given her this Name at first;
when God first united them, under that Blessing. Be fruitful and multiply, and
when he had a Prospect of her being the Mother of Mankind in a State of
Immortality, living indeed, living and never dying. But that Adam should at
that Time give her only the Name of Isha, and then immediately on that
melancholy Change, by their coming under the Sentence of Death, with all their
Posterity, having now a new awful Prospect of her being the Mother of Nothing
but a dying Race, all from Generation to Generation turning to Dust, through her
Folly: I say, that immediately on this, he should change her Name into Life,
calling her now the Mother of all living, is perfectly unaccountable. Besides,
it is manifest, that it was not her being the Mother of all Mankind, or her
Relation as a Mother, which she stood in to her Posterity, but the Quality of
those she was to be the Mother of, which was the Thing Adam had in View, in
giving his Wife this new Name; as appears by the Name it self, which signifies
Life. And if it had been only a natural and mortal Life which he had in View,
this was Nothing distinguishing of her Posterity from the Brutes; for the very
same Name of living ones, or living Things, is given from Time to Time in this
Book of Genesis to them: As in Chap. i. 21, 24, 28. Chap. ii. 19. Chap. vi.19.
-- vii. 23. and viii. 1. and many other Places in the Bible. -- And besides, if
by Life was not the Quality of her Posterity meant, there was nothing in it to
distinguish her from Adam; for thus she was no more the Mother of all living,
than he was the Father of all living; and she could no more properly be called
by the Name of Life on any such Account, than he: But Names are given for
Distinction. Doubtless Adam took Notice of something distinguishing concerning
her, that occasioned his giving her this new Name. And I think, it is exceeding
natural to suppose, that as Adam had given her her first Name from the Manner
of her Creation, so he gave her her new Name from Redemption, and as it were
new Creation, through a Redeemer, of her Seed. And that he should give her this
Name from that which comforted him, with respect to the Curse that God had
pronounced on him and the Earth, as Lamech named Noah, (Genesis v. 29.) Saying,
This same shall comfort us concerning our Work, and Toil of our Hands, because
of the Ground which the Lord has cursed. Accordingly, he gave her this new
Name, not at her first Creation, but immediately after the Promise of a
Redeemer, of her Seed. See Genesis iii. 15, -- 20.

Now as to the Consequence which I infer from Adam's giving his Wife this Name,
on the Intimation which God had given, that Satan should by her Seed be
overthrown and disappointed, as to his malicious Design, in that Deed of his
which God then spoke of, viz. his tempting the Woman; Adam infers from it, that
great Numbers of Mankind should be saved, whom he calls the Living; they should
be saved from the Effects of this malicious Design of the old Serpent, and from
that Ruin which he had brought upon them by tempting their first Parents to
Sin; and so the Serpent would be, with respect to them, disappointed and
overthrown in his Design. But how is any Death or Ruin, or indeed any Calamity
at all (...) upon their (...) by Satan's Malice in that (...), if instead of
that, all the Death and Sorrow that (...) consequent, was the Fruit of God's
fatherly Love, and not Satan's Malice, and was an Instance of God's free and
sovereign Favor, (...) Favor as Satan could not possibly foresee? And if
Multitudes of Eve's Posterity are saved, from either spiritual or temporal
Death, by a (...), of her Seed, how is that any Disappointment of Satan's
Design, in tempting our first Parents? How came he to have any such Thing in
View, as the Death of Adam's and Ev^'s Posterity by tempting them to Sin, or
any Expectation that their Death would be the Consequence, unless he knew that
they were included in the Threatening?

Some have objected against Adam's Posterity's being included in the Threatening
delivered to Adam, that the Th^^^t^ing itself was inconsistent with his having
any Posterity: It being that he should die ^n the Day that ^e sinned.

To this I answer, that the Threatening was not inconsistent with his having
Posterity, on two Accounts:

1. Those Words, In the Day thou ^atest there of thou shall surely die,
according to the Use of such like Expressions among the Hebrews, don't signify
immedi^^^ Death, or that the Execution shall be within twenty-four Hours from
the Commission of the Fact; nor did God by those Words, limit himself as to the
Time of ex^cuting the threatened Punishment; but that was still left to God's
Pleasure. Such a Phrase, according to the Idi^m of the Hebrew Tongue, signifies
no more than these two Things:

1. A real Connection between the Sin and the Punishment. So Ezekiel. xxxiii. 12,
13. The Righteousness of the Righteous shall not deliver him IN THE DAY of his
Transgression. As for the Wicked^^ss of the Wicked, He shall not fall thereby
IN THE DAY that the turn^th from his Wickedness: Neither shall the Righteous be
able to live IN THE DAY THAT HE SINS: But for his Iniquity that he has
committed, HE SHALL DIE for it. Here (...) said, that in the Day he sins, he
shall not be able to live, but he shall die; not signifying the Time when Death
shall be executed upon him, but the Connection (...) his Sin and Death; such a
Connection as in our present common Use of Language is signified by the Adverb
of Time. When; As if One should say, According to the Laws of our Nation, so
long as a Man behaves Himself as a good Subject, he may live; but When he turns
Rebel, he must die: Not signifying the Hour, Day or Month, in which he must be
executed, but only the Connection between his Crime and Death.

2. Another Thing which seems to be signified by such an Expression, is, that
Adam should be exposed to Death for one Transgression, without waiting on him
(...) try him the second Time. If he eat of that Tree, he should immediately
fall under Condemnation, though afterward he might abstain ever so strictly. In
this Respect, the Words are much of the same Force with those Words of Solomon
to Shimei. 1 Kings ii. 37. For it shall be that ON THE DAY that thou go out,
and passest over the Brook Kidron, thou shall know for "certain, that thou
shall surely die." Not meaning, that he should certainly be executed on that
Day, but that he should be (...) to Death for the first Offense, and that he
should not have another Trial, to see whether he would go over the Brook Kidron
a second Time.

And then besides,

II. If the Words had implied, that Adam should die that very Day, within 24 or
12 Hours, or that Moment that he transgressed, yet it will by no Means follow,
that God obliged himself to execute the Punishment in its utmost Extent on that
Day. The Sentence was in great Part executed immediately; he then died
spiritually; he lost his Innocence and original Righteousness, and the Favor
of God; A dismal Alteration was made in his Soul, by the Loss of that holy
divine Principle, which was in the highest Sense the Life of the Soul. In this
he was truly ruined and undone that very Day; becoming corrupt, miserable and
helpless. And I think it has been shown, that such a spiritual Death was one
great Thing implied in the Thr^^tning. -- And the Alteration then made in his
Body and external State, was the Beginning of temporal Death, Grievous external
Calamity is called by the Name of Death in Scripture, Exodus x. 17. -- Entreat
the Lord that he may take away this Death. -- Not only was Adam's Soul ruined
that Day, but his Body was ruined; it lost it is Beauty and Vigor, and became a
poor dull, de^^ying, dying Thing. And besides all this, Adam was that Day
undone in a more dreadful Sense: He immediately fell under the Curse of the
Law, and Condemnation to eternal Perdition. In the Language of Scripture, he is
dead, that is in a State of Condemnation to Death; ever as our Author often
explains this Language in his Expo^^tion upon Romans. In Scripture Language, he
that believes in Christ, immediately receives Life. He passes at that Time from
Death to Life, and thenceforward (to use the Apostle John's Phrase) "has
eternal Life abiding in him." But yet he don't then receive eternal Life in
it is highest Completion; he has but the Beginnings of it; and receives it in a
vastly greater Degree at Death: but the proper Time for the complete Fullness is
not till the Day of Judgment. When the Angels sinned, their Punishment was
immediately executed in a Degree: But their full Punishment is not till the End
of the World. And there is nothing in God's Threatening to Adam, that bound him
to execute his full Punishment at once; nor any thing which determines, that he
should have no Posterity. The Law or Constitution which God established and
declared, determined, that if he sinned, and had Posterity, he and they should
die: But there was no Constitution determining concerning the actual Being of
his Posterity in this Case; what Posterity he should have, how many, or whether
any at all. All these Things God had reserved in his own Power: The Law and its
Sanction intetmeddl^d not with the Matter.

It may be proper in this Place also to take some Notice of that Objection of
Dr. T -- r's against Adam's being supposed to be a federal Head for his
Posterity, that it gives him greater H^nour than Christ, as it supposes that
all his Posterity would have had eternal Life by his Ob^dience, if he had
stood; and so a greater Number would have had the Benefit of his Obedience,
than are saved by Christ. P. 396, etc.
-- I think, a very little Consideration is sufficient to show, that there is
no Weight in this Objection. For the Benefit of Christ's Merits may
nevertheless be vastly beyond that which would have been by the Obedience of
Adam. For those that are saved by Christ, are not merely advanced to Happiness
by his Merits, but are saved from the infinitely dreadful Effects of Adam's
Sin, and many from immense Guilt, Pollution and Misery by personal Sins; also
brought to a holy and happy State, as it were through infinite Obstacles; and are
exalted to a far greater Degree of Dignity, Felicity and Glory, than would have
been due for Adam's Obedience; for aught I know, many Thousand Times so great.
And there is enough in the Gospel Dispensation, clearly to manifest the
Sufficiency of Christ's Merits for such Effects in all Mankind. And how great
the Number will be, that shall actually be the Subjects of them, or how great a
Proportion of the whole Race, considering the vast Success of the Gospel, that
shall be in that future extraordinary, exempt, and glorious Season, often
spoken of, none can tell. And the Hono^r of these two federal Heads arises not
so much from what was proposed to each for his Trial, as from their Success,
and the Good actually obtained; and also the Manner of obtaining: Christ
obtains the Benefits Men have through him by proper Merit of Condignity, and a
true Purchase by an Equivalent: which would not have been the Case with Adam,
if he had obeyed.

I have now particularly considered the Account which Moses gives us in the
Beginning of the Bible, of our first Parents, and God's Dealings with them, the
Constitution he established with them, their Transgression, and what followed.
And on the whole, if we consider the Manner in which God apparently speaks to
Adam, from Time to Time; and particularly, if we consider how plainly and
undeniably his Posterity are included in the Sentence of Death pronounced on
Adam after his Fall, founded on the foregoing Threatening; and consider the
Curse denounc^d on the Ground for his sake, and for his and his Posterity's
Sorrow: And also consider what is evidently the Occasion of his giving his Wife
the new Name of Eve, and his Meaning in it, and withal consider apparent Fact
in constant and universal Events, with Relation to the State of our first
Parents, and their Posterity from that Time forward, through all Ages of the
World; I cannot but think, it must appear to every impartial Person. that
Moses's Account does, with sufficient Evidence, lead all Mankind, to whom his
Account is communicated, to understand, that God, in his Constitution with
Adam, dealt with him as a public Person, and as the Head of the human Species,
and had Respect to his Posterity, as included in him: And that this History is
given by divine Direction, in the Beginning of the first-written Revelation, to
exhibit to our View the Origin of the present sinful, miserable State of
Mankind, that we might see what that was, which first gave Occasion for all
those consequent wonderful Dispensations of divine Mercy and Grace toward
Mankind; which are the great Subject of the Scriptures, both of the old and new
Testament; and that these Things are not obscurely and doubtfully pointed
forth, but delivered in a plain Account of Things, which easily and naturally
exhibits them to our Understandings.

And by what follows in this Discourse, we may have, in some Measure,
Opportunity to see how other Things in the holy Scripture agree to what has
been now observed from the three first Chapters of Genesis.

CHAP. II.
Observations on other Parts of the holy Scriptures, chiefly in the Old
Testament, that prove the Doctrine of Original Sin.
ORiginal Depravity may well be argued from Wickedness being often spoken of in
Scripture as a Thing belonging to the Race of Mankind, and as if it were a
Property of the Species. So in Psalm. xiv.2* 3. The Lord looked down from Heaven
upon the CHILDREN OF MEN, to see if there were any that did understand, and
seek God. They are all gone aside; they are altogether become filthy: There is
none that dothGood; no, not one. The like we have again, Psalm. Liii* 2,3. --
Dr. T. says, The holy Spirit don't mean this of every Individual; because in
the very same Psalm. He speaks of some that were righteous. v. 5. God is in the
Generation of the Righteous. But how little is this Observation to the Purpose?
For who ever supposed, that no unrighteous Men were ever changed by divine
Grace, and afterward made righteous? The Psalmist is speaking of what Men are
as they are the Children of Men, born of the corrupt human Race; and not as
born of God, whereby they come to be the Children of God, and of the Generation
of the Righteous. The Apostle Paul cites this Place in Romans ^ii. 10, 11, 12. to
prove the universal Corruption of Mankind; but yet in the same Chapter he
supposes, these same Persons here spoken of as Wicked, may become righteous,
through the Righteousness and Grace of God.

So Wickedness is spoken of in other Places in the Book of Psalms, as a Thing
that belongs to Men, as of the human Race, as Sons of Men. Thus, in Psalm. iv.
2: O ye Sons of Men, how long will ye turn my Glory into Shame? How long will
ye love Vanity etc? Psalm. lvii. 4. -- I lie among them that are set on Fire,
even the Sons of Men, whose Teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue a
sharp Sword. Psalm. lviii. 1, 2. Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, O
Congregation? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? Yea, in Heart ye work
Wickedness; ye weigh out the Violence of your Hands in the Earth. Our Author
mentioning these Places, says, There was a strong Party in Israel disaffected
to David's Person and Government, and sometimes he chooses to denote them by
the Sons or Children of Men. But it would have been worth his while to have
enquired, Why the Psalmist should choose to denote the wickedest and worst Men
in Israel by this Name? Why he should choose thus to disgrace the human Race, as
if the Compellation of Sons of Men most properly belonged to such as were of
the vilest Character, and as if all the Sons of Men, even every one of them,
were of such a Character, and none of them did good; no, not one? Is it not
strange, that the Righteous should not be thought worthy to be called Sons of
Men, and ranked with that noble Race of Beings, who are born into the World
wholly right and innocent! It is a good, easy and natural Reason why he chooses
to call the Wicked Sons of Men, as a proper Name for 'em, That by being of the
Sons of Men, or of the corrupt ruined Race of Mankind, they come by their
Depravity. And the Psalmist himself leads us to this very Reason, Psalm. lviii.
at the Beginning. Do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? yea, in Heart ye
work Wickedness, ye weigh out the Violence of your Hands. The Wicked are
estranged from the Womb,etc. Of which I would speak more by and by.

Agreeable to these Places, is Prove. xxi. 8. The Way of MAN is froward and
strange; but as for the pure, his Work is right. He that is perverse in his
Walk, is here called by the Name of Man, as distinguished from the pure: which
I think is absolutely unaccountable, if all Mankind by Nature are pure, and
perfectly innocent, and all such as are froward and strange in their Ways,
therein depart from the native Purity of all Mankind. The Words naturally lead
us to suppose the contrary; that Depravity and Perverseness properly belong to
Mankind as they are naturally, and that a Being made pure, is by an Afterwork,
work, by which some are delivered from native Pollution, and distinguished from
Mankind in general: Which is perfectly agreeable to the Representation in Rev.
xiv.4. Where we have an Account of a Number that were not defiled, but were
pure, and following the Lamb, of whom it is said, These were REDEEMED FROM
AMONG MEN.

To these Things agree, Jer. xvii. 5, 9. In the 5 v. it is said, Cursed is he
that trusts in MAN. And in the 9th v. this Reason is given, The Heart is
deceitful above all Things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? What Heart
is this so wicked and deceitful? Why, evidently the Heart of him who, it was
said before, we must not trust; and that is MAN. It alters not the Case as to
the present Argument, whether the Deceitfulness of the Heart here spoken of, be
its Deceitfulness to the Man himself, or to others. So that forementioned
Eccl. ix. 3. Madness is in the Heart of the SONS OF MEN, while they live. And
those Words of Christ to Peter, Matthew. xvi. 23. Get thee behind me, Satan --
For thou savourest not the Things that be of God, but the Things that be of
MEN. Signifying plainly, that to be carnal and vain, and opposite to what is
spiritual and divine, is what properly belongs to Men in their present State.
The same thing is supposed in that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. iii. 3. For ye are
yet carnal. For where as there is among you Envying and Strife, are ye not
carnal, and walk as MEN? And that in Hos. vi. 7. But they like MEN, have
transgressed the Covenant. To these Places may be added, Matthew. vii. 11. If ye
being Evil, know how to give good Gifts -- Jam. iv. 5. Do ye think that the
Scripture faith in vain, The Spirit that dwells in us, lus^eth to Envy? -- 1
Pet. iv.2. That he no longer should live the rest of his Time in the Lusts of
MEN, but to the Will of God. -- Yet above all, that in Job xv.16. How much more
abominable and filthy is MAN, "who drinks Iniquity like Water?" Of which more
presently.

Now what Account can be given of these Things, on Dr. T -- r's Scheme? How
strange is it, that we should have such Descriptions, all over the Bible of
MAN, and THE SONS OF MEN! Why should Man be so continually spoken of as evil,
carnal, perverse, deceitful, and desperately Wicked, if all Men are by Nature
as perfectly innocent, and free from any Propensity to Evil, as Adam was the
first Moment of his Creation, all made right, as our Author would have us
understand Eccl. vii. 29? Why, on the contrary, is it not said, at least as
often, and with equal Reason; that The Heart of Man is right and pure; that The
Way of Man is innocent and holy; and that he who savours true Virtue and
Wisdom, savours the Things that be of Men? Yea, and why might it not as well
have been said, The Lord looked down from Heaven on the Sons of Men, to see if
there were any that did understand, and did seek after God; and they were all
right, altogether pure, there was none inclined to do Wickedness, no, not one!

Of the like import with the Texts mentioned, are those which represent
Wickedness as what properly belongs to the WORLD; and that they who are
otherwise, are saved from the World, and called out of it. As, Joh vii. 7. The
WORLD cannot hate you; but me it hates; because I testify of it, that the
Works there of are evil. Chap. viii. 23. Ye are of this WORLD: I am not of this
WORLD Chap. xiv. 17. The Spirit of Truth, whom the WORLD cannot receive;
because it sees him not, neither knows him: But ye know him. Chap. xv. 18,
19. If the WORLD hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye
were of the WORLD, the WORLD would love its own: But because ye are not of the
WORLD, but I have chosen you out of the WORLD, therefore the WORLD hates you.
Rev. xiv. 3, 4. These are they which were redeemed from the EARTH, -- redeemed
from among Men. Joh. xvii. 9. I pray not for the WORLD, but for them which thou
have given me. v. 14. I have given them thy Word; and the WORLD has hated
them, because they are not of the WORLD, even as I am not of the WORLD, 1 John
iii. 13. Marvel not my Brethren, if the WORLD hate you. Chap. iv. 5. They are
of the WORLD, therefore speak they of the WORLD, and the WORLD hears them.
Chap. v. 19. We are of God, and the whole WORLD lies in Wickedness. It Is
evident, that in these Places, by the World is meant the World of Mankind; not
the Habitation, but the Inhabitants. For, it is the World spoken of as loving,
hating, doing evil Works, speaking hearing etc.

It shows the same Thing, that Wickedness is often spoken of as being Man's
OWN, in Contradistinction from Virtue and Holiness. So Men's Lusts are often
called their own Heart's Lusts, and their practicing Wickedness is called
walking in their own Ways, walking in their own Counsels, in the Imagination of
their OWN Heart, and in the Sight their OWN Eyes, according to their OWN
Devices etc. These Things denote Wickedness to be a Quality belonging properly
to the Character and Nature of Mankind, in their present State: As, when Christ
would represent that Lying is remarkably the Character and the very Nature of
the Devil in his present State, he expresses it thus, (Joh. viii.44.) "When he
speaks a Lie, he speaks of his OWN; For he is a Liar, and the Father of it."

And that Wickedness belongs to the Nature of Mankind in their present State,
may be argued from those Places which speak of Mankind as being wicked in their
Childhood, or from their Childhood. So, that in Prove. xxii. 15. Foolishness is
bound in the Heart of a Child; but the Rod of Correction shall drive it far
from him. Nothing is more manifest, than that the Wise man in this Book
continually uses the Word Folly, or Foolishness, for Wickedness: And that this
is what he means in this Place, the Words themselves do show: For the Rod of
Correction is proper to drive away no other Foolishness, but that which is of a
moral Nature. The Word rendered Bound signifies, as is observed in Pool's
Synopsis, a close and firm Union. The same Word is used in Chap. vi. ^1. Bind
them continually upon thine Heart. And Chapter vii. 3. Bind them upon thy Fingers,
write them upon the Table of thine Heart. To the like Purpose is Chap. iii. 3.
and Deuteronomy. xi. 18. where this Word is used. The same Verb is used, 1 Samuel xviii.
1. The Soul of Jonathan was knit (or bound) to the Soul of David, and Jonathan
loved him as his own Soul. -- But how comes Wickedness to be so firmly bound,
and strongly fixed, in the Hearts of Children, if it be not there naturally?
They having had no Time firmly to fix Habits of Sin by long Custom in actual
Wickedness, as those that have lived many Years in the World.

The same Thing is signified in that noted Place, Genesis viii.21. For the
Imagination of Man's Heart is evil "from his Youth." -- It alters not the Case,
whether it be translated For, or Though the Imagination of Man's Heart is evil
from his Youth, as Dr. T. would have it; still the Words suppose it to be so as
is said. The Word translated Youth, signifies the whole of the former Part of
the Age of Man, which commences from the Beginning of Life. The Word in its
Derivation, has Reference to the Birth, or Beginning of Existence. It comes
from Nagnar, which signifies to shake off, as a Tree shakes off its ripe Fruit,
or a Plant its Seed: -- the Birth of Children being commonly represented by a
Tree's yielding Fruit, or a Plant's yielding Seed. So that the Word here
translated Youth, comprehends not only what we in English most commonly call
the Time of Youth, but also Childhood and Infancy, and is very often used to
signify these latter. A Word of the same Root is used to signify a young Child,
or a little Child, in the following Places; 1 Samuel i. 24* 25, 27. 1 Kin. iii.
7. and xi. 17. 2 Kin. ii. 23. Job xxxiii. 25. Prove. xxii. 6. and xxiii. 13. and
xxix. 21. Isai. x. 19. and xi. 6. and lxv. 29. Jer. x. 6. Ho^. xi. 1. The same
Word is used to signify an Infant, in Exodus ii. 6. and x. 9. Judge. xiii. 5, 7,
8. and xii. 24. 1 Samuel i. 22. and iv. 21. ^ Kin. v. 14. Isai. vii. 16* and
viii. 4.

Dr. T. says (P. 124.) that he conc^iv^s, From the Youth, is a Phrase
signifying the Greatness, or long Duration of a Thing. But if by long Duration
he means any Thing else than what is literally expressed, viz. from the
B^^^^ning of Life, he has no Reason to conceive so; neither has what he offers,
so much as the Shadow of a Reason for his Conception. There is no Appearance in
the Words of the two or three Texts he mentions, of their meaning any thing
else than what is most literally signified. -- And it is certain, that what he
suggests, is not the ordinary Import of such a Phrase among the Hebrews: But
that thereby is meant, from the Beginning, or early Time of Life, or Existence;
as may be seen in the Places following, where the same Word in the Hebrew is
used, as in this Place by the eighth of Genesis. 1 Samuel xii. 2. I am old, and
gr^yheaded -- and I have walked before you from my Ch^^^hood, unto this Day:
where the original Word is the same, Psalm. lxxi. 5,6. Thou art my Trust from my
Youth: By thee have I been holden up from the Womb. Thou art he that took me
out of my Mother's Bowels. v. 17, 18. O God, thou have taught me from my Youth;
and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous Works: Now also, when I am old and
gr^y-headed, forsake me not. Psalm. cxxix. 1, 2. Many a time have they afflicted
me from my Youth, may Israel now say: many a Time have they afflicted me from
my Youth; yet have they not prevailed against me. Isai. xlvii. 12. Stand now
with the Multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein th^^ have labored from thy Youth.
So v. 15. and 2 Samuel xix. 7. That will be worse unto thee, than all the Evil
that befell thee from thy Youth, until now. Jer. iii. 24, 25. Shame has
devoured the Labor of our Fathers, from our Youth. -- We have sinned against
the Lord our God, from our Youth, even to this Day. So Jer. xxxii. 30. and
xlviii. 11. Job xxxi. 18. Genesis xlvi. 34. Ezekiel. iv. 14. Zech. xiii. 5.

And it is to be observed, that according to the Manner of the Hebrew Language,
when it is said, such a thing has been from Youth, or the first Part of
Existence, the Phrase is to be understood as including that first Time of
Existence. So, Josh. vi. 21. They Utterly destroyed all, from the Young to the
Old (so it is in the Hebrew) i. e. including both. So Esth. iii. 13. and Genesis
xix. 4.

And as Mankind are represented in Scripture, as being of a wicked Heart from
their Youth, so in other Places they are spoken of as being thus from the Womb
Psalm. lviii. 3. The Wicked are estranged from the Womb: They go astray as soon
as they be born, speaking Lies. It Is observable, that the Psalmist mentions,
this as what belongs to the Wicked, as the SONS OF MEN: for, these are the
proceeding Words; " Do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? -- Yea, in Heart
ye work Wickedness." (A Phrase of the like Import with that in Genesis viii. 21.
The Imagination, or Operation, as it might have been rendered, of his Heart is
evil.) Then it follows. The Wicked are estranged from the Womb, etc. The next
Verse is, Their Poison is like the Poison of a Serpent. It Is so remarkably, as
the very Nature of a Serpent is Poison: Serpents are poisonous as soon as they
come into the World: They derive a poisonous Nature by their Generation. -- Dr.
T.(P. 134, 135.) says, It Is evident that this is a scriptural figurative Way of
aggravating Wickedness, on the one Hand, and Virtue on the other, to speak of
it as being from the Womb. And as an Instance of the latter, he cites that in
Isai. xlix. 1. The Lord has called me from the Womb; from the Bowels of my
Mother, he made Mention of my Name. But I apprehend, that in order to seeing
this to be evident, which he asserts, a Man must have Eyes peculiarly affected.
I humbly conceive, that such Phrases as that in the 49th of Isaiah, of God's
calling the Prophet from the Womb, are evidently, not of the Import which he
supposes; but mean truly from the Beginning of Existence, and are manifestly of
like Signification with that which is said of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. i. 5.
Before I formed thee in the Womb; I know thee: Before thou came out of the
Womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a Prophet of the Nations. Which
surely means something else besides a high Degree of Virtue: It plainly
signifies that he was, from his first Existence, set apart by God for a
Prophet. And it would be as unreasonable to understand it otherwise, as to
suppose, the Angel meant any other than that Samson was set apart to be a
Nazarite from the Beginning of his Life, when he says to his Mother, Behold,
thou shall conceive and bear a Son: and now drink no Wine, nor strong Drink,
etc. For the Child shall be a Na^arite to God, from the Womb, to the Day of his
Death. By these Instances it is plain, that the Phrase, From the Womb, as the
other, From the Youth, as used in Scripture, properly signifies from the
Beginning of Life.

Very remarkable is that Place, Job xv. 14, 15, 16. What is Man, that he should
be clean? And he that is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous? Behold,
he puts no Trust in his ^aints; yea, the Heavens are not clean in his Sight:
How much more abominable and filthy is Man, which drinks Iniquity like Water?
And no less remarkable is our Author's Method of managing of it. The 16th v.
expresses an exceeding Degree of Wickedness, in as plain and emphatical Terms,
almost, as can be invented; every Word representing this in the strongest
Manner: How much more abominable and filthy is Man, that drinks Iniquity like
Water? I cannot now recollect, where we have a Sentence equal to it, in the
whole Bible, for an emphatical, lively and strong Representation of great
Wickedness of Heart. Any one of the Words, as such Words are used in Scripture,
would represent great Wickedness: If it had been only said, How much more
abominable is Man? Or, How much more filthy is Man? Or, Man drinks Iniquity.
-- But all these are accumulated, with the Addition of -- like Water, -- the
further to represent the Boldness or Greediness of Men, in Wickedness: Though
Iniquity be the most deadly Poison, yet Men drink it as boldly as they drink
Water, are as familiar with it as with their common Drink, and drink it with
like Greediness, as he that is thirsty drinks Water. That Boldness and
Eagerness in persecuting the Saints, by which the great Degree of the Depravity
of Man's Heart often appears, is represented thus (Psalm. xiv. 4.) Have the
Workers of Iniquity no Knowledge, who eat up my People, "as they eat Bread?"
And the greatest Eagerness of Thirst is represented by thirsting as an Animal
thirsts after Water, Psalm. X^ii. 1.

Now let us see the soft, easy, light Manner, in which Dr. T. treats this
Place. P. 143. How much more abominable and filthy is Man, IN COMPARISON OF THE
DIVINE PURITY, "who drinks Iniquity like Water"? Who is attended with so many
sensual Appetites, and so apt to indulge them. You see the Argument; Man in his
present weak, and fleshly State, cannot be clean before God. Why so? Because he
is conceived and born in Sin, by Reason of Adam's Sin? No such thing. But
because the purest Creatures are not pure in Comparison of God. Much less a
Being subject to so many INFIRMITIES, as a MORTAL Man. Which is a Demonstration
to Me, not only, that Job and his Friends did not intend to establish the
Doctrine we are now examining, but that they were wholly Strangers to it. Thus
this Author endeavors to reconcile this Text with his Doctrine of the perfect
native Innocence of Mankind: In which we have a notable Specimen of his
Demonstrations, as well as of that great Impartiality and Fairness in examining
and expounding the Scripture, which he makes so often a Profession of.

In this Place we are not only told, how wicked Man's Heart is, but also how
Men come by such Wickedness; even by being of the Race of Mankind, by ordinary
Generation: What is Man, that he should be clean? and he that is born of a
Woman, that he should be righteous? Our Author (P. 141, 142.) represents Man's
being born of a Woman, as a Periphrasis, to signify Man; and that there is no
Design in the Words to give a Reason, why Man is not clean and righteous. But
the Case is most evidently otherwise, if we may interpret the Book of Job by
itself: It Is most plain, that Man's being born of a Woman is given as a Reason
of his not being clean; Chap. xiv. 4. Who can bring a clean Thing out of an
unclean? Job is speaking there expressly of Man's being born of a Woman, as
appears in v. 1. And here how plain is it, that this is given as a Reason of
Man's not being clean? Concerning this Dr. T. says, That this has no respect to
any moral Uncleanness, but only common Frailty, etc. But how evidently i^ this
also otherwise? when that Uncleanness which a Man had by being born of a Woman,
is expressly explained of Unrighteousness, in the next Chapter at the 14th v.
What is Man, that he should be clean? and he that is born of a Woman, that he
should be RIGHTEOUS? And also is Chap. xxv. 4. How then can Man be justified
with God? And how can be he clean, that is born of a Woman? It Is a moral
Cleanness Bildad is speaking of, which a Man needs in order to being justified.
-- His Design is, to convince Job of his moral Impurity, and from thence of
God's Righteousness in his severe Judgments upon him; and not of his natural
Frailty.

And without Doubt, David has respect to this same Way of Derivation of
Wickedness of Heart, when he says, Psalm. li. 5. Behold, I was shapen in
Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. It alters not the Case as to
the Argument we are upon, whether the Word translated conceive, signify
conceive, or nurse; which latter, our Author takes so much Pains to prove: For
when he has done all, he speaks of it as a just Translation of the Words to
render 'em thus, I was BORN in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother nurse me. (P.
135.) If it is owned that Man is born in Sin, it is not worth the while to
dispute, whether it is expressly asserted, that he is conceived in Sin. But Dr.
T. after his Manner insists, that such Expressions, as being born in Sin, being
Transgressors from the Womb, and the like, are only Phrases figuratively to
denote Aggravation, and high Degree of Wickedness. But the contrary has been
already demonstrated, from many plain Scripture-Instances. -- Nor is one
Instance produced, in which there is any Evidence that such a Phrase is used in
such a Manner. A poetical Sentence out of Virgil's Aen^ids, has here been
produced, and made much of by some, as parallel with this, in what Dido says to
AEneas, in these Lines:

Nec tibi Diva Parens Generis, nec Dardanus Author,

Perfide: Sed duris genuit teCautibus horrens

Cau^^sus, Hyrcanoeque admount Ubera Tigres.

In which she tells AEneas, that not a Goddess was his Mother, nor Anchises his
Father; but that he had been bro't forth by a horrid rocky Mountain, and nursed
at the Dugs of Tigers, to represent the Greatness of his Cruelty to her. But
how unlike and unparallel is this: Nothing could be more natural, than for a
Woman overpowered with the Passion of Love, and distracted with raging Jealousy
and Disappointment, thinking herself treated with brutish Perfidy and Cruelty,
by a Lover whose highest Fame had been his being the Son of a Goddness, to
aggravate his Inhumanity and Hard-heartedness with this, That his Behavior was
not worthy the Son of a Goddess, nor becoming one whose Father was an
illustrious Prince; and that he acted more as if he had been brought forth by
hard unrelenting Rocks, and had sucked the Dugs of Tyg^rs. But what is there in
the Case of David, parallel, or at all in like Manner leading him to speak of
himself as born in Sin, in any such Sense? He is not speaking himself, nor any
one else speaking to him, of any excellent and divine Father and Mother, that
he was born of: Nor is there any Appearance of his aggravating his Sin, by its
being unworthy of his high Birth. There is nothing else visible in David's
Case, to lead him to take Notice of his being born in Sin, but only his having
such Experience of the Continuance and Power of indwelling Sin, after so long a
Time, and so many and great Means to engage him to Holiness; which showed, that
Sin was inbred, and in his very Nature.

Dr. T. very often objects to these and other Texts, brought by Divines to
prove original Sin, that there is no Mention made in them of Adam, nor of his
Sin. He cries out, Here is not the least Mention, or Intimation of Adam, or any
ill Effects of his Sin upon us. -- Here Is not one Word, nor the least Hint of
Adam, or any Consequences of his Sin, etc. etc. P. 5. 64, 96, 97, 98, 102, 108,
112, 118, 120, 122, 123, 127, 128, 136, 142, 143, 152, 155, 229, 149.
He says, 142.
If Job and his Friends had known and believed the Doctrine of a corrupt
Nature, derived from Adam's Sin only, they ought in Reason and Truth to have
given this as the true and only Reason of the human Imperfection and
Uncleanness they mention. But these Objections and Exclamations are made no
less impertinently, than they are frequently. It Is no more a Proof, that
Corruption of Nature did not come by Adam's Sin, because many times when it is
mentioned, Adam's Sin is not expressly m^^tion'd as the Cause of it, than that
Death did not come by Adam's Sin (as Dr. T. says it did) because though Death as
incident to Mankind, is mentioned so often in the old Testament, and by our
Savior in his Discourses yet Adam's Sin is not once expressly mentioned, after
the three first Chapters of Genesis, any where in all the old Testament, or the
four Evangelists, as the Occasion of it.

What Christian has there ever been, that believed the moral Corruption of the
Nature of Mankind, who ever doubted that it came that Way, which the Apostle
speaks of, when he says, " By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin"? Nor indeed have they any more Reason to doubt of it, than to doubt of the
whole History of our first Parents, because Adam's Name is so rarely mentioned,
on any Occasion in Scripture, after that first Account of him, and Eve's never
at all; and because we have no more any express Mention of the particular
Manner, in which Mankind were first brought into Being, either with respect to
the Creation of Adam, or Eve. It Is sufficient, that the abiding, most visible
Effects of these Things remain, in the View of Mankind in all Ages, and are
often spoken of in Scripture; and the particular Manner of their being
introduced, is once plainly set forth in the Beginning of the Bible, in that
History which gives us an Account of the Origin of all Things. And doubtless it
was expected, by the great Author of the Bible, that the Account in the three
first Chapters of Genesis should be taken as a plain Account of the
Introduction of both natural and moral Evil, into the World; as it has been
shown to be so indeed. The History of Adam's Sin, with its Circumstances, God's
Threatening, and the Sentence pronounced upon him after his Transgression, and
the immediate Conse^uences, consisting in so vast an Alteration in his State,
and the State of the World, which abides still, with respect to all his
Posterity, do most directly and sufficiently lead to an understanding of the
Rise of Calamity, Sin and Death, in this sinful miserable, World.

It Is fit, we all should know, that it don't become us to tell the most High,
how often he shall particularly explain and give the Reason of any Doctrine
which he teaches in order to our believing what he says. If he has at all given
us Evidence that it is a Doctrine agreeable to his Mind, it becomes us to
receive it with full Credit and Submission; and not sullenly to reject it,
because our Notions and Humors are not suited in the Manner, and Number of
Times, of his particularly explaining it to us. How often is Pardon of Sins
promised in the Old Testament to repenting and returning Sinners? How many
hundred Times is God's special Favor there promised to the sincerely
Righteous, without any express Mention of these Benefits being through Christ?
Would it therefore be becoming us to say, that in-as-much as our Dependence on
Christ for these Benefits, is a Doctrine, which, if true, is of such
Importance, that God ought expressly to have mentioned Christ's Merits as the
Reason and Ground of the Benefits, if he knew they were the Ground of 'em, and
should have plainly declared it sooner, and more frequently, if ever he
expected we should believe him, when he did tell us of it? -- (...) often is
Vengeance and Misery threatened in the old Testament to the Wicked, without any
clear and express Signification of any such thing intended, as that everlasting
Fire, where there is Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth, in another World, which
Christ so often speaks of as the Punishment appointed for all the Wicked? Would
it now become a Christian, to object and say, that if God really meant any such
thing, he ought in Reason and Truth to have declared it plainly and fully; and
not to have been so silent about a Matter of such vast Importance to all
Mankind, for four Thousand Years together?

CHAP. III.
Observations on various other Places of Scripture, principally of the New
Testament, proving the Doctrine of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
Observations on Joh. III. 6. in Connection with some other Passages in the New
Testament.
THose Words of Christ, giving a Reason to Nicodemus, why we must be born
again, Joh. iii. 6. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which
is born of the Spirit, is Spirit; have not without good Reason been produced by
Divines, as a Proof of the Doctrine of Original Sin: supposing, that by Flesh
here is meant the human Nature in a debased and corrupt State. Yet Dr. T.(P.
144.) thus explains these Words, That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh;
That which is born by natural Descent and Propagation, is a Man consisting of
Body and Soul, or the mere Constitution and Powers of a Man, in their natural
State. But the constant (...) of these Terms, Flesh, and Spirit, in other Parts
of the New Testament, when thus set in Opposition one to another, and the
latter said to be produced by the Spirit of God, as here; and when speaking of
the same Thing, which Christ is here speaking of to Nicodemus, viz. the
requisite Qualifications to Salvation, this will fully vindicate the Sense of
our Divines. Thus in the 7th and 8th Chapters of Romans, where these Terms
Flesh, and Spirit ((...)and (...)) are abundantly repeated, and set in
Opposition, as here. So, Chap. vii. 14. The Law is spiritual ((...)) but I am
carnal, ((...)) sold under Sin. He cannot only mean, 'I am a Man, consisting of
Body and Soul, and having the Powers of a Man.' Ver. 18. I know that in me,
that is, in ^y Flesh, dwells no good thing. He don't mean to condemn his
Frame, as consisting of Body and Soul; and to assert, that in his human
Constitution, with the Powers of a Man, dwells no good thing. And when he says
in the last Verse of the Chapter, With the Mind I my self serv^ the Law of God,
but with the Flesh the Law of Sin; He cannot mean, 'I my self serve the Law of
God; but with my innocent human Constitution, as having the Powers of a Man, I
serve the Law of Sin.' And when he says in the next Words, in the Beginning of
the 8th Chapter, There is no Condemnation to them -- that walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit; and ver. 4. The Righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh; He cannot mean, 'There is no
Condemnation to them that walk not according to the Powers of ^ Man,' etc. And
when he says, ver. 5,and 6. They that (...) after the Flesh, do mind the things
of the Flesh; and to be carnally minded is Death; He don't intend, 'They that
are according to the human Constitution and the Powers of a Man, do mind the
Things of the human Constitution and Powers; and to mind these, is Death.' And
when he says, ver. 7,and 8. The carnal (or fleshly) Mind is Enmity against God,
and is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be; So that they that are
in the Flesh, cannot please God; He cannot mean, that to mind the Thi^^^ which
are agreeable to the Powers and Constitution of a Man (who, as our Author says,
is constituted or made right) is Enmity against God; And that a Mind which is
agreeable to this right human Constitution, as God has made it, is not subject
to the Law of God, nor indeed can be; and that they who are according to such a
Constitution, cannot please God. And when it is said, v. 9. Ye are not in the
Flesh, but in the Spirit; the Apostle cannot mean, Ye are not in the human
Nature, as constituted of Body and Soul, and with the Powers of a Man. It Is
most manifest, that by the Flesh here the Apostle means some Nature that is
corrupt, and of an evil Tendency, and directly opposite to the Law, and holy
Nature of God; so that to be and walk according to it, and to have a Mind
conformed to it, is to be an utter Enemy to God and his Law, in a perfect
Inconsistence with being subject to God, and pleasing God; and in a sure
infallible Tendency to Death, and utter Destruction. And it is plain, that here
by being and walking after, or according to the Flesh, is meant the same thing
as being and walking according to a corrupt and sinful Nature; and to be and
walk according to the Spirit, is to be and walk according to a holy and divine
Nature, or Principle: and to be carnally minded, is the same as being viciously
and corruptly minded; to be spiritually minded, is to be of a virtuous and holy
Disposition.

When Christ says, Joh. iii. 6. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, he
represents the Flesh not merely as a Quality; for it would be incongruous, to
speak of a Quality as a Thing born: it is a Person, or Man, that is born.
Therefore Man, as in his whole Nature corrupt, is called Flesh: Which is
agreeable to other Scripture-Representations, where the corrupt Nature is called
the Old Man, the Body of Sin, and the Body of Death. Agreeable to this are those
Representations in the 7th and 8th Chapters of Romans: there Flesh is
figuratively represented as a Person, according to the Apostle's Manner,
observed by Mr. Lock, and after him by Dr. T -- r; who takes Notice, that the
Apostle, in the 6th and 7th of Romans represents Sin as a Person; and that he
figuratively distinguishes in himself two Persons, speaking of Flesh as his
Person. For I know that in ME, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good thing.
And it may be observed, that in the 8th Chapter, he still continues this
Representation, speaking of the Flesh as a Person: and accordingly in the 6th
and 7th Verses, speaks of the Mind of the Flesh, (...) and of the Mind of the
Spirit, (...) as if the Flesh and Spirit were two opposite Persons, each having
a Mind contrary to the Mind of the other. Dr. T. interprets this Mind of the
Flesh, and Mind of the Spirit, as though the Flesh and the Spirit were here
spoken of as the different Objects, about which the Mind spoken of is
conversant. Which is plainly beside the Apostle's Sense; who speaks of the
Flesh and Spirit as the Subjects and Agents, in which the Mind spoken of is;
and not the Objects, about which it acts. We have the same Phrase again, v. 27.
He that searches the Hearts, knows what is the MIND OF THE SPIRIT, (...) the
Mind of the spiritual Nature in the Saints being the same with the Mind of the
Spirit of God himself, who imparts and actuates that spiritual Nature; Here the
Spirit is the Subject and Agent, and not the Object. The same Apostle in like
Manner uses the Word, (...) in Col. ii. 18. Vainly puffed up by his fleshly
Mind, (...) by the Mind of his Flesh. And this Agent so often called Flesh,
represented by the Apostle, as altogether evil, without any good Thing dwelling
in it, or belonging to it, yea perfectly contrary to God and his Law, and
tending wholly to Death and Ruin, and directly opposite to the Spirit, is what
Christ speaks of to Nicodemus as born in the first Birth, as giving a Reason
why there is a Necessity of a New Birth, in order to a better Production.

One thing is particularly observable in that Discourse of the Apostle, in the
7th and 8th of Romans, in which he so often uses the Term Flesh, as opposite to
Spirit, which as well as many other things in his Discourse, makes it plain,
that by Flesh he means something in itself corrupt and sinful; and that is,
that he expressly calls it sinful Flesh, Romans viii. 3. It Is manifest, that by
sinful Flesh he means the same Thing with that Flesh spoken of in the
immediately foregoing and following Words, and in all the Context: And that
when it is said, Christ was made in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, the
Expression is equipollent with those that speak of Christ as made Sin, and made
a Curse for us.

Flesh and Spirit are opposed one to another in Gal. v. in the same Manner as
in the 8th of Romans: And there, by Flesh cannot be meant only the human Nature
of Body and Soul, or the mere Constitution and Powers of a Man, as in its
natural State, innocent and right. In the 16th v. the Apostle says, Walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh: where the Flesh is
spoken of as a Thing of an evil Inclination, Desire or Lust. But this is more
strongly signified in the next Words; For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary one to another. What
could have been said more plainly, to show that what the Apostle means by
Flesh, is something very evil in its Nature, and an irreconcilable Enemy to
all Goodness? And it may be observed, that in these Words, and those that
follow, the Apostle still figuratively represents the Flesh as a Person or
Agent, desiring, acting, having Lusts, and performing Works. And by Works of
the Flesh, and Fruits of the Spirit, which are opposed to each other, from v.
19. to the End, are plainly meant the same as Works of a sinful Nature, and
Fruits of a holy renewed Nature. Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which
are these; Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, etc. -- But
the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, etc. The Apostle, by Flesh, don't mean any thing that is innocent and
good in itself, that only needs to be restrained, and kept in proper Bounds;
but something altogether Evil, which is to be destroyed, and not only
restrained. 1 Cor. v. 5. To deliver such an One to Satan, for the Destruction
of the Flesh. We must have no Mercy on it; we cannot be too cruel to it; it must
even be crucified. Gal. v. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts.

The Apostle John, the same Apostle that writes the Account of what Christ said
to Nicodemus, by the Spirit means the same thing as a new, divine and holy
Nature, exerting itself in a Principle of divine Love, which is the Sum of all
Christian Holiness. 1 John iii. 23, 24. And that we should love one another, as
he gave us Commandment; and he that keeps his Commandments, dwells in him,
and he in him: and hereby we know that be abides in us, by the Spirit that he
has given us. With Chap. iv. 12, 13. If we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his Love is perfected in us: Hereby know we, that we dwell in him,
because he has given us of his Spirit. The spiritual Principle in us being as
it were a Communication of the Spirit of God to us.

And as by (...)is meant a holy Nature, so by the Epithet (...). spiritual, is
meant the same as truly virtuous and holy, Gal. vi. 1. Ye that are spiritual,
restore such an one in the Spirit of Meekness. The Apostle refers to what he
had just said, in the End of the foregoing Chapter, where he had mentioned
Meekness, as a Fruit of the Spirit. And so by carnal, or fleshly, (...) is
meant the same as sinful. Romans vii. 14. The Law is spiritual (i. e. holy) But I
am carnal, sold under Sin.

And it is evident, that by Flesh, as the Word is used in the New Testament, and
opposed to Spirit, when speaking of the Qualifications for eternal Salvation,
is not meant only what is now vulgarly called the Sins of the Flesh, consisting
in inordinate Appetites of the Body, and their Indulge^^e; but the whole Body
of Sin, implying those Lusts that are most subtle, and furthest from any
Relation to the Body; such as Pride, Malice, Envy, etc. When the Works of the
Flesh are enumerated, Gal. v. 19, 20, 21. they are Vices of the latter Kind
chiefly, that are mentioned; Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings. So, Pride of Heart is
the Effect or Operation of the Flesh. Col. ii. 18. Vainly puffed up by his
fleshly Mind: in the Greek, by the Mind of the Flesh. So Pride, Envying, Strife
and Division, are spoken of as Works of the Flesh, 1 Cor. iii. 3,4. For ye are
yet carnal ((...) fleshly.) For whereas there is Envying, and Strife, and
Division, are ye not carnal, and walk as Men? For while one says, I am of
Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? Such kind of Lusts don't
depend on the Body, or external Senses; for the Devil himself has them in the
highest Degree, who has not, nor ever had, any Body or external Senses to
gratify.

Here, if it should be inquired, how Corruption or Depravity in general, or the
Nature of Man as corrupt and sinful, came to be called Flesh; and not only that
Corruption which consists in inordinate bodily Appetites? I think, what the
Apostle says in the last cited Place, Are ye not carnal, and walk AS MEN? leads
us to the true Reason. It Is because a corrupt and sinful Nature is what
properly belongs to Mankind, or the Race of Adam, as they are in themselves,
and as they are by Nature. The Word Flesh is a Word often used in both old
Testament and new to signify Mankind in their present State. To enumerate all
the Places, would be very tedious; I shall therefore only mention a few Places
in the New Testament. Matt. xxiv. 22. Except those Days should be shortened, no
Flesh should be saved. Luke iii. 6. All Flesh shall see the Salvation of God.
Joh. xvii. 2. Thou have given him Power over all Flesh. See also Act. ii. 17.
Romans iii.20. 1 Cor. i. 29. Gal. ii. 16. Man's Nature, being left to it self,
forsaken of the Spirit of God, as it was when Man fell, and consequently
forsaken of divine and holy Principles, of it self became exceeding corrupt,
utterly depraved and ruined. And so the Word Flesh, which signifies Man, came
to be used to signify Man as he is in himself, in his natural State debased,
corrupt and ruined. And on the other Hand, the Word Spirit came to be used to
signify a divine and holy Principle, or new Nature; because that is not of Man,
but of God, by the Indwelling and vital Influence of his Spirit. And thus to be
corrupt, and to be carnal, or fleshly, and to walk as Men, are the same thing
with the Apostle. And so in other Parts of the Scripture, to savor the Things
that be of Men, and to savor Things which are corrupt, are the same; and Sons
of Men, and wicked Men, also are the same, as was observed before. And on the
other hand, to savor the Things that be of God, and to receive the Things of
the Spirit of God, are Phrases that signify as much as relishing and embracing
true Holiness or divine Virtue.

All these Things confirm what we have supposed to be Christ's Meaning, in
saying, That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit. His Speech implies, that what is born in the first Birth
of Man, is Nothing but Man as he is of himself, without any thing divine in
him; depraved, debased, sinful, ruined Man, utterly unfit to enter into the
Kingdom of God, and incapable of the spiritual divine Happiness of that
Kingdom: but that which is born in the new Birth, of the Spirit of God, is a
spiritual Principle, and holy and divine Nature, meet for the divine and
heavenly Kingdom. It Is a Confirmation that this is the true Meaning, that it is
not only evidently agreeable to the constant Language of the Spirit of Christ in
the New Testament; but the Words understood in this Sense, contain the proper
and true Reason, why a Man must be born again, in order to enter into the
Kingdom of God; the Reason that is given every where in other Parts of the
Scripture for the Necessity of a Renovation, a Change of Mind, a new Heart etc.
in order to Salvation: To give a Reason of which to Nicodemus, is plainly
Christ's Design in the Words which have been insisted on.

Before I proceed, I would observe one Thing as a Corollary from what has been
said.

Corol. If by Flesh and Spirit when spoken of in the New Testament, and opposed
to each other, in Discourses on the necessary Qualifications for Salvation, we
are to understand what has been now supposed, it will not only follow, that Men
by Nature are corrupt, but wholly corrupt, without any good Thing. If by Flesh
is meant Man's Nature, as he receives it in his first Birth, then therein
dwells no good Thing; as appears by Romans vii. 18. It Is wholly opposite to
God, and to Subjection to his Law, as appears by Romans ^iii. 7, 8. It Is directly
contrary to true Holiness, and wholly opposes it, and Holiness is opposite to
that; as appears by Gal. v. 17. So long as Men are in their natural State, they
not only have no good Thing, but it is impossible they should have, or do any
good Thing; as appears by Romans viii. 8. There is nothing in their Nature, as
they have it by the first Birth, whence should arise any true Subjection to
Old; as appears by Romans viii. 7. If there were any thing truly good in the
Flesh, or in Man's Nature, or natural Disposition, under a moral View, then it
should only be amended; but the Scripture represents as though we were to be
Enemi^s to it, and were to seek nothing short of its entire Destruction, as has
been observed. And elsewhere the Apostle directs not to the amending of the old
Man, but putting it off, and putting on the new Man; and seeks not to have the
Body of Death made better, but to be delivered from it; And says, That if any
Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature (which doubtless means the same as a Man
newborn) Old Things are (not amended) but passed away, and ALL Things are
become new.

But this will be further evident, if we particularly consider the Apostle's
Discourse in the latter Part of the second Chapter of 1 Cor. and the Beginning
of the third. There the Apostle speaks of the natural Man, and the spiritual
Man: where natural and spiritual are opposed just in the same Manner, as I have
observed carnal and spiritual often are. In Chap. ii. 14,15. he says, The
natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God: for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. But he that is spiritual, judges all Things. And not only does the
Apostle here oppose natural and spiritual, just as he elsewhere does carnal and
spiritual, but his following Discourse evidently shows, that he means the very
same Distinction, the same two distinct and opposite Things. For immediately on
his thus speaking of the Difference between the natural and the spiritual Man,
he turns to the Corinthians, in the first Words of the next Chapter, connected
with this, and says, And I, Brethren, could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal. Referring manifestly to what he had been saying,
in the immediately proceeding Discourse, about spiritual and natural Men, and
evidently using the Word, carnal, as synonymous with natural. By which it is
put out of all reasonable Dispute, that the Apostle by natural Men means the
same as Men in that carnal, sinful State, that they are in by their first
Birth; -- notwithstanding all the Glosses and Criticisms, by which modern
Writers have endeavored to palm upon us another Sense of this Phrase, and so
to deprive us of the clear Instruction the Apostle gives in that 14th ver.
concerning the sinful miserable State of Man by Nature. Dr. T. says, by (...),
is meant the animal Man, the Man who makes Sense and Appetite the Law of his
Action. If he aims to limit the Meaning of the Word to external Sense, and
bodily Appetite, his Meaning is certainly not the Apostle's. For the Apostle in
his Sense includes the more spiritual Vices of Envy, Strife, etc. as appears by
the four first Verses of the next Chapter; where, as I have observed, he
substitutes the Word carnal in the Place of cc. So the Apostle Jude uses the
Word in like Manner, opposing it to spiritual, or having the Spirit, ver. 19.
These are they that separate themselves, sensual ((...)) "not having the
Spirit." The Vices he had been just speaking of, were chiefly of the more
spiritual Kind. v. 16. These are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their
own Lusts; and their Mouth speaks great swelling Words, having Men's Persons
in Admiration because of Advantage. The Vices mentioned are much of the same
Kind with those of the Corinthians, for which he calls them carnal; Envying,
Strife and Divisions, and saying, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos; and being
puffed up for one against another. We have the same Word again, Jam. iii. 14,
15. If y^^ have bitter Envying and Strife, glory not, and lie not against the
Truth: This Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual ((...))
and devilish; where also the Vices the Apostle speaks of are of the more
spiritual Kind.

So that on the whole, there is sufficient Reason to understand the Apostle,
when he speaks of the natural Man in that 1 Cor. ii. 14. as meaning Man in his
native corrupt State. And his Words represent him as totally corrupt, wholly a
Stranger and Enemy to true Virtue or Holiness, and Things appertaining to it,
which it appears are ^^^monly intended in the New Testament by Things
spiritual, and are doubtless here meant by Things of the Spirit of God. These
Words also represent, that it is impossible Man should be otherwise, while in
his natural State. The Expressions are very strong: The natural Man receives
not the Things of the Spirit of God, is not susceptible of Things of that Kind,
neither can be know them, can have no true Sense or Relish of them, or Notion
of their real Nature and true Excellency; Because they are spiritually
discerned; they are not discerned by Means of any Principle in Nature, but
altogether by a Principle that is divine, something introduced by the Grace of
God's holy Spirit, which is above all that is natural. The Words are in a
considerable Degree parallel with those of our Savior, Joh. xiv. 16,17. He
shall give you the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it
sees him not, neitheir knows him: But ye know him; for he dwells with you,
and shall be in you.

SECT. II.
Observations on Romans iii. 9, -- 24.
IF the Scriptures represent all Mankind as wicked in their first State, before
they are made Partakers of the Benefits of Christ's Redemption, then they are
wicked by Nature: For doubtless Men's first State is their native State, or the
State they come into the World in. But the Scriptures do thus represent all
Mankind.

Before I mention particular Texts to this Purpose, I would observe, that it
alters not the Case as to the Argument in Hand, whether we suppose these Texts
speak directly of Infants, or only of such as are capable of some
Understanding, so as to understand something of their own Duty and State. For
if it be so with all Mankind, that as soon as ever they are capable of
reflecting and knowing their own moral State, they find themselves wicked, this
proves that they are wicked by Nature; either born wicked, o^ ^^rn with an
infallible Disposition to be wicked as soon as possible, if there be any
Difference between these; and either of 'em will prove Men to be born
exceedingly depraved. I have before proved, that a native Propensity to Sin
certainly follows from many things said in the Scripture, of Mankind; but what
I intend now, is something more direct, to^prove by direct Scripture-Testimony,
that all Mankind in their first State are really of a wicked Character.

To this Purpose is exceeding full, express and abundant that Passage of the
Apostle, in Romans iii. beginning with the 9th v. to the End of the 24th; which I
shall set down at large, distinguishing the universal Terms which are here so
often repeated, by a distinct Character. The Apostle having in the first Chap.
v. 16, 17. laid down his Proposition, that none can be saved in any other Way
than through the Righteousness of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ, he proceeds to
prove this Point, by showing particularly that all are in themselves Wicked,
and without any Righteousness of their own. First, he insists on the Wickedness
of the Gentiles, in the first Chapter; and next, on the Wickedness of the Jews,
in the second Chapter. And then in this Place, he comes to sum up the Matter,
and draw the Conclusion in the Words following: What then, are we better than
they? No, in no wise; for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that
they are all under Sin: As it is written, There is NONE righteous, NO, NOT ONE;
there is NONE that understands; there is NONE that ^eeketh after God; they
are ALL gone out of the Way; they are TOGETHER become unprofitable; there is
NONE that does Good, NO, NOT ONE. Their Throat is an open, Sepulcher; with
their Tongues they have used Deceit; the Poison of Asps is under their Lips;
whose Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness; their Feet are swift to shed
Blood; Destruction and Misery are in their Ways, and the Way of Peace they have
not known; there is no Fear of God before their Eyes. Now we know, that
whatsoever Things the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that
EVERY Mouth may be stopped, and ALL THE WORLD may become guilty before God.
Therefore by the Deeds of the Law, there shall NO FLESH be justified in his
Sight; for by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. But now the Righteousness of God
without the Law, is manifest, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets; even
the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto ALL, and upon
ALL them that believe; for there is NO DIFFERENCE. For ALL have sinned,and come
short of the Glory of God. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption which is in Jesus Christ. --

Here the thing which I would prove, viz. that Mankind in their first State,
before they are interested in the Benefits of Christ's Redemption, are
universally wicked, is declared with the utmost possible Fullness and Precision.
So that if here this Matter ben't set forth plainly, expressly and fully, it
must be because no Words can do it, and it is not in the Power of Language or
any Manner of Terms and Phrases, however contrived and heaped up one upon
another, determinately to signify any such Thing.

Dr. T. to take off the Force of the whole, would have us to understand (P. 104
-- 107) that these Passages, quoted from the Psalms, and other Parts of the old
Testament, don't speak of all Mankind, nor of all the Jews; but only of them of
whom they were true. He observes, there were many that were innocent and
righteous; though there were also many, a strong Party, that were wicked,
corrupt, etc. of whom these Texts were to be understood. Concerning which I
would observe the following Things.

1. According to this, the Universality of the Terms that are found in these
Places, which the Apostle cites from the old Testament, to prove that all the
World, both Jews and Gentiles, are under Sin, is nothing to his Purpose. The
Apostle uses universal Terms in his Proposition, and in his Conclusion, that
ALL are under Sin, that EVERY MOUTH is stopped, ALL THE WORLD guilty, -- (...)
by the Deeds of the Law NO FLESH can be justified. And he chooses out a Number
of universal Sayings or Clauses out of the Old Testament, to confirm this
Universality; as, There is none righteous; no, not one: They are all gone out
of the Way; There is none that understands, etc. But yet the Universality of
these Expressions is nothing to his Purpose; because the universal Terms found
in 'em have indeed no Reference to any such Universality, as this the Apostle
speaks of, nor any thing akin to it; they mean no Universality, either in the
collective Sense, or personal Sense; no Universality of the Nations of the
World, or of particular Persons in those Nations, or in any one Nation in the
World: But only of those of whom they are true. That is, There is none of them
righteous, of whom it is true, that they are not righteous; no, not one: There
is none that understand, of whom it is true, that they understand not: They are
all gone out of the Way, of whom it is true, that they are gone out of the Way,
etc. -- Or these Expressions are to be understood concerning that strong Party
in Israel, in David's and Solomon's Days and in the Prophets Days: they are to
be understood of them universally. And what is that to the Apostle's Purpose?
How does such an Universality of Wickedness, as this, -- that all were wicked
in Israel, who were wicked, -- or, that there was a particular evil Party, all
of which were wicked, -- confirm that Universality which the Apostle would
prove, viz. That all Jews and Gentiles, and the whole World were wicked, and
every Mouth stopped, and that no Flesh could be justified by their own
Righteousness.

Here nothing can be said to abate the Nonsense, but this, That the Apostle
would convince the Jews, that they were capable of being wicked, as well as
other Nations; and to prove it, he mentions some Texts, which show that there
was a wicked Party in Israel, a Thousand Years ago: And that as to the
universal Terms which happened to be in these Texts, the Apostle had no Respect
to these; but his reciting them is as it were accidental, they happened to be
in some Texts which speak of an evil Party in Israel, and the Apostle cites 'em
as they are, not because they are any more to his Purpose for the universal
Terms, which happen to be in them. But let the Reader look on the Words of the
Apostle, and observe the Violence of such a Supposition. Particularly let the
Words of the 9th and 10th Verses, and their Connection, be observed. All are
under Sin: as it is written, There is none righteous; no, not one. How plain is
it, that the Apostle cites that latter universal Clause out of the 14th Psalm,
to confirm the proceeding universal Words of his own Proposition? And yet it
will follow from the Things which Dr. T. supposes, that the Universality of the
Terms in the last Words, There is none righteous; no, not one, have no Relation
at all to that Universality he speaks of in the preceding Clause, to which
they are joined, All are under Sin: and is no more a Confirmation of it, than
if the Words were thus, 'There are some, or there are many in Israel, that are
not righteous.'

2. To suppose, the Apostle's Design in citing these Passages, was only to
prove to the Jews, that of old there was a considerable Number of their Nation
that were wicked Men, is to suppose him to have gone about to prove what none
of the Jews denied, or made the least Doubt of. Even the Pharisees, the most
self-righteous Sect of them, who went furthest in glorying in the Distinction
of their Nation from other Nations, as a holy People, knew it, and owned it:
they openly confessed that their Forefathers killed the Prophets, Matthew. xxiii.
29, 30, 31. And if the Apostle's Design had been only to refresh their Memories
to put 'em in Mind of the ancient Wickedness of their Nation, to lead to
Reflection on themselves as guilty of the like Wickedness (as Stephen does,
Acts vii.) what Need had the Apostle to go so far about to prove this;
gathering up many Sentences here and there, which prove that their Scriptures
did speak of some as wicked Men; and then, in the next Place, to prove that the
wicked Men spoken of must be of the Nation of the Jews, by this Argument, That
what things so ever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, or
that whatsoever the Books of the Old Testament said, it must be understood of
that People that had the Old Testament? What Need had the Apostle of such an
Ambages or Fetch as this, to prove to the Jews, that there had been many of
their Nation in some of the ancient Ages, which were wicked Men; when the Old
Testament was full of Passages that asserted this expressly, not only of a
strong Party, but of the Nation in general? How much more would it have been to
such a Purpose, to have put 'em in Mind of the Wickedness of the People in
general, in worshipping the golden Calf, and the Unbelief, Mumuring and
Perverseness of the whole Congregation in the Wilderness, for forty Years as
Stephen does? Which Things he had no need to prove to be spoken of their
Nation, by any such indirect Argument, as that, Whatsoever Things the Law
says, it says to them that are under the Law.

3. It would have been impertinent to the Apostle's Purpose, even as our Author
understands his Purpose, for him to have gone about to convince the Jews, that
there had been a strong Party of bad Men in David's, and Solomon's, and the
Prophets Times. For Dr. T. supposes, the Apostle's Aim is to prove the great
Corruption of both Jews and Gentiles at that Day, when Christ came into the
World. See Key 275, 278.


In order the more fully to evade the clear and abundant Testimonies to the
Doctrine of original Sin, contained in this Part of the holy Scripture, our
Author says, The Apostle is here speaking of Bodies of People, of Jews and
Gentiles in a collective Sense, as two great Bodies into which Mankind are
divided; speaking of them in their collective Capacity, and not with respect to
particular Persons; that the Apostle's Design is to prove, neither of these two
great collective Bodies, in their collective Sense, can be justified by Law,
because both were corrupt; and so, that no more is implied, than that the
Generality of both were Wicked. P. 102, 104, 117, 119, 120. and Note on Romans
iii. 10 -- 19.
On this I observe,

(1.) That this supposed Sense disagrees extremely with the Terms and Language
which the Apostle here makes use of. For according to this, we must understand,
either

First, that the Apostle means no Universality at all, but only the far greater
Part. But if the Words which the Apostle uses, don't most fully and
determinately signify an Universality, no Words ever used in the Bible are
sufficient to do it. I might challenge any Man to produce any one Paragraph in
the Scripture, from the Beginning to the End, where there is such a Repetition
and Accumulation of Terms, so strongly and emphatically and carefully to
express the most perfect and absolute Universality; or any Place to be compared
to it. What Instance is there in the Scripture, or indeed any other Writing,
when the Meaning is only the much greater Part, where this Meaning is signified
in such a Manner, by repeating such Expressions, They are all, -- They are all,
-- They are all, --,together -- every one, -- all the World; joined to
multiplied negative Terms, to show the Universality to be without Exception;
saying, There is no Flesh, -- there is none -- there is none -- there is none
-- there is none, four times over; besides the Addition of, No, not one, -- no,
not one, -- once and again!

Or Secondly, if any Universality at all be allowed, it is only of the
collective Bodies spoken of; and these collective Bodies but two, as Dr. T.
reckons them, viz. the Jewish Nation, and the Gentile World; supposing the
Apostle is here representing each of these Parts of Mankind as being Wicked.
But is this the Way of Men's using Language, when speaking of but two Things,
to express themselves in universal Terms, of such a Sort, and in such a Manner,
and when they mean no more than that the Thing affirmed is predicated of both
of them? If a Man speaking of his two Feet as both lame, should say, All my
Feet are lame, They are all lame. All together are become weak, None of my Feet
are strong, None of them are sound; No, not one; would not he be thought to be
lame in his Understanding, as well as his Feet? When the Apostle says, That
every Mouth may be stopped, must we suppose, that he speaks only of those two
great collective Bodies, figuratively ascribing to each of them a Mouth, and
mean that those two Mouths are stopped!

And besides, according to our Author's own Interpretation, the universal Terms
used in these Texts cited from the old Testament, have no respect to those two
great collective Bodies, nor indeed to either of them; but to some in Israel, a
particular dissaffected Party in that one Nation, which was made up of wicked
Men. So that his Interpretation is every way absurd and inconsistent.

(2.) If the Apostle is speaking only of the Wickedness or Guilt of great
collective Bodies, then it will follow, that also the Justification he here
treats of, is no other than the Justification of such collective Bodies. For,
they are the same he speaks of as guilty and wicked, that he argues cannot be
justified by the Works of the Law, by Reason of their being Wicked. Otherwise
his Argument is wholly disannul'd. If the Guilt he speaks of be only of
collective Bodies, then what he argues from that Guilt, must be only, that
collective Bodies cannot be justified by the Works of the Law, having no
Respect to the Justification of particular Persons. And indeed this is Dr. T --
r's declared Opinion. He supposes, the Apostle here, and in other Parts of this
Epistle, is speaking of Men's Justification considered only as in their
collective Capacity. See Note on Romans iii. 10, -- 19. and on Chap. v. 11. and
on Chap. ix. 30, 31. and on Chap. xi. 31.
But the contrary is most manifest. The 16th and 18th Verses of this third
Chapter cannot, without the utmost Violence, be understood otherwise than of the
Justification of particular Persons. That he might be just, and the Justifier
of HIM that believes in Jesus. -- Therefore we conclude that A MAN is
justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law. So Chap. iv. 5. But to HIM
that work^th not, but b^li^veth on him that justifies the ungodly. HIS Faith
is counted for Righteousness. And what the Apostle cites in the 6, 7, and 8th
Verses from the Book of Psalms, evidently shows, that he is speaking of the
Justification of particular Persons. Even as David also describ^th the
Blessedness of THE MAN unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works,
saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are
covered. David says these Things in the 32d Psalm, with a special respect to
his own particular Case; there expressing the great Distress he was in, while
under a Sense of the Guilt of his personal Sin, and the great Joy he had when
God forgave him; as in v. 3.4.

And then, it is very plain in that Paragraph of the third Chapter, which we
have been upon. that it is the Justification of particular Persons that the
Apostle speaks of, by that Place in the Old Testament, which he refers to in v.
20. Therefore by the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh he justified in his
Sight. He refers to that in Psalm. exliii. Enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant; for in thy Sight shall NO MAN LIVING be justified. Here the Psalmist
is not speaking of the Justification of a Nation, as a collective Body, or of
one of the two Parts of the World, but of a particular Man. And it is further
manifest, that the Apostle is here speaking of personal Justification,
in-as-much as this Place is evidently parallel with that, Gal. iii. 10,11. For
as many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse: for it is written,
Cursed is EVERY ONE that contin^eth not in all things that are written in the
Book (...) ^ the Law to do them. But that NO MAN is justified by the Works of
the Law, is evident; for the just shall live by Faith. It is plain, that this
Place is parallel with that in the 3d of Romans, not only as the Thing asserted
is the same, and the Argument by which it is proved here, is the same as there,
viz. that all are guilty, and exposed to be condemned by the Law; But the same
Saying of the Old Testament is cited here in the Beginning of this Discourse in
Galatians. (Chap. i. 16.) And many other Things demonstrate, that the Apostle
is speaking of the same Justification in both Places, which I omit for
Brevity's sake.

And besides all these Things, our Author's Interpretation makes the Apostle's
Argument wholly void another Way. The Apostle is speaking of a certain Subject,
which cannot be justified by the Works of the Law; and his Argument is that,
that same Subject is guilty, and is condemned by the Law, If he means, that one
Subject, suppose a collective Body or Bodies, cannot be justified by the Law,
because another Subject, another collective Body, is condemned by the Law, it is
plain, the Argument would be quite vain and impertinent. Yet thus the Argument
must stand according to Dr. T -- r's Interpretation. The collective Bodies,
which he supposes are spoken of as wicked, and condemned by the Law, considered
as in their collective Capacity, are those two, the Jewish Nation, and the
heathen World: But the collective Body which he supposes the Apostle speaks of
as justified without the Deeds of the Law, is neither of these, but the
Christian Church, or Body of Believers; which is a new collective Body, a new
Creature, and a new Man, (according to our Author's understanding of such
Phrases) which never had any Existence before it was justified, and therefore
never was wicked or condemned, unless it was with regard to the Individuals, of
which it was con^^^^ted: and it does not appear, according to our Author's
Scheme, that these Individuals over corrupt, in every Part. And not only is the
total Corruption thus intimated, by ^numerating the several Parts, but by
denying of all Good; any true Understanding or spiritual Knowledge, any
virtuous Action, or so much as truly virtuous Desire, or seeking after God.
There is none that understands; There is none that seeks after God: There
is none that does Good; The Way of Peace have they not known. And in general,
by denying all true Piety or Religion in Men, in their first State, v. 18.
There is no Fear of God before their Eyes. -- The Expressions also are
evidently chosen to denote a most extreme and desperate Wickedness of Heart. An
exceeding Depravity is ascribed to every Part: to the Throat, the Scent of an
open S^pulchre; to the Tongue and Lips, D^c^it and the Poison of Asps; to the
Mouth, Cursing and Bitterness; of their F^^t it is said, they are swift to shed
Blood: And with regard to the whole Man, it is said, Destruction and Misery are
in their Ways. The Representation is very strong, of each of these Things, viz.
That all Mankind are corrupt; that every one is wholly, and altogether corr^pt;
and also extremely and desperately corrupt. And it is plain, it is not
accidental, that we have here such a Collection of such strong Expressions, so
emphatically signifying these Things; but that they are chosen of the Apostle
on Design, as being directly and fully to his Purpose; which Purpose appears in
all his Discourse in the whole of this Chapter, and indeed from the Beginning
of the Epistle.

SECT. III.
Observations on Romans v. 6, -- 10. and Ephesians. ii. 3. with the Context, and Romans
vii.
ANother Passage of this Apostle in the same Epistle to the Romans, which shows
that all that are made Partakers of the Benefits of Christ's Redemption, are in
their first State wicked and desperately wicked, is that, Chap. v. 6, -- 10.
For when we were yet (...) Strength, in due Time Christ died for the Ungodly.
For scarcely for a righteous Man will one die; yet (...) for a good Man, some
would even dare to die. But God commends his Love toward us, in that while
we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. Much more than, being now justified by
his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through him. For if while we were
Enemies, we were reconciled to God through the Death of his Sin? much more,
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

Here all that Christ died for, and that are saved by him, are spoken of as
being in their first State Sinners, Ungodly, Enemies to God, exposed to divine
Wrath, and without Strength, without Ability to help themselves, or deliver
their Souls from this miserable State.

D. T. says, The Apostle here speaks of the Gentiles only in their heathen
State, in Contradistinction to the Jews; and that not of particular Persons
among the heathen G^^tiles, or as to the State they were in personally; but
only of the Gentiles collectively taken, or of the miserable State of that
great collective Body, the heathen World: And that these Appellations; Sinners,
Ungodly, Enemies, (...) were Names by which the Apostles in their Writings were
worst to signify and distinguish the heathen World, in Opposition to the Jews;
and that in this Sense these Appellations are to be taken in their Epistles,
and in this Place in particular. P. 114, -- 120. See also Dr. T. -- r's
Pharaph. and Notes on the Place.
And it is observable, that this Way of interpreting these Phrases in the
apostolic Writings, is become fashionable with many late Writers; whereby they
not only evade several clear Testimonies to the Doctrine of original Sin, but
make void great Part of the New Testament; on which Account it deserves the
more particular Consideration.

It Is allowed to have been long common and customary among the Jews, in
Christ's and the Apostles Days, especi^lly those of the Sect of the Pharisees,
in their Pride, and Confidence in their Privileges as the peculiar People of
God, to exalt themselves exceedingly above other Nations, and greatly to
despise the Gentiles, and call them by such Names as Sinners, Enemies, Dogs,
etc. as Notes of Distinction from themselves, whom they accounted in general
(excepting the Publicans and the noto^^ously (...)) as the Friends, special
Favorites, and Children of God; because they were the Children of Abraham,
were circumcised, and had the Law of Moses, as their peculiar Privilege, and as
a Wall of Partition between them and the Gentiles.

But it is very remarkable, that a Christian Divine, who has studied the new
Testament, and the Epistle to the Romans in particular, so diligently as Dr. T.
-- should be strong in an Imagination, that the Apostles of Jesus Christ should
so far countenance, and do so much to cherish these self-exalting, uncharitable
Dispositions and Notions of the Jews, which gave Rise to such a Custom, as to
fall in with that Custom, and adopt that Language of their Pride and Contempt;
and especially that the Apostle Paul should do it. It Is a most unreasonable
Imagination, on many Accounts.

1. The whole Gospel Dispensation is calculated entirely to overthrow and
abolish every thing to which this self-distinguishing, self-exalting Language
of the Jews was owing. It was calculated wholly to exclude such Boasting, and
to destroy that Pride and Self-Righteousness, that were the Causes of it: It
was calculated to abolish the Enmity, and break down the Partition Wall between
Jews and Gentiles, and of Twain to make one new Man, so making Peace; to
destroy all Dispositions in Nations and particular Persons to despise one
another, or to say one to another, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for
I am b^lier than Thou; and to establish the contrary Principles of Humility,
mutual Esteem, Honor and Love, and universal Union, in the most firm and
perfect Manner.

2. Christ, when on Earth, set himself, through the Course of his Ministry, to
militate against this (...) Spirit. Practice and Language of the Jews;
appearing in such Representations, Names and Epithets so (...) among them; by
which they showed so much Contempt of the Gentiles, Publicans, and such as were
openly lewd and vicious, and so exalted themselves above them; calling them
Sinners and Enemies, and themselves Holy and God's Children; not allowing the
Gentile to (...) their Neighbor, etc. He condemned the Pharishes for not
esteeming themselves Sinners, as well as the Publicans; trusting in themselves
that they were righteous, and d^spising others. He militated against these
things in his own Treatment of some Gentiles, Publicans and others, which they
called Sinners, in what he said on these, Occasions. Matthew. viii. 5, -- 13.
Chap. ix. 9, -- 13. Chap. xi. 19, -- 24. Luke vii. 37, to the End. Chap. xvii.
12, -- 19. Chap. xix. 1, -- 10. Matt. xv. 21, -- 28. Joh. iv. 9, etc. ver. 39,
etc. Compare Luke x. 29, etc.
He opposed these Notions and Manners of the Jews in his Parables; Matt. xxi.
28, -- ^2. Chap. xxii. 1, -- 10. Luke xiv. 16, -- 24. Compare Luke xiii.
28,29,30.
and in his Instructions an (...) how to treat the unbelieving Jews; Matt. x.
14, 15.
and in what he says to Nicodemus about the Necessity of a NewBirth, even for
the Jews, as well as the (...) Gentiles with Regard to their Proselytism, which
some of the Jews looked upon as a new Birth; And in Opposition to their Notions
of their being the Children of God, because the Children of Abraham, but the
Gentiles by Nature Sinners and Children of Wrath, he tells them that even they
were Children of the Devil.

Joh. viii. 33, -- 44.

It may also be observed, that John the Baptist greatly ^^^^radicted the Jews
Opinion of Themselves, as being a holy People, and accepted of God, because
they were the Children of Abraham, and on that Account better than the Heathen,
whom they called Sinners, Enemies, Unclean, etc. in baptizing the Jews as a
polluted People and Sinners, as the Jews used to baptize proselytes from among
the Heathen; calling them to Repentance as Sinners, saying, Think not to say
within your (...), We have Abraham to our Father; for I say unto you, that God
is able of these Stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham; and teaching the
Pharisees that instead of their being a holy Generation and Children of God, as
they called themselves, they were a Generation of Vipers.


3. Though we should suppose the Apostles not to have been thoroughly brought off
from such Notions, Manners and Language of the Jews, till after Christ's
Ascension; yet after the pouring out of the Spirit on the Day of (...), or at
least, after the Calling of the Gentiles, begun in the Conversion of Cornelius,
they were fully indoctri^^^ed in this Matter, and effect^ally taught no longer
to call the Gentiles Unclean, as a Note of Distinction from the Jews (Act. x.
24.) which was before any of the (...) Epistles were written.

4. Of all the Apostles, some were more perfectly (...) in this Matter, and
none so abundant in instructing (...) in it, as Paul, the great Apostle of the
Gentiles. He had Abundance to do in this Matter: None of the Apostles had so
much Occasion to exert themselves against (...) Notion and Language of the
Jews, in Opposition to Jewish Teachers, and Judaiting Christians, that strove
to keep up the Separation-Wall between Jews and Gentiles, and to exalt the
former, and set the latter (...)*

5. This Apostle does especially strive in this Matter in this Epistle to the
Romans, above all his other Writings; (...) himself in a most elaborate Manner,
and with his utmost Skill and Power to bring the Jewish Christians off from
every thing of this Kind; end^^v^^^ing by all Means, that there might no longer
be in them any Remains of these odd Notions they had been educated in, of such
a great Distinction between Jews and Gentiles, as were expressed in the Names
they used to distinguish them by, calling the Jews holy, Children of Abraham,
Friends and Children of God, but the Gentiles Sinners, Unclean, Enemies, and
the like. He makes it almost his whole Business, from the Beginning of the
Epistle, to this Passage in the 5th Chapter which we are upon, to convince them
that there was no Ground for any such Distinction, and to prove that in common,
both Jews and Gentiles, all were desperately wicked, and none righteous, no,
not one. He tells them, Chap. iii. 9. that the Jews were by no Means better
than the Gentiles; and (in what follows in that Chapter) that there was no
Difference between Jews and Gentiles; and represents all us without Strength,
or any Sufficiency of their own in the Affair of Justification and Redemption:
And in the Continuation of the same Discourse, in the 4th Chapter, teaches that
all that were justified by Christ, were in themselves ungodly; and that being
the Children of Abraham was not peculiar to the Jews. In this 5th Chap. still
in Continuation of the same Discourse, on the same Subject and Argument of
Justification through Christ, and by Faith in him, he speaks of Christ's dying
for the Ungodly and Sinners, and those that were without Strength or
Sufficiency for their own Salvation, as he had done all along before. But now,
it seems, the Apostle by Sinners and ungodly must not be understood according
as he used these Words before; but must be supposed to mean only the Gentiles,
as distinguished from the Jews; adopting the Language of those self-righteous;
self-exalting, disdainful Judaizing Teachers, whom he was with all his Might
opposing: Countenancing the very same thing in them, which he had been from the
Beginning of the Epistle discountenancing, and endeavoring to discourage, and
utterly to abolish, with all his Art and Strength.

One Reason, why the Jews looked on themselves better than the Gentiles, and
called themselves holy and the Gentiles Sinners, was, that they had the Law of
Moses. They made their Boast of the Law. But the Apostle shows them, that this
was so far from making them better, that it condemned them, and was an Occasion
of their being Sinners in a higher Degree, and more aggravated Manner, and more
e^^ectually and dreadfully dead in and by Sin, Chap vii. 4, -- 13. agreeable to
those Words of Christ, Joh. v. 45.

It cannot be justly objected here, that this Apostle did indeed use this
Language, and call the Gentiles Sinners, in Contradistinction to the Jews, in
what he said to Peter, which he himself gives an Account of in Gal. ii. 15,16.
We who are Jews by Nature, and not Sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a Man
is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by Faith in Jesus Christ. It Is
true, that the Apostle here refers to this Distinction, as what was usually
made by the self-righteous Jews, between themselves and the Gentiles; but not
in such a Manner as to adopt, or favor it; but on the contrary, so at plainly
to show his Disapprobation of it; q.d. 'Tho we were born Jews, and by Nature
are of that People which are wont to make their Boast of the Law, expecting to
be justified by it, and trust in themselves that they are righteous, despising
others, calling the Gentiles Sinners, in Distinction from themselves; yet we
being now instructed in the Gospel of Christ, know better; we now know, that a
Man is not justified by the Works of the Law; that we are all justified only by
Faith in Christ, in whom there is no Difference, no Distinction of Greek or
Gentile, and Jew, but all are one in Christ Jesus.' And this is the very thing,
he there speaks of, which he blamed Peter for; that by his withdrawing and
separating himself from the Gentiles, refusing to eat with them etc. he had
countenanced this self-exalting, self-disting^^^hing, separating Spirit and
Custom of the Jews, whereby they treated the Gentiles, as in a distinguishing
manner Sinners and Unclean, and not fit to come near them who were a holy
People.

6. The Words themselves of the Apostle in this Place, show plainly, that he
here uses the Word, Sinners, not as signifying Gentiles, in Opposition to Jews,
but as denoting the morally evil, in Opposition to such as are righteous or
good: because this latter Opposition or Distinction between Sinners and
Righteous is here expressed in plain Terms. Scarcely for a righteous Man will
one die; yet peradventure for a good Man some would even dare to die: But God
commended his Love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died
for us. By righteous Men are doubtless meant the same that are meant by such a
Phrase, throughout this Apostle's Writings, and throughout the New Testament,
and throughout the Bible. Will any one pretend, that by the righteous Man, whom
Men would scarcely die for, and by the good Man, that perhaps some might even
dare to die for, is meant a Jew? Dr. T. himself don't explain it so, in his
Exposition of this Epistle; and therefore is not very consistent with himself,
in supposing, that in the other Part of the Distinction the Apostle means
Gentiles, as distinguished from the Jews. The Apostle himself had been
laboring abundantly, in the preceding Part of the Epistle, to prove that the
Jews were Sinners in this Sense, namely in Opposition to righteous; That all
had sinned, that all were under Sin, and therefore could not be justified,
could not be accepted as righteous, by their own Righteousness.

7. Another thing which makes it evident, that the Apostle when he speaks in
this Place of the Sinners and Enemies which Christ died for, don't mean only
the Gentiles, is, that he includes himself among them, saying, while WE were
Sinners, and when WE were Enemies.

Our Author from Time to Time says, The Apostle, though he speaks only of the
Gentiles in their Heathen State, yet puts himself with them, because he was the
Apostle of the Gentiles. But this is very violent and unreasonable. There is no
more Sense in it, than there would be in a Father's ranking himself among his
Children, when speaking to his Children of the Benefits they have by being
begotten by himself; and saying, We Children --: Or in a Physician's ranking
Himself with his Patients, when talking to them of their Diseases and Cure;
saying, We sick Folks. -- Paul's being the Apostle of the Gentiles, to save 'em
from their Heathenism, is so far from being a Reason for him to reckon himself
among the Heathen, that on the contrary, it is the very thing that would render
it in a peculiar Manner unnatural and absurd for him so to do. Because, as the
Apostle of the Gentiles, he appears as their Healer and Deliverer from
Heathenism; and therefore in that Capacity does in a peculiar Manner appear in
his Distinction from the Heathen, and in Opposition to the State of Heathenism.
For it is by the most opposite Qualities only, that he is fitted to be an
Apostle of the Heathen, and Recoverer from Heathenism. As the clear Light of
the Sun is the Thing which makes it a proper Restorative from Darkness; and,
therefore, the Sun's being spoken of as such a Remedy, none would suppose to be
a good Reason why it should be ranked with Darkness, or among dark Things. And
besides (which makes this Supposition of Dr. T -- r's appear more violent) the
Apostle, in this Epistle, does expressly rank himself with the Jews, when he
speaks of them as distinguished from the Gentiles; as in Chap. iii. 9. What
then? are WE better than They? That is, are we Jews better than the Gentiles?

It cannot justly be alleged in Opposition to this, that the Apostle Peter puts
himself with the Heathen. 1 Pet. iv. 3. For the Time past of OUR Life may
suffice US to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles; when WE walked in
Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Reviling, Banquetings, and abominable
Idolatries. For the Apostle Peter (who by the Way was not an Apostle of the
Gentiles) here don't speak of himself as one of the Heathen, but as one of the
Church of Christ in general, made up of those that had been Jews, Proselytes
and Heathen, who now were all one Body, of which Body he was a Member. It Is
this Society therefore, and not the Gentiles, that he refers to in the Pronoun
US. He is speaking of the Wickedness that the Members of this Body or Society
had lived in before their Conversion: not that every Member had lived in all
those Vices here mentioned, but some in one, others in another. Very parallel
with that of the Apostle Paul to Titus, Chap. iii. 3. For WE our selves (i.e.
We of the Christian Church) sometimes also were foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, (some one Lust and Pleasure, others
another) living in M^lice, Envy, hateful and hating one another,etc. There is
Nothing in this but what is very natural. That the Apostle, speaking to the
Christian Church, and of that Church, confessing it is former Sins, should speak
of himself as one of that Society, and yet mention some Sins that he personally
had not been guilty of, and among others, heathenish Idolatry, is quite a
different Thing from what it would have been for the Apostle, expressly
distinguishing those of the Christians which had been Heathen, from those which
had been Jews, to have ranked himself with the former, though he was truly of the
latter.

If a Minister in some Congregation in England, speaking in a Sermon of the
Sins of the Nation, being himself of the Nation, should say, WE have greatly
corrupted our selves, and provoked God by our Deism, our Blasphemy, our profane
Swearing, our Lasciviousness, our Venality, etc. speaking in the first Person
plural, though h^ himself never had been a Deist, and perhaps none of his
Hearers, and they might also have been generally free from other Sins he
mentioned; yet there would be nothing unnatural in his thus expressing himself.
But it would be a quite different Thing, if one Part of the British Dominions,
suppose our King's American Dominions, had universally apostatized from
Christianity to Deism, and had long been in such a State, and if One that had
been born and brought up in England among Christians, the Country being
universally Christian, should be sent among them to show them the Folly and
great Evil of Deism, and convert them to Christianity; and this Missionary,
when making a Distinction between English Christians, and these Deists, should
rank himself with the latter, and say, WE American Deists, We foolish blind
Infidels etc. This indeed would be very unnatural and absurd.

Another Passage of the Apostle, to the like Purpose with that which we have
been considering in the 5th of Romans, is that in Ephesians. ii. 3. -- And were by
Nature Children of Wrath, even as others. This remains a plain Testimony to the
Doctrine of original Sin, as held by those that used to be called orthodox
Christians, after all the Pains and Art used to torture and pervert it. This
Doctrine is here not only plainly and fully taught, but abundantly so, if we
take the Words with the Context; where Christians are once and again
represented as being, in their first State, dead in Sin, and as quickened, and
raised up from such a State of Death, in a most mavelous Display of the free
and rich Grace and Love, and exceeding Greatness of the Power of God, etc.

With respect to those Words (...) We were by Nature Children of Wrath, Dr. T.
says (P.112, 113, 114.) The Apostle means no more by this, than truly or really
Children of Wrath; using a metaphorical Expression, borrowed from the Word that
is used to signify a true and genuine Child of a Family, in Distinction from
one that is a Child only by Adoption: To express this we say, he is by Nature a
Child. In which it is owned, that the proper Sense of the Phrase is being a
Child by Nature, in the same Sense as a Child by Birth or natural Generation;
but only he supposes, that here the Word is used metaphorically. The Instance
he produces as parallel, to confirm his supposed metaphorical Sense of the
Phrase, as meaning only truly, really or properly Children of Wrath, viz. the
Apostle Paul's calling Timothy his own Son in the Faith, (...) is so far from
confirming his Sense, that it is rather directly against it. For doubtless the
Apostle uses the Word (...) in it is original Signification here, meaning his
begotten Son; (...) being the Adjective from (...) Off spring, or the Verb
(...) to beget; as much as to say, Timothy my begotten Son in the Faith; only
allowing for the two Ways of being begotten, spoken of in the new Testament,
one natural, and the other spiritual; one being the first Generation, the other
Regeneration; the one a being begotten as to the human Nature, the other a
being begotten in the Faith, begotten in Christ, or as to one's Christianity.
The Apostle expressly signifies which of these he means in this Place, Timothy
my begotten Son in the Faith, in the same Manner as he says to the Corinthians,
1 Cor. iv. 15. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. To say,
the Apostle uses the Word, (...) in Ephesians. ii. 3. only as signifying real, true
and proper, is a most arbitrary Interpretation, having nothing to warrant it in
the whole Bible. The Word (...) is no where used in this Sense in the
New Testament. The following are all the Places where the Word is used. Romans i.
26. and ii. 14. and ver. 17. and xi. 21. and ver. 24. twice in that Verse. 1
Cor. xi. 14. Gal. ii. 15. and iv. 8. Jam. iii. 7. twice in that Verse. and 2
Pet. i. 4.


Another Thing which our Author alleges to evade the Force of this, is, that
the Word rendered Nature, sometimes signifies Habit contracted by Custom, or an
acquired Nature. But this is not the proper Meaning of the Word. And it is
plain, the Word in its common Use, in the new Testament, signifies what we
properly express in English by the Word Nature. There is but one Place where
there can be the least Pretext for supposing it to be used otherwise; and that
is 1 Cor. xi. 14. Does not even Nature it self teach you, that if a Man have
long Hair, it is a Shame unto him? And even here there is, I think, no Manner
of Reason for understanding Nature otherwise than in the proper Sense. The
Emphasis used, (...) Nature IT SELF, shows that the Apostle don't mean Custom,
but Nature in the proper Sense. It is true, it was long Custom, that made
having the Head covered a Token of Subjection, and a feminine Habit or
Appearance; As it is Custom that makes any outward-Action or Word a Sign or
Signification of any thing: But Nature it self, Nature in its proper Sense,
teaches, that it is a Shame for a Man to appear with the established Signs of
the female Sex, and with Significations of Inferiority, etc. As Nature it self
shows it to be a Shame for a Father to bow down or kneel to his own Child or
Servant, or for Men to bow to an Ido^, because bowing down is by Custom an
established Token or Sign of Subjection and Submission: Such a Sight therefore
would be unnatural, shocking to a Man's very Nature. So Nature would teach,
that it is a Shame for a Woman to use such and such lascivious Words or
Gestures; though it be Custom, that establishes the unclean Signification of
those Gestures and Sounds.

It Is particularly unnatural and unreasonable, to understand the Phrase, (...)
in this Place, any otherwise than in the proper Sense, on the following
Accounts. 1. It may be observed, that both the Words, (...) and (...) in their
original Signification, have Reference to the Birth or Generation. So the Word.
(...) which comes from (...) which signifies to beget or bring forth Young, or
to put forth, or bud forth as a Plant, that brings forth young Buds and
Branches. And so the Word (...) comes from (...) which signifies to bring forth
Children. -- 2. As though the Apostle took Care by the Word used here, to signify
what we are by Birth, he changes the Word he used before for Children. In the
preceding Verse he used (...) speaking of the Children of Disobedience; -- but
here (...) which is a Word derived, as was now observed, from (...) to bring
forth a Child, and more properly signifies a begotten or born Child. -- 3. It Is
natural to suppose that the Apostle here speaks in Opposition to the Pride of
some, especially the Jews (for the Church in Ephesus was made up partly of
Jews, as well as the Church in Rome) who exalted themselves in the Privileges
they had by Birth, because they were born the Children of Abraham, and were
Jews by Nature, (...) as the Phrase is, Gal. ii. 15. In Opposition to this
proud Conceit, he teaches the Jews, that notwithstanding this they were by
Nature Children of Wrath, even as others, i. e. as well as the Gentiles, which
the Jews had been taught to look upon as Sinners, and out of Favor with God by
Nature, and born Children of Wrath. -- 4. It Is more plain, that the Apostle
uses the Word Nature in its proper Sense here, because he sets what they were
by Nature, in Opposition to what they are by Grace. In this Verse, the Apostle
shows what they are by Nature, viz. Children of Wrath; and in the following
Verses he shows, how very different their State is by Grace; saying, v. 5. By
Grace ye are saved; repeating it again v. 8. By Grace ye are saved; But if, by
being Children of Wrath by Nature, were meant no more than only their being
really and truly Children of Wrath, as Dr. T. supposes, there would be no
Opposition in the Signification of these Phrases; for in this Sense they were
by Nature in a State of Salvation, as much as by Nature Children of Wrath: for
they were truly, really and properly in a State of Salvation.

If we take these Words with the Context, the whole abundantly proves, that by
Nature we are totally corrupt, without any good Thing in us. For if we allow
the plain Scope of the Place, without attempting to hide it, by extreme
Violence used with the Apostle's Words andExpressions, the Design here is
strongly to establish this Point; That what Christians have that is good in
them, or in their State, is in no Part of it naturally in themselves, or from
themselves, but is wholly from divine Grace, all the Gift of God, and his
Workmanship, the Effect of his Power, and free and wonderful Love: None of our
good Works are primarily from ourselves, but with respect to 'em all, we are
God's Workmanship, created unto good Works, as it were out of Nothing: Not so
much as Faith itself, the first Principle of good Works in Christians, is of
themselves, but that is the Gift of God. Therefore the Apostle compares the
Work of God, in forming Christians to true Virtue and Holiness, not only to a
new Creation, but a Resurrection, or raising from the Dead. v. ^. You has he
quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. And again v. 5. Even when we
were dead in Sins, has he quickened us together with Christ. In speaking of
Christians being quickened with Christ, the Apostle has Reference to what he
had said before, in the latter Part of the foregoing Chapter, of God's
manifesting the exceeding Greatness of his Power toward Christian Converts, in
their Conversion, agreeable to the Operation of his mighty Power, when he raised
Christ from the dead. So that it is plain by every thing in this Discourse, the
Apostle would signify that by Nature we have no Goodness; but are as destitute
of it as a dead Corpse is of Life: And that all Goodness, all good Works, and
Faith the Principle of all, are perfectly the Gift of God's Grace, and the Work
of his great, almighty and exceeding excellent Power. I think, there can be
need of Nothing but reading the Chapter, and minding what is read, to convince
all who have common Understanding, of this; whatever any of the most subtle
Critics have done, or even can do, to twist, rack, perplex and pervert the
Words and Phrases here used.

Dr. T. here again insists, that the Apostle speaks only of the Gentiles in
their heathen State, when he speaks of those that were dead in Sin, and by
Nature Children of Wrath; and that though he seems to include himself among
these, saying, WE were by Nature Children of Wrath, WE were dead in Sins, yet
he only puts himself among them because he was the Apostle of the Gentiles. The
gross Absurdity of which may appear from what was said before. But besides the
things which have been already observed, there are some things which make it
peculiarly unreasonable to understand it so here. It Is true, the greater Part
of the Church of Ephesus had been Heathens, and therefore the Apostle often has
Reference to their heathen State, in this Epistle. But the Words in this Chap.
ii. 3. plainly show, that he means himself and other Jews, in Distinction from
the Gentiles: for the Distinction is fully expressed. After he had told the
Ephesians, who had been generally Heathen, that they had been dead in Sin, and
had walked according to the Course of this World, etc. v. 1, and 2. he makes a
Distinction, and says, Among whom WE ALSO had our Conversation, etc. and were
by Nature Children of Wrath. EVEN AS OTHERS. Here first he changes the Person;
whereas, before he had spoken in the second Person, YE were dead, -- YE in time
past walked, etc. Now he changes Style, and uses the first Person, in a most
manifest Distinction, Among whom WE ALSO, that is, we Jews, as well as ye
Gentiles. Not only changing the Person, but adding a Particle of Distinction,
Also; which would be Nonsense, if he meant the same without Distinction. And
besides all this, more fully to express the Distinction, the Apostle further
adds a Pronoun of Distinction; WE also, even as OTHERS, or, we as well as
others: most evidently having respect to the Notions, so generally entertained
by the Jews, of their being much better than the Gentiles, in being Jews by
Nature, Children of Abraham, and Children of God; when they supposed the
Gentiles to be utterly cast off, as born Aliens, and by Nature Children of
Wrath. In Opposition to this, the Apostle says, 'We Jews, after all our
glorying in our Distinction, were by Nature Children of Wrath, as well as the
rest of the World.' And a yet further Evidence, that the Apostle here means to
include the Jews, and even himself, is the universal Term he uses, Among whom
also we ALL had our Conversation, etc. Tho Wickedness was supposed by the Jews
to be the Course of this World, as to the Generality of Mankind, yet they
supposed themselves an exempt People, at least the Pharisees, and the devout
Observers of the Law of Moses, and Traditions of the Elders; whatever might be
thought of Publicans and Harlots. But in Opposition to this, the Apostle
asserts, that they all were no better by Nature than others, but were to be
reckoned among the Children of Disobedience, and Children of Wrath.

And then besides, if the Apostle chooses to put himself among the Gentiles,
because he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, I would ask, why he don't do so in
the 11 th v. of the same Chapter, where he speaks of their Gentile State
expressly? Remember that YE being in time past Gentiles in the Flesh. -- Why
does he here make a Distinction between the Gentiles and himself? Why did he
not say, Let us remember, that we being in past Time Gentiles? And why does the
same Apostle, even universally, make the same Distinction, speaking either in
the second or third Person, and never in the first, where he expressly speaks of
the Gentilism of those that he wrote to; or speaks of 'em with Reference to
their Distinction from the Jews? So every where in this same Epistle; as, in
Chap. i. 12,13. where the Distinction is made just in the same Manner as here,
by the Change of the Person, and by the distinguishing Particle, Also, That WE
should be to the Praise of his Glory who first trusted in Christ [the first
Bel^evers in Christ being of the Jews, before the Gentiles were called] In whom
YE ALSO trusted, after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your
Salvation. And in all the following Part of this second Chapter; as v. 11, 17,
19. and 22. In which last Verse the same distinguishing Particle again is used;
In whom YOU ALSO are builded together for an Habitation of God through the
Spirit. See also in the following Chapters; Chap. iii. 6. and iv. 17. And not
only in this Epistle, but constantly in other Epistles: as, Romans i. 12, 13.
Chap. xi. 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 30, 30, 31. Chap. xv.
15, 16. 1 Cor. xii. 2. Gal. iv. 8. Col. i. 27. Chap. ii. 13. 1 The^^. i. 5, 6,
9. Chap. ii. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Though I am far from thinking our Author's Exposition of the 7th Chap. of Romans
to be in any wise agreeable to the true Sense of the Apostle, yet it is needless
here to stand particularly to examine it; because the Doctrine of original Sin
may be argued not the less strongly, though we should allow the Thing wherein he
mainly differs from such as he opposes in his Interpretation, viz. That the
Apostle don't speak in his own Name, or to represent the State of a true
Christian, but as representing the State of the Jews under the Law. For even on
this Supposition, the Drift of the Place will prove, that every one who is
under the Law, and with equal Reason every one of Mankind, is carnal, sold
under Sin, in his first State, and till delivered by Christ. For, it is plain,
that the Apostle's Design is to show the Insufficiency of the Law to give Life
to any one whatsoever. This appears by what he says when he comes to draw his
Conclusion, in the Continuation of this Discourse; Chap. viii. 3. Dr. T.
himself reckons this a Part of the same Discourse or Paragraph, in the Division
he makes of the Epistle, in his Paraphrase and Notes upon it.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh; 'God,
sending his own Son, etc. Our Author supposes, this here spoken of, viz. "that
the Law cannot give Life, because it is weak through the Flesh," is true with
respect to every one of Mankind. See Note on Romans v. 20.
And when the Apostle gives this Reason, In that it is weak through the Flesh,
it is plain, that by the Flesh, which here he opposes to the Spirit, he means
the same Thing which in the preceding Part of the same Discourse, in the
foregoing Chapter, he had called by the Name Flesh, v. 5, 14, 18. and the Law
of the Members, v. 23. and the Body of Death. v. 23. Which is the Thing that
through this Chapter he insists on as the grand Hindrance and Reason why the
Law could not give Life, just as he does in his Conclusion, Chap. viii. 3.
Which in this last Place, is given as a Reason why the Law cannot give Life to
any of Mankind. And it being the same Reason, of the same Thing, spoken of in
the same Discourse, in the former Part of it; as appears, because this last
Place is the Conclusion, of which that former Part is the Premises: And
inasmuch as the Reason there given is being in the Flesh, and a being carnal,
sold under Sin. Therefore taking the whole of the Apostle's Discourse, this is
justly understood to be a Reason why the Law cannot give Life to any of Mankind;
and consequently, that all Mankind are in the Flesh, and are carnal, sold under
Sin, and so remain till delivered by Christ: And consequently all Mankind in
their first or original State are very sinful; which was the Thing to be proved.

CHAP IV.
Containing Observations on Romans v. 12, -- (...) to the End.
SECT. I.
Remarks on Dr. T -- r's* Way of explaining this Text.
THE following Things are worthy to be taken Notice of, concerning our Author's
Exposition of this remarkable Passage of the Apostle Paul.

1. He greatly insists that by Death in this Place no more is meant, than that
Death which we all die, when this present Life is extinguished, and the Body
returns to the Dust; that no more is meant in the 12, 14, 15, and 17th Verses.
P. 27. he speaks of it as evidently, clearly and infallibly so, because the
Apostle is still discoursing on the same Subject; plainly implying, that it
must most infallibly be so, that the Apostle means no more by Death, throughout
this Paragraph on the Subject. But as infallible as this is, if we believe what
Dr. T. elsewhere says, it must needs be otherwise. He, in P.396, speaking of
those Words in the last Verse of the next Chapter, The Wages of Sin is DEATH,
but the Gift of God is ETERNAL LIFE, through Jesus Christ our Lord, says, Death
in this Place is widely different from the Death we now die; as it stands there
opposed to eternal Life, which is the Gift of God through Jesus Christ, it
manifestly signifies eternal Death, the second Death, or that Death which they
shall here after die, who live after the Flesh. But Death, in the Conclusion of
the Paragraph we are upon in the 5th Chapter, concerning the Death that comes
by Adam, and the Life that comes by Christ, in the last v. of the Chapter, is
opposed to eternal Life, just in the same Manner as it is in the last v. of the
next Chapter. That as Sin has reigned unto DEATH, even so might Grace reign,
through Righteousness, unto ETERNAL LIFE, by Jesus Christ our Lord. So that by
our Author's own Argument, Death in this Place also is manifestly widely
different from the Death we now die, as it stands here opposed to eternal Life
through Jesus Christ; and signifies eternal Death, the second Death. And yet this
is a Part of the same Discourse or Paragraph with that begun in the 12th v. as
reckoned by Dr. T. himself in his Division of Paragraphs, in his Paraphrase and
Notes on the Epistle. So that if we will follow him, and admit his Reasonings
in the various Parts of his Book, here is manifest Proof, against infallible
Evidence! So that it is true, the Apostle throughout this whole Passage on the
same Subject, by Death, evidently, clearly and infallibly means no more, than
that Death we now die, when this Life is extinguished; and yet by Death, in
some Part of this Passage, is meant something widely different from the Death
we now die, and is MANIFESTLY intended eternal Death, the second Death.

But had our Author been more consistent with himself in his laying of it down
as so certain and infallible, that because the Apostle has a special Respect to
temporal Death, in the 14th v. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, therefore he
means no more in the several consequent Parts of this Passage, yet he is
doubtless too confident and positive in this Matter. This is no more evident,
clear and infallible, than that Christ meant no more by perishing, in Luke
xiii. 5. when he says, I tell you, Nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish, than such a temporal Death, as came on those that died by the
Fall of the Tower of Siloam, spoken of in the preceding Words of the same
Speech: and no more infallible, than that by Life, Christ means no more than
this temporal Life, in each Part of that one Sentence, Matt. x. 39. He that
finds his Life, shall lose it; and he that loses his Life for my Sake, shall
find it; because in the first Part of each Clause he has respect especially to
temporal Life. There are many Places parallel with these, as Joh. xi. 25, 26. I
am the Resurrection, and the Life: He that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall be live: and whosoever lives, and believ^th in me, shall never
die. Here both the Words, Life and Death, are used with this Variation; I am
the Resurrection, and the Life, meaning spiritual and eternal Life: He that
believes in me, though he were dead, having respect to temporal Death, yet
shall be live, with respect to spiritual Life, and the Restoration of the Life
of the Body. And whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die, meaning
a spiritual and eternal Death. So in Joh. vi. 49, 50. Your Fathers did (...) in
the Wilderness, and are dead, having respect chiefly to ^emporal Death. This is
the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a Man may (...) thereof, and not
die, i. e. by the Loss of spiritual Life, and by eternal Death. (See also
(...). 5^.) And in the next ver. If any Man ^^t of this Bread, he shall live
forever, have eternal Life. So ver. 54. See another like Instance, Joh. v. 24,
-- 29.


The Truth of the Case with respect to what the Apostle intends by the Word
Death in this Place, is this, viz. That the same Thing is meant, as is meant by
Death in the foregoing and following Parts of this Epistle, and other Writings
of this Apostle, where he speaks of Death as the Consequence of Sin, namely,
the Whole of that Death, which He, and the Scripture every where, speaks of as
the proper Wages and Punishment of Sin, including Death temporal, spiritual and
eternal; though in some Parts of this Discourse he has a more special respect to
one Part of this Whole, in others to another, as his Argument leads him;
without any more Variation, than is common in the same Discourse. That Life
which the Scripture speaks of as the Reward of Righteousness, is a Whole
containing several Parts, viz. The Life of the Body, Union of Soul and Body,
and the most perfect Sensibility, Activity and Felicity of both, which is the
chief Thing. In like Manner the Death, which the Scripture speaks of as the
Punishment of Sin, is a Whole including the Death of the Body, and the Death of
the Soul, and the eternal, sensible, perfect Destruction and Misery of both.
It Is this latter Whole, that the Apostle speaks of by the Name of Death in this
Discourse, in Romans v* Though in some Sentences he has a more special Respect to
one Part, in others to another: And this without changing the Signification of
the Word. For an having Respect to several Things included in the extensive
Signification of the Word, is not the same thing as using the Word in several
distinct Significations. As for Instance, the Appellative, Man, or the proper
Name of any particular Man, is the Name of a Whole, including the different
Parts of Soul and Body. And if any one in speaking of James or John, should
say, he was a wise Man, and a beautiful Man; in the former Part of the
Sentence, Respect would be had more especially to his Soul, in the latter to
his Body, in the Word Man: But yet without any proper Change of the
Signification of the Name, to distinct Senses. In Joh. xxi. 7. it is said,
Peter was naked, and in the following Part of the same Story it is said, Peter
was grieved. In the former Proposition, Respect is had especially to his Body,
in the latter to his Soul: But yet here is no proper Change of the Meaning of
the Name, Peter. And as to the Apostle's Use of the Word Death, in the Passage
now under Consideration, on the Supposition that he in the general means the
whole of that Death which is the Wages of Sin, there is nothing but what is
perfectly natural in supposing, that he, in order to evince, that Death, the
proper Punishment of Sin, comes on all Mankind, in Consequence of Adam's Sin,
should take Notice of that Part of this Punishment, which is visible in this
World, and which every Body therefore sees does in Fact come on all Mankind (as
in v. 14.) and from thence should infer, that all Mankind are exposed to the
whole of that Death which is the proper Punishment of Sin, whereof that
temporal Death which is visible, is a Part, and a visible Image of the whole,
and (unless changed by divine Grace) an Introduction to the principal, and
infinitely the most dreadful Part.

II. Dr. T -- r's Explanation of this Passage makes wholly insignificant those
first Words, By one Man, Sin entered into the World, and leaves this
Proposition without any Sense or Signification at all. The Apostle had been
largely and elaborately representing, how the whole World was full of Sin, in
all Parts of it, both among Jews and Gentiles, and all exposed to Death and
Condemnation. It Is plain, that in these Words he would tell us, how this came
to pass, namely, that this sorrowful Event came by one Man, even the first Man.
That the World was full of Sin, and full of Death, were two great and notorious
Facts, deeply affecting the Interests of Mankind; and they seemed very
wonderful Facts, drawing the Attention of the more thinking Part of Mankind
every where, who often asked this Question, Whence comes Evil, moral and
natural Evil? (The latter chiefly visible in Death.) It Is manifest, the Apostle
here means to tell us, how these came into the World, and came to prevail in it
as they do. But all that is meant, according to Dr. T -- r's Interpretation,
is, " He begun Transgression." P. 56.
As if all that the Apostle meant, was, to tell us who happened to sin first;
not how such a Malady came upon the World, or how any one in the World, besides
Adam himself, came by such a Distemper. The Words of the Apostle, By one Man
Sin entered INTO THE WORLD, and Death by Sin, show the Design to be, to tell us
how these Evils came, as affecting the State of the World; and not only as
reaching one Man in the World. If this were not plain enough in itself, the
Words immediately following demonstrate it; And so Death passed upon ALL MEN,
for that all have sinned. By Sin's being in the World, the Apostle don't mean
being in the World only in that one Instance of Adam's first Transgression, but
being abroad in the World, among the Inhabitants of the Earth, in a wide Extent
and continued Series of Wickedness; as is plain in the first Words of the next
Verse, For until the Law, Sin was IN THE WORLD. And therefore when he gives us
an Account how it came to be in the World, or which is the same Thing, how it
entered into the World, he don't mean only coming in in one Instance.

If the Case were as Dr. T. represents, that the Sin of Adam, either in its
Pollution or Punishment, reached none but himself, any more than the Sin of any
other Man, it would be no more proper to say, that by one Man Sin entered into
the World, than if it should be enquired, how Mankind came into America, and
there had anciently been a Ship of the Phenicians wrecked at Sea, and a single
Man of the Crew was driven ashore on this Continent, and here died as soon as
he reached the Shore, and it should be said, By that one Man Mankind came into
America.

And besides, it is not true that by one Man, or by Adam, Sin entered into
World, in Dr. T -- r's Sense: For it was not he, but Eve, that begun
Transgression. By one Man Dr. T. understands Adam, as the Figure of Christ. And
it is plain, that it was for his Transgression, and not Eve's, that the
Sentence of Death was pronounced on Mankind after the Fall, Genesis iii. 19. It
appears unreasonable to suppose the Apostle means to include Eve, when he
speaks of Adam: for he lays great Stress on it, that it was BY ONE, --
repeating it no less than seven Times.

III. In like Manner this Author brings to Nothing the Sense of the causal
Particles, in such Phrases as these, so often repeated, Death BY Sin, v. 12. If
THROUGH the Offense of one, many be dead, v. 15. BY one that sinned, --
Judgment was BY one to Condemnation, v. 16. BY one Man's Offense, Death reigned
BY one, v. 17. BY the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all, etc.v. 18. BY one
Man's Disobedience, v. 19. These causal Particles, so dwelt upon, and so
variously repeated, unless we make mere Nonsense of the Discourse, signify some
Connection and Dependence, by some Sort of Influence of that Sin of one Man, or
some Tendency to that Effect which is so often said to come BY it. But
according to Dr. T. there can be no real Dependence or Influence in the Case,
of any Sort whatsoever. There is no Connection by any natural Influence of that
one Act to make all Mankind mortal. Our Author don't pretend to account for
this Effect in any such Manner; but in another most diverse, viz, A gracious
Act of God, laying Mankind under A^^liction, Toil and Death, from special
Favor and Kindness. Nor can there be any Dependence of this Effect on that
Transgression of Adam, by any moral Influence, as deserving such a Consequence,
or exposing to it on any moral Account: For he supposes, that Mankind are not
in this way exposed to the least Degree of Evil. Nor has this Effect any legal
Dependence on that Sin, or any Connection by Virtue of any antecedent
Constitution, which God had established with Adam: For he insist, that in that
Threatening, In the Day thou ^atest thou ^^alt die, there is not a Word said of
his Posterity; And Death on Mankind, according to him, cannot come by Virtue of
that legal Constitution with Adam; because the Sentence by which it came, was
after the annulling and abolishing that Constitution. And it is manifest, that
this Consequence cannot be through any Kind of Tendency of that Sin to such an
Effect; because the Effect comes only as a Benefit, and is the Fruit of mere
Favor: But Sin has no Tendency, either natural or moral, to Benefits and
divine Favors, And that Sin of Adam could neither be the efficient Cause, nor
the procuring Cause, neither the natural, moral nor legal Cause, nor an
exciting and moving Cause, any more than Adam's eating of any other Tree of the
Garden. And the only real Relation that the Effect can have to that Sin, is a
Relation as to Time, viz. that it is after it. And when the Matter is closely
examined, the whole amounts to no more than this, That God is pleased, of his
mere good* Will and Pleasure, to bestow a greater Favor upon us, than he did
upon Adam in Innocence, after that Sin of his eating the forbidden Fruit; which
Sin we are no more concerned in, than in the Sin of the King of Pegu, or
Empero^ of China.

IV. It Is altogether inconsistent with the Apostle's Scope, and the Import of
what he says, to suppose that the Death which he here speaks of as coming on
Mankind by Adam's Sin, comes not as a Punishment, but only as a Fav^ur. It
quite makes void the Opposition, in which the Apostle sets the Consequences of
Adam's Sin, and the Consequences of the Grace and Righteousness of Christ. They
are set in Opposition to each other, as opposite Effects, arising from opposite
Causes, throughout the Paragraph. One as the just Consequence of an Offense,
the other a free Gift. v.15, 16, 17, 18. Whereas, according to this Scheme,
there is no such Opposition in the Case; both are Benefits, and both are free
Gifts. A very whol^ome Medicine, to save from (...), ordered by a kind Father,
or a Shield to preserve from (...) Enemy, bestowed by a Friend, is as much a
free Gift, as pleasant Food. The Death that comes by Adam, is set in Opposition
to the Life and Happiness that comes by Christ, as being the Fruit of Sin, and
Judgment for Sin; when the latter is the Fruit of divine Grace. v. 15. 17, 20,
21. Whereas according to our Author, both came by Grace: Death (...) on Mankind
by the free Kindness and Love of God, much more truly and properly than by
Adam's Sin. Dr. T. speaks of it as coming by OCCASION, of Adam's Sin. But as I
have observed, it is an Occasion without any Influence.) Yet the proper CAUSE
is God's Grace: So (...) true Cause is wholly good. Which, by the Way, is
direc^^y ^^^^gnant so the Apostle's Doctrine in Romans vii. 13. Was thou that
which is good, made Death unto me? God forbid, (...) Sin* that it might appear
Sin, working Death in me (...) which is good. Where the Apostle utterly rejects
any such Suggestion, as tho that which is good were the proper Cause of Death;
and signifies, that Sin is the proper Cause, and that which is good, only the
Occasion. But according to this Author, the Reverse is true: That which is good
in the highest Sense, even the Love of God, and a divine gracious Constitution,
is the proper Cause of Death; and Sin, only the Occasion.

But to return, it is plain, that Death by Adam, and Life and Happiness by
Christ, are here set in Opposition; the latter being spoken of as good, the
other as evil; one as the Effect of Righteousness, the other of an Offense; one
the Fruit of Obedience, the other of Disobedience; one as the Fruit of God's
Favor, in Consequence of what was pleasing and acceptable to him, but the
other the Fruit of his Displeasure, in Consequence of what was displeasing and
hateful to him: the latter coming by Justification, the former by the
Condemnation of the Subject. But according to the Scheme of our Author, there
can be no Opposition in any of these Respects: The Death here spoken of,
neither comes as an Evil, nor from an evil Cause; either an evil efficient
Cause, or procuring Cause; nor at (...) as any Testimony of God's Displeasure
to the Subject, but as properly the Effect of God's Favor, no less than that
which is spoken of as coming by Christ; yea, and as much as that, appointed by
an Act of JUSTIFICATION of the Subject; as he understands and explains the
Word, Justification: For both are by a Grant of Fav^^r, and are Instances of
Mercy and Goodness. And he does abundantly insist upon it, that ANY Grant of
Favor, ANY Instance of Mercy and Goodness, whereby God delivers and exempts
from any Kind of Danger, Suffering or Calamity, or confers ANY Favor, Blessing
or Privilege, is called Justification, in the Scripture-Sense and Use of the
Word. Key.. 342. where it is to be observed, that he himself puts the Word ANY
in Capital Letters. The same Thing in Substance is often asserted elsewhere.
And this indeed is his main Point in what he calls the true Gospel-Scheme.


And over and above all these Things, our Author makes void and destroys the
grand and fundamental Opposition of all, to illustrate which is the chief Scope
of this whole Passage, viz. That between the first and second Adam, in the
Death that comes by one, and the Life and Happiness by the other. For,
according to his Doctrine, both come by Christ, the second Adam; both by his
Grace Righteousness and Obedience: the Death, that God sentenced Mankind to in
Genesis iii. 19. being a great deal more properly and truly by Christ, than by
Adam. For, according to him, that Sentence was not pronounced on the Foot of
the Covenant with Adam, because that was abrogated, and entirely set aside, as
what was to have no more Effect, before it was pronounced; as he largely
insists for many Pages together, P. 389, -- 395. He says, (...) ^9. This
Covenant with Adam was disannul'd immediately after Adam sinned. Even before God
passed Sentence upon Adam, Grace was introduced. And in P, 395. He says, The
Death that Mankind are the Subjects of now, stands under the Covenant of Grace.
And in P. 396. In the Counsel and Appointment of God, it stood in this very
Light, even before the Sentence of Death was pronounced upon Adam; and
consequently Death is no proper and legal Punishment of S^^. And he often
insists, that it comes only as a Favor and Benefit: and standing, as he says,
under the Covenant of Grace, which is by Christ, therefore is truly one of the
Benefits of the new Covenant, which comes by Christ, the second Adam. For he
himself (...) in it, to use his own Words, Key Chap. x. Title.
That all the Grace of the Gospel is dispensed to us IN, BY or THROUGH the Son
of God. Nothing is clearer (says he Key. 119.
) from the whole Current of Scripture, than that all the Mercy and Love of God,
and all the Blessings of the Gospel, from first to last, -- are IN, BY and
THROUGH Christ, and particularly by his Blood, by the Redemption that is in
him. -- This (says he) can bear no Dispute among Christians. What then becomes
of all this Discourse of the Apostle's about the great Difference and
Opposition between Adam and Christ; as Death is by one, and eternal Life and
Happiness by the other? This grand Distinction between the two Adams, and all
the other Instances of Opposition and Difference, here insisted on, as between
the Effects of Sin and Righteousness, the Consequences of Obedience and
Disobedience, of the Offense and the free Gift, Judgment and Grace,
Condemnation and Justification, they all come to Nothing: And this whole
Discourse of the Apostle's wherein he seems to labor much, as if it were to
set forth some very grand and most important Distinctions and Oppositions in
the State of Things, as derived from the two great Heads of Mankind, proves
nothing but a Multitude of Words without Meaning, or rather an Heap of
Incon^i^^ences.

V. Our Author's own Doctrine ^ntirely makes void what he supposes to be the
Apostle's Argument in the 13th and 14th Verses; in these Words, For until the
Law Sin was in the World: but Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law.
Nevertheless Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression.

What he supposes the Apostle would prove here, is, that Death or the Mortality
of Mankind comes only by Adam's Sin, and not by Men's personal Sins; and that
it is here proved by this Argument, viz. Because there was no Law, threatening
Death to Adam's Posterity for personal Sins, before the Law of Moses; but Death
or Mortality of Adam's Posterity took Place many Ages before the Law was given;
therefore Death could not be by any Law threatening Death for personal Sins, and
consequently could be by Nothing but Adam's Sin. P. 40, 41, 42, 57, and often
elsewhere.
On this I would observe,

1. That which he supposes the Apostle to take for a Truth in this Argument,
viz. That there was no Law of God in Being, by which Men were exposed to Death
for personal Sin, during the Time from Adam to Moses, is neither true, nor
agreeable to this Apostle's own Doctrine.

First, It is not true. For the Law of Nature, writ^^^ in Men's Hearts, was
then in Being, and was a Law by which Men were exposed to Death for personal
Sin. That there was a divine Establishment, fixing the Death and Destruction of
the (...) as the Consequences of personal Sin, which was well known before the
giving of Moses's Law, is plain by many Passages in the Book of Job; as fully
and clearly implying a Connection between such Sin and such a Punishment, as
any Passage in the Law of Moses: such as that in Job xxiv.19. Drought and Heat
consume the Snow-Waters; so does the Grave them that have sinned (compare ver.
20 and 24.) Also Chap. xxxvi. 6. He (...) not the Life of the Wicked. Chap.
xxi. 29, -- 32. Have ye not asked them that go by the Way? and do ye not know
their Tokens? That the Wicked is reserved to the Day of Destruction; They shall
be brought forth to the Day of Wrath. -- ver. 31. He shall be brought to the
Grave. See also Job iv. 7, 8, 9. Chap. xv. 17, -- 35. Chap. xviii. ^, -- 21.
and xix. 2^. and xx. 4, -- 8. and ver. 23, -- 29. Chap. xxi. 16, -- 18, 20, --
26. and xxii. 13, -- 20. xxvii. 11. to the End. xxxi. 2, 3, 23. xxxiii. 18, 22,
23, 24, 28, 30. xxxiv. 11, 21, -- 26. xxxvii. 12, 18, 19, 20. and xx^viii. 13,
14.


Secondly, To suppose that there is no Law in Being, by which Men are exposed
to Death for personal Sins, where or when the revealed Law of God in or after
Moses's Time is not in Being, is contrary to this Apostle's own Doctrine in
this Epistle. Romans ii. 12,14,15. For as many as have sinned without Law (i. e.
the (...) Law) shall perish without Law. But how they (...) be exposed to die
and perish, who have not the Law of Moses, (...) any revealed Law, the Apostle
shows us in the 14th and 15th Verses; viz. In that they have the Law of Nature,
by which they fall under Sentence to this Punishment. For when the Gentiles
which have not the Law, do by Nature the Things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law, are a Law to themselves; which show the Work of the Law
written in their Hearts; their Conscience also ^earing Witness -- Their
Conscience not only bore Witness to the Duty prescribed by this Law, but also
to the Punishment before spoken of, (...) that which they who ^in'd without
Law, were liable to suffer, viz. that they should perish. In which the Apostle
is yet more express, Chap. i. 32. speaking more especially of the Heathen, Wh^
knowing the Judgment of God, that they which commit such Things are worthy of
Death. -- Dr. T. often calls the Law the Rule of Right: and this Rule of Right
sentenced those Sinners to Death, who were not under the Law of Moses,
according to this Author's own ^araphra^e of this Verse, in these Words, The
Heathen were not ignorant of the Rule of Right, which God has implanted in the
human Nature; and which sh^ws that they which commit such Things, are deserving
of Death. And he himself supposes Abraham, who lived between Adam and Moses, to
be under Law, by which he would have been exposed to Punishment without Hope,
were it not for the Promise of Grace, -- in his Paraphrase on Romans iv. 15.

So that in our Author's Way of explaining the Passage before us, the grand
Arg^^^^t, which the Apostle insists upon here, to prove his main Point viz.
that D^^th don't come by Men's personal Sins, but by Adam's Sin, because it
came before the Law was given, that threatened Death for Personal Sin; I say,
this Argument which Dr. T. supposes so clear and strong, P. 393.
is brought to Nothing more than a mere Shadow without Substance; the very
Foundation of the Argument having no Truth. To say, there was no such Law
actually expressed in any standing Revelation, would be mere Trifling: For it
no more appears, that God would not bring temporal Death for personal Sins,
without a standing revealed Law threatening it, than that he would not bring
eternal Death before there was a revealed Law threatening that: which yet wicked
Men that lived in Noah's Time, were exposed to, as appears by 1 Pet. iii. 19,
20. and which Dr. T. supposes all Mankind are exposed to by their personal
Sins; and he himself says, P. 77, 78.
Sin in it is own unalterable Nature leads to Death. -- Yet, it might be argued
with as much Strength of Reason, that God could bring an Men no Punishment at
all for any Sin, that was committed from Adam to Moses, because there was no
standing revealed Law then extant, threatening any Punishment. It may here be
properly observed, that our Author supposes, the shortening of Man's Days, and
hastening-of Death, entered into the World by the Sin of the Antedi^^vians, in
the same Sense as Death and Mortality entered into the World by Adam's Sin. P.
68.
But where was there any standing revealed Law for that, the the Event was so
universal? If God might bring this on all Mankind, on Occasion of other Men's
Sins, for which they deserved Nothing, without a revealed Law, what could there
be to hinder God's bringing Death on Men for their personal Sins, for which
their own Consciences tell 'em they do deserve Death, without a revealed Law?

2. If it had been so, that from Adam to Moses there had been no Law in Being,
of any Kind, revealed or natural by which Men could be properly exposed to
temporal Death for personal Sin, yet the Mention of Moses's Law would have been
wholly, impertinent, and of no Signification in the Argument, according to our
Author's understanding of it. He supposes, what the Apostle would prove, is,
that temporal Death, or the Death we now die, comes by Adam; and not by any Law
threatening such a Punishment for personal Sin; because this Death prevailed
before the Law of Moses was in Being, which is the only Law threatening Death
for personal Sin. And yet he himself supposes, that the Law of Moses, when it
was in Being, threatened no such Death for personal Sin. For he abundantly
asserts, that the Death which the Law of Moses threatened for personal Sin, was
eternal Death, as has been already noted: And he says in express Terms, that
eternal Death is of a Nature widely different from the Death we now die; P.
396. He says to the like Purpose in his Note on Romans v. 17.
as was also observed before.

How impertinently therefore does Dr. T. make an inspired Writer argue, when
according to him the Apostle would prove, that this Kind of Death did not come
by any Law threatening this Kind of Death, because it came before the Existence
of a Law threatening another Kind of Death, of a Nature widely different? How is
it to the Apostle's Purpose, to fix on that Period, the Time of giving Moses's
Law, as if that had been the Period wherein Men began to be threatened with
this Punishment, for their personal Sins, when in Truth it was no such Thing?
And therefore it was no more to his Purpose, to fix on that Period, from Adam
to Moses, than from Adam to David, or any other Period whatsoever. Dr. T.
holds, that even now, since the Law of Moses has been given, the Mortality of
Mankind, or the Death we now die, don't come by that Law; but that it always
comes only by Adam. This is plain by what he says, P. 38, 40, 53, 393.
And if it never comes by that Law, we may be sure it never was threatened in
that Law.

3. If we should allow the Argument in Dr. T -- r's Sense of it, to prove that
Death don't come by personal Sin, yet it will be wholly without Force to prove
the main Point, even that it must come by Adam's Sin. For it might come by
God's sovereign and gracious Pleasure; as innumerable other divine Benefits do.
If it be ordered, agreeable to our Author's Supposition, not as a Punishment,
nor as a Calamity, but only a Favor, what Necessity of any settled
Constitution, or revealed Sentence, in order to the bestowing such a Favor,
more than other Favors; and particularly more than that great Benefit, which
he says entered into the World by the Sin of the Antediluvians, the shortening
Men's Lives so much after the Flood? -- Thus the Apostle's arguing, by Dr. T --
r's Explanation of it, is turned into mere Trifling, and a vain and impertinent
Use of Words, without any real Force or Significance.

VI. The Apostle here speaks of that great Benefit, which we have by Christ as
the A^^itype of Adam, under the Notion of a Fruit of GRACE. I don't (...) that
Super-abounding of Grace, wherein the Benefit we have by Christ goes beyond the
Damage (...) by Adam; but that Benefit, with Regard to which Adam was the
Figure of him that was to come, and which is as it were the Counterpart of the
Suffering by Adam, and which repairs the Loss we have by him. This is here
spoken of (...) the Fruit of the free Grace of God; as appears by v. 1^, 16,
17, 18, 20, 21. This, according to our (...) the Restoring of Mankind to that
Life which they loss in Adam: and he himself supposes this Restoration of Life
by Christ to be what Grace does for us, and calls it the Free Gift of God, and
the Grace and Favor of the Lawgiver. P. 39, 40, 70, 148, 393. See also
Contents of this Paragraph in Romans v. In his Notes on the Epistle, and his Note
on ver. 15, 16, 17.
And speaking of this Restoration, he breaks out in Admiration of the
unspeakable Ric^^s of this (...)* P. 395.


But it follows from his Doctrine, that there is NO Grace at all in this
Benefit, and it is no more (...) a (...) Act of Justice, being only a removing
of what Mankind suffer, being innocent. Death, as it commonly comes on Mankind,
and even on Infants (as has been observed) in an extreme positive Calamity; to
bring which on the (...) innocent, unremedied, and without any thing to (...)
it, we are sufficiently taught, is not (...) with the Righteousness of the
Judge of all the Earth. What Grace therefore, worthy of being so celebrated,
would there be in affording Remedy and Relief, after there had been brought on
innocent Mankind that which is (as Dr. T. himself represents 69.
) the dreadful and universal D^struction of their Nature; being a striking
Demonstration how infinitely odious Sin is to God! What Grace in delivering,
from such shocking Ruin, them that did not deserve the least Calamity! Our
Author says, We could not justly lose Communion with God by Adam's Sin. P. 148.
If so, then we could not justly lose our Lives, and be an^^hil^t^d, after a
Course of extreme Pains and Agonies of Body and Mind, without any Restoration;
which would be on eternal Loss of Communion with God, and all other Good,
besides the positive Suffering. The Apostle, thro^^^ this Passage, represents
the Death, which is the Conseque^c^ of Adam's Transgression, as coming in a Way
of Judgment and Condemnation for Sin: but Deliverance and Life through Christ,
as by Grace, and the free Gift of God. Whereas, on the contrary, by Dr. T --
r's Scheme, the Death that comes by Adam, comes by Grace, great Grace; is being
a great Benefit, ordered in fatherly Love and Kindness, and on the foot of a
Covenant of Grace! But in the Deliverance and Restoration by Christ, there is
no Grace at all. So things are turned topsy-turvy, the Apostle's Scope and
Scheme entirely inverted and confounded.

VII. Dr. T. explains the Words, Judgment, Condem^^^ion, Justification, and
Righteousness, as used in this (...) in a very unreasonable Manner.

I will first consider the Sense he puts upon the two for^^r, Judgment and
Condemnation. He often calls this Condemnation a judicial Act, and a Sentence
of Condem^^tion* But, according to his Scheme, it is a judicial (...) of
Condemnation passed upon them that are perfectly innocent, and viewed by the
Judge, even in his passing the Sentence and condemning them, as having no Guilt
of Sin, or Fault at all chargeable upon them; and a judicial Proceeding,
passing Sentence arbitrarily, without any Law or Rule of Right, before
established: For there was no pre^^^ding Law or Rule threatening Death, that he,
or any one else, ever pretended to have been established, but only this, In the
Day that thou ^atest thereof, thou shall surely die. And concerning this, be
insists, that there is not a Word said in it of Adam's Posterity. So that the
Condemnation spoken of, it a Sentence of Condemnation to Death, for, or in
Consequence of the Sin of Adam, without any Law, by which that Sin could be
imputed, to bring any such Consequence; contrary to the Apostle's plain Scope.
And not only so, but over and above all this, it is a judicial Sentence of
Condemnation to that which is no Calamity, nor is considered as such in the
Sentence: but it is Condemnation to a great Favor!

The Apostle uses the Words, Judgment and Condemnation, in other Places; they
are no strange and unusual Terms with him: But never are they used by him in
this Sense, or any like it; Nor are they ever used thus any where else in the
New Testament. This Apostle elsewhere in this Epistle to the Roman's is often
speaking of Condemnation; using the same or similar Terms and Phrases, as here;
but never in the above said Sense. Chap. ii. 1, 2, 3. Six Times in these
Verses; also v. 12 and 27. and Chap. iii. 7. Chap. viii. 1 and 3. Chap. xiv. 3,
4. and v. 10. v. 13. v. 22, and 23. This will be plain to every one that casts
his Eye on these Places. And if we look into the former Part of this Chapter,
the Apostle's Discourse here (...) it evident, that he is here speaking of a
Condemnation, that is no Testimony of Favor to the innocent; but of God's
Displeasure, toward those that he is not reconciled to, but looks on as
Offenders, Sinners, and Enemies, and (...) as the Objects of his Wrath, which
we are delivered from by Christ; as may be seen in Verses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11.

And viewing this Discourse it self, in the very Paragraph we are upon, if we
may judge any thing by Language and manner of Speaking, there is every thing to
lead us to suppose, that the Apostle uses these Words here, as he does
elsewhere, properly, and as implying a Supposition of Sin, chargeable on the
Subject, and exposing to Punishment. He speaks of Condemnation with reference
to Sin, as what comes by Sin, and as a Condemnation to Death, which seems to be
a most terrible Evil, and capital Punishment, even in what is temporal and
visible; and this in the Way of Judgment and Execution of Justice, in
Opposition to Grace or Favor, and Gift or a Benefit coming by Favor. And Sin
and Offense, Transgression and Disobedience are, over and over again, spoken of
as the Ground of the Condemnation and of the capital Suffering condemned to, --
for ten Verses successively, that is, in every Verse in the whole Paragraph,
without missing one.

The Words, Justification and Righteousness, are explained by Dr. T. in a no
less unreasonable Manner. He understands Justification in v. 18th, and
Righteousness in v. 19th, -- in such a Sense, as to suppose 'em to belong to
all, and actually to be applied to all Mankind, good and bad, Believers and
Unbelievers; to the worst Enemies of God, remaining such, as well as his
peculiar Favorites, and many that never had any Sin imputed to 'em; meaning
thereby no more than what is fulfilled in an universal Resurrection from the
Dead, at the last Day. So P. 47. 49, 49, 60, 61, 62, and other Places.
Now this is a most arbitrary, forced Sense. The these Terms are used every
where, all over the New Testament, yet nothing like such an Use of 'em is to be
found, in any one Instance, through all the Writings of the Apostles and
Evangelists. The Words, Justify, Justification, and Righteousness, as from God
to Men, are never used but to signify a Privilege belonging only to some, and
that which is peculiar to distinguished Favorites. This Apostle in particular,
above all the other Writers of the new Testament, abounds in the Use of these
Terms; so that we have all imaginable Opportunity to understand his Language,
and know the Sense in which he uses these Words: But he never elsewhere uses
'em in the Sense supposed here, nor is there any Pretense that he does. Above
all, does this Apostle (...) in the Use of these Terms in this Epistle.
JUSTIFICATION is the Subject he had been upon through all the pr^c^^ding Part
of the Epistle. It was the grand Subject of all the foregoing Chapters, and the
preceding Part of this Chapter; where these Terms are continually repeated.
And the Word, Justification, is constantly used to signify something peculiar
to Believers, who had been Sinners; implying some Reconciliation and
Forgiveness of Sin, and special Privilege in Nearness to God, above the rest of
the World. Yea, the Word is constantly used thus, according to Dr. T -- r's own
Explanations, in his Paraphrase and Notes on this Epistle. And there is not the
least Reason to suppose but that he is still speaking of the same Justification
and Righteousness, which he had dwelt upon from the Beginning, to this Place.
He speaks of Justification and Righteousness here, just in the same Manner, as
he had done in the preceding Part of the Epistle. He had all along spoken of
Justification as standing in Relation to Sin, Disobedience to God, and Offense
against God, and so he does here: He had before been speaking of Justification
through free Grace, and so he does here: He before had been speaking of
Justification through Righteousness, as in Christ Jesus, and so he does here.

And if we look into the former Part of this very Chapter, there we shall find
Justification spoken of just in the same Sense as in the rest of the Epistle;
which is also supposed by our Author in his Exposition: It Is still
Justification by Faith, Justification of them that had been Sinners,
Justification attended with Reconciliation, Justification peculiar to them that
had the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts. The Apostle's foregoing
Discourse on Justification by Grace, through Faith, and what he had so greatly
insisted on as the Evidence of the Truth of this Doctrine, even the universal
Sinfulness of Mankind in their original State, is plainly what introduces this
Discourse in the latter Part of this 5th Chapter; where he shows how all
Mankind came to be sinful and miserable, and so to need this Grace of God, and
Righteousness of Christ. And therefore we cannot without the most absurd
Violence, suppose any other than that he is still speak in; of the same
Justification.

And as to the universal Expression used in the 18th v. By the Righteousness of
one, the free Gift came upon ALL MEN to Justification of Life; it is needless
here to go into the Controversy between the Remonstrants and Anti-remonstrants,
concerning universal Redemption, and their different Interpretations of this
Place. If we take the Words even as the Arminians do; yet, in their Sense of
them, the free Gift comes on all Men to Justification only Conditionally, i. e.
provided they believe, repent, etc. But in our Author's Sense, it actually
comes on all, whether they believe and repent, or not; which certainly cannot be
inferred from the universal Expression, as here used. Dr. T. himself supposes,
the main Design of the Apostle in this universal Phrase, All Men, is to
signify, that the Benefits of Christ shall come on Gentiles, as well as Jews.
P. 60, 61. See also Contents of this Paragraph, in his Notes on the Epistle.
And he supposes, that the Many, and the All, here signify the same: But it is
quite certain, that all the Benefits here spoken of, which the Apostle says are
to the many, don't actually come upon all Mankind; as particularly the
abounding of Grace, spoken of v. 18th. The Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace,
has abounded unto the many, (...).

This abounding of Grace our Author explains thus; The rich Overplus of Grace,
in erecting a new Dispensation, furnished with a glorious Fund of Light, Means
and Motives. But will any pretend, that all Mankind have actually been
Partakers of this new Fund of Light,etc? How were the many Millions of Indians,
on the American Side of the Globe, Partakers of it, before the Europeans came
hither? Yea, Dr. T. himself supposes, all that is meant, is, that it is free
for all that are willing to accept of it. Id. Ibid.
The Agreement between Adam as the Type or Figure of him that was to come, and
Christ as the Antitype, appears as full and clear, if we suppose, ALL which are
IN CHRIST (to use the common ScripturePhrase) have the Benefit of his
Obedience, as ALL that are IN ADAM have the sorrowful Fruit of his
Disobedience. The Scripture speaks of Believers as the Seed or Posterity of
Christ. ( Gal. iii. 29.) They are in Christ by Grace, as Adam's Posterity are
in him by Nature: The one are in the first Adam naturally, as the other are in
the second Adam spiritually: exactly agreeable to the Representation this
Apostle makes of the Matter, 1 Cor. xv.45, -- 49. The spiritual Seed are those
which this Apostle often represents as Christ's Body: And the (...) here spoken
of as made righteous by Christ's Obedience, are doubtless the same with the
(...) which he speaks of in Chap. xii. 5. We, being many, are one Body; or, We,
the many, (...). And again, 1 Cor. x. 17. (...). And the same which the Apostle
had spoken of in the preceding Chapter, Romans iv. 18. compared with Genesis xv. 5.

Dr. T. much insists on that Place, 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22. For since by Man came
Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead: For as in Adam all die,
so in Christ shall all be made alive; to confirm his Suppositions, that the
Apostle here in the 5th of Romans, speaking of the Death and Condemnation which
come by Adam, has respect only to the Death we all die, when this Life ends:
And that by the Justification and Life which come by Christ, he has respect
only to the general Resurrection at the last Day. But it is observable, that
his Argument is wholly built on these two Suppositions, viz. First, that the
Resurrection meant by the Apostle, in that Place in the 1 Cor. xv. is the
Resurrection of all Mankind, both just and unjust. Secondly, That the Opposite
Consequences of Adam's Sin, and Christ's Obedience, spoken of here in Romans 5th,
are the very same, neither more nor less, as are spoken of there. But there are
no Grounds for supposing either of these things to be true.

1. There is no Evidence, that the Resurrection there spoken of, is the
Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust; but abundant Evidence of the
contrary. The Resurrection of the Wicked is seldom mentioned in the New
Testament, and rarely included in the Meaning of the Word; it being esteemed
not worthy to be called a Rising to Life, being only for a great Increase of
the Misery and Darkness of eternal Death: And therefore by the Resurrection is
most commonly meant a Rising to Life and Happiness; as may be observed in
Matthew. xxii. 30. Luke xx. 35, 36. Joh. vi. 39, 40, 54. Philip. iii. 11. and
other Places. The Saints are called the Children of the Resurrection, as Dr. T.
observes in his Note on Romans viii. 11. And it is exceeding evident, that it is
the Resurrection to Life and Happiness, the Apostle is speaking of in this 1
Cor. xv. 2^, 22. It appears by each of the three foregoing Verses. v. 18. Then
they which are fallen asleep IN CHRIST ( i. e. the Saints) are perished. v 19.
If in this Life only WE (Christians or Apostles) have Hope in Christ, (and have
no Resurrection and eternal Life to hope for) we are of all Men most miserable.
-- v.20. But now is Christ risen from the Dead, and is become the FIRST FRUITS
of them that slept. He is the Forerunner and first Fruits only with respect to
them that are his; who are to follow him, and partake with him in the Glory and
Happiness of his Resurrection: but He is not the first Fruits of them who shall
come forth to the Resurrection of Damnation. It also appears by the Verse
immediately following. v. 23. But every Man in his own Order; Christ the first
Fruits, and afterward, they that are Christ's, at his Coming. The same is
plain by what is said in v. 29, 30, 31, and 32; and by all that is said from
the 35th v. to the End of the Chapter, for twenty three Verses together: It
there expressly appears, that the Apostle is speaking only of a Rising to Glory,
with a glorious Body, as the little Grain that is sown, being quickened, rises
a beautiful flourishing Plant. He there speaks of the different Degrees of
Glory among them that shall r^se, and compares it to the different Degrees of
Glory among the celestial Luminaries. The Resurrection which he treats of, is
expressly a being raised in Incorruption, in Glory, in Power, with a spiritual
Body, having the Image of the second Man, the spiritual and heavenly Adam; a
Resurrection, wherein this corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and this
Mortal put on Immortality, and Death be swallowed up in Victory, and the Saints
shall gloriously triumph over that last Enemy. Dr. T. himself says that which
is in Effect owning, the Resurrection here spoken of, is only of the Righteous:
for it is expressly a Resurrection (...) and (...) v. 53, and 42. But Dr. T.
says* These are never attributed to the Wicked, in Scripture. Note on Romans
viii. 28.
So that when the Apostle says here, As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all
be made alive; it is as much as if he had said, As in Adam we all die, and our
Bodies are sown in Corruption, in Dishonor, and in Weakness; so in Christ we
all (we Christians, whom I have been all along speaking of) shall be raised in
Power, Glory and Incorruption, spiritual and heavenly, conformed to the second
Adam. For as we have born the Image of the earthy, we shall also bear the Image
of the heavenly.v.49. Which clearly explains and determines his Meaning in v.
21, 22.

2. There is no Evidence, that the Benefit by the second Adam, spoken of in
Romans 5th, is the very same (containing neither more nor less) as the
Resurrection spoken of in 1 Cor. xv. It is no Evidence of it, that the Benefit
is opposed to the Death that comes by the first Adam, in like Manner in both
Places. The Resurrection to eternal Life, the it be not the whole of that
Salvation and Happiness which comes by the second Adam, yet is it that wherein
this Salvation is principally obtained. The Time of the Saints glorious
Resurrection is often spoken of as the proper Time of the Saints Salvation, The
Day of their Redemption, The Time of their Adoption, Glory and Recompense. (As,
in Ephesians. iv. 30. Romans viii. 23. Luke xiv. 14. and xxi. 28. 2 Timothy iv. 1, 9.
Colos. iii. 4. 1 These. i. 7. Heb. ix. 23. 1 Pet. i. 13. and v. 4. 1 John iii.
2. and other Places.) All that Salvation and Happiness which is given before,
is only a Prelibation and Earnest of their great Reward. Well therefore may
that consummate Salvation bestowed on them be set in Opposition to the Death
and Ruin which comes by the first Adam, in like Manner as the whole of their
Salvation is opposed to the same in Romans v. -- Dr. T. himself observes Note on
Romans viii. 11.
, That the Revival and Resurrection of the Body, is frequently put for our
Advancement to eternal Life. It being the highest Part, it is often put for the
Whole.

This Notion, as if the Justification, Righteousness and Life spoken of in Romans
5th, implied the Resurrection to (...), is not only without Ground from
Scripture, but contrary to Reason. For those Things are there spoken of as
great Benefits, by the Grace and free Gift of God: but this is the contrary, in
the highest Degree possible, being the most consummate and infinite Calamity.
-- To obviate this, our Author supposes the Resurrection of all to be a great
Benefit in it self, tho turned into a Calamity by the Sin and Folly of
obstinate Sinners, who abuse God's Goodness. But the far greater Part of
Mankind since Adam have never had Opportunity to abu^e this Goodness, it having
never been made known to them. Men cannot abuse a Kindness, which they never had
either in Possession, Promise, Offer, or some Intimation: But a Resurrection is
made known only by divine Revelation; which few comparatively have enjoyed. So
that as to such wicked Men as die in Lands of Darkness, if their Resurrection
comes at all by Christ, it comes, from him and to them, only as a Curse, and
not as a Blessing; for it never comes to them at all by any Conveyance, Grant,
Promise, or Offer, or any thing by which they can claim it, or know any thing
of it, till it comes as an infinite Calamity, past all Remedy.

VIII. In a peculiar Manner is there an unreasonable Violence used in our
Author's Explanation of the Words Sinners and sinned, in the Paragraph before
us. He says, These Words, By one Man's Disobedience, many were made Sinners,
mean neither more nor less, than that by one Man's Disobedience the Many were
made subject to Death, by the judicial Act of God. P. 30.
And he says in the same Place, By Death, most certainly, is meant no other
than the Death and Mortality common to all Mankind. And those Words, v. 12. For
that all have sinned, he thus explains, All Men became Sinners, as all Mankind
are brought into a State of Suffering. P. 54. and elsewhere.
Here I observe,

1. The main Thing, by which he justifies such Interpretations, is, that Sin,
in various Instances, is used for Suffering, in the old Testament. To which I
reply* Though it be true, that the Word Chattaah, signifies both Sin, and a
Sin-offering; and this, and some other Hebrew Words, which signify Sin,
Iniquity, and Wickedness, are sometimes put for the Effect or Punishment of
Iniquity, by a M^tonymy of the Cause for the Effect; yet it does not appear,
that these Words are ever used for enduring Suffering, where the Suffering is
not spoken of under any Notion of a Punishment of Sin, or a Fruit of God's
Anger for Sin, or of any Imputation of Guilt, or under any Notion of Sin's
being at all laid to the Charge of the Sufferer, or the Suffering's being at
all of the Nature of any Recompense, Compensation or Satisfaction for Sin. And
therefore none of the Instances he mentions, come up to his Purpose. When Let
is commanded to leave Sodom, that he might not be consumed in the Iniquity of
the City, meaning, in that Fire, which is the Effect and Punishment of the
Iniquity of the City; this is quite another Thing, than if that Fire came on
the City in general as no Punishment at all, nor as any Fruit of a Charge of
Iniquity on the City, or of God's Displeasure for their Sin, but as a Token of
God's Favor to the Inhabitants; Which is what is supposed with respect to the
Death of Mankind; it being introduced only as a Benefit, on the Foot of a
Covenant of Grace. And especially is this quite another Thing, than if, in the
Expression used, the Iniquity had been ascribed to Lot; and God, instead of
saying, Lest thou be consumed in the Iniquity of the City, had said, Lest thou
be consumed in thine Iniquity, or, Lest thou Sin, or be made a Sinner. Whereas,
the Expression is such as does expr^^ly remove the Iniquity, spoken of, from
Lot, and fix it on another Subject, viz. the City. The Place cited by our
Author, in Jer. li. -- is exactly Parallel. And as to what Abimeleck says to
Abraham, What have I offended thee, that thou have brought on me, and on my
Kingdom, a great Sin? It Is manifest, Abimeleck was afraid, that God was angry,
for what he had done to Sarah or; would have been angry with him, if he had
done what he was about to do, as imputing Sin to him for it: which is a quite
different Thing from calling some Calamity, Sin, under no Notion of it is being
any Punishment of Sin, nor in the least Degree from God's Displeasure. And so
with regard to every Place our Author cites in the Margin, it is plain, that
what is meant in each of them, is the Punishment of Sin, and not some Suffering
which is no Punishment at all. And as to the Instances he mentions in his
Supplement, P. 184. the Two that look most favorable to his Design, are those
in Genesis xxxi. 39. and 2 Kin. vii. 9. -- With respect to the former, where Jacob
says, That which was torn of Beasts, A^ochi a^hattenah -- Which Dr. T. is
pleased to translate, I was the Sinner: but is properly rendered, I expiated
it; the Verb in Pihel properly signifying to expiate. And the plain Meaning is
I bore the Blame of it, and was obliged to pay for it, as being supposed to be
lost through my Fault or Neglect. Which is a quite different Thing from Suffering
without any Supposition of Fault. And as to the latter Place, where the Lepers
say, This Day is a Day of good Tidings, and we hold our Peace: If we tarry till
Morning some Mischief will befall us. In the Hebrew, Umetzaanu gnaon; --
Iniquity will find us, that is, Some Punishment of our Fault will come upon us.
Elsewhere such Phrases are used, as, Your Iniquity will find you out, and the
like. But certainly this is a different Thing from suffering without Fault, or
Supposition of Fault. And it does not appear, that the Verb in Hiphil,
Hirshiang, is ever put for condemn in any other Sense than condemning for Sin,
or Guilt, or supposed Guilt, belonging to the Subject condemned. This Word is
used, in the Participle of Hiphil, to signify condemning, in Prove. xvii. 15. He
that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even both are an
Abomination to the Lord. This Dr. T. observes, as if it were to his Purpose,
when he is endeavoring to show, that in this Place in the 5th of Romans, the
Apostle speaks of God Himself as condemning the just, or perfectly innocent, in
a Parallel-Signification of Terms. Nor is any Instance produced, wherein the
Verb, Sin, which is used by the Apostle when he says, All have sinned, is any
where used in our Author's Sense, for being brought into a State of Suffering,
and that not as a Punishment for Sin, or as any Thing arising from God's
Displeasure; much less for being the Subject of what comes only as the Fruit of
divine Love, and as a Favor of the HIGHEST NATURE. P. 303.
Nor can any thing like this Sense of the Verb be found in the whole Bible.

2. If there had been any thing like such an Use of the Words, Sin and Sinner,
as our Author supposes, in the old Testament, it is evident that such as Use of
them is quite aliene from the Language of the New Testament. Where can an
Instance be produced, of any thing like it, in any one Place, besides what is
pretended in this? And particularly, Where else shall we find these Words and
Phrases used in such a Sense, in any of this Apostle's Writings? We have enough
of his Writings, by which to learn his Language and Way of speaking about Sin,
Condemnation, Punishment, Death and Suffering. He wrote much more of the New
Testament, than any other Person. He very often has Occasion to speak of
Condemnation; but where does he express it by being made Sinners? Especially
how far is he elsewhere from using such a Phrase, to signify a being condemned
without Guilt, or any Imputation or Supposition of Guilt, or Atonement for
Guilt? Vastly more still is it remote from his Language, so to use the Verb
Sin, and to say, Man sins, or has sinned, though hereby meaning Nothing more
nor less, than that he, by a judicial Act, is condemned, on the Foot of a
Dispensation of Grace, to receive a great Favor! He abundantly uses the Words,
Sin and Sinner; his Writings are full of such Terms: but where else does he use
them in such a Sense? He has much Occasion in his Epistles to speak of Death,
temporal and eternal; He has much Occasion to speak of Suffering, of all Kinds,
in this World, and the World to come: But where does he call those things Sin?
and denominate innocent Men Sinners? or say, They have sinned, meaning that
they are brought into a State of Suffering? If the Apostle, because he was a
Jew, (...) ^o addic^ed to the Hebrew Idiom, as thus is one Paragraph to repeat
this particular Hebraism, which, at most, it comparatively rare even in the old
Testament, it is strange that never any thing like it should appear any where
else in his Writings; and especially that he should never fa^l into such a Way
of speaking in his Epistle to the Hebrews, written to Jews only, who were most
used to the Hebrew Idiom. And why does Christ never use such Language in any of
his Speeches, though he was born and brought up amongst the Jews, and delivered
almost all his Speeches only to Jews? -- And why do none of the rest of the
Writers of the New Testament ever use it, who were all born and educated Jews
(at least all excepting Luke) and some of them wrote especially for the Benefit
of the Jews?

It Is worthy to be observed, what Liberty is taken, and Boldness used with this
Apostle; such Words as (...) and Words of the same Root and Signification, are
Words abundantly used by him elsewhere in this and other Epistles, and also
when speaking, as he is here, of Christ's Redemption and Atonement, and of the
general Sinfulness of Mankind, and of the Condemnation of Sinners, and of
Justification by Christ, and of Death as the Consequence of Sin, and of Life
and Restoration to Life by Christ, as here; yet no where are any of these Words
used, but in a Sense very remote from what is supposed here. However, in this
Place these Terms must have a distinguished singular Sense found out for them,
and annexed to 'em! A new Language must be coined for the Apostle, which he is
evidently quite unused to, and put into his Mouth on this Occasion, for the
sake of evading this clear, precise and abundant Testimony of his, to the
Doctrine of original Sin.

3. The putting such a Sense on the Word, Sin, in this Place, is not only to
make the Apostle greatly to disagree with himself in the Language he uses every
where else, but also to disagree with himself no less in the Language he uses
in this very Passage. He often here used the Word Sin, and other Words plainly
of the same Design and Import, such as Transgression, Disobedience, Offense.
Nothing can be more evident, than that these are here used as several Names of
the same Thing; for they are used in^e^cha^ge^bly, and put one for another; as
will be manifest only on the Cast of an Eye on the Place. And these Words are
used no less than seventeen Times in this one Paragraph. Perhaps we shall find
no Place in the whole Bible, in which the Word, Sin, and other Words
synonymous, are used so often in so little Compass: and in all the Instances,
in the proper Sense, as signifying moral Evil, and even so understood by Dr. T.
himself (as appears by his own Exposition) but only in these two Places; where
in the Midst of all, to evade a clear Evidence of the Doctrine of Original Sin,
another Meaning must be found out, and it must be supposed that the Apostle
uses the Word in a Sense ^^^irely different, signifying something that neither
implies nor supposes any moral Evil at all in the Subject.

Here it is very remarkable, the Gentleman who so greatly insisted upon it, that
the Word, Death, must needs be understood in the same Sense throughout this
Paragraph; yea, that it is evidently, clearly and infallibly so, in as much as
the Apostle is still discoursing on the same Subject; yet can, without the
least Difficulty, suppose the Word, Sin, to be used so differently in the very
same Passage, wherein the Apostle is discoursing on the same Thing. Let us take
that one Instance in v. 12. Wherefore as by one Man SIN entered into the World,
and Death by SIN, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have SINNED.
Here, by Sin, implied in the Word, sinned, in the End of the Sentence, our
Author understands something perfectly and altogether diverse from what is
meant by the Word Sin, not only in the same Discourse, on the same Subject, but
twice in the former Part of the very same Sentence, of which this latter Part
is not only the Conclusion, but the Explication: And also entirely different
from the the Use of the Word twice in the next Sentence, wherein the Apostle is
still most plainly discoursing on the same Subject, as is not denied: And in
the next Sentence to that (v. 14.) the Apostle uses the very same Verb, sinned,
and as signifying the committing of moral Evil, as our Author himself
understands it. Afterward (v. 19.) the Apostle uses the Word, Sinners, which
our Author supposes to be in somewhat of a different Sense still. So that here
is the utmost Violence, of the Kind, that can be conceived of, to make out a
Scheme, against the plainest Evidence, in changing the Meaning of a Word,
backward and forward, in one Paragraph, all about one Thing, and in different
Parts of the same Sentences, coming over and over in quick-Repetitions, with a
Variety of other synonymous Words to fix it is Signification; Besides the
continued Use of the Word in the former Part of this Chapter, and in all the
preceding Part of this Epistle, and the continued Use of it in the next
Chapter, and in the next to that, and the 8th Chapter following that, and to
the End of the Epistle; in none of which Places is it pretended, but that the
Word is used in the proper Sense, by our Author in his Paraphrase and Notes on
the whole Epistle. Ag^eable to this Manner, our Author in explaining the 7th
Chap. of Romans, understands the Pronoun, I, or Me, used by the Apostle in that
one continued Discourse, in no less than Six different Senses. He takes it in
the 1st ver. to signify the Apostle Paul himself. In the and 9, 10, and 11th
Verses, for the People of the Jews, through all Ages, both before and after
Moses, especially the carnal ungodly Part of 'em. In the 13th ver. for an
objecting Jew, entering into a Dialogue with the Apostle. In the 15, 16, 17,
20th, and latter Part of the 25th ver. it is understood in two different
Senses, for two I's in the same Person; one, a Man's Reason; and the other, his
Passions and carnal Appetites. And in the 7th and former Part of the last
Verse, for Us Christians in general; or, for all that enjoy the Word of God,
the Law and the Gospel. And these different Senses, the most of 'em, strangely
intermixed and interchanged, backwards and forwards.


But indeed we need go no further than that one v. 12. What the Apostle means
by Sin, in the latter Part of the Verse, is evident with the utmost Plainness,
by comparing it with the former Part; one Part answering to another, and the
last Clause exegetical of the former. Wherefore, as by one Man Sin entered into
the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that (or,
unto which) all have sinned. Here Sin and Death are spoken of in the former
Part, and Sin and Death are spoken of in the latter Part; the two Parts of the
Sentence so answering one another, that the same Things are apparently meant by
Sin and Death in both Parts.

And besides to interpret sinning, here, of falling under the Suffering of
Death, is yet the more violent and unreasonable, because the Apostle in this
very Place does once and again distinguish between Sin and Death; plainly
speaking of one as the Effect, and the other the Cause. So in the 21st v. That
as Sin has reigned unto Death; and in the 12th v. Sin entered into the World,
and Death BY Sin. And this plain Distinction holds through all the Discourse, as
between Death and the Offense, v. 15. and v. 17. and between the Offense and
Condemnation,v. 18.

4. Tho we should omit the Consideration of the Manner in which the Apostle
uses the Words, Sin, sinned, etc. in other Places, and in other Parts of this
Discourse, yet Dr. T -- r's Interpretation of 'em would be very absurd.

The Case stands thus: -- According to his Exposition, we are said to have
sinned, by an active Verb, as though we had actively sinned; yet this is not
spoken truly and properly, but it is put figuratively for our becoming Sinners
passively, our being made or constituted Sinners. Yet again, not that we do
truly become Sinners passively, or are really made Sinners, by any thing that
God does; this also is only a figurative or tropical Representation: And the
Meaning is only, we are condemned, and treated AS IF we were Sinners. Not
indeed that we are properly condemned; for God never truly condemns the
Innocent: But this also is only a figurative Representation of the Thing. It is
but as it were condemning; because it is appointing to Death, a terrible Evil,
as if it were ^ Punishment. But then, in Reality, here is no Appointment to a
terrible Evil, or any Evil at all; but truly to a Benefit, a great Benefit: And
so, in representing Death as a Punishment, or Calamity condemned to, another
Figure or Trope is made use of, and an exceeding bold one; for, as we are
appointed to it, it is so far from being an Evil or Punishment, that it is
really a Favor, and that of the highest Nature, appointed by mere Grace and
Love; though it seems to be a Calamity. -- Thus we have Tropes and Figures
multiplied, one upon the back of another; and all in that one Word, sinned;
according to the Manner, as it is supposed, the Apostle uses it. We have a
^^gurative Representation, not of a Reality, but of a figurative
Representation. Neither is this a Representation of a Reality, but of another
Thing that still is but a figurative Representation of something else: Yea,
even this something else is still but a Figure, and one that is very harsh and
far-fetched. So that here we have a Figure to represent a Figure, even a Figure
of a Figure representing some very remote Figure, which most obscurely
represents the Thing intended; if the most terrible Evil can indeed be said at
all to represent the contrary Good, of the highest Kind. -- And now, what
cannot be made of any Place of Scripture, in such a Way of managing it, as
this? And is there any Hope of ever deciding any Controversy by the Scripture,
in the Way of using such a License with the Scripture, in order to force it to
a Compliance with our own Schemes? If the Apostle indeed uses Language after so
strange a Manner in this Place, it is perhaps such an Instance, as not only
there is not the like of it in all the Bible besides, but perhaps in no Writing
whatsoever. -- And this, not in any parabolical, vi^ionary, or prophetic
Description, in which difficult and obscure Representations are wont to be made
Use of; nor in ^ dramatic or poetical Representation, in which a great License
is often taken, and bold Figures are commonly to be expected: But it is in a
familiar Letter, wherein the Apostle is delivering Gospel-Instruction, as a
Minister of the New Testament; and wherein, as he professes, he delivers divine
Truth without the Vail of ancient Figures and Similitudes, and uses great
Plainness of Speech. And in a Discourse that is wholly didactic, narrative and
arg^mentative; evidently setting himself to explain the Doctrine he is upon, in
the Reason and Nature of it, with a great Variety of Expressions, turning it as
it were on every Side, to make his Meaning plain, and to fix in his Readers the
exact Notion of what he intends. -- Dr. T. himself observes, Pr^f. to Paraph.
on Romans
This Apostle takes great Care to guard and explain every Part of his Subject:
and I may venture to say, he has left no Part of it unexplained, or unguarded.
Never was an Author more exact and cautious in this, than be. Sometimes he
writes Notes, on a Sentence liable to Exception, and wanting Explanation. --
Now I think, this Care and Exactness of the Apostle no where appears more than
in the Place we are upon. Nay, I scarcely know another Instance equal to this,
of the Apostle's Care to be well understood, by being very particular, explicit
and precise, setting the Matter forth in every Light, going over and over again
with his Doctrine, clearly to exhibit, and fully to settle and determine the
Thing which he aims at.

SECT. II.
Some Observations on the Connection, Scope and Sense of this remarkable
Paragraph in Romans v. -- With some Reflections on the Evidence, which we here
have of the Doctrine of Original Sin.
THE Connection of this remarkable Paragraph with the foregoing Discourse in
this Epistle, is not obscure and difficult; nor to be sought for at a Distance.
It may be plainly seen, only by a general Glance on Things which went before,
from the Beginning of the Epistle: And indeed what is said immediately before
in the same Chapter, leads directly to it. The Apostle in the preceding Part
of this Epistle had largely treated of the Sinfulness and Misery of all
Mankind, Jews, as well as Gentiles. He had particularly spoken of the Depravity
and Ruin of Mankind in their natural State, in the foregoing Part of this
Chapter; representing them as being Sinners, Ungodly, Enemies, exposed to
divine Wrath, and without Strength. -- No Wonder now, this leads him to
observe, how this so great and deplorable an Event came to pass; how this
universal Sin and Ruin came into the World. And with Regard to the Jews in
particular, who, tho they might allow the Doctrine of original Sin in their own
Profession, yet were strongly prejudiced against what was implied in it, or
evidently following from it, with regard to themselves; in this respect they
were prejudiced against the Doctrine of universal Sinfulness, and Exposedness
to Wrath by Nature, looking on themselves as by Nature holy and Favorites of
God, because they were the Children of Abraham; and with them the Apostle had
labored most in the foregoing Part of the Epistle, to convince them of their
being by Nature as sinful, and as much the Children of Wrath, as the Gentiles:
-- I say, with Regard to them, it was exceeding proper, and what the Apostle's
Design most naturally led him to, to take off their Eyes from their Father
Abraham, who was their Father in Distinction from other Nations. and direct
them to their Father Adam, who was the common Father of Mankind, and equally of
Jews and Gentiles. And when he was entered on this Doctrine of the Derivation
of Sin and Ruin, or Death, to all Mankind from Adam, no Wonder if he thought it
needful to be somewhat particular in it, seeing he wrote to Jews and Gentiles;
the former of which had been brought up under the Prejudices of a proud Opinion
of themselves, as a holy People by Nature, and the latter had been educated in
total Ignorance of all Things of this Kind.

Again, the Apostle had from the Beginning of the Epistle been endeavoring to
evince the absolute Dependence of all Mankind on the free Grace of GOD for
Salvation, and the Greatness of this Grace; and particularly in the former Part
of this Chapter. The Greatness of this Grace he shows especially by two Things.
(1) The universal Corruption and Misery of Mankind; as in all the foregoing
Chapters, and in the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Verses of this Chapter. -- (2.) The
Greatness of the Benefits which Believers receive, and the Greatness of the
Glory they have Hope of. So especially in ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 11th of this
Chapter. And here, in this Place we are upon, from ver. 12, to the End, he is
still on the same Design of magnifying the Grace of God, in the same Thing,
viz. the Favor, Life and Happiness which Believers in Christ receive; speaking
here of the Grace of God, the Gift by Grace, the Abounding of Grace, and the
Reign of Grace. And he still sets forth the Freedom and Riches of Grace by the
same two Arguments, viz. The universal Sinfulness and Ruin of Mankind, all
having sinned, all naturally exposed to Death, Judgment and Condemnation; and
the exceeding Greatness of the Benefit received, -- being far greater than the
Misery which comes by the first Adam,and abounding beyond it. And it is by no
Means consistent with the Apostle's Scope, to suppose, that the Benefits which
we have by Christ as the Antitype of Adam, here mainly insisted on, is without
any Grace at all, being only a Restoration to Life, of such as never deserved
Death.

Another Thing observable in the Apostle's Scope from the Beginning of the
Epistle, is, he endeavors to show the Greatness and Absoluteness of the
Dependence of all Mankind on the Redemption and Righteousness of CHRIST, for
Justification and Life, that he might magnify and exalt the Redeemer: which
Design his whole Heart was swallowed up in, and may be looked upon as the main
Design of the whole Epistle. And this is what he had been upon in the
preceding Part of this Chapter; inferring it from the same Argument, the utter
Sinfulness and Ruin of all Men. And he is evidently still on the same Thing in
this Place, from the 12th v. to the End; speaking of the same Justification and
Righteousness, which he had dwelt on before; and not another totally diverse.
No Wonder, when the Apostle is treating so fully and largely of our
Restoration, Righteousness and Life by Christ, that he is led by it to consider
our Fall, Sin, Death and Ruin by Adam; and to observe wherein these two
opposite Heads of Mankind agree, and wherein they differ, in the Manner of
Conveyance of opposite Influences and Communications from Each.

Thus, if this Place be understood, as it used to be understood by orthodox
Divines, the whole stands in a natural, easy and clear Connection with the
preceding Part of the Chapter, and all the former Part of the Epistle; and in
a plain Agreement with the express Design of all that the Apostle had been
saying; and also in Connection with the Words last before spoken, as introduced
by the two immediately preceding Verses, where he is speaking of our
Justification, Reconciliation and Salvation by Christ; which leads the Apostle
directly to observe, how, on the contrary, we have Sin and Death by Adam.
Taking this Discourse of the Apostle in it is true and plain Sense, there is no
Need of great Extent of Learning, or Depth of Criticism, to find out the
Connection: But if it be understood in Dr. T -- r's Sense, the plain Scope and
Connection are wholly lost, and there was truly Need of a Skill in Criticism,
and Art of Discerning, beyond, or at least different from that of former
Divines, and a Faculty of seeing something afar of, which other Men's Sight
could not reach, in order to find out the Connection.

What has been already observed, may suffice to show the Apostle's general
Scope in this Place. But yet there seem to be some other Things, which he has
his Eye to, in several Expressions; some particular things in the thenpresent
State, Temper and Notions of the Jews, which he also had before spoken of, or
had Reference to, in certain Places of the foregoing Part of the Epistle. As
particularly, the Jews had a very superstitious and extravagant Notion of their
Law, delivered by Moses; as if it were the prime, grand, and indeed only Rule
of God's Proceeding with Mankind, as their Judge, both in Men's Justification
and Condemnation, or from whence all, both Sin and Righteousness, was imputed;
and had no Consideration of the Law of Nature, written in the Hearts of the
Gentiles, and of all Mankind. Herein they ascribed infinitely too much to their
particular Law, beyond the true Design of it. They made their Boast of the Law;
as if their being distinguished from all other Nations by that great Privilege,
the giving of the Law, sufficiently made 'em a holy People, and God's Children.
This Notion of theirs the Apostle evidently refers to, Chap. ii. 13, 17. -- 19.
and indeed through that whole Chapter. They looked on the Law of Moses as
intended to be the only Rule and Means of Justification; and as such, trusted
in the Works of the Law, especially Circumcision: which appears by the iiid
Chapter. But as for the Gentiles, they looked on them as by Nature Sinners, and
Children of Wrath; because born of uncircumcised Parents, and Aliens from their
Law, and who themselves did not know, profess and submit to the Law of Moses,
become Proselytes, and receive Circumcision. What they esteemed the Sum of
their Wickedness and Condemnation was, that they did not turn Jews, and act as
Jews. Here are worthy to be observed the Things which Dr. T. himself says to
the same Purpose, Key. 270, 271. and Preface to Par. on Epist. to Rom.. 43.
This Notion of their's the Apostle has a plain Respect to, and endeavors to
convince them of the Falseness of, in Chap. ii. 12, -- 16. And he has a
manifest Regard again to the same Thing here, in the 12, 13, and 14th Verses of
Chap. v th. Which may lead us the more clearly to see the true Sense of those
Verses; about the Sense of which is the main Controversy, and the Meaning of
which being determined, it will settle the Meaning of every other controverted
Expressions through the whole Discourse.

Dr. T. misrepresents the Apostle's Argument in these Verses. (Which, as has
been demonstrated, is in his Sense altogether vain and impertinent.) He
supposes, the Thing which the Apostle mainly intends to prove, is, that Death
or Mortality don't come on Mankind by personal Sin; and that he would prove it
by this Medium, that Death reigned when there was no Law in Being, which
threatened personal Sin with Death. It Is acknowledged, that this is implied,
even that Death came into the World by Adam's Sin: yet this is not the main
thing the Apostle designs to prove. But his main Point evidently is, that Sin
and Guilt and just Exposedness to Death and Ruin came into the World by Adam's
Sin; as Righteousness, Justification, and a Title to eternal Life come by
Christ. Which Point he confirms by this Consideration. That from the very Time
when Adam sinned, these Things namely, Sin, Guilt and Desert of Ruin, became
universal in the World, long before the Law given by Moses to the Jewish Nation
had any Being.

The Apostle's Remark, that Sin entered into the World by one Man, who was the
Father of the whole human Race, was an Observation which afforded proper
Instruction for the Jews, who looked on themselves an holy People, because they
had the Law of Moses, and were the Children of Abraham, an holy Father; while
they looked on other Nations as by Nature unholy and Sinners, because they were
not Abraham's Children. He leads 'em up to an higher Ancestor than this
Patriarch, even to Adam, who being equally the Father of Jews and Gentiles,
both alike come from a sinful Father; from whom Guilt and Pollution were
derived alike to all Mankind. And this the Apostle proves by an Argument, which
of all that could possibly be invented, tended the most briefly and directly to
convince the Jews: even by this Reflection, that Death had come equally on all
Mankind from Adam's Time, and that the Posterity of Abraham were equally
subject to it with the rest of the World. This was apparent in Fact; a Thing
they all knew. And the Jews had always been taught, that Death (which began in
the Destruction of the Body, and of this present Life) was the proper
Punishment of Sin. This they were taught in Moses's History of Adam, and God's
first Threatening of Punishment for Sin, and by the constant Doctrine of the Law
and the Prophets; as has been already observed.

And the Apostle's Observation, that Sin was in the World long before the Law
was given, and was as universal in the World from the Times of Adam, as it had
been among the Heathen since the Law of Moses, this showed plainly, that the
Jews were quite mistaken in their Notion of their particular Law; and that the
Law which is the original and universal Rule of Righteousness and Judgment for
all Mankind, was another Law, of far more ancient Date, even the Law of Nature;
which began as early as the human Nature began, and was established with the
first Father of Mankind, and in him with the whole Race: the positive Precept
of abstaining from the forbidden Fruit, being given for the Trial of his
Compliance with this Law of Nature; of which the main Rule is supreme Regard to
God and his Will. And the Apostle proves that it must be thus, because, if the
Law of Moses had been the highest Rule of Judgment, and if there had not been a
superior, prior, divine Rule established, Mankind in general would not have
been judged and condemned as Sinners, before that was given (for "Sin is not
imputed, when there is no Law") as it is apparent in Fact they were, because
Death reigned before that Time, even from the Times of Adam.

It may be observed, the Apostle in this Epistle, and that to the Galatians,
endeavors to convince the Jews of these two Things, in Opposition to the
Notions and Prejudices they had entertained concerning their Law. (1.) That it
never was intended to be the Covenant, or Method by which they should actually
be justified. (2.) That it was not the highest and universal Rule or Law, by
which Mankind in general, and particularly the heathen World, were condemned.
And he proves both by similar Arguments. -- He proves, that the Law of Moses
was not the Covenant, by which any of Mankind were to obtain Justification,
because that Covenant was of older Date, being expressly established in the Time
of Abraham, and Abraham himself was justified by it. This Argument the Apostle
particularly handles in the iiid Chap. of Galatians, especially in v. 17, 18,
19. And this Argument is also made Use of in the Apostle'sReasonings in the
ivth Chap. of this Epistle to the Romans, especially v. 13, 14, 15. -- He
proves also, that the Law of Moses was not the prime Rule of Judgment, by which
Mankind in general, and particularly the heathen World, were condemned. And
this he proves also the same Way, viz. by showing this to be of older Date than
that Law, and that it was established with Adam. -- Now, these things tended to
lead the Jews to right Notions of their Law, not as the intended Method of
Justification, nor as the original and universal Rule of Condemnation, but
something superadded to both: both being of older Date. Superadded to the
latter, to illustrate and confirm it, that the Offense might abound; and
superadded to the former, to be as a Schoolmaster, to prepare Men for the
Benefits of it, and to magnify divine Grace in it, that this might much more
abound.

The chief Occasion of the Obscurity and Difficulty, which seems to attend the
Scope and Connection of the various Clauses in the three first Verses of this
Discourse, particularly the 13th and 14th Verses, is, that there are two Things
(although Things closely connected) which the Apostle has in his Eye at once, in
which he aims to enlighten them he writes to; which will not be thought at all
strange, by them that have been conversant with, and have attended to this
Apostle's Writings. He would illustrate the grand Point he had been upon from
the Beginning, even Justification through Christ's Righteousness alone, by
showing how we are originally in a sinful miserable State, and how we derive
this Sin and Misery from Adam, and how we are delivered and justified by Christ
as a second Adam. -- At the same Time, he would confute those fosolish and
corrupt Notions of the Jews, about their Nation and their Law, that were very
inconsistent with these Doctrines. -- And he here endeavors to establish, at
once, these two Things in Opposition to those Jewish Notions:

(1.) That it is our natural Relation to Adam, and not to Abraham, which
determines our native moral State; and that therefore the being natural
Children of Abraham, will not make us by Nature holy in the Sight of God, since
we are the natural Seed of sinful Adam: Nor does the Gentiles being not
descended from Abraham, denominate them Sinners, any more than the Jews, seeing
both alike are descended from Adam.

(2.) That the Law of Moses is not the prime and general Law and Rule of
Judgment for Mankind, to condemn them, and denominate them Sinners; but that
the State they are in with regard to a higher, more ancient and universal Law,
determines Mankind in general to be Sinners in the Sight of God, and liable to
be condemned as such. Which Observation is, in many Respects, to the Apostle's
Purpose; particularly in this Respect, that if the Jews were convinced, that
the Law which was the prime Rule of Condemnation, was given to all, was common
to all Mankind, and that all fell under Condemnation through the Violation of that
Law by the common Father of all, both Jews and Gentiles, then they would be led
more easily and naturally to believe, that the Method of Justification, which
God had established, also extended equally to all Mankind: And that the
Messiah, by whom we have this Justification, is appointed, as Adam was, for a
common Head to all, both Jews and Gentiles.

The Apostle's aiming to confute the Jewish Notion, is the principal Occasion
of those Words in the 13th v. For until the Law, Sin was in the World; but Sin
is not imputed, when there is no Law.

As to the Import of that Expression, Even over them that had not sinned after
the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, not only is the Thing signified by it,
in Dr. T -- r's Sense of it, not true; or if it had been true, would have been
impertinent, as has been shown: But his Interp^etation is, otherwise, very much
strained and unnatural. According to him, by "sinning after the Similitude of
Adam's Transgression," is not meant any Similitude of the Act of sinning, nor
of the Command sinned against, nor properly any Circumstance of the Sin; but
only the Similitude of a Circumstance of the Command, viz. the Threatening it is
attended with. A far-fetched Thing, to be called a Similitude of sinning!
Besides, this Expression, in such a Meaning, is only a needless, impertinent,
and awkward Repeating over again the same Thing, which, it is supposed, the
Apostle had observed in the foregoing Verse, even after he had left it, and had
proceeded another Step in the Series of his Discourse, or Chain of Arguing. As
thus, in the foregoing Verse, the Apostle had plainly laid down his Argument
(as our Author understands it) by which he would prove, Death did not come by
personalSin viz. that Death reigned before any Law, threatening Death for
personal Sin, was in Being; so that the Sin th^n committed was against n^ Law,
threatening Death for personal Sin. Having laid this down, the Apostle leaves
this Part of his Argument, and proceeds another Step, Nevertheless Death
reigned from Adam to Moses: And then returns, in a strange, unnatural Manner,
and repeats that Argument or Assertion again, but only more ob^curely than
before, in these Words, Even over them that had not sinned after the Similitude
of Adam's Transgression, i. e. over them that had not sinned against a Law
threatening Death for personal Sin. Which is just the same Thing, as if the
Apostle had said, They that sinned before the Law, did not sin against a Law
threatening Death for personal Sin; for there was no such Law, for any to sin
against, at that Time: Nevertheless Death reigned at that Time, even over such
as did not sin against a Law threatening Death for personal Sin. -- Which latter
Clause adds Nothing to the Premises, and tends Nothing to illustrate what was
said before, but rather to obscure and darken it. The Particle ((...)) even,
when prefixed in this Manner, used to signify something additional, some
Advance in the Sense or Argument; implying, that the Words following express
something more, or express the same thing more fully, plainly, or forcibly. But
to unite two Clauses by such a Particle, in such a Manner, when there is
Nothing besides a flat Repetition, with no superadded Sense or Force, but
rather a greater Uncertainty and Obscurity, would be very unusual, and indeed
very absurd.

I can see no Reason, why we should be dissatisfied with that Explanation of
this Clause, which has more commonly been given, viz. That by them who have not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, are meant Infants; who,
though they have indeed sinned in Adam, yet never sinned as Adam did, by actually
transgressing in their own Persons; unless it be, that this Interpretation is
too old, and too common. It was well known by those the Apostle wrote to, that
vast Numbers had died in Infancy, within that Period which the Apostle speaks
of, particularly in the Time of the Deluge: And it would be strange, the
Apostle should not have the Case of such Infants in his Mind; even supposing,
his Scope were what our Author supposes, and he had only intended to prove that
Death did not come on Mankind for their personal Sin. How directly would it
have served the Purpose of proving this, to have mentioned so great a Part of
Mankind, that are subject to Death, who, all know, never committed any Sin in
their own Persons? How much more plain and easy the Proof of the Point by that,
than to go round about, as Dr. T. supposes, and bring in a Thing so dark and
uncertain, as this, That God never would bring Death on all Mankind for
personal Sin (though they had personal Sin) without an express revealed
Constitution; and then to observe* that there was no revealed Constitution of
this Nature from Adam to Moses; which also seems a Thing without any plain
Evidence; and then to infer, that it must needs be so, that it could come only
on Occasion of Adam's Sin, though not for his Sin, or as any Punishment of it;
which Inference also is very dark and unintelligible.

If the Apostle in this Place meant those who never sinned by their personal
Act, it is not strange that he should express this by their not sinning after
the Similitude of Adam's Transgression. We read of two Ways of Men's being like
Adam, or in which a Similitude to him is ascribed to Men: One is a being
begotten or born in his Image or Likeness, Genesis v. 3. Another is a
transgressing God's Covenant or Law, like him, Hos. vi. 7. They, like Adam [so,
in the Heb. and Vulg. Lat.] have transgressed the Covenant. Infants have the
former Similitude; but not the latter. And it was very natural, when the
Apostle would infer, that Infants become Sinners by that one Act and Offense of
Adam, to observe, that they had not renewed the Act of Sin themselves, by any
second Instance of a like Sort. And such might be the State of Language among
Jews and Christians at that Day, that the Apostle might have no Phrase more
aptly to express this Meaning. The Manner in which the Epithets, Personal and
Actual, are used and applied now in this Case, is probably of later Date and
more modern Use.

And then this Supposition of the Apostle's having the Case of Infants in View,
in this Expression, makes it more to his Purpose, to mention Death Reigning
before the Law of Moses was given. For the Jews looked on all Nations, besides
themselves, as Sinners, by Virtue of their Law; being made so especially by the
Law of Circumcision, given first to Abraham, and completed by Moses, making
the Want of Circumcision a legal Pollution, utterly disqualifying for the
Privileges of the Sanctuary. This Law, the Jews supposed, made the very Infants
of the Gentiles Sinners, polluted and hateful to God; they being uncircumcis^d,
and born of uncircumcised Parents. But the Apostle proves, against these
Notions of the Jews, that the Nations of the World don't become Sinners by
Nature, and Sinners from Infancy, by Virtue of their Law, in this Manner, but
by Adam's Sin: In-as-much as Infants were treated as Sinners long before the
Law of Circumci^ion was given, as well as before they had committed actual Sin.

What has been said, may, as I humbly conceive, lead us to that which is the
true Scope and Sense of the Apostle in these three Verses; which I will
endeavor more briefly to represent in the following Paraphrase.

12. Wherefore, as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and
so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned.
The Things which I have largely insisted on, viz. the Evil that is in the
World, the general Wickedness, Guilt and Ruin of Mankind, and the opposite
Good, even Justification and Life, as only by Christ, lead me to observe the
Likeness of the Manner, in which they are each of them introduced. For it was
by one Man, that the general Corruption and Guilt which I have spoken of, came
into the World, and Condemnation and Death by Sin: And this dreadful Punishment
and Ruin came on all Mankind, by the great Law of Works, originally established
with Mankind in their first Father, and by his one Offense, or Breach of that
Law; All thereby becoming Sinners in God's Sight, and exposed to final
Destruction.

13. For until the Law Sin was in the World; But Sin is not imputed, when there
is not Law.
"It is manifest, that it was in this Way the World became sinful and guilty:
and not in that Way which the Jews suppose, viz. That their Law, given by
Moses, is the grand universal Rule of Righteousness and Judgment for Mankind,
and that it is by being Gentiles, uncircumcised and Aliens from that Law, that
the Nations of the World are constituted Sinners and unclean. For before the
Law of Moses was given, Mankind were all looked upon by the great Judge as
Sinners, by Corruption and Guilt derived from Adam's Violation of the original
Law of Works; which shows, that the original, universal Rule of Righteousness
is not the Law of Moses; for if so, there would have been no Sin imputed before
that was given; because Sin is not imputed, when there is no Law.

14. Nevertheless, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression.
"But, that at that Time Sin was imputed, and Men were by their Judge reckoned
as Sinners, through Guilt and Corruption derived from Adam, and condemned for Sin
to Death, the proper Punishment of Sin, we have a plain Proof; in that it
appears in Fact, all Mankind, during that whole Time which prec^eded the Law of
Moses, were subjected to that temporal Death, which is the visible Introduction
and Image of that utter Destruction which Sin deserves; not excepting even
Infants, who could be Sinners no other Way than by virtue of Adam's
Transgression, having never in their own Persons actually ^in'd as Adam did;
nor could at that Time be made polluted by the Law of Moses, as being
uncircumcised, or born of uncircumcised Parents."

Now, by way of Reflection on the whole, I would observe, that though there are
two or three Expressions in this Paragraph, Romans v. 12, etc, the Design of
which is attended with some Difficulty and Obscurity, as particularly in the
13th and 14th Verses; yet the Scope and Sense of the Discourse in general is
not obscure, but on the contrary very clear and manifest; and so is the
particular Doctrine mainly taught in it. The Apostle sets himself with great
Care and Pains to make it plain, and precisely to fix and settle the Point he
is upon. And the Discourse is so framed, that one Part of it does greatly clear
and fix the Meaning of other Parts; and the Whole is determined by the clear
Connection it stands in with other Parts of the Epistle, and by the manifest
Drift of all the preceding Part of it.

The Doctrine of original Sin is not only here taught, but most plainly,
explicitly and abundantly taught. This Doctrine is asserted, expressly or
implicitly, in almost every Verse; and in some of the Verses several Times.
It Is fully implied in that first Expression in the 12th v. By one Man Sin
entered into the World. Which implies, that Sin became universal in the World;
as the Apostle had before largely shown it was; and not merely (which would be
a trifling insignificant Observation) that one Man, who was made first, sinned
first, before other Men sinned; or, that it did not so happen that many Men
began to sin just together at the same Moment. -- The latter Part of the Verse,
And Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that (or, if you will,
unto which) all have sinned, shows, that in the Eye of the Judge of the World,
in Adam's first Sin, all sinned; not only in some Sort, but all sinned so as to
be exposed to that Death, and final Destruction, which is the proper Wages of
Sin. -- The same Doctrine is taught again twice over in the 14th v. It is there
observed, as a Proof of this Doctrine, that Death reigned over them which had
not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, i. e. by their
personal Act; and therefore could be exposed to Death, only by deriving Guilt
and Pollution from Adam, in Consequence of his Sin. And it is taught again, in
those Words, Who is the Figure of him that was to come. The Resemblance lies
very much in this Circumstance, viz. our deriving Sin, Guilt and Punishment by
Adam's Sin, as we do Righteousness, Justification, and the Reward of Life by
Christ's Obedience: for so the Apostle explains himself. -- The same Doctrine
is expressly taught again, v 1^th. Through the Offense of one many be dead. And
again, twice in the 16th v. It was by one that sinned, i. e. It was by Adam
that Guilt and Punishment (before spoken of) came on Mankind: And in these
Words, Judgment was by one to Condemnation. -- It is again plainly and fully
laid down in the 17th v. By one Man's Offense, Death reigned by one. So again
in the 18th v. By the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation. -- Again, very plainly in the 19th v. By one Man's Disobedience,
many were made Sinners.

And here is every Thing to determine and fix the Meaning of all important
Terms, that the Apostle makes Use of: As, the abundant Use of 'em in all Parts
of the New Testament; and especially in this Apostle's Writings, which make up
a very great Part of the New Testament: and his repeated Use of 'em in this
Epistle in particular, especially in the preceding Part of the Epistle, which
leads to and introduces this Discourse, and in the former Part of this very
Chapter; and also, the Light, that one Sentence in this Paragraph casts on
another; which fully settles their Meaning: As, with respect to the Words,
Justification, Righteousness, and Condemnation; and above all, in regard of the
Word, Sin, which is the most important of all, with Relation to the Doctrine
and Controversy we are upon. Besides the constant Use of this Term every where
else through the new Testament, through the Epistles of this Apostle, this Epistle
in particular, and even the former Part of this Chapter, it is often repeated in
this very Paragraph, and evidently used in the very Sense, that is denied to
belong to it in the End of v. 12th, and v. 19th, the owned every where else;
and its Meaning is fully determined by the Apostle's varying the Term; using
together with it, to signify the same thing, such a Variety of other synonymous
Words, such as Offense, Transgression, Disobedience. And further, to put the
Matter out of all Controversy, it is particularly and expressly, and repeatedly
distinguished from that which our Opposers would explain it by, viz.
Condemnation, and Death. And what is meant by Sin's entering into the World, in
v. 12th, is determined by a like Phrase of Sin's being in the World, in the
next Verse. -- And that by the Offense of one, so often spoken of here, as
bringing Death and Condemnation on all, the Apostle means the Sin of one,
derived in it is Guilt and Pollution to Mankind in general, is a Thing which
(over and above all that has been already observed) is settled and determined
by those Words in the Conclusion of this Discourse. v. 20. Moreover, the Law
entered, that the Offense might abound: But where Sin abounded, Grace did much
more abound. These Words plainly show, that the OFFENSE, spoken of so often,
and evidently spoken of still in these Words, which was the Offense of one Man,
became the Sin of all. For when he says, The Law entered, that the Offense might
abound, his Meaning cannot be, that the Offense of Adam, merely as his
personally, should abound; but, as it exists in it is derived Guilt, corrupt
Influence, and evil Fruits, in the Sin of Mankind in general, even as a Tree in
it is Root and Branches. The Offense, according to Dr. T -- r's Explanation,
don't abound by the Law at all really and truly, in any Sense; neither the Sin,
nor the Punishment. For he says, The Meaning is not, that Men should be made
more wicked; but, that Men should be liable to Death for every Transgression.
-- But after all, they are liable to no more Deaths, nor to any worse Deaths,
if they are not more sinful: For they were to have Punishment, according to
their Deserts before. Such as died and went into another World before the Law
of Moses was given, were punished according to their Deserts; and the Law, when
it came, thre^tned no more.


It Is a Thing that confirms the Certainty of the Proof of the Doctrine of
Original Sin, which this Place affords, that the utmost Art cannot pervert it
to another Sense. What a Variety of the most artful Methods have been used by
the Enemies of this Doctrine, to wrest and darken this Paragraph of holy Writ,
which stands so much in their Way, as it were to force the Bible to speak a
Language that is agreeable to their Mind! How have Expressions been strained,
Words and Phrases racked! What strange Figures of Speech have been invented,
and with violent Hands thrust into the Apostle's Mouth; and then with a bold
Countenance and magisterial Airs obtruded on the World, as from him! -- But,
blessed be God, we have his Words as he delivered them, and the rest of the
same Epistle and his other Writings, to compare with them; by which his Meaning
stands in too strong and glaring a Light to be hid by any of the a^tificial
Mists, which they labor to throw upon it.

It Is really no less than abusing the Scripture and its Readers, to represent
this Paragraph as the most obscure of all the Places of Scripture, that speak
of the Consequences of Adam's Sin; and to treat it as if there was Need first
to consider other Places as more plain. Whereas, it is most manifestly a Place
in which these things are declared, beyond all, the most plainly, particularly,
precisely and of set Purpose, by that great Apostle, who has most fully
explain*d to us those Doctrines, in general, which relate to the Redemption by
Christ, and the Sin and Misery we are redeemed from. -- And it must be now left
to the Reader's Judgment, whether the Christian Church has not proceeded
reasonably, in looking on this as a Place of Scripture most clearly and fully
treating of these things, and in using it is determinate Sense as an Help to
settle the Meaning of many other Passages of sacred Writ.

As this Place in general is very plain and full, so the Doctrine of the
Corruption of Nature, as derived from Adam, and also the Imputation of his
first Sin, are both clearly taught in it. The Imputation of Adam's one
Transgression, is indeed most directly and frequently asserted. We are here
assured, that by one Man's Sin, Death passed on all; all being adjudged to this
Punishment, as having sinned (so it is implied) in that one Man's Sin. And it is
repented over and over, that all are condemned, many are dead, many made
Sinners, etc. by one Man's Offense, by the Disobedience of one, and by one
Offense. -- And the Doctrine of original Depravity is also here taught, when
the Apostle says, By one Man Sin entered into the World; having a plain Respect
(as has been shown) to that universal Corruption and Wickedness, as well as
Guilt, which he had before largely treated of.

PART III.
Observing the Evidence given us, relative to the Doctrine of Original Sin, in
what the Scriptures reveal concerning the Redemption by CHRIST.
CHAP. I.
The Evidence of Original Sin from the Nature of Redemption, in the Procurement
of it.
ACcording to Dr. T -- r's Scheme, a very great Part of Mankind are the
Subjects of Christ's Redemption, who live and die perfectly innocent; who never
have had, and never will have any Sin charged to their Account, and never are
either the Subjects of, or exposed to any Punishment whatsoever, viz. All that
die in Infancy. They are the Subjects of Christ's Redemption, as he redeems 'em
from Death, or as they by his Righteousness have Justification, and by his
Obedience are made Righteous, in the Resurrection of the Body, in the Sense of
Romans v. 18, 19. And all Mankind are thus the Subjects of Christ's Redemption,
while they are perfectly guiltless, and exposed to no Punishment, as by Christ
they are entitled to a Resurrection. Tho with respect to such Persons as have
sinned, he allows it is in some Sort by Christ and his Death, that they are
saved from Sin and the Punishment of it.

Now let us see whether such a Scheme well consists with the Scripture-Account
of the Redemption by Jesus Christ.

1. The Representations of the Redemption by Christ, every where in Scripture,
lead us to suppose, that all whom he came to redeem, are Sinners; that his
Salvation, as to the Term from which (or the Evil to be redeemed from) in all
is Sin, and the deserved Punishment of Sin. It Is natural to suppose, that when
he had his Name Jesus, or Savior, given him by God's special and immediate
Appointment, the Salvation meant by that Name should be his Salvation in
general; and not only a Part of his Salvation, and with Regard only to some of
them that he came to save. But this Name was given him to signify his saving
his People from their Sins, Matthew. i. 21. And the great Doctrine of Christ's
Salvation is, that ^e came into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy i. 15. And
that Christ has once suffered, the just for the un^ust, 1 Pet. iii. 18. In
this was manifested the Love of God toward us (toward such in general as have
the Benefit of God's Love in giving Christ) that God sent his only begotten Son
into the World, that we might live through Him. Herein is Love -- that he sent
his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John iv. 10. Many other Texts
might be mentioned, which seem evidently to suppose, that all who are redeemed
by Christ, are saved from Sin. We are led by what Christ himself said, to
suppose, that if any are not Sinners, they have no Need of him as a Redeemer,
any more then a well Man of a Physician, Mark ii. 17. And that Men, in order to
being the proper Subjects of the Mercy of God through Christ, must first be in
a State of Sin, is implied in Gal. iii. 22. But the Scripture has concluded
all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe. To the same Effect is Romans xi. 32.

These Things are greatly confirmed by the ScriptureDoctrine of Sacrifices.
It Is abundantly plain, by both old and new Testament, that they were Types of
Christ's Death, and were for Sin, and supposed Sin in those for whom they were
offered. The Apostle supposes, that in Order to any having the Benefit of the
eternal Inheritance by Christ, there must of Necessity be the Death of the
Testator; and gives that Reason for it, that without shedding of Blood there is
no Remission. Heb. ix. 15, etc. And Christ Himself, in representing the Benefit
of his Blood, in the Institution of the Lord's Supper, under the Notion of the
Blood of a Testament, calls it the Blood of the New Testament, shed for the
Remission of Sins, Matthew. xxvi. 28. -- But according to the Scheme of our
Author, many have the eternal Inheritance by the Death of the Testator, who
never had any Need of Remission.

II. The Scripture represents the Redemption by Christ as a Redemption from
deserved Destruction; and that, not merely as it respects some Particulars, but
as the Fruit of God's Love to Mankind. Joh. iii. 16. God so loved the WORLD;
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him MIGHT NOT
PERISH, but might have everlasting Life. Implying, that otherwise they must
perish, or be destroyed. But what Necessity of this, if they did not deserve to
be destroyed? Now, that the Destruction here spoken of, is deserved
Destruction, is manifest, because it is there compared to the perishing of such
of the Children of Israel as died by the Bite of the fiery Serpents, which God
in his Wrath, for their Rebellion, sent amongst them. And the same Thing
clearly appears by the last Verse of the same Chapter, He that believes on the
Son, has everlasting Life; and be that believes not the Son, shall not see
Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him, or, is left remaining on him:
Implying, that all in general are found under the Wrath of God, and that they
only of all Mankind; who are intere^^ed in Christ, have this Wrath removed, and
eternal Life bestowed; the rest are left, with the Wrath of God still remaining
on them. The same is clearly illustrated and confirmed by Joh. v. 24. -- He
that believes -- has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation,
but is passed from Death to Life. In being passed from Death to Life is
implied, that before they were all in a State of Death; and they are spoken of
as being so by a Sentence of Condemnation; and if it be a just Condemnation,
it is a deserved Condemnation.

III. It will follow on Dr. T -- r's Scheme, that Christ's Redemption, with
regard to a great Part of them who are the Subjects of it, is not only a
Redemption from no Sin, but from no Calamity, and so from no Evil of any Kind.
For as to Death, which Infants are redeemed from, they never were subjected to
it as a Calamity, but purely as a Benefit. It came by no Threatening, or Curse,
denounced upon or through Adam; the Covenant with him being utterly abolished,
as to all it is Force and Power on Mankind (according to our Author) before the
pronouncing the Sentence of Mortality. Therefore Trouble and Death could be
appointed to innocent Mankind, no other Way than on the Foot of another
Covenant, the Covenant of Grace; and in this Channel they come only as Favors,
not as Evils. Therefore they could need no Medicine or Remedy; for they had no
Disease. Even Death itself, which it is supposed Christ saves 'em from, is only
a Medicine; it is preventing Phy^ick, and one of the greatest of Benefits. It Is
ridiculous, to talk of Persons needing a Medicine, or a Physician, to save 'em
from an excellent Medicine; or of a Remedy from a happy Remedy! If it be said,
though Death be a Benefit, yet it is so because Christ changes it, and turns it
into a Benefit, by procuring a Resurrection: -- I would here ask, What can be
meant by turning or changing it into a Benefit, when it never was otherwise,
nor could ever justly be otherwise? Infants could not at all be brought under
Death as a Calamity: for they never deserved it. And it would be only an Abuse
(be it far from us, to ascribe such a Thing to God) in any Being, to make the
Offer, to any poor Sufferers, of a Redeemer from some Calamity, which he had
brought upon them without the least Desert of it on their Part.

But it is plain, that Death or Mortality was not at first brought on Mankind
as a Blessing, on the Foot of the Covenant of Grace through Christ, and that
Christ and Grace don't bring Mankind under Death, but find 'em under it. 1 Cor.
v. 14. We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. Luke x. 10.
The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. The Grace,
which appears in providing a Deliverer from any State, supposes the Subject to
be in that State prior to that Grace and Deliverance; and not that such a State
is first introduced by that Grace. In our Author's Scheme, there never could be
any Sentence of Death, or Condemnation, that requires a Savior from it;
because the very Sentence itself, according to the true Meaning of it, implies
and makes sure all that Good, which is requisite to abolish and make void the
seeming Evil to the innocent Subject. So that the Sentence itself is in Effect
the Deliverer; and there is no Need of another Deliverer, to deliver from that
Sentence. Dr. T. insists upon it, that Nothing comes upon us in Consequence of
Adam's Sin, in any SENSE, KIND, or DEGREE, inconsistent with the original
Blessing pronounced on Adam, at his Creation; and Nothing but what is perfectly
consistent with God's Blessing, Love, and Goodness, declared to Adam, as soon
as he came out of his Maker's Hands. P. 364, 365.
If the Case be so, it is certain there is no Evil or Calamity at all, for
Christ to redeem us from; unless Things agreeable to the divine Goodness, Love
and Blessing, are Things which we need Redemption from.

IV. It will follow on our Author's Principles, not only with Respect to
Infants, but even adult Persons, that Redemption is needless, and Christ is
dead in vain. Not only is there no Need of Christ's Redemption in Order to
Deliverance from any Consequences of Adam's Sin, but also in Order to perfect
Freedom from personal Sin, and all it is evil Consequences. For God has made
other sufficient Provision for that, viz. a sufficient Power and Ability, in
all Mankind, to do all their Duty, and wholly to avoid Sin. Yea, this Author
insists upon it, that when Men have not sufficient Power to do their Duty, they
have no Duty to do. P. 111. 339, 340.
We may Safely and assuredly conclude (says he) that Mankind in all Parts of
the World have SUFFICIENT Power to do the Duty, which God requires of them; and
that he requires of 'em NO MORE than they have SUFFICIENT Power to do. And in
another Place, P. 343.
God has given Powers EQUAL to the Duty, which he expects. And he express a
great Dislike at R. R's supposing, that our Propen^ities to Evil, and
Temptations, are too strong to be EFFECTUALLY and CONSTANTLY resisted; -- or
that we are unavoidably sinful IN A DEGREE, that our Appetites and Passions
will be breaking out, notwithstanding our everlasting Watchfulness. P* 344.
These Things fully imply, that Men have in their own natural Ability
sufficient Means to avoid Sin, and to be perfectly free from it; and so, from
all the bad Consequences of it. And if the Means are sufficient, then there is
no Need of more. And therefore there is no Need of Christ's dying in Order to
it. What Dr. T. says in P. 348. fully implies, that it would be unjust in God,
to give Mankind Being in such Circumstances, as that they would be more likely
to sin, so as to be exposed to final Misery, than otherwise. Hence then,
without Christ and his Redemption, and without any Grace at all, MERE JUSTICE
makes sufficient Provision for our being free from Sin and Misery, by our own
Power.

If all Mankind, in all Parts of the World, have such sufficient Power to do
their whole Duty, without being sinful in any Degree, then they have sufficient
Power to obtain Righteousness by the Law: And then, according to the Apostle
Paul, Christ is dead in vain. Gal. ii. 21. If Righteousness come by the Law,
Christ is dead in vain; -- (...), without the Article, by Law, or the Rule of
right Action, as our Author explains the Phrase. Pref. to Par. on Rom.. 38.
And according to the Sense in which he explains this very Place, It would have
frustrated, or rendered useless, the Grace of God, if Christ died to accomplish
what was or MIGHT have been effected by Law itself, without his Death. Note on
Romans v. 20.
So that it most clearly follows from his own Doctrine, that Christ is dead in
vain, and the Grace of God is useless. The same Apostle says, If there had been
a Law which COULD have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the
Law, Gal. iii. 21. i. e. (still according to Dr. T -- r's own Sense) if there
was a Law, that Man, in his present State, had sufficient Power perfectly to
fulfill. For Dr. T. supposes the Reason why the Law could not give Life, to be,
no^ because it was weak in itself, but through the Weakness of our Flesh, and the
Infirmity of the human Nature in the present State. Ibid.
But he says, We are under a mild Dispensation of GRACE, making Allowance for
our Infirmities. P. 368.
By our Infirmities, we may upon good Grounds suppose, he means that Infirmity
of human Nature, which he gives as the Reason, why the Law cannot give Life. But
what Grace is there in making that Allowance for our Infirmities, which Justice
itself (according to his Doctrine) most absolutely requires, as he supposes
divine Justice exactly proportions our Duty to our Ability?

Again, If it be said, that although Christ's Redemption was not necessary to
preserve Men from beginning to sin, and getting into a Course of Sin, because
they have sufficient Power in themselves to avoid it; yet it may be necessary
to deliver Men, after they have by their own Folly brought themselves under the
Dominion of evil Appetites and Passions. See P. 228. and also what he says of
the helpless State of the Heathen, in Paraph. and Notes on Romans vii. and
Beginning of Chap. viii.
I answer, if it be so, that Men need Deliverance from those Habits and
Passions, which are become too strong for them, yet that Deliverance, on our
Author's Principles, would be no Salvation from Sin. For, the Exercise of
Passions which are too strong for us, and which we cannot overcome, is
necessary; and he strongly urges, that a necessary Evil can be no moral Evil.
It Is true, it is the Effect of Evil as it is the Effect of a bad Practice, while
the Man remained at Liberty, and had Power to have avoided it. But then,
according to Dr. T -- r, that evil Cause alone is Sin; and not so, the
necessary Effect: For he says expressly, The Cause of every Effect, alone, is
chargeable with the Effect it produces, or which proceeds from it. P. 128.
-- And as to that Sin which was the Cause, the Man needed no Savior from
that, having had sufficient Power in himself to have avoided it. So that it
follows, by our Author's Scheme, that none of Mankind, neither Infants, nor
adult Persons, neither the more nor less vicious, neither Jews nor Gentiles,
neither Heathens nor Christians, ever did, or ever could stand in any Need of a
Savior; and that, with respect to all, the Truth is, Christ is dead in vain.

If any should say, Although all Mankind in all Ages have sufficient Ability to
do their whole Duty, and so may by their own Power enjoy perfect Freedom from
Sin, yet God foresaw that they would sin, and that after they had sinned they
would need Christ's Death: -- I answer, It Is plain by what the Apostle says, in
those Places which were just now mentioned, Gal. ii. 21. and iii. 21. that God
would have esteemed it needless to give his Son to die for Men, unless there
had been a prior Impossibility of their having Righteousness by Law; and that
if there had been a Law which COULD have given Life, this other Way by the
Death of Christ would not have been provided. And this appears to be agreeable
to our Author's own Sense of Things, by his Words which have been cited,
wherein he says, It would have FRUSTRATED or rendered USELESS the Grace of God,
if Christ died to accomplish what was or MIGHT HAVE BEEN effected by Law
itself, without his Death.

V. It will follow on Dr. T -- r's Scheme, not only that Christ's Redemption is
needless for the saving from Sin or it is Consequences, but also that it does no
Good that Way, has no Tendency to any Diminution of Sin in the World. For as to
any Infusion of Virtue or Holiness into the Heart, by divine Power, through
Christ or his Redemption, it is altogether inconsistent with this Author's
Notions. With him, inwrought Virtue, if there were any such thing, would be no
Virtue; not being the Effect of our own Will, Choice and Design, but only of a
sovereign Act of God's Power. See P. 245, 250, 180.
And therefore, all that Christ does to increase Virtue, is only increasing our
Talents, our Light, Advantages, Means and Motives; as he often explains the
Matter. In P. 44. P. 50. and innumerable other Places.
But Sin is not at all diminished. For he says, Our Duty must be measured by
our Talents: as, a Child that has less Talents, has less Duty; and therefore
must be no more exposed to commit Sin, than he that has greater Talents;
because he that has greater Talents, has more Duty required, in exact
Proportion. See P. 55, 224, 234, 337, 338* 342, 343, 3^4, 345.
If so, he that has but one Talent, has as much Advantage to perform that one
Degree of Duty which is required of him, as he that has free Talents, to
perform his five Degrees of Duty, and is no more exposed to fail of it. And
that Man's Guilt, who sins against greater Advantages, Means and Motives, is
greater in Proportion to his Talents. See Paraph. on Romans ii. 9* also on v^r.
12.
And therefore it will follow, on Dr. T -- r's Principles, that Men stand no
better Chance, have no more eligible or valuable Probability of Freedom from
Sin and Punishment, or of contracting but little Guilt, or of performing
required Duty, with the great Advantages and Talents implied in Christ's
Redemption, than without them; when all things are computed, and put into the
Balances together, the Numbers, Degrees and Aggravations of Sin exposed to,
Degrees of Duty required,etc. So that Men have no Redemption from Sin, and no
new Means of performing Duty, that are valuable or worth any thing at all. And
thus the great Redemption by Christ in every respect comes to Nothing, with
regard both to Infants and adult Persons.

CHAP. II.
The Evidence of the Doctrine of Original Sin from what the Scripture teaches
of the Application of Redemption.
THE Truth of the Doctrine of Original Sin is very clearly manifest from what
the Scripture says of that Change of State, which it represents as necessary to
an actual Interest in the spiritual and eternal Blessings of the Redeemer's
Kingdom.

In order to this, it speaks of it as absolutely necessary for every one, that
he be regenerated, or born again. Joh. iii. 3. Verily, verily I say unto thee,
except a Man (...), be begotten again, or born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God. Dr. T. though he will not allow, that this signifies any Change from a
State of natural Propensity to Sin, yet supposes, that the new Birth here
spoken of means a Man's being brought to a divine Life, in a right Use and
Application of the natural Powers in a Life of true Holiness: P. 144.
and that it is the Attainment of those Habits of Virtue and Religion, gives us
the real Character of true Christians, and the Children of God; P. 246, 248.
and that it is putting on the new Nature of right Action. P. 251.


But in order to proceed in the most sure and safe Manner, in our understanding
what is meant in Scripture by being born again, and so in the Inferences we
draw from what is said of the Necessity of it, let us compare Scripture with
Scripture, and consider what other Terms or Phrases are used, in other Places,
where Respect is evidently had to the same Change. And here I would observe the
following Things.

I. If we compare one Scripture with another, it will be sufficiently manifest,
that by Regeneration, or being begotten or born again, the same Change in the
State of the Mind is signified, with that which the Scripture speaks of as
effected in true REPENTANCE and CONVERSION. I put Repentance and Conversion
together, because the Scripture puts them together, Act. iii. 19. and because
they plainly signify much the same Thing. The Word, (...) (Repentance)
signifies a Change of the Mind; as the Word, Conversion, means a Change or
Turning from Sin to God. And that this is the same Change with that which is
called Regeneration (excepting that this latter Term especially signifies the
Change, as the Mind is passive in it) the following Things do show.

In the Change which the Mind passes under in Repentance and Conversion, is
attained that Character of true Christians, which is necessary to the eternal
Privileges of such. Act. iii. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that
your Sins may be blotted out, when the Times of Refreshing shall come from the
Presence of the Lord Jesus. -- And so it is with Regeneration; as is evident
from what Christ says to Nicodemus, and as is allowed by Dr. T.

The Change the Mind passes under in Repentance and Conversion, is that in
which saving Faith is attained. Mark i. 15. The Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand,
repent ye and believe the Gospel. -- And so it is with a being born again, or
born of God; as appears by Joh. i. 12, 13. But to as many as received him, to
them gave be Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that BELIEVE on his
Name, which were born, not of Blood, etc. but of God.

Just as Christ says concerning Conversion, Matthew. xviii. 3. Verily, verily I
say unto you, Except ye be converted and become as little Children, ye shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God: So does he say concerning being born again,
in what he spoke to Nicodemus.

By the Change Men pass under in Conversion, they become as little Children;
which appears in the Place last cited: And so they do by Regeneration. 1 Pet.
i. at the End, and Chap. ii. at the Beginning. Being born again -- Wherefore --
as newborn Babes, desire -- etc. It Is no Objection, that the Disciples, whom
Christ spoke to in Matthew. xviii. 3. were converted already: This makes it not
less proper for Christ to declare the Necessity of Conversion to them, leaving
it with them to try themselves, and to make sure their Conversion: In like
Manner as he declared to 'em the Necessity of Repentance, in Luke xiii. 3, 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

The Change that Men pass under at their Repentance, is expressed and exhibited
by Baptism. Hence it-is called the Baptism of Repentance, from Time to Time.
Matthew. iii. 11. Luke iii. 3. Act. xix. 4. and ii. 38. And so is Regeneration or
being born again expressed by Baptism: as is evident by such Representations of
Regeneration as those, Joh. iii. 5. Except a Man be born of Water, and of the
Spirit -- Tit. iii. 5. He saved us by the Washing of Regeneration. -- Many
other Things might be observed, to show, that the Change Men pass under in
their Repentance and Conversion, is the same with that which they are the
Subjects of in Regeneration. -- But these Observations may be sufficient.

II. The Change which a Man passes under when born again, and in his Repentance
and Conversion, is the same that the Scripture calls the CIRCUMCISION OF THE
HEART. -- This may easily appear by considering.

That as Regeneration is that in which are attained the Habits of true Virtue
and Holiness, as has been shown, and as is confessed; so is Circumcision of
Heart. Deuteronomy. xxx. 6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine Heart, and the
Heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God, with all thine Heart, and with all
thy Soul.

Regeneration is that whereby Men come to have the Character of true
Christians; as is evident, and as is confessed; and so is Circumcision of
Heart: for by this (...) become Jews inwardly, or Jews in the Spiritual (...)
Christian Sense (and that is the same as being true Chri^^^ans) as of old
Proselytes were made Jews by Circumcision of the Flesh. Romans ii. 28, 29. For he
is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that Circumcision, which is
outward in the Flesh: But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and Circumcision
is that of the Heart, in the Spirit and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not
of Men, but of God.

That Circumcision of the Heart is the same with Conversion, or turning from
Sin to God, is evident by Jer. iv. 1, -- 4. If thou will return, O Israel,
return (or, convert) unto me. -- Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and put
away the Foreskins of your Heart. And Deuteronomy. x. 16. Circumcise therefore the
Foreskin of thine Heart, and be no more stiff-necked.

Circumcision of the Heart is the same Change of the Heart, that Men pass under
in their Repentance; as is evident by Levi^. xxvi. 4. If their uncircumcised
Heart be humbled; and they accept the Punishment of their Iniquity --

The Change Men pass under in Regeneration, Repentance and Conversion, is
signified by Baptism, as has been shown; and so is Circumcision of the Heart
signified by the same Thing. None will deny, that it was this internal
Circumcision, which of old was signified by external Circumcision; nor will any
deny, now under the new Te^^ament, that inward and spiritual Baptism, or the
Cleansing of the Heart, is signified by external Washing, or Baptism. But
spiritual Circumcision and spiritual Baptism are the same Thing; both being the
putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh: as is very plain by Colos. ii.
11, 12, 13. In whom also ye are circumcised, with the Circumcision made without
Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of
Christ, buried with him in Baptism; wherein also ye are risen with him, etc.

III. This inward Change, called Regeneration, and Circumcision of the Heart,
which is wrought in Repentance and Conversion, is the same with that spiritual
RESURRECTION so often spoken of, and represented as a dying unto Sin, and
living unto Righteousness.

This appears with great Plainness in that last cited Place, Col. ii. In whom
also ye are circumcised with the Circumcis^on made without Hands -- buried with
him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him, through the Faith of the
Operation of God, etc. And you, being dead in your Sins, and the Uncircumcision
of your Flesh, has he quickened together with him; having forgiven you all
Trespasses.

The same appears by Romans vi. 3, 4, 5. Know ye not that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we are
buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as Christ was raised up from
the Dead, by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of
Life, etc. -- v. 11. Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead unto Sin,
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In which Place also it is evident, by the Words recited, and by the whole
Context, that this spiritual Resurrection is that Change, in which Persons are
brought to Habits of Holiness and to the divine Life, by which Dr. T. describes
the Thing obtained in being born again.

That a spiritual Resurrection, to a new divine Life, should be called a being
born again, is agreeable to the Language of Scripture; in which we find, a
Resurrection is called a being born or begotten. So those Words in the iid
Psalm, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee, are applied to Christ's
Resurrection, Act. xiii. 33. So in Colos. i. 18. Christ is called the first
BORN from the Dead; and in Rev. i. 5. The first BEGOTTEN from the Dead. The
Saints, in their Conversion or Spiritual Resurrection, are risen with Christ,
and are begotten and born with him. 1 Pet. i. 3. Which has begotten us again,
to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, from the Dead, to an
Inheritance incorruptible. -- This Inheritance is the same Thing with that
KINGDOM OR HEAVEN, which Men obtain by being born again, according to Christ's
Words to Nicodemus; and that same Inheritance of them that are sanctified,
spoken of as what is obtained in true CONVERSION. -- Act. xxvi. 18. To turn
them (or, convert them) from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan
unto God, that they may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them
that are sanctified, through Faith that is in me. -- Dr. T -- r's own Words, in
his Note on Romans i. 4. speaking of that Place in the iid Psalm, just now
mentioned, are very worthy to be here recited. He observes how this is applied
to Christ's Resurrection and Exaltation, in the New Testament, and then has
this Remark, Note, Begetting is conferring a new and happy State: A Son is a
Person put into it. Agreably to this, good Men are said to be the Sons of God,
as they are the Sons of the Resurrection to eternal Life, which is represented
as (...), a being BEGOTTEN or BORN AGAIN, REGENERATED.

So that I think it is abundantly plain, that the spiritual Resurrection spoken
of in Scripture, by which the Saints are brought to a new divine Life, is the
same with that being born again, which Christ says is necessary for every one,
in order to his seeing the Kingdom of God.

IV. This Change, which Men are the Subjects of, when they are born again, and
circumcised in Heart, when they repent, and are converted, and spiritually
raised from the Dead, is the same Change which is meant when the Scripture
speaks of making the HEART and SPIRIT NEW, or giving a new Heart and Spirit.

It Is needless here to stand to observe, how evidently this is spoken of as
necessary to Salvation, and as the Change in which are attained the Habits of
true Virtue and Holiness, and the Character of a true Saint; as has been
observed of Regeneration, Conversion, etc. and how apparent it is from thence,
that the Change is the same. For it is as it were self-evident: It Is apparent
by the Phrases themselves, that they are different Expressions of the same
Thing. Thus Repentance ((...)) or the Change of the Mind is the same as being
changed to a NEW Mind, or new Heart and Spirit. Conversion is the turning of
the Heart; which is the same Thing as changing it so, that there shall be
another Heart, or a new Heart, or a new Spirit. To be born again, is to be born
A NEW; which implies a becoming NEW, and is represented as a becoming newborn
Babes: But none supposes, it is the Body, that is immediately and properly new,
but the Mind, Heart, or Spirit. And so a spiritual Resurrection is the
Resurrection of the Spirit, or rising to begin a NEW Existence and Life, as to
the Mind, Heart or Spirit. So that all these Phrases imply an having a new
Heart, and being renewed in the Spirit, according to their plain Signification.

When Nicodemus expressed his Wonder at Christ's declaring it necessary, that a
Man should-be born again in order to see the Kingdom of God, or enjoy the
Privileges of the Kingdom of the Messiah, Christ says to him, Art thou a Master
of Israel, and know^st not these things? i. e. 'Art thou one who is set to
teach others, the Things written in the Law and the Prophets, and know not a
Doctrine so plainly taught in your Scriptures, that such a Change as I speak
of, is necessary to a partaking of the Blessings of the Kingdom of the
Me^^iah'? -- But what can Christ have Respect to in this, unless such
Prophecies as that in Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25, 26, 27? Where God by the Prophet
speaking of the Days of the Messiah's Kingdom, says, Then will I sprinkle clean
Water upon you, and ye shall be clean. -- A NEW HEART also will I give you, and
A NEW SPIRIT will I put within you -- and I will put my Spirit within you. Here
God speaks of having a new Heart and Spirit, by being washed with Water, and
receiving the Spirit of God, as the Qualification of God's People, that shall
enjoy the Privileges of the Kingdom of the Messiah? How much is this like the
Doctrine of Christ to Nicodemus, of being born again of Water and of the
Spirit? We have another like Prophecy in Ezekiel. xi. 19.

Add to these Things, that Regeneration or a being born again, and the RENEWING
(or making new) by the Holy Ghost, are spoken of as the same Thing. Tit. iii.
5. By the H^ashing of Regeneration and Renewing of the holy Ghost.

V. It Is abundantly manifest, that being born again, a spiritually rising from
the Dead, to Newness of Life, receiving a new Heart, and being renewed in the
Spirit of the Mind, these are the same Thing with that which is called putting
off the OLD MAN, and putting on the NEW MAN.

The Expressions are equivalent; and the Representations are plainly of the
same Thing. When Christ speaks of being born again, two Births are supposed; a
first and a second; an OLD Birth, and a NEW one: And the Thing born is called
MAN. So, what is born in the first Birth, is the old MAN: and what is brought
forth in the second Birth, is the new MAN. That which is born in the first
Birth (says Christ) is Flesh: it is the carnal Man, wherein we have borne the
Image of the earthly Adam, whom the Apostle calls the FIRST MAN. That which is
born in the new Birth, is Spirit, or the spiritual and heavenly Man: wherein we
proceed from Christ the SECOND MAN, the new Man, who is made a quickening
Spirit, and is the Lord from Heaven, and the Head of the new Creation. -- In
the new Birth, Men are represented as becoming newborn Babes (as was observed
before) which is the same thing as becoming New Men.

And how apparently is what the Scripture says of the spiritual Resurrection of
the Christian Convert, equivalent and of the very same Import with putting, off
the old Man, and putting on the new Man? So in the vith of Romans, the Convert
is spoken of as dying and being buried with Christ: which is explained in the
6th v by this, that the OLD MAN is crucified, that the Body of Sin might be
destroyed. And in the 14th v. Converts in this Change are spoken of as rising
to NEWNESS of Life. Are not these Things plain enough? The Apostle does in
Effect tell us, that when he speaks of that spiritual Death and Resurrection
which is in Conversion, he means the same Thing as crucifying and burying the
old Man, and rising a New Man.

And it is most apparent, that spiritual Circumcision, and spiritual Baptism,
and the spiritual Resurrection, are all the same with putting off the old Man,
and putting on the new Man. This appears by Colos. ii. 11, 12. In whom also ye
are circumcised with the CIRCUMCISION made without Hands, IN PUTTING OFF the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him
by BAPTISM; wherein also ye are RISEN with him. Here it is manifest, that the
spiritual Circumcision, Baptism, and Resurrection, all signify that Change,
wherein Men put off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh: But that is the same
Thing, in this Apostle's Language, as putting off the old Man; as appears by
Romans vi. 6. Our OLD MAN is crucified, that the BODY OF SIN may be destroyed. --
And that putting off the old Man is the same with putting off the Body of Sins,
appears further by Ephesians. iv. 22, 23, 24. and Colos. iii. 8, 9, 10.

As Dr. T. confesses, that a being born again is that wherein are obtained the
Habits of Virtue, Religion and true Holiness; so how evidently is the same
thing predicated of that Change, which is called putting off the Old Man, and
putting on the New Man? Ephesians. iv. 22, 23, 24. That ye put off the Old Man, which
is corrupt, etc. -- and put on the New Man, which, after God, is created IN
RIGHTEOUSNESS AND TRUE HOLINESS.

And it is most plain, that this putting off the old Man, etc. is the very same
thing with making the Heart and Spirit new. It Is apparent in it self: the
Spirit is called the Man, in the Language of the Apostle; it is called the
inward Man, and the hidden Man. (Romans vii. 22. 2 Cor. iv. 16. 1 Pet. iii. 4.)
And therefore putting off the old Man, is the same thing with the Removal of
the old Heart, and the putting on the new Man is the receiving a new Heart and
a new Spirit. Yea, putting on the new Man is expressly spoken of as the same
Thing with receiving a new Spirit, or being renewed in Spirit. Ephesians. iv. 22, 23,
24. That ye put off the old Man -- and be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind,
and that ye put on the new Man.

From these Things it appears, how unreasonable, and contrary to the utmost
Degree of Scriptural Evidence, is Dr. T -- r's Way of explaining the Old Man,
and the New Man* P. 425, -- 429.
as though thereby were meant Nothing personal; but that by the old Man were
meant the Heathen State, and by the New Man the Christian Dispensation, or
State of professing Christians, or the whole collective Body of Professors of
Christianity, made up of Jews and Gentiles: When all the Color he has for it,
is, that the Apostle once calls the Christian Church a new Man, Ephesians. ii. 15.
It Is very true, in the Scriptures, often, both in the old Testament and new,
collective Bodies, Nations, Peoples, Cities, are figuratively represented by
Persons: particularly the Church of Christ is represented as one holy Person,
and has the same Appellatives as a particular Saint or Believer; and so is
called a Child and a Son of God, Exodus iv. 22. Gal. iv. 1, 2. and a Servant of
God,Isai. xli. 8,9. and xliv. 1. The Daughter of God,and Spouse of Christ,
P^al. xlv. 10, 13, 14. Rev. xix. 7 -- Nevertheless, would it be reasonable, to
argue from hence, that such App^llations, as a Servant of God, a Child of God,
etc. are always, or commonly to be taken as signifying only the Church of God
in general, or great collective Bodies; and not to be understood in a personal
Sense? But certainly, this would not be more unreasonable, than to urge, that
by the Old and the New Man, as the Phrases are mostly used in Scripture, is to
be understood Nothing but the great collective Bodies of Pagans and of
Christians, or the Heathen and the Christian World, as to their outward
Profession, and the Dispensation they are under. It might have been proper, in
this Case, to have considered the Unreasonableness of that Practice which our
Author charges on others, and finds so much Fault with in them, P. ^^^.
That they content themselves with a few Scraps of Scripture, which the wrong
understood, they make the Test of Truth, and the Ground of their Principles, in
Contradiction to the whole Tenor of Revelation.

VI. I observe once more, It Is very apparent, that a being born again, and
spiritually raised from Death to a State of new Existence and Life, having a
new Heart created in us, being renewed in the Spirit of our Mind, and being the
Subjects of that Change by which we put off the old Man, and put on the new
Man, is the same Thing with that which in Scripture is called a being CREATED
ANEW, or made NEW CREATURES.

Here, to pass over many other Evidences of this, which might be mentioned, I
would only observe, that the Representations are exactly equivalent. These
several Phrases naturally and most plainly signify the same Effect. In the
first Birth or Generation, we are created, or brought into Existence; it is then
the whole Man first receives Being: The Soul is then formed, and then our
Bodies are fearfully and wonderfully made, being curiously wrought by our
Creat^r; So that a newborn Child is a new Creature. So, when a Man is born
again, he is created again; in that new Birth, there is a new Creation; and
therein he becomes as a newborn Babe, or a NEW CREATURE. -- So, in a
Resurrection, there is a new Creation. When a Man is dead, that which was
created or made in the first Birth or Creation, is destroyed: When that which
was dead is raised to Life, the mighty Power of the Creator or Author of Life,
is exerted the second Time, and the Subject restored to new Existence, and new
Life, as by a new Creation. So, giving a new Heart is called CREATING a clean
Heart, Psalm. li. 10. Where the Word translated create, is the same that is used
in the first Verse in Genesis. And when we read in Scripture of the new
Creature, the Creature that is called NEW is MAN; not Angel, or Beast, or any
other Sort of Creature; and therefore the Phrase, New Man, is evidently
equipollent with New Creature; and a putting off the old Man, and putting on
the new Man, is spoken of expressly as brought to pass by a Work of Creation.
Col. iii. 9, 10. Ye have put off the old Man -- and have put on the new Man,
which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that CREATED him. So,
Ephesians. iv. 22, 23, 24. That ye put off the old Man, which is corrupt etc. and be
renewed in the spirit of your Mind, and that ye put on the new Man, which after
God is CREATED in Righteousness and true Holiness. -- These Things absolutely
six the Meaning of that in 2 Cor. v. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature: Old Things are passed away; behold, all Things are become New.

On the whole, the following Reflections may be made:

1. That it is a Truth of the utmost Certainty, with respect to every Man, born
of the Race of Adam, by ordinary Generation, that unless he be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. This is true, not only of the Heathen, but of
them that are born of the professing People of God, as Nicodemus, and the Jews,
and every Man born of the Flesh. This is most manifest by Christ's Discourse,
in Job. iii. 3, -- 11. So it is plain by 2 Cor. v. 17. That every Man who is in
Christ, is a new Creature.

2. It appears from this, together with what has been proved above, that it is
most certain with respect to every one of the human Race, that he can never
have any In^erest in Christ, or see the Kingdom of God, unless he be the
Subject of that Change in the Temper and Disposition of his Heart, which is
made in Repentance, and Conversion, Circumcision of Heart, spiritual Baptism,
dying to Sin and rising to a new and holy Life; -- and unless he has the old
Heart taken away, and a new Heart and Spirit given, and puts off the old Man,
and puts on the new Man, and old Things are past away and all Things made new.

3. From what is plainly implied in these Things, and from what the Scripture
most clearly teaches of the Nature of 'em, it is certain, that every Man is born
into the World in a State of moral Pollution. For SPIRITUAL BAPTISM is a
Cleansing from moral Filthiness. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25. compared with Acts ii. 16.
and Job. iii. 25. -- So the Washing of Regeneration or the NEW BIRTH, is a
Change from a State of Wickedness. Tit. iii. 3, 4 5. -- Men are spoken of as
purified in their Regeneration, 1 Pet. i. 22, 23. See also 1 Jo^. ii. 29. and
iii. 1, 5. -- And it appears, that every Man in his first or natural State is a
Sinner: for otherwise they would then need no REPENTANCE, no CONVERSION, no
Turning from Sin, to God. -- And it appears, that every Man in his original
State has a Heart of Stone; for thus the Scripture calls that old Heart, which
is taken away, when a NEW HEART and NEW SPIRIT is given* Ezekiel. xi. 19. and
xxxvi. 26. -- And it appears, that Man's Nature, as in his native State, is
corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts, and of it is own Motion exerts it self
in Nothing but wicked Deeds. For thus the Scripture characterises the OLD MAN,
which is put off, when Men are renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, and put on
the NEW-MAN. Ephesians.iv.22,23,24. Col. iii. 8, 9, 10. -- In a Word, it appears,
that Man's Nature, as in his native State, is a Body of Sin, which must be
destroyed, must die, be buried, and never rise more. For thus the OLD MAN is
represented, which is crucified, when Men are the Subjects of a spiritual
RESURRECTION. Romans vi. 4, 5, 6. -- Such a Nature, such a Body of Sin as this,
is put off in the spiritual RENOVATION, wherein we put on the NEW MAN, and are
the Subjects of the spiritual CIRCUMCISION. Ephesians. iv. 21, 22, 23.

It must now be left with the Reader to judge for himself, whether what the
Scripture teaches of the APPLICATION of Christ's Redemption, and the Change of
State and Nature necessary to true and final Happiness, don't afford clear and
abundant Evidence to the Truth of the Doctrine of Original Sin.

PART IV.
Containing Answers to OBJECTIONS.
CHAP. I.
Concerning that OBJECTION, That to suppose Men's being BORN IN SIN, without
their Choice, or any previous Act of their own, is to suppose what is
inconsistent with the Nature of SIN.
SOme of the Objections, made against the Doctrine of original Sin, which have
Reference to particular Arguments used in Defense of it, have been already
considered in the handling of those Arguments. What I shall therefore now
consider, are such Objections as I have not yet had Occasion to take any
special Notice of.

There is no Argument Dr. T. insists more upon, than that which is taken from
the Arminian and Pelagian Notion of Freedom of Will, consisting in the Will's
Self-determination, as necessary to the Being of moral Good or Evil. He often
urges, that if we come into the World infected with sinful and depraved
Dispositions, then Sin must be natural to us; and if natural, then necessary;
and if necessary, then no Sin, nor any thing we are blam^able for, or that can
in any respect be our Fault, being what we cannot help: and he urges, that Sin
must proceed from our own Choice, etc. P. 125, 128, 129, 130, 186, 187, 188,
190, 200, 245, 246, 253, 258, 339, 340, 437, and other Places.


Here I would observe in general, that the forementioned Notion of Freedom of
Will as essential to moral Agency, and necessary to the very Existence of
Virtue and Sin, seems to be a grand favorite Point with Pelagians, and
Arminians, and all Divines of such Characters, in their Controversies with the
Orthodox. There is no one thing more fundamental in their Schemes of Religion:
On the Determination of this one leading Point depends the Issue of almost all
Controversies we have with such Divines. Nevertheless, it seems a needless Task
for me particularly to consider that Matter in this Place; having already
largely discussed it, with all the main Grounds of this Notion, and the
Arguments used to defend it, in a late Book on this Subject, to which I ask
Leave to refer the Reader. -- It Is very necessary, that the modern prevailing
Doctrine concerning this Point, should be well understood, and therefore
thoroughly considered and examined: For without it there is no Hope of putting
an End to the Controversy about original Sin, and innumerable other
Controversies that subsist, about many of the main Points of Religion. I stand
ready to confess to the forementioned modern Divines, if they can maintain
their peculiar Notion of Freedom, consisting in the s^l^determining Power of
the Will, as necessary to moral Agency, and can thoroughly establish it in
Opposition to the Arguments lying against it, then they have an impregnable
Castle, to which they may repair, and remain invincible, in all the
Controversies they have with the reformed Divines, concerning original Sin, the
Sovereignty of Grace, Election, Redemption, Conversion, the efficacious
Operation of the Holy Spirit, the Nature of saving Faith, Perseverance of the
Saints, and other Principles of the like Kind. -- However, at the same Time I
think, this same Thing will be as strong a Fortress for the Deists, in common
with them; as the great Doctrines, subverted by their Notion of Freedom, are so
plainly and abundantly taught in the Scripture. But I am under no Apprehensions
of any Danger, the Cause of Christianity or the Religion of the Reformed is in,
from any Possibility of that Notion's being ever established, or of it is being
ever evinced, that there is not proper, perfect and manifold Demonstration
lying against it. But as I said, it would be needless for me to enter into a
particular Disquisition of this Point here; from which I shall easily be
excused by any Reader who is willing to give himself the Trouble of consulting
what I have already written: and as to others, probably they will scarce be at
the Pains of reading the present Discourse; or at least would not, if it should
be enlarged by a full Consideration of that Controversy.

I shall at this Time therefore only take Notice of some gross Inconsistencies,
that Dr. T. has been guilty of, in his handling this Objection against the
Doctrine of original Sin.

In Places which have been cited, he says, That Sin must proceed from our own
Choice: and that if it does not, it being necessary to us, it cannot be Sin, it
cannot be our Fault, or what we are to blame for: And therefore all our Sin must
be chargeable on our Choice, which is the Cause of Sin: For he says, The Cause
of every Effect is alone chargeable with the Effect it produces, and which
proceeds from it. ^. 125*
-- Now here are implied several gross Contradictions. He greatly insists, that
Nothing can be sinful, or have the Nature of Sin, but what proceeds from our
Choice. Nevertheless, he says, Not the Effect, but the Cause alone is
chargeable with Blame. Therefore the Choice, which is the Cause, this alone is
blameable, or has the Nature of Sin; and not the Effect of that Choice. Thus
Nothing can be sinful, but the Effect of Choice; and yet the Effect of Choice
never can be sinful, but only the Cause, which alone is chargeable with all the
Blame.

Again, The Choice, which chu^es and produces Sin, or from which Sin proceeds
is it self sinful. Not only is this implied in his saying, "The Cause alone is
chargeable with all the Blame;" but he expressly speaks of the Choice as faulty;
P. 190.
and calls that Choice wicked, from which Depravity and Corruption proceeds. P.
200. See also P. 216.
Now, if the Choice it self be Sin, and there be no Sin but what proceeds from
a sinful Choice, then the sinful Choice must proceed from another antecedent
Choice; It must be chosen by a foregoing Act of Will, determining it self to
that sinful Choice, that so it may have that which he speaks of as absolutely
essential to the Nature of Sin, namely, That it proceed from our Choice, and
don't happen to us ^ecessarily. -- But if the sinful Choice it self proceeds
from a foregoing Choice, then also that foregoing Choice must be sinful; it
being the Cause of Sin, and so alone chargeable with the Blame. Yet if that
foregoing Choice be sinful, then, neither must that happen to us necessarily,
but must likewise proceed from Choice, another Act of Choice prec^eding that:
for we must remember, that "Nothing is sinful, but what proceeds from our
Choice." And then, for the same Reason, even this prior Choice, last mentioned,
must also be sinful, being chargeable with all the Blame of that consequent
evil Choice, which was it is Effect. And so we must go back till we come to the
very first Volition, the prime or original Act of Choice, in the whole Chain.
And this, to be sure, must be a sinful Choice, because this is the Origin or
primitive Cause of all the Trail of Evils which follow; and according to our
Author, must therefore be "alone chargeable with all the Blame." And yet so it
is, according to him, this "cannot be sinful," because it don't "proceed from
our own Choice," or any foregoing Act of our Will; it being, by the
Supposition, the very first Act of Will in the Case. And therefore it must be
necessary, as to us, having no Choice of ours to be the Cause of it.

In Page 232, he says, Adam's Sin was from his own disobedient Will; and so
must every Man's Sin, and all the Sin in the World, as well as his. -- By this,
it seems, he must have a "disobedient Will" before he sins; for the Cause must
be before the Effect: and yet that disobedient Will itself is sinful; otherwise
it could not be called disobedient. But the Question is, How do Men come by the
disobedient Will, this Cause of all the Sin in the World? It must not come
necessarily, without Men's Choice: for if so, it is not Sin, nor is there any
Disobedience in it. Therefore that disobedient Will must also come from a
disobedient Will; and so on, in infinitum. Otherwise, it must be supposed, that
there is some Sin in the World, which don't come from a disobedient Will;
contrary to our Author's dogmatical Assertions.

In P. 442. He says, "Adam could not sin without a sinful Inclination." -- Here
he calls that Inclination it self sinful, which is the Principle from whence
sinful Acts proceed; as elsewhere he speaks of the disobedient Will, from
whence all Sin comes: And he allows, Contents of Romans Chap. vii. in Notes on
the Epistle.
that the Law reaches to all the latent Principles of Sin; meaning plainly,
that it forbids, and threatens Punishment for those latent Principles. Now
these latent Principles of Sin, these sinful Inclinations, without which,
according to our Author, there can be no sinful Act, cannot all proceed from a
sinful Choice; because that would imply great Contradiction. For, by the
Supposition, they are the Principles from whence a sinful Choice comes, and
whence all sinful Acts of Will proceed; and there can be no sinful Act without
'em. So that the first latent Principles, and Inclinations, from whence all
sinful Acts proceed, are sinful; and yet they are not sinful, because they
don't proceed from a wicked Choice, without which, according to him, "Nothing
can be sinful."

Dr. T. speaking of that Proposition of the Assembly of Divines, wherein they
assert, that Man is by Nature utterly corrupt, etc. P. 125.
thinks himself well warranted by the supposed great Evidence of these his
contradictory Notions, to say, Therefore Sin is not natural to us; and
therefore I shall not scruple to say, this Proposition in the Assembly of
Divines is FALSE. -- But it may be worthy to be considered, whether it would
not have greatly become him, before he had clothed himself with so much
Assurance, and proceeded, on the Foundation of these his Notions, so
magisterially to charge the Assembly's Proposition with Falsehood, to have taken
Care, that his own Propositions, which he has set in Opposition to them, should
be a little more consistent; that he might not have contradicted himself, while
contradicting them; left some impartial Judges, observing his Inconsistence,
should think they had Warrant to declare with equal Assurance, that They shall
not scruple to say, Dr. T -- r's Doctrine is FALSE.

CHAP. II.
Concerning that Objection against the Doctrine of native Corruption, That to
suppose Men rec^ive their first Existence in Sin, is to make Him who is the
Author of their Being, the Author of their Depravity.
ONE Argument against Men's being supposed to be born with sinful Depravity,
which Dr. T. greatly insists upon, is, "That this does in Effect charge Him who
is the Author of our Nature, who formed us in the Womb, with being the Author
of a sinful Corruption of Nature; and that it is highly injurious to the God of
our Nature, whose Hands have formed and fashioned us, to believe our Nature to
be originally corrupted, and that in the worst Sense of Corruption." P. 137.
187, 188, 189, 256, 258, 260, 419, 424, and other Places.


With respect to this, I would observe in the first Place, that this Writer, in
his handling this grand Objection, supposes something to belong to the Doctrine
objected against, as maintained by the Divines whom he is opposing, which does
not belong to it, nor does follow from it: As particularly, he supposes the
Doctrine of original Sin to imply, that Nature must be corrupted by some
positive Influence; something, by some Means or other, infused into the human
Nature; some Quality or other, not from the Choice of our Minds, but like a
Taint, Tincture, or Infection, altering the natural Constitution, Facultiesand
Dispositions of our Souls. P. 187.
That Sin and evil Dispositions are IMPLANTED in the Foetus in the Womb. P.
14^. 424, 425, and the like in many other Places.
-- Whereas truly our Doctrine neither implies nor infers any such Thing. In
order to account for a sinful Corruption of Nature, yea, a total native
Depravity of the Heart of Man, there is not the least Need of supposing any
evil Quality infused, implanted, or wrought into the Nature of Man, by any
positive Cause, or Influence whatsoever, either from God, or the Creature; or
of supposing, that Man is conceived and born with a Fountain of Evil in his
Heart, such as is any thing properly positive. I think, a little Attention to
the Nature of Things will be sufficient to satisfy any impartial considerate
Inquirer, that the Absence of positive good Principles, and so the With holding
of a special divine Influence to impart and maintain those good Principles,
leaving the common natural Principles of Selflove, natural Appetite, etc.
(which were in Man in Innocence) leaving these, I say, to themselves, without
the Government of superior divine Principles, will certainly be followed with
the Corruption, yea, the total Corruption of the Heart, without Occasion for
any positive Influence at all: And, that it was thus indeed that Corruption of
Nature came on Adam, immediately on his Fall, and comes on all his Posterity,
as sinning in him and falling with him.

The Case with Man was plainly this: When God made Man at first, he implanted
in him two Kinds of Principles. There was an inferior Kind, which may be
called NATURAL being the Principles of mere human Nature; such as Self-love,
with those natural Appetites and Passions, which belong to the Nature of Man,
in which his Love to his own Liberty, Honor and Pleasure, were exercised:
These, when alone, and left to themselves, are what the Scriptures sometimes
call FLESH. Besides these, there were superior Principles, that were
spiritual, holy and divine summarily comprehended in divine Love; wherein
consisted the spiritual Image of God, and Man's Righteousness and true
Holiness; which are called in Scripture the Divine Nature. These Principles
may, in some Sense, be called SUPER NATURAL, To prevent all Cavils, the Reader
is desired particularly to observe, in what Sense I here use the Words, Natural
and Supernatural: -- Not as Epithets of Distinction between that which is
Concreated or Connate, and that which is extraordinarily introduced afterward,
besides the first State of Things, or the Order established originally,
beginning when Man's Nature began; -- but as distinguishing between what
belongs to, or flows from, that Nature which Man has, mee^ly as Man, and those
things which are above this, -- by which one is denominated, not only a Man,
but a truly virtuous, holy, and spiritual Man; which, though they began, in Adam,
as soon as Humanity began, and are necessary to the Perfection and Well-being
of the human Nature, yet are not essential to the Constitution of it, or
necessary to it is Being: inasmuch as one may have every Thing needful to his
being Man, exclusively of them. -- If in thus using the Words, Natural and
Supernatural, I use them in an uncommon Sense, it is not from any Affectation of
Singularity, but for Want of other Terms, more aptly to express my Meaning.
being (however concreated or connate, yet) such as are above those Principles
that are essentially implied in, or necessarily resulting from, and in^eperably
connected with, mere human Nature; and being such as immediately depend on
Man's Union and Communion with God, or Divine Communications and Influences of
God's Spirit: Which tho withdrawn, and Man's Nature forsaken of these
Principles, human Nature would be human Nature still; Man's Nature, as such,
being entire without these Divine Principles; which the Scripture sometimes
calls SPIRIT, in Contradistinction to Flesh. These superior Principles were
given to possess the Throne, and maintain an absolute Dominion in the Heart:
the other, to be wholly subordinate and subservient. And while Things continued
thus, all Things were in excellent Order, Peace and beautiful Harmony, and in
their proper and perfect State. These divine Principles thus reigning, were the
Dignity, Life, Happiness, and Glory of Man's Nature. -- When Man ^in'd, and
broke God's Covenant, and fell under his Curse, these superior Principles left
his Heart: for indeed God then left him; that Communion with God, on which
these Principles depended, entirely ceased; the Holy Spirit, that divine
Inhabitant, forsook the House. Because it would have been utterly improper in
it self, and inconsistent with the Covenant and Constitution God had
established, that God should still maintain Communion with Man, and continue,
by his friendly, gracious vital Influences, to dwell with him and in him, after
he was become a Rebel, and had incurred God's Wrath and Curse. Therefore
immediately the superior divine Principles wholly ceased; so Light ceases in a
Room, when the Candle is withdrawn: and thus Man was left in a State of
Darkness, woeful Corruption and Ruin; Nothing but Flesh, without Spirit. The
inferior Principles of Self-love and natural Appetite, which were given only
to serve, being alone, and left to themselves, of Course became reigning
Principles; having no superior Principles to regulate or control them, they
became absolute Masters of the Heart. The immediate Consequence of which was a
fatal Catastrophe, a turning of all Things upside down, and the Succession of a
State of the most odious and dreadful Confusion. Man did immediately set up
himself, and the Objects of his private Affections and Appetites, as supreme;
and so they took the Place of GOD. -- These inferior Principles are like Fire
in an House; which, we say, is a good Servant, but a bad Master; very useful
while kept in it is Place, but if left to take Possession of the whole House,
soon brings all to Destruction. Man's Love to his own Honor, separate
Interest, and private Pleasure, which before was wholly subordinate unto Love
to God and Regard to his Authority and Glory, now dispose and impel Man to
pursue those Objects, without Regard to God's Honor, or Law; because there is
no true Regard to these divine Things left in him. In Consequence of which, he
seeks those Objects as much when against God's Honor and Law, as when agreeable
to 'em. And God still continuing strictly to require supr^^m Regard to himself,
and forbidding all Gratifications of these inferior Passions, but only in
perfect Subordination to the Ends, and Agreableness to the Rules and Limits,
which his Holiness, Honor and Law prescribe, hence immediately arises Enmity
in the Heart, now wholly under the Power of Self-love; and Nothing but War
en^ues, in a constant Course, against God. As, when a Subject has once
renounced his lawful Sovereign, and set up a Pretender in his Stead, a State of
Enmity and War against his rightful King necessarily ensues. -- It were easy to
show, how every Lust and depraved Disposition of Man's Heart would naturally
arise from this privative Original, if here were Room for it. Thus it is easy to
give an Account, how total Corruption of Heart should follow on Man's eating
the forbidden Fruit, tho that was but one Act of Sin, without God's putting any
Evil into his Heart, or implanting any bad Principle, or infusing any corrupt
Taint, and so becoming the Author of Depravity. Only God's Withdrawing, as it
was highly proper and necessary that he should, from Rebel-Man, being as it
were driven away by his abominable Wickedness, and Men's natural Principles
being left to themselves, this is sufficient to account for his becoming
entirely corrupt, and bent on sinning against God.

And as Adam's Nature became corrupt, without God's implanting or infusing any
evil Thing into his Nature; so does the Nature of his Posterity. God dealing
with Adam as the Head of his Posterity (as has been shown) and treating them as
One, he deals with his Posterity as having all sinned in him. And therefore, as
God withdrew spiritual Communion and his vital gracious Influence from the
common Head, so he withholds the same from all the Members, as they come into
Existence; whereby they come into the World mere Flesh* and entirely under the
Government of natural and inferior Principles; and so become wholly corrupt,
as Adam did.

Now, for God so far to have the Disposal of this Affair, as to withold those
Influences, without which Nature will be corrupt, is not to be the Author of
Sin. -- But, concerning this, I must refer the Reader to what I have said of it
in my Discourse on the Freedom of the Will. Part iv. Sect. 9. P. 25, etc.
The, besides w^^t I have there said, I may here observe; That if for God so
far to order and dispose the Being of Sin, as to permit it, by withholding the
gracious Influences necessary to prevent it, is for him to be the Author of
Sin, then some Things which Dr. T. himself lays down, will equally be attended
with this very Consequence. For, from Time to Time, he speaks of God's giving
Men up to the vilest Lusts and Affections, by permitting, or leaving them. ^e^.
356. and Par* on Romans i. 24, 26.
Now, if the Continuance of Sin, and it is Increase and Prevalence, may be in
Consequence of God's Disposal, by withholding his Grace, that is needful,
under such Circumstances, to prevent it, without God's being the Author of that
Continuance and Prevalence of Sin; then, by Parity of Reason, may the Being of
Sin, in the Race of Adam, be in Consequence of God's Disposal, by withholding
his Grace, needful to prevent it, without his being the Author of that Being of
Sin.

If here it should be said, that God is not the Author of Sin, in giving Men up
to Sin, who have already made themselves sinful, because when Men have once
made themselves sinful, their continuing so, and Sin's prevailing in them, and
becoming more and more habitual, will follow in a Course of Nature: -- I
answer, Let that be remembered, which this Writer so greatly urges, in
Opposition to them that suppose original Corruption comes in a Course of
Nature, viz. That the Course of Nature is Nothing without God. He utterly
rejects the Notion of the Course of Nature's being a proper Active Cause, which
will work, and go on by it self, without God, if he lets or permits it. But
affirms, That the Course of Nature, separate from the Agency of God, is no
Cause, or Nothing; and that the Course of Nature should continue it self, or go
on to operate by it self, any more than at first produce it self, is absolutely
impossible. P. 410. See also with what V^^emence this is urged in P.413
These strong Expressions are his. Therefore, to explain the Continuance of the
Habits of Sin in the same Person, when once introduced, yea, to explain the
very Being of any such Habits, in Consequence of repeated Acts, our Author must
have Recourse to those same Principles, which he rejects as absurd to the
utmost Degree, when alleged to explain the Corruption of Nature in the
Posterity of Adam. For, that Habits, either good or bad, should continue after
being once established, or that Habits should be settled and have Existence, in
Consequence of repeated Acts, can be owing only to a Course of Nature, and
those Laws of Nature which God has established.

That the Posterity of Adam should be born without Holiness, and so with a
depraved Nature, comes to pass as much by the established Course of Nature, as
the Continuance of a corrupt Disposition in a particular Person, after he once
has it; or as much as Adam's continuing unholy and corrupt, after he had once
lost his Holiness. For Adam's Posterity are from Him, and as it were in him,
and belonging to him, according to an established Course of Nature,as much as
the Branches of a Tree are, according to a Course of Nature,from the Tree, in
the Tree, and belonging to the Tree; or (to make use of the Comparison which
Dr. T. himself chooses and makes use of from Time to Time, as proper to
illustrate the Matter P. 14^, 187.
) just as the Acorn is derived from the Oak. And I think, the Acorn is as much
derived from the Oak, according to the Course of Nature, as the Buds and
Branches. It Is true, that God, by his own almighty Power, creates the Soul of
the Infant; and it is also true, as Dr. T. often insists, that God, by his
immediate Power, fer^s and fashions the Body of the Infant in the Womb; yet he
does both according to that Course of Nature, which he has been pleased to
establish. The Course of Nature is demonstrated, by late Improvements in
Philosophy, to be indeed what our Author himself says it is, viz. Nothing but
the established Order of the Agency and Operation of the Author of Nature. And
tho there be the immediate Agency of God in bringing the Soul into Existence in
Generation, yet it is done according to the Method and Order established by the
Author of Nature, as much as his producing the Bud, or the Acorn of the Oak;
and as much as his continuing a particular Person in Being, after he once has
Existence. God's immediate Agency in bringing the Soul of a Child into Being,
is as much according to an established Order, as his immediate Agency in any of
the Works of Nature whatsoever. It Is agreeable to the established Order of
Nature, that the good Qualities wanting in the Tree, should also be wanting in
the Branches and Fruit. It Is agreeable to the Order of Nature; that when a
particular Person is without good moral Qualities in his Heart, he should
continue without 'em, till some new Cause or Efficiency produces them: And it is
as much agreeable to an established Course and Order of Nature, that since Adam,
the Head of the Race of Mankind, the Root of that great Tree with many Branches
springing from it, was deprived of original Righteousness, the Branches should
come forth without it. Or, if any dislike the Word, Nature, as used in this
last Case, and in Stead of it c^use to call it a Constitution, or established
Order of successive Events, the Alteration of the Name will not in the least alter
the State of the present Argument. Where the Name, Nature, is allowed without
Dispute, no more is meant than an established Method and Order of Events,
settled and limited by divine Wisdom.

If any should object to this, That if the Want of original Righteousness be
thus according to an established Course of Nature, then why are not Principles
of Holiness* when restored by divine Grace, also communicated to Posterity? I
answer, The divine Laws and Establishments of the Author of Nature are
precisely settled by him, as he pleases, and limited by his Wisdom. -- Grace
is introduced among the Race of Mankind by a new Establishment; not on the Foot
of the original Establishment of God, as the Head of the natural World, and
Author of the first Creation; but by a Constitution of a vastly higher Kind;
wherein Christ is made the Root of the Tree, whose Branches are his spiritual
Seed and He is the Head of the new Creation; of which I need not stand now to
speak particularly.

But here I desire it may be noted, that I don't suppose, the natural Depravity
of the Posterity of Adam is owing to the Course of Nature only; it is also owing
to the just Judgment of God. But yet I think, it is as truly, and in the same
Manner, owing to the Course of Nature, that Adam's Posterity come into the
World without original Righteousness, as that Adam continued without it, after
he had once lost it. -- That Adam continued destitute of Holiness, when he had
lost it, and would always have so continued, had it not been restored by a
Redeemer, was not only a natural Consequence, according to the Course of Things
established by God, as the Author of Nature; but it was also a penal
Consequence, or a Punishment of his Sin. God, in righteous Judgment, continued
to absent himself from Adam, after he became a Rebel; and withheld from him now
those Influences of the holy Spirit, which he before had. And just thus, I
suppose it to be with every natural Branch of Mankind: all are looked upon as
sinning in and with their common Root; and God righteously withholds special
Influences and spiritual Communications from all. for this Sin. -- But of the
Manner and Order of these Things, more may be said in the next Chapter.

On the whole, this grand Objection against the Doctrine of Men's being born
corrupt, That it makes Him who gave us our Being, to be the Cause of the Being
of Corruption, can have no more Force in it, than a like Argument has to prove,
that if Men by a Course of Nature continue Wicked, or remain without Goodness,
after they have by vicious Acts contracted vicious Habits, and so made
themselves wicked, it makes Him who is the Cause of their Continuance in Being,
and the Cause of the Continuance of the Course of Nature, to be the Cause of
their continued Wickedness. Dr. T. says, P. 412.
God would not make any thing that is hateful to him; because, by the very
Terms, He would hate to make such a Thing. But if this be good arguing in the
Case to which it is applied, may I not as well say, God would not continue a
Thing in Being that is hateful to him; because, by the very Terms, he would
hate to continue such a Thing in Being? I think, the very Terms do as much (and
no more) infer one of these Propositions, as the other. -- In like Manner, the
rest that he says on that Head, may be shown to be unreasonable, by only
substituting the Word, continue, in the Place of, make and propagate. I may
fairly imitate his way of Reasoning, thus: To say, God continues us according
to his own original Decree, or Law of Continuation, which obliges him to
continue us in a Manner he abhors, is really to make bad worse: for it is
supposing him to be defective in Wisdom, or by his own Decree or Law to lay
such a Constraint upon his own Actions, that he cannot do what he would; but is
continually doing what he would not, what he hates to do, and what he condemns
in us; viz. continuing us sinful, when he condemns us for continuing our selves
sinful. -- If the Reasoning be weak in the one Case, it is no less so in the
other.

If any shall still insist, That there is a Difference, between God's so
disposing Things as that Depravity of Heart shall be continued, according to
the settled Course of Nature, in the same Person, who has by his own Fault
introduced it, -- and his so disposing as that Men, according to a Course of
Nature, should be born with Depravity, in Consequence of Adam's introducing
Sin, by his Act, which we had no Concern in, and cannot be justly charged with:
On this I would observe, that it is quite going off the Objection, which we
have been upon, from God's Agency, and flying to another. It is then no longer
insisted on, that simply for him, from whose Agency the Course of Nature and
our Existence derive, so to dispose Things, as that we should have Existence in
a corrupt State, is for him to be the Author of Sin: But the Plea now advanced
is, That it is not proper and just for such an Agent so to dispose in this
Case, and only in Consequence of Adam's Sin; it not being just to charge Adam's
Sin to his Posterity. And this Matter shall be particularly considered, in
Answer to the next Objection; to which I now proceed.

CHAP. III.
That great Objection against the Imputation of Adam's Sin to his Posterity,
considered, That such Imputation is unjust and unreasonable, inasmuch as Adam
and his Posterity are not one and the same. With a brief Reflection subjoined,
on what some have supposed, of God's imputing the Guilt of Adam's Sin to his
Posterity, but in an infinitely less Degree, than to Adam himself.
THat we may proceed with the greater Clearness in considering the main
Objections against supposing the Guilt of Adam's Sin to be imputed to his
Posterity, I would premise some Observations with a View to the right Stating
of the Doctrine of the Imputation of Adam's first Sin; and then show the
Reasonableness of this Doctrine, in Opposition to the great Clamor raised
against it on this Head.

I think, it would go far toward directing us to the more clear and distinct
conceiving and right stating of this Affair, if we steadily bear this in Mind;
That God, in each Step of his Proceeding with Adam, in Relation to the Covenant
or Constitution established with him, looked on his Posterity as being One with
him. (The Propriety of his looking upon them so, I shall speak to afterward)
And though he dealt more immediately with Adam, yet it was as the Head of the
whole Body, and the Root of the whole Tree; and in his Proceedings with him, he
dealt with all the Branches, as if they had been then existing in their Root.

From which it will follow, that both Guilt, or Exposedness to Punishment, and
also Depravity of Heart, came upon Adam's Posterity just as they came upon him,
as much as if he and they had all co-existed, like a Tree with many Branches;
allowing only for the Difference necessarily resulting from the Place Adam
stood in, as Head or Root of the whole, and being first and most immediately
dealt with, and most immediately acting and suffering. Otherwise, it is as if,
in every Step of Proceeding, every Alteration in the Root had been attended, at
the same Instant, with the same Steps and Alterations throughout the whole
Tree, in each individual Branch. I think, this will naturally follow on the
Supposition of there being a constituted Oneness or Identity of Adam and his
Posterity in this Affair.

Therefore I am humbly of Opinion, that if any have supposed the Children of
Adam to come into the World with a double Guilt, one the Guilt of Adam's Sin,
another the Guilt arising from their having a corrupt Heart, they have not so
well conceived of the Matter. The Guilt a Man has upon his Soul at his first
Existence, is one and simple; viz. the Guilt of the original Apostasy, the
Guilt of the Sin by which the Species first rebelled against God. This, and the
Guilt arising from the first Corruption or depraved Disposition of the Heart,
are not to be looked upon as two things, distinctly imputed and charged upon
Men in the Sight of God. Indeed the Guilt, that arises from the Corruption of
the Heart, as it remains a confirmed Principle, and appears in it is consequent
Operations, is a distinct and additional Guilt: but the Guilt arising from the
first existing of a depraved Disposition in Adam's Posterity, I apprehend, is
not distinct from their Guilt of Adam's first Sin. For so it was not in Adam
himself. The first evil Disposition or Inclination of the Heart of Adam to Sin,
was not properly distinct from his first Act of Sin, but was included in it.
The external Act he committed was no otherwise his, than as his Heart was in
it, or as that Action proceeded from the wicked Inclination of his Heart. Nor
was the Guilt he had, double, as for two distinct Sins: One, the Wickedness of
his Heart and Will in that Affair; another, the Wickedness of the external Act,
caused by his Heart. His Guilt was all truly from the Act of his inward Man;
exclusive of which the Motions of his Body were no more than the Motions of any
lifeless Instrument. His Sin consisted in Wickedness of Heart, fully sufficient
for, and entirely amounting to, all that appeared in the Act he committed.

The depraved Disposition of Adam's Heart is to be considered two Ways. (1.) As
the first rising of an evil Inclin^tion in his Heart, exerted in his first Act
of Sin, and the Ground of the complete Transgression. (2.) An evil Disposition
of Heart continuing afterward, as a confirmed Principle, that came by God's
forsaking him; which was a Punishment of his first Transgression. This
confirmed Corruption, by it is remaining and continued Operation, brought
additional Guilt on his Soul.

And in like Manner, Depravity of Heart is to be considered two Ways in Adam's
Posterity. The first Existing of a corrupt Disposition in their Hearts is not
to be looked upon as Sin belonging to them, distinct from their Participation
of Adam's first Sin: it is as it were the extended Pollution of that Sin,
through the whole Tree, by Virtue of the constituted Union of the Branches with
the Root; or the Inherence of the Sin of that Head of the Species in the
Members, in the Consent and Concurrence of the Hearts of the Members with the
Head, in that first Act. (Which may be, without God's being the Author of Sin:
about which I have spoken in the former Chapter.) But the Depravity of Nature,
remaining an established Principle in the Heart of a Child of Adam, and as
exhibited in After-Operations, is a Consequence and Punishment of the first
Apostasy thus participated, and brings new Guilt. -- The first Being of an evil
Disposition in the Heart of a Child of Adam, whereby he is disposed to approve
of the Sin of his first Father, as fully as he himself approved of it when he
committed it, or so far as to imply a full and perfect Consent of Heart to it,
I think, is not to be looked upon as a Consequence of the Imputation of that
first Sin, any more than the full Consent of Adam's own Heart in the Act of
sinning; which was not consequent on the Imputation of his Sin to himself, but
rather prior to it in the Order of Nature. Indeed the Derivation of the evil
Disposition to the Hearts of Adam's Posterity, or rather the Co-existence of
the evil Disposition, implied in Adam's first Rebellion, in the Root and
Branches, is a Consequence of the Union, that the wise Author of the World has
established between Adam and his Posterity; but not properly a Consequence of
the Imputation of his Sin; nay rather antecedent to it, as it was in Adam
himself. The first Depravity of Heart, and the Imputation of that Sin, are both
the Consequen^es of that established Union; but yet in such Order, that the
evil Disposition is first, and the Charge of Guilt consequent; as it was in the
Case of Adam himself. My Meaning, in the whole of what has been here said, may
be illustrated thus: Let us suppose, that Adam and all his Posterity had
co-existed, and that his Posterity had been, through a Law of Nature established
by the Creator, united to him, something as the Branches of a Tree are united
to the Root, or the Members of the Body to the Head; so as to constitute as it
were one complex Person, or one moral Whole: So that by the Law of Union there
should have been a Communion and Co-existence in Acts and Affections; all
jointly participating, and all concurring, as one Whole, in the Disposition and
Action of the Head: as we see in the Body natural, the whole Body is affected
as the Head is affected; and the whole Body concurs when the Head acts. Now, in
this Case, the Hearts of all the Branches of Mankind, by the Constitution of
Nature and Law of Union, would have been affected just as the Heart of Adam,
their common Root, was affected. When the Heart of the Root, by a full
Disposition committed the first Sin, the Hearts of all the Branches would have
concurred; and when the Root, in Consequence of this, became guilty, so would
all the Branches; and when the Heart of the Root, as a Punishment of the Sin
committed, was forsaken of God, in like Manner would it have faired with all
the Branches; and when the Heart of the Root, in Consequence of this, was
confirmed in permanent Depravity, the Case would have been the same with all
the Branches; and as new Guilt on the Soul of Adam would have been consequent
on this, so also would it have been with his moral Branches. And thus all
Things, with Relation to evil Disposition, Guilt, Pollution and Depravity,
would exist, in the same Order and Dependence, in each Branch, as in the Root.
Now, Difference of the Time of Existence don't at all hinder Things succeeding
in the same Order, any more than Difference of Place in a Co-existence of Time.

Here may be worthy to be observed, as in several Respects to the present
Purpose, some Things that are said by Stapferus, an eminent Divine of Zurich in
Switzerland, in his Theologia Polemica, published about fourteen Years ago; --
in English as follows. Seeing all Adam's Posterity are derived from their first
Parent, as their Root, the whole of the human Kind, with it is Root, may be
considered as constituting but one Whole, or one Mass; so as not to be properly
a Thing distinct from it is Root; the Posterity not differing from it, any
otherwise than the Branches from the Tree. From which it easily appears, how
that when the Root sinned, all that which is derived from it, and with it
constitutes but one Whole, may be looked upon as also sinning; seeing it is not
distinct from the Root, but is one with it. -- T^m. I. Chap. III.. 856, 57.

It Is objected, against the Imputation of Adam's Sin, that we never committed
the same Sin with Adam, neither in Number nor in Kind. I answer, we should
distinguish here between the Physical Act it self, which Adam committed, and
the Morality of the Action, and Consent to it. If we have respect only to the
external Act, to be sure it must be confessed, that Adam's Posterity did not
put forth their Hands to the forbidden Fruit: In which Sense, that Act of
Transgression, and that Fall of Adam cannot be physically one with the Sin of
his Posterity. But if we consider the Morality of the Action, and what Consent
there is to it, it is altogether to be maintained, that his Posterity committed
the same Sin, both in Number and in Kind, inasmuch as they are to be looked
upon as consenting to it. For where there is Consent to a Sin, there the same
Sin is committed. Seeing therefore that Adam with all his Posterity constitute
but one moral Person, and are united in the same Covenant, and are
Transgressors of the same Law, they are also to be looked upon as having, in a
moral Estimation, committed the same Transgression of the Law, both in Number
and in Kind. Therefore this Reasoning avails nothing against the righteous
Imputation of the Sin of Adam to all Mankind, or to the whole moral Person that
is consenting to it. And for the Reason mentioned, we may rather argue thus;
The Sin of the Posterity, on Account of their Consent, and the moral View in
which they are to be taken, is the same with the Sin of Adam, not only in Kind,
but in Number; therefore the Sin of Adam is rightfully imputed to his
Posterity. -- Id. Tom. iv. Cap. 16.. 60, 61.

The Imputation of Adam's first Sin consists in Nothing else than this, that
his Posterity are viewed as in the same Place with their Father, and are like
him. But seeing, agreeable to what we have already proved, God might, according
to his own righteous Judgment, which was founded on his most righteous Law,
give Adam a Posterity that were like himself; and indeed it could not be
otherwise, according to the very Laws of Nature; therefore he might also in
righteous Judgment impute Adam's Sin to them: inasmuch as to give Adam a
Posterity like himself, and to impute his Sin to them, is one and the same
Thing. And therefore if the former be not contrary to the divine Perfections,
so neither is the latter. -- Our Adversaries contend with us chiefly on this
Account, That according to our Doctrine of original Sin, such an Imputation of
the first Sin is maintained, whereby God, without any Regard to universal
native Corruption, esteems all Adam's Posterity as guilty, and holds them as
liable to Condemnation, purely on Account of that sinful Act of their first
Parent; so that They, without any Respect had to their own Sin, and so, as
innocent in themselves, are destined to eternal Punishment. -- I have therefore
ever been careful to show, that they do injuriously suppose those things to be
separated, in our Doctrine, which are by no Means to be separated. The whole of
the Controversy they have with us about this Matter, evidently arises from
this, That they suppose the mediate and the immediate Imputation are
distinguished one from the other, not only in the Manner of Conception, but in
Reality. And so indeed they consider Imputation only as immediate, and
abstractly from the mediate; when yet our Divines suppose, that neither ought
to be considered separately from the other. Therefore I chose not to use any
such Distinction, or to suppose any such Thing, in what I Have said on the
Subject; but only have endeavored to explain the Thing it self, and to
reconcile it with the divine Attributes. And therefore I have every where
conjoined both these Conceptions concerning the Imputation of the first Sin, as
inseparable; and judged, that one ought never to be considered without the
other. -- While I have been writing this Note, I consulted all the Systems of
Divinity, which I have by me, that I might see what was the true and genuine
Opinion of our chief Divines in this Affair; and I found that they were of the
same Mind with Me; namely, That these two Kinds of Imputation are by no Means
to be separated, or to be considered abstractly one from the other, but that
one does involve the other. -- He there particularly cites those two famous
reformed Divines, Vitring^, and Lampius. -- Tom. iv. Cap. 17.. 78.




The first Existence of an evil Disposition of Heart, amounting to a full
Consent to Adam's Sin, no more infers God's being the Author of that evil
Disposition in the Child, than in the Father. The first Arising or Existing of
that evil Disposition in the Heart of Adam, was by God's Permission; who could
have prevented it, if he had pleased, by giving such Influences of his Spirit,
as would have been absolutely effectual to hinder it: which, it is plain in
Fact, he did withold: and whatever Mystery may be supposed in the Affair, yet
no Christian will presume to say, it was not in perfect Consistence with God's
Holiness and Righteousness, notwithstanding Adam had been guilty of no Offense
before. So Root and Branches being one, according to God's wise Constitution,
the Case in Fact is, that by virtue of this Oneness answerable Changes or
Effects through all the Branches co-exist with the Changes in the Root:
consequently an evil Disposition exists in the Hearts of Adam's Posterity,
equivalent to that which was exerted in his own Heart, when he eat the
forbidden Fruit. Which God has no Hand in, any otherwise, than in not exerting
such an Influence, as might be effectual to prevent it; as appears by what was
observed in the former Chapter.

But now the grand Objection is against the Reasonableness of such a
Constitution, by which Adam and his Posterity should be looked upon as One, and
dealt with accordingly, in an Affair of such infinite Consequence; so that if
Adam sinned, they must necessarily be made Sinners by his Disobedience, and
come into Existence with the same Depravity of Disposition, and be looked upon
and treated as the they were Partakers with Adam in his Act of Sin. -- I have
not Room here to rehearse all Dr. T -- r's vehement Exclamations against the
Reasonableness and Justice of this. The Reader may at his Leisure consult his
Book, and see them in Places referred to in the Margin. P. 13. 150, 151, 156,
261, 384, 387.
-- Whatever black Colors and frightful Representations are employed on this
Occasion, all may be ^um'd up in this, That Adam and his Posterity are not one,
but intir^ly distinct Agents. -- But with Respect to this mighty Outcry made
against the Reasonableness of any such Constitution, by which God is supposed
to treat Adam and his Posterity as One, I would make the following Observations.

I. It signifies Nothing, to exclaim against plain Fact -- Such is the Fact,
most evident and acknowledged Fact, with respect to the State of all Mankind,
without Exception of one Individual among all the natural Descendents of Adam,
as makes it apparent, that God actually deals with Adam and his Posterity as
One, in the Affair of his Apostasy, and it is infinitely terrible Consequences.
It has been demonstrated, and ^hewn to be in Effect plainly acknowledged, that
every Individual of Mankind comes into the World in such Circumstances, as that
there is no Hope or Possibility of any other than their violating God's holy
Law (if they ever live to act at all, as moral Agents) and being thereby justly
exposed to eternal Ruin. Part I. Chap. I. the three first Sections.
And it is thus by God's ordering and disposing of Things. And God either thus
deals with Mankind, because he looks upon them as one with their first Father,
and so treats them as sinful and guilty by his Apostasy; or (which will not mend
the Matter) He, without viewing them as at all concerned in that Affair, but as
in every Respect perfectly innocent, does nevertheless subject them to this
infinitely dreadful Calamity. Adam by his Sin was exposed to the Calamities
andSorrows of this Life, to temporal Death, and eternal Ruin; as is confessed.
And it is also in Effect confessed, that all his Posterity come into the World
in such a State, as that the certain Consequence is their being exposed, and
justly so, to the Sorrows of this Life, to temporal Death, and eternal Ruin,
unless saved by Grace. So that we see, God in Fact deals with them together, or
as one. If God orders the Consequences of Adam's Sin, with regard to his
Posterity's Welfare, even in those things which are most important, and which
do in the highest Degree concern their eternal Interest, to be the same with
the Consequences to Adam himself, then he treats Adam and his Posterity as in
that Affair one. Hence, however the Matter be attended with Difficulty, Fact
obliges us to get over the Difficulty, either by finding out some Solution, or
by shutting our Mouths, and acknowledging the Weakness and Scantiness of our
Understandings; as we must in innumerable other Cases, where apparent and
undeniable Fact, in God's Works of Creation and Providence, is attended with
Events and Circumstances, the Manner and Reason of which are difficult to our
Understandings, -- But to proceed,

II. We will consider the Difficulties themselves, insisted on in the
Objections of our Opposers. They may: be reduced to these two; First, That such
a Constitution is injurious to Adam's Posterity. Secondly, That it is
altogether improper, as it implies Falsehood; viewing and treating those as one,
which indeed are not one, but entirely distinct.

FIRST Difficulty, That the appointing Adam to stand, in this great Affair, as
the moral Head of his Posterity, and so treating them as one with him, as
standing or falling with him, is injurious to them, and tends to their Hurt. To
which I answer, It is demonstrably otherwise; that such a Constitution was so
far from being injurious and hurtful to Adam's Posterity, or tending to their
Calamity, any more than if every one had been appointed to stand for himself
personally, that it was, in it self considered, very much of a contrary
Tendency, and was attended with a more eligible Probability of an happy Issue,
than the latter would have been: and so is a Constitution truly expressing the
Goodness of it is Author. For, here the following Things are to be considered.

1. It Is reasonable to suppose, that Adam was as likely, on Account of his
Capacity and natural Talents, to persevere in Obedience, as his Posterity
(taking one with another) if they had all been put on the Trial singly for
themselves. And supposing, that there was a constituted Union or Oneness of him
and his Posterity, and that he stood as a public Person, or common Head, all
by this Constitution would have been as sure to partake of the Benefit of his
Obedience, as of the ill Consequence of his Disobedience, in Case of his Fall.

2. There was a greater Tendency to a happy Issue, in such an Appointment, than
if every one had been appointed to stand for himself; especially on two
Accounts.

(1.) That Adam had stronger Motives to Watchfulness, than his Posterity would
have had; in that not only his own eternal Welfare lay at Stake, but also that
of all his Posterity. (2.) Adam was in a State of complete Manhood, when his
Trial began. It was a Constitution very agreeable to the Goodness of God,
considering the State of Mankind, which was to be propagated in the Way of
Generation, that their first Father should be appointed to stand for all For by
Reason of the Manner of their coming into Existence in a State of Infancy, and
their coming so gradually to mature State, and so remaining for a great while
in a State of Childhood and comparative Imperfection, after they were become
moral Agents, they would be less fit to stand for themselves, than their first
Father to stand for them.

If any Man, notwithstanding these Things, shall say, That for his own Part, if
the Affair had been proposed to him, he should have chosen to have his eternal
Interest trusted in his own Hands: It Is sufficient to answer, that no Man's
vain Opinion of himself, as more fit to be trusted than others, alters the true
Nature and Tendency of Things, as they demonstrably are in themselves. -- Nor
is it a just Objection. That this Constitution has in Event proved for the Hurt
of Mankind. For it don't follow, that no Advantage was given for a happy Event,
in such an Establishment, because it was not such as to make it utterly
impossible there should be any other Event.

3. The Goodness of God in such a Constitution with Adam appears in this; That
if there had been no sovereign gracious Establishment at all, but God had
proceeded only on the Foot of mere Justice, and had gone no further than this
required, he might have demanded of Adam and all his Posterity, that they
should perform perfect perpetual Obedience, without ever failing in the least
Instance, on Pain of eternal Death; and might have made this Demand without the
Promise of any positive Reward for their Obedience. For perfect Obedience is a
Debt, that every one owes to his Creator; and therefore (...) what his Creator
was not obliged to pay him for. None is obliged to pay his Debtor, only for
discharging his just Debt. -- But such was evidently the Constitution with
Adam, that an eternal happy Life was to be the Consequence of his persevering
Fidelity, to all such as were included within that Constitution (of which the
Tree of Life was a Sign) as well as eternal Death to be the Consequence of his
Disobedience. -- I come now to consider the

SECOND Difficulty. -- It being thus manifest, that this Constitution, by which
Adam and his Posterity are dealt with as One, is not unreasonable upon Account
of it is being injurious and hurtful to the Interest of Mankind, the only thing
remaining in the Objection against such a Constitution, is the Impropriety of
it, as implying Falsehood, and Contradiction to the true Nature of Things; as
hereby they are viewed and treated as one, who are not one, but wholly
distinct; and no arbitrary Constitution can ever make that to be true, which in
it self considered is not true.

This Objection, however specious, is really founded on a false Hypothesis, and
wrong Notion of what we call Sameness or Oneness, among created Things; and the
seeming Force of the Objection arises from Ignorance or Inconsideration of the
Degree, in which created Identity or Oneness with past Existence, in general,
depends on the sovereign Constitution and Law of the supreme Author and
Disposer of the Universe.

Some Things, being most simply considered, are entirely distinct, and very
diverse; which yet are so united by the established Law of the Creator, in some
Respects and with Regard to some Purposes and Effects, that by Virtue of that
Establishment it is with them as if they were One. Thus a Tree, grown great,
and an hundred Years old, is One Plant with the little Sprout, that first came
out of the Ground, from whence it grew, and has been continued in constant
Succession; tho it is now so exceeding diverse, many Thousand Times bigger, and
of a very different Form, and perhaps not one Atom the very same: Yet God,
according to an established Law of Nature, has in a constant Succession
communicated to it many of the same Qualities, and most important Properties,
as if it were One. It has been his Pleasure, to constitute an Union in these
Respects, and for these Purposes, naturally leading us to look upon all as One.
-- So the Body of Man at forty Years of Age, is one with the Infant-Body which
first came into the World, from whence it grew; though now constituted of
different Substance, and the greater Part of the Substance probably changed
Scores (if not hundreds) of Times: and though it be now in so many Respects
exceeding diverse, yet God, according to the Course of Nature, which he has
been pleased to establish, has caused, that in a certain Method it should
communicate with that infantile Body, in the same Life, the same Senses, the
same Features, and many the same Qualities, and in Union with the same Soul;
and so, with regard to these Purposes, it is dealt with by him as one Body.
Again, the Body and Soul of a Man are one, in a very different Manner, and for
different Purposes. Considered in themselves, they are exceeding different
Beings, of a Nature as diverse as can be conceived; and yet, by a very peculiar
divine Constitution or Law of Nature, which God has been pleased to establish,
they are strongly united, and become One, in most important Respects; a
wonderful mutual Communication is established; so that both become different
Parts of the same Man. But the Union and mutual Communication they have, has
Existence, and is entirely regulated and limited, according to the sovereign
Pleasure of God, and the Constitution he has been pleased to establish.

And if we come even to the personal Identity of created intelligent Beings,
tho this be not allowed to consist wholly in that which Mr. Lock places it in,
i. e. Same Consciousness; yet I think it cannot be denied, that this is one
thing essential to it. But it is evident, that the Communication or Continuance
of the same Consciousness and Memory to any Subject, through successive Parts of
Duration, depends wholly on a divine Establishment. There would be no
Necessity, that the Remembrance and Idea's of what is past should continue to
exist, but by an arbitrary Constitution of the Creator. -- If any should here
insist, that there is no Need of having Recourse to any such Constitution, in
order to account for the Continuance of the same Consciousness; and should say,
that the very Nature of the Soul is such as will sufficiently account for it;
and that the Soul will retain the Idea's and Consciousness it once had,
according to the Course of Nature: -- Then let it be remembered, Who it is,
gives the Soul this Nature; and let that be remembered, which Dr. T. says of
the Course of Nature, before observed; denying, that the Course of Nature is a
proper active Cause, which will work and go on by itself without God, if he
lets and permits it; saying, that the Course of Nature, separate from the
Agency of God, is no Cause, or Nothing; and affirming, that it is absolutely
impossible, the Course of Nature should continue it self, or go on to operate
by itself, any more than produce itself; P. 410.
and, that God, the Original of all Being, is the ONLY CAUSE of all natural
Effects. P. 416.
-- Here is worthy also to be observed, what Dr. Turnbull says of the Laws of
Nature, in Words which he cites from Sir Isaac Newton. Mor. Phil. P. 7.
It is the Will of the Mind that is the first Cause, that gives Subsistence and
Efficacy to all those Laws, who is the efficient Cause that produces the
Phenomena, which appear in Analogy, Harmony and Agreement, according to these
Laws. And he says, The same Principles must take Place in Things pertaining to
moral, as well as natural Philosophy. Ibid P. 9*


From these Things it will clearly follow, that Identity of Consciousness
depends wholly on a Law of Nature; and so, on the sovereign Will and Agency of
GOD; and therefore, that Personal Identity, and so the Derivation of the
Pollution and Guilt of past Sins in the same Person, depends on an arbitrary
divine Constitution: and this, even though we should allow the same
Consciousness not to be the only Thing which constitutes Oneness of Person, but
should, besides that, suppose Samen^ss of Substance requisite. For, if same
Consciousness be one Thing necessary to Personal Identity, and this depends on
God's sovereign Constitution, it will still follow, that personal Identity
depends on God's sovereign Constitution.

And with respect to the Identity of created Substance it self, in the
different Moments of its Duration, I think, we shall greatly mistake, if we
imagine it to be like that absolute, independent Identity of the FIRST BEING,
whereby He is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. Nay, on the contrary,
it may be demonstrated, that even this Oneness of created Substance, existing
at different Times, is a ^eerly dependentIdentity; dependent on the Pleasure
and sovereign Constitution of Him who works all in all. This will follow from
what is generally allowed, and is certainly true, That God not only created all
Things, and gave them Being at first, but continually preserves them, and
upholds them in Being. -- This being a Matter of considerable Importance, it
may be worthy here to be considered with a little Attention. -- Let us inquire
therefore, in the first Place, Whether it ben't evident, that God does
continually, by his immediate Power, uphold every created Substance in Being;
and then let us see the Consequence.

That God does, by his immediate Power, uphold every created Substance in
Being, will be manifest, if we consider, that their present Existen^e is a
dependent Existence, and therefore is an Effect, and must have some Cause: and
the Cause must be one of these two; either the antecedent Existence of the same
Substance, or else the Power of the Creator. But it cannot be the antecedent
Existence of the same Substance. For Instance, the Existence of the Body of the
Moon at this present Moment, cannot be the Effect of it is Existence at the last
foregoing Moment. For not only was what existed the last Moment, no active
Cause, but wholly a passive Thing; But this also is to be considered, that no
Cause can produce Effects in a Time and Place in which it self is not. It Is
plain, Nothing can exert itself, or operate, when and where it is not existing.
But the Moon's past Existence was neither where not when its present Existence
is. -- In point of Time; what is past, entirely ceases, when present Existence
begins; otherwise it would not be past. The past Moment is ceased and gone,
when the present Moment takes Place,; and does no more co-exist with it, than
does any other Moment that had ceased twenty Years ago. Nor could the past
Existence of the Particles of this moving Body produce Effects in any other
Place, than where it then was. But its Existence at the present Moment, in
every Point of it, is in a different Place, from where its Existence was at the
last preceding Moment. From these Things, I suppose, it will certainly follow,
that the present Existence, either of this, or any other created Substance,
cannot be an Effect of its past Existence. The Existences (so to speak) of an
Effect, or Thing dependent, in different Parts of Space or Duration, tho ever
so near one to another, don't at all co-exist one with the other; and therefore
are as truly different Effects, as if those Parts of Space and Duration were
ever so far asunder: And the prior Existence can no more be the proper Cause of
the new Existence, in the next Moment, or next Part of Space, than if it had
been in an Age before, or at a Thousand Miles Distance, without any Existence
to fill up the intermediate Time or Space. Therefore the Existence of created
Substances, in each successive Moment, must be the Effect of the immediate
Agency, Will, and Power of GOD.

If any shall say, This Reasoning is not good, and shall insist upon it, that
there is no Need of any immediate divine Power, to produce the present
Existence of created Substances, but that their present Existence is the Effect
or Consequence of past Existence, according to the Nature of Things; that the
established Course of Nature is suffient to continue Existence, where Existence
is once given; -- I allow it: But then it should be remembered, what Nature is,
in created Things; and what the established Course of Nature is; That, as has
been observed already, it is Nothing, separate from the Agency of God; and
that, as Dr. T. says, GOD, the Original of all Being, is the ONLY Cause of all
natural Effects. -- A Father, according to the Course of Nature, begets a
Child; an Oak, according to the Course of Nature, produces an Acorn, or a Bud;
so according to the Course of Nature, the former Exist^nce of the Trunk of the
Tree is followed by it is new or present Existence. In the one Case, and the
other, the new Effect is consequent on the former, only by the established
Laws, and settled Course of Nature; which is allowed to be Nothing but the
continued immediate Efficiency of GOD, according to a Constitution that he has
been pleased to establish. Therefore, as our Author greatly urges, that the
Child and the Acorn, which come into Existence according to a Constitution that
he has been pleased to establish. Therefore, as our Author greatly urges, that
the Child and the Acorn, which come into Existence according to the Course of
Nature, in Consequence of the prior Existence and State of the Parent and the
Oak, are truly immediately created or made by God; so must the Existence of
each created Person and Thing, at each Moment of it, be from the immediate
continued Creation of God. It will certainly follow from these Things, that
God's preserving created Things in Being is perfectly equivalent to a continued
Creation, or to his creating those Things out of Nothing at each Moment of
their Existence. If the continued Existence of created Things be wholly
dependent on God's Preservation, then those Things would drop into Nothing,
upon the ceasing of the present Moment, without a new Exertion of the divine
Power to cause them to exist in the following Moment. If there be any who own,
that God preserves Things in Being, and yet hold that they would continue in
Being without any further Help from him, after they once have Existence; I
think, it is hard to know what they mean. To what Purpose can it be, to talk of
God's preserving Things in Being, when there is no Need of his preserving them?
Or to talk of their being dependent on God for continued Existence, when they
would of themselves continue to exist, without his Help; nay, though he should
wholly withdraw his sustaining Power and Influence?

It will follow from what has been observed, that God's upholding created
Substance, or causing it is Existence in each successive Moment, is altogether
equivalent to an immediate Production out of Nothing, at each Moment. Because
it is Existence at this Moment is not merely in Part from God, but wholly from
him; and not in any Part, or Degree, from it is antecedent Existence. For the
suppo^ing, that it is antecedent Existence concurs with God in Efficiency, to
produce some Part of the Effect, is attended with all the very same
Absurdities, which have been shown to attend the Supposition of it is producing
it wholly. Therefore the antecedent Existence is Nothing, as to any proper
Influence or Assistance in the Affair: And consequently God produces the Effect
as much from Nothing, as if there had been Nothing before. So that this Effect
differs not at all from the first Creation, but only Circumstantially; as in
first Creation there had been no such Act and Effect of God's Power before:
whereas, his giving Existence afterward, follows preceding Acts and Effects
of the same Kind, in an established Order.

Now, in the next Place, let us see how the Consequence of these Things is to
my present Purpose. If the Existence of created Substance, in each successive
Moment, be wholly the Effect of God's immediate Power, in that Moment, without
any Dependence on prior Existence, as much as the first Creation out of
Nothing, then what exists at this Moment, by this Power, is a new Effect; and
simply and absolutely considered, not the same with any past Existence, though it
be like it, and follows it according to a certain established Method. When I
suppose, that an Effect which is produced, every Moment, by a new Action or
Exertion of Power, must be a new Effect in each Moment, and not absolutely and
numerically the same with that which existed in pr^ceeding Moments, the Thing
that I intend, may be illustrated by this Example. The lucid Color of
Brightness of the Moon, as we look steadfastly upon it, seems to be a permanent
Thing, as though it were perfectly the same Brightness continued. But indeed it
is an Effect produced every Moment. It ceases, and is renewed, in each
successive Point of Time; and so becomes altogether a new Effect at each
Instant; and no one Thing that belongs to it, is numerically the same that
existed in the preceding Moment. The Rays of the Sun, impressed on that Body,
and reflected from it, which cause the Effect, are none of them the same: The
Impression, made in each Moment on our Sensory, is by the Stroke of new Rays:
And the Sensation, excited by the Stroke, is a new Effect, an Effect of a new
Impulse. Therefore the Brightness or lucid Whiteness of this Body is no more
numerically the same Thing with that which existed in the preceding Moment,
than the Sound of the Wind that blows now, is individually the same with that
which passed a little before. And if it be thus with the Brightness or Color
of the Moon, so it must be with it is Solidity, and every thing else belonging
to it is Substance, if all be, each Moment, as much the immediate Effect of a
new Exertion or Application of Power.

The Matter may perhaps be in some Respects still more clearly illustrated by
this. -- The Images of Things in a Glass, as we keep our Eye upon them, seem to
remain precisely the same, with a continuing perfect Identity. But it is known
to be otherwise. Philosophers well know, that these Images are constantly
renewed, by the Impression and Reflection of new Rays of Light; so that the
Image impressed by the former Rays is constantly vanishing, and a new Image
impressed by new Rays every Moment, both on the Glass and on the Eye. The Image
constantly renewed, by new successive rays, is no more numerically the same,
than if it were by some Artist put on anew with a Pencil, and the Colors
constantly vanishing as fast as put on. And the new Images being put on
immediately or instantly, don't make 'em the same, any more than if it were
done with the Intermission of an Hour or a Day. The Image that exists this
Moment, is not at all derived from the Image which existed the last preceding
Moment: as may be seen, because, if the Succession of new Rays be intercepted,
by something interposed between the Object and the Glass, the Image immediately
ceases; the past Existence of the Image has no Influence to uphold it, so much
as for one Moment. Which shows, that the Image is altogether new-made every
Moment; and strictly speaking, is in no Part numerically the same with that
which existed the Moment preceding. And truly so the Matter must be with the
Bodies themselves, as well as their Images: They also cannot be the same, with
an absolute Identity, but must be wholly renewed every Moment, if the Case be
as has been proved, that their present existence is not, strictly speaking, at
all the Effect of their past existence; but is wholly, every Instant, the
Effect of a new Agency, or Exertion of the Power, of the Cause or their
Existence. If so, the Existence caused is every Instant a new Effect, whether
the Cause be Light, or immediate divine Power, or whatever it be.


And there is no Identity or Oneness in the Case, but what depends on the
arbitrary Constitution of the Creator; who by his wise sovereign Establishment
so unites these successive new Effects, that he treats them as One, by
communicating to them like Properties, Relations, and Circumstances; and so,
leads us to regard and treat them as one. When I call this an arbitrary
Constitution, I mean, that it is a Constitution which depends on Nothing but
the divine Will; which divine Will depends on Nothing but the divine Wisdom. In
this Sense, the whole Course of Nature, with all that belongs to it, all it is
Laws and Methods, and Constancy and Regularity, Continuance and Proceeding, is
an arbitrary Constitution. In this Sense, the Continuance of the very Being of
the World and all it is Parts, as well as the Manner of continued Being, depends
entirely on an arbitrary Constitution: for it don't at all necessarily follow,
that because there was Sound, or Light, or Color, or Re^istance, or Gravity,
or Thought, or Consciousness, or any other dependent Thing the last Moment,
that therefore there shall be the like at the next. -- All dependent Existence
whatsoever is in a constant Flux, ever passing and returning; renewed every
Moment, as the Colors of Bodies are every Moment renewed by the Light that
shines upon them; and all is constantly proceeding from GOD, as Light from the
Sun. In Him we live, and move, and have our Being.

Thus it appears, if we consider Matters strictly, there is no such Thing as
any Identity or Oneness in created Objects, existing at different Times, but
what depends on GOD's sovereign Constitution. And so it appears, that the
Objection we are upon, made against a supposed divine Constitution, whereby
Adam and his Posterity are viewed and treated as One, in the Manner and for the
Purposes supposed, as if it were not consistent with Truth, because no
Constitution can make those to be one, which are not one; I say, it appears
that this Objection is built on a false Hypothesis: For it appears, that a
divine Constitution is the Thing which makes Truth, in Affairs of this Nature.
The Objection supposes, there is a Oneness in created Beings, whence Qualities
and Relations are derived down from past Existence, distinct from, and prior to
any Oneness that can be supposed to be founded on divine Constitution. Which is
demonstrably false; and sufficiently appears so from things conceded by the
Adversaries themselves: And therefore the Objection wholly falls to the Ground.

There are various Kinds of Identity and Oneness, found among created Things,
by which they become one in different Manners, Respects and Degrees, and to
various Purposes; several of which Differences have been observed; and every
Kind is ordered, regulated and limited, in every Respect, by divine
Constitution. Some Things, existing in different Times and Places, are treated
by their Creator as One in one Respect, and others in another; some are united
for this Communication, and others for that; but all according to the sovereign
Pleasure of the Fountain of all Being and Operation.

It appears, particularly, from what has been said, that all Oneness, by Virtue
whereof Pollution and Guilt from past Wickedness are derived, depends entirely
on a divine Establishment. It Is this, and this only, that must account for
Guilt and an evil Taint on any individual Soul, in Consequence of a Crime
committed twenty or forty Years ago, remaining still, and even to the End of
the World and forever. It Is this, that must account for the Continu^nce of any
such Thing, any where, as Consciousness of Acts that are past; and for the
Continuance of all Habits, either good or bad: and on this depends every Thing
that can belong to personal Identity. And all Communications, Derivations, or
Continuation of Qualities, Properties, or Relations, natural or moral, from
what is past, as if the Subject were one, depends on no other Foundation.

And I am persuaded, no solid Reason can be given, why God, who constitutes all
other created Union or Oneness, according to his Pleasure, and for what
Purposes, Communications, and Effects, he pleases, may not establish a
Constitution whereby the natural Posterity of Adam, proceeding from him, much
as the Buds and Branches from the Stock or Root of a Tree, should be treated as
One with him, for the Derivation, either of Righteousness, and Communion in
Rewards, or of the Loss of Righteousness, and consequent Corruption and Guilt.
I appeal to such as are not wont to content themselves with judging by a
superficial Appearance and View of Things, but are habituated to examine things
strictly and closely, that they may judge righteous Judgment, Whether on
Supposition that all Mankind had co-existed, in the Manner mentioned before,
any good Reason can be given, why their Creator might not, If he had pleased,
have established such an Union between Adam and the rest of Mankind, as was in
that Case supposed. Particularly, if it had been the Case, that Adam's
Posterity had actually, according to a Law of Nature, some how grown out of
him, and yet remained contiguous and literally united to him, as the Branches
to a Tree, or the Members of the Body to the Head; and had all, before the
Fall, existed together at the same Time, tho in different Places, as the Head
and Members are in different Places: In this Case, who can determine, that the
Author of Nature might not, if it had pleased him, have established such an
Union between the Root and Branches of this complex Being, as that all should
constitute one moral Whole; so that by the Law of Union, there should be a
Communication in each moral Alteration, and that the Heart of every Branch
should at the same Moment participate with the Heart of the Root, be conformed
to it and concurring with it in all its Affections and Acts, and so jointly
partaking in its State, as a Part of the same Thing? Why might not God, if he
had pleased, have fixed such a Kind of Union as this, an Union of the various
Parts of such a moral While, as well as many other Unions, which he has
actually fixed, according to his sovereign Pleasure? And if he might, by his
sovereign Constitution, have established such as Union of the various Branches
of Mankind, when existing. In different Places, I don't see why he might not
also do the same, though they exist in different Times. I know not why
Succession, or Diversity of Time, should make any such con^^itued Union more
unreasonable, than Diversity of Place. The only Reason, why Diversity of Time
can seem to make it unreasonable, is, that Difference of Time shows, there is
no absolute Identity of the Things existing in those different Times: But it
shows this, I think, not at all more than the Difference of the Place of
Existence.


As I said before, All Oneness in created Things, whence Qualities and
Relations are derived, depends on a divine Constitution that is arbitrary, in
every other Respect, excepting that it is regulated by divine Wisdom. The
Wisdom, which is exercised in these Constitutions, appears in these two Things.
First, In a beautiful Analogy and Harmony with other Laws or Constitutions,
especially relating to the same Subject: and Secondly, in the good Ends
obtained, or useful Consequences of such a Constitution. If therefore there be
any Objection still lying against this Constitution with Adam and his
Posterity, it must be, that it is not sufficiently wise in these Respects. But
what extreme Arrogance would it be in us, to take upon us to act as Judges of
the Beauty and Wisdom of the Laws and established Constitutions of the supreme
Lord and Creator of the Universe? -- And not only so, but if this Constitution,
in particular, be well considered, it is Wisdom, in the two forementioned
Respects, may easily be made evident. There is an apparent manifold Analogy to
other Constitutions and Laws, established and maintained through the whole
System of vital Nature in this lower World; all Parts of which, in all
Successions, are derived from the first of the Kind, as from their Root, or
Fountain; each deriving from thence all Properties and Qualities, that are
proper to the Nature and Capacity of the Kind, or Species: No Derivative having
any one Perfection (unless it be what is merely circumstantial) but what was in
it is Primitive. And that Adam's Posterity should be without that original
Righteousness, which Adam had lost, is also analogous to other Laws and
Establishments, relating to the Nature of Mankind; according to which, Adam's
Posterity have no one Perfection of Nature, in any Kind, superior to what was
in him, when the human Race began to be propagated from him.

And as such a Constitution was fit and wise in other Respects, so it was in
this that follows. Seeing the divine Constitution concerning the Manner of
Mankind's coming into Existence in their Propagation, was such as did so
nat^rally unite them, and made 'em in so many Respects One, naturally leading
them to a close Union in Society, and manifold Intercourse, and mutual
Dependence, Things were wisely so established, that all should naturally be in
one and the same moral State; and not in such exceeding different States, as
that some should be perfectly innocent and holy, but others corrupt and wicked;
some needing a Savior, but others needing none; some in a confirmed State of
perfect Happiness, but others in a State of public Condemnation to perfect and
eternal Misery; some justly exposed to great Calamities in this World, but
others by their Innocence raised above all Suffering. Such a vast Diversity of
State would by no Means have agreed with the natural and necessary Constitution
and unavoidable Situation and Circumstances of the World of Mankind; all made
of one Blood, to dwell on all the Face of the Earth, to be united and blended
in Society, and to partake together in the natural and common Goods and Evils
of this lower World*

Dr. T. urges, P. 13.
that Sorrow and Shame are only for personal Sin: and it has often been urged,
that Repentance can be for no other Sin. To which I would say, that the Use of
Words is very arbitrary: But that Men's Hearts should be deeply affected with
Grief and Humiliation before God, for the Pollution and Guilt which they bring
into the World with them, I think, is not in the least unreasonable. Nor is it
a Thing strange and unheard of, that Men should be ashamed of Things done by
others, whom they are nearly concerned in. I am sure, it is not unscriptural;
especially when they are justly looked upon in the Sight of God, who sees the
Disposition of their Hearts, as fully consenting and concurring.

From what has been observed it may appear, there is no sure Ground to
conclude, that it must be an absurd and impossible Thing, for the Race of
Mankind truly to partake of the Sin of the first Apostasy, so as that this, in
Reality and Propriety, shall become their Sin; by Virtue of a real Union
between the Root and Branches of the World of Mankind (truly and properly
availing to such a Consequence) established by the Author of the whole System
of the Universe; to whose Establishments is owing all Propriety and Reality of
Union, in any Part of that System; and by Virtue of the full Consent of the
Hearts of Adam's Posterity to that first Apostasy. And therefore the Sin of the
Apostasy is not their's, merely because God imputes it to them; but it is truly
and properly their's, and on that Ground, God imputes it to them.

By Reason of the established Union between Adam and his Posterity, theCase is
far otherwise between him and them, than it is between distinct Parts or
Individuals of Adam's Race; betwixt whom is no such constituted Union: As,
between Children and other Ancestors. Concerning whom is apparently to be
understood that Place, Ezekiel. xviii. 1, -- 20. Which Dr. T. alleges P. 286, 287.
Where God reproves the Jews for the Use they made of that Proverb, The Fathers
have eaten sour Grapes, and the Children's Teeth are set on Edge; and tells
them, that hereafter they shall no more have Occasion to use this Proverb; and
that if a Son sees the Wickedness of his Father, and sincerely disapproves it
and avoids it, and he himself is righteous, he shall not die for the Iniquity
of his Father; that all Souls, both the Soul of the Father and the Son, are
his; and that therefore the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father, nor
the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son; but the Soul that sins, it shall
die; that the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the
Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him. The Thing denied, is Communion in
the Guilt and Punishment of the Sins of others, that are distinct Parts of
Adam's Race; and expressly, in that Case, where there is no Consent and
Concurrence, but a sincere Disapprobation of the Wickedness of Ancestors. It is
declared, that Children who are adult and come to act for themselves, who are
righteous, and don't approve of, but sincerely condemn the Wickedness of their
Fathers, shall not be punished for their disapproved and avoided Iniquities.
The Occasion of what is here said, as well as the Design and plain Sense,
shows, that Nothing is here intended in the least Degree inconsistent with what
has been supposed concerning Adam's Posterity's sinning and falling in his
Apostasy. -- The Occasion is, the People's murmuring at God's Methods under the
Mosaic Dispensation; agreeable to that in Levit. xxvi.29. And they that are left
of you, shall pine away in their Iniquity in their Enemies Land, and also in
the Iniquities of their Fathers shall they pine away with them. And other
parallel Places, respecting external Judgments, which were the Punishments most
plainly threatened, and chiefly insisted on, under that Dispensation (which
was, as it were, an external and carnal Covenant) and particularly the People's
suffering such terrible Judgments at that Day, even in Ezekiel's Time, for the
Sins of Manasseh; according to what God says by Jeremiah (Jer. xv. 4.) and
agre^ble to what is said in that Confession, Lam. v. 9. Our Fathers have sinned
and are not, and we have borne their Iniquities.

In what is said here, there is a special Respect to the introducing the
Gospel Dispensation; as is greatly confirmed by comparing this Place with Jer.
xxxi. 29, 30, 31. Under which Dispensation, the Righteousness of God's Dealings
with Mankind would be more fully manifested, in the clear Revelation then to be
made of the Method of the Judgment of God, by which the final State of wicked
Men is determined; which is not according to the Behavior of their particular
Ancestors; but every one is dealt with according to the Sin of his own wicked
Heart, or sinful Nature and Practice. The Affair of Derivation of the natural
Corruption of Mankind in general, and of their Consent to, and Participation
of, the primitive and common Apostasy, is not in the least intermeddled with,
or touched, by any thing meant or aimed at in the true Scope and Design of this
Place in Ezekiel.

On the Whole, if any don't like the Philosophy, or the Metaphysics (as some
perhaps may choose to call it) made use of in the foregoing Reasonings; yet I
cannot doubt, but that a proper Consideration of what is apparent and
undeniable in Fact, with respect to the Dependence of the State and Course of
Things in this Universe on the sovereign Constitutions of the supreme Author
and Lord of all, who gives none Account of any of his Matters, and whose Ways
are past finding out, will be sufficient, with Persons of common Modesty and
Sobriety, to stop their Mouths, from making peremptory Decisions against the
Justice of God, respecting what is so plainly and fully taught in his holy
Word, concerning the Derivation of a Depravity and Guilt from Adam to his
Posterity; a Thing so abundantly confirmed by what is found in the Experience
of all Mankind in all Ages.

This is enough, one would think, forever to silence such bold Expressions as
these -- If this be just, -- if the Scriptures teach such Doctrine, etc. then
the Scriptures are of no Use -- Understanding is no Understanding* -- and, What
a GOD must be be, that can thus curse innocent Creatures! -- Is this thy GOD, O
Christian! -- etc. etc.

It may not be improper here to add something (by Way of Supplement to this
Chapter, in which we have had Occasion to say so much about the Imputation of
Adam's Sin) concerning the Opinions of two Divines, of no inconsiderable Note
among the Dissenters in England, relating to a partial Imputation of Adam's
first Sin.

One of them supposes, that this Sin, tho truly imputed to INFANTS, so that
thereby they are exposed to a proper Punishment, yet is not imputed to them in
such a Degree, as that upon this Account they should be liable to eternal
Punishment, as Adam himself was, but only to temporal Death, or Annibilation;
Adam himself, the immediate Actor, being made infinitely more guilty by it,
than his Posterity. -- On which I would observe; That to suppose, God imputes
not all the Guilt of Adam's Sin, but only some little Part of it, this relieves
Nothing but one's Imagination. To think of poor little Infants bearing such
Torments for Adam's Sin, as they sometimes do in this World, and these Torments
ending in Death andAnnihilation, may fit easier on the Imagination, than to
conceive of their suffering eternal Misery for it. But it does not at all
relieve one's Reason. There is no Rule of Reason, that can be supposed to lie
against imputing a Sin in the Whole of it, which was committed by one, to
another who did not personally commit it, but what will also lie against its
being so imputed and punished in Part. For all the Reasons (if there are any)
lie against the Imputation; not the Quantity or Degree of what is imputed. If
there be any Rule of Reason, that is strong and good, lying against a proper
Derivation or Communication of Guilt, from one that acted, to another that did
not act; then it lies against all that is of (...) Nature. The Force of the
Reasons brought against imputing Adam's Sin to his Posterity (if there be any
Force in them) lies in this, That Adam and his Posterity are not One. But this
lies as properly against charging a Part of the Guilt, as the Whole. For Adam's
Posterity, by not being the same with him, had no more Hand in a Little of what
was done, than in the Whole. They were as absolutely free from being concerned
in that Act partly, as they were wholly. And there is no Reason can be brought,
why one Man's Sin cannot be justly reckoned to another's Account, who was not
then in Being, in the Whole of it; but what will as properly lie against it is
being reckoned to him in any Part, so as that he should be subject to any
Condemnation or Punishment on that Account. -- If those Reasons are good, all
the Difference there can be, is this; That to bring a great Punishment on
Infants for Adam's Sin, is a great Act of Injustice, and to bring a
comparatively small Punishment* (...) a smaller Act of Injustice; but not, that
this is not as truly and demonstrably an Act of Injustice, as the other.

To illustrate this by an Instance something parallel. It Is used as an Argument
why I may not exact from one of my Neighbors, what was due to me from another,
that he and my Debtor are not the same; and that their Concerns, Interests and
Properties are entirely distinct. Now if this Argument be good, it lies as
truly against my demanding from him a Part of the Debt, as the Whole. Indeed it
is a greater Act of Injustice, for me to take from him the Whole of it, than a
Part; but not more truly and certainly an Act of Injustice.

The other Divine thinks, there is truly an Imputation of Adam's Sin, so that
Infants cannot be looked upon as innocent Creatures; yet seems to think it not
agreeable to the Perfec^ions of God, to make the State of Infants in another
World worse than a State of Nonexistence. But this to me appears plainly a
giving up that grand Point of the Imputation of Adam's Sin, both in Whole and
in Part. For it supposes it to (...) not right, for God to bring any Evil on a
Child (...) ^dam, which is innocent as to personal Sin, without paying for it,
or balancing it with Good; so that still the State of the Child shall be as
good, as could be demanded in Justice, in Case of mere Innocence. Which plainly
supposes, that the Child is not exposed to any proper Punishment at all, or is
not at all in Debt to divine Justice, on the Account of Adam's Sin. For if the
Child were truly in Debt, then surely Justice might take something from him,
without paying for it, or without giving that which makes it is State as good,
as mere Innocence could in Justice require. P. 359, etc.
If he owes the suffering of some Punishment, then there is no Need that
Justice should requite the Infant for suffering that Punishment; or make up for
it, by conferring some Good, that shall countervail it, and in Effect remove
and disannul it; so that, on the Whole, Good and Evil shall be at an even
Balance, yea, so that the Scale of Good shall preponderate. If it is unjust in
a Judge, to order any Quantity of Money to be taken from another, without
paying him again, and fully making it up to him, it must be because he had
justly forfeited none at all.

It seems to me pretty manifest, that none can, in good Consistence with
themselves, own a real Imputation of the Guilt of Adam's first Sin to his
Posterity, without owning that they are justly viewed and treated as Sinners,
truly guilty, and Children of Wrath, on that Account; nor unless they allow a
just Imputation of the Whole of the Evil of that Transgression; at least, all
that pertains to the Essence of that Act, as a full and complete Violation of
the Covenant, which God had established; even as much as if each one of Mankind
had the like Covenant established with him singly, and had by the like direct
and full Act of Rebellion, violated it for himself.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein several other Objections are considered.
DR. T. objects against Adam's Posterity's being supposed to come into the
World under a Forfeiture of God's Blessing, and subject to his Curse through
his Sin, -- That at the Restoration of the World after the Flood, God
pronounced equivalent or greater Blessings on Noah and his Sons, than he did on
Adam at his Creation, when he said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish
the Earth, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, etc. PART II. Chap. I.
Sect. 3.


To this I answer, in the following Remarks.

1. As it has been already shown, that in the Threatening, denounced for Adam's
Sin, there was Nothing which appears inconsistent with the Continuance of this
present Life for a Season, or with the Propagating his Kind; so for the like
Reason, there appears Nothing in that Threatening, upon the Supposition that it
reached Adam's Posterity, inconsistent with their enjoying the temporal
Blessings of the present Life, as long as this is continued: even those
temporal Blessings which God pronounced on Adam at his first Creation. For it
must be observed, that the Blessings which God pronounced on Adam, when he
first created him, and before the Trial of his Obedience, were not the same
with the Blessings which were suspended on his Obedience. The Blessings thus
suspended, were the Blessings of eternal Life; which, if he had maintained his
Integrity through his Trial, would have been pronounced upon him afterward;
when God, as his Judge, should have given him his Reward. God might indeed, if
he had pleased, immediately have deprived him of Life, and of all temporal
Blessings, given him before. But those Blessings pronounced on him beforehand,
were not the Things, for the obtaining of which his Trial was appointed. These
were reserved, till the Issue of his Trial should be seen, and then to be
pronounced, in the blessed Sentence, which would have been passed upon him by
his Judge, when God came to decree to him his Reward for his approved Fidelity.
The pronouncing these latter Blessings on a degenerate Race, that had fallen
under the Threatening d^nounc^^, would indeed (without a Redemption) have been
inconsistent with the Constitution which had been established. But the giving
them the former Kind of Blessings, which were not the Things suspended on the
Trial, or dependent on his Fidelity (and these to be continued for a Season)
was not at all inconsistent therewith.

2. It Is no more an Evidence of Adam's Posterity's being not included in the
Threatening, denounced for his eating the forbidden Fruit, That they still have
the temporal Blessings of Fruitfulness and a Dominion over the Creatures
continued to them, than it is an Evidence of Adam's being not included in that
Threatening himself, That he had these Blessings continued to him, was fruitful,
and had Dominion over the Creatures after his Fall, equally with his Posterity.

3. There is good Evidence, that there were Blessings implied in the
Benedictions God pronounced on Noah and his Posterity, which were granted on a
new Foundation: on the Foot of a Dispensation diverse from any Grant, Promise,
or Revelation, which God gave to Adam, antecedently to his Fall; even on the
Foundation of the Covenant of Grace, established in Christ Jesus; a
Dispensation, the Design of which is to deliver Men from the Curse, that came
upon them by Adam's Sin, and to bring them to greater Blessings than over he
had. These Blessings were pronounced on Noah and his Seed, on the same
Foundation, whereon afterward the Blessing was pronounced on Abraham and his
Seed, which included both spiritual and temporal Benefits. -- Noah had his Name
prophetically given him by his Father Lamech, because by him and his Seed
Deliverance should be obtained from the Curse, which came by Adam's Fall. Genesis
v.29. And he called his Name Noah (i. e. REST,) saying, This same shall comfort
us concerning our Work, and Toil of our Hands, because of the Ground which the
Lord has cursed. Pursuant to the Scope and Intent of this Prophecy (which
indeed seems to respect the same Thing with the Prophecy in Genesis iii. 15.) are
the Blessings pronounc^d on Noah after the Flood. There is this Evidence of
these Blessings being conveyed through the Channel of the Covenant of Grace, and
by the Redemption through Jesus Christ, That they were obtained by Sacrifice; or
were bestowed as the Effect of God's Favor to Mankind, which was in
Consequence of God's smelling a sweet Savor in the Sacrifice which Noah
offered. And it is very evident by the Epistle to the Hebrews, that the ancient
Sacrifices never obtained the Favor of God, but only by Virtue of the Relation
they had to the Sacrifice of Christ. -- That now Noah and his Family had been
so wonderfully saved from the Wrath of God, which had destroyed the rest of the
World, and that the World was as it were restored from a ruined State, this was
a proper Occasion to point to the great Salvation to come by Christ: As it was
a common Thing, for God, on Occasion of some great Temporal Salvation of his
People, or Restoration from a low and miserable State, to renew the Intimations
of the great spiritual Restoration of the World by Christ's Redemption. It may
be noted that Dr. T. himself signifies it as his Mind, that these Blessings on
Noah were on the Foot of the Covenant of Grace. P. 360, 366, 367, 368.
God deals with the Generality of Mankind, in their present State, for
differently, on Occasion of the Redemption by Jesus Christ, from what he
otherwise would do: For, being capable Subjects of saving Mercy, they have a
Day of Patience and Grace, and innumerable temporal Blessings bestowed on them;
which, as the Apostle signifies ( Act.xiv. 17.) are Testimonies of God's
Reconcilableness to sinful Men, to put 'em upon seeking after God.

But beside the Sense in which the Posterity of Noah in general partake of
these Blessings of Dominion ever the Creatures etc. Noah himself, and all such
of his Posterity as have obtained like precious Faith with that exercised by
him in offering his Sacrifice, which made it a sweet Sav^ur, and by which it
procured these Blessings, have Dominion over the Creatures, through Christ, in a
more excellent Sense than Adam in Innocence; as they are made Kings and Priests
unto God, and reign with Christ, and all Things are theirs, by a Covenant of
Grace. They partake with Christ in that Dominion over the Beasts of the Earth,
the Fowls of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea, spoken of in the viiith Psalm;
which is by the Apostle interpreted of Christ's Dominion over the World. (1
Cor. xv. 27.) and Heb. ii. 7.) And the Time is coming, when the greater Part of
the Posterity of Noah and each of his Sons, shall partake of this more
honorable and excellent Dominion over the Creatures, through Him in whom all
the Families of the Earth shall be blessed. -- Neither is there any Need of
supposing, that these Blessings must have their most complete Accomplishment
until many Ages after they were granted, any more than the Blessing on Japhet,
expressed in those Words, God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the
Tents of Shem.

But that Noah's Posterity have such Blessings given them through the great
Redeemer, who suspends and removes the Curse which came through Adam's Sin, surely
is no Argument, that they originally, and as they be in their natural State,
are not under the Curse. That Men have Blessings through Grace, is no Evidence of
their being not justly exposed to the Curse by Nature; but it rather argues the
contrary: for if they did not deserve the Curse, they would not depend on Grace
and Redemption for the Removal of it, and for bringing them into a State of
Favor with God.

Another Objection, which our Author strenuously urges against the Doctrine of
original Sin, is, That it disparages the divine Goodness in giving us our
Being; which we ought to receive with Thankfulness, as a great Gift of God's
Ben^ficence, and look upon as the first, original and fundamental Fruit of the
divine Liberality. ^. 2^0, 257, 260, 347, -- 350.


To this I answer, in the following Observations.

1. This Argument is built on the supposed Truth of a Thing in Dispute; and so
is a begging the Question. It is built on this Supposition, That we are not
properly looked upon as one with our first Father, in the State wherein God at
first created him* and in his Fall from that State. If we are so, it becomes
the whole Race to acknowledge God's great Goodness to them, in the State
wherein Mankind was made at first; in the happy State they were then in, and
the fair Opportunity they then had of obtaining confirmed and eternal
Happiness; and to acknowledge it as an Aggravation of their Apostasy; and to
humble themselves, that they were so ungrateful as to rebel against their good
Cr^^tor. -- Certainly, we may all do this with as much (y^^, much more) Reason,
as the People of Israel in Daniel's and Nehemiah's Times, did with Thankfulness
acknowledge God ^ great Goodness to their Fathers,many Ages before and in their
Confessions bewailed, and took Shame to themselves for, the Sins committed by
their Fathers, notwithstanding such great Goodness. See the ixth Chapter of
Daniel, and ixth of Nehemiah.

2. If Dr. T. would imply in his Objection, that it don't consist with the
Goodness of G^d, to give Mankind Being in a State of Misery what ever was done
before by Adam, whether he sinned, or did not sin: I reply, If it be justly so
ordered, that there should be a Posterity of Adam, which must be looked upon as
one with him, then it is no more contrary to God*s Attribute of Goodness to give
Being to his Posterity in a State of Punishment, than to continue the Being of
the same wicked and guilty Person, who has made himself guilty, in a State of
Puni^^ment. The giving Being, and the continuing Being are both alike the Work
of God's Power and Will, and both are alike fundamental to all Blessings of
Man's present and future Existence. -- And if it be said, It cannot be justly
so ordered, that there should be a Posterity of Adam, which should be looked
upon one with him, this is begging the Question.

3. If our Author would have us suppose, that it is contrary to the Attribute
of Goodness, for God, in any Case, by an immediate Act of his Power, to cause
Existence, and to cause new Existence, which shall be an exceeding miserable
Existence, by Reason of Exposedness to eternal Ruin; then his own Scheme must
be supposed contrary to the Attribute of God's Goodness: for he supposes, that
God will raise Multitudes from the dead at the last Day (which will be giving
new Existence to their Bodies, and to bodily Life and Sense) in Order only to
their suffering eternal Destruction.

4. Notwithstanding we are so sinful and miserable, as we are by Nature, yet we
may have great Reason to bless God, that he has given us our Being under so
glorious a Dispensation of Grace through Jesus Christ; by which we have a happy
Opportunity to be delivered from this Sin and Misery, and to obtain unspeakable
eternal Happiness. -- And because, through our own wicked Inclinations, we are
disposed so to neglect and abuse this Mercy, as to fail of final Benefit by it,
this is no Reason why we ought not to bethankful for it, even according to our
Author's own Sentiments. What (says He P. 349.
) if the whole World lies in Wickedness, and few therefore shall be saved? Have
Men no Reason to be thankful, because they are wicked and ungrateful, and abuse
their Being and God's Bounty? -- Suppose, our own evil Inclinations do
withold us [ viz. from seeking after Happiness, which under the Light of the
Gospel we are placed within the nearer and easier Reach of] suppose, the whole
Christian World should lie in Wickedness, and but few Christians should be
saved; is it therefore certainly true, that we cannot reasonably thank God for
the Gospel? Well, and tho the evil Inclination, which hinder our seeking and
obtaining Happiness by so glorious an Advantage, are what we are born with, yet
if those Inclinations are our Fault or Sin, that alters not the Case: and to
say, they are not our Sin, is still begging the Question. Yea, it will follow
from several Things asserted by our Author, put together, that notwithstanding
Men are born in such Circumstances, as that they are under a very great
Improbability of ever becoming righteous, yet they may have Reason to be
thankful for their Being. Thus, particularly, those that were born and lived
among the Heathen, before Christ came. For Dr. T. asserts, that all Men have
Reason of Thankfulness for their Being; and yet he supposes, that the Heathen
World, taken as a collective Body, were dead in Sin, and could not deliver or
help themselves, and therefore stood in Necessity of the Christian
Dispensation. And not only so, but he supposes, that the Christian World is now
at length brought to the like deplorable and helpless Circumstances, and needs
a new Dispensation for its Relief; as I observed before. According to these
Things, the World in general, not only formerly, but even at this Day, are dead
in Sin, and helpless as to their Salvation; and therefore the Generality of
them that are born into it, are much more likely to perish, than otherwi^e,
till the new Dispensation comes: And yet he supposes, we all have Reason to be
thankful for our Being. -- Yea, further still, I think, according to our
Author's Doctrine, Men may have great Reason to be thankful to God for bringing
them into a State, which yet, as the Case is, is attended with Misery, as it is
certain Consequence. As, with Respect to God's raising the Wicked to Life, at
the last Day; which, he supposes, is in it self a great Benefit, procured by
Christ, and the wonderful Grace of God through him: and if it be the Fruit of
God's wonderful Grace, surely Men ought to be thankful for that Grace, and
praise God for it. Our Doctrine of original Sin, therefore, no more disparages
God's Goodness in Man's Formation in the Womb, than his Doctrine disparages
God's Goodness in their Resurrection from the Grave.

Another Argument, which Dr. T. makes Use of, against the Doctrine of original
Sin, is what the Scripture reveals of the Process of the Day of Judgment; which
represents the Judge as dealing with Men singly and separately, rendering to
every Man according to his Deeds, and according to the Improvement he has made
of the particular Powers and Talents God has given him personally. P. 341, --
3^3. and 387.


But this Objection will vanish, if we consider what is the End or Design of
that public Judgment. Now this will not be, that God may find out what Men
are, or what Punishment or Reward is proper for them, or in Order to the
passing a right Judgment of these Things within himself, which is the End of
human Trials; but it is to manifest what Men are, to their own Consciences, and
to the World. As the Day of Judgment is called the Day of the REVELATION of the
righteous Judgment of God; in Order to this, God will make Use of Evidences, or
Proofs. But the proper Evidences of the Wickedness of Men's Hearts (the true
Seat of all Wickedness) both as to Corruption of Nature, and additional
Pollution and Guilt, are Men's Works.

The special End of God's public Judgment will be, to make a proper, perfect,
open Distinction among Men, rightly to state and manifest their Difference one
from another, in Order to that Separation and Difference in the eternal
Retribution, that is to follow: and this Difference will be made to appear, by
their personal Works.

There are two Things, with Regard to which Men will be tried, and openly
distinguished, by the perfect Judgment of God at the last Day; according to the
twofold real Distinction subsisting among Mankind: viz. (1) The Difference of
STATE; that primary and grand Distinction, whereby all Mankind are divided into
two Sorts, the Righteous and the Wicked. (2.) That secondary Distinction,
whereby both Sorts differ from others in the same general State, in DEGREES of
additional Fruits of Righteousness and Wickedness. Now the Judge, in Order to
manifest both these, will judge Men according to their personal Works. But to
inquire at the Day of Judgment, whether Adam sinned or no, or whether Men are to
be looked upon as one with him, and so Partakers in his Sin, is what in no
Respect tends to manifest either of these Distinctions.

1. The first Thing to be manifested, will be the State, that each Man is in,
with Respect to the grand Distinction of the whole World of Mankind into
Righteous and Wicked; or, in metaphorical Language, Wheat and Tares; or, the
Children of the Kingdom of Christ, and the Children of the Wicked One; the
latter, the Head of the Apostasy; but the former, the Head of the Restoration
and Recovery. The Judge, in manifesting this, will prove Men's Hearts by their
Works, in such as have had Opportunity to perform any Works in the Body. The
evil Works of the Children of the wicked One will be the proper Manifestation
and Evidence or Proof of whatever belongs to the general State of such; and
particularly they will prove, that they belong to the Kingdom of the great
Deceiver, and Head of the Apostasy, as they will demonstrate the exceeding
Corruption of their Nature, and full Consent of their Hearts to the common
Apostasy; and also that their Hearts never relinquished the Apostasy, by a
cordial Adherence to Christ, the great Restorer. -- The Judge will also make
use of the good Works of the Righteous to show their Interest in the Redemption
of Christ; as thereby will be manifested the Sincerity of their Hearts in their
Acceptance of, and Adherence to the Redeemer and his Righteousness. And in thus
proving the State of Men's Hearts by their Actions, the Circumstances of those
Actions must necessarily come into Consideration, to manifest the true Quality
of their Actions; as, each one's Talents, Opportunities, Advantages, Light,
Motives, etc.

2. The other Thing to be manifested, will be that secondary Distinction,
wherein particular Persons, both Righteous and Wicked, differ from one another,
in the Degree of secondary Good or Evil, that is something beside what is
common to all in the same general State: The Degree of evil Fruit, which is
additional to the Guilt and Corruption of the whole Body of Apostates and
Enemies; And the Degree of personal Goodness and good Fruit, which is a
secondary Goodness, with Respect to the Righteousness and Merits of Christ,
which belong to all by that sincere Faith manifested in all. Of this also each
one's Works, with their Circumstances, Opportunities, Talents etc. will be the
proper Evidence.

As to the Nature and Aggravations of the general Apostasy by Adam's Sin, and
also the Nature and Sufficiency of the Redemption by Jesus Christ, the great
Restorer, though both these will have vast Influence on the eternal State,
which Men shall be adjudged to, yet neither of them will properly belong to the
Trial Men will be the Subjects of at that Day, in Order to the Manifestation of
their State, wherein they are distinguished one from another. They will belong
to the Business of that Day no otherwise, than the Manifestation of the great
Truths of Religion in general; as the Nature and Perfections of God, the
Dependence of Mankind on God, as their Creator and Preserver, etc. Such Truths
as these will also have great Influence on the eternal State, which Men will
then be adjudged to, as they aggravate the Guilt of Man's Wickedness, and must
be considered in Order to a due Estimate of Christ's Righteousness, and Men's
personal Virtue; yet being of general and equal Concernment, will not properly
belong to the Trial of particular Persons.

Another Thing urged by our Author particularly against the Imputation of
Adam's Sin, is this: Though, in Scripture, Action is frequently said to be
imputed, reckoned, accounted to a Person, it is no other than his own Act and
Deed. P. 27^, etc. 381.
In the same Place he cites a Number of Places of Scripture, where these Words
are used, which he says are all that he can find in the Bible.

But we are no Way concerned with this Argument at present, any further than it
relates to Imputation of Sin, or sinful Action. Therefore all that is in the
Argument, which relates to the present Purpose, is this; That the Word is so
often applied in Scripture to signify God's imputing personal Sin, but never
once to his imputing Adam's Sin. -- So often! -- How often? -- But Twice. There
are but two of all those Places which he reckons up, that speak of, or so much
as have any Reference to, God's imputing Sin to any Person, where there is any
Evidence that only personal Sin is meant; and they are Levit. xvii. 3, 4. and 2 Timothy iv. 16. All therefore the Argument comes to, is this; That the Word,
impute, is applied in Scripture, two Times, to the Case of God's imputing Sin,
and neither of those Times to signify the imputing of Adam's Sin, but both
Times it has Reference to personal Sin; therefore Adam's Sin is not imputed to
his Posterity. -- And this is to be noted, that one of these two Places, even
that in Levit. xvii. 3, 4. don't speak of imputing the Act committed, but
another not committed. The Words are, What Man soever there be of the House of
Israel, that kills an Ox or Lamb or Goat in the Camp, or that kills it out
of the Camp, and brings it not unto the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, to offer an Offering unto the Lord, before the Tabernacle of the
Lord, Blood shall be imputed unto that Man; he has shed Blood; that Man shall
be cut off from among his People, i. e. plainly, Murder shall be imputed to
him: He shall be put to Death for it, and therein punished with the same
Severity as if he had stain a Man. It Is plain by Isai. lxvi. 3. that in some
Cases, a shedding the Blood of Beasts, in an unlawful Manner, was imputed to
them, as if they slew a Man.

But whether it be so or not, although in both these Places the Word, impute,
be applied to personal Sin, and to the very Act done by the Person spoken of,
and in ten more Places; Or although this could be said of all the Places, which
our Author reckons up; yet that the Word, Impute, is never expressly applied to
Adam's Sin, does no more argue, that it is not imputed to his Posterity, than
it argues, that Pride, Unbelief, Lying, Theft, Oppression, Persecution,
Fornication, Adultery, Sodomy, Perjury, Idolatry, and innumerable other
particular moral Evils, are never imputed to the Persons that commit them, or
in whom they are; because the Word, impute, though so often used in Scripture, is
never applied to any of these Kinds of Wickedness.

I know not what can be said here, except one of these two Things; That tho
these Sins are not expressly said to be imputed, yet other Words are used that
do as plainly and certainly imply, that they are imputed, as if it were said so
expressly. Very well, and so I say with respect to the Imputation of Adam's Sin.
The thing meant by the Word, impute, may be as plainly and certainly expressed
by using other Words, as if that Word were expressly used; and more certainly,
because the Words used instead of it, may amount to an Explanation of this
Word. And this, I think, is the very Case here. Tho the Word, impute, is not
used with respect to Adam's Sin, yet it is said, All have sinned; which,
respecting Infants, can be true only of their sinning by his Sin. And, it is
said, By his Disobedience many were made Sinners; and, Judgment and
Condemnation came upon all by that Sin; and that by this Means Death [the Wages
of Sin] passed on all Men, etc. Which Phrases amount to full and precise
Explanations of the Word, Impute; and therefore do more certainly determine the
Point really insisted on.

Or, perhaps it will be said, With respect to those personal Sins
forementioned, Pride, Unbelief, etc. it is no Argument, they are not imputed
to those who are guilty of 'em, that the very Word, impute, is not applied to
'em; for the Word itself is rarely used; not one Time in a hundred, and perhaps
five hundred, of those wherein the Thing meant is plainly implied, or may be
certainly inferred. -- Well, and the same also may be replied likewise, with
Respect to Adam's Sin.

It Is probable, Dr. T. intends an Argument against original Sin, by that which
he says in Opposition to what R. R. suggests of Children's discovering the
Principles of Iniquity, and Seeds of Sin, before they are capable of moral
Action. P. 353, 354.
viz. "That little Children are made Patterns of Humility, Meekness and
Innocence, in Matthew. xviii. 3. 1 Cor. xiv. 20. and Psalm. cxxxi. 2.

But when the utmost is made of this, there can be no Shadow of Reason, to
understand more by these Texts, than that little Children are recommended as
Patterns in regard of a negative Virtue, Innocence with respect to the
Exercises and Fruits of Sin, Harmlesness as to the hurtful Effects of it, and
that Image of Meekness and Humility arising from this, in Conjunction with a
natural Tenderness of Mind, Fear, Self-diffidence, Yieldableness, and
Confidence in Parents and others older than themselves. And so, they are
recommended as Patterns of Virtue no more than Doves, which are an harmless
Sort of Creature, and have an Image of the Virtues of Meekness and Love. Even
according to Dr. T -- r's own Doctrine, no more can be made of it than this:
For his Scheme will not admit of any such thing as positive Virtue, or virtuous
Disposition, in Infants; he insisting (as was observed before) that Virtue must
be the Fruit of Thought and Reflection. But there can be no Thought and
Reflection, that produces positive Virtue, in Children, not yet capable of moral
Action; and it is such Children he speaks of. And that little Children have a
negative Virtue or Innocence, in relation to the positive Acts and hurtful
Effects of Vice, is no Argument that they have not corrupt Nature within them:
for let their Nature be ever so corrupt, yet surely it is no Wonder that they
ben't guilty of positive wicked Action, before they are capable of any moral
Action at all. -- A young Viper has a malignant Nature, though incapable of
doing a malignant Action, and at present appearing a harmless Creature.

Another Objection, which Dr. T. and some others offer against this Doctrine,
is, That it pours Contempt upon the human Nature. P. 350, 351.


But their declaiming on this Topic is like addressing the Affections and
Conceits of Children, rather than rational arguing with Men. It seems, this
Doctrine is not complaisant enough. -- I am sensible, it is not suited to the
Taste of some, who are so very delicate (to say no worse) that they can bear
Nothing but Compliment and Flattery. -- No Contempt is by this Doctrine cast
upon the noble Faculties and Capacities of Man's Nature, or the exalted
Business, and divine and immortal Happiness he is made capable of. And as to
speaking ill of Man's present moral State, I presume, it will not be denied,
that Shame belongs to them that are truly sinful; and to suppose, that this is
not the native Character of Mankind, is still but meanly begging the Question.
If we, as we come into the World, are truly sinful, and consequently miserable,
he acts but a friendly Part to us, who endeavors fully to discover and
manifest our Disease. Whereas, on the contrary, he acts an unfriendly Part, who
to his utmost hides it from us; and so, in Effect, does what in him lies to
prevent our seeking a Remedy from That, which, if not remedied in Time, must
bring us finally to Shame and everlasting Contempt, and end in perfect and
remediless Destruction hereafter.

Another Objection, which some have made against this Doctrine, much like the
former, is, That it tends to beget in us an ill Opinion of our
Fellow Creatures, and so to promote Ill Nature and mutual Hatred.

To which I would say, If it be truly so, that we all come sinful into the
World, then our heartily acknowledging it, tends to promote Humility: But our
disowning that Sin and Guilt, which truly belongs to us, and endeavoring to
persuade ourselves that we are vastly better than in Truth we are, tends to a
foolish Self-Exaltation and Pride. And it is manifest, by Reason, Experience,
and the Word of God, that Pride is the chief Source of all the Contention,
mutual Hatred, and Ill Will, which are so prevalent in the World; and that
Nothing so effectually promotes the contrary Tempers and Deportments, as
Humility. This Doctrine teaches us to think no worse of others, than of our
selves: It teaches us, that we are all, as we are by Nature, Companions in a
miserable helpless Condition* which, under a Revelation of the divine Mercy,
tends to promote mutual Compassion. And Nothing has a greater Tendency to
promote those amiable Dispositions of Mercy, Forbearance, Long-suffering,
Gentleness and Forgiveness, than a Sense of our own extreme Unworthiness and
Misery, and the infinite Need we have of the divine Pity, Forbearance and
Forgiveness, together with a Hope of obtaining Mercy. -- If the Doctrine, which
teaches that Mankind are corrupt by Nature, tends to promote Ill Will, why
should not Dr. T -- r's Doctrine tend to it as much? For he teaches us, that
the Generality of Mankind are very wicked, having made themselves so by their
own free Choice, without any Necessity: which is a Way of becoming wicked, that
renders Men truly worthy of Resentment; but the other, not at all, even
according to his own Doctrine.

Another Exclamation against this Doctrine is. That it tends to hinder Comfort
and Joy, and to promote Melancholy and Gloominess of Mind. P. 231, and ^ome
other Places.


To which I shall briefly say, Doubtless, supposing Men are really become
sinful, and so exposed to the Displeasure of God, by whatever Means, if they
once come to have their Eyes opened, and are not very stupid, the Reflection on
their Case will tend to make them sorrowful; and it is fit, it should. Men, with
whom this is the Case, may well be filled with Sorrow, till they are sincerely
willing to forsake their Sins, and turn to God. -- But there is Nothing in this
Doctrine, that in the least stands in the Way of Comfort and exceeding Joy, to
such as find in their Hearts a sincere Willingness, wholly to forsake all Sin,
and give their Hearts and whole Selves to Christ, and comply with the
Gospel-Method of Salvation by him.

Another Thing objected, is, That to make Men believe that Wickedness belongs
to their very Nature. tends to encourage them in Sin, and plainly to lead them
to all Manner of Iniquity; because they are taught, that Sin is natural, and
therefore necessary and unavoidable P. 139, and 2^9.


But if this Doctrine, which teaches that Sin is natural to us, does also at
the same Time teach us, that it is never the better, or less to be condemned,
for its being natural, then it don't at all encourage Sin, any more than Dr. T
-- r's Doctrine encourages Wickedness that is become inveterate; who teaches,
that such as by Custom have contracted strong Habits of Sin, are unable to help
themselves. See his Exposition of Romans vii. P. 2^5, -- 220. But especially in
his Paraphrase and Note^ on the Epi^^le.
-- And is it reasonable, to represent it as encouraging a Man's boldly
neglecting and wilfully continuing in his Disease, without seeking a Cure, to
tell him of his Disease, to show him that his Disease is real and very fatal,
and what he can never cure himself of; yet withal directing him to a great
Physician, who is sufficient for his Restoration? -- But for a more particular
Answer to what is objected against the Doctrine of our natural Impotence and
Inability, as being an Encouragement to go on in Sin, and a Discouragement to
the Use of all Means for our Help, I must for Brevity refer the Reader to what
has been largely written on this Head in my Discourse on the Freedom of the
Will.

Our Author is pleased to advance another Notion, among others, by Way of
Objection against the Doctrine of original Sin; That if this Doctrine be true,
it would be unlawful to beget Children. He says, P. 145.
If natural Generation be the Means of unavoidably conveying all Sin and
Wickedness into the World, it must it self be a sinful, and unlawful Thing. --
Now, if there be any Force of Argument here, it lies in this Proposition,
Whatsoever is a Means or Occasion of the certain infallible Existence of Sin
and Wickedness, must itself be sinful. But I imagine Dr. T. had not thoroughly
weighed this Proposition, nor considered where it would carry him. For, God's
continuing in Being the Devil, and others that are finally given up to
Wickedness, will be attended, most certainly and infallibly, with an eternal
Series of the most hateful and horrid Wickedness. But will any be guilty of
such vile Blasphemy, as to say, Therefore God's upholding them in Being is it
self a sinful Thing? -- In the same Place our Author says, "So far as we are
generated in Sin, it is a Sin to be generated." [Probably he intended the
active Voice.] But there is no Appearance of Evidence in that Position, any
more than in This; So far as any is upheld in Existence in Sin* it is a Sin to
uphold them in Existence. Yea, if there were any Reason in the Case, it would
be strongest in the latter Position: For Parents, as Dr. T. himself observes,
are not the Authors of the Beginning of Existence: Whereas, God is truly the
Author of the Continuance of Existence. As it is the known Will of God, to
continue Satan and Millions of others in Being, though the most sure Consequence
is the Continuance of a vast infernal World, full of everlasting hellish
Wickedness: so it is Part of the revealed Will of God, that this World of
Mankind should be continued, and the Species propagated, for his own wise and
holy Purposes; which Will is complied with by the Parents joined in lawful
Marriage. Whose Children, though they come into the World in Sin, yet are
capable Subjects of eternal Holiness and Happiness: Which infinite Benefits for
their Children, Parents have great Reason to encourage a Hope of, in the Way of
giving up their Children to God in Faith, through a Redeemer, and bringing them
up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. I think, this may be Answer
enough to such a Cavil.

Another Objection is, That the Doctrine of original Sin is no oftener, and no
more plainly spoken of in Scripture; it being, if true, a very important
Doctrine. Dr. T. in many Parts of his Book suggests to his Readers, that there
are very few Texts, in the whole Bible, wherein there is the least Appearance
of their teaching any such Doctrine.

Of this I took Notice before, but would here say further; That the Reader who
has perused the pr^c^ding Defense of this Doctrine, must now be left to judge
for himself, whether there be any Ground for such an Allogation; whether there
be not Texts in sufficient Number, both in the old Testament and new, that
exhibit undeniable Evidence of this great Article of Christian Divinity; and
whether it be not a Doctrine taught in the Scripture with great Plainness. I
think, there are few, if any, Doctrines of Revelation, taught more plainly and
expressly. Indeed it is taught in a more and explicit Manner in the
New Testament, than the Old: Which is not to be wondered at; it being thus with
respect to all the most important Doctrines of revealed Religion.

But if it had been so, that this Doctrine were rarely taught in Scripture; yet
if we find that it is indeed a Thing declared to us by God, if there be good
Evidence of its being held forth to us by any Word of his, then what belongs to
us, is, to believe his Word,and receive the Doctrine which he teaches us; and
not, instead of this, to prescribe to him how often he shall speak of it, and
to insist upon knowing what Reasons he has for speaking of it no oftener, before
we will receive what he teaches us; or that he should give us an Account, why
he did not speak of it so plainly as we think he ought to have done, sooner
than he did. In this Way of Proceeding, if it be reasonable, the Sadducees of
old, who denied any Resurrection or future State, might have maintained their
Cause against Christ, when he blamed 'em for not knowing the Scrip^ures, nor
the Power of God: and for not understanding by the Scripture, that there would
be a Resurrection to spiritual Enjoyment, and not to animal Life, and sensual
Gratifications; and they might have insisted, that these Doctrines, if true,
were very important, and therefore ought to have been spoken of in the
Scriptures oftener and more explicitly, and not that the Church of God should be
left, till that Time, with only a few obscure Intimations of that which so
infinitely concerned them. And they might with Disdain have rejected Christ's
Argument, by Way of Inference, from God's calling himself, in the Books of
Moses, the GOD of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. For Answer, they might have said,
That Moses was sent on Purpose to teach the People the Mind and Will of God;
and therefore, if these Doctrines were true, he ought in Reason and in Truth to
have taught them plainly and frequently, and not have left the People to spell
out so important a Doctrine, only from God's saying, that he was the God of
Abraham, etc.

One great End of the Scripture is, to teach the World what Manner of Being GOD
is; about which the World, without Revelation, has been so woefully in the dark:
And that God is an infinite Being, is a Doctrine of great Importance, and a
Doctrine sufficiently taught in the Scripture. But yet, it appears to me, this
Doctrine is not taught there, in any Measure, with such Explicitness and
Precision, as the Doctrine of original Sin: and the Socinians, who deny God's
Omnipresence and Omniscience, have left 'em as much Room for Cavil, as the
Pelagians, who deny original Sin

Dr. T. particularly urges, That Christ says not one Word of this Doctrine
throughout the four Gospels; which Doctrine, if true, being so important, and
what so nearly concerned the great Work of Redemption, which he came to work
out (as is supposed) one would think, it should have been emphatically spoken
of in every Page of the Gospels. P. 242, 243.


In Reply to this, it may be observed, that by the Account given in the four
Gospels, Christ was continually saying those Things which plainly implied, that
all Men in their original State are sinful and miserable. As, when he declared,
that they which are whole, need not a Physician, but they which are sick; Matt.
ix. 12.
-- That he came to seek and to save that which was lost; Matt. xviii. 11. Luk*
xix. 10.
-- That it was necessary for all to be born again, and to be converted, and
that otherwise they could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Matt. xviii. 3.
-- and, That all were Sinners, as well as those whose Blood Pilate mingled
with their Sacrifices, etc. and that every one who did not repent, should
perish; Luke xiii. 1, -- 5.
-- Withal directing every one to pray to God for Forgiveness of Sin; Matt. vi.
12. Luke xi. 4.
-- Using our Nece^^^^y of Forgiveness from God, as an Argument with all to
forgive the Injuries of their Neighbors; Matt. vi. 14, 15. and xviii. 35.
-- Teaching, that earthly Parents, though kind to their Children, are in
themselves evil; Matt. vii. 11.
-- And signifying, that Things carnal and corrupt are properly the Things of
Men; Matt. xvi. 23.
-- Warning his Disciples rather to beware of Men, than of wild Beasts; Matt.
x. 16, 17.
-- Often representing the WORLD as evil, as wicked in its Works, at Enmity
with Truth and Holiness, and hating him; Joh. vii. 7. and viii. 23. and xiv.
17. and xv* 18, 19.
-- Yea, and teaching plainly, that all Men are extremely and inexpressibly
sinful, owing ten Thousand Talents to their divine Creditor. Matt* xvili. 21*
to the End*


And whether Christ did not plainly teach Nicodemus the Doctrine of original
total Depravity, when he came to him to know what his Doctrine was, must be
left to the Reader to judge, from what has been already observed on Joh. iii.
1, -- 11. And besides, Christ in the Course of his Preaching took the most
proper Method to convince Men of the Corruption of their Nature,and to give
them an effectual and practical Knowledge of it, in Application to themselves,
in particular, by teaching and urging the holy and strict Law of God, in it is
Extent and Spirituality and dreadful Threatenings: Which, above all things,
tends to search the Hearts of Men, and to teach them their inbred exceeding
Depravity; not merely as a Matter of Speculation, but by proper Conviction of
Conscience; which is the only Knowledge of original Sin, that can avail to
prepare the Mind for receiving Christ's Redemption; as a Man's Sense of his own
Sickness prepares him to apply in good Earnest to the Physician.

And as to Christ's being no more frequent and particular in mentioning and
inculcating this Point in a doctrinal Manner, it is probable, one Reason to be
given for it, is the same that is to be given for his speaking no oftener of
God's creating the World: Which, tho so important a Doctrine, is scarce ever
spoken of in any of Christ's Discourses: and no Wonder, seeing this was a
Matter which the Jews, to whom he confined his personal Ministry, had all been
instructed in from their Forefathers, and never was called in Question among
them. And there is a great deal of Reason. from the ancient Jewish Writers, to
suppose, that the Doctrine of original Sin had ever been allowed in the open
Profession of that People: What is found in the more ancient of the Jewish
Rabbis, who have wrote since the Coming of Christ, is an Argument of this.
Many Things of this Sort are taken Notice of by Stapserus, in his Theolegia
Polemica before mentioned. Some of these things which are there cited by him in
Latin, I shall here faithfully give in English, for the sake of the English
Reader.

-- So Menasseh, concerning human Frailty, Page 129. -- Genesis viii. 21. I will
not any more curse the Earth for Man's Sake; for the Appetite of Man is evil
from his Youth; that is, from the Time when he comes forth from his Mother's
Womb. For at the same Time that he lucks the Breasts, he follows his Lust; and
while he is yet an Infant, he is under the Dominion of Anger, Envy, Hatred and
other Vices to which that tender Age is obnoxious. -- Prove. xxii. 15. Solomon
says, Foolishness is b^und to the Mind of a Child. Concerning which Place R.
Levi Ben. Gerson observes thus, "Foolishness as it were grows to him in his
very Beginning." Concerning this Sin, which is common and original to all Men,
David said, Psalm. li. 7. Behold, I was begotten in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother warm me. Upon which Place Eben-Ezra says thus; Behold, because of the
Concupiscence which is innate in the Heart of Man, it is said, I am begotten in
in Iniquity. And the Sense is, that there is implanted in the Heart of Man
Jetzer harang, an evil Figment, from his Nativity.

And M^nasseh Ben. Israel, de Fragil. Page 2. Behold, I we formal in Iniquity,
and in Sin has my Mother warmed me. But whether this be understood concerning
the common Mother, which was Eve, or whether David spoke only of his own
Mother, he would signify, that Sin is as it were natural, and inseparable in
this Life. For it is to be observed, that Eve conceived after the Transgression
was committ^d; and as many as were begotten afterward, were not brought forth
in a Conformity to the Rule of right Reason, but in Conformity to disorderly
and lustful Affections. He adds, One of the wise Men of the Jews, namely, R.
Aba, rightly observed, David would signify, that it is impossible, even for
pious Men, who excel in Virtue, never to commit any Sin. Job also asserts the
same Thing with David, Chap. xiv. 4. saying, Who will give a dare Thing from an
unclean? Truly not one. Concerning which Words Aben-Ezra says thus; The Sense
is the same with that, I was begotten in Iniquity, because Man is made out of
an unclean Thing. -- St^pferus, ^h^olog. Polem. Tom. iii. P. 36, 37.

Id.Ibid. P. 132.etc. So Sal Jarchi ad Gemaram, Cod. Schabbath, Fol. 142. Page
2. And this is not only to be referred to Sinners; because all the Posterity of
the first Man are in like Manner subjected to all the Curses pronounced on him.
And Menasseh Ben. Israel, in his Preface to Human Frailty, says I had a Mind to
show by what Means it came to pass, that when the first Father of all had lost
his Righteousness, his Posterity are begotten liable to the same Punishment
with him. -- And Munsterus on the Gospel of Matthew cites the following Words,
from the Book called The Bundle of Myrrh: The Blessed Lord said to the first
Man, when he cursed him, Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and
thou shall eat the Herb of the Field. The thing which he means, is, That
because of his Sin all who should descend from him, should be wicked and
perverse, like Thorns and Thistles; according to that Word of the Lord,
speaking to the Prophet; Throns and Irritators are with thee, and thou dwell
among Scorpions. And all this is from the Serpent, who was the Devil, Sam-macl,
who emitted a mortiferous and corruptive Poison into Eve, and became the Cause
of Death to Adam himself, when he eat the Fruit. -- Remarkable is the Place
quoted in Joseph de Voisin, against Martin Raymund, P. 471. of Master Menachem
Ra^anatensis, Sect. Berese^it, from Midrasch T^hillim; which is cited by
Hoornbekius, against the Jews, in these Words; It Is no Wonder, that the Sin of
Adam and Eve is written and sealed with the King's Ring, and to be propagated
to all following Generations; because on the Day that Adam was created, all
things were finished; so that he stood forth the Perfection and Completion of
the whole Workmanship of the World: So when he sinned, the whole World sinned;
whose Sin we bear and suffer. But the Matter is not thus with respect to the
Sins of his Posterity. -- Thus far Stapferus.

Besides these, as Ainsworth on Genesis 8. 2. observes, In Bereshith Rabba (a
Hebrew Commentary on this Place) a Rabbin is said to be asked, when is the evil
Imagination put into Man? And he answered, From the Hour that he is formed. And
in Pool's Synopsis it is added, from Grotius, So Rabbi Solomon interpret, Con.
viii 21. The Imagination of Man's Heart is evil from his Youth, of its being
evil from the time that he is taken out of his Mother's Bowels. Aben-Ezra thus
interprets Psalm. li. 5. I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin dia my Mother
conceive me; That evil Concupiscence is implanted in the Heart from Childhood,
as if he were formed in it; and by my Mother, he understands Eve, who did not
bear Children till she had sinned. And so Kafvenaki says, How shall I avoid
sinning? My Original is corrupt, and from thence are those Sins. So Manasseh
Ben. Israel, from this Place ( Psalm. li. 5.) concludes, that not only David,
but all Mankind, ever since Sin was introduced into the World, do sin from
their Original. To this Purpose is the Answer of Rabbi Hakkad^s^h, which there
is an Account of in the Talmud. From what Time does Concupiscence rule over
Man? From the very Moment of his first Formation, or from his Nativity? Ans.
From his Formation. -- Pool's Syn^ps. in Loc.

On these things I observe, there is the greatest Reason to suppose, that these
old Rabbis of the Jewish Nation, who gave such Heed to the Tradition of the
E^^ers, would never have received this Doctrine of original Sin, had it not
been delivered down to 'em from their Forefathers. For it is a Doctrine very
disagreable to those practical Principles and Notions, wherein the Religion of
the unbelieving Jews most fundamentally differs from the Religion manintained
among Christians: particularly their Notion of Justification by their own
Righteousness, and Privileges as the Children of Abraham, etc. without standing
in Need of any Satisfaction, by the Sufferings of the Messiah. On which Account
the modern Jews do now universally reject the Doctrine of original Sin, and
Corruption of Nature; as Stapferns observes. And it is not at all likely, that
the ancient Jews, if no such Doctrine had been received by Tradition from the
Fathers, would have taken it up from the Christian, whom they had in such great
Contempt and Enmity; especially as it is a Doctrine so peculiarly agreeable to
the Christian Notion of the spiritual Salvation of Jesus, and so contrary to
their carnal Notions of the Messiah, and of his Salvation and Kingdom, and so
contrary to their Opinion of themselves; and a Doctrine, which Men in general
are so apt to be prejudiced against. And besides, these Rabbis do expressly
refer to the Opinion of their Forefathers; as, R. Menasseh says, Accroding to
the Opinion of the ANCIENTS, none are subject to Death, but those which have
sinned: for where there is no Sin, there is no Death. Stapfer. Tom. iii. P. 37,
38.

But we have more direct Evidence, that the Doctrine of original Sin was truly
a received Doctrine amongst the ancient Jews, even before the coming of Christ.
This appears by ancient Jewish Writings, which were written before Christ; as,
in the Apocrypha, 2. Esdras iii. 21. For the first Adam, having a wicked Heart,
transgressed, and was overcome: and so be all they that be born of him. Thus
Infirmity was made permanent; and the Law also in the Heart of the People, with
the Malignity of the Root; so that the Good departed away, and the Evil abode
still. -- 2 Esdras iv. 30. For the Grain of evil Seed has been sown in the
Heart of Adam, from the Beginning; and how much Ungodliness; has it brought
forth unto this Time? And how much shall it yet bring forth, till the time of
threshing shall come? And Chap. vii. 46. It had been better, not to have given
the Earth to Adam; or else, when it was given, to have restra^^'d him from
sinning: for what Profit is it, for Man now in this present Time, to live in
Heaviness, and after Death, to look for Punishment? O thou Adam, what have thou
done! For though it was thou that sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all
that come of thee. And we read, Ecclus. xxv. 24. Of the Women came the
Beginning of Sin, and through her we all die.

As this Doctrine of original Corruption was constantly maintained in the
Church of God from the Beginning's so from thence, in all Probability, as well
as from the Evidence of it in universal Experience, it was, that the wiser
Heathen maintained the like Doctrine. Particularly Plate, that great
Philosopher, so distinguished for his Veneration of ancient Traditions, and
diligent Inquiries after them. Gole, in his Court of the Gentiles, observes as
follows; PLATO says (Gorg. Fol. 493.) I have heard from the wise Men, that we
are now dead, and that the Body is but our Sepulcher. And in his Timoeus Locrus
(Fol. 10^.) he says, The C^^se of Vitiosity is from our Parents, and first
Principles, rather than from ourselves. So that we never relinquish those
actions, which lead us to follow these primitive Blemishes of our FIRST
PARENTS. -- Plato mentions the corruption of the Will, and seems to disown any
Free Will to true Good, albeit he allows some (...), or natural Dispositions,
to civil Good, in some great Heroes. -- SOCRATES asserted the Corruption of
human Nature, or (...) -- Grotius affirms, that the Philosophers acknowledged,
it was own natural to Men, to sin.

SENECA (Benef. 5. 14.) says, Wickedness has not it is first Beginning in wicked
Practice; though by that it is first exercised and made manifest. -- And
PLUTARCH (de Sera vindicta) says, Man does not first become wicked, when he
first manifests himself so: but he has Wickedness from the Beginning; and he
shows it as soon as he finds Opportunity and Ability. As Men Rightly judge,
that the Sting is not first ingender'd in Scorpions (...) they strike, or the
Poison in Vipers when they bite. -- Pool's (...). on Genesis viii. 21.

To which may be subjoined what JUVENAL says, -- Ad Mores Natura recurrit
damnatos, fixa et mutari nescit.


Englished thus, in Prose; NATURE, a Thing fixed and not knowing how to change,
returns to its wicked Manners. --
WATTS, Ruin and Recovery.


tho they were generally, in that corrupt Time, very far from a practical
Conviction of it; and many Notions were then prevalent, especially among the
Pharisees, which were indeed inconsistent with it. And tho on Account of these
Prejudices they might need to have this Doctrine explained and applied to them,
yet it is well known, by all acquainted with their Bibles, that Christ, for wise
Reasons, spoke more sparingly and obscurely of several of the most important
Doctrines of revealed Religion, relating to the Necessity Grounds, Nature and
Way of his Redemption, and the Method of the Justification of Sinners, while he
lived (...) in the Flesh; and left these Doctrines to be more plainly and fully
opened and inculcated by the Holy Spirit, after his Ascension.

But if after all, Christ did not speak of this Doctrine often enough to suit
Dr. T -- r, he might be asked, Why he supposes Christ did no oftener, and no
more plainly teach some of his (Dr. T -- r's) Doctrines, which he so much
insists on? As, That temporal Death comes on all Mankind by Adam; and, That it
comes on them by him, not as a Punishment or Calamity, but as a great Favor,
being made a rich Benefit, and a Fruit of God's abundant Grace, by Christ's
Redemption, who came into the World as a second Adam for this End. Surely, if
this were so, it was of vast Importance, that it should be known to the Church
of God in all Ages, who saw Death reigning over Infants, as well as others. If
Infants were indeed perfectly innocent, was it not needful, that the Design of
that which was such a melancholy and awful Dispensation toward so many
Millions of innocent Creatures, should be known, in order to prevent the worst.
Thoughts of God from arising in the Minds of the constant Spectators of so
mysterious and gloomy a Dispensation? But why then such a total Silence about
it, for four Thousand Years together, and not one Word of it in all the old
Testament; nor one Word of it in all the four Gospels; and indeed not one Word
of it in the whole Bible, but only as forced and wrung out by Dr. T -- r's Arts
of Criticism and Deduction, against the plainest and strongest Evidence!

As to the Arguments, made use of by many late Writers, from the universal
moral Sense, and the Reasons they offer from Experience, and Observation of the
Nature of Mankind; to show that we are born into the World with Principles of
Virtue; with a natural prevailing Relish, Approbation, and Love of
Righteousness, Truth, and Goodness, and of whatever tends to the public
Welfare; (...) a prevailing natural Disposition to dislike, to resent and
^^ndemn what is selfish, unjust, and immoral; and a (...) Bent in Mankind to
mutual Benevolence, tender Comp^^^ion, etc. those who have had such Objections
against the Doctrine of original Sin, thrown in their Way, and desire to see
them particularly considered, I ask Leave to refer them to a Treatise on the
Nature of true VIRTUE, lying by me prepared for the Press, which may are long
be exhibited to public View.

CONCLUSION.
On the whole, I observe, There are some other Things, besides Arguments, in
Dr. T -- r's Book, which are calculated to influence the Minds, and bias the
Judgments of some Sorts of Readers. Here, not to insist on the taking
Profession he makes, in many Places, of Sincerity, Humility, Meekness, Modesty,
Charity, etc. in his searching after Truth; and freely proposing his Thoughts,
with the Reasons of them, to others; See his Preface, and P. 6. 237, 265, 267,
451.
Nor on his magisterial Assurance, appearing on many Occasions, and the high
Contempt the sometimes expresses of the Opinions and Arguments of very
excellent Divines and Fathers in the Church of God, who have thought
differently from him: P. 110, 125, 150, 151, 159, 161, 183, 188, 353.
Both of which Things, it is not unlikely, may have a Degree of Influence on
some of his Readers (However, that they may have only their just Influence,
those Things might properly be compared together, and set in Contrast, one with
the other) -- I say, not to dwell on these Matters, I would take some Notice of
another Thing, observable in the Writings of Dr. T. and many of the late
Opposers of the more peculiar Doctrines of Christianity, tending (especially
with Juvenile and (...) Readers) not a little to abate the Force, and prevent
the due Effect, of the clearest Scripture-Evidences, in Favor of those
important Doctrines; and particularly to make void the Arguments taken from the
Writings of the Apostle Paul, in which those Doctrines are more plainly and
fully revealed, than in any other Part of the Bible. What I mean, is this;
These Gentlemen express a high Opinion of this Apostle, and that very justly,
for his eminent Genius, his admirable Sagacity, strong Powers of Reasoning,
acquired Learning, etc. They speak of him as a Writer -- of masterly Address,
of extensive Reach, and deep Design, every where in his Epistles, almost in
every Word he says. This looks exceeding specious: it carries a plausible
Appearance of Christian Zeal, and Attachment to the holy Scriptures, in such a
Testimony of high Veneration for that great Apostle, who was not only the
principal Instrument of propagating Christianity, but with his own Hand wrote
so considerable a Part of the new Testament. And I am far from determining,
with respect at least to some of these Writers, that they are not sincere in
their D^clarations, or that all is mere Artifice, only to make Way for the
Reception of their own peculiar Sentiments. However, it tends greatly to
sub^^^ve such a Purpose; as much as if it were designedly contrived, with the
utmost Subtl^ty, for that End. Hereby their incautious Readers are prepared the
more easily to be drawn into a Belief, that they, and others in their way of
thinking, have not rightly understood many of those Things in this Apostle's
Writings, which before seemed very plain to them; and they are also prepared,
by a Prepossession in Favor of these new Writers, to entertain a favorable
Thought of the Interpretations put by them upon the Words and Phrases of this
Apostle; and to admit in many Passages a Meaning which before lay intir^ly out
of Sight; quite foreign to all that in the View of a common Reader seems to be
their obvious Sense; and most remote from the Expositions agreed in by those
which used to be esteemed the greatest Divin^^ and best Commentators. For they
must know, that this Apostle being a Man of no vulgar Understanding* it is
nothing strange if his Meaning lies very deep; and no Wonder then, if the
superficial Discerning and Observation of vulgar Christians, or indeed of the
Herd or common Divines, such as the WestminsterAssembly etc. falls vastly short
of the Apostle's Reach, and frequently don't enter into the true Spirit and
Design of Paul's Epistles. They must understand, that the first Reformers, and
Preachers and Expositors in general, both before and since the Reformation, for
fifteen or sixteen Hundred Years past, were too unlearned and short-sighted, to
be capable of penetrating into the Sense, or fit to undertake the making
Comments on the Writings of so great a Man's as this Apostle; or else had dwelt
in a Cave of Bigatry and Superstition, too gloomy to allow'em to use their own
Understandings with Freedom, in reading the Scripture. But at the same Time, it
must be understood, that there is risen up, now at length in this happy Age of
Light and Liberty, a Set of Men, of a more free and g^n^rous Turn of Mind, a
more inquisitive Genius, and better Discernment. By such Insinuations, they
seek Advantage to their Cause; and thus the most unreasonable and extravagant
Interpretations of Scripture are palliated and recommended: So that, if the
simple Reader is not very much on his Guard, if he don't clearly see with his
own Eyes, or has too much Indolence, or too little Leisure, thoroughly to
examine for himself (as few, alas, are willing to be at the Pains of
acquainting themselves so thoroughly with the Apostle's Writings, and of
comparing one Part of them with another, so as to be fully able to judge of
these Gentlemen's Glosses and Pretenses) in this Case, he is in Danger of being
imposed on with de^^sive Appearances; as he is prepared by this fair Pretext of
exalting the Sagacity of the Apostle, and by a Parade of Learning, Cri^icism,
exact Version. Penetration into the true Scope, and Discerning of wonderful
Connections, together with the Airs these Writers assume of dictatorial
Peremptoriness, and Contempt of old Opinions and old Expositions; I say, such
an one is by these Things prepared to swallow strange Doctrine, as trusting to
the s^periour Abilities of these modern Interpreters.

But I humbly conceive, their Interpretations, particularly of the Apostle
Paul's Writings, tho in some Things ingenious, yet in many Things concerning
these great ^rticles of Religion, are extremely absurd, and demonstrably
disagreable, in the highest Degree, to his real Design, to the Language be
commonly uses, and to the Doctrines currently taught in his Epistles. Their
Criticisms, when examined, appear far more subtle, than solid; and it seems as
if Nothing can possibly be strong enough Nothing perspicuous enough, in any
Composure whatever, to stand before such Liberties as these Writers indulge:
The plainest and most nervous Discourse is analyzed and criticized, till it
dissolves into Nothing, or till it becomes a Thing of little Significance: The
holy Scripture is subtili^ed into a mere Mist; or made to evaporate into a thin
Cloud, that easily puts on any Shape, and is moved in any Direction, with a
Puff of Wind, just as the Manager pleases. It Is not in the Nature and Power of
Language, to afford sufficient Defense against such an Art, so abused; as I
imagine, a due Consideration of some Things I have had Occasion in the
preceding Discourse to observe, may abundantly convince us.

But this, with the rest of what I have offered on this Subject of original
Sin, must be left to every candid Reader to judge of, for himself; and the
Success of the whole must now be left with GOD, who knows what is agreeable to
his own Mind, and is able to make his own Truths prevail; however mysterious
they may seem to the poor, partial narrow and extremely imperfect Views of
Mortals, while looking through a cloudy and delusory Medium; and however
disagreable they may be to the innumerable Prejudices of Men's Hearts: -- And
who has promised, that the Gospel of CHRIST, such as is really his, shall
finally be victorious; and has assured us, that the Word which goes out of his
Mouth, shall not return to him void, but shall accomplish that which he
pleases, and shall prosper in the thing where to he sends it. -- Let GOD
arise, and plead his own Cause, and glorify his own great Name. AMEN.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 10. lin. 5. dele the Mark referring to the Margin. -- P. 27. I. 17. read,
on the Decision -- P. 30. l 3. r. these -- ibid l. 7. r. Objections -- P. 32.
l. 23. r. guilty of -- P. 34. l. 20. r. great Number -- P. 35. Marg. Note, l.
10. r. intervening -- P. 45. l. 25. r. at least -- P. 78. l. 19 r. excite (...)
-- P. 95. l. 4. r. Part of -- P. 105. l. 3. r. fixed Cause -- P. 115. l. 12. r.
these Objects -- P. 151. l. 16 r. Degree, of -- P. 218. l. 19. r. is, that that
same -- P. 264. l. 1. r. Sarah; or would --

N. B. The Lines in the Margin of Page 10. properly belong to the Extracts in
the Marg. of P. 8. and are to be read in Connection with them. -- The Sheet L.
next after Page 144. having the Pages numbered wrong; for 153. put 145. and so
on to the first 160, which should be 152. -- Lesser Escapes in Literals, and
Printings, are left to the Candor of intelligent Readers.

A List of SUBSCRIBERS, in Alphabetical Order.
A
THe Hon John Alford, Esquire Charlestown, Massachusetts Mr. John Adams, Milton,
Massachusetts. Mr. Israel Ashley, Hampshire County, Massach. 6 Books, Mr. Jacob
Ashton, Ditto.
B
REV. Mr. John Ballantine, Westfield, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Stephen Badger,
Natick, Massachusetts. Mr. Eliphalet Ball, Hampshire County, Massachusetts. Mr.
Samuel Bacon, Mr. Elijah Baker, Hampshire County, Massachusetts. Mr. Caleb
Burnham, Connecticut. Mr. Noah Baker, Hampshire County, Massachusetts. Mr.
Stephen Baker, Ditto. 6 Books. Mr. Jabez Baker, Ruling Elder, Gloucester,
Massachusetts. Rev Mr. Joseph Bellamy, Bethlem, Connecticut. 6 Books. Capt.
Samuel Beebee, Salisbury, Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Beeman, Kent,
Connecticut. Mr. Joseph Bird, Salisbury, Connecticut. Mr. John Bickford, Mr.
Solomon Bill, Kent, Connecticut, 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Daniel Bliss, Concord,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Boyce, Farmington, Connecticut. Rev. Mr.
Daniel Brim^made, Woodbury, Con. 6 Books. Mr. Samuel Brown, Stockbridge,
Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel Brown, Jun. Ditto. Mr. Samuel Brown, Guilford,
Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Christopher Brown, Connecticut. Mr. Daniel Brown,
County of Hampshire, Massachusetts *Rev. Mr. Aaron Burr, late President of the
College of New Jersey, 6 Books. Mr. El^azer Burt, Northampton. Mr. Manning
Bull, Student of Mathematics, N. York.
C
MR. Josiah Cawdey, Farmington, Connecticut. Rev. Benjamin Chapman, Ditto. 6
Books. Rev. Mr. Samuel Clark, Ditto. Rev. Mr. Peter Clark, Danvers,
Massachusetts. Mr. Caleb Clark, Ditto. Mr. Hugh Clark Ditto. Mr. Jonathan
Clark, Southampton, Massachus. 6 Books. Mr. George Clark, Milford, Connecticut.
Rev. Mr. John Cleaveland, Ipswick, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Cleaveland,
Gloucester. John Cotton, A. M. Plymouth, Massachusetts. Mr. Abel Comstock, Kent,
Connecticut. Mr. Richard Crouch, Student, Yale-College. Mr. David Curtis,
Woodbury, Connecticut.
D.
DEacon Samuel Davis, Gloucester, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Joseph Davis, Holden,
Massachusetts. Mr. Moses Dewey, Hampshire County, Massachusetts. Mr. Martin
Dewey, Ditto. 6 Books. Timothy Dwight, Esquire Northampton, Mass. 6 Books.
E
REv. Mr. Andrew Eliot, Boston, Massachusetts. Mr. Jehosaphat Eldred, Kent,
Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson, Malden, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Daniel
Emerson, Hollis, New Hampshire. Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson, Pepperrell,
Massachusetts.
F
MR. Richard Fairman, Connecticut. 6 Books. Capt. William Fitch* Canterbury,
Con. Mr. John Finney, Jun. Kent, Connecticut, 6 Books. Jonathan Fitch, A. M.
Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Thomas Foxcroft, Boston, Massachusetts. Mr. Philip
Freeman, Ditto. Rev. Mr. Eli Furbish. Brookfield, Mass. 12 Books. Mr. Adiger
Fuller, Kent, Connecticut.
G
Mr. Moses Gill, Boston, Massachusetts. Mr. Joshua Goodale, Mr. Benjamin
Goodhue, Salem, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. John Graham, Southborough, Connecticut.
6 Books. Rev. Mr. Chaun^y Graham, Rumbout, New York. 6 Books. Mr.
Richard-Crouch Graham, Student, Yale-College. 6 Books. Mr. Donald Grant,
Connecticut. Mr. Edmund Graves, Ruling Elder, Gloucester, Massachusetts
H
JOseph Hawley, Esquire Northampton, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Gideon Hawley,
Mashpee, Massachusetts. Mr. John Hathorn* Lieut. ^^nathan Hall, New-Fairfield,
Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Samuel Hopkins, Sheffield, Massachusetts. 6 Books. Rev.
Mr. Samuel Hopkins, Hadley, Ditto. 9 Books. Mr. Daniel Hopkins, Yale-College.
Rev. Mr. John Hooker, Northampton, Massach 6 Books. Rev. Mr. William Hobby,
Reading, Mass. 6 Books. Mr. Jonathan Hunt, Northampton, Ditto. 6 Books.
I
MR. John Ingersoll, Hampshire County. Deacon Daniel Jones, Boston,
Massachusetts. Mr. David Judson, Connecticut. Mr. Jesse Ives, Student,
Yale-College. Mr. Jonathan Judd, Southampton, 6 Books.
K
REv. Mr. Elisha Kent, -- Connecticut. Mr. Samuel Kent, Northampton,
Massachusetts. Mr. Moss Kent, Attorney at Law, Poghkeepsie, New York. Mr.
Edward Kitchen, Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Knibloe, Philippi, New York. Mr. Benjamin
Kneeland, Boston, Massachusetts.
L
Rev. Mr. Dudley Leavitt, Salem, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Jonathan Lee,
Salisbury, Connecticut, 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Mark Leavenworth, Waterbury, Ditto. 6
Books. Rev. Mr. Israel Loring, Sudbury, Massachusetts. Mr. Benjamin Lyman,
Southampton, Ditto.
M
CApt. Alex. McKnot, Londonderry, New Ham. 6 Books Mr. Nehemiah Mead, --
Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Matthew Meriam, Student at Yale-College. Mr. John
Metcalf, Bellingham, Massachusetts. Lieut. Jonathan Mills, Ke^t, Connecticut. 6
Books. Rev. Mr. John Moorhead, Boston, Massachusetts.
N
REv. Mr. Samuel Nowell, Farmington, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Abel Newell, Goshen,
Ditto. 6 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Norton, Ditto. 6 Books.
O
Rev. Mr. Sylvanus Osborne, Connecticut. 6 Books.
P
THe Hon. Joseph Pynchon, Esquire Boston* Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Parkman,
Westb^r^* Mass. 6 Books Rev. Mr. Jonathan Parsons, Newbury, Ditto. 6 Books.
Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, Boston, Ditto. Rev. Mr. Samuel Phillips, Andover,
Ditto. 6 Books. Mr. William Philips, Boston, Ditto. Mr. Charles Phelps, Hadley,
Attorney at Law. 6 Books. Mr. Timothy Pickering -- Rev. Mr. Timothy Pitkin,
Farmington, Con^^ct. 6 Books. Mr. A^hbel Pitkin, Ditto. Rev. Mr. Ne^emiah
Porter, Ipswich, Mass. Mr Ebenezer Pomroy, Northampton, Massachusetts. Col.
Seth Pomroy, Northampton, Ditto. 6 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Pool, Gloces^er, Ditto.
Capt. Eli^ha Pomroy, N^rthampton, Ditto. 12 Books. Mr Seth Pomroy, A. B -- Rev.
Mr. Peter Powers, Norwich Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Thomas Prince, Boston,
Massachusetts. Mr. Thorndike Proctor, -- Rev. Mr. Job Pruden, Milford,
Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Joseph Pratt, ^ent, Ditto. 6 Books. Eleazer Porter,
Esquire Hadley, Mass^chusetts, 6 Books.
R
MR. Robert Ransom, Kent, Connecticut, 6 Books. Mr. Grindal Rawson, Student*
Yale-College. Rev. Mr. Nathanael Rogers, Ipswich, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr.
Daniel Rogers, Exeter, New Hampshire. Rev. Mr. Benajah Roots, Simsbury,
Connecticut, 6 Books. Mr. Hewit Root, -- Connecticut. Rev. Mr. David Rowland,
Plain^^eld, Connecticut. Mr. Israel Rowley, Kent, Ditto. Lieut. John Row,
Gloucester, Massachusetts. Mr. Jonathan Ropes, Jun. Mr. Jonathan Rust,
Northampton, Massachusetts.
S
REv. Joseph Sewall, D. D. Boston, Massach. 2 Books. Mr. Edmund Sawyer,
Newbury, Ditto. 6 Books. Mr. Justus Sacket, Kent, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. John
Searl, -- Connecticut Rev. Mr. Josiah Sherman, Wobourn, Massachusetts. William
Skinner, Esquire Boston, Ditto. Mr. Jesse Smith, -- Connecticut. Mr. Joseph
Smalley, Kent, Connecticut. Mr. John Smalley, A. M. Cornwall, Connecticut.
Reuben Smith, A. M. Farmington, Connecticut. Asa Spalding, A. M. Connecticut.
Rev. Mr. James Sprout, Guilford Connecticut. 6 Books. Rev Mr. Thomas Strong,
New-Marlboro', Massachusetts. Mr. Nehemiah Strong, A. B. -- Connecticut. Mr.
Simeon Stoddard, A. B. -- Ditto. Mr. Noah Strong, -- Ditto.
T
MR. James Tailor, Yale College. Mr. Gershom Tenney, Boston, Massachusetts.
Amos Thompson, Esquire -- Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Isaac Thomlinson, Waterbury,
Connecticut, 6 Books. Mr. Joseph Thurston, Gloucester, Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel
Torrey, Jun Boston, Ditto Rev. Mr. John Trumball, Westerly, Connecticut. Rev.
Mr. Henry True, Hampstead, New Hampshire. Royal Tyler, Esquire Boston,
Massachusetts.
W
REv. Mr. John Walley, Ispwich, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Noah Wadham,
New-Preston, Connecticut. Mr. Miles Ward, Jun -- Rev. Mr. Ebenezer White, --
Connecticut. Mr. Jonathan Wells, Hampshire County, Massachusetts. Mr. Stephen
West, Ditto Mr. William Whitwell, Boston, Massachusetts. Lieut. Livermore
Whitbridge, Beverly, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Samuel Wiggleswo^th, Ipswich,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams, Springfield, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr.
Benjamin Woodbridge, Amity, Connecticut Timothy Woodbridge, Esquire Stockbridge,
Massachusetts. Mr. Joseph Woodbridge, Ditto Richard Woodhall, A M --
Connecticut Mr. Asa Wright, County of Hampshire, Massachusetts. Mr. Selah
Wright, County of Hampshire Massachusetts. Mr. Stephen Wright, Southampton,
Massachusetts.
The following Subscriptions (in the Order as received) from Edinburgh in
Scotland, are not only for this Piece on Original Sin, but also for our
Author's other Book prepared for the Press upon the NATURE of VIRTUE.
THe Right Hon. the Earl of Leven. Robert Craigie, Esquire of Glendoig, Lord
President of the Court of Session. Sir James Ferguson, of Killkerran, Baronet.
Alexander Fraser, Esquire of Stricken, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice. Henry Hume, Esquire of Kaims, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice. Alexander Boswell, Esquire of Auchenlect, one of the Senators of the
College of Justice. Mr. Robert ^ackentosh, Advocate. Robert Wellwood* of
Garvock, Esquire 2 Books. Patrick Boil, Esquire of Shualton, one of the Senators of
the College of Justice. James Nimmo, Esquire Cashier of Excise in Edinburg. Mr.
Michael Menzi^s, Advocate in Edinburg. Rev. Mr. Alexander Webster, Minister in
Edinburg. Rev. Mr. John Erskine, Minister in Edinburg. Rev. Mr. John Bonnar,
Minister in Perth. Rev. Mr. James Smith, Minister of Newburn, 3 Books. Rev. Mr.
Thomas Randal, Minister at Inchture. Rev. Mr. James Robertson, Professor of
Oriental Languages in Edinburg. Mr. Archibald Ladley, Preacher of the Gospel in
Edinburg. Mr. Charles Logan, Preacher of the Gospel in Edin. 3 Books. Mr.
William Hogg, Merchant in Edinburg, 6 Books. Mr. James Grant, Merchant in
Edinburg. 6 Books. Mr. John Walker, Merchant in Edinburg. Mr. William Ramsey,
Writer, Edinburg. Mr. John Can, one of the Clerks of Excise, in Edinburg. Mr.
William Braidwood, Candlemaker in Edinburg. Mr. Robert Scot, Merchant in
Edinburg. Rev. Mr. John Gowdie, Principal of the College of Edinb. Rev. Mr.
Robert Hamilton, Professor of Divinity in Edinb. Mr. Robert Walker, Surgeon in
Edinburg. Mr. Archibald Wallace, Merchant in Edinburg. Rev. Mr. Adam
Wedderstone, Minister of Bathgate. William Wardrop of Cull, Esquire Rev. Mr. John
Gillies, Minister of Glasgow. Mr. Robert Scot. Merchant in Glasgow. Mr. John
Hamilton, Sen. Merchant in Glasgow. Mr. George Brown, Merchant in Glasgow.

