The CHRISTIAN SOLDIER'S DUTY; the Lawfulness and Dignity of his Office; and
the Importance of the Protestant Cause in the British Colonies, stated and
explained.

A SERMON, Preached April 5, 1757. IN CHRIST-CHURCH, (...) To the first
Battalion of his Majesty's ROYAL AMERICAN REGIMENT at the Request of their
COLONEL and OFFICERS.

By WILLIAM SMITH A.M. (...) Philadelphia.

To which is annexed, A PRAYER on the same Occasion.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN. 1757 [Price One Shilling]

TO JOHN STANWIX, Esquire COLONEL-COMMANDANT of the first Battalion of HIS
MAJESTY'S ROYAL AMERICAN REGIMENT, whereof His Excellency JOHN EARL OF LOUDOUN
is COLONEL in CHIEF; GOVERNOR of, and MEMBER of PARLIAMENT for, the City of
CARLISLE; AND DEPUTY QUARTER-MASTER-GENERAL of all HIS MAJESTY'S Forces, raised
or to be raised: As a sincere Testimony of Esteem for His public Character, and
Friendship for His Person, this SERMON, preached and published at His Request,
is

HUMBLY DEDICATED, By His most Obedient Servant, WILLIAM SMITH.
Philadelphia, April 1^, 1757.
A SERMON.
LUKE III. Verse 14. And the SOLDIERS demanded of him likewise, saying --
master, And what shall we do? he said unto them, do violence to no man, neither
accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages.


THIS chapter contains an account of the Preaching of saint John the Baptist;
who, being called of God in the wilderness, and duly commissioned for his high
office, came into all the country about Jordan, preaching to the people the
BAPTISM of REPENTANCE for the REMISSION of SINS.

THE more thoroughly to awake their attention and evince the necessity of his
doctrine, he appears in the most striking character; being, as was prophesied
concerning him, the voice of one crying in the wilderness; prepare ye the way
of the Lord; make his paths straight! Every valley shall be filled, every
mountain and hill shall be (...); the crooked [places] shall be (...) straight;
the rough ways smooth; and all (...) shall see the SALVATION of GOD!

THESE words allude to a known custom of great Kings, who, when they undertook
any long journey, were wont to send forth their messengers before them;
proclaiming it among the people to make their way plain. Now as the Jews, at
this time, daily looked for the Coming of their KING or PROMISED MESSIAH, such
a proclamation, from to extraordinary a person, crying out to clear the way,
for that the Salvation of God was at hand, could not fail to excite their
curiosity, and interest their affections!

EVERY heart was accordingly seized with an instant hope of beholding the
DESIRE OF NATIONS; with whom they expected to share Crowns and Empire and
Temporal Glory. Nay, they began to muse in their hearts whether John himself
were the Christ They were, no doubt, sometime in this suspense, before John
resolves them, by telling them that he was not the Christ, nor even worthy to
unloose the latchet of his shoes; but that the Christ was quickly to follow
after him.
, or only his forerunner. In either case, they were eager to embrace the
Baptism which he preached; as artful Courtiers will strive to recommend
themselves to the Graces of an expected Master. Hence, a Multitude of them came
forth, to be baptized of him.

JOHN, who saw their carnal views, is not too forward in conferring his Baptism
upon them, without duly instructing them in the nature and conditions of it. O
generation of vipers! says he; who has warned you to flee from the wrath which
is to come? Nevertheless, if you are really desirous to escape it, and to be
admitted to the blessings promised in the Messiah, do not deceive yourselves in
thinking those blessings may be derived to you by inheritance. They are not of
a Carnal but a Spiritual nature. Nor will it avail you any thing to say, we
have Abraham to our father; and are thereby the children of Promise. For I say
unto you that unless you bring forth fruits meet for repentance; you can by no
means inherit those PROMISES -- For God is able of these Scenes to raise up
Children to Abraham; and in them shall his Promises be made good, if not in
you. And you must now, without delay, make your choice. For the ax is already
laid to the root of the trees; and every tree that brings not forth good
fruit is to be (...) down and cast into the fire.

SUCH an alarming denunciation struck the people with double astonishment; and
they pressed still more eagerly about John, crying -- what shall we do then; to
escape this Ruin and obtain this Salvation? He answered and said unto them, he
that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none. And he that has
meat let him do likewise: herein strenuously recommending the universal
practice of that diffusive Charity and Benevolence, which are a main foundation
of Moral virtue, and the most acceptable service we can render to our adorable
Creator!

AMONG others who pressed forward, on this occasion, came the Publicans, a set
of men infamous for their illegal Exactions upon the people, crying -- Master,
what shall we do? John, who knew their character, strikes boldly at their
capital vice; charging by their hope of Salvation and their dread of Ruin, --
exact no more than what is appointed you by law; for how shall you begin to be
good, till you cease to be unjust?

LAST of all came the SOLDIERS demanding of him likewise, saying -- and what
shall we do? he said unto them do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages.

SUCH are the words which were recommended to me as the subject of this
discourse. And had I been left to my own choice, I could not have selected any
more suitable, nor more becoming a Gospel-minister to explain, on such an
occasion. For being delivered by divine Inspiration, at a most important
period; namely, when the Soldiers themselves earnestly requested to know, by
what means they might escape the threatened Fire of God's wrath, and obtain
salvation through the Messiah, we may be sure they imply in them the fundamental
parts of the CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS DUTY; so far at least as relates to that
particular character.

I shall therefore proceed upon them, in their natural order. With diffidence,
however, I enter upon my subject. I know many of you to be men of distinguished
understanding; conscious of the dignity of your own character, and of the
glorious cause wherein you are engaged. And nothing but your own express
desire, could give me courage to offer my thoughts concerning any part of your
duty. But, being invited thereto, I shall proceed to the utmost of my
abilities, as far as the time will permit. And, whatever may be the execution,
I can safely say that I bring with me a heart panting for the Public -- and for
you!

FIRST, then, the Christian-soldier is to do VIOLENCE to no man. There are two
sorts of violence which a Soldier may be guilty of. One is against those who
are lawfully vested with Command over him. This is commonly styled Mutiny, and
is a crime of the most atrocious nature; seldom to be expiated but by the DEATH
of the offender. And as God is a God of Order, it must be peculiarly odious to
him.

ANOTHER sort of Violence, which a Soldier may be guilty of, is against his
Fellow Subjects. This is that Violence more immediately meant in the text; the
original word there, signifying, the shaking or terrifying a man, so as to
force money from him, through fear. This we find expressly forbid by the Spirit
of Christianity, under pain of forfeiting the Salvation of God. And we may
glory to say that it is also forbid by the mild Spirit of the British
Constitution!

OUR Soldiery are armed by the laws of their country, and supported by the
community; not to command, but to serve, it; not to oppress, but to protect,
it. Should they, therefore, turn their sword against those from whom they
derive their authority, and thus violate the just rights even but of one
Freeman, who contributes to their support -- what a complication of guilt would
it imply? It would be Treachery! It would be Ingratitude! Nay it would be
Parricide!

AS for the Tyrants of mankind, let them (belying heaven and pretending an
authority from God!) let them lead forth their armed Slaves to plunder, to
harass and to destroy those, to whom they owe Protection! Let them fill those
lands with Violence and Blood, which they ought to fill with Blessing and Joy!
verily I say unto you they shall have their reward. For, trust me, such actions
are odious to Heaven, repugnant to the Gospel; and God will certainly avenge
his own cause!

HAPPY for us, we rejoice under milder influences! our gracious Sovereign,
through a long and prosperous reign, has never, in any instance, offered Violence
to the rights of his subjects; nor permitted it in his servants. The amiable
nobleman, placed over us in our present distress, has long been distinguished
as a patron of Justice, and a true friend of British Liberty. And, though
appointed to the most difficult Command, with a great army under him, among a
people long accustomed to a profound peace, jealous of their Liberties, and
some of them even unreasonably prejudiced against all force and arms; yet such
has been his conduct, that he has happily reconciled jarring interests, and
supported the Military, without violating the Civil, power.

HENCE, general harmony has diffused itself through all the parts of his
extensive Command. As a signal instance of this, it will be but justice to
mention you, gentlemen, of this Battalion which I have now the honor to
address. You have been among us for several months. You were at first but a raw
unformed corpse; and from your manner of being quartered out in small parties
among the inhabitants of this city, disorders might have been expected. But
quite the reverse has happened. No deeds of Violence have been offered. No
complainings have been heard in our streets. Your conduct has done honor to
yourselves; done honor to your Officers in general, and to your worthy
Commandant in particular; whose name is thereby become dear to us. And our best
wishes will attend him and them and you, whithersoever you are destined.

ALL I shall add on this head is, to beseech you, by your hopes of the
Gospelpromises, to persevere in the same dutiful inoffensive behavior toward
your fellow-citizens, in all parts of your future conduct. And, as you can
never be led to deeds of Violence by any authority appointed over you, let it
never be said that your own choice or rashness engaged you in them; so as to
subject you to the severe and shameful punishments denounced against them, by
the laws of your country in this world, and by the Gospel of Christ in the
world to come.

THUS I have endeavored to give the true meaning of the words -- do violence
to no man. I know there are some who affect to understand them in a more
unlimited sense; as containing a general prohibition of all Force and Arms
whatsoever. But, in this, they are neither warranted by Scripture nor Reason.
Nay, the very reverse is evident from the text itself.

THE Soldiers, whom saint John addresses, received wages for Fighting and
Bearing arms against the enemies of their country. He expressly enjoins them to
be content with those wages. But this he never would have done, if the Service,
which they performed as the condition of the wages, had been that identical
Violence, which he so strongly prohibits in the former part of the verse. They
must indeed be very daringly bold, who can charge the Spirit of God with such
an absurdity!

BUT the fact is that -- to support Justice, to maintain Truth, to defend the
goods of Providence, to repress the wild fury of lawless Invaders, and by main
force, if possible, to extirpate Oppression and Wickedness from the earth --
this has never been accounted Violence in any language or country. On the
contrary, it is Duty to the public, and Mercy to thousands!

IF Society is of God's appointment, every thing essential to its subsistence
must be so too; for he that ordains the End, ordains the Means. But how shall
Society subsist, if we are to submit to the unrighteous encroachments of every
restless Invader? if we are tamely to be plundered, tortured, massacred and
destroyed by those who covet our possessions! has God given us his Gospel,
endowed us with reason, and made us fit for Society, only to put us in a worse
condition than the roaming Savage, or the Beast of prey?

WE all allow, in common cases, that a public Robber may be subdued by force or
death, if other means fail. We grant also that those who invade private
property may be compelled to restitution at the bar of Justice. But if
independent states have injured us, to what Bar shall we cite them? who shall
constrain them to appear at our summons? or, if they should appear, who shall
oblige them to abide by the sentence? open Force, then, must be the dernier
resort. And strange it is that those who are often so litigious in cases of
private right, should affect to be most passive in what concerns the Rights of
the Community!

IN short, if human Societies are instituted for any end at all, independent
States may not only defend their Rights when invaded; but if they are already
deprived or defrauded of them, they may demand restitution in the loudest and
most importunate manner; even by calling for it in Thunder at the very gates of
their enemy. This is often the shortest and most merciful method. Nor is it
doing Violence to our neighbors, but justice to ourselves, and to the cause of
Right, Liberty, Virtue and public Safety; which would otherwise be left
unavoidably to suffer.

IT were indeed sincerely to be wished that the Gospel of the blessed Jesus
might have such an universal influence on the lives of all men, as to render it
no more necessity to learn the art of war. But alas! this is a degree of
perfection not to be hoped for in the present state of things, and only to be
looked for in the kingdom of universal Righteousness. Were all men arrived to
such a degree of goodness as to render force unnecessary, then also the
Magistracy, the Laws and every thing else belonging to particular Societies in
this world, would be a needless Institution. But as long as particular
Societies are of any use, so long will Force and Arms be of use. For the very
end of such Societies is to unite the Force of Individuals, for obtaining
safety to the whole.

WHAT I have already said will convince every reasonable person that the words
-- do violence to no man -- were never meant as a general prohibition of all
Force and Arms; so often necessary in this embarassed scene of things. As for
those who from views of interest, pretended scruples of conscience and I know
not what prejudices of education, still shut their eyes against the clearest
light, I do not pretend to offer arguments for their conviction.

IF the barbarities that have been committed around them; if the cries of their
murdered and suffering brethren; if their country swimming in blood and
involved in an expensive war -- if these things have not already pierced their
stony hearts and convinced their deluded reason, that their Principles are
absurd in Idea and criminal in Practice, I am sure any thing I might say
farther, would have but little weight. I shall only beg leave to remind them,
that they will have this cause to plead one day more before a Tribunal, where
subterfuges will stand them in no stead; and where it will be well if they are
acquitted, and no part of the blood that has been spilt is required (...) their
hands.

HAVING found it necessary to dwell so long on the former part of the text, I
shall be very brief on what remains. The Christian-soldier is forbid, in the
SECOND PLACE, to accuse any man falsely.

TO circumvent, to bear down, or to take away, the character of another, for
the sake of revenge, profit or preferment, is indeed a crime of the most
unpardonable nature. It seldom admits of any reparation, and strikes at the
very root of all peace and faith and society among men. Surely, then, among a
society of Soldiers, whose strength consists in their Harmony, and whose
peculiar character is their Honor and Veracity, such a pernicious vice should
be discouraged in an eminent degree, as tending to their immediate ruin, and
odious both to God and Man.

IN the THIRD and last place, the Christian-soldier is to be content with his
wages. This is also a very essential duty. Nothing ought to be more inviolable
among men than the performance of their Covenants. Now, between the British
State and its Soldiery, there is a Covenant of the most sacred nature. They
voluntarily enlist into a certain service for certain wages. These wages are
sufficient for a comfortable subsistence. The British Government has Mercy in
its whole nature, and all its appointments are liberal. The wages of our common
Soldiery are almost equal to those of the inferior officers in many other
services. Surely then, for them, above all others, to be discontented with
these wages, to neglect the duty annexed to them, or to be faint-hearted in its
performance, would argue the highest baseness. It would be breach of Faith,
breach of Honor, and a total want of every generous affection.

MOREOVER, to be content with one's wages implies also a faithful application
of them to the uses for which they are given. They are not to be spent in riot
and intemperance, but in keeping the body neat, clean, healthy and vigorous for
the discharge of its duty. Nastiness and slovenliness in dress or behavior are
sure marks of a mean and dastardly temper. The man who disregards the care of
his own person, which is the Image of his Maker, can have neither spirit nor
grace nor virtue in him. It will be almost impossible to exalt his grovelling
Soul to the performance of any great or heroic action.

AND as for Intemperance, in a Soldier, a Vice of more ruinous consequence
cannot well be imagined; or rather it is a complication of all vices. For, not
to say that it generally leads to those acts of Violence so fully mentioned
above, it is in itself a manifest violation of every tie between the Soldier
and his country. The Soldier, by the terms of his enlistment, consigns his
health, strength and service to the public, in consideration of his receiving
certain wages. Now for him to spend those wages in enervating or destroying
that very health and strength for which they are given -- what is it? It is
robbery of the public! nay Desertion itself is not a greater crime; and nothing
but the mercy of our laws, in compassion to the frailties of human nature,
could have made the punishment of the one less than that of the other. For a
Soldier may as well be found absent from his post, or asleep on it, as be found
on it in a condition which renders him unfit for the duties of it. Indeed,
Discontent, Sloth, Murmuring and Intemperance, have been the bane of many a
powerful army, and have often drawn down the divine displeasure, by giving them
up to certain ruin.

UPON the whole then, we may conclude from the text, that the particular Duty
of Christian Soldiers consists chiefly in -- Obedience to those who are
appointed to command them; a respectful inoffensive behavior to those who
support and maintain them; strict Honor and unshaken Veracity toward one
another; Temperance, Sobriety, Cleanliness and Contentment in their private
character; and a steady, bold and cheerful discharge of whatever service their
King and Country may require of them.

I said that these things constitute the particular duty of Soldiers,
considered as such. But here let it be remembered, that no particular
injunctions of this kind to any particular order of men as such, exempt them
from the general precepts of the Gospel. Though the text be addressed
particularly to the Soldiers, considered in that character; yet as they are
also Men and Creatures of God, they are equally called (in the eleventh verse
for instance) to the practice of universal Benevolence and Charity with the
whole body of the people, whereof they are a part, and to whom that verse is
immediately addressed.

THUS I have finished what I proposed from the text. And now, Gentlemen
Officers, you will permit me to address the remainder of this discourse more
particularly to you. I know you love your King and Country. I know you regard
those men under your command, and would wish to see them shining in the
practice of those virtues I have been recommending. But yet, after all, this
must, in a great measure, depend upon yourselves.

IF, then, you would desire to have any tie upon the Consciences of these men;
if you would wish to see them act upon principle, and give you any other hold
of them than that of mere Command -- let me, Oh let me beseech you, to
cultivate and propagate among them, with your whole influence and authority, a
sublime sense of Religion, Eternity and Redeeming-love! Let the bright
prospects of the Gospel of Jesus be placed full before their eyes; and let its
holy precepts be inculcated frequently into their hearts!

BUT oh! above all things, let the adorable name of the everlasting Jehovah be
kept sacred among you! Glorified angels fall prostrate before it! The very
devils themselves tremble at it! And shall poor worms of the earth; dependent
on a pulse for every breath of Being; surrounded with dangers innumerable;
marching forth in the very shadow of death; to day here, and tomorrow in
Eternity -- shall they dare to blaspheme and tear asunder that holy name,
before which all nature bends in adoration and awe? shall they forget their
absolute dependence upon it for all they have, and all they hope to have?

ALAS! when the Name of our great Creator is become thus familiar, and
prostituted to every common subject, what Name shall we invoke in the day of
danger? to what refuge shall we fly amidst the various pressures of life? to
whose mercy shall we lift up our eyes in the hour of death? and into whose
bosom consign our souls, when we launch forth into the dark precincts of
Eternity?

ONCE more, then, let the Name of the Lord be holy among you; else have you no
sure foundation for Virtue or Goodness; none for dependence upon Providence;
none for the sanctity of an Oath; none for Faith, nor Truth, nor Obedience for
Conscience Sake.

NEXT to Religion and a sovereign regard to the honor and glory of your great
Creator, it will be of the utmost importance to cultivate, in yourselves and
those under you, a noble, manly and rational Enthusiasm in the glorious cause
wherein you are engaged; founded on a thorough conviction of its being the
cause of Justice, the Protestant-cause, the cause of Virtue and Freedom on
earth.

ANIMATED by this sublime principle, what wonders have not Britons performed?
how have they risen, the terror of the earth; the Protectors of the oppressed;
the avengers of Justice, and the scourge of Tyrants? how have the Sons of
Rapine and Violence shrunk before their united ardors, confounded and
overthrown? witness ye Danube Hochstet and Blenheim, villages in Germany, in
the circles of Bavaria and Suabia, famous to all posterity for the glorious
victory of the duke of Marlborough, August 2, 1704, are situated on the Danube;
of which Mr. ADDISON makes mention as follows -- Thousands of fiery steeds,
with wounds transfixt,
Floating in gore, with their dead masters mixed,
Midst heaps of spears and standards driven around,
Lie in the Danube's bloody whirl-pools drowned.
Troops of bold youths the billows sweep away,
And into Scythian seas their bloated corpse convey

and Sambre At the conflux of the Maes and Sambre stands the strong city of
Namur, so nobly taken by the great king WILLIAM in 1695; of which another poet
says -- Sambre and Maes their waves may join,
But never can WILLIAM'S force restrain;
He Will pass them both who passed the Boyn.
PRIOR.
, and thou Boyn crimsoned in blood! hear witness and say -- what was it that
fired our WILLIAMS and our MARLBOROUGHS to deeds of immortal renown? what was
it that steeled their hearts with courage, and edged their swords with victory?
was it not, under God, an animating conviction of the justice of their cause,
and an unconquerable passion for Liberty and the purity of the Protestant-Faith
Never were the noble effects of this sublime principle so conspicuous as at the
glorious battle of the Boyn. Here out immortal deliverer king William, with a
small army routed a much superior, and perhaps a better one. There was only
this difference. The one fought for Liberty, for Religion, and their country;
and were ardent in their cause, from a conviction of its Justice. The other
sought in defense of Tyranny, having nothing of their own to lose, and no
steady principle to act upon.
?

AND do you think now, Gentlemen, that the cause wherein you are engaged is
less honorable, less important; or that less depends on the sword you draw? No:
I pronounce it before Men and Angels that from the days of our ALFREDS, our
EDWARDS and our HENRY'S downwards, the British-sword was never unsheathed in a
more glorious or more divine cause than at present!

LOOK round you! behold a country* vast in extent, merciful in its climate,
exuberant in its soil, the seat of Plenty, the garden of the Lord! behold it
given to us and to our posterity, to propagate Virtue, to cultivate useful
Arts, and to spread abroad the pure evangelical Religion of Jesus! behold
Colonies founded in it! Protestant Colonies! free Colonies! British Colonies!
behold them exulting in their Liberty; flourishing in Commerce; the Arts and
Sciences planted in them; the GOSPEL preached; and in short the seeds of
happiness and glory firmly rooted, and growing up among them!

BUT, turning from this prospect for a moment, look to the other hand! direct
your eyes to the westward! behold popish Perfidy, French Tyranny and savage
Barbarity, leagued in triple combination, advancing to deprive us of those
exalted blessings, or to circumscribe us in the possession of them, and make
the land too small for us and the increasing multitude of our posterity!

SAVE me, ye Powers to whom the Interests of Britain and Liberty are dear! save
me, what a sight do I behold? It Is odious to the view, and horrible to relate!
See, in the van, a set of human monsters hounded out against us from their dark
lurking places; brandishing their murderous knives; sparing neither age nor
sex: neither the hoary Sire, nor the hopeful Son; neither the tender Virgin,
nor the helpless Babe. Ten thousand Furies follow behind and close up the
horrid scene! grim Superstition, lording it over Conscience! bloody
Persecution, shaking her Iron scourge! and gloomy Error, seducing the unwary
Soul! while, in the midst, and all around, is heard the voice of Lamentation
and Mourning and Woe; Religion bleeding under her Stripes! Virtue banished into
a Corner! Commerce bound in Chains and Liberty in Fetters of Iron!

BUT look again, Gentlemen! between us and those evils, there is yet a space or
gap left! and in that gap, among others Though the plan of this Discourse obliges
the author to (...) particularly to the royal American Regiment, to whom it was
preached; yet what he has said of them he would have understood to be said of
all those brave men sent out to (...), and engaged in the same common cause
with them
, you stand; a glorious Phalanx! a royal Regiment a ROYAL AMERICAN REGIMENT! a
Regiment formed by the best of Kings for the noblest of purposes the first that
has ever been formed expressly, as the scourge of Tyrants and the avengers of
Liberty, in this new world! and formed for these important ends to continue,
not for the present only, but probably in all time coming!

AND now is not my assertion proved? Considered in this light, does it not
appear to yourselves that never, from the first of time, was a body of Britons
engaged in a more glorious cause than you are at present: nor a cause on whose
issue more depends? you are not led forth by wild Ambition, nor by ill-grounded
claims of Right, nor by false notions of Glory. But, consigned to you is the
happiness of the present age and of late posterity. You wear upon your swords
every thing that is dear and valuable to us as men and as Christians. And upon
your success it depends, perhaps, whether the pure Religion of the Gospel,
streaming uncorrupted from its sacred source, rational, moral and divine,
together with Liberty and all its concomitant blessings, shall finally be
extended over these American Regions; or whether they are to remain in the
bondage of Idolatry, and darkness of Error for ever!

IN such an exalted and divine cause, let your hearts betray no doubts nor
unmanly fears. Though the prospect may look dark against us, and though the Lord
may justly think fit to punish us for our sins, yet we may firmly trust that he
will not wholly give up the Protestant-cause; but that it is his gracious
purpose, in due time, to add to the REFORMED CHURCH OF CHRIST, the HEATHEN for
an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession.

GO forth, then, with humble boldness* as men conscious that their designs are
approved of God. And oh! if perchance your feet shall touch those fields that
have already drank in the blood of the Slain, and have beheld our brethren
expiring in all the variety of woe -- gently, oh gently tread among their
uncoffin'd Bones! drop a tear over their scattered Ashes; and give a moment's
pause for reflection! It will touch the heart with tenderness, and be a
fruitful source of much useful thought. It will give fresh vigor to every arm,
and new ardor to every breast!

TO see one of our species mangled and torn in pieces is horrible! to see a
Briton, a Protestant, our Friend, our Neighbor, so used is more horrible
still! but to think that this should be done, not to one but to thousands; and
done in an unguarded hour; and done without provocation; and done with all the
aggravation of infernal torture; and done by Savages; and by Savages whom we
have cherished in our bosom; and by Savages stirred up against us contrary to
the faith of Treaties; and stirred up by men professing the name of Christians
-- good heaven! what is it? words cannot paint the anguish of the thought; and
human nature startles from it with accumulated horror!

RISE Indignation! rise Pity! rise Patriotism! and thou Lord God of
Righteousness, rise! avenge our bleeding cause! support Justice, and extirpate
Perfidy and Cruelty from the earth! Inspire those men, who go forth for their
King and Country, with every spark of the magnanimity of their Forefathers! The
same our cause, the same he its issue! Let our enemies know that Britons will
be Britons still, in every clime and age! and let this American world behold
also thy Salvation; the work of the Lord for his Inheritance! Even so; rise
Lord God of Hosts! rise quickly! Amen and Amen.

SUNG as follows, PSALM 94.
O God to whom Revenge belongs,
Thy vengeance now disclose;
Arise thou Judge of all the Earth,
And crush our haughty Foes.
How long, O Lord, shall sinful men
Their solemn Triumphs make;
How long their wicked actions boast
And insolently speak?
Not only they thy Saints oppress,
But unprovoked they spill
The Widow's and the Stranger's (...)
And helpless Orphans kill!
A PRAYER On the same Occasion.
FATHER of all! Preserver of all! Judge of all! thou first and best of Beings!
all praise, all glory be ascribed unto thy holy name; who have made us capable
of seeking and loving thee; and have invited us to fly to the throne of thy
Mercy for aid and direction in all our Undertakings, and deliverance in all our
dangers. Surely that heart must be lost to every nobler feeling that does not
see and adore thy unspeakable Goodness toward the guilty Sons of men --

We see and we adore it, O thou King of Nations! struck with the transcendent
majesty of thy Perfections, conscious of our own Unworthiness, and relying on
the merits of thy ever blessed Son, we prostrate ourselves in the dust, before
thy glorious presence; fearing, yet loving; trembling, yet adoring!

WE confess, O Lord! that thou have done wonderful things for us and for our
Fathers! thou have distinguished us among all the nations of the earth, by
giving us the purest of Religions and the best of Governments In the
Composition of some parts of this Prayer, the author would have it observed,
that he had in view a beautiful Formula* recommended in substance by an act of
the general assembly of the church of Scotland, for the national Fast in June
last. But the nature of his plan, which required a Prayer suitable only to the
Subject of the Sermon, permitted him to make use only of one or two general
Sentiments in it; and those are marked in Italics above, though expressed in a
different language.
. We have indeed received a goodly heritage, and have often been signally
supported by the power of thy glory, in the days of our danger! But alas! while
thou have been heaping favors upon us, we have been multiplying transgressions
against thee! Infidelity, Luxury and Immorality have increased among us, and
spread themselves far abroad. Thou has visited us for these things; but we have
neither learned Righteousness from thy Judgments, nor Gratitude from thy
Deliverances. And justly might our unworthiness provoke thee to remove from us
our inestimable privileges; both civil and religious.

YET still, though we have sinned against Heaven and before thee, we will trust
in thy paternal mercy -- and we know in what we trust. Thine ear is not heavy
that it cannot hear, nor thy hand shortened that it cannot save; and there is
sufficiency in the blood of the Redeemer! suffer us therefore, O merciful
Father, in this day of our visitation, to throw ourselves upon the merits of
the ever-living Jesus; humbled under thy chastisements; confessing and
bewailing our past offenses, both public and private; and beseeching thy divine
Grace to revive among us a spirit of primitive Piety, Integrity and Virtue!

BUT oh! above all, and as the foundation of all, inspire us with an awful
reverence of thy glorious majesty. Give us an unshaken Loyalty to our gracious
Sovereign; and a prevailing love and veneration for our excellent Constitution,
civil and religious! And as often as we are called more immediately to appear
in defense of it, O grant that, in such a glorious cause, we may betray no
unmanly fears; but act the part of BRITONS and FREEMEN; going forth, devoted
either to death or victory; and scorning a Life that is to be purchased at the
expense of the PROTESTANT RELIGION and our NATIONAL PRIVILEGES!

BLESS and long preserve our rightful sovereign KING GEORGE! Bless his royal
family and all his alliances! surround him with Councillors of a true
uncorrupted British Spirit; men sagacious to discover, and steadfast to pursue,
their country's Good, Guard him from all conspiracies against his person and
government; whether secret or more open. May his administration be steady!
steady in the cause of Liberty! steady in promoting the public welfare! steady
in oppossing the enemies of our Zion! and may the gates of hell never prevail
against it!

FOR this end, O Lord, give success to his Arms both by Sea and Land, and favor
our righteous cause! give Courage, Conduct and Integrity to our Commanders, and
those who turn the battle from our gates. In a particular manner, bless his
excellency the Earl of LOUDOUN our Commander, and all those who go sorth with
him for the PROTESTANT-CAUSE, in this AMERICAN WORLD! make them instrumental in
preserving among us, and spreading abroad to the remotest parts of the
habitable world, the precious Blessings of Liberty and the pure EVANGELICAL
RELIGION OF JESUS! (...) that stillest the raging of the waves and the tumults
of the people, set bounds to the rage of our implacable enemies; and bring this
expensive war to the speedy issue of a safe and honorable peace!

FINALLY, O Lord God, to whose uncontrollable power the elements are subject,
grant us mild and seasonable weather; and let neither seed-time nor harvest
fail us. Let our pastures he clothed with flocks, and our valleys covered with
corn. May we soon be delivered from all our fears, and peace be restored in all
our borders. And may these men, who now go forth for us, be returned safe to
our friendship and to our bosoms, crowned with triumph and victory; so that
they and we may together serve and adore thee without fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before thee, all the remainder of our days! Hear us O heavenly
Father, for thy son JESUS CHRIST'S sake, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost,
one GOD, be the Kingdom and the Power and the Glory, world without end. AMEN.

FINIS

