Mr. Pemberton's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 25. 1757.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience OF The HONORABLE His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, And
the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY 25th. 1757.

Being the Anniversary for the ELECTION of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province.

BY EBENEZER PEMBERTON, A. M.

Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by John Draper, Printer to the Honorable His Majesty's
COUNCIL. 1757.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, In Council, May 26. 1757. VOTED,
THAT JACOB WENDELL and SAMUEL WATTS, Esqrs. be a Committee to wait on the
Reverend Mr. EBENEZER PEMBERTON, and return him the Thanks of this Board for
his Sermon preached Yesterday before the General Court, being the Anniversary
Election of Counselors for this Province; and to desire a Copy thereof for the
Press.

Copy attest. A. OLIVER, Secry.

An Election Sermon.
DEUTERONOMY. V. 29. O! that there were such an Heart in them, that they would fear
Me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and
with their Children forever.
A DESIRE of public Prosperity, is deeply implanted in every benevolent Mind;
but the Way to obtain it, is frequently mistaken.

GOD is the ^ounder of Civil Society, by his Favor alone, it can flourish in
Peace and Plenty. But unthinking Mortals, act as if they were independent on
the divine Government, and there was no Law established, for the Punishment of
Vice, the Reward of Virtue. They expect to be happy, without ceasing to be
criminal; and would enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, without fearing it is appointed
Consequences.

BUT this their Way is their Folly. The supreme Monarch of the Universe, ever
attentive to the Felicity of his Creatures; has expressly declared, that a
sacred Regard to his Laws, is the only Foundation of solid and abiding
Prosperity. -- What else means the pathetic Desire of my Text, O that there
were such an Heart in them, etc. This is the Voice of God to the People of
Israel, and demands the serious Attention of this honorable Assembly.

IN my following Discourse, I propose to vindicate the Ways of God with Man;
and show the Advantages of Piety, not only to particular Persons but public
Communities -- and then apply it to the Occasion of the present Day.

I AM FIRST, to show the Advantages of Piety to public Communities -- That to
fear God and keep his Commandments, is the only Way to secure the Prosperity of
a People.

MEN of Libertine Principles, take Pleasure to represent Religion in the most
disagreable Light, as an Enemy to the Peace and Prosperity of Mankind: They
would persuade us, that the Candidates for an heavenly Inheritance, must quit
every Claim to the Honors and Advantages of Earth. Many who do not openly
espouse the Cause of Infidelity, seem to think, Artifice generally prevails
over Christian Candor, and the Man who dismisses all Scruples of Conscience as
imaginary Terrors, has a fairer Prospect of Advantage, than those who strictly
adhere to the Laws of Truth and Righteousness. -- They therefore conclude, that
Provinces and Kingdoms, cannot flourish in Wealth and Grandeur, without
violating the Precepts of Equity; and deserting the Discipline of the CHURCH of
CHRIST.

BUT in vain does the World speak evil of that, with which they are
unacquainted -- In vain do they misrepresent the Design of Religion, to
affright Mankind from a Submission to it is Empire. -- I know that temporal
Prosperity is not the highest Object of the Christian Ambition; the People of
God aspire after sublimer Happiness, than can be obtained in these transitory
Abodes of Guilt and Misery. -- But I know, that temporal Blessings des^end from
above, and the common Enjoyments of Life, acquire a just Value, when they are
the Gifts of God, and used with Sobriety.

THE great Doctor of the Gentiles assures us, that Godliness is profitable for
all Things. Our divine Master promises to those that seek first the Kingdom of
God an Addition of every Thing else. In Conformity to these Declarations, we
find, God often distinguishes in the Course of His Providence those Persons,
who pay a voluntary Submission to the Laws of His Government, and crowns with
earthly Honors those illustrious Heads for whom are reserved Diadems of
immortal Glory.

BUT whatever Darkness may appear upon the Face of Providence, with respect to
particular Persons; yet this is certain, that public Virtue, is generally
attended with public Prosperity -- Peace and Plenty reign in those happy
Countries, where Piety and Justice flourish in the greatest Perfection and
Purity. -- To establish this important Truth we may consider -- The Nature of
Religion -- the Conduct of Providence -- the Experience of all Ages.

FIRST. CONSIDER the Nature of Religion, and you will find it has the highest
Tendency to promote the general Good.

VICE is the grand Disturber of public Happiness -- the guilty Criminal, that
causes all manner of Disorders in Civil Society. Like a devouring Lion, it
ravages the Earth, and would soon cover the Face of Nature with Cruelty and
Violence, if not kept in Chains by the Authority of the Magistrate.

WHAT is it that renders Government, originally designed for the Good of
Mankind, an Instrument of Fraud -- Oppression -- and Injustice? -- Is it not,
when Persons clothed with the venerable Character of Magistrates, are more
zealous to promote their private Interests, than the public Welfare, or make
their own capricious Inclinations the Rule of their Conduct, and extend their
Authority beyond what is permitted by the Laws of the Commonwealth? -- Is it
not, when they form into Cabals, and are more forward to promote the Designs of
a Party, than to advance the Good of the Whole! -- Is it not, when they are
more careful to oblige their Friends and Favorites, than introduce
well-qualified Men into Posts of Honor and Profit?

WHAT is it that ripens a People for Destruction, and opens a Door for Tyranny
to enter in, with all it is attendant Train of Evils? It is -- When that
dear-bought Liberty, which they derive, an Inheritance from their Ancestors,
degenerates into Licenciousness; and an Impatience under the Discipline of
wholesome Laws, precipitates them into Riot and Rebellion -- When their public
Elections are carried on by Intrigue; and their invaluable Privileges entrusted
with Men, whose Hearts are destitute of the Fear of God, -- whose Hands are
stained with the Wages of Unrighteousness.

WHEREVER these Vices prevail, among Magistrates and People, they destroy the
good Order of the Community, and evidence it is political Constitution to be
under a melancholy Decay, if not hastening to it is final Dissolution.

BUT on the contrary, the Fear of God is the noblest Preservative of civil
Society, and lays the firmest Foundation for the Prosperity of all Orders and
Degrees of Men. -- It equally extends its Influence to those appointed to
command, and those who are called to obey -- It forms at once the faithful
Magistrate, and the peaceable Subject.

WHAT can be more finely adapted, to inspire the Rulers of Men with Moderation
and Fear; than frequently to meditate on the Greatness of God, and consider
that they are the Subjects of an Almighty Sovereign, in whose Presence the
Princes of Earth, are but contemptible Worms of the Dust, at whose impartial
Bar they must give an Account of their Administration?

I MAY further observe, the Piety of a Magistrate, supports his Authority,
increases his Reputation, and by this Means extends his Power. The Ensigns of
State with which he is attended, do not render him so respectable, in the Eyes
of the People, as the Splendour of his Virtues. -- How amiable does that
Authority appear, to which we submit, not barely from a Sense of Duty, but of
Choice and Inclination? -- How cheerfully do we pay Obedience, when we esteem
the Person, more than we fear his Power; and reverence the Goodness of the Man,
more than the Dignity of the Magistrate. -- But Vice when seated in high
Places, is odious in every Eye, and renders a Government weak and contemptible.
How can Rulers expect Obedience, to those Laws which they wantonly violate?
With what Decency can they punish Criminals, when they are Companions with them
in their Crimes?

THOSE Rulers alone support the Dignity of their Character, and diffuse
Happiness among the People, -- who honor God that has advanced them to their
elevated Stations, and subject their derived Power, to the Laws of his
Sovereign Empire -- who seek with greater Ardor the Kingdom of Heaven, than the
Dignities of this inferior Earth -- who esteem themselves not Masters, but
Fathers of the Commonwealth -- who pardon with Pleasure, but punish with
Regret -- who take more Care to subdue their Corruptions, than extend the
Bounds of their Power -- who had rather be extensive Blessings to Mankind, than
triumph over prostrate Nations of Enemies -- who go on in this shining Course,
not from a Desire to enjoy the vain Phantom of human Glory, but a lively Hope
of eternal Felicity.

IF Religion is so essential to the Character of a good Magistrate, it is
equally necessary to form an obedient and loyal People -- A People always
prepared to support and assist the State, and submit to lawful Authority, as
the Appointment of Heaven: -- And this not through a slavish Fear of Punishment,
which is a weak and inconstant Motive, but from a Principle of Conscience,
which operates, at all Times, in all Places, and is superior to all worldly
Considerations.

THE Fear of God, then, is the Parent of Order, and unites the several Parts of
a Community together, by strong and indissoluble Bonds -- It moderates the
Power of Princes by Goodness, secures the Fidelity of the Subject from a Sense
of Duty. -- Magistrates of this Character -- are like Gods, diffusive Blessings
upon Earth: And the People will esteem them Ministers of Heaven ordained for
their Good. From this mutual Agreement arises the Strength and Beauty of
Society, and public Prosperity is the native Consequence. --

I SHALL only add -- The Fear of God renders a People happy, as it inspires
them with a Spirit of Union and Charity. It teaches us to regard each other, as
the Offspring of the same Father -- Subjects of the same King -- Members of the
same Body -- Partakers of the same Spirit -- Heirs of the same Glory. It
instructs Particulars, to submit their Interest to the general Welfare; to
preserve their proper Bounds; and employ their various Talents, for the common
Advantage. God who created all Things by His omnipotent Arm, disposes them in
beautiful Order; whoever departs out of the Circle, in which he is placed by
Providence, disturbs the public Repose: Whoever deserts his Station, and
invades the Province of another, rebels against the supreme Governor, and
introduces extensive Confusion.

THE Gospel is styled the Gospel of Peace, not only because it is a Law of
Grace, and creates Peace in the Consciences of Men; but also because it is a
Law of Love, and produces Harmony and Concord in Society. It sweetens the
Tempers of Mankind, corrects their Passions -- mortifys their Lusts, which
render them uneasy at Home, and troublesome Abroad. It severely condemns
Ambition, Avarice, Hatred and Revenge, which are the Cause, of that Enmity and
Division, which make this World emphatically a Valley of Tears. It forms in our
Breasts those amiable Virtues of Humility, Meekness, Patience and Charity,
which if universally practiced, would transform this Earth into an Image of
Heaven.

How inviting would be the Charms of a Society, regulated according to the
Institutions of the Gospel. Every one content with his Lot, would rejoice in
the Prosperity of his Neighbor. -- The Great would command without
Haughtiness, and Inferiors submit without Murmuring -- The Rich would employ
their superfluous Wealth, to relieve the Miseries of the Poor; and the Poor
gratefully acknowledge the Kindness of their Benefactors -- Envy would be
banished from among Equals, and Contentions finished by mutual Concessions.
There would be no Infidelity in Friendship; no Censuring in Conversation. Every
one by mutual good Offices become useful and agreeable to each other. This
People would enjoy a Tranquillity which would be a bright Resemblance of that,
which is possessed by the Saints above. -- We might hope no Enemies would
disturb their Repose -- if they should -- God would be their Protector and
Friend, and encompass them with His Favor as with a Shield.

THIS naturally leads me to say

SECONDLY, THE Equity of divine Providence assures us, that the only Way to
secure the Prosperity of a People, is to fear God and keep his Commandments.

THE Conduct of Heaven toward public Bodies of Men, is very different from
that which God observes, in punishing the Vices, and rewarding the Virtues of
private Persons. The Equity of the divine Dispensations to particular Men, is
often concealed: Clouds and Darkness surround the Throne of his Justice;
distinguished Virtue is sometimes covered with Reproach, and triumphant
Wickedness crowned with Applause: The faithful Servants of Christ, confined in
Dungeons, and their bloody Persecutors advanced to Thrones of Dignity. We cannot
judge who are the Favorites of God, or the Objects of his Displeasure, by the
Prosperity or Adversity they meet with in this Life.

THIS is no Disparagement to the Justice of the great Lord and GOVERNOR OF THE
WORLD: For particular Persons are immortal; the Time appointed to reward or
punish them, is reserved for a future State: Then the Justice of God will be
vindicated, the Mysteries of His Providence unveiled, the Majesty of His
Government supported, His loyal People bountifully recompensed, His implacable
Enemies severely punished: The proud Oppressors of Mankind, shall expiate their
Crimes in eternal Flames; the humble Disciples of JESUS, triumph in boundless
Felicity and Glory. -- We ought not, then, to be surprised, if the Wicked
prosper upon Earth; while the Righteous are exposed to a Variety of Trials. --
Through much Tribulation the one enter into the Kingdom of Glory: by flowery
Paths the others descend to a World of Darkness and Misery.

BUT this is not the Case of public Communities, they are of a shorter Date.
Those Motives which now form Men into Societies, will have no Existence in a
future State. Kingdoms and Commonwealths will be abolished forever:
Communities of Men, therefore, can only be rewarded or punished in this World.
Upon this Account, God, in the ordinary Course of His Providence, distinguishes
a wise and virtuous People, by temporal Blessings; and bears Testimony against
prevailing Iniquity, by public and general Calamities. To expect Prosperity,
merely from worldly Policy; above all, to pretend to establish it upon Fraud
and Injustice; is impiously to affront the Government of GOD, and defy that
ALMIGHTY ARM which will certainly, sooner or later, pour out all His Wrath,
upon those Combinations of Men, who despise His Authority and violate His Laws.

GOD may, indeed, defer the Punishment of a corrupted People, till they have
filled up the Measure of their Iniquities, and are prepared for immediate
Destruction. He may visit an holy Nation with His paternal Rebukes, to purify
their Graces, and fit them for more signal Favors; but in the common Course of
His Providence, we shall find that Righteousness exalts a Nation: Public
Prosperity is the Reward of public Virtue.

THIS Conduct is necessary to humble the Pride of Men, -- restrain the
Prevalence of Vice, -- and manifest the Power of the most High. Among Men, the
Multitude of Criminals sometimes obliges the Magistrate to wink at their
Crimes. Wickedness in high Places, escapes with Impunity, because there is no
Power to punish it. But the Throne of God is above all; a Frown of His
Countenance humbles the proudest Monarch; a single Act of His Will destroys
Millions of Criminals. -- And has He not threatened -- Has He not declared --
that He will proceed in righteous Severity, against a rebellious and unreformed
People?

HEARKEN with awful Reverence, to the Denunciations of His Wrath against
Israel, His once favorite Inheritance. It shall come to pass, if thou will not
hearken to the Voice of the LORD thy GOD, to observe all His Commandments and
Statutes; Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall thou be in the
Field, etc. -- Say not, This is the Language of the Law, which was a
Dispensation of Rigor, and not agreeable to the Gospel, which is an Economy of
Grace and Compassion. -- Is not God the same Yesterday, Today, and forever? --
Is not Disobedience to His Laws, equally offensive in the present, as in former
Ages? -- Has He descended from the Throne, quitted the Reins of Government, and
abandoned all Nations to their own Conduct? -- No my Brethren -- Let us

THIRDLY, Consult the Experience of all Ages, and it confirms the Truth of my
Text.

THE Heathens themselves were sensible, the Prosperity of a People, depended,
not so much on the Number of their Armies, the greatness of their Courage; as
upon a strict Obedience to the Laws of the CommonWealth, and a careful
Attendance on the Duties of Religion. If we consult the History of all Nations,
we shall find that they sunk in Reputation, when they degenerated in Morals;
the Prevalence of Pride, Luxury and Debauchery, has ever been a fatal
Prognostic of approaching Ruin.

To exemplify this -- let us consider the State of ancient Rome, in it is Rise
-- Progress -- Decay. -- By what Art did that City emerge out of its original
Obscurity, lift up its Head among the Nations, and finally became the Mistress
of the Universe? -- By what wonderful Secret, did a small Number of Fugitives,
advance themselves to the Dignity of Heroes and lay the Foundation of an
Empire, to which the greatest Princes paid the most submissive Homage. -- Their
Magistrates gave a constant Attention to the Necessities of the People; and
renounced their private Interests for the general Good -- Their Laws were so
sacredly observed, that the Fathers of the Commonwealth, offered up the
Offspring of their Bodies Sacrifices to public Justice -- Their Frugality was
so great, that victorious Generals, descended from their triumphal Chariots, to
cultivate the Earth with their own Hands, and live upon their paternal
Inheritance, without Pomp or Splendour. -- Their Economy was so exact, that it
was high Treason against the State, to employ its Revenues to any other
Purpose, than to adorn and support the Republic. Temperance and Exercise
strengthened their Bodies for the severest Toils -- A warm Love of their
Country, inspired their Breasts with invincible Courage -- An invariable
Attendance on the Ceremonies of their Religion, flushed them with Expectation
of certain Victory.

THUS Rome from inconsiderable Beginnings, increased and prosper'd, till all
Countries were filled with its Glory: The Fate of Kingdoms, depended on the
Voice of its Senate; its Eagles triumphed to the Extremities of the Earth.

By what Fate did this mighty Empire fall from its envied Height, and become a
Prey to Troops of undisciplined Barbarians? -- Unlimited Ambition, usurped the
supreme Dignities of the Commonwealth, without seeking to obtain them by
Merit. -- The Asian Luxury, diminished the St^^ngth and debased the Courage, of
their once victorious Legions -- Insatiable Avarice plundered Provinces and
Kingdoms, to support the Pride and Extravagance of particular Persons --. As
their Vices increased, the Spirit of Patriotism decayed: The People became
venal, the Magistrates despotic. Dissension reigned among all Orders of Men. --
Their Generals instead of defending their Country, employed their Force to
subdue it. ROME fell a Sacrifice to ROMAN Arms. The Capital of the Universe,
was deluged with the Blood of her noblest Sons. That People, who gave Law to
distant Nations, and established Kingdoms according to their Pleasure, meanly
bowed their Necks to the Yoke of a Conqueror, and became the Slaves of every
successful Usurper.

BUT we need not search any further into the Annals of Rome: The History of the
Jews is a convincing Evidence of the same Truth: Their Virtues or their Vices
formed the Prosperity or Adversity of the State. When they kept the Covenant of
their God, they triumphed over their Enemies: When they renounced His
Government they were carried Captive into distant Lands and became Servants, to
the most arbitrary and cruel Masters. -- But on this I need not enlarge -- The
Conduct of Providence to the People of the JEWS, we are acquainted with from
our Infancy. From what has been said, we may certainly conclude, that Impiety
and Vice, are the Destruction of every People. But on the contrary, if we Fear
God and keep His Commandments, it will be well with us and our Children forever.

I REMAINS, to apply this Discourse, to the Design of the present Solemnity,
and address my self, to the Honorable His Majesty's Council; and the Honorable
House of Representatives.

O FATHERS! I am persuaded, I am invited into this Desk, not to explain the
Institutions of human Policy, but enforce the important Duties of Truth and
Righteousness. You will allow me to plead the Cause of my native Country, upon
this public Occasion, and warmly recommend to you a disinterested Zeal for its
Safety and Happiness, in the present dangerous Situation.

IF an affectionate Concern for the Prosperity of our Country, is always a
Duty; never was there a louder Call for the Exercise of this Virtue, than in
the present Day -- When the Flames of War, are spreading among the Nations of
EUROPE, and the Enemies of the Protestant Faith, are formed into a strong
Confederacy against it -- When the Thunder of the Battle, is heard even in
these remote Regions; and our British AMERICA, is threatened with immediate
Destruction -- When we are surrounded, with numberless active, vigilant
Adversaries; animated not only by Ambition, but irritated by Envy and Revenge;
who seek not only to conquer, but utterly to destroy.

IF they should succeed -- How melancholy a Change must we Experience? -- What
Ruin must ensue? -- We are now through the Indulgence of Heaven, under the
Government of a Prince, descended from a Race of illustrious Ancestors, in all
Ages at War with the proud Oppressors of Mankind, and strenuous Defenders of
civil and religious Liberty. A Prince who ascended the Throne of GREAT BRITAIN,
amidst the universal Acclamations of a brave and loyal People; and governs them
not with arbitrary Violence, but according to the established Laws of the
Commonwealth. A Prince, who softens the Authority of a Monarch, with the
Tenderness of a Parent; and pursues His own Glory, only in Subordination to the
Safety and Happiness of His Subjects.

BUT if the House of Bourbon, should prosper in their ambitious Designs; we
should be under the Command of an insulting Tyrant, whose Ancestors from the
Beginning, have been the public Disturbers of the Peace of EUROPE, the common
Invaders of the Liberties of Mankind. A Prince who aspires at universal Empire,
by violating the Faith of Treaties, and practices every Method of Fraud and
Injustice, to extend his Dominions: Whose absolute Will, determines the Fate of
his Subjects, and condemns them daily to Tortures and Death, for obeying the
Dictates of their Consciences.

THIS is that tyrannical Power, that now surrounds the Continent of
NORTH AMERICA with his mercenary Troops, and employs barbarous Salvages, to
execute those inhuman Cruelties, which he is ashamed publicly to authorize --
Already one of our Armies has been defeated -- One of our Forts taken -- Many
of our Brethren carried into Captivity, and our Southern Provinces deluged with
Blood. -- Should he go further -- the Consequences are too melancholy to be
expressed.

DOUBTLESS, Honored Fathers, it is your united Enquiry in this critical Day --
What can be done for our Defense? -- How shall we escape the Power and Policy
of our Enemies? -- Not I, but the supreme Monarch of the Universe, gives you an
Answer in the Words of my Text -- Fear God, etc. -- His Power is Almighty; His
Promise unfailing; neither Earth nor Hell, can resist the Executions of His
Will. He is not a Man that He should lie, nor like the variable Sons of Men,
that He should repent. Has He said, and shall He not verify it? The Fruit of
Righteousness is Peace, the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance
forever.

IT is certainly our Duty to blow the Trumpet, assemble the Men of War, and
employ every prudent Method, to resist the Violence of our Invaders. His
MAJESTY in His paternal Goodness, has appointed a military Force, sufficient
(we trust) to defeat the Designs of the French; and establish the British
Empire in America. He has placed at the Head of His Troops, a Nobleman The
Right Honorable, the Earl of LOUDOUN.
of consummate Prudence, experienced Valor; who equally shines in the Cabinet
and the Field; and we trust is commissioned by the Highest Authority, to
scourge the Perfidy of our Enemies, and defend the Church of CHRIST, in this
Wilderness. But melancholy Experience has taught us, it is in vain to trust in
the Number and Greatness of our Forces. God must preside in our Councils of
War, inspire our Commanders with Conduct and Valor, give Bravery to our common
Soldiers, and crown our Expeditions with Success. The Ark of God must march at
the Head of our Troops, if we desire the Fortresses of our Enemies should fall
before us. -- In vain do we equip Fleets, if commanded by Men who bid defiance
to Heaven. -- In vain, do we form Armies, if we wage War with the LORD OF
HOSTS. -- In vain do we establish the wisest Systems of human Policy, if the
Laws of Religion are profanely violated. The only Way to Safety, is to secure
the Favor of that BEING, with whom alone is Power and Victory. --

IT is the highest Presumption to hope for Prosperity, whilst we persist in
those Sins, which are the Cause of our Miseries -- Can we expect God will
reward with Victory, our Abuse of His Mercies -- Will He bless us with Peace,
while we wage War against His Crown and Dignity -- Will He deliver us from the
Fear of our Enemies, that we may securely violate the Laws of His Government?
-- This is contrary to the Declarations of His Word, the Conduct of His
Providence. -- Love to your native Country, which the Enemy has invaded; Zeal
for the Church of CHRIST, which our Fathers planted at such vast Expense in
this Wilderness; a Regard to your Wives and Families which are in Danger of
falling a Prey to Papal Tyranny; will engage You, whom God has placed at the
Head of the Commonwealth in this dark Day, to exert your most vigorous
Endeavors, to obtain the Favor of God, and secure the Prosperity of this
People. --

THEIR Welfare, in a great Measure, depends upon your Conduct. You are the
appointed Instruments, in the Hands of Providence, to advance their Happiness
or increase and perpetuate their Misery. If you are Examples of distinguished
Piety, unblemished Justice, disinterested Patriotism; the Influence will extend
far and wide, and transfuse the same noble Spirit, among all Orders and Degrees
of Men. But when Vice is advanced to the Seat of Government, and Men of corrupt
Principles and Practices, are placed in Posts of Power, the Contagion is soon
disseminated, through all Parts of the Community, and "destroys as a Pestilence,
that walks not in Darkness, but wastes at Noon Day." Every civil and
religious Motive, call upon you, our Political Fathers, to exert your
Authority, to vindicate the Honor of the Gospel, to support the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, to maintain the Worship of God in its Purity and
Power, to reform the Manners of this degenerate People. -- If you would not
have this good Land destroyed by Fire and Sword; these Houses of God, become
the Nurseries of Superstition; and your innocent Posterity devoted to
Destruction; -- Now is the Time to arise, and teach this People by your
Influence and Example, to Fear God, and keep His Commandments, that it may be
well with them and their Children forever.

ANIMATED by this divine Principle, we trust, You will proceed this Day, to the
Choice of His Majesty's Council, and give your Votes, for Men who have an awful
Regard for the Laws of God, and will make the divine Government the Model of
their Administration -- You will choose Men of Wisdom to discern the Times;
more zealous to advance the public Welfare, than their private Advantage. --
Men who will hazard their Credit and Estates, rather than unite in any Schemes
of Oppression and Injustice. -- Men who will venture to displease the highest
Authority upon Earth, rather than give a Vote, for a Person unqualified for the
Office to which he is nominated. -- Men that will not sell their Country for a
Bribe, but exert all their Power to promote its Happiness. -- Men that will
generously neglect their personal Affairs, when the Public requires all their
Attention. -- Men that will recommend Religion, not only by wholesome Laws, but
by their instructive Example.

MAGISTRATES of this Character, answer the benevolent Design for which human
Government is established: They are the invaluable Gifts of God, and merit the
highest Applauses of Men. They procure, not barely temporal Blessings for
Mankind; but are happy Instruments of promoting their eternal Felicity. The
good Order of the State, advances the Prosperity of the Church. Their Virtue,
not only embalms their Memory upon Earth, but will be approved at the supreme
Tribunal of Heaven.

YET a little while, O Honored Fathers, You must descend from your elevated
Stations; Your distinguished Heads must be laid in the Dust. Those Voices which
now decide the Fate of your Country, must be silent in the Grave. Your immortal
Spirits must ascend TO GOD THE JUDGE OF ALL, and give an Account, of the
important Trust now committed to your Management. Of this, You have had solemn
Warning, by the Death of our late Honorable Commander in Chief SPENCER PHIPS,
Esquire; Lieuten^^^ (...) of this Province.
; who having served his Generation by the Will of God, is fallen asleep.

FROM the World of Spirits, into which He is now entered, He calls upon You, to
maintain the Cause of God and your Country, with unwearied Diligence, and
intrepid Fortitude -- Yea, all your illustrious Ancestors, who once filled the
Places you now possess, look down from their shining Seats, to observe your
Conduct in this critical Day. They are, doubtless, ardently desirous, that the
civil and sacred Privileges of this People, may by your Means, be safely
transmitted to the latest Posterity. If possessed of their patriotic Spirit,
you imitate their amiable Virtues, it will afford you a divine Comfort, when
all the splendid Distinctions of this Life, shall vanish as a Dream -- A
Consciousness of your Fidelity to God and your Country, will fill you with
inward Joy, when you bid an eternal Adieu, to every Thing below -- The
Testimony of an unreproaching Heart will illuminate the Chambers of Death,
dissipate the Horrors of the Grave, and brighten your Passage to the Regions of
immortal Day. -- When these Heavens, shall vanish as a Scroll, this Earth shall
expire in Flames, the sincere Christian, the uncorrupted Patriot, shall appear
with distinguished Luster upon the Stage of Eternity, and hear that
transporting Sentence pronounced in his Favor; Well done thou good and faithful
Servant; Enter thou into the Joy of THY LORD.

To whom, etc.

AMEN.

