Dr. Wigglesworth's DISCOURSE AT THE DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, at HARVARD-COLLEGE in
CAMBRIDGE, NEW ENGLAND, May 11. 1757.

SOME THOUGHTS UPON THE Spirit of Infallibility, CLAIMED BY THE CHURCH of ROME:
OFFERED AT THE ANNIVERSARY DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, AT HARVARD-COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE,
May 11. 1757.

By EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH, D. D. And HOLLISIAN Professor of Divinity.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by JOHN DRAPER, in Cornhill. MDCCLVII

THE INFALLIBILITY Of the CHURCH of ROME, briefly considered.
1 JOHN IV. 1. BELOVED, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.


YOU are doubtless, my Hearers, some of you, sensible, that I have publicly
delivered, and printed Discourses on the Words now read unto you, about two and
twenty Years ago; at a Time when a Spirit of strong Enthusiasm was making it is
Way apace into this Society. A short Account of this Matter may be seen in my
Letter to Mr. Whitefield, P. 6. 7.
But the Spirit I am now to try, being of a very different Sort from that, will
lead me into a Discourse of quite another Nature.

THE Business of the third Dudleian Lecture, at this Time assigned to me by the
Rev'd Trustees, according to the Will of the honorable, learned and pious
Founder, is to be for the detecting, and convicting and exposing the Idolatry
of the Romish Church, their Tyranny, Usurpations, damnable Heresies, fatal
Errors, abominable Superstitions, and other crying Wickednesses in their high
Places; and finally to prove, that the Church of Rome is that mystical Babylon,
that Man of Sin, that apostate Church, spoken of in the New Testament.

BUT when we charge the Church of Rome with any of these Enormities, or with
any other Error, either in Faith or Practice; her Advocates think it a
sufficient Answer to tell us, Alas, Gentlemen, you are grossly mistaken! As for
these Opinions and Practices which you take to be Errors, it is your selves only
that err in thinking them to be so; for the Church of Rome is so highly
privileged, as to be under the constant Guidance of an Infallible Spirit. You
might as well therefore imagine that Christ and his Apostles have erred, as
that She has, or can.

THE first Thing therefore to be done, in our Disputes with the Adheren's and
Advocates of the Romish Church, seems to be this; to enquire carefully, Whether
their Claim to such an extraordinary Privilege, as the continual Guidance of an
Infallible Spirit, be well grounded, or not? For on the one Hand, if it be, all
Dispute with them is at an End. We have nothing to do, but to believe as their
Church believes; to receive all her Dictates with implicit Faith, and follow
them with blind Obedience. -- And again, on the other Hand, if this Claim be
false and groundless, yet till we convince them of it, they will and must
remain impenetrable, to any Arguments with which we can press them, on other
Points. You see then, that this is the fundamental Article in the Controversies
between us, and them; and that Consequences of the last Importance depend upon
it.

I HOPE therefore we shall all with humble Reverence attend the affectionate
Charge of the Apostle in my Text, and not believe this Spirit, till we have
tried whether it be of God. And to this, by Divine Assistance, I shall now
apply myself. -- But here so many Things present themselves to View, that I
find it no easy Matter to determine which to pass in silence, since I am
confined to the Limits of one short Discourse, which can by no means contain
them all. I must content myself therefore to select such Thots only, as can be
best crowded into so small a Compass, without being too much obscured or maimed.

YOU may observe then, that our Adversaries the Papists define their Church, to
which they arrogate a Spirit of Infallibility, to be that Society of Persons,
who profess Faith in Jesus Christ, and live in Subjection to, and Communion
with the Pope, or Bishop of Rome.

THE Infallibility they ascribe to this Church is, That through the Assistance of
Christ and his Holy Spirit, it not only does not, but cannot err in any
Doctrine of Religion. -- Go then say they to this Church, and receive the
Doctrine which She teaches; and there you have certainly and infallibly, the
true and pure Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Yea they set up the Dictates of their
Church as a Rule of Faith and Manners, distinct from, and superior to the Holy
Scriptures; inasmuch as they affirm, that the Scriptures can neither be truly
understood, nor savingly believed, without presupposing the Infallibility of
their Church in testifying the divine Inspiration of them; and ascertaining the
Sense of them; and superadding certain necessary Traditions of the same
Original and Authority with them.

THIS Infallibility they place, not in the Church Diffusive, but in the Church
Representative. But who the Representative of their Church endowed with this
Infallibility is, whether the Pope, who is the Head of it; or a General Council
of its Bishops and Doctors; or both together; they are at no Agreement among
themselves. And we are not at all concerned to help them in adjusting their own
Differences; tho methinks it looks with but an ill Aspect on their pretended
Infallibility, that it has never yet been at Leisure, or in Humor to decide a
Controversy in which it is so much concerned; and on which all its Usefulness
to the Church is suspended.

FOR till this Point is determined, how shall the Church Diffusive, or any of
its Members, know on whom to depend, or where to apply for infallible Guidance,
in any Matter of Faith or Practice. I think with the learned Bishop Burnet,
That every Side does so effectually confute the other, that I believe them all
as to that: And think they argue much stronger when they prove where it cannot
be, than when they pretend to prove where it must be. And if the Time would
allow, it would be both an agreeable and edifying Amusement, to take a View of
their Arguments one against another, on this Subject, wherein it so much
concerns them to be all of one Mind.

BUT the Limits to which I am confined will not suffer me on this Occasion to
attempt to prove separately, either by their Arguments, of one Party against
another, or by any of my own, that neither Pope, nor General Council, nor both
together, are guided by an Infallible Spirit in delivering the Doctrines of the
Christian Religion. -- It will be sufficient to answer all the Ends I aim at,
if I can prove at once, That no such Assistance of Christ and his Holy Spirit
is vouchsafed any where in the Romish Church, as infallibly secures it from
erring in any Doctrine of the Christian Religion.

PERHAPS the shortest Way of proving this would be, to show that that Church
not only may, but actually has, erred exceedingly in some Doctrines authorized
by both Pope and Council, so contrary both to Sense and Reason, as well as
Scripture; that we, who live so far removed from the Seat of pretended
Infallibility, have more and better Assurances that those Doctrines must be
notoriously false; than we have, or possibly can have, that there is, or ever
was, either Pope, or General Council in the World, to enjoin us to believe them.

BUT this would lead me to take up most of the Time in exposing the Absurdity
of some other Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and to deduce the Falsehood and
Arrogance of their Claim to Infallibity, only by Way of Inference from it;
which though I believe the shortest, would yet look like a more indirect Method
of Proceedure; and might perhaps prevent some of my Successors in this Lecture,
from attempting to expose such a false Doctrine, in a more effectual manner,
than I am able to do. -- I shall therefore take another Course, and confine
myself entirely to the single Point before me, by endeavoring to show,

I. THAT it is evident, both from the Nature of the Thing, and from the Account
which they themselves give of the Infallibility they pretend to, that we can
have no good Reason to believe such Infallibility lodged any where in the
Romish Church, without some divine Promise to found our Belief of it upon. And,

II. THAT none of the Promises alleged for this Purpose, intend or prove any
such Thing.

Now if I can make it appear, that none of the Promises alleged intimate any
such Thing, as the Conduct of an infallible Spirit in delivering the Doctrines
of Religion, to be bestowed any where in the Romish Church; and if I can prove,
that we can have no good Reason to believe any such Conduct vouchsafed to the
Romish Church, without a divine Promise of it; 'twill thence plainly follow,
that we ought not to believe the Romish Spirit of Infallibility; but should
reckon the Pretenders to it, among the false Prophets, of whom we are warned in
my Text.

Here then,

I. I AM to prove, That it is evident both from the Nature of the Thing, and
from the Account which they themselves give, of the Infallibility they pretend
to, that we can have no good Reason to believe such Infallibility lodged any
where in the Romish Church, without some divine Promise to found our Belief of
it upon.

1st. THIS is evident from the Nature of the Thing itself. -- For it cannot be
pretended, that God is under any Necessity of Nature, or Obligation in Point of
Justice, unless he has laid himself under one by Promise, to bestow the
infallible Conduct of his Holy Spirit in delivering the Doctrines of Religion,
upon any Person or Community whatever: And much less can it be pretended, that
he is under any Necessity or Obligation to bestow it upon one particular Person
or Church, rather than another. And therefore, if God does vouchsafe the
infallible Guidance of his Holy Spirit in delivering the Doctrines of Religion
to any Church; and more especially if he does it to one Church exclusive of all
others, it must be allowed by all to be an Act entirely free and arbitrary. And
if so, then it can never be known what Church God so highly favors, or whether
he do so by any; unless we know that he has made some antecedent Promise that
he will: Or unless he bares Witness to the Pretensions of his favorite Church,
with such miraculous Powers, and apparent Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as it would
be inconsistent for the God of Truth to confirm a Lie with. -- But now the
Romanists, I think, don't presume to say, that their Church is endowed with any
miraculous Powers or Gifts of the Holy Ghost, to confirm its Pretensions to
Infallibility. For tho they study to persuade the World, that Miracles are
still among them; yet they do not so much as say, that the Miracles are wrought
by those, with whom this Infallibility is lodged; or that they are done to
prove them to be Infallible. And therefore, Since the Gift of Infallibility is
an arbitrary Thing, and they don't pretend to prove they have it by Miracles;
if they can ever prove that their Church has it, they can do it only by
producing some Promise of God to bestow it on them. But what wretched
Contradiction, Confusion, and Circulation will this unavoidably run them into?
For according to their Principles, we can neither be assured that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, nor be certain what is the Meaning of the
Promises of them; unless we first believe the Infallibility of their Church in
testifying the divine Authority of the Scriptures, and ascertaining the Sense
of them. And yet when we enquire, how we shall be assured of the pretended
Infallibility of their Church, it is evident from the Nature of the Thing
itself, compared with their own Principles and Concessions, that they can never
prove it, unless they can find some Promise of it in the Scriptures. -- So that
we must believe their Church to be Infallible, before we can either believe, or
know the Meaning of the Scriptures; and yet we must believe their Church
Infallible, because they pretend that the Scriptures say it is. But this is
only to run round in a Circle, and favors so little of a Spirit of
Infallibility, that we hardly need enquire, whether the Scriptures have
promised them Infallibility, or no. For it is an eternal Principle and Rule of
Reason (as has been frequently observed upon this Occasion) never to prove one
Thing by another, till that other is first well proved, if it be not a
self-evident Truth: Nor can any Thing be proved afterward by that, which was
first proved by it. This is as impossible, as if a Father should beget a Son,
and should be after wards begotten by that Son. Therefore the Scriptures cannot
prove the Infallibility of the Church, since their Authority (according to
Popish Principles) must first be proved by the Churches Testimony. -- Thus much
for the Nature of the Thing it self. I proceed to say,

2. IT is likewise evident from the Account which the Romanists themselves give
of the Infallibility which they ascribe to their Church, that we can have no
good Reason to believe any such Infallibility conferred upon it, without some
Divine Promise to found our Belief of it upon. -- The Account they give of the
Matter is, that it is by the Assistance of Christ and his Holy Spirit, that
their Church cannot err in any Doctrine of Religion. From whence it is plain,
that in order to believing their Churches Infallibility, we must believe, that
the Person or Persons who constitute their Church-Representative, (as they call
it) whether Pope, or Council, or both together we cannot tell; nor has their
Infallibility ever yet been so kind as to inform us in a Point so necessary to
our Salvation; that this Person or Persons, I say, are assisted by Christ and
his Holy Spirit. But this will both run them again into a Circle; and also
prove the Necessity of some Promises to found such a Belief upon.

1. IT will run them again into a circular Argumentation. -- For how shall we
be persuaded that their Church has the Assistance, the Infallible Assistance,
of Christ and the Holy Ghost. We should never have known that there were such
Divine Persons as Christ and the Holy Ghost, if the Scriptures had not revealed
them to us. They tell us, we can neither savingly believe, nor understand the
Scriptures, without the Infallible Testimony and Interpretation of their
Church: That is in effect, we cannot believe that there are such Persons as
Christ and the Holy Ghost, unless we first believe their Church to be
Infallible; and yet we cannot believe their Church to be Infallible, unless we
believe that there are such Persons as Christ and the Holy Ghost; for its
Infallibility, by their own Confession, does suppose the peculiar Assistance of
both these. And none can believe their Assistance before he believes they are.
But leaving them in the midst of this Circle, I proceed to observe,

2. THAT in order to our believing that Church favored with the Infallible
Assistance of Christ and the Holy Spirit, we must of Necessity have some
Promise to it of such Assistance, to found our Faith upon. -- For how comes
this Church to have this Infallible Assistance? We can well enough suppose,
that Christ and the Holy Spirit may exist without giving this Assistance. And
we can suppose, that the Christian Religion may very well continue in the
World, after that all the Doctrines and Precepts of it have been committed to
Writing by Men under the Conduct of an Infallible Spirit, without the
Continuance of such an Infallibility in the Church. This Assistance therefore
is not a necessary, but a free Act. And if a free Act, then for ought that they
know, their Church may not be so assisted. For whence can they be sure of an
arbitrary Thing, unless the Authors of this Assistance have engaged themselves
by Promise, to give their Church, that Infallible Assistance? So that is
impossible for them to prove such an Infallible Assistance of Christ and the
Holy Ghost, unless they produce some express Promise for it. -- And should they
produce any such Promises, they will still be liable to be questioned, how they
are sure that these are Divine Promises? When the Knowledge that they are
Divine, must suppose the Thing to be true, which they would prove out of them;
viz. that their Church is Infallible? And supposing the Promises Divine, how
are they sure, that this and no other is the Meaning of them? When from such
Places they prove, that their Church is the only Infallible Interpreter of
Scripture. -- But waving any further Advantage which might be made of their
losing themselves perpetually in such inextricable Labyrinths, I shall proceed
to show,

II. THAT none of the Promises ordinarily alleged to prove the Infallibility
of the Romish Church, can possibly mean any such Thing. -- These Promises are
of two Sorts, namely, such as are pleaded by them, who imagine the Spirit of
Infallibility to reside in the Pope alone; or such as are urged by them, who
place it in a General Council, or in Pope and Council. -- I shall consider the
Allegations of both Sorts distinctly, but as briefly as I can.

THEY who place Infallibility in the Pope alone, think it is well proved in
general, that there must be an Infallibility in the Church; and from hence they
conclude, that it must be in the Pope. For if there must be a living speaking
Judge, always ready to guide the Church, and to decide Controversies, they say
this cannot be in the diffusive Body of Christians, for these cannot meet to
judge; nor can it be in a General Council, the meeting of which depends upon so
many Accidents, and on the Consent of so many Princes, that the Infallibility
must lie dormant frequently for whole Ages together, if the General Council, or
Pope and Council is the Seat of it. And therefore, taking it for granted that
it is certainly in the Church, they conclude it can be no where else but in the
Pope BURNET'S Exp. P. 180.
. -- The chief Proof they allege from Scripture, is taken from the Words of
our Savior, when upon Peter's confessing, that He was the Christ, the Son of
the living God; Matthew. xvi. 16, 18.
our Lord said to Him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. -- This we allow to
be a Promise of Perpetuity to the Christian Church, but we can by no means find
Infallibility here promised to the Church, and much less to the Pope, the
pretended Head of it. -- Indeed from the Perpetuity here promised to the
Christian Church; we may fairly conclude, that there shall always be a Number
of Men in the World professing the Christian Religion, who shall believe and
practice enough of it, to carry them safe to Heaven. But this is far from
proving, that they shall never be suffered to err in such Points, as are not
absolutely necessary to Salvation. And it is at least as far from proving, that
these Men shall always live in Subjection to, and Communion with the Bishop of
Rome, rather than with the Bishop of Jerusalem, Antioch, or London.

BUT St. Peter, say they, was that Rock Christ meant, when He said, Upon THIS
ROCK I will build my Church. But if the Popes are all Infallible, it is certain,
that by the Rock is meant, not the Person, but the Faith or Confession of
Peter; for so Pope Felix III. has expounded it, Super ista Confessione
edificabo Ecclesiam meam, as I find him quoted by the learned Dr. Stratford
Vid. Discourse of the Necessity of Reformation, P. 5.
And as the Dr. further observes, From the Promise of our Savior, that the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church, they can by no means infer
Infallibility, till they have first proved, that the Gates of Hell prevail
against every Saint; yea, against every Person, that is not infallible! And
when that shall be once proved, the Gates of Hell will be set so wide open, and
they who enter in at them will be so numerous, that it is to be feared, St.
Peter will never more be put to the Trouble of opening the Gates of Heaven for
any Man.

BUT so much for the Promise pleaded by them, who place Infallibility in the
Pope alone. -- I pass now to consider the Promises alleged by such as place
Infallibility in a General Council, or in Pope and Council. These Promises are
more numerous, but not less impertinent. They serve the Purpose a little
better, than God's ^^^ing said to Genesis 1.16.
make two great Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day, and the lesser Light
to rule the Night, does to prove that the Pope must consequently be above the
Emperor.

THE first Text urged upon this Occasion is that of our Savior to the Seventy,
Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. -- From these Words our
Adversaries infer, that an infallible Assistance is promised to their Church in
all Ages, not in its diffusive Sense, but representative, viz. in the Pastors
and Doctors assembled in Council. -- But by what Laws of Interpretation, this
Construction can be justified, it is not easy to imagine. For

1st. THESE Words' were spoken to such Persons, as were sent out only with a
temporary Commission, which expired at their Return to their Master, and in
which therefore they have no Successors in the Church.

2dly. SUPPOSING (but not granting) that the Office of the Seventy had been
standing and perpetual; yet how could that, which was applicable to each of
them singly, be fairly and certainly extended to their Successors; and yet not
belong to each of them singly, nor yet to all of them collected in a Body;
unless the supposed Successors of the Apostles also be convened with them, in a
General Council. -- Or even supposing this to be just also, yet,

3dly. No such Thing as Infallibility seems to be implied in this Place. For,

(1.) EVEN the Apostles themselves seem not to have had the constant infallible
Assistance of the Spirit of God, 'till after Christ's Ascension. -- And then
much less can we suppose the Seventy Disciples had, who are here spoken of.

(2.) THE Message they were sent up on did not at all require any infallible
Assistance. -- For they were sent two and two before Christ's Face, into every
City and Place whither he himself would come, not to deliver fully the Doctrine
of Christ, but only to tell the People that the Kingdom of God was at Hand:
That is, that blessed State of Things under the Messiah, is now ready to be
revealed to you. The whole Design therefore of that Commission of the Seventy
was, to prepare People for the Reception of that Doctrine, which Christ himself
was about to deliver to them. And what infallible Assistance can be supposed
necessary in order to this?

4thly. SUPPOSING it should be granted that the Seventy were infallible in what
they delivered, yet nothing can be hence drawn for the Church's continual
Infallibility; because the Reason which there might be for the Infallibility of
the Seventy, don't hold for the Infallibility of the Church now. For,

(1.) THE Seventy were sent abroad by Christ when there were yet no infallible
Writings containing his Doctrine, made by Himself, or his Apostles, or other
inspired Persons. -- And so the Seventy had more need of the immediate Guidance
of the Spirit of God then, than the Church can have now; since that the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ has been published to the World by the Writings of
the Apostles and Evangelists in the New Testament, so fully and clearly, that
the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works by
them. 2 Timothy 3.17.


(2.) THE Seventy had sufficient Evidences to attest their Infallibility if
they had it, by the Power given them to cast out Devils, and heal Diseases. --
And therefore those they were sent to, had sufficient Inducement to believe
such an Infallibility if they pretended to it. When therefore our Adversaries
can produce the like Credentials, for their Doctors and Pastors, either apart,
or in a General Council, they may then perhaps from hence argue something in
Favor of their Infallibility, but not before.

AGAIN it is pleaded, that Christ says, Tell the Church; and if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, and a Publican. Math.
18.17.
-- But what is it, which is here to be told to the Church? Not a Doubt about
any Point of Doctrine, but a Complaint of Trespass of one Brother against
another. So that if Infallibility is promised in these Words, it is
Infallibility, not in determining the Doctrines of Religion, but in judging
Matters of Trespass. -- Again, What Church is to be applied to? Not the Church
Catholic, convened in General Council, but the private Christian Assembly, to
which the aggrieved Brother belongs. He was first to use his own private
Endeavors; then the Interposition of Friends was to be tried; and if that was
without Success, the Matter was to be referred to the Assembly, to which they
belonged. So that if infallible Guidance in Judgment can be gathered from this
Passage, it may be claimed by every private Christian Assembly; and surely then
there can be no need of traveling to a Popish General Council to obtain it.

ANOTHER Place alleged is that Promise of our Savior, Math. 28.20.
I am with you always, even to the End of the World. -- This implies Christ's
spiritual Presence with his Ministers. And this Promise of Christ's spiritual
Presence, was to the Successors of the Apostles, as well as to themselves; for
it reaches to the End of the World. But then, this Promise intends only
continual Assistance, and not infallible. For whatever is here promised to the
Apostles, is promised to each of them singly, and therefore cannot with any
good Reason be restrained to their Successors taken collectively. Whereas our
Adversaries themselves do not pretend, that each of the Successors of the
Apostles singly, is rendered Infallible, by virtue of this Promise.

BESIDES (as has already been observed) there is not the same Reason, that the
Pastors of the Church collectively should be infallible now, which there was
for the Apostles being so then. Nor can they produce the same Evidences for
their being so, which the Apostles did. Nor can any good Reason be drawn from
this Promise, for Infallibility to the Successors of the Apostles in the Romish
Church, and not elsewhere. -- So that this Text also may be dismissed, as of no
Use to our Adversaries.

NOR is Joh. 16.13. alleged to any better Purpose. -- For Guidance into all
Truth by the Spirit is there promised to none, but such as have it promised to
them also, that the Spirit will show them Things to come. And therefore, that
Promise must be restrained to the Apostles, and not extended to their
Successors. For I think the Romanists do not pretend their Church is endowed
with a Spirit of Prophecy, as well as of Infallibility.

NOR lastly, will it prove their Pretensions, if the Church of the living God
is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. -- For that is only
because it is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; which the
Romish Church can scarce be allowed to be, since it lays it is own Infallibility
in the Foundation, and builds both Credit and Meaning of the Apostles and
Prophets upon that.

MOREOVER it ought to be observed, that if it was a Church which is here called
the Pillar and Ground of Truth, it was not the Church of Rome, but the Church
in which Timothy was directed how to behave himself, namely the Church of
Ephesus. And that this Church has erred fundamentally must needs be granted,
since, as Historians tell us, there is not one Family of Christians now to be
found in Ephesus.

BUT after all, I think with an eminent Critic Dr. SHARP.
, that it is Timothy himself, and not the Church of Ephesus, which is here
called a Pillar and Support of the Truth: that the Passage should be rendered,
that thou may know how to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the
Church of the living God, as a Pillar and Support of the Truth. The Apostle is
giving Rules to Timothy, how to behave himself in the Church, which He calls
the House of God. Now after he had called it an House, one would think it not
proper, that in the same Breath, he should call it a Pillar of an House. But it
is very natural to give that Name to Timothy, and to exhort him to behave
himself as such in the House of God. And if you take it in this Sense, it is as
far off from the Purpose they allege it for, as that of their angelick Doctor
Aquinas.
; who proved that all Men are not equally bound to have an explicit Faith,
because it is written, that the Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding beside
them Job. 1.14.
.

THESE are the principal Texts alleged by those who place the Infallibility in
a General Council of such as live in Subjection to, and Communion with the
Bishop of Rome. And concerning them all I think it will hold true, that any
other Christian Church may put in as fair a Claim to what they Promise, as the
Church of Rome. So that we must either believe, that all Churches are
Infallible, or deny that the Romish Church is so. For where all have an equal
Claim with her, it is very plain that the Claim of all must be just, or else
that her Claim cannot be so. -- Now that all Christian Churches are not
Infallible, we need no other Proof, but their Contradictions one to another.
And therefore we need not be at a Loss what to think of the Romish Church,
unless some Promise of Infallibility could be produced which respected her,
more than others.

AND now the Sum of all is, That that Spirit which cannot stand the Test, ought
not to be believed: that the Spirit of Infallibility contended for by the
Romanists, can never be proved without some express Scripture Promise of it to
them: that for them to betake themselves to Scripture Proof upon this Occasion,
is to involve themselves in such Circulations and Contradictions, as would
better become any Thing else, than Infallibility: that if waving the Advantages
this would give us, we attend to the Promises alleged, we find none of them
can, without manifest Violence, be interpreted of a standing, perpetual
Infallibility in the Church: And lastly, that if, contrary to the Truth, we
should suppose this to be the obvious Intention of them all; yet not one of
them has more respect to the Romish Church, than to any other.

FROM these Things laid together, it will be no difficult or unfair Conclusion,
that the Infallibility which the Romanists arrogate to their Church is not from
the Spirit of Truth, but from a Spirit of Error.

AND now (to borrow the Words of the celebrated Bishop Burnet Exp. P. 152.
) the Importance of this Argument, rather than the Difficulty of it, has made
it necessary to dwell so long upon it. For it is indeed, the main fundamental
Point in Debate between us and the Papists, and upon which, in a manner all the
other Points of Difference do depend. Since then so much depends upon it, and
since the Missionaries of the Church of Rome are generally very well instructed
in it, therefore it ought to be thoroly considered. For how little Strength
soever there may be in the Arguments brought to prove this Infallibility, yet
they put specious Colors upon them, and they are commonly managed, both with
much Art, and with great Confidence. But the only infallible Rule in this, as
in all other Points of Importance, is, To the Law, and to the Testimony: If
they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.
Isai. 8.20.


OUR Adversaries the Papists dare not deny, that the Holy Scriptures were all
given by Inspiration of God: And surely then we may believe them, if we can but
understand them. The Scriptures themselves assure us, that they are able to
make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and that they may be known of children; which certainly supposes, that however
there may be some Things in them hard to be understood, yet that in all Points
necessary to Salvation, they are written with Perspicuity enough to be
apprehended by very ordinary Capacities. What need then can there be of an
infallible Interpreter, to explain the Meaning of what a Child may know without
such Help? And where shall we find such Interpreter, if we needed him; since
the Church of Rome, with all it is Infallibility, cannot determine, whether it
be Pope, or General Council, or both together? And what Help or Satisfaction
shall we find if we look into the Decisions of that Church; since it is certain
that its Definitions in Matters of Faith, are both more in Number, and much
more intricate and hard to be understood, than those of the Scripture are? --
But I am insensibly sliding into the Consideration of what may be urged in
Point of Reason against the Romish Doctrine of Infallibility; to take a just
View of which would probably far exceed, both your Patience, and my own
Strength.

I MUST therefore leave this, together with the several interesting and
important Points expressed in the Statute of the worthy Founder of these
Lectures, which I read unto you at the Beginning of this Discourse, to such as
by the Will of God may succeed me. -- I must also wave the Reflections which
offer themselves upon what has been spoken at this Time: And shall conclude in
one Word of Advice, to such of you, my Hearers, as intend the Study of
Divinity; namely,

THAT after you have laid the Foundations of your Faith in the great Points of
natural and revealed Religion, in Opposition to the Atheist and the Deist, as
deep and strong as you can; if you find Leisure and Advantages to look much
into the Controversies between the several Denominations of Christians, you
would begin with that between us and the Church of Rome. -- That Church is a
restless, incroaching and implacable Enemy to Protestants of every
Denomination. It is indefatigable in it is Endeavors, compassing Land and Sea
to make Proselytes. It utterly denies Salvation to any out of it is Communion.
And it is Heresies, Superstitions, Cruelties, Idolatries, and other crying
Wickednesses are such, that you will find it no very easy Matter to persuade
your selves, that there can be any Salvation in it. This is doubtless
therefore, the most interesting and important Controversy among Christians; and
so deserves your Attention in the first Place. And you will find that a
competent Understanding of this, will be no small Help to you in determining
some Controversies between Protestants one with another. -- To which I may add,
that if we consider, how much the Protestant Interest, both in Europe and
America, is at this Day threatened, by the Sword of its Popish Enemies; this is
the Controversy in which it seems most likely that we may be bro't to the
Trial, whether we are rooted and grounded in our Faith, and can hold fast the
Profession of it, without wavering.

THE END.

