Mr. Clark's SERMON PREACHED TO A Society of Young Men.

Spiritual Fortitude recommended to young Men, In resisting and overcoming the
wicked one, by the Word of God abiding in them.

A SERMON PREACHED At a LECTURE TO A Society of Young Men, In the North-Parish
of Danvers, December 15th 1757. And Published at their Request, with some
Enlargement.

By Peter Clark, M. A. Pastor of the First Church in Danvers.

Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities,
against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against
spiritual Wickednesses in High Places.

1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like Men, be strong.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Edes and Gill, at their Printing-Office in
Queen Street, 1758.

Spiritual Fortitude recommended to Young Men.
1 JOHN II. 14. -- I have written unto you, young Men, because ye are strong,
and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.


IT is observable, that the Apostle John, in the preceding Verses, addresses
his Exhortations and Admonitions to the Christians, to whom he directs this
Epistle, under the several Titles or Appellations of Fathers, Young Men, and
Little Children; which Titles, or Characters, some understand as respecting the
Diversity of the Degrees of Grace, that obtain among Christians, who according
to their Standing and Proficiency in the School of Christ, are variously
denominated, in Allusion to the natural Age; some, Fathers, from their Age and
Experience in Christianity, their Wisdom and Knowledge of ancient Things; some,
Young Men, from their spiritual Strength, and Fortitude, fitting them for
Conflicts with Satan's Temptations, and for obtaining the Victory over them;
some, Little Children, from their knowing God as a Father. -- Others conceive
these Distinctions to refer to the Diversity of the natural Age. And it is
generally agreed, that the Words may be aptly accommodated to both Sorts,
either to the several Ranks of Christians, differing from each other in Regard
of their Growth in Christian Knowledge, and Holiness, as Fathers, young Men and
Babes in Christ; or to the Diversity or Distinction of Christians with Respect
to their natural Age. And it is without all Doubt, that the Holy Scriptures in
general (as well as this Epistle) were written for the Use and Benefit of
Christians, in common, of whatever Rank or Age of human Life, old, or young.
And there are in the Word of God Counsels, Instructions, and Encouragements,
peculiarly adapted to Persons of every Age, particularly to young Men; they are
counseled and exhorted to remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth,
(Eccl. 12.1.) and cautioned against walking in the Ways of their Heart, and in
the Sight of their Eyes. (Chap. 11.9.) Solomon declares it his Design in
writing his Proverbs, to give unto the young Man Knowledge and Discretion. (
Prove. 1.4.) And the Apostle Paul instructs Titus to give proper Advices to the
Aged and Youth; particularly to exhort young Men to be sober-minded. (Tit.
2.6.) There are also Examples of pious young Men set before them for their
Encouragement and Imitation. Such was Joseph in Potiphar's Family. (Genesis 39.2,
-- 9.) Such was Josiah King of Judah, who, in the Eighth Year of his Reign,
while he was yet young (about the Sixteenth Year of his Age, for he began to
reign, when he was Eight Years old) began to seek after the God of David his
Father. (2 Chronicles. 34.1, 3.) Such was Obadiah, who feared the Lord from his
Youth, (1 King. 18.12.) and others that might be named. And they were young Men
in Age ('it is probable) as well as in Grace, to whom this Address is made by the
Apostle, giving them a great Commendation for their spiritual Fortitude, in
opposing and vanquishing Satan, that Wicked one, through the Word of God abiding
in them. I have written unto you, young Men, because ye are strong; and the
Word of God abides in you, etc. -- And they are the young Men of this Flock,
whom I propose now to address, agreeable to these Words of the Apostle; young
Men, who desire to bear and receive the Word of God, and of whom it may be
hoped, that his Word, both written and preached. will abide in them, to
strengthen them unto spiritual Conflicts with, and Victory over Satan's
Temptations, and thereby furnish them for good Service to God, and their
Generation. And happy those young Men, who are not only young in Age, but young
Men in Grace, and in Christian Knowledge and Practice, strong Men in Christ; in
whom this Character, and Commendation may be verified, Ye are strong to
overcome the wicked one, having the Word of God abiding in you.

I shall briefly open the Words, and then apply them for Instruction and
Exhortation to our young Men, under some Heads of Doctrine. And,

1. We may take Notice of the Perfection ascribed to these Young Men, which is,
that they are strong. As old Men are feigned for Wisdom; With the Ancient is
Wisdom ( Job 12.12.) So young Men, for Strength. The Glory of young Men is
their Strength. (Prove. 20.29.) Old Men are therefore fittest for Counsel and
Advice, (hence it is noted as an Instance of great Weakness and Indiscretion in
Rehoboam, that he forsook the Counsel of the old Men 1 King. 12.13.) as young
Men are for Execution by their bodily Strength, which is most eminent in those
of that Age. But it is spiritual Strength which is here intended, and the
Effects of it are spiritual, in the Conquest of the Wicked one. And those who
are young in Grace, are to be commended for this Strength, whereby they are
enabled to overcome their Lusts, and to resist Temptations.

2. The Means of this Strength is the Word of God abiding in them. Strength of
the Mind, which is here spoken of, lies in strong Reasons, which beget
Resolution, whereby the Mind is fortified against all Solicitations to turn
aside from the Way of Truth and Righteousness. And the Word of God affords the
strongest Reasons, to establish the Heart against Satan's Temptations; taken
from the Evil of Sin, the Excellency, Pleasure and Advantage of the Ways of
Holiness, the Death of Christ for the Expiation of Sin, the Love and Mercy of
God toward repenting Sinners, the awful Judgment to come, the Horrors of Hell,
and the Happiness of Heaven, all clearly revealed in the Word of God. And those
who have this Word abiding in them, as a Principle of the spiritual Life,
deeply rooted in their Hearts, are thereby well furnished with Strength against
their spiritual Enemies. The Word of God is the great Weapon of our spiritual
Warfare. Ephesians. 6.17. -- The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.

3. The main Evidence, or Effect of this spiritual Strength, through the Word of
God abiding in them, is their Victory over Satan, who is the Wicked One, and
all his Lusts and Temptations; -- and have overcome the Wicked One. He cannot
mean a full and final Conquest; for that is not to be expected till the End of
Life. Then (and not before) our Warfare shall be accomplished, and we pass from
this militant State to the triumphant; but the Victory was begun at their first
Conversion, when they first embraced the Holy Religion of Christ, being enabled
by divine Grace to renounce the Devil, and all his Works, and to overcome all
the Opposition he could make against their Entrance into the Kingdom of God.
And this was a real Victory over that Wicked one, and an Earnest and Pledge of
a full and complete Victory at last.

4. This Description and Commendation he gives of these young Men in Christ,
that he might the better enforce the Exhortations to Holiness, which he writes
to them in this Epistle. I have written to you, young Men, for ye are strong,
etc. And in pressing any Branch of Duty, certainly one of the most effectual
Methods to gain our Point, especially with young People, is, to take Notice of
and commend the Beginnings and Appearances of it in them, or such Instances of
virtuous Goodness, as they have already attained unto: this, beside the
Reasonableness of the Duty exhorted to, will excite a laudable Ambition to go
on, and make good the Commendation given them, in a more eminent Degree. -- But
I shall endeavor further to explain these several Heads of the Text, in a few
Observations from it.

DOCT. I. That it is the Duty, and will be the Commendation, Honor, and
Happiness of young Men, to be strong to overcome the Wicked one.

DOCT. II. The Means of acquiring this Strength is the Word of God, our
receiving it into our Hearts, and having it abiding in us.

DOCT. III. That young Men, even such as have experienced the effectual saving
Impression of the Word, are to be exhorted, and encouraged to the Duties of
Christian Piety, by the Word of God, written or preached. I can speak but
briefly to each of these Points.

DOCT. I. That it is the Duty, and will be the Commendation, Honor, and
Happiness of young Men, to be strong to overcome the Wicked one. Here I shall
make a few Remarks in general, for Illustration.

1. By the wicked one is meant the Devil. This is the Character he bears in the
Writings of this Apostle. Chap. 3.12. Not as Gain who was of that wicked one,
(i. e. the Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning) and slew his righteous
Brother. He had said before, ver. 8. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil.
This he exemplifies in Cain, who was of that wicked one, the firstborn of
Satan. So Chap. 5.18. He that is begotten of God, keeps himself; and that
wicked one touches him not. And he is elsewhere in Scripture styled the wicked
one. As in our Savior's Parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13.38. The Tares are the
Children of the wicked one, i. e. the Children of the Devil; so it is explained
in the next Words, ver. 38. The Enemy that sowed them, is the Devil. And in the
old Testament we meet with the same Appellation. Psalm. 109.6. Set thou a wicked
Man over him; and let Satan stand at his right Hand. -- Aynsworth translates
it, Set in Office the wicked one over him. The Psalm is a prophetic
Imprecation against Judas, the Betrayer of our Lord; as appears from the
Application of the following 8th Verse to Judas, in Act. 1.20. And we know, the
Devil had full Power given him over Judas, to hurry him on to his unnatural
Treason against his Master; and after that, to lay violent Hands on himself.
There are many wicked ones among the Children of Men, but the Devil is
eminently and emphatically called that wicked one; being himself, the first in
Wickedness, and fixed in Wickedness and Malice against God, and Holiness. The
Devil sins from the Beginning. (1 John 3.8.) He was the first Rebel, and
Ringleader in Sin and Rebellion against God. 'Twas he that seduced our first
Parents to that great Transgression, which has involved all Mankind in Sin and
Death. And he has made it his Business ever since to draw and entice others to
Sin and Wickedness; and is the Father of all Sinners among Men. He that
commits Sin, is of the Devil. (ibid.) Ye are of your Father the Devil (said
Christ to the unbelieving Jews) and the Lusts of your Father ye will do. (Joh.
8.44.) He is the Enemy of all Righteousness; and that malicious apostate
Spirit, that works in all the Children of Disobedience. ( Ephesians. 2.2.) He works
in the Hearts of all wicked People by their Lusts and corrupt Passions,
instigating them to evil Practices. Justly therefore may he be styled the
wicked One.

But note here. Though he be called the wicked One, in the singular Number, yet
we are not to think, that there is but one single wicked Spirit, that goes by
the Name of the Devil and Satan, in Scripture; if so, surely, he could not
carry on his wicked Designs with Men, all over the World, without having a Sort
of Omnipresence ascribed to him. But the Scripture represents their Number to
be very great. The Apostle Paul terms them wicked Spirits, in the plural. Ephesians.
6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against spiritual
Wickednesses ( Marg. Wicked Spirits) in high Places. There is an innumerable
Company of these apostate Angels, many Legions of them. We read, not only of
seven Devils, that were cast out of one Woman ( Luke 8.2.) but of a Legion of
Devils, which Christ cast out of one Man. ( Mar. 5.9.) "Notwithstanding the
great Employment the Devils have among Men, walking to and fro in the Earth, to
preserve and enlarge their Empire among the Children of Disobedience, we see
they could spare an whole Legion to take Possession of one Man." How vast then
must their Number be? And when we read of the Devil or Satan, in the singular
Number, it is supposed, that the grand Devil is intended, who is called the
Prince of Devils. Matt. 12.24. For he is represented as having a Kingdom in
Opposition to the Kingdom of God, ver. 26, 28. And there is a vast Number of
these apostate Spirits in Confederacy with the Arch-Devil, in the Rebellion
against God; who are called the Angels of the Devil. Rev. 12.9. The Dragon was
cast out -- and his Angels with him. Matt. 25.41. -- Everlasting Fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. And it is supposed to have been one of those
Angels of Satan, with whom Paul had that Conflict, mentioned 2 Cor. 12.7. --
There was given me a Thorn in the Flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet one.
And since they have all one common Interest, being combined together against
God, and Christ, and Holiness, and the Salvation of Men's Souls; therefore
whenever any one Angel of Satan assaults any particular Person with his
Temptations, the Devil is said to tempt him. And whenever such an Angel of
Satan is resisted or overcome, the Devil or the wicked One is said to be
overcome, as if he were but one single evil Spirit; because they all hold
together in one common Interest, being united in Opposition to the Souls of Men.

2. The Things implied in overcoming this wicked One are,

1. That this wicked One is an Enemy, the great Enemy of our Souls. All Victory
supposes Opposition from an Enemy we have gotten the Mastery of: and the three
great Enemies we are called to encounter in this our warfaring State, are the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil. But of these, the Devil is the principal; the
World and the Flesh are his Auxiliaries; the World supplies the Matter of his
Temptations. either the Pleasures and Gratifications of Sense, or the Terrors
of Sense; the Flesh or carnal Lusts are the traitorous Party in our own Bosom,
which are ready to betray us into the Snares of Satan; and by these Means he
seeks to circumvent, and ruin us. Wherefore Satan is to be considered as our
Enemy in a threefold Respect, either as a Tempter, an Accuser, or a Tormentor.
(1.) As a Tempter. Herein he plainly shows his Enmity, that by tempting Men to
sin against God and transgress his Laws, he might destroy them in Soul and Body
forever. This was his Aim in tempting our first Parents to a Revolt from God:
and what Ruin has he thereby bro't on Mankind? And this malicious Design he
pursues in all his Temptations ever since, whereby he has been seducing the
Children of Adam. In this his tempting Work (how plausible soever he appears in
his Temptations to deluded Sinners) he goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour. (1 Pet. 5.8.) Hence he has his Name, the Tempter. 1 Thessalonians.
3.5. -- (2.) As an Accuser. Having tempted Men to sin, he accuses them to God,
that he may obtain a fuller Possession of them, and greater Power over them. So
that Imprecation against Judas may be understood, Psalm. 109. 6. Set a wicked
Man (the wicked One, or the Devil) over him, i. e. Let him be given up to his
Power, to hurry him to the Sin of betraying his Master; and then, Let Satan
stand at his right Hand, as an Accuser, to his Condemnation. The Right Hand
being the Place in the ancient Judicatories where the Accuser stood. Thus this
inveterate Adversary manifests his Enmity, not only against wicked Men, who are
wholly under his Power, but even against pious and good Men; as he is
represented in Zechariah's, Vision, as accusing Joshua the High Priest of the
Jews. Zech. 3.1. He showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the Angel
of the Lord, and Satan standing at his Right Hand to resist him. So he accused
Job of Hypocrisy in serving God with a mercenary Spirit. Job 1.9, 10, 11. Satan
answered the Lord, and said, Does Job fear God for naught? etc. Hence he is
styled the Accuser of the Brethren. Rev. 12.10. But they are, for the most
Part, false Accusations that he prefers against the People of God: but if they
are not altogether groundless, they have an Advocate in Heaven, who effectually
pleads for them. -- (3.) As a Tormentor. Hence he is said to have the Power of
Death. Heb. 2.14. -- that through Death he might destroy him that had the Power
of Death, that is, the Devil. He is permitted in the righteous Judgment of God,
to have the Power of Death, or of excuting the Curse on those who have given up
themselves to the Power of his Temptations. So he that was their Tempter,
having succeeded therein, is appointed to be their Tormentor.
-- In all these Respects the Devil is the grand Enemy of Mankind; but chiefly
as a Tempter: For as an Accuser and Tormentor he could have no Advantage
against them, unless he had first played his Part successfully as a Tempter;
and as such, we are therefore principally concerned to withstand this Enemy.
This invisible Solicitor to Evil is little though it on by careless Sinners, while
they are intent on the Pursuit of their Lusts and carnal Imaginations; they are
not sensible of the Agency of any invisible Spirit, that is busily at work
with, or upon them; are sensible of no other Influence they are under, than the
Sway of their own natural Appetites and Passions. But if we believe divine
Revelation, we are assured thence, that there are spiritual Wickednesses (or
wicked Spirits) in High Places, which are the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, and work powerfully in all the Children of Disobedience. There are vast
Multitudes of these infernal Spirits, busy with Men all over the World,
endeavoring to draw, or drive them to Vice and Wickedness, or to divert them
from their Duty. And though Satan has no immediate Knowledge of the Hearts of
Men, nor immediate Access to them, yet he may be able to reach and affect the
Powers of their Souls by Means of the corporeal Organs, that Imagination and
bodily Spirits and Humors which fall under his Cognizance; and being a most
subtle Spirit, is able to insinuate himself into their Fancies, which have a
great Influence on their Wills and Affections, and thereby excite and inflame
their Lusts and Passions; and by Means of the corrupt Imaginations and Passions
of Men, he has a great Advantage for enforcing his Baits of Temptation. But
whether we are able to account for the Manner of the Devil's tempting Men or
no, the Thing itself is real and undoubted, that he has a strong Hand in
carrying Men out to all the wicked Acts of their Lives. Some more heinous Sins
are more immediately from the Inspiration of Satan, such as the Sin of Judas (
Joh. 13.2.) such also as Blasphemy, unnatural Sins, Self-murder, and the like:
but in more ordinary. Sins there is more of the Hand of Satan than Men are
commonly aware of, and more than even good Men are aware of: When David was
stirred up to the Sin of numbering the People (for a Sin it was in God's
Account, and by David's Confession, 1 Chronicles. 21.7, 8.) we can hardly persuade
ourselves, that he was at all sensible of the Agency of Satan in that Affair,
or that the Reasons that moved him to it, were fetched from Hell; but it is
affirmed in the Word of God, 1. Chron. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel,
and provoked David to number Israel. He has a greater Advantage against us,
because we are so unobservant of him. This wicked one watches all Occasions for
carrying on his wicked Designs; he is a vigilant Adversary, therefore we are
required to be vigilant in opposing him, 1 Pet. 5.8. Hence are those frequent
Cautions against the Wiles and Temptations of this subtle Adversary, 1 Cor. 7.3
-- Lest Satan tempt you for your Incontinency. -- 2 Cor. 2.11. Lest Satan
should get an Advantage of us. -- 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. -- Lest by some Means the
Tempter have tempted you, and our Labor be in vain. 1 Timothy 3.7. -- Lest he
fall into Reproach, and the Snare of the Devil. -- Ephesians. 4.26.27. Let not the
Sun go down on your Wrath: neither give Place to the Devil. Which implies, that
the Devil has an Influence in raising and fomenting wrathful Passions, and by
harboring and indulging them we give Place to him, and give great Advantage to
his Temptations. All which Cautions speak our Danger from this Adversary as a
Tempter; and as such we are particularly concerned to withstand him.

And let me add,

2. The wicked one, as a Tempter, does in a peculiar Manner assault young Men
with his Temptations; both young Men in Age, and young Men in Grace. As God
calls most earnestly for the youthful Age to be dedicated to, and employed in
his Service, Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. -- Mic. 7.1. My
Soul desired the first ripe Fruit. So the Devil peculiarly bestirs himself by
his Temptations to gain over young Men to his Party and Interest, as hoping for
more Service from them, than from any other Age. But if they be also young Men
in Christ, they may chiefly expect his Assaults, who have by Conversion entered
on the Ways of Religion and Holiness, or who begin to mind Religion in good
Earnest, and to set their Faces Zion-wards. These Beginners in Christianity
Satan bears a Spite against, and pursues them with his Temptations, if
possible, to bring them back to his Service again, or otherwise to disturb
their Peace and Comfort, and weary them in the Service of God. As Christ, as
soon as he was baptized and solemnly consecrated to his Office, and owned as
the Son of God, was tempted by the Devil, Matt. 4.1. And as the Christian
Church, in the Vision of John, under the Emblem of a Woman clothed with the
Sun, etc. when being with Child, cried, travailing in Birth, and pained to be
delivered, i. e. striving with great Earnestness, Labors and Conflicts in her
Ministers, under Persecutions and Sufferings, to bring forth Children to God,
The Dragon, (i. e. the Devil, that cruel and Blood-thirsty Adversary) stood
before the Woman -- to devour her Child, as soon as it was born. i. e. (as it
may be interpreted) to assault and destroy (if possible) her young Convert: so
young Christians must expect Encounters from Satan, either by the Frowns or
Flatteries of the World, and by the Corruptions and Lusts of their own Hearts,
asson as they set out in the Ways of Godliness; and should prepare accordingly,
And the Ground of this Enmity of the Devil, against the newborn Christian, we
have intimated in the Curse denounced against the old Serpent, which involves a
Promise in Favor of Mankind, Genesis 3.15. I will put Enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed. Wicked Men, whilst in their Apostasy
from God, are in Confederacy with Satan, who is the Head of the apostate World.
But by converting Grace, God puts a Principle of Enmity into the Sinner's Heart
against the Devil and all his Works; and so breaks off that Confederacy: And
then, no Wonder this malignant Adversary begins to show his Enmity against God
and Holiness, in pursuing the new Convert with his Temptations and fiery Darts.

2. Another Thing implied in overcoming the wicked One, is a striving against,
or resisting this Adversary. All Victory supposes a preceding Combat or
Struggle with an Enemy, and our Victory over Satan is not an imaginary, but a
real Thing; and therefore not to be obtained but by a vigorous Resistance, and
many Times by fore Conflicts. There must be a striving for the Mastery, and
fighting in good earnest, and not as beating the Air. (1 Cor. 9.25, 26.) But
here, we are not to consider the Devil as an external Foe, or our War with him,
as lying abroad, at a Distance from us; but as one that has a mighty Party
within us, by whose Means he carries on all his Opposition against our Souls:
And the Seat of this War is in our own Souls. For (as we have observed) the
Three grand Enemies that fight against us, are the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh; and as of these Three, the Devil is the principal, so the most dangerous
is the Flesh, or fleshly Lusts of our own Hearts; those Enemies of our own
House, those Traiters in our own Bosoms, which are in the Interests of the
Devil, and the World; and as they do, of themselves, war against our Souls, 1
Pet. 2.11. Abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul -- So they
often betray us unto the Devil's Snares, and the Power of the World's
Temptations. It Is by these that the Devil and World prevail against us. So that
the Contest, in Effect, lies between the 'Spirit and the Flesh, as the Apostle
has represented it. Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusleth against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other. Or
between an enlightened Conscience, and corrupt Lusts and Passions, which have
different Interests, and draw several Ways. Conscience is on God's Side, and
takes his Part in Behalf of the Soul. Carnal Lusts are on the Devil's Side, and
take his Part against the Soul. If we yield to the corrupt Motions and Lusts of
our own Hearts, we give Place to the Devil; but if we resist these with Vigor
and Resolution, we resist the Devil, and put him to Flight: for he can have no
Advantage against us, but what we give him by our own corrupt Lusts, in
yielding a Compliance with his Temptations. It Is therefore our Concern, to join
in heartily with God and Conscience, in opposing the carnal Inclination, and in
suppressing and mortifying sleshly Lusts. This Method of striving for the
Mastery over our spiritual Enemies, the Apostle has recommended by his own
Example, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. -- So fight I, not as one that beats the Air; but I
keep under my Body (i. e. the corrupt Appetites and Lusts of the Body; and the
Body itself, in Subordination to the Soul) and bring it into Subjection. And
the Flesh being thus subdued, and kept under due Government and in Subjection
to the Dictates of Reason, and the Rules of Religion, the Devil and the World
may tempt in vain. And to maintain this Resistance, we are directed to put on
the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11. The several Parts whereof are described,
ver. 13, -- 18. The Meaning whereof in general is, that we should be in the
daily Use and Exercise of those several Graces, and Means of spiritual
Strength, which serve as an Armor to withstand our spiritual Enemies, and to
defend our Souls against the malignant Effects of their Assaults: As Faith,
Repentance, Self-Denial, Abstinence, the Word of God, and Prayer; to which must
be joined constant Watchfulness, as our Savior has directed, Matt. 26.41.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation.

Hence I proceed to show.

4. Wherein consists our Victory over the wicked One? or when, or in what
Instances may we be said to overcome this Enemy? We have chiefly considered him
as an Enemy to be resisted and overcome, as he is a Tempter; nevertheless, he
is an Adversary we have also to deal with as an Accuser; and there are many sad
Conflicts with him, as such, which both young Converts, and more improved
Christians, are exposed to. But the best Way to get the Victory over him as an
Accuser, is by Prevention, by repelling his Temptations, and maintaining our
Innocence and Integrity, notwithstanding all his Assault;; so we shall prevent
his Design in feelding Occasion to accuse us to God, or render his Accusations
groundless, and then they can do us no Harm. But if we yield to his
Temptations, in being thereby drawn to Sin, both the Law of God and our own
Confciences will join in with Satan, in accusing and condemning us: In which
Case (as it but too often happens) the only Way to overcome this Adversary as
an Accuser, is to have Recourse to the Blood of the Lamb. Thus the primitive
Christians overcame the Accuser of the Brethren, by the Blood of the Lamb.
(Rev. 12.10, 11.) In this Case we must fly to the Patronage of our almighty
Advocate Jesus Christ, confessing Guilt, and pleading with God the Propitiation
in the Blood of Christ, and his allsufficient Merit and Righteousness, to which
alone we betake ourselves by Faith, for Justification; and by which all Satan's
Accusations are invalidated, to the Believer. And upon this Plea we may stand
secure, and boldly make that Challenge, Romans 8.33.34. Who shall lay any Thing
to the Charge of God's Elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen again, who is
even at the right Hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us. So we may
come off more than Conquerors, through him that loved us. Ver. 27.

But the Enquiry chiefly relates to our Victory over Satan as a Tempter. And
then we may be said to overcome the wicked one, when we successfully resist his
Temptations, and stand our Ground, so as to defeat his cursed Design thereby,
either to draw us to Sin and Wickedness, or to divert us from our Duty. And the
Devil being overcome, as a Tempter, our Victory over him as an Accuser and
Tormentor, follows of Course. And there are Three special Seasons, in which we
are called to encounter and overcome this ghostly Adversary; which are so many
Instances of our Victory over him.

(1.) At Conversion; when a Sinner by divine Grace breaks through all Opposition,
from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, in a resolute turning from Sin to
God. The Devil sets himself with all his Power and Craft to oppose and hinder
the saving Conversion of a Soul. He raises all his Forces, from the Flesh and
the World, in Opposition to it. The Flesh, he knows, is in his Interest, being
wholly addicted to the Things of Time and Sense, whereby he endeavors to
extinguish all spiritual Sensations and Motions of the Soul to God and Holiness
and the Things above; for the carnal Mind is Enmity against God, for it is not
subject to his Law, Romans 8.7. And the carnal Mind, Lusts and Imaginations, are
the strong Holds of Satan in Men's Spirits; which must be cast down by a
superior Power, before they will be captivated to the Obedience of Christ.
Hence his Possession of the Hearts of Sinners, and Dominion over them, our
Savior has represented by the Parable of a strong Man armed keeping his
Palace, Luke 11.21, 22. And the worldly Baits of Pleasure, Profit, and Honor,
suited to the Three capital Lusts, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life, are the Armor wherewith the strong Man endeavors to
strengthen his Possession of the Palace (i. e. of the Souls of Men) and does
all he can to secure it to himself, and fortify it against the Lord Jesus. The
Devil is so mortal an Enemy to the Conversion of Souls, because thereby his
Kingdom goes to Ruin, which is founded in Sin and Wickedness. And he has often
a great Hand in preventing the saving Efficacy of the Word for Conversion, in
many careless Souls, by distracting their Minds with worldly Cares, diverting
them from a serious Attention, filling them with vain Fancies and drawing out
their Lusts, that he might intercept the saving Profit of the Word; as our
Savior has plainly intimated, Matt. 13.19. When any one hears the Word of
the Kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and catches
away that which was sown in his Heart. The Devil is especially very active and
busy with Souls under Convictions and Awakenings, either tempting them to
Presumption, persuading them that some slight Sorrow for Sin, and a few Words
of Confession and Prayer, is enough to entitle them to God's Mercy; and that
there is no Need of so much Strictness and Preciseness, but that they may yet
safely allow themselves in some carnal Liberties, and after all hope in God's
Mercy for Pardon and Salvation: Or else persuading them that they have Time
enough for Repentance, and that there is no need of so much Haste in the
Master; but that they may defer it till, they have tasted the Pleasures of Sin,
and bathed themselves in the Delights of the Flesh and the World a little
longer, unto a more convenient Season, which they promise themselves with
Felix, Act. 24, 25. and thus the Convictions of many prove abortive. -- Or
discouraging them by representing the Difficulties and Austerities of a
religious Life, to restrain them by Fear, or by working on their Shame;
suggesting, that they will be laughed at by their loose Companions, as
hypocritical and precise. -- Or if all this will not answer his Purpose, but
their Convictions are too powerful to be removed by such slighty Methods; then
he betakes himself to his terrifying Assaults, and tempts them to despair of
God's Mercy, by representing their Sins in such horrid Aggravations, as to
leave no Room for Hope; and thus he sets upon them as a roaring Lion,
increasing the Horrors of their Consciences, by setting before them the Terrors
of the Law, and concealing from them the only Relief or Remedy bro't in by
Gospel Grace, urging upon their Minds the desperate Conclusion, that they are
Castaways, and abandoned by God; and that it is in vain to use the Means, to
pray, or entertain any Hope of Salvation. Thus the Devil sets himself to oppose
the Conversion of a Soul, either by his stubtle Wiles, or fiery Darts. Now, in
such a Case, this malicious Adversary may be said to be overcome, when an
awakened Sinner, under deep Conviction of the Sinfulness and Danger of his
State, breaks through all Discouragements and Impediments, and with a fixed
Resolution gets over all Opposition from within and from without, and with a
steady Violence presses into the Kingdom of Heaven. For the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers Violence, and the violent take it by Force. (Matt. 11.12.) When be
not only seeks, but strives to enter in at the strait Gale. (Luke 13.24.) When
he puts a kind of Force upon his corrupt Nature; and notwithstanding the
Temptations of the World, and the Suggestions of the wicked One, he is
resolved, upon any Terms, to secure the Salvation of his Soul: When a Sinner, I
say, thus resolutely breaks through all this potent Opposition, to get into the
Kingdom of Christ, this is a glorious Victory; he is already a Conqueror; though
it is by the Power of divine Grace, that he gets this Victory. And to the
Honor of this divine Grace it must ultimately be referred. 2 Cor. 10.4. The
Weapons of our Warfare are -- mighty through God, etc. Yet the Victory itself,
in the Work of Repentance and Conversion, must be the Sinner's own Act, under
the Influence of divine Grace. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. -- If God peradventure will
give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth; and that they may
recover themselves our of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him
at his Will. When God gives Repentance, the Penitent co-operates with the Grace
of God, and recovers himself out of the Snare of the Devil, and so overcomes;
and in stead of being any longer a Captive of Satan, triumphs over him.

(2.) Another Instance of this Victory over Satan is, when he is resisted in
any particular strong Temptation, wherewith he assaults the Christian. Though
converting Grace sets the Christian at Liberty in a great Measure from the
Power of Satan's Temptations, yet it does not free him from the Assaults of his
Temptations. These he must expect, more or less, during his whole Life: but a
steadfast Resistance of this malicious Adversary is, in Effect, Victory over
him. For a Christian not to yield, not to give Place to the Devil (as the
Expression is, Ephesians. 4.27.) but to stand his Ground, is to overcome: Therefore
says the Apostle, Jam. 4.7. -- Resist the Devil, and he will slay from you; he
will slay as a baffled Enemy. There is no Medium in this War, between
conquering and being conquered. If therefore, when the Tempter seeks by carnal
Pleasures or carnal Fears to turn us aside from our Duty, or solicit us to that
which is Evil, we tamely yield to his Solicitation, we put the Victory into his
Hand, and suffer ourselves to be overcome by him. But if we stand out with
Resolution not to yield upon any Terms, we conquer, and put to flight our Enemy.

(3.) The Devilis finally overcome, when a Christian holds out with Constancy
in this Warfare, until the finishing of his Course, and suffers not himself to
be seduced or diverted by all the Temptations and Oppositions he meets with, in
his Way to the Kingdom of God, from the Devil and the World, but approves
himself a faithful Soldier and Follower of Christ unto Death: For to be
faithful unto Death, and finally to overcome, are in Effect the same Thing.
Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.
To the same Purpose it follows, ver. 11. -- He that overcomes, shall not be
hurt of the second Death. Then the Christian Soldier is a complete Conqueror,
and receives the Garland of Immortality from the Captain of his Salvation. The
Victory over the wicked one, in the two former Respects, the Christian gains in
this Life; and this is especially intended in our Text; for the Apostle speaks
of a Conquest already obtained: Ye have overcome the wicked one. The final
Victory is reserved till the Time that he puts off Mortality, and therewith all
the Relicts of Corruption. Then Satan, with all his confederate Powers, the
Flesh, and the World, shall be entirely vanquished, according to that Promise,
Romans 16.20. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly. Then
the conquering Christian shall be set beyond the Reach of all Assailants for
ever. The Tempter has no Place found for him in Heaven.

I add now,

5. There is much spiritual Strength required for getting this Victory. As no
Victory is to be obtained without a preceding Fight or Struggle, wherein the
Strength of the Combatant is tried; so this is an Adversary not to be repelled
or put to Flight by a faint Resistance; but the Exertion of our utmost Strength
and Vigor is requisite to that End. For this, these young Men are commended,
Ye are strong, -- and have overcome the wicked one. Now Strength is twofold,
natural and spiritual. Again, natural Strength is either of the Body or of the
Mind. Bodily Strength, though a natural Perfection, and the Glory of young Men,
who are apt to boast in their Strength, whereby they are are able to worst an
Adversary, yet is no great Excellence, nor properly human; many of the brutal
Kind are, for Strength, superior to the strongest Men: Let not, then, the
mighty Man glory in his Might. (Jer. 9.23.) There is also the Strength of the
Mind and Spirit; -- Of the Mind, to comprehend and retain a great Number of
Idea's, and to reason with Force and Clearness, upon any Subject. And Strength
of the Spirit, to bear up with Alacrity and Vigor under Afflictions and
Infirmities. The Spirit of a Man will sustain his Infirmity. (Prove. 18.14.) But
if thou saint in the Day of Adversity, thy Strength is small. (Chap. 24.10.)
And also to encounter Dangers with an undaunted Valor, to face an Enemy in the
Field of Battle, with a firm and fearless Resolution. This is martial Strength
or Courage, arising from the Heat of Blood and Spirits. And this Kind of
Strength, especially if joined with bodily Strength, is of great Use to the
Public in a Time of War, in those that are called out for its Defense, or
engaged in any military Expedition against an Enemy: And it is much to be
commended and encouraged in our young Men, who are chiefly (as Instruments in
the Hand of Providence) our Strength and Defense in a Time of War; and who, as
the present War continues, may be called forth into the Service of the Public,
against the Enemies of our Land; their Fortitude both of Body and Mind, Courage
and Valor joined with bodily Strength, will be likely to do Honor to
themselves, and their Country. -- But it is not natural Strength, that is
required to combat with, and overcome the wicked Spirit; yea, those that excel
in bodily Strength, are often some of the chief Slaves of the Devil, and are
easily taken Captive by him at his Will; while many of a weaker Constitution
are enabled by divine Grace to stand their Ground, and put him to Flight. But
it is spiritual Strength, that is suited to this spiritual Warfare, which
consists in a firm Resolution, grounded on the eternal Reasons of Truth and
Righteousness, propounded to us in the Word of God. It Is the Strength of the
inner Man. Hence that Prayer of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.16. That he would grant
unto you according to the Riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with Might by
his Spirit in the inner Man. It Is the Strength of Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Zeal,
Patience; which divine Graces are begotten, cherished and invigorated in us by
the Word, accompanied by the Spirit of God to our Hearts, and are our Armor of
Defense against all the Enemies of our Salvation. The Christian Graces,
therefore, are often set forth in Scripture, under the Notion of Armor,
adapted to their spiritual Warfare; particularly 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. -- Putting on the
Breast Plate of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation. These
Graces in their vital Exercise establish the Soul, as on a firm Rock, against
all the Assaults the Devil can make upon it, either by the Allurements or
Terrors of Sense. This Strength we derive from Christ, by his Spirit, in whom
we have both Righteousness and Strength, ( Isai. 45.24.) and are therefore
directed to depend on him alone for Strength in all our spiritual Conflicts; to
be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might ( Ephesians. 6.10.) to be strong
in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus. (2 Timothy 2.1.) This Strength is not of
ourselves; if left to ourselves, or to the mere Power of Nature, we should
every Day be liable to become an easy Prey to Satan; but it is put into us by
supernatural divine Grace. Hence, when Paul was buffetted by a Messenger of
Satan, be received this Answer from the Lord to his Prayer for Help and
Deliverance; My Grace is sufficient for thee: for my Strength is made perfect
in Weakness. (2 Cor. 12.9.) Therefore (says he, Ver. 10.) I take Pleasure in
Infirmities, etc. for when I am weak, then am I strong. And the Strength of
divine Grace in a weak Believer will enable him to carry the Victory over this
mighty Adversury.

And now, what a commendable Thing? What a glorious Thing is it, in any
Christian, compassed with Infirmities, to be able in the Strength of divine
Grace to combat with, and conquer this inveterate Enemy of his Soul, the wicked
one? What Glory and Renown do earthly Conquerors think themselves entitled to,
who fight but against Flesh and Blood? And what Honors and Applauses are paid
them by High and Low, on their gaining any signal Victory? Surely, it is a much
more reputable and glorious Thing in the Eye of Heaven, to become a Conqueror
in the spiritual War, in fighting against spiritual Wickednesses in High
Places; as the Perfections and Seize of the Mind are far more noble and
excellent than those of the Body. And it is a great Favor of God. and a great
Honor that he puts upon a poor sinful Man, when he is enabled by Strength from
above to recover himself out of the Snare, and from under the Power of the
Devil, and to grapple with and overcome this ghostly Adversary. This will
entitle him to the Approbation of God, to the Euge and Applause of Christ, and
of holy Angels, which is an Honor, to which there is nothing comparable on
Earth.

And if this spiritual Strength, and Victory obtained by it, be justly reckoned
a commendable Attainment in any others of the Sons of Men, it is much more so
in those of the youthful Age, in whom the bodily Appetites and Passions are
usually most impetuous, and importunate to be gratified, which gives Satan a
great Advantage against them. But it will be an Argument of spiritual Fortitude
in young Men, highly to their Commendation, to be able to govern their
Affections. Appetites, Senses and Passions, and keep them in Subjection to the
Rule of Reason and Grace, so as to defeat the Temptations of the wicked one.
Young Men are apt to value themselves upon their bodily Strength, when they
have thereby been an Over-match for an Antagonist; yet this which seems so
glorious, has no Glory in Comparison of the more excellent Strength, which
enables them to struggle with and get the Mastery of spiritual Enemies. For,
says Solomon, He that rules his Spirit, is better than he that takes a City.
(Prove. 16.32.) There needs great Strength of Resolution, and a wise Conduct,
for a Man to conquer himself and subdue his Will and Passions to the grave
Dictates of Reason and Conscience. And this is a more honorable and happy
Conquest, than that which is obtained over an Enemy by outward Force, Blood and
Slaughter, which is a Stain to Victory itself. And while we keep up the
Government and Command of ourselves, and keep Possession of our own Souls, we
frustrate the Attempts of the wicked one, and triumph over him; who can have no
Power against us as a Tempter, but in and from ourselves. 1 John 5.18. -- He
keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not. Let young Men then see
here the Way to true Glory. Show yourselves Men, by preserving the Dignity of
your rational Nature, by suppressing corrupt Affections and Lusts, keeping a
watchful Eye, and a strict Hand over that traitorous Party within yourselves,
whence your greatest Danger arises in this Warfare; in which your main
Contention ought to be for the Dominion of Reason and Grace over carnal
Passions and Imaginations, by strictly adhering to the Principles and Precepts
of Wisdom and Virtue. And if you prevail in this Contest (which is in itself
justifiable and honorable in the Sight of God, and of all wise and good Men)
it will redound to your everlasting Honor. What an honorable Memorial is left
of sacred Record, of Joseph, when a young Man in Potiphar's Family, in his
giving that brave Repulse to the Temptations he was accosted with from his lewd
Mistress? How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? (Genesis 39.9.)
This was a noble Victory, and it is recorded to his Praise through all
Generations. Though your grand Enemy be very powerful and politic, yet by the
Grace of Christ you may overcome; and if you steadfastly adhere to his Interest,
in his Strength you shall overcome; and the weaker in yourselves, the more
glorious will be the Victory obtained in the Strength of divine Grace. It Is
recorded to the Honor of David, that, though a Strippling. yet in the Name of
the Lord of Hosts he encountered and vanquished the Philistine Giant, Goliath of
Gath, and silenced his insolent Boasts and Threats. On which Occasion, it is
though it, he penned the 8th Psalm, in which he thus sings, ( Ver. 2.) Out of the
Mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained Strength, because of thine
Enemies; that thou might still the Enemy and the Avenger. And in the Name
and Strength of Christ (though in yourselves as weak as Babes and Sucklings) you
may be as successful in conquering the Goliath of Hell, to the Praise of divine
Strength, which is made perfect in Weakness; at the same Time, it will be a
great Honor and Happiness God will bestow upon you, in making you victorious
over this infernal Adversary. By overcoming this wicked one, you will show
forth a superior Strength through the Grace of the second Adam, to that which the
first Adam with all his Perfections in Paradise was possessed of or at least
put in Exercise, when tempted to the Transgression. Hereby you will in same
Measure retrieve the Honor of the human Nature, that was so shamefully
forfeited and thrown away by our first Parents yielding to the Temptations of
the Devil; hereby you will gain Re-admittance to the Tree of Life, or a blessed
Immortality, though not in the earthly, yet (which will be infinitely more to
your Advantage) in the heavenly Paradise; according to that Promise of Christ,
Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

Thus much for the first Point of Observation, which I proposed chiefly to
insist on, viz. That as it is the Duty of all, so it will be peculiarly the
Commendation, Honor and Happiness of young Men, to overcome the wicked one.

I shall now add a Word or two to the remaining Heads of Doctrine.

DOCT. II. The Means of acquiring this Strength is the Word of God; our
receiving it into our Hearts, and having it abiding in us. -- Ye are strong,
and the Word of God abides in you, etc. Or, because the Word of God abides in
you, ye are made strong to resist and overcome Satan and his Temptations. This
spiritual Strength we have from Christ originally, as the principal Author,
communicated to us by his Spirit; but the Word of God ( viz. in the
Gospel-Revelation) is the Means of its Communication. And this Word is a very
apt and proper Means of imparting Strength to the Souls of Men, whether for
Duties and Services, or for Sufferings and Trials, or for Conflicts with
spiritual Enemies; for all which Purposes, we need to be strengthened with
Might by the Spirit in the inner Man. But it is Strength for our spiritual
Warfare, as the Effect of the indwelling Word, that comes under present
Consideration. And the Word of God received and improved by Faith, is the
Soul's Strength, whereby it is able to withstand the strongest Assaults of
Temptation. It is the Sword of the Spirit, which being wielded by the Hand of
Faith, never fails to put to Flight our great Adversary. It was by the same
Means, that Christ vanquished the Devil, when tempted by him in the Wilderness;
by alleging pertinent Passages of Scripture (which the Devil could not
withstand the Force of) It is written, etc. Matthew. 4.1, 4, etc. And by the
Example of our Lord we are taught and encouraged to make use of the same
Weapon, for repelling the Assaults of this Adversary. But it is the Word of God
abiding in us, which is of such Force in our spiritual Conflict. This Word
received and settled as a Principle in the Heart, and constantly improved by
Faith and Meditation, will be to the young Man a sovereign Antidote against
Satan's Temptations. So, we find it recommended by the Psalmist, to the young
Man, as the Means of keeping himself pure from the defiling Lusts and
Temptations of the World and the Devil. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young
Man cleanse his Way? By taking Heed thereto according to thy Word. When the
Word not only floats in the Imagination, or furnishes Matter of Discourse; but
sinks down into the Heart, and is laid up, or hid there, as a choice Treasure,
It will be an effectual Guard against Sin and Temptation: as the Psalmist goes
on to say, Ver. 11. Thy Word have I hid in mine Heart, that I might not sin
against thee. If the Word has Place and abides in our Hearts, prevailing Lusts
shall have no Place there; though they remain and infest us, they shall be so
checked, and kept under the Power of the Word, that they shall not prevail; and
so Satan's Designs shall be more easily deseated: for he assaults us by these
Lusts, and has all his Success from them. Now the Word received into, and
abiding in the Heart, is available to the Purposes of our spiritual Warfare.

(1.) As it is the Means of quickening us to the Life of God and Holiness, and
thereby puts spiritual Strength into us. It Is the abiding Word, that is the
Principle of the new Life. 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible
Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and abides for
ever. And there is an irreconcilable Opposition between this abiding Seed of
Grace, and all Sin. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin;
for his Seed remains in him. The Word of God abiding in us, as the Seed or
Principle of an holy Life, has a sovereign Efficacy to guard it against every
Thing prejudicial to this Life.

(2.) As it maintains this spiritual Life in Vigor. 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn
Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, i. e.
increase in spiritual Strength, unto a confirmed State of Grace. The Word of
God abiding in us, with Respect to our spiritual Warfare, is the same Thing in
Effect with Faith in the Gospel-Revelation. For it is by Faith we receive the
Impression of the Word, and it is abiding Influence on the Heart. And it is
Faith that is our main Armor, our Shield and Breast Plate in this spiritual
War. (Ephesians. 6.16. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.) Yea, it is our Victory over the World, the
Flesh and the Devil. (1 John 5.4.) And the holy Dispositions, which correspond
to the Impression of the several Parts of the Word received by Faith, do
strongly fence the Soul against all Temptations. So I might go on to show how
the several Parts of the Word, Doctrines, Precepts, Promises and Threatenings,
contribute to our spiritual Strength. -- The Doctrines of the Word exhibit the
most potent Reasons and Arguments to fortify Resolution for our Conflicts (in
which it was observed, the Strength of the Mind consists) as they discover to
us the Evil of Sin, and the Misery it has involved us in, and the Method of our
Recovery through the Grace and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ; the Faith whereof
works by Love, which is of signal Use in our spiritual Warfare, as well as Work
and Service; and serves for a Breast Plate to keep the Heart entire for God. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. Putting on the Breast Plate of Faith and Love. The Doctrine of
another Life, of a Judgment to come, a State of everlasting Rewards and
Punishments, are fortifying Considerations. -- Faith gives Weight and Force to
the Commands of the Word, by urging the Authority of God upon the Conscience,
which strikes Temptations dead. -- Faith in the Promises works by Hope, of the
Favor of God, Pardon and Life everlasting, which Hope is the Christian's
Helmet, (1 Thessalonians. 5.8. -- And for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation) which
secures the Head, and keeps up firm Resolution under Dangers and
Discouragements, and opposes the Love and Approbation of God and the eternal
Reward, to all the tempting Offers of the Devil and the World -- In the
Threatenings of the Word, Faith works by Fear of Death and Judgment, the Wrath
to come and eternal Damnation; which is a mighty Preservative against the
alluring Baits of Satan, and the Affrightments of Sense, whereby he seeks to
divert the Christian from his heavenly Course. There are many spiritual
Considerations suggested in the Word of God, which tend greatly to confirm the
Mind, and are effectual. being applied by Faith, to repel Satan's Assaults, and
baffle all his Attempts. Men are first drawn off from the Consideration of the
grave and serious Truths of the Word, which should establish their Hearts,
before a Temptation can have any Force upon them; for its Prevalency begins
here. Jam. 1.14. Every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lusts,
etc. But when the Word abides in us, and our Hearts are stored with the holy
Truths of it, we have a spiritual Weapon ready at Hand, to defend ourselves,
and repel the Force of all Temptations. Isai. 30.21. Thine Ears shall hear a
Word behind thee, saying, This is the Way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the
Right Hand, and when ye turn to the Left. But not to insist further on this
Head. -- Let me speak a Word now to the third and last Observation.

DOCT. 3. That young Men, even such as have experienced the effectual saving
Impression of the Word, are to be exhorted and encouraged to the Duties of
Christian Piety by the Word of God, written or preached.

Though these young Men, addressed in the Text, had the Word of God abiding in
them, and had Experience of the powerful Effects of it, though they had already
overcome the wicked one; yet the Apostle sees meet to write to them, to
instruct, exhort, and admonish them. -- Partly, because the most improved and
established Christians are yet but imperfect, with Regard both to their Work
and Warface, and not past all Danger, therefore have Need of frequent
Excitations and Cautions from the Word of God. Psalm. 19.11. -- By them is thy
Servant warned. Much more young Men, who are but Novices in this spiritual War.
The Apostle suggests, that though they had exerted their Fortitude in overcoming
the Wicked one, in Part, yet they had but entered on their Warfare, and must
not think they are out of Danger, but must expect and prepare for new Assaults,
and nor suffer the Devil to wrest the Victory they had obtained, out of their
Hands; but pursue it to a final and complete Conquest. So his commending them
for their spiritual Strength, is in Effect exhorting them to the Exercise of it
in maintaining their Ground, with Perseverance, in their future Conflicts; and
a cautioning them against fainting under any Trials they might meet with. And
so his Aim seems much the same with that of the Apostle Peter in writing his
second Epistle, Chap. 3.17. -- Beware, lest ye being led away with the Error of
the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness. They had shown their Stedfastness
in the Faith, by resisting and defeating their great Adversary: after this, it
would be a Shame to them, to give Ground, and to fall from their own
Stedfastness. -- And partly, because the good Impression of the Word once
received is an Encouragement to hope, that the Counsels and Instructions of it
will meet with proper Entertainment for the Time to come. I have written unto
you, young Men, says the Apostle. What is it he had written? The Doctrines,
Precepts and Admonitions, contained in this Epistle, especially in the Verses
of the Content: as (1.) His Caution against Sin, ver. 1. (2.) Instructions and
Directions to convinced Sinners, to look to Jesus as their only Advocate and
Propitiation for Sin, ver. 1, 2. (3.) Recommending Obedience to the Gospel, as
the great Evidence of the Knowledge and Love of God, ver. 3, 5. (4.) His
enforcing his new Commandment of Love to the Brethren, ver. 7 -- 10.
And in the following Context, his Caution against the Love of the World, ver.
15, etc. All which are highly necessary to be inculcated on all Ranks of
Christians; but may be more peculiarly adapted to those of the youthful Age. --
But waving all doctrinal Enlargements on this Observation --

APPLICATION.
I shall apply myself to the main Design of this Discourse, in addressing our
young Men with proper Counsels and Exhortations, agreeable to the Mind and
Intention of the Apostle in our Text.

I am therefore to speak to you, young Men, in Way of particular Application,
what the Apostle has here written unto young Men. And it is with Pleasure I
have reflected on it, that it is at your Request I have taken upon me to speak
to you in this Manner; and therefore am the more encouraged to speak to you the
Word of God in his Name, in Hope that the Word so spoken may abide in you, to
strengthen you to overcome the wicked one, who (you are not to doubt) will be
very busy to oppose your Entrance upon, and Progress in the Ways of serious
Piety, as soon as you begin to look toward the Kingdom of God. And this is the
Subject of the first Exhortation I shall address unto you; and then shall
briesly press the other Lessons of Piety exhibited in the Context.

First, Let me exhort you, young Men, to acquit yourselves as strong Men in
Christ, by manfully resisting Lusts and Temptations, so as to overcome the
wicked one: Or in the Words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye; stand
fast in the Faith, quit you like Men, be strong. Ephesians. 6.10, 11. -- Be strong in
the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Put on the whole Armor of God, that
ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. For your Excitation and
Encouragement, let me briefly propose to your Consideration, (1.) This Warfare
will admit of no Neutrality. As the Kingdom of Christ is diametrically opposite
to that of Satan; so you must, of Necessity, be on Christ's Side, or on
Satan's. In this Case, Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me.
(Matt. 12.30.) He will endure no Neuters; his Soul nauseates lukewarm
Professors; it is not enough, that you don't join with those who are manifestly
the Children of the wicked one, in open and gross Wickedness; but you must
heartily join in with Christ, and espouse his Interest, in Opposition to the
Devil and all his Works; otherwise you will be reputed to belong to the Camp of
his Enemies. There must be no Peace with Satan. You must either fight or die,
overcome or perish. He that overcomes, (says Christ) shall not be hurt of the
second Death. (Rev. 2.11.) And what does this imply, but that all others shall
be swallowed up of the second Death? The victorious Christian only is exempted.

(2.) Seriously and steadfastly resist, and you shall overcome. Resist the
Devil, and he will flee from you. Give a peremptory Denial to his Temptations,
and he is defeated. The Devil is a proud Spirit, and cannot bear Contradiction
or Opposition; therefore where he meets with an obstinate Resistance, he cannot
endure it, but will be gone: Only be steadfast in your Resistance, 1 Pet. 5.9.
Whom resist, steadfast in the Faith. A faint Resistance does but embolden the
Tempter to renew his Onset; but Stedfastness puts him to Flight; when a Soul is
resolved and fixed in opposing his evil Motions; as it is said of Ruth, that
when her Mother-in-Law saw she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she lest
speaking unto her. (Ruth 1.18.) The Devil has some Hope of wavering unfix'd
Souls; and therefore plies them most strongly with his Temptations. But when a
Man is once steadfastly resolved in his Mind, not to hearken to him, the Tempter
is discouraged. Here then, a resolute and steadfast Resistance is Conquest. It
is not so in other Wars, the most valiant Resistance is not always crowned with
Success and Victory; nor is the Battle always to the Strong. But in this
spiritual War, a strong and persevering Resistance never fails of Victory. And
the Reason is obvious, Satan can only tempt by the Baits of the World and the
Lusts of the Flesh; he cannot force your Compliance; wherefore to deny your
Consent to his Solicitations, is to conquer. So here the Battle is always to
the strong; be strong and steadfast in the Fight, resolving never to yield, and
you infallibly overcome.

(3.) Consider the mighty Assistants engaged for you. Though Satan has a strong
Party on his Side, the Men and Things of this World, the Corruptions of our
Nature, and the Lusts of the Flesh, the most dangerous of all; yet if we belong
to Christ, and have him dwelling in us by his Spirit and Faith, we have One on
our Side greater and mightier than all. 1 John 4.4. Greater is he that is in
you, than he that is in the World, i. e. than the Devil and all his combined
Forces of the Flesh and the World. Put yourselves under the Protection of this
mighty Savior (to whom all the Legions of Devils are made subject) by a true
Faith, and Self-Dedication to him; and you shall be safe in his Hand, and find
his promised Grace and Strength sufficient for you, to carry you on to Victory
and Triumph. And the holy Angels under him are also ready to take your Part,
and minister Aid in this holy War; in which, I doubt not, they are more than
bare Spectators: For are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation? (Heb. 1.14.)

(4.) Consider the glorious Reward promised. Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes,
will I give to eat of the Tree of Life -- So, ver. 10. Be thou faithful unto
Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Eternal Life, the Life of your
immortal Souls is at Stake. This is the Prize contended for. O who would not
strive with all his Might to win the Prize of a blessed Immortality? Is not
this abundant Encouragement? O fight the good Fight of Faith, and lay hold on
eternal Life.

It is now a Time of War, at Home and Abroad; and the Judgments of God upon the
Land in the present War are very distressing: which should awaken all to great
Seriousness, and Reverence of the divine Displeasure; especially you, our young
Men, some of whom it is likely may be called forth to this external Warfare
with visible potent and malicious Enemies; and if you would be fortified
against all your Fears of other Enemies, set yourselves to encounter and
overcome this grand Enemy of your Souls; which you may do by the Grace of God.
And if this Enemy be once overcome, you have obtained the most glorious
Conquest, and you need to fear no other visible Enemies. Satan is God's Enemy,
as well as yours. And if you fight against Satan, you are on God's Side, and
then be assured that God is on yours. And then you may boldly bid Defiance to
all your Enemies, in the Language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 128.6. The Lord is on
my Side, I will not fear what Man can do unto me. This will embolden your
Confidence in God, in the greatest Perils you may be exposed to from Flesh and
Blood. The Help on your Side is infinitely superior; for if God be with you,
and for you, who can be against you? So you may, again in the Words of the
Psalmist, bear up yourselves above your Enemies; Psalm. 56.4. In God have I put
my Trust, I will not fear what Flesh can do unto me. This will inspire true
Courage and Magnanimity, when you are called to face an Enemy in the Field of
Battle; from a well-governed Persuasion of the favorable Presence of God with
you. And you can by no Means more effectually secure the divine Presence, than
by engaging heartily in this spiritual Conflict with God's great Adversary, the
Devil; then you fight in God's Cause, and may rest assured of the Protection of
the Almighty. Be excited then and animated to this spiritual War, and press on
toward Victory and Triumph with Resolution and Vigor. Now, though the sinal
Victory is reserved 'till hereafter; yet in two Cases, a real Victory may be
won in this Life (as you have heard) viz. At first Conversion, and in resisting
particular Assaults of Satan.

Let me press these two Instances --

First, Be exhorted to strive for the Victory, by pressing into the Kingdom of
Christ with Resolution, through all Opposition and Discouragement, by a sound and
thoro' Conversion. This the Devil opposes with all his Might; but herein he has
been overcome, in the Strength of Christ, by the young Men here written to; and
in a Dependence on the same Strength, you may and shall get the Victory over
him, if you resolvedly set yourselves to turn from all Sin, to God and Christ
and Holiness, by a cordial Faith, and Dedication of your selves to the
Government of Christ, renouncing the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, with all
his Works. You must expect to meet with much Opposition herein, from the Flesh
and the World. These are your old Lovers, from which you may find it hard to be
divorced. But perhaps, you are not aware, that all your Prejudices against
serious Religion which hinder your Conversion, all your Objections against it,
all your Pleas for Delays, all your Discouragements arising from the Greatness
of your Sins, Fears of being rejected, and the like, are the Suggestions of the
Devil; but it is certain, that if you yield to these Pleas and Objections, when
Christ earnestly calls you to Repentance, Faith and Communion with himself, and
as often as you do so, you give the Devil the Victory, you obey the Devil, and
disobey Christ; as certainly, as that the Kingdom of Christ, and of Satan,
divide the whole World. In Prove. 9. Christ and Satan are bro't in by Solomon as
Competitors for the Heart of Man, especially of young Men. Christ under the
Character of Wisdom, ( ver. 1.) inviting Sinners to the rich Entertainments of
spiritual Blessings which he has provided for them; for he deals with Men in a
Way of Wisdom, by rational Motives and Arguments to engage them to a Compliance
with his Calls; and he calls them to nothing but what it is their highest
Wisdom to comply with; he calls, Forsake the Foolish and live; and go in the
Way of Understanding. (ver. 6.) Satan, on the other Hand, with his Agents and
Instruments, under the Character of a foolish Woman, soliciting Passengers that
go right on their Way, to turn in, to the Entertainments of forbidden
Pleasures, which he has provided for them. ( ver. 13, 15.) For he deals with
Sinners in a Way of Falsehood and Deceit, deluding and befooling them with false
(though pleasing) Shows and Appearances, to their utter Undoing. Christ says,
Hearken unto me, O ye Children; for blessed are they that keep my Ways. (Prove.
8.32.) Satan says, Hearken unto me, O young Man, and thou shall have Liberty
to walk in the Ways of thine Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes. -- But
know thou not, that the Dead are there, and her Guests in the Depth of Hell?
O how many hopeful young Men, who to Appearance set out in the right Way of
Virtue and Piety, have, for want of Wisdom, Caution and Resolution, been
decoyed into the Snares of Satan to their final Ruin, and are in vain
lamenting, in the Region of Despair, their cursed folly, in harkening to his
Delusions. But now, if in a Sense of the Reasonableness of Christ's Precepts
and Invitations, and under deep Conviction of the important Interests of your
immortal Souls, and the Necessity of doing speedily what in you lies to prevent
their eternal Ruin, and secure their eternal Welfare, you set yourselves in the
Strength of divine Grace, to break through all this Opposition from Satan and
your own corrupt Hearts, and with a steady Zeal and Resolution press into the
Kingdom of God, renouncing the Dominion of Sin and Satan, and resolvedly and
unfeignedly dedicating yourselves to God and his Service, by Faith in his Son
Jesus Christ, in so doing you overcome the wicked one; you have already gotten
a signal Victory over Satan, greatly to the Honor and Pleasure of your
Redeemer, and glorious to yourselves. And I willingly hope, as to a Number of
you, at least, the Commendation given the young Men in the Text may be truly
applied; that you have been strengthened by the Word and Spirit of Grace, to
get the better of the wicked one, by a penitent Return to God through Faith in
Christ; and as to all of you, that you are setting your Faces with Resolution
to seek the Way to the Kingdom of God, the heavenly Zion; so that if not
converted, you are in the Way to Conversion: O be persuaded and encouraged to
go on to a thorough Conversion, surmounting all the Difficulties and
Impediments your great Adversary casts in your Way; which you may do in the
Name and Strength of Christ, who has overcome Satan, and led Captivity captive.
Put yourselves over into his Hand, by an humble self-dedicating Faith, and
adhere steadfastly to his Interest, as good Soldiers of Christ, following the
Captain of your Salvation, and he will infallibly give you the Victory. And let
this your Conversion be made more evident, to your own and others Satisfaction,
by a more solemn and public Dedication of yourselves to him. Be not ashamed to
declare openly for Christ and his Cause, and against Satan and all his Works
and Lusts. This will afford Matter of Joy to Heaven, which will resound with
Applauses and Acclamations upon this Victory over Satan. Our Savior tells us,
there is Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents. (Luke 15.7.) All will be
well pleased there, God and Christ, and Angels. The holy Angels rejoice at a
Sinner's Conversion. ( ver. 10.) It Is Joy to them to see the Ruin of the
Devil's Kingdom, and the Enlargement of the Church and Kingdom of Christ; they
rejoice also from a generous Love and Good Will they bear to the Souls of Men.

Secondly, I am now to exhort you to strive for the Mastery, by resisting the
particular Temptations of the Devil, wherewith he may assault you, even after
your Conversion. And by an effectual Resistance you may get the Victory, yea,
many Victories over him in this Life. But here consider, that as the Devil
encounters you by the Lusts and Corruptions of your own Hearts, and cannot
fasten one Temptation upon you, but as he finds a corrupt Party within
yourselves, ready to yield a Compliance with it; so your main Care and Business
ought to be to resist and suppress those fleshly Lusts, which war against the
Soul (1 Pet. 2.11.) as being the Party which holds with Satan against your
immortal Souls. And your effectual Resistance of these corrupt Lusts, is your
Victory over Satan; for he is overcome by such Resistance. Here then, you must
exert yourselves with Strength and vigorous Resolution in contending for the
Dominion of Reason and Conscience, over carnal. Appetites and Passions; and to
that End, must exercise yourselves in Sobriety and Temperance, Self-denial,
Prayer and Watchfulness, striving to keep under the Body, with it is inordinate
Affections, bringing it into Subjection to the Law of the Mind, as the Apostle
has directed you, 1 Cor. 9.25, -- 27. But there is also another Way to be
recommended, for overcoming Satan's Temptations and the Lusts of your own
Hearts, that is, by Flight. Hence are those Counsels and Directions to
Christians, Flee Fornication. 1 Cor. 6.18. Flee youthful Lusts. 2 Timothy 2.22.
Fly from the Sin you are tempted to, with Abhorrence: hold no Party with Satan,
nor debate the Matter, whether you had best yield, or forbear; but be resolute
and peremptory in giving a Denial. This will put a Stop to Satan's Attempts,
and wholly defeat them. Hence we are taught to deny worldly Lusts (2 Tit.
2.12.) to deny their importunate Cravings. And not only to forbear the
Gratification of them, but as much as in us lies to extirpate the Lusts
themselves. Abstain from fleshly Lusts. (1 Pet. 2.11.) Labor to get rid of
these Lusts, to weaken them more and more in the Work of Mortification, which
is the great Duty and constant Practice of all real Christians; for they that
are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. (Gal.
5.24.) The greater Progress you make in your Mortification of these Lusts, the
less will be your Danger from Satan's Temptations, and the more complete will
be your Victory over them, Therefore arm yourselves with strong Resolutions to
resist Temptations, and mortify Corruptions, and so to defear and vanquish this
Enemy of your Souls.

This Conflict with Satan, and Victory over him, is not an airy Notion, but an
undoubted Reality (and therefore we are to fight, not as beating the Air) though
the Evidence of this depends chiefly on divine Revelation. Thence we are
assured, there are vast Numbers of apostate wicked Spirits, who are
irreconcilable Enemies to God and Christ, and all Goodness; and particularly to
the Souls of Men, and their Salvation; which is attested by the sad Experience
of many poor Souls. And we are therein often warned of our Danger from them,
and directed to proper Methods for our Security. The Apostle Peter calls upon
us to be sober and vigilant; because (says he) your Adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about; seeking whom he may devour, (1 Pet. 5.8.) Which
was not only true of that Age in which the Apostle wrote, but even to this Day.
This great Adversary of God and Man is unweariedly active and industrious in
the Pursuit of his blood-thirsty Design, going about like a ravenous Beast of
Prey, hunting for the precious Life, even the Life of precious immortal Souls.
Nothing less will satisfy his Malice. Wherefore, to awaken your Vigilance and
Caution, let me put you upon considering the Nature and Design of this your
Adversary.

(1.) As to his Nature, he is an active, malicious, powerful and wicked Spirit,
or rather Spirits, in the plural, for (as has been observed) there is an
innumerable Company of them: And the Name Devil seems to be a collective Term,
and applied to the whole Crew. The Apostle Paul terms them spiritual
Wickednesses, or wicked Spirits, Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against wicked Spirits; which shows our Danger, in that our Enemy is
of a spiritual Nature. Were we to conflict only with Flesh and Blood, with Men
like ourselves, bodily Strength, which is most vigorous in young Men, would be
of most Service to us; but this Warfare is of a spiritual Nature, and requires
spiritual Strength, Wisdom Faith, Sobriety, Watchfulness, Resolution. For the
Enemies with whom we are to combat, are wicked Spirits; the Devils are Spirits,
invisible to us, and wicked Spirits. And our Danger is the greater from our
Enemies, because they are unseen, and assault us ere we are aware of them.
Satan is ready to take Men at a Disadvantage, when they are off their Guard,
when their Spirits are ruffled, in their Company, Business, Enjoyments, when
they are least aware of this invisible Foe at Hand; and being a Spirit, he is
able to insinuate into your Fancies, bodily Tempers, Affections, Appetites and
Passions; and observes which Way all these work, that he might suit his
Temptations accordingly, and the more easily obtrude his cursed Baits upon you:
which is a Reason, you see, why you should be always upon your Watch, and never
give Way to Security.

(2.) Let me put you in Mind of the hellish pernicious Design of this your
Adversary in all his Temptations; which is, to prevail with you to sin against
God, that he might prevail against you to the Ruin of your precious Souls.
Justly therefore is he called the wicked one, it being his great Aim to entice
you to Wickedness, and to hinder your Repentance; and then he knows, the small
Issue will be your eternal Damnation. There is this Difference, in Relation to
Sin, between the Devil, and Sinners of Mankind. The Devil's End is sinning: but
with Men sinning is ordinarily the Means to some other End. While you are
pursuing the Imaginations of the earnal Heart, you don't aim at sinning against
God, or sin for sinning sake, out of pure Enmity to God and Holiness, which is
the right diabolical Temper; but your Aim is at the Pleasures of Sense, the
Gratification of the Flesh, or the Possession and Enjoyment of the World, and
you would doubtless choose to have these Desires gratified, if it might be, upon
caster Terms, than sinning against God, and wounding your own Consciences. But
because your Minds and Hearts are set upon these Things, and carried out with a
strong Inclination toward them, and cannot obtain them without Sin, therefore
it is that you are prevailed upon to sin, and break the Law of God. But the
Devil has a further Reach, he aims at your Sin and Ruin, and so he has a
twofold Design which is served hereby. The one is against God, to express his
malicious Enmity against the blessed God, by bringing you to dishonor him by
transgressing his Law. The other is against your own Souls, that by the Baits
of worldly Temptations suired to your Lusts, he might bring you into his
Snares, and plunge your Souls in Perdition. This he pursues with a
blood-thirsty Eagerness in all his Temptations, which should awaken you to a
constant Sense of your Danger, and to a vigorous Resistance, whenever a
Temptation strongly insinuates itself into your Minds and Affections; for
remembert, hat nothing less than your precious immortal Souls are the Prize,
which the Devil is thereby contending for.

Now that you may be strong in spirit for this spiritual Warfare, let the Word
of God dwell and rule in your Hearts. Not only give it a transient Hearing, but
let it, in the important Sense and Weight of it, sink into your Hearts, and
form within you a correspondent Temper. Let it be digested by Faith and
Meditation, that it may become proper Nourishment and Strength to your Souls,
and produce and strengthen those Christian Principles of Faith, Love and Hope,
which in their genuine lively Exercise will be found Armor of Proof against
all the Assaults of your spiritual Enemies. Get your Minds and Hearts stored
with the holy Counsels, Precepts and Instructions of the Word: which will
abundantly furnish you with strong Reasons, to oppose to all the subtle Devices
and Allurements of the Tempter; that you may have always this Weapon of your
Warfare, the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, in a Readiness to
repel the Temptations and fiery Darts of the wicked one: And that in Imitation
of our blessed Savior (when tempted by the Devil) you may be able to resist
and put to flight this great Adversary, with -- It is written. Thus when in
Danger of being lifted up with Pride, say, It is written, God resists the
Proud. (1 Pet. 5.5.) When tempted to murmur under adverse Providence, say, It
is written, Neither murmur ye as some of them murmured and were destroyed of
the Destroyer. (1 Cor. 10.10.) When tempted to tell a lie, or to speak falsely,
say, It is written, All Liars shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone. (Rev. 21, 8.) When tempted to Acts of Injustice, say, It is
written, The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. (1 Cor. 6.9.)
When tempted to the Sin of Uncleanness, say, It is written. God reserveth the
Unjust to the Day of Judgment, to be punished; but chiefly them that walk after
the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness. (2 Pet. 2.9, 10) When tempted to
excessive Drinking, say, It is written, Take Heed to yourselves, lest as any
Time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, -- and so that
Day come upon you unawares. (Luke 21.34.) Thus let the Sword of the Spirit be
pointed against every Sin that solicits your Affections, and let Faith have the
wielding of it; and the Tempter must flee before it. Only let me caution you
against the prevailing Errors of the Times, whereby the pure Word of God is
corrupted, and Satan seeks to blunt the Edge of our Weapon, or to disarm us of
our main Strength and Defense. But it is Truth which is great and strong: Stand
therefore having your Loins girt about with Truth, the Truth as it is in Jesus,
according as you have been taught; and beware lest any of you being led away
with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedsastness.

I proceed now, in the Close of all, according to what was proposed,

Secondly, To press upon you, in a very few Words, the Counsels and Lessons of
Piety in the Context of this Chapter, which the Apostle wrote to these young
Men. Which, though of great Use to Christians of every Age, yet are peculiarly so
to young People; and not impertinent to the main Subject discoursed.

1. You are to observe his Caution against Sin. Ver. I. My little Children,
these Things write I unto you, that ye sin not. It Is the Scope of the whole
Scripture, as well as of this Epistle, to take us off from Sin, and to engage
us against it. This therefore ought to be your first and main Concern, to keep
yourselves from Sin, from all Sin: in so doing you will most effectually defeat
the great Design of the wicked one, which is to seduce you to Sin and
Wickedness. But by every known wilful Sin you commit, you do, as it were,
surrender yourselves Captives to the Devil. O then, let little Children, young
Men, and all, be exhorted to keep up a Dread of Sin, and keep at the greatest
Distance from it.

2. Under a Sense and Conviction of Sin, you are directed to the Advocacy and
Propitiation of Christ, in order to Pardon and Reconciliation to God. Ver. 1,
2. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. Forasmuch as there is no
Man that sins not; and Sins of daily Infirmity will unavoidably attend us in
this mortal State; therefore the true and only Method of Relief against
Consciousness of Guilt, is he repointed out to us; which is, repairing to Jesus
Christ our great Advocate in Heaven, looking by Faith to the Propitiation in
his Blood. An Advocate is one who patronises and pleads the Cause of an accused
Party, before any Bar of Justice. So Jesus Christ pleads our Cause with his
Father, against the Charge of Guilt, against the Accusations of Satan and our
own Consciences, in the Virtue of his own Merit, or of that propitiatory
Sacrifice he once offered on Earth, to make Reconciliation for Iniquity, and so
secures our Peace; that notwithstanding our daily sinful Infirmities, we might
yet (our Hearts being, in the main, right with God) maintain settled Peace and
Comfort, in our Walk with God. Or, if it should be your unhappy Lot at any Time
(as it may be, and that even contrary to the settled Bent of your Judgments and
Resolutions) to be foiled by your Adversary, and to fall into any more grievous
Sin, to the Distress of your Consciences; yet having such a sovereign Remedy
provided and offered to you, despair not, but fly to the Protection of your
Advocate and Mediator; and with deep Humiliation and Contrition of Soul, and by
Faith and Prayer plead with God, the Propitiation in the Blood of Christ, for
the Pardon of your Guilt, and the Healing of your Backslidings; but be not
discouraged from persisting in your Warfare; but in Dependence on divine Grace
and Strength, rise again from your Falls, and renew the Combat with fresh
Vigor, and with greater Wisdom, Watchfulness, and Resolution never to yield:
and you may be victorious at last; as a General may lose a Battle in some
particular Skirmishes, and yet come off Conqueror in the Issue of War.

"Our utmost Strength! when down, to rise again;
"And not to yield, though beaten, all our Praise.
(YOUNG's Night-Thoughts.) And here, suffer me seriously and earnestly to press
it upon you, to improve this great Gospel-Privilege of the Propitiation or
Atonement in the Blood of Christ, in order to get into a State of Peace, and
Reconciliation with God upon the Terms of the Gospel. O how much does it
concern you, who may be called to war with Enemies abroad, now to get your
Peace made with God? And so to get your Feet shod beforehand, with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace (which is directed to as Part of our
spiritual Armor) by securing an Interest in that Peace which the Gospel
publishes and offers to you. This will secure you against all the Chances of
War. The Devil will be an Enemy to you, whether you be so to him, or not. And
how dreadful will it be, to have God for your Enemy, and the Devil too: And all
Creatures in Heaven, Earth and Hell, in Consequence of God's being your Enemy!
Till you are reconciled, the Wrath of God abides on you: And can you bear the
Though It of lying under the Wrath of an eternal God! But O precious immortal
Souls! (for as such I speak to you, in treating with you about the Things of
your everlasting Peace) precious, because immortal. Of what infinite Importance
is that reconciled Favor and Love of an eternal God, to an immortal Soul! This
will be your Security and Felicity in Life, in Death, and to Eternity. O then,
acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, thereby Good shall come unto
thee. (Job. 22.21.) Nothing but what is Good, or works for Good, shall befall
you; this should raise you above the Terrors of your Enemies. Yea, though you
should fall in Batrie, as good Josiah did, yet you shall die in Peace, as God
promised him. (2 Chronicles. 34.28.) Now, that God is very willing and desirous of
entering into Terms of Peace with you, appears from his sending his Son to be a
Propitiation, or reconciling Sacrifice, for our Sins. (1 John 4.10.) And from
that moving Language of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20. As though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled to God. O let not your
Consent be wanting to the Terms of this Peace, who will be the only Gainers by
it. Lay aside your Enmity, and submit to the Scepter of Grace. Let this be your
Aim and Pursuit. And the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, shall
keep your Hearts and Minds through Jesus Christ.

3. The new Commandment of Love is enforced more largely, Ver. 5, -- 11. This
is an excellent Christian Virtue often recommended, in which the true Spirit of
Christianity is chiefly manifested. It is the Nature and Image of God our
heavenly Father; as the contrary, Malice and Uncharitableness, is of the Devil,
and therefore to be abhorred in every Shape, by those who have renounced the
Devil and his Works. There is a general Love, to be extended to all Men, in
various Instances and Degrees; but a more special Love toward Christian
Brethren, and more particularly toward those of your own Society, and with
whom you commonly converse. Let this your Love be generous, pure, cordial and
undissembled. Let it be not only a Love of common Friendship or Courcesy; but a
truly religious Love. Let it be manifested in counselling, exhorting,
reproving, and edifying one another in the Ways of Religion; in forbearing and
forgiving one another; in praying with and for one another. Thus the true
Spirit of Christian Love will operate, and evidence itself.

4. The Caution against immoderate Love of the World, here fitly subjoined.
Ver. 15. Love not the World, nor the Things of the World, etc. Because the
World, and the Things of it, are the common Baits wherewith the Devil seeks to
seduce and ensnare the Souls of Men; and young Men are most in Danger of this
Snare. While they are setting out in the World, and seeking after Settlements
and Accommodations in it, they are too apt to suffer their Hearts, by worldly
Cares and Business, to be estranged from God, and the serious Concerns of
Religion; and thereby give the Adversary great Advantage against them, to lead
them astray by many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which without a speedy Recovery
by Faith and Repentance, will drown them in Destruction and Perdition. (1 Timothy
6.9.) You may, doubtless, lawfully use the World, attend the Business of the
World in your several Callings, and enjoy the Comforts of the World: strict
Religion allows and requires all this; but all in Subordination to higher and
better Things, for which you ought to reserve the chief Room in your
Affections: that Love to the World, and distracting Cares about it, may not
divert your Attention from the one Thing needful. Labor therefore to get
worldly Love mortified. To this End, meditate much on the Death of Christ: one
Design whereof was, to deliver you from this present evil World, and that the
World might be crucified to you, and you to the World. (Gal. 1.4. and 6.14.)
Think much on your own Death, and live in the daily Views of it, as sure and
near; when all that is so much admired in this World, shall vanish as a Dream.
What is it, that makes Death so bitter and dreadful, but an Heart too strongly
attached to this World, and corrupted by the Lusts of it? But the Mortification
of worldly Love carries with it Victory over Satan and Death. Let us learn
then, to place our Affections on Objects more noble and sublime, more worthy of
an immortal Soul. Let us raise our Souls to God and the Things of Heaven, by
Faith and Meditation, and spiritual Aspirations. Unto thee, O Lord, (says
David, Psalm. 25.1.) do I lift up my Soul. A Spirit of true Devotion lifts up
the Soul to God. Let us then hold on a Course of holy Devotion, by daily Prayer
and Praise, and Converse with God in his Word and Ordinances; which will be an
happy Preparation for the Soul's Return to God at Death; that when our Warfare
is accomplished, it may return victorious, and our immortal Spirit being
loosened from this Clod of Earth, by a previous Work of Mortification, may,
upon the Dissolution of this earthly Tabernacle, mount up to the heavenly
Paradise, and eat of the Tree of Life and live for ever.

AMEN.

