A JOURNAL Of the Landing of His Majesty's Forces on the Island of CAPE-BRETON,
And of the Siege and Surrender of LOUISBOURG: Extracted from Major General
AMHERST' s and Admiral BOSCAWEN' s Letters to the Right Honorable Mr. Secretary
PIT.

THE THIRD EDITION.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by Green and Russell, in Queen Street.
Sold also by Edes and Gill, in Queen Street.

A Journal of the Siege and Surrender of Louisbourg, etc.
ON the 28th of May I had the good Fortune to meet Admiral Boscawen with the
fleet and troops coming out of the harbor of Halifax. Lieutenant General
Bragg's regiment, from the Bay of Fundy, joined the fleet this Day.

The 29th we had sine weather; the ships kept well together; the whole
consisted of 157 sail. The Dublin [which carried over General Amherst] went
very sickly into Halifax.

The 30th the wind blew hard in the Afternoon; the ships were greatly dispersed.

The 31st the wind sometimes contrary, obliged us to tack, and it blew fresh.

The 1st of June Capt. Rous, in the Sutherland, came from off the harbor of
Louisbourg, and said, two ships had got in the 30th; and that there were
thirteen sail in the harbor. We saw the entrance of Gabarous at night.

The 2nd it was foggy in the morning; about twelve saw Louisbourg, and the
ships in the harbor. The fleet, with about a third of the troops, anchored in
Gabarous Bay; and this evening, with Brigadier-Generals Lawrence and Wolf, I
reconnoitred the shore as near as we could, and made a disposition for landing
in three places the next morning, in case the troops arrived.

The enemy had a chain of posts from Cape Noir to the Flat Point and irregulars
from thence to the bottom of the bay; some works thrown up at the places which
appeared practicable to land at, and some batteries.

On the 3d, most of the transports came in this morning, all was prepared for
landing; but the surff on shore was so great, it was impossible to land. This
day Brigadier-General Whitmore arrived from Halifax, at which place I have left
Colonel Monckton to command. As one bay was found to have less surff than the
others, a disposition was made to land the next morning in one place, instead
of three.

The 4th the wind and surff were so very high, that Admiral Boscawen told me it
was impracticable to land.

The 5th a great swell and fog in the morning, and the Admiral declared it
still impracticable to land.

The 6th an appearance of change of weather, in the morning early: I was
resolved to seize the first opportunity; the signal was made to prepare to land
between five and six o'clock, and at eight all the men were in the boats: the
fog came on again, and the swell increafed during the time the men were getting
into the boats, and the Admiral again declared it impracticable to land. I
ordered the troops on board their respective ships, first acquainting them with
the reason for so doing.

The 7th the weather bad in the morning; in the afternoon the swell rather
decreased, and gave us great hopes of landing at daybreak the next morning,
for which orders were given; and Bragg's regiment, who were in a number of
sloops, to sail under convoy, by the mouth of the harbor, to Lorembec;
sending, at the same time, a proportion of artillery destined for the light
house point, with orders to make all the show they could of landing, but not to
land till further orders, intending to draw the enemy's attention on that side.

From the 2nd to this time, the enemy has been reinforcing their posts, adding
to their works, cannonading and throwing shells at the ships, and making all
the preparations they can to oppose our landing. Seven transports were now
missing with troops on board, three of which came in at night. The Admiral gave
all necessary orders for the frigates to cover our landing.

On the 8th the troops were assembled in the boats before break of day, in
three divisions; and Commodore 'Durell having viewed the coast by order of the
Admiral, and given me his opinion the troops might land, without danger from
the surff, in the bay on our left, the Kennington and Halifax snow began the
fire on the left, followed by the Gramont, Diana, and Shannon Frigates in the
center, and the Sutherland and Squirrel upon the right. When the fire had
continued about a quarter of an hour, the boats upon the left rowed into the
shore, under the command of Brigadier General Wolf, whose detachment was
composed of the four eldest companies of Grenadiers, followed by the Light
Infantry (a corpse of 550 men, chosen as marksmen from the different regiments;
they serve as Irregulars, and are commanded by Major Scott, who was Major of
Brigade) and the companies of Rangers, supported by the Highland Regiment, and
those by the eight remaining companies of Grenadiers.

The division on the right, under the command of Brigadier-General Whitmore,
consisted of the Royal, Lascelles, Monckton, Forbes, Anstruther and Webb, and
rowed to our right by the White Point, as if intending to force a landing there.

The center division, under the command of Brigadier-general Lawrence, was
formed of Amberst's, Hopson's, Otway's, Whitmore's, Lawrence's, and
Warburton's, and made at the same time, a show of landing at the Fresh Water
Cove. This drew the enemy's attention to every part, and prevented their
troops, posted along the coast, from joining those on their right.

The enemy acted very wisely; they did not throw away a shot till the boats
were near in shore; and then directed the whole fire of their cannon and
musketry upon them. The surff was so great, that a place could hardly be found
to get a boat on shore. Notwithstanding the fire of the enemy, and the violence
of the surff, Brigadier Wolf pursued his point, and landed just at the left of
the Cove, took post, attacked the enemy, and forced them to retreat. Many boats
overset, several broke to pieces, and all the men jumped into the water to get
on shore.

So soon as the left division was landed, the first detachments of the center
rowed a proper time to the left, and followed; then the remainder of the center
division, as fast as the boats could fetch them from the ships; and the right
division followed the center in like manner.

It took up a great deal of time to land the troops; the enemy's retreat, or
rather flight, was through the roughest and worst ground I ever saw; and the
pursuit ended with a connonading from the Town, which was so far of use, that
it pointed out how near I could encamp to invest it; on which the regiments
marched to their ground, and lay on their Arms. The wind increased, and we
could not get any thing on shore.

The loss of his Majesty's troops at landing is Capt. Baillie and Lieut.
Cuthbert, of the Highland regiment; Lieut. Nicholson, of mine, four sergeants,
one corporal, and 38 men killed, 21 were of my regiment, (the Grenadiers) of
which 8 were shot, and the rest drowned in trying to get on shore.

Five lieutenants, two sergeants, one corporal, and 51 men wounded; and of the
five companies of rangers, one ensign and three private men killed, one wounded
and one missing.

On the enemy's side, two captains of grenadiers, and two lieutenants, are
prisoners; one officer killed, and an Indian chief: several men likewise
killed, and I imagine, about 70 men taken prisoners: they were sent on board as
fast as possible. By some of the prisoners I had intelligence, that M. St.
Julien, colonel, commonded in the Cove: that there were five battalions in the
town, namely, Bourgogne, Artois Royal, Marine, Cambise, and Volantaires
Etrangers, with about 700 Canadians. The three first regiments wintered in
Louisbourg; Volontaires Etrangers, came there not long since with part of the
Fleet, and Cambise the night before we landed,

We took from the enemy three 24 pounders, seven nine pounders, and seven six
pounders, two mortars, and 14 swivels; all which were placed along the shore,
to prevent our landing; with ammunition, tools, and stores of all kinds.

The 9th lieutenant general Bragg's regiment returned in their sloops to
Lorembec. The weather continued extremely bad; the surff so great, that we
could get only some of our tents on shore in the afternoon.

The 10th the surff still continued, and it was with great difficulty we got
any thing on shore.

The 11th the weather grew clear and better, and the light six pounders, which
I ordered on shore immediately after the troops, were now only landed, and some
artillery stores with them.

On the 12th, from intelligence I had received, that the enemy had destroyed
the grand battery, and called in their out-posts, I detached Brigadier Wolf
with 1200 men, four companies of grenadiers, three-companies of rangers, and
some light infantry, round the N. E. harbor to the light house point, with an
intention to silence the island battery, and, at the same time, to destroy the
ships in the harbor; sending at the same time by sea, the proportion of
artillery tools, etc. that had been ordered for this service.

I received this day a report from brigadier Wolf, that he had taken
possession of the light house point, and all the posts on that side the
harbor, which the enemy had abandoned, leaving several cannon, which were
rendered useless, tools, etc. and a great quantity of fish at Lorembec. The
weather continued extremely bad; but we got some tools on shore this night; so
that on the 13th, we began to make a communication from the right to the left
in the front of the camp, and I ordered three redoubts on the most advantageous
ground in the front. A party of the enemy came out this day toward our camp,
but were soon beat back by the light infantry before two piquets could well get
up to their assistance. We worked at the three redoubts in front all night.

The 14th the enemy cannonaded us a great part of the day. The surff still
continued so great, that it was with the greatest difficulty we could land any
thing. The fleet, under the command of Sir Charles Hardy, which appeared
yesterday for some time, was in the night blown off to sea.

The 15th I sent four more mortars in a sloop to the light-house, but we could
not get any artillery landed on this shore. At night two deserters from the
Volontaires Etrangers came in, and said they had 5 killed, and 46 wounded, in
the skirmish on the 13th.

The 16th the first fine weather, we landed 12 days provisions, and got many
things on shore, but could not yet land any artillery.

The 17th I got Colonel Bastide [chief Engineer] on horseback, and with Colonel
Williamson and Major M'Kellar, we reconnoitred the whole ground as far as we
could; and Colonel Bastide was determined in his opinion of making approaches
by the green hill, and confining the destruction of the ships in the harbor to
the light-house point, and the batteries on that side. I added two eight inch
mortars and three royals to the light-house batteries.

The 18th we had fine weather. Some Indians took three of the transports men at
the bottom of Gabarus Bay, who landed there contrary to orders. The road for
the artillery was pushed on as fast as possible. We got three 24 pounders on
shore, though the surff was great the beginning of the Day.

The 19th the batteries of the Light House were intended to have been opened
this night, but could not be got ready so soon. L'Echo, a French frigate of 32
Guns, was brought in today; had got out of the harbor the 13th at night, and
was bound to Quebec: By her we have intelligence, that the Bizane got out the
day we landed, and the Commette since our arrival off the harbor.

The 20th the Island battery and ships fired at the batteries on the shore, who
began their fire this last night. The enemy burnt an old ship at the bottom of
the harbor.

The 21st very bad weather, and the surff high. The enemy discovered us making
the road for the artillery, and canonaded us; threw some shot into the left of
the camp, but did not oblige me to decamp any part. An advanced redoute toward
Green Hill was thrown up this night.

The 22d the bad weather continued; we were employed on the roads, and getting
up a blockhouse on the left, by the Miry Road, to secure the communication to
the N. E. harbor and Light House, and to hinder any parties from going into
Town.

The 23d the Admiral assured me there were above 100 boats lost in landing the
troops and provisions. This day fine weather; and we have now on shore twelve
24 pounders, and six twelve pounders. The enemy fired a great deal from their
shipping and Island Battery, and threw some shot into the left of the camp.
Colonel Messervey and most of his carpenters taken ill of the smallpox, which
is a very great loss to the army. Gabions and facscines are landed, and carried
forward as fast as possible, to make an epaulement to Green Hill. The batteries
at the Light House fire with success against the Island Battery, and I hope
will soon silence it.

On the 24th the enemy fired on the Light House batteries from the town and
shipping; and on our advanced redoubt, which was finished; they fired from the
town. Colonel Bastide remained fixed in his opinion of advancing by Green Hill.
We had this day in the park of artillery thirteen 24 pounders, and seven 12
pounders.

The 25th the cannonading continued night and day: in the evening the Island
Battery was silenced; their own fire had helped to break down part of their
works. Fascines and gabions were forwarded to Green Hill as fast as possible.
All the men employed at work, and making the necessary communications. The
enemy fired a good deal at our advanced redoute.

The 26th a small alarm on the left of a party that had advanced from the town,
had got up to the Block House, which was not quite finished. They had with them
a barrel of pitch to set it on fire: the guard on it was not sufficient to
oppose a large party; but a detachment was sent out so quick, that they were
forced to retreat without effecting their design, though two of the men had
been in the block house, and they were drove back into the Town very fast.
Three hundred pioneers ordered to Green Hill. Admiral Boscawen landed 200
marines, and took the post at Kennington Cove, which is a great ease to the
army. I desired of the Admiral four 32 pounders, and two 24 pounders to leave
at the Light House, to keep the Island Battery in ruin, that with a proper
number of men entrenched there, Brigadier Wolf, with his detachment, might be
able to come round the harbor, bringing his artillery with him; and to try to
destroy the shipping, to advance toward the west gate.

The 27th one brass 24 pounder was lost in twelve fathom water, by slipping off
the catamaran, as they were coming from the ship to land it. The cannon I asked
of the Admiral were landed this night at the Light House.

The 28th a great many popping shots and cannonading. As the post at Green Hill
was covered, we began the road over the bog, and throwing up an epaulement.
Colonel Messervey and his son both died this day; and of his company of
carpenters of 108 men, all but 16 in the smallpox, who are nurses to the sick.
This is particularly unlucky at this time.

The 29th cannonading continued, the frigate fired constantly at the
epaulement; we pursued working at the road, which cost a great deal of labor:
at night the enemy sunk four ships in the harbour's mouth; Apollo, a two-decked
one, La Fidelle of 36 guns, La Chevre, and la Biche, of 16 guns each, and they
cut off most of their masts. Remain in the harbor five of the line of battle,
and a frigate of 36 guns.

The 30th at night some firing at Kennington Cove: the marines thought they saw
Indians: the firgate fired all night at the epaulement, as the men worked in
the night time.

The 1st of July the enemy creeped out in the morning to get some old
pallisades and wood. Brigadier Wolf and Major Scott's Light Infantry pushed
them in with a very brisk fire; and the Brigadier took posts on the hills, from
whence it was intended to try to demolish the shipping; we marched forward on
the right, forced the enemy back to Cape Noir with a smart fire.

The 2nd the epaulement and road went on heavily, from the extreme badness of
the ground: The enemy continued their cannonading, and threw some shells; we
skirmished all Day with parties out of the town.

The 3d a great cannonading from the town and shipping, on the batteries.
Brigadier Wolf was making an advanced work on the right, thrown up 650 yards
from the covered way, with an intention of erecting a battery to destroy the
defenses of the place, it being pretty well on the capital of the citadel
bastion; and the falling of the ground from this place, toward the works,
would hinder discovering as much of the works as would be necessary to do them
any damage. In the evening the sea officers thought some of the ships would try
to get out of the harbor. The batteries on the left immediately played on
them, but it grew so dark they could not continue.

The 4th a great fog; when there were glares of light, the cannonading began;
500 men kept continually making fascines.

The 5th very bad weather; the epaulement was hastened on as much as possible;
it swallowed up an immense number of fascines, cost some men, as the frigate
cannonaded on it without ceasing.

The 6th a sloop sailed out of the harbor with a flag of truce to Sir Charles
Hardy, to carry some things to their wounded officers and prisoners.

The many difficulties of landing everything in almost a continual surff, the
making of roads, drawing and passing of bogs, and putting ourselves under cover
render our approach to the place much longer than I could wish.

On the 7th we had very foggy weather; cannonading continued all day, and a
good deal of popping shots from the advanced posts.

The 8th I intended an attack on some advanced posts at Cape-Noir, but it did
not take place. Colonel Bastide got a contusion by a musket ball on his boot,
which laid him up in the gout.

The 9th, in the night, the enemy made a sally where Brigadier Lawrence
commanded; they came from Cape Noir, and though drunk, I am afraid rather
surprised a company of grenadiers of Forbes's, commanded by Lord 'Dundonald,
who were posted in a fleecke, on the right, Major Murry, who commanded three
companies of grenadiers, immediately detached one, and drove the enemy back
very easily. Whitmore's and Bragg's grenadiers behaved very well on this
occasion. Lord Dundonald was killed. Lieut. Tew wounded and taken prisoner,
Capt. Bontein, of the engineers, taken prisoner: 1 corporal, 3 men killed; 12
missing; 17 men wouned. The sally was of five picquets, supported by 600 men; a
captain, Chevalier de Chavelin, was killed; a lieutenant wounded and taken
prisoner; 17 men killed; 4 wounded, and bro't off prisoners; besides what
wounded they carried into the town: one of which, a captain, died immediately.
The enemy sent out a flag of truce to bury their dead, which when over, the
cannonading began again. The frigate was so hurt, she hauled close to the town;
the ships fired very much against Brigadier Wolfe's batteries.

The 10th the road at the epaulement went on a little better; the enemy fired a
great deal, and threw many shells.

The 11th a waggoner was taken off by some Indians, between the block-house and
the left of the north-east harbor.

The 12th it rained very hard all night; not a man in the detachment could have
a dry thread on; we made an advanced work to Green-Hill; at night the waggoner
who had been taken, luckily made his escape; said, they were 250 Canadians. The
citadel bastion fired very smartly.

The 13th the enemy threw a great many shells; we perfected our works as fast
as we could; had rainy weather; the enemy was at work at Cape Noir, to hinder
our taking possession near that point, which is of no consequence; some
deserters came in said a sloop from Miray, got in three days ago.

The 14th, the batteries were traced out last night with an intention to place
twenty 24-pounders, divided in four different batteries, to destroy the
defenses: and a battery of 7 mortars, with some twelve-pounders, to ricohet the
works and the town.

The 15th the cannonading and firing continued; the enemy tried to throw some
shells into camp, supposed to be intended against our powder magazines: At ten
at night the light-house battery fired some rockets as a signal of ships
sailing out of the harbor; Sir Charles Hardy answered it; the frigate got out,
and Sir Charles Hardy's Fleet got under sail and went to sea. Before daybreak,
Capt. Sutherland, posted at the end of the north-east harbor, was attacked,
and there was a great deal of firing; the grenadiers of Brigadier Wolfe's corpse
marched to sustain him, and all the light infantry; it was over before they
could get up, and, by a diserter from the enemy, they were only 100 men come
from Miray, where they left Mons. de Boisbiere, who had, on the other side of
the water, 300 men, with boats to pass. Major Scott, with the light infantry,
pursued, but could not get up with them. I encamped a corpse forward.

The 16th, toward night, Brigadier Wolf pushed on a corpse and took possession
of the hills in the front of the barasoy, where we made a lodgment; the enemy
fired very briskly from the town and shipping.

The 17th a great fire continued from the town and shipping; we resolved to
extend the parallel from the right to the left. The fleet returned.

The 18th, all last night the enemy fired musketry from the covert-way, and
tried to throw shells into the camp.

The 19th I relieved the trenches by battalions, the 14 battalions formed 3
brigades; a smart fire from the covert-way; the batteries on the left fired
against the bastion Dauphine with great success.

The 21st one of the ships in the harbor had some powder blown up in her, made
a great explosion, and set the ship on fire, which soon caught the sails of two
more; they burned very fast, and we kept firing on them the whole time, to try
to hinder the boats and people from the town, to get to their assistance; the
Entreprenant, Capricieux, and Superb, were the three burned ships; the Prudent
and Bienfaisant remained.

The 22d two batteries on the right opened with 13 24-pounders, and another
with 7 mortars, and fired with great success; the enemy fired very well from
the town for some time, and threw their shells into our works. Our shells put
the citadel in flames. I ordered Col. Williamson to confine his fire as much as
he could to the defenses of the place, that we might not destroy the houses. A
lieutenant of the Royal-Americans, going his rounds on an advanced post, lost
his way, and was taken prisoner near Cape Noir. A battery was begun on the left
for four 24-pounders.

The 23d the cahorns were used at night and the French mortars sent to throw
stones from the trenches. The enemy fired all sorts of old iron, and any stuff
they could pick up. Col. Bastide was out today for the first time since he
received the contusion. Our batteries fired with great success. This night the
shells set fire to the barracks, and they burnt with great violence.

On the 24th the fire was very brisk on our side, and the enemy's decreased.
The admiral gave me 400 seamen to help work at the batteries, and 200 miners
added to a corpse of 100 already established, that we might make quick work of
it, and they were immediately employed. The 4 gun battery opened, and another
of 5 erecting. One of the men of war in the harbor, the Bienfaisant, fired at
our trenches at high water, and the citadel and bastion Dauphine fired against
the 4 gun battery; but our men firing small-arms into the embrazures, beat the
enemy off their guns.

The 25th the batteries fired with great success. The admiral sent me word, he
intended to send in boats with 600 men, to take or destroy the Prudente and
Bienfaisant, in the harbor. I ordered all the batteries at night to fire into
the works as much as possible, to keep the enemy's attention to the land. The
miners and workmen went on very well with their approaches to the covered way,
though they had a continued and very smart fire from it, and grape shot, and all
sorts of old iron from the guns of the ramparts. We continued our fire without
ceasing, and a ricochet: The boats got to the ships at one in the morning, and
took them both: They were obliged to burn the Prudente, as she was a-ground;
and they towed off the Bienfaisant to the north-east harbor.

The 26th the admiral came on shore, and told me he proposed sending 6 ships
into the harbor the next day. Just at this time I received a letter from the
governor, offering to capitulate, and the articles were agreed upon. The troops
remained in the trenches this night as usual.

The 27th three companies of grenadiers, under the command of Major Farquhar,
took possession of the west gate; and I sent in brigadier general Whitmore, to
see the garrison lay down their arms, and post the necessary guards in the
town, on the stores, magazines, etc. And I had the arms bro't out of town, and
11 colors, which I send you, under the care of Captain William Amherst. As I
have given in orders that I desired every commanding officer of corpse would
acquaint the officers and men that I was greatly pleased with the brave and
good behavior of the troops, which has, and always must insure success; I am
to acquaint you, Sir, that I took the liberty to add to it, that I would report
it to the King.

Extract of a Letter from Admiral BOSCAWEN, to the Rt. Hon. Mr. Secretary PIT,
dated Namure, Gabreuse-Bay, 26th July, 1758.
I Will not trouble you with a particular detail of the landing and siege, but
cannot help mentioning a particular gallant action in the night between the
25th and 26th instant: The boats of the squadron were in two divisions detached
under the command of captains Laforey and Balfour, to endeavor either to take
or burn the Prudente of 74 guns, and the Bienfaisant of 64, the only remaining
French ships in the harbor; in which they succeeded so well, as to burn the
former, she being a-ground, and take the latter, and tow her into the N. E.
harbor, notwithstanding they were exposed to the fire of the cannon and
musketry of the island battery, point Rochefort, and the town, being favored
with a dark night. Our loss was inconsiderable, 7 men killed and 9 wounded.

I have given the command of the Bienfaisant to Captain Balfour, and the Echo,
a frigate to Captain Laforey; Mr. Affleck, and Mr. Bickerton, lieutenants, who
boarded the Bienfaisant, succeed those gentlemen in the Aetna fire-ship, and
Hunter sloop.

I have only farther to assure his Majesty, that all his troops and officers,
both sea and land, have supported the fatigue of this siege with great firmness
and alacrity.

An account of the guns, mortars, shot, shells, etc. in the town of Louisbourg
found upon the surrender of the town to his Majesty's forces, under the command
of his Excellency major general AMHERST.
Iron ordnance, mounted on standing carriages, with beds and quoins. 36
pounders 38 Iron ordnance, mounted on standing carriages, with beds and quoins.
24 pounders 97 Iron ordnance, mounted on standing carriages, with beds and
quoins. 18 pounders 23 Iron ordnance, mounted on standing carriages, with beds
and quoins. 12 pounders 16 Iron ordnance, mounted on standing carriages, with
beds and quoins. 8 pounders 10 Iron ordnance, mounted on standing carriages,
with beds and quoins. 6 pounders 28 Iron ordnance, mounted on standing
carriages, with beds and quoins. 4 pounders 6 Mortars, brass, with beds. 12
Inches 3 Mortars, brass, with beds. 9 Inches 1 Mortars, brass, with beds. 6
Inches 3 Mortars, iron, with beds. 12 Inches 6 Mortars, iron, with beds. 11
Inches 4 Mortars, iron, with beds. 9 Inches 1 Muskets, with accoutrements. 7500
Powder, whole barrels 600 Musket Cartridges, 80,000 Ditto balls, Tons 13 Round
shot, 36 1607 Round shot, 24 1658 Round shot, 12 4000 Round shot, 6 2336 Grape
hot, 36 239 Grape hot, 24 134 Grape hot, 12 330 Grape hot, 6 130 Case shot, 24
poundrs. 53 Double-headed shot, 24 poundrs. 245 Double-headed shot, 12 poundrs.
153 Shells, 13 inches, 850 Shells, 10 inches, 38 Shells, 8 inches, 138 Shells,
6 inches, 27 Lead pig, Tons, 12 Ditto sheet, Tons, 12 Iron of sorts, Tons, 6
Wheel-barrows, 600 Shovels, -- wood, 760 Ditto, -- iron, 900 Pick-axes, 822
Iron crows, Large 22 Iron crows, Small 12 Iron wedges, 42 Hand mauls, 18 Pin
mauls, 12 Masons trowels, 36 Hammers, 36 Axes, 18

This is all that the Commissaries have as yet found, but there is undoubtedly
more not yet accounted for.


