AN EPISTLE TO THE National Meeting OF FRIENDS, IN DUBLIN, Concerning good
ORDER and DISCIPLINE in the CHURCH.

Written by JOSPH PIKE.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted, and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, 1757.

AN EPISTLE TO THE NATIONAL MEETING, etc.
My dearly beloved Friends, and Brethren,
HAving been for some Time under a deep and mournful Sense of the States of
many of the Churches of Christ, a weighty Concern came upon my Spirit, to
communicate some of those Things to you which came under my Consideration, and
I could not be easy until I had given up to do it; and as I foresee what I
shall write will be long, and the longer by commemorating the Dealings of the
LORD with us in this Nation, as well as by writing some Things new and old: So
therefore, I desire you will bear its Length, it being, in Probability, the
last Time that ever I shall write to you, for I am but weak in Body, and ill
able to write at this Time; and, in all human Prospect, not likely to continue
long in this World. But however that may be, Oh! says my Soul, that the Lord
will be pleased to keep and preserve me near to himself to the End, that so in
the End of my Time, I may attain to that everlasting Rest, that the ELDERS, who
have gone before me, are already entered into.

And now, my dear Friends, I herewith send you the Salutation of my endeared
Love in our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, which remains as fresh and fervent
with me now in old Age, as in my Youth, more especially to you that travel in
Spirit, and are zealously concerned for the Welfare and Prosperity of SION, you
are as near and dear to me as ever, and I have Unity with you, in the Covenant
of Love and Life, whether you are old or young, rich or poor, for in this Love
it is that we are bound up together in the Bundle of Life, being baptized by
one Spirit into one Body, and in this Love which proceeds from the Spirit, the
true Unity of the Church is kept up and maintained in the Bond of Peace,
whereby the whole Body is edified together in love, which you know is a
stronger Bond and Tie than all outward Laws, Creeds, or Confessions of Faith
without it.

And besides this Gift of the HOLY SPIRIT, which CHRIST has given us for our
Salvation, he has given additional Means and Assistances conducive to that
great End; thus he has afforded us the HOLY SCRIPTURES for our Information,
Edification and Comfort, through the Spirit. He has sent us his Ministers and
Messengers, whom he has furnished with the immediate Power of his Word: He has
gifted ELDERS to oversee, advise and admonish us, and, by his holy Spirit, he
has moved upon both Ministers and Elders, to give forth and leave us holy
Instructions, for keeping godly Order and Discipline in the Churches of CHRIST,
to be as an Hedge and Fence about us for our Preservation (so far as Means can
do) in this Unity of the Spirit, as well as to keep us from the Inroads of the
Enemy, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
who goes about continually seeking whom he may devour.

Our gracious LORD has done all this for us in our Day and Time, as he did
formerly, so that we may truly say with that holy Prophet Isaiah, who spoke
from the Mouth of the Lord, saying, What could have been done more to my
Vineyard that I have not done in it. And I pray God it may not be said of many
of us now as he said to Israel then, viz. Wherefore, when I looked that it
should bring forth Grapes, it brought forth wild Grapes. Isa. 5. 4.


Now, my dear Friends, that which bears the greatest Weight upon my Spirt at
this Time, is, relating to godly Order and Discipline in the Churches of
Christ: And though I well know that you, who have retained your first Love to
God, and have kept your Habitations in his holy Truth, do not want any
Information of mine to convince you of the Necessity and Service thereof; yet,
as out of the Abundance of the Heart: the Mouth speaks, so out of the
abundant Concern I feel upon my Spirit for the Prosperity of Truth, I beseech
you bear with me while I ease my Mind, if it but prove of the least Benefit to
the Younger in your Meeting, by stirring up the pure Mind by Way of
Remembrance; for notwithstanding I am very sensible that some of you do want
but little stirring up to your Duty, respecting Discipline, yet I believe many
others do. Neither do you want to be convinced that our Women's, as well as
Men's, Meeting for Discipline, were first set up by the Movings of the LORD's
Power, through that worthy and faithful Elder GEORGE FOX; and also, that the
Authority of these Meetings is to be kept up and maintained therein, you are
living Witnesses thereof, because the LORD has often owned your Services in
them by the Overshawdowings of his glorious Power.

Exodus 18. 4.
You know also, that in the first Institution of these our Men's Meetings, the
Members of them were to be faithful Men, who were to rule and govern for the
LORD, Men fearing GOD, and hating Covetousness, agreeable to those in the
Apostles Times, whom the HOLY GHOST had made Overseers in the Church of CHRIST;
yet this does not exclude honest minded young Men from being admitted to sit in
those Meetings as Learners, who, growing in Truth, may at length come to have
their spiritual Senses exercised, so as rightly to discern between Good and
Evil, and Things that differ, though at first they may not see into Things so
clearly as the faithful Elders did, yet as they grow in Truth, and follow them,
as the Apostle Paul advises, the Lord in due Time will reveal such Things unto
them. I can speak this from my own Experience; likewise, in a more general Way,
as there are, and always will be, different Degrees of Growth in the Members of
the Church of CHRIST, yet as all are growing in Truth, and drawing one Way, and
aiming at the same Thing, namely the Honor of the LORD, and Prosperity of his
holy Truth, there will be a general Condescension and Submission to one
another, but more especially to godly Elders and Overseers; here the Phil. 3.
15.
strong and Self-will of Man is kept out, and the Unity of the Spirit, in an
heavenly Harmony, maintained in those Meetings, as well as among the whole
Body, or Church of CHRIST.

And while Things remained in this Order, the true Watchmen for CHRIST, those
Elders, were good Examples to the Flock themselves; they diligently watched
them, lest the Enemy should steal in upon them; and when at any Time he made an
Appearance, they gave the Alarm to the Flock to beware of the Devourer: Thus,
if any Thing did appear contrary to Truth, of what Kind soever, then presently
(without Delay) those true Watchmen did endeavor to put a Stop thereto; then
it was that Things went well in general in the Churches of CHRIST. I could
enlarge abundantly upon the good Effects of it, but stop myself, and in a few
Words say, That then the Disorderly were dealt with in due Time, according to
the Nature of their Offenses, and for their Good: And if they could not be
reclaimed, they were set in their Places, Truth cleared, and they made as
Examples to others, and then those Examples in some Measure became a Terror to
such who were inclined and ready to follow their disorderly Steps, by which
Means many, I believe, were deterred there from: And thus holy Discipline was
kept in its right Channel, and, above all, the LORD was pleased to own those
Services with his heavenly Power.

But alas! alas! The State of Things continued in this Condition but a few
Years before the Enemy of all Righteousness made Attempts to break down the
Fence of Discipline, which had been set up by the Power of GOD, and even
prevailed on some, who had been as leading Elders and Ministers, to be
concerned therein (such who once knew better Things) but had departed from
their first Love to Truth, and Zeal for it; these Men, with their libertine
Company in our bordering Nation, did rise up against that Man of GOD, G. Fox,
who had been made the Instrument, in the Hand of the LORD, to set up good Order
and Discipline; they levelled their Rage and Malice against him in particular,
with those who had kept their first Love in general: But their chief End was to
lay waste, and destroy this good Order and Discipline, and leave every one to
do as they pleased, and would have no Bounds set, with this plausible Pretense,
that all must be left to the Light in their Consciences, and Friends must wait
until they are convinced, that such and such Things were contrary to Truth,
though even many of the Things they went into, the Light of CHRIST led the true
Followers of it out of, and to testify against, in the Beginning. This was
pleasing Doctrine to Libertines; it took with them, and they made use of it,
and thereupon went into wrong Liberty, as Height, Pride, Fashions of the World,
Stiff-neckedness, Strife, Centention, and so unruly, that they would not submit
their Differences to Friends, with many other Things contrary to Truth, too
long to enumerate; and yet all this under a Pretense of Christian Liberty, and
that they were not convinced by the Light in their Consciences to the contrary.
In short, the Rebellion and Confederacy (against good Order in the Church) was
very great and strong, and in some Places they set up separate Meetings; but
the LORD brought a Blast upon that Spirit, and they came to nothing, as a Body
of People; yet notwithstanding this, the Seeds, which they had sown in this
Time of undue Liberty remained, and still remain amongst many, in some Places,
and in this Time it was that some of those Seeds were brought into this Nation,
by Examples from them, and in particular Height and Finery in Apparel and
Household Stuff, with some other Things, of which I am presently to speak.

Though I was but a young Man then, yet an Eye and Ear Witness of many of those
Things, having been at several of the Meetings in England, wherein this
libertine Spirit raised Contention, and then I clearly saw the Tendency
thereof, that it would, if possible, lay waste the whole Heritage of GOD, and I
bore my Testimony against it, as convenient Seasons and Opportunities offered.

I have written after this Manner to show how good Order and Discipline was set
up and established in a general Way, and what Spirit it was that opposed it
then, and I greatly fear the same Spirit is at work now, in this Nation, though
in a different Appearance, not by their opposing all Discipline in a general
Manner as they did, but by breaking of Minutes, and weakening the Hands of the
Faithful, who are zealously concerned in Spirit for the Promotion of Truth, and
keeping up the Discipline thereof, in its right Line.

Now, in opening these Things, I find I shall be still led on in an historical
Manner, and therefore desire your Patience, and though it tend not to the
Information of you faithful Elders in Israel, who know them already, yet it may
be to the Younger, by commemorating the kind Dealings of the LORD toward us,
and stirring up the pure Mind in them, and that none of us may be ungrateful to
him, for all the Benefits and Labor that he has bestowed upon us.

I have already said, that some of the Seeds, which that libertine Spirit had
sown, were brought over into this Nation, and particularly that of Height and
Finery in Apparel and Household Furniture, etc. And by exampling one another,
they came to a great Height at last, though not to that Degree, as in the other
Nation, but we are going fast into them.

Now, upon this Occasion, I must revive the Memory of that Worthy Elder William
Edmundson, of this Nation, whose Memory and Labors live, and are sweet to the
upright in Heart, and who (as most of you well know) was eminently instrumental
in the Hand of the LORD, not only in a powerful Ministry by Word and Doctrine,
but also for establishing and maintaining good Order and Discipline in the
Churches of CHRIST. He zealously and with undaunted Courage stood up faithfully
for the LORD and his Cause, and opposed all false Liberty, in its first
Appearance, and was, to my certain Knowledge, much grieved, when he saw it
growing in this Nation, and faithfully bore his Testimony against it, without
Favor or Affection, and though he did so, and that many Epistles and Minutes
went forth from our Half-year Meeting, against that libertine Spirit of Height,
Pride, and other Things, that had grown upon us, yet all did not prove fully
effectual, until at last the LORD blessed his unwearied Endeavors, with Success,
as a chief Instrument in the Hand of GOD, for putting godly Discipline in due
and close Execution, and by which Means a Stop was put to that Spirit, in great
Measure, until he was taken from us, and it is now about out Thirty Years since
the LORD raised up and spirited many godly Elders to join with him, as one Man,
in this Work of Reformation, and thereupon Epistles were given forth from
Half-years Meetings, which named Abundance of Superfluities, in Apparel, House
Furniture, garnishing of Houses, etc. with numerous other Things relating to
Conversation and Behavior, and running greedily after the Things of this
World, too long to enumerate, and which may be seen in those Minutes, and for
the more effectual performing this Work, they directed us to choose out right
spirited Friends, who had a Concern upon them for the Prosperity of Truth, and
putting away all those Things that were as Nuisances in the Church, to visit
every particular Family, to see, inspect and advise accordingly, as they saw
Occasion for it.

Now, about this Time, the LORD had also raised a Concern in the Minds of the
faithful Elders, in most Parts of this Nation, and, with them, had likewise
been preparing the Hearts of a younger and middle aged Generation, to join in
this Work, and when those Epistles and Minutes came down to this Province,
there was a general Assent in the Minds of Friends to comply with the Advices
they gave us, as seeing the Necessity of it; and indeed I must confess, I
believe that we, in this City of Cork, were at that time as much concerned to
take the Advice as any in the Nation; for though our Wives and Children dressed
pretty plain, yet many of them wore rich costly Apparel, though of grave Colors,
and many of our Houses were furnished with diverse Superfluities, that were not
agreeable to the Plainness of Truth, and as Truth (I am satisfied) led into, in
the Beginning.

However, so it was that the LORD touched the Hearts of those also, and they
joined Heart and Hand to the Work, in first cleansing their own Houses and
Families from these Things, and after that, as Elders were appointed according
to the Advice of the Half-year's Meeting to visit Families, so some of those,
the Younger, were appointed amongst the rest; but I well know it was very hard
for some them to give up to it, as thinking the Service too weighty for them,
but having a Concern upon their Spirits, that the Work should go on, they at
last complied, though in a Cross to their own Wills, they went in much Weakness,
Fear and Trembling, but the LORD (I testify) was with and strengthened them in
the Service. I write this for the Encouragement of all honest hearted young
Persons, such who are concerned in Spirit for the Prosperity of Truth, and that
think themselves very weak, and thereby are too backward in such Services,
which the faithful Elders in the Church of GOD shall think them measurably
capable of.

It is with me to let the Younger know how Friends proceeded in their Visits;
and this I do, in order to stir up their Minds by Way of Information and
Encouragement. The Visiters chosen first met together, and, in the Love of GOD,
without Partiality, examined one another, how far they stood clear themselves,
relating to the Things about which they were going to advise others; and, after
due Examination, proceeded thus: When we came to a Family, we sat down with
them, and first waited a while upon the LORD, and then, as it arose in the
Minds of any, we principally in the first Place directed them to the Gift of
the LORD's Spirit in themselves, as that by which alone they could grow in the
Truth, and which would lead them in outward Things, agreeable thereto, as to
Conversation, Behavior and Plainness of Apparel and Speech, etc. as it led our
Elders in the Beginning; and that although these Things were very commendable in
their Places, yet told them, they would not do of themselves, except the Heart
was also right in the Sight of the LORD: And having spoken what was in our
Minds, according to the State of the Family we visited (sometimes all together,
and sometimes particularly apart, as we saw Occasion for it) we then came to
the Minutes from our Half-year's Meeting, and spoke particularly to them.

And this I may tell you of a Truth, that in all those Visits we made in this
City at that time we met with no Opposition or Contradiction in any one Family
or particular Person, that I remember, but a general Condescension in all, and
sometimes a free and open Confession of Things that had been amiss, and that in
great Tenderness, with Hopes of Amendment for the future; so that the Visiters
and Visited had great Satisfaction in that Service; and this I may further tell
you, above all, the LORD owned our Service, by favoring us with his holy Power
therein, so that in some Families, where Things were well, the LORD
overshadowed us by his living Presence, and melted us down together, as into
one Lump; May my Soul never forget those Times, while I have a Day to live in
this World!

Now, after those Visits were over in this City, in convenient Time most of
those Visiters here did accompany some other faithful Elders in the Province,
and they went through it, visiting the Families of Friends, like as they had
done in this City, which had much the same Effects as here, there being a
general Condescension to comply with the Desire of the Half-year's Meeting; and
accordingly, in Time, there was (I think I may say) a pretty full and effectual
Reformation in this Province in outward Things that had been amiss, and which
that Meeting desired might be put away) and I understood the like Success
attended that Service in other Parts of this Nation; and thus Things stood for
several Years, and there was great Unity among Friends of this Province in
particular, as well as in general throughout the rest of the Kingdom, and the
LORD was pleased therewith, which he manifested oftentimes by the Overflowings
of his divine Power in the Meetings of Friends.

I confess, my dear Friends, my writing after this Manner looks rather like an
History or Narrative than an Epistle, but I desire you will bear with me, it
being to magnify the loving Kindness of the LORD in (rehearsing) his Dealings
with us, and for the Information and Encouragement of the Younger, that they
may follow the Steps of the worthy Ancients, who have followed Christ, and shun
and avoid that libertine Spirit, which I fear is now getting in, and has got in
again, endeavoring to throw down and lay waste what our godly Elders had
reared up by the Power of the LORD, and from this Fear, I am led to query after
this Manner.

Is there not (some) in Being, who not only saw those Times of outward
Reformation, but also heartily joined therein, by putting away out of their
Houses and Families those Superfluities in Fineness of Apparel and Household
Furniture, etc. I am satisfied there are. Or is there any who, since that Time,
have owned that Concern, and for a Time stood zealous for the Plainness of
Truth? I am persuaded there are. And now I query, is there any of late Times,
of both Sorts, who have lost that former Zeal, and suffered or permitted some
of the same or greater Superfluities in Apparel and Dress to be worn by their
Children, and in their Families; and likewise have suffered or permitted as
fine or finer House Furniture and Garnishing to come into their own Houses, or
their Childrens, which I am satisfied they might have prevented, by zealously
standing against it; and moreover, have they not connived at others that have
gone into such Things? I fear there are such.

Now, by these and the like Means, and by taking Examples from one another, the
Seeds of Height, Pride and Vanity, have grown and spread more (among us) than
ever they were before that Time of Reformation, to the Wounding and Grieving of
the Souls of the upright in Heart. Oh! Friends ( Friends) I have this to say to
you, from the Movings of the Spirit of the LORD in my Heart, how will you
answer it in the Day of Account? You, I say, that by your Easiness and
Luke-warmness, have let in those offensive Things upon us again; for as our
blessed Lord said, Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones which believe in
me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that
he were drowned in the Depth of the Sea. What will be the Portion of such as
these? Therefore let all who are concerned herein repent, and do their first
Works, before it be too late. Mat. 18. 6.


Again, besides Height, Pride and Fashions, which have (I fear) appeared in too
many with a daring Face, is there not some that have very much lost, or been
ashamed of, the plain Language, both in speaking and writing.

I further query, Are there not some, who have gone into undue Liberty of many
Kinds, and others that would be accounted something, who have gone into
Contentions, Broils, and Differences, (through a covetous and selfish Spirit)
to the Trouble of the Church? I wish there may not. But I cannot well pass by
that evil Spirit of Covetousness without the following Remark. It is an
abominable Evil in the Sight of the LORD, CHRIST himself severely reprehended
it, and cautioned to beware thereof; his holy Apostle called it Idolatry, and
the former Prophets cried out against it; as did in like Manner that worthy
Elder William Edmundson (herein before mentioned) often warning us to beware
thereof; where it takes deep Root in the Heart, it is a merciless devouring
Spirit, not only endeavoring to devour others, but even destroy that Man
himself who gives Way thereto, and very little can stand before it, therefore
beware thereof wherever it appears.

And lastly, besides what I have queried above, I here query in a more general
Manner, Are there not some who were once very zealous, and stood against all
those Things I have mentioned, and if they had kept their Habitations in the
LORD's holy Truth, might have been made serviceable Instruments in his Hand;
and as bright Stars in the Firmament of his Power, and have joined Hand in
Hand, and put Shoulder to Shoulder, in helping the Faithful to keep out those
Things; and by which Means I am persuaded they would in great Measure have been
kept out. I say, Is there not some of those (though I hope not many) that now of
late Years have been faulty in some of those Things themselves, and others who
have stood easy, and unconcerned in Mind, while they have seen and beheld some
that were going into them, and instead of helping the zealous and upright in
Heart, have rather clogged and weakened their Hands, by openly or secretly
abetting the Cause of the wrong Spirited and the Disorderly, so far as they
were able, and thereby have sometimes fended off the Stroke of Justice and
Judgment, in the Way of Discipline (and hindered the Line thereof) from being
stretched over such in due Time, according to the Nature of their Offenses: For
if right Times be not observed, right Services may be lost. Whereas, if true
Discipline had been duly and rightly executed, it might probably have tended to
the Good of such Offenders themselves; as well as the Dettering others from
following their Steps; but, above all, it would have kept up, and established
good Order and Discipline in its right Line in the Church of CHRIST.

The Breaking or Obstructing this right Line of Discipline has (I fear)
produced a partial conniving amongst some; for have not the Easy, Lukewarm,
and Indifferent (who have lost their first Love) daubed with untempered Mortar,
while they have endeavored to skreen and defend the Covetous, and Troublers of
the Church? And, on the other Hand, have not such joined with the lukewarm
Daubers, when they have been justly found Fault withal, and then both Sorts
have been easy with the High, Proud and Libertines, who also in their Turn (as
they had Opportunity) defended the rest; and thus they have strengthened one
another, contrary to that most solemn Charge which the Apostle Paul gave to
Timothy, in Relation to the Management of the Church Affairs, viz. I charge
thee (says he) before GOD, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the elect Angels,
that thou observe these Things, without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by Partiality, 1 Timothy v. 21. Such as these are Men for GOD, and right
Judges for Him. They cannot swerve or be partial to any Party, Person, or even
nearest Relations, for Favor, Affection, or worldly Ends; but as to those who
are easy, lukewarm, partial or cold, or such that are Troublers of the Church
of GOD, and who once knew better Things, I have this in my Heart to say (if
there be any such, as I fear there are) the LORD's Controversy is against them,
whether they pretend to be Teachers of others, or as Elders, and he will
dreadfully plead with such above others, for they may not only have their own
Blood to answer for, but also the Blood of others; therefore repent in Time,
before it be too late. If any one shall think me too sharp in what I write, I
may tell them it is no pleasing Work to me, for I do it in a Cross to my own
Will, but the Day calls for plain Dealing, and I must discharge my Conscience.

But as for you, my dear Friends, who have retained your first Love to GOD, and
have stood zealous for the LORD and his Truth, whether you are Ministers or
Elders, young or old, what I write touches you not; therefore I verily believe
you will not be offended at it, for you can discern from what Spirit I write:
But notwithstanding I have enumerated so many hurtful Things which have
prevailed upon some that have been unwatchful, yet I hope none will mistake me
so far as that thereby I mean the Generality of Friends, which I am far from
doing; for I believe, and know, that the Lord has still a faithful People in
this Nation, which I hope he will preserve to the End.

Moreover, I have this in particular to say to you that go mourning under the
Burden of those Things I have mentioned, be not too much discouraged though some
of your Brethren, that should have helped you, have left you, it was so of old;
remember that great Servant of the LORD, Moses, how often he was brought into
great Straits, by Oppositions he met with from rebellious Israel, yet the LORD
stood by him, and carried him through to the End. Remember the Prophets,
Elijah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah, with others, who sometimes thought they stood
alone, yet the LORD stood by them, and likewise carried them through. Remember
Paul, who said to Timothy upon Occasion, that no Man stood with him, and all
they of Asia turned from him, and he oftentimes met with great Opposition and
Discouragements, yet the LORD stood by him, and carried him through: These may
be as Examples and Encouragements to you; therefore slack not your Hands, be
not dismayed because of Oppositions and Discouragements you meet withal 2 Timothy
1. 15.
stand your Ground, and be zealous for the LORD and his Testimony, and though
you cannot do all you desire, yet do all you can for him, and the LORD will
stand by you, as he did by them formerly.

Dear Friends, there is another Thing of great Consequence that I have not yet
mentioned, which has done abundance of Mischief in the Church, and that is the
Fondness and Indulgence of many Parents to their Children, in giving them their
own Way and Wills so long, until the Root of Evil has grown and spread itself
forth into many evil Branches, and at length they have been so alienated from
Truth and Friends, that some of them have run quite out. I could enlarge
abundantly upon the evil Effects of this fond Indulgence, but that I have been
so large already on other Matters, and that we have so many Minutes against it.

However I say, that though some godly Parents have discharged their Duty to
their Children, which has not had the desired Effect, yet they will be clear of
their Blood; but I believe too many have not performed their Duty, by which
Neglect their Children have taken wrong Liberty, and fallen into hurtful
Things; such Parents must be accountable for it in the Day of the LORD.

I have already spoken of admitting young Men into Men's Meetings, but have this
to add (not as your Director) but as believing it is what Truth will lead all
right spirited Friends into in every Quarter, viz. To be very careful not to
admit of any unless they come under these following Qualifications. First, They
should be sober and orderly in their Conversations. Secondly, they should be
plain, and exemplary in their Habit, Apparel and Dressing, likewise no Tatlers.
And thirdly, that so far as Friends can have a Sense of their Spirits, that
they will be condescending to godly Elders, and not either in their Words or
Spirits likely to oppose them, for I have observed in my Time, that some, who
have been admitted, without these Qualifications, have in Time proved great
Troublers of the Church, especially if they have had fluent Tongues, which I
have beheld in some Places (in my former Travels,) to the Grief of my Soul.

Another Thing I may observe to you, that we have a great many young and
middle-aged Men amongst us, who are orderly, in their Conversations, and also
wish well to the Prosperity of Truth, and yet are (as I may term it) either
indolent, or too much encumbered in the Things of this World, and thereby are
backward in coming up into that Service for Truth, which otherwise they might
be capable of, were their Spiritual Senses rightly exercised, but by their
being so backward their Senses grow (as it were) dull, for want of Use, and I
believe it will become the Duty of godly Elders in all the Meetings where such
are, to stir them up to mind the Gift that is in them, or if Need be, even to
rouse them up to their Duties, as well for their own Good, as the Service they
may have for the Truth.

And now, dear Friends, I am come near to as End of this very long Epistle, and
though I have been thus large already, yet one Thing more, bears Weight upon my
Mind, and I could not be easy without touching upon it, which if it shall only
tend to a Caution of the Younger, my End will be answered; and that is relating
to the close Joining in Familiarity with any dark opposite and unruly Spirits;
you know we have Minutes against it; and the Apostle Paul was of the same Mind,
when he advised to have no Company with any who obeyed not their Word, by that
Epistle, 2 These. iii. 14. 16. yet in that Case advises not to count such as an
Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother, but positively commands, in the Name of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to withdraw from every Brother that walked disorderly
and not after the Tradition received of the Apostle, etc. 2 These. iii. 6. and
likewise to have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but
reprove them.

Now, if any of those who walk orderly, and are in Fellowship with Friends, do
contract a very intimate and unnecessary Familiarity with Persons of dark or
opposite Spirits, I believe it will have these following bad Effects. First, It
may rather strengthen them in that Spirit, than help to reclaim them from their
Opposition. Secondly, It may harden them in Prejudice against those that cannot
do the same. Thirdly, It may be of ill Example, and tend to the further Hurt of
others, who are inclined to follow the Steps of the Unfaithful. But beyond all
this, in my Time I have observed, that even the Orderly themselves have been
greatly hurt, at last some of them lost thereby, for having these Opportunities
of frequent Conversation together; and by the continual buzzing Things against
the Faithful, the Orderly have in length of Time lent an Ear to them, whereby
Surmises and Jealousies have been begotten, then Hardness and Prejudice have
entered; and lastly, a joining in Confederacy with dark Spirits against those
who have nothing more in their View than the Honor of the LORD, and Good of
Souls; and by this very Means (even to my own certain Knowledge) many who (at
first) were orderly and honest minded, were caught in this Snare in the Time of
the Separation, and some taken in the same in this Nation also: Therefore, I
hope the Orderly will observe our Minutes and the Advice and Commands of the
Apostles, and if they have Occasion (as they may often) to converse with any of
the other Sort, to keep upon their Watch, and carry toward them, as to such
who are under Admonition, for I am sure Truth will lead thereto.

And now I shall conclude, in much brotherly Love, your dear Friend,

JOSEPH PIKE.


