An addition to the Book, Entitled, THE Spirit of the Martyrs REVIVED. It
being a short Account of some remarkable Persecutions in New England;
especially of Four faithful Martyrs of Our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, who
suffered Death at Boston.
Rev. 12.11. And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of
their Testimony; and they loved not their Lives unto the Death.


IN the Year 1651, John Clarke, Obadiah Holmes and John Crandall, called
Anabaptists, were proceeded against in Boston Colony for their Faith and
Practice in Religion, by Imprisoning, Fining, and Whipping; Obadiah Holmes was
Whipped Thirty Lashes, several of his Friends being present, among the rest John
Spur and John Hazel, who as they were attending the Prisoner back to the
Prison) took him by the hand in the Marketplace, and praised GOD for his
Courage and Constancy, for which they were fined each of them Forty Shillings,
or to be Whipped; they refused to pay the Money, but some of their Friends doing
it for them they were dismissed. Which may be seen in Daniel Neals History of
New England, Vol. I. Page 279, etc.

The People called Quakers, came to Boston about five Years after, and were
also proceeded against, by Imprisoning, Fining and Whipping, but in a more
barbarous and cruel Manner: But these Punishments proving insufficient to keep
them out of their Government: They proceeded to make many Laws, annexing many
and grievous Punishments, 'till it came to cutting off Ears and Banishment upon
pain of Death, and putting to Death: As it is partly Recorded in Daniel Neals
History of New England, Vol. I. but more fully in George Bishop's History of
New England Judged.

The Law of Banishment on pain of Death, was in these Words, ( D. Neals Hist
Page 306.) This Court does Order and Enact, That every Person or Persons of the
accursed Sect of the Quakers, which is not an Inhabitant of, but is found
within this Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where no
Magistrate is at Hand, by any Constable, Commissioner, or Select-man, and
conveyed from Constable to Constable until they come before the next
Magistrate, who shall commit the said Person or Persons to close Prison, there
to remain without Bail until the next Court of Assistants where they shall have
a legal Trial by a special Jury; and being Convicted to be of the Sect of
Quakers, shall be Banished upon pain of Death; and that every Inhabitant of
this Jurisdiction being Convicted to be of the aforesaid Sect either by taking
up, publishing, or defending the horrid Opinions of the Quakers, -- or by
taking up their absurd and destructive Practices, viz denying civil Respects to
Equals, and Reverence to Superiors, and withdrawing from our Church
Assemblies, and instead thereof frequent private Meetings of their own, or by
adhering to, or approving of any known Quaker, -- or condemning the Practice of
proceeding of this Court against the Quakers -- Every such Person upon
Examination and legal Conviction before the Court of Assistants, shall be
committed to close Prison for one Month, and then, unless they choose
voluntarily to depart this Jurisdiction, shall give Bond for their good
Behavior, and appear at the next Court of Assistants, where continuing
Obstinate, and refusing to retract and reform the said Opinions and Practices,
shall be Sentenced to Banishment upon pain of Death: And in Case of the
aforesaid voluntary Departure, not to remain nor again to return into this
Jurisdiction without the allowance of the Counsel first had and published, on
penalty of being Banished on pain of Death.

Four Quakers suffered Death by this Law as follows,

William Robinson, Marmaduke Stephenson and Mary Dyar, coming from Rhode Island
in the Month of June, 1659, were apprehended and Banished on pain of Death.

When they were Sentenced to Banishment, a Handkerchief was put into William
Robinson's Mouth, to keep them from speaking for themselves; and when he yet
attempted to speak the Court in a great Rage caused him to be carried down, and
Twenty cruel Stripes to be given him with a threefold corded Whip with Knots on
his naked Back. They were allowed till the fourth of September to depart the
Jurisdiction, the two Men went into Piscataqua, and the Woman to Rhode Island.
But coming again to Boston, they were all Three apprehended about the middle of
October, and were demanded why they came again into the Jurisdiction being
Banished on pain of Death? To which they answered severally, and declared, the
ground or cause of their coming was of the LORD, and in obedience to Him; the
Governor said, he desired not their Death, and that they had Liberty to speak
for themselves, why they should not be proceeded with as to the giving Sentence
against them; yet he bid the Jailer, take them away; but the next Day, after
their Worship was done being heated by their Priest, they brought them before
the Court again and the Governor speaking faintly, as a Man whose Life was
departing, said to this effect, "We have made many Laws, and endeavored by
several Ways to keep ye from us, and neither Whipping, nor Imprisoning; nor
cutting off Ears, nor Banishment upon pain of Death, will keep ye from among
us" and further said, "I desire not your Death," yet presently he said, "Give
ear, and hearken to your Sentence ot Death," and then made a stop, whereupon
William Robinson desired that he might be suffered to read a Paper amongst
them, Which was a declaration of his call to Boston, and the Reason why they
stayed in the Jurisdiction after Sentence of Banishment, which the Governor
denied, and said in a great (...) "You shall not read it, nor will the Court
hear it read." -- Then William Robinson laid it on the Table amongst them, and
it was handed to the Governor, who read it to himself, and after he had done
said, " William Robinson, you need not keep such an ado to have it read, for
ye spoke yesterday more than here is Written," -- William Robinson said nay,
and desired again it might be read, that all the People might hear the Cause of
their coming, and of their stay there, and wherefore they were put to Death,
but it was (...) suffered to be read -- And the Governor said to him. Hearken
to your Sentence of Death. You shall be had from whence you came, and from
thence to the Place of Execution to be hanged on the Gallows (...) you are Dead.

Then Marmaduke Stephenson, was called, and the Governor said to him, If you
have any thing to say you may speak, who standing (...) and giving no Answer,
the Governor pronounced the Sentence of Death against him, saying. You shall be
had to the Place from whence you came, and from thence to the Gallows, and
there be hanged till you are dead: Which being pronounced, Marmaduke Stephenson
said, Give ear, ye Magistrates, and all who are guilty, for this the LORD has
said concerning you, who will perform his Word upon you, That the same Day ye
put his Servants to Death, shall the Day of your Visitation pass over your
Heads, and you shall be cursed forevermore: The Mouth of the LORD of Hosts has
spoken it, therefore in Love to you all, I exhort you to take Warning, before
it be too late, that so the Curse may be removed, for assuredly, if you put us
to Death, you will bring innocent Blood upon your own Heads, and swift
Destruction will come upon you. -- After he had spoken this he was had to
Prison.

Then Mary Dyar was called, and the Governor said to her to this Effect, --
Mary Dyar, You shall go to the Place from whence you came, and from thence to
the Place of Execution, and be hanged there until you are dead. -- To which she
replied, the Will of the LORD be done: The Governor said, Take her away
Marshal: She answered, Yea, Joyfully shall I go. -- They were all kept in
Prison while the Twenty-seventh of the same Month; and after their Worship was
done, their Drums were beat, and these Three were taken out of Prison, who
parted from their Friends in Prison full of the Joy of the LORD, who had
counted them worthy to suffer for his Name; and having embraced each other in
fervency of Love, and gladness of Heart, and peace with GOD, like innocent
Lambs: -- The Captain with his band of Men lead them to the Place of Execution,
and caused the Drums to beat when they attempted to speak, and placed them near
the Drums for that purpose, that when they spoke the People might not hear
them, who in great Multitudes flocked about them; his Drums he would not cease
Beating, though he was desired while they were speaking, which ( George Bishop
says) was a barbarous Inhumanity never heard of before in the English Nation;
-- William Robinson went cheerfully up the Ladder to the very top above the
Gallows, and spoke to the People, that they suffered not as evil doers, but as
those who testified and manifested the Truth, and this was the Day of their
Visitation, and therefore desired them to mind the Light that was in them, the
Light of CHRIST of which he testified, and was now going to seal it with his
Blood. -- The Executioner put William Robinson to Death, and after him
Marmaduke Stephenson, who died both of them full of the joy of the LORD, and
steadfast in Him. The Officers were so Barbarous that when their dead Bodies
were cut down they fell to the Ground, with which the Skull of W. Robinson was
broke, his Body being stiff'ere it was cut down, their Shirts were ripped off
with a Knife, and their naked Bodies cast into a Hole of the Earth, which was
dug without any covering; and when some Friends came, and desired their
Bodies to be put in Coffins, the Executioner suffered them to wrap them in
Linen, and to put them into the Hole again, but to take them away he suffered
them not, saying, he was strictly charged to the contrary.

Their Priest Wilson, made a Ballad of these Martyrs.

As the People returned from the Executions of these Martyrs, a Drawbridge
rose up and the one end of it fell upon many, and some were hurt, especially a
wicked Woman who reviled the Servants of the LORD at their death, whom it
greatly bruised, and her flesh Rotted from her bones; and her stink was so
noisome that People could hardly come at her; in which miserable Condition she
died.

Three also of Priest Wilson's Grandchildren died in a short Time after.

William Robinson's Paper to the Court, before he was sentenced to death,
concerning the Cause of their coming into those Parts, for which they were put
to death, which the Governor in a great Fury said, should not be read, and that
the Court would not hear it. Which was in these Words:
ON the 8th Day of the 8th Month, 1659. in the after part of the Day, in
Traveling betwixt Newport in Rhode Island, and Daniel Gold's House, with my
dear Brother, Christopher Holder, The Word of the Lord came expressly to me,
which did fill me immediately with Life and Power, and heavenly Love, by which
he constrained me, and commanded me to pass to the Town of Boston, my Life to
lay down in his Will, for the accomplishing of his Service, that he had there
to perform at the day appointed. To which heavenly Voice I presently yielded
Obedience, not questioning the Lord how he would bring the Thing to pass, being
I was a Child, and Obedience was demanded of me by the Lord, who filled me with
living Strength and Power from his heavenly Presence, which at that Time did
mightily overshadow me, and my Life at that Time did say, Amen, to what the
Lord required of me, and had commanded me to do, and willingly was I given up
from that Time, to this Day, the Will of the Lord to do and perform, whatever
became of my Body: For, the Lord had said unto me. My Soul shall rest in
everlasting Peace, and my Life shall enter into Rest, for being obedient to the
God of my Life. I being a Child, and durst not question the Lord in the least,
but rather willing to lay down my Life, than to bring Dishonor to the Lord: And
as the Lord made me willing, dealing gently and kindly with me, as a tender
Father by a faithful Child whom he dearly loves, so the Lord did deal with me
in ministering his Life unto me, which gave and gives me Strength to perform
what the Lord requires of me; and still as I did and do stand in Need, he
ministered and ministers more Strength, and Virtue, and heavenly Power and
Wisdom, whereby I was and am made strong in God, not fearing what Man shall be
suffered to do unto me: Being filled with heavenly Courage, which is Meekness
and Innocence, for the Cause is the Lord's that we go in, and the Battle is the
Lord's; and thus says the Lord of Hosts, the mighty and the terrible GOD, Not
by Strength nor by Might, nor by Power of Man, but by my Spirit, says the Lord
of Hosts, I will perform what my Mouth has spoken, through my Servants whom I
have chosen, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights. Friends, the God of my
Lite, and the God of the whole Earth, did lay this Thing upon me, for which I
now suffer Bonds near unto Death: He by his a mighty Power, and everlasting
Love, constrained me, and laid this Thing upon me; and truly I could not deny
the Lord, much less resist the Holy One of Israel. Therefore all who are
ignorant of the Motion of the Lord in the inward Parts, be not hasty in judging
in this Matter, lest ye speak evil of the Things ye know not: For, of a Truth,
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth commanded me by his Spirit, and spoke unto me
by his Son, whom he has made Heir of all Things, and in his Life I live, and
in it I shall depart this Earthly Tabernacle, if unmerciful Men be suffered to
take it from me. And, herein I rejoice, that the Lord is with me, the ancient
of Days, the Life of the suffering Seed, for which I am freely given up, and
singly do I stand in the Will of God; for to me to live is (...) and to die is
Gain; and truly I have a great Desire and Will to die herein, knowing that the
Lord is with me, whatever ignorant Men shall be able to say against me; for the
Witness of the Spirit I have received, and the Presence of the Lord, and his
heavenly Life does accompany me, so that I can say in Truth, and from an
upright Heart, Blessed be the Lord God of my Life, who has counted me worthy,
and called me hereunto, to bear my Testimony against ungodly and unrighteous
Men, who seek to take away the Life of the Righteous without a Cause, as the
Rulers of Massachusetts Bay do intend, if the Lord stop them not from their
intent. Oh! hear ye Rulers, and give Ear and listen all ye that have any Hand
herein, to put the Innocent to Death: For, in tne Name, and Fear, and Dread of
the Lord God, I here declare the Cause of my staying here among you, and
continuing in the Jurisdiction after there was a Sentence of Banishment upon
Death, as ye said, pronounced against me without a just Cause, as ye all know
that we that were banished, committed nothing worthy of Banishment, nor of any
Punishment, much less Banishment upon Death. And now ye Rulers, ye do intend to
put me to Death, and my Companion, unto whom the Word of the Lord God came,
saying, Go to Boston with thy Brother W. Robinson: Unto which Command he was
obedient, who had said unto him, he had a great Work for him to do: Which Thing
is now seen, and the Lord is now a doing of it; and it is in Obedience to the
Lord, the God of the whole Earth, that we continued amongst ye, and that we
came to the Town of Boston again, in Obedience to the Lord, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, in whose Hand your Breath is: And will ye put us to Death for
obeying the Lord, the God of the whole Earth? Well, if ye do this Act, and put
us to Death, Know this, and be it known unto you all, ye Rulers and People
within this Jurisdiction, That whosoever has a Hand herein, will be guilty of
innocent Blood, And not only upon your Selves will ye bring innocent Blood, but
upon the Town and the Inhabitants thereof, and every where within your
Jurisdiction, that had the least Hand therein. Therefore be instructed, ye
Rulers of this Land, and take Warning betimes, and learn Wisdom before it be
hid from your Eyes.

Written in the Common Goal, the 19th of the 8th Month, 1659, in Boston. By one
who fears the Lord, who is by ignorant People called a Quaker, and unto such
am I only known by the Name of William Robinson, yet a new Name have I
received, which such know not.


William, Robinson, a faithful martyr who was banished upon Pain of Death and
robbed, and tortured with cruel Whipping, and afterward condemned to die with
his Fellow Sufferers, Marmaduke Stephenson and Mary Dyar, who, all three, Hand
in Hand, like innocent Lambs, were led away, with the Soldiers guarding, and
the Drums beating (that the People might not hear them speak) to the Place of
Execution; where, by the Priests, Rulers, and Professors, they were cruelly
Murdered for the word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus: Eleven (...) before
their Death, this Salutation of his Love to his fellow Prisoners, proceeded
from him as follows:
MY dear Brethren and Sisters, to whom my Love abounds, I am filed with pure
Love unto you all, dear Lambs, feel it in your own Lives, and receive it into
your own Hearts as new Oil; for truly the Fear of the Lord is our Strength, and
the Blessing of the Lord is out Portion, which the Lord does daily give unto
us, Blessed be his Name forever. Oh! let us all keep in Lowliness, and
Holiness, and Meekness, and tender Love one toward another, which is the Seal
and Witness that the Lord is with us; where the Lord forever keep us staid on
him, to receive our daily Bread, which satisfies the hungry Soul. Dear
Friends, Brethren and Sisters, this I am constrained to let you know, how
mightily the Love of the Lord our God abounds in my Heart, and from my Life
toward you all; it runs forth as a living Stream, refreshing the Spirit and
Life within us all, and every one as you feel it, and according to your
Measures receive it into your Hearts, to the refreshing and strengthening of one
another. Dear Lambs, I was the first that the Lord God our heavenly Father, did
lay this Thing upon, for which I now suffer Bonds near to Death, from the first
Day until now; the Weight of the Thing was laid upon me from the Lord God, in
Obedience to his holy Will and Command, I gave up, in which Obedience the Arm
and Power of the Lord has been, and is with me to this Day; and the Thing
which the Lord has said unto me, from the Beginning of it to this Day, which
still remains with me, that my Life must accomplish the Thing, and by it must
the Powers of Darkness fall, and yet will they seek and labor to take it from
me, and through much Difficulty and Bustling will they be suffered, to the Glory
of our God, and to the Rejoicing of the Elect. So, my dear Brethren and
Sisters, my Love and Life feel in your own Hearts, for I am full unto you all
in heavenly Love, and my Life is ever with you: The Lord forever keep us all,
as we are now, to the Glory of his Name, Amen. This was I moved to write unto
you all, my dear Brethren and Sisters, my fellow Prisoners, that have any Part,
or do partake with me herein. Your dear Brother, in holy and heavenly Joy, and
true Love and Peace,

WILLIAM ROBINSON.
Written in the Hole of the Condemned, in Boston Goal, in New England, the
first Day of the Week, being the 16th Day of the 8th Month, 1659.

Marmaduke Stephenson's Paper of his Call to the Work and Service of the Lord.
Given forth by him a little before he was put to Death, and after he had
received his Sentence.
IN the Beginning of the Year 1655, I was at the Plough in the East Parts of
Yorkshire, in Old-England, near the Place where my out-ward Being was, and as I
walked after the Plough, I was filled with the Love and Presence of the living
God, which did ravish my Heart when I felt is: for it did increase and abound
in me like a living Stream, so did the love and life of God run thorough me
like precious Ointment, giving a pleasant Smell, which made me to stand still;
and as I stood a little still with my Heart and Mind stayed on the Lord, the
Word of the Lord came to me in a still small Voice, which I did hear perfectly,
saying to me, in the secret of my Heart and Conscience, -- I have Ordained thee
a Prophet unto the Nations. -- And at the beginning of the Word of the Lord, I
was put to a stand, being that I was but a Child for such a weighty Matter. So
at the Time appointed, Barbados was set before me, until which I was required
of the Lord to go, and leave my dear and loving Wife, and tender Children: For
the Lord said unto me immediately by his Spirit, That he would be as a Husband
to my Wife, and as a Father to my Children, and they should not want in my
Absence, for he would provide for them when I was gone And I believed that the
Lord would perform what he had spoken, because I was made willing to give up my
self to his Work and Service, to leave all, and follow him, whose Presence and
Life is with me, where I rest in Peace and Quietness of Spirit (with my dear
Brother) under the shadow of his Wings, who has made us willing to lay down
our Lives for his own Name sake, if unmerciful Man be suffered to take them
from us; and if they do, we know we shall have Peace and rest with the Lord for
ever in his holy Habitation, when they shall have Torment Night and Day. So, in
Obedience to the living God, I made preparation to pass to Barbados in the 4th
Month. 1658. So, after some time, I had been on the said Island in the service
of God, I heard that New England had made a Law to put the Servants of the
living God to Death, if they returned after they were sentenced away, which did
come near me at that Time; and as I considered the Thing, and pondered it in my
Heart immediately came the Word of the Lord unto me, saying, Thou know not
but that thou may go thither -- But I kept this Word in my Heart and did not
declare it to any, until the Time appointed. So, after that, a Vessel was made
ready for Rhode Island, which I passed in. So, after a little Time that I had
been there, visiting the Seed which the Lord has blessed, the Word of the Lord
came unto me saying. Go to Boston with thy Brother William Robinson. -- And at
his Command I was obedient, and gave up myself to do his Will, that so his Work
and Service may be accomplished: For, he had said unto me, That he had a great
Work for me to do; which is now come to pass: And for yielding obedience to and
obeying the Voice and Command of the everliving God, which created Heaven and
Earth, and the Fountains of Waters, Do I, with my dear Brother, suffer outward
Bonds near unto Death. And this is given forth to be upon Record, that all
People may know, who hear it, That we came not in our own Wills, but in the
Will of God. Given forth by me, who am known to Men by the Name of

Marmaduke Stephenson. But have a new Name given me, which the World knows not
of, written in the Book of Life.
Written in Boston Prison, in the 8th Month, 1659.

MARY DYAR, when she had parted with her Friends, between whom she came Hand in
Hand joyfully to the Place of Execution, though the Marshal asked her, If she was
not ashamed, to walk Hand in Hand between two young Men? (not knowing her joy
in the Lord) to whom she answered, It is an Hour of the greatest Joy I can
enjoy in this World; no Eye can see, no Ear can hear, no Tongue can speak, no
Heart can understand the sweet incomes and refreshings of the Spirit of the
Lord which now I enjoy. I say after she had parted with her two Friends at the
foot of the Ladder, expecting to die, and saw her two Friends hanging dead
before her Eyes, her Arms and Legs tied, the Halter about her Neck, and her
Face covered with a Handkerchief, which Priest Wilson sent the Hangman, An
Order coming for her Reprieve, (upon the Petition of her Son, unknown to her)
which being read, and the Halter taken off her Neck, she was desired to come
down, but not answering, (in so sudden a Change having given up her self to
die) the People cried, Pull her down; and they were so earnest, she could not
prevail with them to stay a little, while she might consider what to do, but
Ladder and she, they were pulling down together, while the Marshal and others
took her down by the Arms, and had her to Prison; from whence she wrote to the
Authority, when she understood upon what Account she was reprieved, denying the
Reprieve and the Ground of it; and the next Morning tendered her Life again,
for the abrogating of their Law, but some came presently and took her in their
Arms, and sat her on Horseback, and conveyed her fifteen Miles toward
Rhode Island, and then left her with a Horse and Man to be conveyed further, so
she went to Rhode Island But she was afterward put to Death, for but barely
coming into the Jurisdiction of Boston, and being such a one as is called a
Quaker.

Here follows a Copy of the Letter that Mary Dyar sent to the Rulers of
Boston, after she had received the Sentence of Death.
To the General Court now in Boston.
WHereas I am by many charged with the Guiltiness of my own Blood; if you mean
in my coming to Boston, I am therein clear, and justified by the Lord, in whose
Will I came, who will require my Blood of you, be sure, who have made a Law to
take away the Lives of the innocent servants of God, if they come among you,
who are called by you, Cursed Quakers; although I say, and am a living Witness
for them and the Lord, that he has blessed them, and sent them unto you:
Therefore be not found Fighters against God, but let my Counsel and Request be
accepted with you, To repeal all such Laws, that the Truth and Servants of the
Lord may have free Passage among you, and you be kept from shedding innocent
Blood, which I know there are many among you would not do, if they knew it so
to be: Nor can the Enemy that stirs you up thus to destroy this holy Seed,
in any Measure countervail the great Damage that you will by thus doing
procure: Therefore, seeing the Lord has not hid it from me, it lies upon me,
in Love to your Souls, thus to persuade you: I have no self ends, the Lord
knows, for if my Life were freely granted by you, it would not avail me, nor
could I expect it of you, so long as I should daily hear or see the Sufferings
of these People, my dear Brethren and Seed, with whom my Life is bound up, as I
have done these two Years; and now it is like to increase, even unto Death, for
no evil Doing, but coming among you. Was ever the like Laws heard of, among a
People that profess Christ come in the Flesh? And have such no other Weapons,
but such Laws, to fight against Spiritual Wickedness withal, as you call it?
Woe is me for you Of whom take you Counsel? Search with the Light of Christ in
you, and it will show you of whom, as it has done me and many more who have
been disobedient and deceived, as now you are; which Light, as you come into,
and obeying what is made manifest to you therein, you will not repent, that you
were kept from shedding Blood, though it were from a Woman: It Is not mine own
Life I seek (for I choose rather to suffer with the People of God, than to enjoy
the Pleasures of Egypt) but the Life of the Seed, which I know the Lord has
blessed; and therefore seeks the Enemy thus vehemently the Life thereof to
destroy, as in all Ages he ever did: Oh! hearken not unto him, I beseech you,
for the Seed's sake, which is one in all, and is dear in the sight of God;
which they that touch touch the Apple of his Eye, and cannot escape his Wrath;
whereof I having felt, cannot but persuade all Men that I have to do withal,
especially you who name the Name of Christ, to depart from such Iniquity, as
shedding Blood, even of the Saints of the Most High: Therefore let my Request
have as much Acceptance with you (if you be Christians) as Esther had with
Abasuerus (whose Relation is short of that that is between Christians) and my
Request is the same that hers was; and he said not, that he had made a Law, and
it would be dishonorable for him to Revoke it; but when he understood that
these People were so prized by her, and so nearly concerned her (as to Truth
these are to me) as you may see what he did for her: Therefore I leave these
Lines with you, Appealing to the faithful and true Witness of God, which is one
in all Consciences, before whom we must all appear; with whom I shall eternally
Rest, in everlasting Joy and Peace, whether you will hear or forbear: With him
is my Reward, with whom to live is my Joy, and to die is my Gain, though I had
not had your forty-eight Hours warning, for the Preparation to the Death of
Mary Dyar.

And know this also, That, if through the Enmity you shall declare your selves
worse than Ahasu^rus and confirm your Law, though it were but by taking away
the Life of one of us, That the Lord will overthrow both your Law and you, by
his righteous Judgments and Plagues poured justly upon you, who now whilst you
are warned thereof, and tenderly sought unto, may avoid the one, by removing
the other: If you neither hear not obey the Lord not his Servants, yet will he
send more of his Servants among you, so that your End shall be frustrated, that
think to restrain them ye call cursed Quakers from coming among you, by any
Thing you can do to them, yea, verily, he has a Seed here among you, for whom
we have suffered all this While, and yet suffer; whom the Lord of the Harvest
will send forth more Laborers to gather (out of the Mouths of the Devourers of
all Sorts) into his Fold, where he will lead them into fresh Pastures, even the
Paths of Righteousness, for his Name's Sake:s Oh! let none of you put this good
Day far from you, which verily in the Light of the Lord I see approaching, even
to many in and about Boston. which is the bitterest and darkest professing
Place, and so to continue, so long as you have done* that ever I heard of; let
the Time past therefore suffice, for such a Profession as brings forth such
Fruits an these Laws are. In Love and in the Spirit of Meekness I again beseech
you, for I have no Enmity to the Persons of any; but you shall know, that God
will not be mocked, but what you sow, that shall ye reap from him, that will
render to every one according to the Deeds done in the Body, whether good or
evil: Even so be it, says

Mary Dyar.
A Copy of this was given to the General Court after Mary Dyar had received the
Sentence of Death, about the 8th or 9th Month, 1659.




WIlliam Leddra, having been several Times cruelly whipped, and endures fore and
long Imprisonments in Boston, was also sentenced unto Banishment upon Pain of
Death; and he coming again to Boston to visit his Friends in Prison, was soon
laid hold of and thrust into Prison and there kept Night and Day, locked in
Chains, during a cold Winter, and in the first Month, 1660 1, being brought
before the Court, was told, That he was found guilty, and that he was to die:
William said, What evil have I done? they said, his own Confession was as good
as a thousand Witnesses: William demanded, What was that? They answered, That
he owned those that were put to Death, and that he would not put off his Hatt
in Court, and that he would say thee and thou: Then said William, You will put
me to Death for speaking English, and for not putting off my Clothes One
replied, A man may speak Treason in English. Let us come to the Thing in Hand
then answered William, Is it Treason to say Thee and Thou, to a single Person?
To which none replied. But one demanded. Whether he would go for England?
William answered, I have no Business there. Then, said one of them, pointing to
the Gallows, you shall be hanged or he should go that Way. William replied,
What will ye put me to Death, for breathing in the Air of your Jurisdiction i
-- And for what you have against me, I appeal to the Laws of England (said he)
for my Trial, and if by them I am guilty, I refuse not to die -- To this they
would not agree; but sought to persuade him to recant of those errors, and to
conform, and submit; to which he answered, What, to join with such Murderers as
you are? then let every Man that meets me say, -- Lo, this is the Man that has
forsaken the Goa of his Salvation.

At the last. General Court he had Liberty given him to go for England, or to
go out of that Jurisdiction; and promising so to do and come there no more, he
might save his Life. He answered, I stand not in mine own Will, but in the Will
of the Lord; if I may have my Freedom, I shall go, but to make you a Promise I
cannot.

William Leddra was sentenced to Death, and returned to Prison in order to
Execution; and on the 14th of the same Month, after their Lecture was ended,
the Governor came, and a Guard of Soldiers to the Prison; and William having
taken his Farewell of Wenlock Christison, his Fellow Prisoner, and the rest of
his Friends then in Bonds for the same Testimony, went forth to the Slaughter,
willingly resigned up to the Will of the Lord, whom the Guard encompassed
round, to prevent his Speech with Friends, or his speaking with any; which
Edward Wharton perceiving, and how the Guard strove to prevent his speaking
with William, he said, Friends, what will you show your selves worse than
bloody Bonner's Brood? What, will you not let me come near my Friend, before
you kill him? Chl said one, Edward, it will be your Turn next. The Captain
said, If you speak a Word, I will stop your Mouth He was brought to the
Gallows, and his Arms pinioned; where he took Leave of his Friend Edward
Wharton as he was about to ascend the Ladder, to whom he said, All that will be
Christ's Disciples, must take up the Cross. And standing where the Guard
ordered him, with an exceeding fresh and lively Countenance, he spoke to the
People, and said, For bearing my Testimony for the Lord, against Deceivers, and
the deceived, am I brought here to suffer.

There was present one Thomas Wilkie, a Stranger, having heard in the Town,
that William might go away if he would, and being moved with pity, believing he
was Innocent; he cried aloud, begging that his Life might be spared, and also
called, to William, to come down from the Gallows, saying, You may go away if
you will; but the Captain said, It is no such Matter; and William looked upon
him, and said, Friend, know that this Day I am willing to offer up my Life, for
the witness of Jesus.

As they were putting the Halter about his Neck, he said, I commit my righteous
Cause unto thee, O God. And as the Ladder was turning off, he cried, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit.

William Leddra being dead, his Body was cut down and E. Wharton, and three
Friends more, catched it in their Arms, and laid it on the Ground, until the
Executioner had stripped it of the Clothes, and they were suffered to lay it in
a Coffin, and bury it where they thought mere, which it is like the Outcry of
the Country led unto, because of the Executioner's drawing the Bodies of
William Robinson, and Marmaduke Stevenson, very barbarously by the Legs, into
the Hole that was dug for them, after their Shirts were ripped off.

While William Leddra was suffering Death, Wenlock Christison was brought
before the Judgment Seat, the Governor and Deputy Governor being (...) present,
they said to him, Except you will renounce your Religion, you shall surely die.
Wenlock (being nothing affrighted) said, Nay, I shall not change my Religion,
nor seek to save my Life; neither do I intend to deny my Master; but if I lose
my Life for Christ's Sake, and the Preaching of the Gospel, I shall save it.
And after a few more Words he was sent to Prison again, there to be kept till
the next Court. -- The Court being sitting in the 3d and 4th Months, 1661, a
Spirit of Confusion was mingled amongst them, so that they were in a Manner
broken; -- the sense of the innocent Blood spilt, and the Consequences thereof
being so weighty on some of them, that they could not consent to the putting of
this Man to Death; insomuch that the Governor (John Endicot) was wrath, and
went away from the Court discontented, and kept from it the Space of two Days,
but he was prevailed with at length to come, they having assured him that if he
would, they would proceed against Wenlock according to their Law: So, they
being agreed, before the Judgment Seat Wenlock was brought; the Governor asked
him, What he had to say for himself, why he might not Die? -- I have done
nothing worthy of Death, replied Wenlock, if I had, I refuse not to die. Thou
art come in amongst us, said one, in Rebellion, which is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and ought to be punished -- I came not in Rebellion, said Wenlock,
but in Obedience to the God of Heaven, not in Contempt to any of you, but in
Love to your Souls and Bodies, and that you shall know one Day, when you and
all Men, shall give Account of the deeds done in the Body. Take heed, said he,
for you cannot escape the righteous Judgments of God.

Then said their Major General Adderton, You pronounce Woes and Judgments, and
those that are gone before you pronounced Woes and Judgments, but the Judgments
of the Lord God are not come upon us yet. -- Be not proud, replied Wenlock,
neither let your Spirits be lifted up. God does but wait till the Measure of
your Iniquity be filled up and that you have run your ungodly Race, then will
the Wrath of God come upon you to the uttermost: -- And as for thy Part, it
hangs over thy Head, and is near to be poured down upon then, and shall come as
a Thief in the Night, suddenly, when thou think not of it.

[ G. B. page 482, There is an Account that this Adderton was killed by a Fall
of his Horse, and of many more untimely Deaths, which befell the most cruel
Persecutors, and also their Teachers, that encouraged thereunto]

By what Law, said Wenlock, will ye put me to Death? They replied, We have a
Law, and by our Law you are to die So laid the Jews of Christ, replied Wenlock;
Who (...) you said he, to make that Law? One of them said, We have a Patent,
and are Patentees, judge whether we have not Power to make Laws. Wenlock
replied again. How, have you Power to make Laws repugnant to the Laws of
England? Nay, said their Governor. Then, answered Wenlock, you are gone beyond
your Bounds, and have forfeited your Patent, and this is more than you can
answer. But they owning themselves the King's Subjects, Wenlock said, So am I,
and for any Thing I know, am as good as you if not better and therefore, seeing
they and he were Subjects to the King, he demanded to be tried by the Laws of
his own Nation; and also said, I never heard nor read of any Law in England to
hang Quakers. The Governor replied. There was a Law in England to hang Jesuits.
Wenlock answered. If you put me to Death, it is not because I go under the Name
of a Jesuit, but a Quaker, therefore, said he, I do appeal to the Laws of my
own Nation. But the Court proceeded to try him, and he was brought in guilty;
whereupon the Secretary said. Wenlock Christison, hold up your Hand. I will not
said Wenlock; I am here, and can hear thee. Then he cried, Guilty, or not
Guilty? I deny all Guilt, replied Wenlock, for my Conscience is clear in the
Sight of God, The Governor answered, The Jury has condemned thee. But he
answered, The Lord does justify me; who art thou that condemnest? Then they
voted as to the Sentence of Death, and were in a Manner confounded, for several
could not vote him guilty of Death. Then said the Governor, I could find it in
my Heart to go Home, being in a Rage, Wenlock cried. It were better for thee to
be at Home than here, for thou art about a bloody Piece of Work Whereupon the
Governor put the Court to vote again, which they did, notwithstanding there
were some that would not consent. But the Governor stood up and said, You that
will not consent, record it And like a Man drunk, he said, I thank God I am not
afraid to give Judgment. Wenlock bristison, hearken to your Sentence, You must
return to the Place from whence you came and from thence to the Place of
Execution and there you must be hanged until you be dead, dead, dead Wenlock
Christison called out and said, The Will of the Lord he done, in whose Will I
came amongst you, and in his Council I stand, feeling his eternal Power, that
will uphold me until the last Gasp, I do not question it. Moreover he cried
saying, known be it unto you all, that if you have Power to take my Life from
me, that my Soul shall enter into everlasting Rest and Peace with God, where
you yourselves shall never come, and if you have Power to take my Life from me,
the which I do Question; I do believe you shall never more take Quakers Lives
from them (note my Words) do not think to weary out the living God, by taking
away the Lives of his Servants. What do you gain by it? For the last Man that
you put to Death, here are Five come in his Room: And if you have Power to take
my Life from me, God can raise up the same Principle of Life, in Ten of his
Servants, and send them among you, in my Room; that you may have Torment upon
Torment, which is your Portion; for there is no Peace to the Wicked, says my
God. Then the Governor said, take him away to Prison. -- Where he rested in
Peace, and quietness of Spirit. -- But within a Week after, came a Marshal, and
Constable to him in the Prison, with an Order from the Court, for his, and
other Friends enlargement; who said, they were ordered by the Court, to make
them acquainted with their new Law. -- Then Wenlock said, what means this? have
you a new Law? Yes, said they, then you have deceived most People, said
Wenlock; why said they? because, said Wenlock, they did think the Gallaws had
been your last Weapon; have you got more yet? Yes said they, Read it, said he;
which they did. Then said Wenlock, Your Magistrates said, your Law was a good
and wholesome Law made for the Peace and Safeguard of your Country: What, are
your Hands now become Weak? the Power of God is over you all. Then the Prison
Doors were set open, and Twenty seven more besides Wenlock, were turned forth;
whereof two were stripped to the Waste, and made, fast to Carts-tails, and
Whipped through the Town of Boston, with Twenty cruel Stripes, on their naked
Backs and Shoulders; so into the Wilderness they were driven, by Sword and Club
men, out of that Jurisdiction. Glory, Glory be given to the Lord, over all
says my Soul, who never leaves nor forsakes the Righteous, but redeems his
faithful Ones out of all their Trouble; Praise the Lord all his Saints who are
upon the Rock of Ages; And the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against you, says
Wenlock Christison.

Edward Wharton* who was often cruelly Whipped, and Persecuted other Ways, was
also taken from his own House in Salem, and carried to Boston, and after he had
been kept close Prisoner almost a Year, was (the 11th of the 1st Month, 1660.)
Banished on pain of Death, to depart the Jurisdiction in Ten Days. He replied,
Friends, I have Dealings with some People, it were good for me to have Time to
make clear with all; and then, if you have Power to Murder me you may. The
Governor said, If we give him an Hundred Days it is all one. Edward replied, I
shall not go away; therefore be careful what you do. -- And he afterward wrote
to them, signifying, whereas they had banished him on Pain of Death, he was yet
at home, at his House in Salem, and could not go away, and therefore intimated
to them to take off their wicked Sentence, from him, that he might go about his
Occasions out of their Jurisdiction. John Chamberlain and Robert Harper, and
others, were also banished on Pain of Death.

A Letter was sent from the King to the Rulers of New England, dated the 9th
Day of September, 1661, by which they were inquired to put no more Quakers to
Death. But George Bishop gives Account in his Book, that they were continually
whipped, imprisoned, and their Goods spoiled, in a wonderful, barbarous, and
cruel Manner, exposed to much Cold and Hardship in their Persecutions,
sometimes their Food was kept from them in Prison, and none suffered to come at
them, and not suffered to have Food for their Money, the Ministers stirring up
the Authority to persecute and drive them away; so that in about seven Years,
they suffered more than one Hundred and Sixty Whippings, most of them very
cruelly laid on; one of them, Anne Coleman, being whipped almost to Death. G.
Bishop, page, 430. -- Of which I shall relate one Passage concerning Elisabeth
Hocton, an ancient Woman, who came from England to New England, and went about
visiting in a godly Manner, and was many Times whipped, and cruelly used for
her Pains.

She crying, Repentance, through Part of Cambridge, was by two Magistrates
committed, whose Jailor thrust her into a noisome, stinking Dungeon, where
there was nothing to lie on, or sit on, and kept her there two Days and two
Nights, without helping her to Bread or Water; and because Benanuel Bower, a
tender hearted Friend, brought her a little Milk in this her great Distress,
(wherein she had like to have perished) they cast him into Prison, for
entertaining a Stranger, and fined him Five Pounds. After this cruel Usage, and
her lying two Days and two Nights in this dismal Cell, she was had to Court,
and ordered to be sent out of their Coasts toward Rhode Island, and to be
Whipped at three Towns, ten Stripes at each, by the Way: So, at Cambrdige she
was tied to the Whipping Post, and lashed with ten cruel Stripes, with a
three-stringed Whip, with three Knots at an End; and at Watertown she was laid
on with ten Stripes more, of Rods of Willows; and at Dedham, in a cold frosty
Morning they laid on her aged Limbs ten Lashes more, with exceeding Cruelty, at
a Cart's Tail.

Her Skin and Flesh being thus torn and beaten with the aforesaid Extremities,
they put her on Horse back, and carried her a weary Journey many Miles into the
Wilderness, and toward Night left her there, where many Wolves and Bears, and
wild Beasts used sometimes to set upon living Persons, and many deep Water's to
pass through, and then, as themselves said, they thought they should see her no
more.

But the Lord so preserved her through the Waters, many of which she passed
through with the Peril of her Life, and all other the extreme Inconveniences
of that her Condition, led her through, and up held her weak, bruised Body, and
brought her the next Morning to Town called Reboboth, being neither weary nor
faint, and then to Rhode Island to Friends, where she was refreshed, and gave
Glory to the Lord who had counted her worthy, and enabled her to suffer for his
Name, beyond what her Age and Sex could otherwise reasonably have born. Several
Times after this, she (...) and Boston, and warned them to Repentance, and of
(...) that was coming upon them from the (...) Whippings, and other Cruelties
at their (...)

All this they suffered in New England, besides what (...) other parts of
America. And some were beaten with pitched Ropes; William Brend was beat almost
to Death with a pitched Rope, by the Jailer, at Boston; but such a cry was made
by the People, that the Authority was constrained (for the satisfaction of
them) to set a Paper on the Meeting House Door and other Places, that the
Jailer should be dealt withal the next Court, but it was soon taken down by the
instigation of John Norton their high Priest, for said he, William Brend
endeavored to beat our Gospel Ordinances black and blue: and if he was beaten
black and blue, it was just upon him, and he said, he would appear in the
Jaylor's Behalf, G. B. p 66 John Whiting also gives Account in his Book of
these Persecutions, and of the Judgments of God, pronounced by them which were
Persecuted, against the Persecutors; and also (...) of many Judgments of God,
that came on New England afterward.

Whosoever desires to be further informed, may have a large and satisfying
Account of all that is above Written, in said Book of George Bishop, out of
which these Persecutions were taken, which was Printed 1561, and John Whiting,
they being both together in one Book.

Sufferings of Thomas Newhouse.
UPON a Lecture-day at Boston in New England, I was much pressed in Spirit to
go into their Worship-house among them, where I stood silent-until the Man had
done Preaching, then my Mouth was opened to the People with a word of
Exhortation, but through the violence of some of the People was haled to
Prison, from whence, about three Hours after, they fetched me out to the Court,
where I was examined, and so returned to Prison again until the Morning: and
into the Court I was brought again, where they had drawn up a Paper against me,
as they thought, of what I had said the day before; and they said, Come, thou
Vagabond, and hear this Paper read with two Witnesses, their Hands to it, for
we will handle thee: And I said, Read on; Where I stood until they had done.
And they asked me, Whether I owned it, or no: And I said, Yea, every Word, and
would make it good by sound Proof if I might have Liberty to speak. But they
cried, Away with him; and some took me by the Throat, and would not suffer me
to answer to it, but hurried me down Stairs, to the Carriage of a great Gun,
which stood in the Marketplace, where I was stripped, and tied to the Wheel,
and whipped with Ten-Stripes, and then loosed, and tied to a Cart's-tail, and
whipped with Ten more to the Town's End; and at (...) at a Cart's-tail, with
other Ten, and at Dedham, at a Cart's-(...) with Ten more, and then sent into
the Woods.

T. Newhouse.


Concerning the Difference between the former Quakers, that suffered
Persecutions, and these in this Day.
IF we may know them by their Fruits, they were two Manner of People, the first
often going to Meeting Houses, and bearing a godly Testimony after the Speaker
had done, also teaching and exhorting at other public Places, for which they
suffered much Persecution, which they took joyfully, being upheld by the Power
of God. And these, only holding Meetings of their own in a formal way, as other
Professors do, having a form of Godliness and not the Power and Life thereof,
as the suffering Quakers had; minding earthly Things, being adulterated and
living in the Friendship of the World, which is Enmity with God. Jam 4.4. So
these not having the Spirit as the first Quakers had, are no more to be
compared with them, than a dead Tree may be compared to a living Tree.

Written in the Year 1758. JOSEPH BOLLES.



