MITE INTO THE TREASURY; OR, Some serious REMARKS on that solemn and
indispensable Duty of duly attending Assemblies for divine Worship, incumbent
upon all Persons come to Years of Understanding (especially the Professors of
TRUTH) whilst favored with Health, Strength and Liberty; together with some
due ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Neglect thereof; as also a Word of Consolation to
such sincere hearted Friends, as are rendered incapable of personally attending
them, by reason of Old Age, some bodily Disorder, or Confinement, etc.

To which is subjoined, An EPISTLE to FRIENDS of Knaresborough Monthly Meeting.

By DAVID HALL.

For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
Midst of them.

MATT. xviii. 20. I beseech you, therefore, Brethren, by the Mercies of God,
that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable Service.

ROMANS xii. 1. Not forsaking the Assembling of ourselves together, as the Manner
of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the Day
approaching.

HEB. x. 25. LONDON Printed: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted by B. FRANKLIN, and D.
HALL. 1758.

THE PREFACE.
FRIENDLY READER,
MAY it be remembered that when Moses, that eminent and faithful Servant of the
Lord, even the Mediator of the first Covenant, having been, by divine
Commission and Assistance, signally and successfully instrumental in delivering
poor sighing and groaning Israel out of the Egyptian Bondage, and was now
bringing them on their Way toward the Land of Promise, flowing with Milk and
Honey, being right sensible how liable People are (if not truly watchful) who
have been very humble while in Adversity and Affliction, to become careless and
forgetful of the Lord and his Succor in their foregoing Trials, when
Prosperity smiles upon them, gave them the following timely Precautions and
seasonable Charges, worthy of their and our due Observation and Notice, saying,
Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. And
these Words which I command thee this Day shall be in thine Heart. And thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a Sign upon thine
Hand, and they shall be as Frontlets between thine Eyes. And thou shall write
them upon the Posts of thy House, and on thy Gates. And it shall be when the
Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land which he swear unto thy
Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly
Cities which thou buildedst not, and Houses full of all good Things which thou
filledst not, and Wells dug which thou diggedst not, Vineyards and
Olive Trees which thou plantedst not; when thou shall have eaten and be full,
then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the Land
of Egypt, from the House of Bondage. Deuteronomy. vi. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

But alas; though Israel, during the Life of Joshua, and of the Elders that
overlived Joshua, were preserved in some good Degree within the Bounds of good
Order and Moderation, yet too many of the succeeding Generation took undue
Liberties, and Jeshurun, waxed fat, and kicked. Have not we just Cause to fear,
that this is too much the Case with many of the Professors of the blessed Truth
in these Days, wherein so great a Calm and Quiet, I say, in so gracious a
Toleration as is now mercifully enjoyed by us?

We have now a large succeeding Generation coming up in our Society, but too
few of them growing up in the real Work of Regeneration, and Obedience to the
holy Spirit, their professed Principle, whence diverse undue Liberties in
Speech, Habit, and Deportment, quite inconsistent with our said Principle, are
run into. Some are seemingly soaring aloft as into the Air, as though they were
above the Reproofs and Teachings of the meek Spirit of humble Jesus; others are
grovelling as in the Earth, and they are hiding their Talents, though perhaps
wrapped up in a Napkin of seeming or moral Righteousness: Others seem neither
to be on the Wing in the airy Regions, nor yet choked with gaping and grasping
after the Earth, but wrapped up, and, as it were, lulled in that careless State
of Indolence and base Neutrality, somewhat like the Inhabitants of Laish, and
the secure Zidonians, as if they were not accountable Creatures for any
Stewardships, either in Temporals or Spirituals: Others, again, are in the
other Extreme, pursuing the World as if it were their summum Bonum, or chiefest
Good, launching out into Multiplicity of Business, as a Horse into the Battle;
mean while neglecting their respective spiritual Talents, and consequently the
greatest and far most important Business of their Day and Generation, and for
want of minding the Directions of the great PILOT, even the Spirit of Truth
they profess, they are often driven into, and (as I may say) miserably
shipwrecked upon, that scandalous Rock of Insolvency; and although some of our
great, bustling, extensive Tradesmen may not, perhaps, as to their outward
Affairs, miscarry, yes, alas! they are often so much involved and taken up with
the Hurries, Projects and Cares about Things of this Life, that they prove
lamentably deficient in those most material and weighty Particulars, viz. In
working out their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and in glorifying God
in their respective Services in the Church, and in their own Families.
Notwithstanding these last Observations, there are, I hope, some, though too
few, extensive Tradesmen, who are very careful that their Hearts may have Room
in them for the pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, and that
the Temple may not be unsuitably crowded with Money Changers and their Tables;
but that their Hearts (though sometimes necessarily busy in Commerce) may be
preserved really a House of Prayer. These religious Tradesmen are truly worthy
of double Honor, remarkable for their prudent and Christian Conduct and
Fortitude, not suffering Mammon to be their Master, but keeping him in his
Place, at a proper Distance, as their Servant; so they are in a Capacity to
serve God, their Lord and Master, and chiefest Sovereign, and also his Church
and People in their respective Places. This Kind of honorable Tradesmen, being
above all other Things concerned to improve their Talents of Grace, dare not
easily omit attending their religious Meetings, either on the First-days, or
other Days of the Week; yea, some have even shut up their Shops during the
Meeting-time on the Weekdays, lest their Shops should have shut them up, and
debarred them from the Enjoyment of Christ's Company with the two or three met
in his Name: May not we account these like faithful Abraham, who said to his
Servants, upon a weighty Occasion, Abide ye here, and I and the Lad will go
yonder and worship, and come again to you. When this Sort of highly valuable
Tradesmen are occasionally called Abroad, and are riding their Circuits among
their Chapmen, they endeavor, I believe, to get to as many Meetings, even on
the Weekdays, as they well can: These have good Ground to hope for and expect
the Blessing of kind Providence to attend their honest Endeavors.

We have also Ground to fear, that too many under our Name keep and frequent
unsuitable Company, taking more Pleasure in the Society of Wine-bibbers, at the
Tavern or Alehouse, than with the two or three at the Meeting, waiting for the
Appearing of blessed Jesus.

Moreover, another afflicting sorrowful Disorder, and, I fear, a growing Evil,
in these Times of Liberty and Ease from Persecution, is Mixt-Marriages, which
generally usher confusion, Trouble and Perplexity into Families and the
Society, much grieving, and almost (if not quite) breaking the Hearts of good
Parents, so that many anxious Fathers and Mothers, observing with Sorrow the
wide Courses which many are taking, do, in Effect, frequently revolve in their
pensive Hearts that mournful Query of solicitous Rebekah of old, -- If my Child
or Children do as such and such have done, what good shall my Life do me!

Again, it is much to be feared there are some (I wish I had Ground to say there
are none) guilty of that absolute and absurd Contradiction of professing the
peaceable Spirit of meek Jesus, the King of Salem, and the Prince of Peace, and
at the same time are litigious and contentious Persons, seeming to delight in
Strife, and striving for Mastery, either in the Church, or among Neighbors,
or, it may be, sometimes both. -- The Eyes of the People have long been, and
still are, upon us, and considering the Extent of our high Profession, have,
and do make, their Remarks upon us, and can quickly observe when our Conduct is
consistent with our professed Principles, and when repugnant thereto, either in
Habit, Speech or Deportment. Have not some been ready to make the following
Observations? Such an one is an honest primitive Quaker, his or her Dress,
Address, and whole Conduct, agree to what he or she professes. But such and
such are modern, fashionable Quakers, they profess the Spirit, yet it is plain
they live after the Flesh; so they are but Nominal Quakers.

Now inasmuch as the Continuance of the above mentioned Errors (and all others)
are owing to, and caused by, Men's slighting and disregarding the spiritual
Appearance and refining Work of Christ in their Hearts, who is now come in
Spirit to put an End to Sin, and to finish Transgression, to make
Reconciliation, to bring in everlasting Righteousness; and inasmuch as he has
promised his blessed Presence to those who, though very few in Number, meet in
his Name, I have in much good Will wrote the following Lines for the
Encouragement of the Faithful and Diligent, and for the rousing, if possible,
the Remiss and Negligent, to that highly necessary and profitable Duty of
rightly attending religious Meetings, where he has promised to be in the Midst
of such Meeters: So that Men's neglecting being the Cause of these their
continued Disorders (as Christ said, -- While Men slept, an Enemy did Mischief
in the Field) this being discontinued, and a vigilant Diligence being used in
the Room thereof, that evil Cause being thus taken away, the evil Effects
thereof might consequently cease.

But in case, after these my honest Endeavors and Labors of Love, I should be
blamed for making the following Remarks, or producing particular Instances of
the bad Effects commonly attending the forsaking of religious Meetings, as
though I exposed the Weakness subsisting in our Society; I assure thee,
friendly Reader, I am far from upbraiding any of my Friends with their
Failures, but in good Will to the Cause, and the Souls of all, I found myself
engaged to write something on these Neglects and Disorders, and the pernicious
Consequences thereof, which long before I penned these Lines, were too
notorious, being plainly exposed by the very Persons themselves, found in the
Errors spoken of here, and in the subsequent Lines; so that the Remarks made,
and the Instances produced of the Deficiencies of any of the Professors of
Truth, proceed not from ill Will, or were hidden Things heretofore, and now
brought to Light, but alas! have long been conspicuous and noted by many. For
notwithstanding the Prophet of old was commanded on this wise, Isa. lviii. Cry
aloud, and spare not, etc. yet I should be very sorry from hence to presume to
say or write any thing against the real Interest of the good and great Cause,
or to the Prejudice of any Man's Person, Condition or Character, but
compassionating my Brethrens Ailings and Failings, am rather ready to cry out,
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Ashkelon.

In much Humility and good Will to the Souls of all, I cast my Bread upon the
Waters, and subscribe myself,

Thy really affectionate Friend, DAVID HALL.

TO ALL THE PROFESSORS OF THE BLESSED TRUTH, Wheresoever the subsequent LINES
may come.
Dear FRIENDS,
IN the universal Love of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which ever breathes
out Glory to God in the highest, on Earth Peace and good Will toward Men, I
cordially salute you, and therein take Freedom humbly to offer the following
Observations to your solid Consideration.

Notwithstanding, with much Comfort, I firmly hope we have a large Number in
our Society, in a good Degree, faithful to the Principle of Truth we profess,
giving Diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, walking circumspectly
and honestly as in the Day, both with regard to their moral and religious
Conversation, though not without their respective Exercises on diverse Accounts,
not daring to forsake the Assembling of themselves together whilst capable; for
the Encouragement of all such beloved Brethren and Sisters, wheresoever their
Lots are cast (to whom my Heart is nearly knit in the Unity of the Spirit, and
the Bond of Peace) it springs up in my Mind to remind them of the Apostle's
tender Advice, Gal. vi. 9. Let us not be weary in Well-doing, for in due Season
we shall reap if we faint not. James v. 7.8. Be patient therefore, Brethren,
unto the Coming of the Lord. Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious
Fruit of the Earth, and has long Patience for it, until he receive the early
and latter Rain. Be ye also patient; stablish your Hearts; for the Coming of
the Lord draws nigh. 1 Pet. i. 13. Wherefore gird up the Loins of your Mind;
be sober, and hope to the End for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at
the Revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. xvi. 13.14. Watch ye, stand fast in the
Faith, quit you like Men; be strong. Let all your Things be done with Charity.

Yet nevertheless, for the Sake of some, yea, alas! (with Regret be it spoken)
many of the Professors of the blessed Truth, who through Coldness,
Lukewarmness, Inconsiderateness, Indolence, and the Want of a true Hunger and
Thirst after Righteousness (occasioned by their neglecting the Work and
Guidance of the Spirit of Truth they profess) are become very remiss and
negligent in this highly and necessary and reasonable Duty of attending
religious Meetings on Weekdays, as well as First-days, I find it to rise in my
Heart, in much Good Will* to recommend the following Observations to their
serious Notice and Consideration.

1 st. Insomuch as Almighty God, our faithful and righteous Creator, has
placed us in a Station absolutely dependent on him, in whom we live, and move,
and have our Being, in whose Hand and Disposal we, our Lives, Health, Abilities
both of Body and Mind, our Preservation, our Protection, Support, Favors,
Privileges and Enjoyments, both Temporal and Spiritual, are, we being, as it
were, Tenants at Will, having no known Lease of our Time, or Command of any
Thing, we are under most reasonable and close Obligations to behave ourselves
as wholly dependent Creatures, humbly and honestly to pay due Homage and
Obedience to him our gracious and bountiful Sovereign, Lord and Benefactor, for
all his unmerited Favors we enjoy under him, in faithfully answering his
Requirings, in doing justly, loving Mercy, and walking humbly with him; which
three Articles briefly contain all our moral and religious Duties, which none
rightly perform who are negligent in attending Meetings for divine Worship.

2 dly. May it be remembered, that in the preceding Dispensations the Lord God
required of his People, and commanded them strictly to observe diverse
Convocations, and Feast-days; as the Feast of Passover; solemn Feasts and
Fasts, as the Feast of the Tabernacles, of unleavened Bread, of Weeks, of
Solemn-days and Assemblies; in the sincere and devout Observation whereof the
People of God were accepted of him; Joel ii. 15.16. Blow the Trumpet in Zion
(says the Prophet) sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly. Gather the People;
sanctify the Congregation; assemble the Elders; gather the Children, and those
that suck the Breasts: Let the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the
Bride out of her Closet. Zech. viii. 19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the Fast
of the fourth Month, and the Fast of the Fifth, and the Fast of the Seventh,
and the Fast of the Tenth, shall be to the House of Judah Joy and Gladness, and
cheerful Feasts; therefore love the Truth and Peace. But the Neglect and
Slighting thereof displeased God, and turned much to their own Disadvantage, as
being the sorrowful Effect of their Declension, Captivity and Servitude,
through their Disobedience to the Lord. Judah, says the Text, is gone into
Captivity, etc. The Ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn
Feasts: All her Gates are desolate, her Priests sigh, her Virgins are
afflicted, and she is in Bitterness.

3 dly. It Is worthy our serious Notice and Consideration, how acceptable and
pleasing to the Lord the Meetings, Communications, and the very Thoughts of
those that scared him, and what peculiar Regard and tender Respect he had, what
precious Promises he made unto them in those depraved Times, wherein Irreligion
so much prevailed, that the Proud were called happy; yea, they that wrought
Wickedness were set up; yea, they that tempted God were even delivered: Mal.
iii. 16.17. Then (says the Prophet Malachi) they that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another, (whence we may conclude they were met together) and the
Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And they shall
be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that Day when I make up my Jewels; and I
will spare them as a Man spares his own Son that serves him. The Passover was
so strictly enjoined, that it was commanded on this wise, viz. Numb. ix. 13.14.
The Man that is clean, and is not in a Journey, and forbeareth to keep the
Passover, even the same Soul shall be cut off from his People; because he
brought not the Offering of the Lord in his appointed Season: That Man shall
bear his Sin. And if a Stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the
Passover unto the Lord, according to the Ordinance of the Passover, and
according to the Manner thereof, so he shall do: Ye shall have one Ordinance,
both for the Stranger, and for him that was born in the Land.

Yet such was, and now is, the Mercy and Justice of God, that he neither ever
did, nor now does, require any Thing unreasonable or impracticable, for he
condescended to allow a second Passover to such as were necessarily deprived of
appearing at the First, by Reason of Indisposition, through Uncleanness, or
Absence in a Journey afar off.

4 thly. Let us now come to the glorious Dispensation of the Gospel that we
live in, wherein Christ, the Author thereof, our glorious High Priest and
blessed Mediator, himself speaks unto the Churches, who is the complete
Antitype, in whom all the Types, Shadows and Figures concenter; and let it be
with solemn Reverence, and all due Regard, humbly observed, that he has
graciously promised on this wise, Mat. xviii. 20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the Midst of them. Romans xii. 1. I
beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye present your
Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
Service. Heb. x. 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of ourselves together, as the
Manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see
the Day approaching.

Now, dear Friends, have we not some Ground to fear, that so many as under the
Profession of the blessed Truth, who do, whilst in Health and Strength, sadly
neglect the Attending of Religious Meetings, so much encouraged by the Promise
above, are not truly obedient, but neglecting their own Mercies, by so
slighting our glorious High Priest, and his blessed Company, with his two or
three gathered in his Name. Oh! that all the Professors of Truth were rightly
concerned duly to regard the said gracious Promise, with the full Extent and
Conditions thereof; and also to reduce to Practice the Advice of the Apostle, 1
Cor. v. 7.8. Purge out therefore the old Leaven, that ye may be a new Lump; as
ye are unleavened. For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore
let us keep the Feast, not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice
and Wickedness, but with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

May it therefore, I say, be humbly remembered, how this our gracious High
Priest has not only promised his Attendance, and most worthy Company, where
two or three are gathered in his Name (as above) but has also mercifully and
tenderly invited needy Souls unto him, on this wise, Mat. xi. 28.29.30. Come
unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest. Take
my Yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye
shall find Rest unto your Souls: For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light.
And again, his Call is repeated. John vii. 37.38.39. In the last Day, that
great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood, and cried, saying. If any Man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has
said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. But this spoke he of
the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, etc.

5 thly. May it be added to the Premises, how that soon after the breaking
forth of the blessed Truth, after the long and dark Night of Apostasy, our
ancient Friends in the Morning of the Day, finding a conscientious Concern upon
them to decline the Formalities then run into, retired and met together to wait
upon the Lord, to know and witness the fulfilling of that blessed Promise of
Christ to his Disciples, John xiv. 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, He shall teach you all Things, and
bring all Things to your Remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. -- As
they were (we have good Ground certainly to believe) led into this Practice,
and by the same also mercifully regarded and protected therein, through many
and great Sufferings, occasioned by the penal Laws then in Force against those
that dissented from the national Church, established by Law; so that our dear
Forefathers and ancient faithful Friends, conscientiously then attended
religious Meetings, both on First-days and other Days of the Week, under the
Hazard of their Lives, Liberties and Estates; yea, I say, they flocked to
Meetings as Doves to the Windows, though sometimes a good many Miles distant,
and found great Peace in so doing, and the enriching Blessing of God to attend
them, and often their Offspring too: So in Time, as they increased, by the
Direction and sweet Influence of the blessed Spirit, they were engaged to
appoint and settle Mettings here and there, as in the Wisdom of Truth they saw
convenient, both on First-days and other Days of the Weeek; and when they were
hauled from their Meetings to Prisons, they had often precious Meetings there,
and found those Places, as Jacob said of Bethel, on his Pillow of Stone, to be
to them as the House of God, and Gate of Heaven, being made to sing in the
Prison as Paul and Silas did when their Legs were in the Stocks, by the then
secular Powers.

Now, therefore, I beseech all that profess the ever blessed Truth, and
especially those that are remiss in this important and so material a Duty now
before us, duly to remember, and truly consider, how wonderfully the Lord has
wrought for his Church and People, how he has turned the Hearts of Kings, and,
in Effect, has said to them, -- Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no
Harm. What peaceable calm Times have we long enjoyed, with respect to those
violent Storms and rugged Billows of Persecution aforesaid! Are not we now both
tolerated and protected in keeping our religious Meetings! What then will
become of those poor Professors of the unchangeable Truth, who, in this Time of
Tranquillity, and, as I may say, Sabbath Day of Rest from the aforementioned
Probations, are taking their Flight from the refining Work and Baptism of the
holy Spirit they are making a Profession of, into the inordinate Cares or
Pleasures of this World, or into Indolence, Indifferency and Lukewarmness,
touching the vital Part of Religion, so as miserably to forsake (or at least
too much neglect) the assembling of themselves together, in order to worship
and pay due Homage to the bountiful Author of all our unmerited Mercies,
temporal and spiritual!

Insomuch, therefore, as the divine Minister of the Sanctuary and true
Tabernacle, which God has pitched, and not Man, has so reasonably afforded us
such great Encouragement to attend religious Meetings, though consisting of
very few in Number, and has shown so undeniably and indisputably his peculiar
Approbation thereof, by that gracious and special Promise of his vouchsafing to
be present with the two or three that so meet: The same Duty being also urged,
and earnestly recommended by the Apostle to the Believers of his Day, that they
should not forsake the Assembling of themselves together, as the Manner of some
in those Times was, and, alas! of too many in these Days, though so highly
favored: Heb. x. 24, 25. And let us consider, says he, one another, to
provoke unto Love, and to good Works: Not forsaking the Assembling of ourselves
together, as the Manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the
more, as ye see the Day approaching. -- And likewise remembering how the same
Apostle fervently and pathetically addressed the Roman Church, exciting them to
pious and devout Performance of this their reasonable Service, reminding them
of the signal Mercies of God, as a pressing and cogent Argument, moving
grateful and truly considerate Persons to the faithful Performance of their
reasonable Duties to their merciful Benefactor, and the glorious Donor of all
their Enjoyments, expressed his Address on this wise, -- Romans xii. 1. I beseech
you, therefore, (as above hinted) Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye
present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable Service. May we not safely conclude, that the right attending
of Assemblies for divine Worship, is both a Duty acceptable unto God, and
signally advantageous unto our Souls; and that, as this is an indispensable
Duty (whilst we are in Health and Strength, and at Liberty) therefore the
Omission of this weighty Service is of dangerous Consequence. -- Ezra ix. 4.
Then were assembled unto me (says Ezra, that deeply concerned Servant of the
Lord) every one that trembled at the Words of the God of Israel. The true
hearted Quakers then did, and now do (whilst Strength and Liberty do permit)
assemble, in order to obtain Help and Relief from the Lord, to worship him in
Spirit and Truth, to enjoy the sweet and edifying Communion one with another,
as Members of one Body, by feeling the one quickening Spirit from the holy
Head, the living Circulation of the Blood of Christ.

And now, my Friends, may I take Freedom to make the following Remarks.

1 st. It has been objected by some on this wise, That as the Sabbath was but
one Day in the Week commanded and set apart for divine Service, in the Time of
the Mosaic Law, what need so much ado about Weekdays Meetings now? To which
very weak and poor Objection, I shall in the first Place answer thus: Suppose
there had been in that Dispensation no other Day but the Seventh in each Week,
appointed by the Lord, wherein his People should cease from servile Work, and
devoutly and solemnly perform Worship to him; yet in this Gospel Dispensation
we are, or ought to be, brought much nearer to God, and be much more devout and
spiritually minded, according to the Apostle's Testimony, Heb. vii. 19. For the
Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, by the
which we draw nigh unto God. Besides, the Solemnity and holy Convocations,
above mentioned, sufficiently refute the aforesaid very weak Plea and
Objection, which Solemnities were to be observed by the Lord's People in that
Dispensation; the Neglectors whereof were to be taken Notice of, and called to
an Account. What Apology then, I say, shall those make, or how shall they
answer it, who are remiss and negligent in observing and attending the solemn
Meetings and Assemblies in this glorious Gospel Day?

2 dly. Some may perhaps object, and seem to endeavor to excuse themselves in
this Kind of Negligence, and Omission of so necessary and profitable a Duty, as
we are, in much good Will to the Cause of Truth, and the Souls of its
Professors, treating of, by alleging, That their Meeting is so small, or, that
they have no public Minister settled therein, they may perhaps scarce think it
worth their while constantly to attend the same. Answ. Are not there two or
three? If so many, Christ has promised them his blessed Company, if met in a
right Mind, who being the most excellent Minister of the Sanctuary and true
Tabernacle, which God has pitched, and not Man, without whom, the greatest of
instrumental Ministers can do nothing, are of no Service: But this most
powerful, most merciful, and most glorious High Priest, and heavenly Minister,
appears with his People and Flock, according to his gracious Promise; he can
when he pleases, whose Time is the best Time, effectually and suitabiy supply
all the Wants of his true Followers, without instrumental Ministers, (although
we own, and humbly confess, that the Ministry of the Gospel, by and through
Instruments influenced and actuated by the abovesaid all-powerful Minister,
has been, is, and ever will be of singular Service to the Husbandry, Heritage
and Plantation of God, as it is rightly applied) and therefore ought to be
valued in its Place. -- But oh, alas! how do those ungrateful Creatures
undervalue and put a Slight upon our blessed Mediator of this new Covenant, our
Physician of the greatest Value, the Bishop of our Souls, and our Savior, who
has shed his precious Blood, and given his Life a Ransom for us, that in any
wise can find in their Heart to omit the attending even small Meetings, though
without any instrumental Minister, when he has upon most reasonable Conditions
promised his Life-giving Presence there.

3 dly. As the true-hearted and faithful Followers of humble Jesus find it
their indispensable Duty, and peculiar Interest, to attend religious Meetings,
whether they be great or small, whether they have in them instrumental
Ministers, or they have none, both on First-days and other Days of the Week,
they grow and prosper in the Truth, even in the Root of true Religion, and are
very often signally blessed and favored by kind Providence, even in the Things
of this Life, and come up in the real Improvement of their Talents, and
consequently in their respective Services in the Church, enjoying their Peace
whilst in Health, and the Aboundings thereof when on sick and dying Beds;
whilst, on the other hand, those poor unthinking Professors of Truth, who by
neglecting the Work thereof in their own Hearts, become slack and backward in
the attending of Meetings for divine Worship, letting in Reasonings, and
probably the vain Allegations abovesaid, they don't thrive in the true
Religion, and seem also sometimes blasted, as touching their Success in
temporal Affairs, are of little or no Help (but rather Nusances) in the
Society, and often are made to bewail their past Negligence (...) sick and
dving Beds, of which more hereafter.

Diverse remarkable Instances of the peculiar Blessing of kind Providene
attending the Profess^^s (...) Truth, who witnessed the real Work thereof in
their own Hearts, and were obedient to its Requirings, have occurred to my
particular Notice in my Pilgrimage; one whereof I may here mention.

A certain worthy ancient Minister gave, in my Audience, the following
Relation; That in his young Years (having been from his Childhood educated in
the Way of the national Church) being favored with the merciful Visitation of
the Lord, he became uneasy with the traditional Singings and superficial
formalities used in the said Communion, whereupon seeking and enquiring for the
right Way of Worship acceptable unto God, he dropped into a small Meeting of
Friends, wherein no instrumental Ministry (as I remember) was heard that Day;
yet nevertheless the seeking Youth was made contrite, melted, and thoroughly
convinced of the Truth in that silent Meeting. (The like Account I have also
heard concerning the Convincement of some others) And thenceforward,
persevering under an awful Regard to that gracious Hand that had so visited
him, he grew in Grace and the saving Knowledge of God; who being of poor and
low Circumstances, as to Things of this Life, was obliged to labor hard for
his Bread, and, being a Tailor by Trade, was often obliged to work at other
Peoples Houses, yet could not be easy to omit Weekday Meetings, but laying
aside his Work, was engaged to walk often a pretty Way to Weekday Meetings;
yet such was his Diligence and Industry before and after the said Meetings,
that those he worked for desired no Allowance or Abatement for the Time spent
on Account of the said Meetings. Some Time after this he married a young Woman
convinced of the Truth a little while before. Now the Storms of Persecution
rose high, and having now and then a Meeting in his House (being himself in the
ministerial Capacity) they cheerfully suffered the Spoiling of their Goods for
Truth's Sake, and were stripped very bare as to Temporals, having two small
Children, and his Wife with Child of the third; yet keeping faithful, according
to the best of their Knowledge and Ability, and consequently not daring to be
remiss or indifferent in that important Duty of attending religious Meetings,
they were blessed every Way, and their little Oil and Meal were thereby
rendered capable to answer all just Demands, and moreover to make many little
Cakes for the Prophets of the Lord, having all along a Place and House of
Reception and Hospitality for his Messengers to the Day of their Death, which
was in Peace inexpressible.

On the other Hand many, by the wretched Indifferency about spiritual and
religious Matters (though it may be at the same time pretty stanch Moralists,
have become guilty of this miserable Deficiency of neglecting or forsaking the
Assembling themselves, in order to perform divine Worship on Weekdays, and
some have so lamentably been prevailed upon by that Indisposition of
Lukewarmness, or by the surfeiting and choking Cares of this World, the
Deceitfulness of Riches, or the Love of other Things, or it may be in some weak
Persons, by taking a Disgust against some Minister, Friend or Friends of the
Meeting) have shamefully absented religious Assemblies, even often on the
First-days of the Week, absolutely contrary to the Laws of God, the Laws of the
Land, and the repeated Advices and well known Rules of the Society, they would
unreasonably be accounted Members of. But alas! alas! such are in a miserable
dwindling State and Habit of Soul, laying a Foundation for future Repentance,
Anguish and Tribulation; many piteous Instances of this Kind have appeared (and
peradventure some such may at this Day be found) under the Profession of the
Truth; one of which I shall here take Freedom to mention, as a Caution worthy
to be taken Notice of.

A certain young Man, as I remember, beginning Trade and Business for himself,
was thereby so engrossed and hurried in his anxious Mind, that he too much
omitted the Attending of religious Meetings; but being attacked by Sickness,
and brought to a Bed of Languishing, his past Negligence became his Burden,
under the Sense of which he groaned and bemoaned himself; and being asked by a
Friend the Cause of his so great Distress of Mind, he answered, It was because
he had been too remiss in going to Meetings, especially Weekday Meetings; but
added, that if the Lord would be pleased to raise him up again to his former
State of Health, he would for the future be more careful, and more diligent in
that important Duty.

Oh! therefore that all in Time of Liberty, Health and Strength of Body, may
consider their own both Duty and Interest in this Respect, as that they may not
suffer themselves, through too eager Pursuit of, or too close Attachment to the
Enjoyments of this fading World, or supine Indolence, to be deprived thereby of
the many Gospel Privileges offered unto us, of which the peaceable Enjoyment of
our religious Meetings is one of great Worth, and always so accounted and
highly valued by the faithful and truly thoughtful People of God.

4 thly. Besides what is before said touching the great Disadvantage that
accrues to those Particulars, who are found deficient in this momentous Duty
now treated of, they are bad Examples to the young People and others, and
especially those who have Children coming up, and perhaps Servants under their
Care too, being in the Station of Governors of Families (as they are evidently
negligent) lose their Authority, and render themselves bad Precedents to their
Children and Servants, and so, as such, cannot give effectual Precepts and
Advice to their Families, but alas! through their dismal Neglect and Indolence,
their poor Children, being too much left to themselves, often prove Libertines,
and run to Ruin. How then shall such unfaithful Parents in the Day of Account
answer for these Neglects, both with respect to their own Particulars, and poor
Families, and the Meetings they belong, to which, if they had been honestly
concerned, they might have been of good Service? Shall not such unjust Stewards
be called to an Account? Oh! that all Parents of Children, and Governors of
Families, would seriously and timely consider how pleasing and acceptable to
the Lord Abraham's Care and Concern for his Children, and for those under his
immediate Care was! Genesis xviii. 17, 19. Shall I, said the Lord, hide from
Abraham that Thing which I do? For I know him, that he will command his
Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord.

All those that meet, I say, in the Name of Jesus, that is, under a truly
awful, religious and conscientious Concern of Mind, do not only perform their
reasonable Service to God, and so reap his Peace and Blessing, but are of
singular Help and Comfort to the true-hearted in the Meeting; whilst the absent
Worldlings, being as miserable Comforters, are neither just and honest to God,
to themselves, nor to their Friends and Families: Manifold, therefore, I say,
are the Obligations we are all under, and more especially we that have Children
and Families, to come up in the honest Discharge of that our reasonable
Service, viz. both with regard to the due Performance of, 1 st, Our Duties to
God; 2 dly, To our Children and Families; 3 dly, To the Meetings we
respectively belong; and 4 thly, That we may bear our Testimony openly to all
Beholders, in assembling ourselves to wait upon, and worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth, even on Weekdays as well as First-days.

5 thly. It is almost surprising to observe, how diverse Professors of Truth,
who seem very disregardful of Christ's glorious Promise, which they plainly
discover by their slighting and absenting Meetings, where two or three are met;
yet if a noted public Friend appoints a Meeting, how such are raised on the
Wing, and flock to hear him, and sometimes follow him to the next Meeting. Now
although we ought certainly, whilst capable, willingly and thankfully to give
the Lord's Messengers and Ambassadors our Company, and seriously hear, and
rightly apply their Messages; yet insomuch as blessed Jesus, our great and good
Lord and Master, has promised to be in the Midst of two or three rightly met,
we ought to prefer him above all; I say, without slighting or undervaluing the
least Servant who brings glad Tidings, whose very Feet are beautiful upon the
Mountains: But they plainly appear to neglect and slight the most glorious
Minister and High Priest, who too seldom attend small Meetings, pursuant to his
said conditional Promise, and (as it were) Appointment.

I would by no Means have my Reader to suppose, by what is before said, that I
am blaming my Friends for accompanying the Messengers of the Lord to the next
Meeting, for that is a Brotherly Duty, which I myself took great Delight in,
whilst in Health and Strength in my younger Years, and would encourage the
right Minded in so doing; neither would I hereby discourage any who having been
Neglectors of Weekday Meetings, may find themselves awakened and roused up by
any Instrument: I would not, I say, discourage such from going along with such
a Friend to the next Meeting, or further, as the Cords of Truth may draw him,
and to keep close to that divine Touch and Influence they have been favored
with, through the Ministry of the said Instrument, which they may undoubtedly
find renewed and increased, as they humbly retire to the Master and Spring of
all Good in their own Hearts, who has promised to be with the two or three,
who are, or shall be, rightly gathered, when such instrumental Ministers may be
far absent, or even removed from us (by Death.) The great and good Shepherd,
speaking of himself and his Flock, says thus, John x. 4. When he puts forth
his own Sheep, he goes before them, and the Sheep follow him, for they know
his Voice. Whenever therefore he puts sorth any, old or young, Masters or
Servants, rich or poor, and goes before them, let them readily go forth and
follow him. We heartily wish they may grow and prosper; yet I must say,
wheresoever any Professors of Truth are found and observed from Time to Time to
neglect or forsake, or, at least, do not duly attend their respective Meetings
at Home, both on First-days and other Days of the Week; and yet it may be are
forward to attend Monthly, General, and sometimes probably Quarterly-meetings,
may not such their Proceedings be justly accounted irregular and preposterous?
Or how can we expect those can be of real Service at Monthly and
Quarterly-meetings, who slight and forsake the Meetings they belong to at Home?
It is much desired therefore, that all professing the blessed Principle of
Truth, in whatsoever Stations or Vocations they are placed, may let the Harms
of others be their seasonable Caution, that they may be effectually roused up
and excited to Diligence in the honest Performance of this weighty Duty, now
spoken of in much Goodwill to Souls, the right Discharge whereof has often
been, and is, attended with the enriching Blessing of kind Providence in
spiritual Things, and sometimes in temporal, and the Neglect thereof is
attended with Leanness of Soul, with many Disappointments and Disadvantages.

And further, with regard to that great Duty Friends owe to their Children, in
the due Nurture and Education of them, to which they are bound by the Laws of
God and Nature, we ought in the first Place to look well to ourselves, and then
to our Children; Luke xxiii. 28. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, said
Christ, but weep for yourselves, and for your Children. How shall any be
rightly concerned for their Children, who are negligent touching their own
Conditions? It Is to be feared the wide Courses of many Children have been often
occasioned (in great Measure) by the Indolence and Irreligion of their Parents.
I cannot well omit taking Notice of one Stripling, whose Parents were
Professors of Truth, rich in Things of this Life; yet alas! these Parents,
being themselves too remiss in attending Weekday Meetings, and consequently
not good Examples, did not train up their Son in the Performance of that Duty,
wherein they themselves were deficient: So he grew up so much indulged in
Liberty, that I was credibly informed he has been seen, even in the very Time
of the Meeting, which was held near their Dwelling House, to walk into the
fields with his Fowling-piece, etc. But oh! what was the Consequence of such
irreligious Proceedings and Liberties; this Youth became rather an Affliction
than a Comfort to Friends, lived fast as a Libertine, and died soon in the
Flower of his Age: Which sorrowful Remarks I make with much Awe, Humility and
Reverence.

6 thly. Some Professors of Truth, as hinted before, have betrayed so much
Indiscretion, and unmortified Temper of Mind, as to absent religious Meetings,
and it may be, Meetings of Business too, through some Dislike or Offense taken
against some particular Friend or Friends, or perhaps against some Steps in the
Discipline, or it may be, against the Minister belonging to the Meeting; which
unjustifiable Steps lead to Confusion, the Loss of Unity with the Society, and
oftentimes is attended with great Disadvantage to the immortal Souls of these
unhappy Persons, who foolishly fall into so bad a Practice; and besides all
this, it affords a very bad Example to the young People (especially) whose
quick Eyes are upon them, and these their By-steps, and will very likely make
shrewd Remarks on such Misconduct, which is grievous to all good Men that
behold it, but most pernicious to those guilty thereof; of whom we may say, Job
v. 2. Wrath kills the foolish Man, and Envy slays the silly One.

7 thly. As the truly concerned and faithful Friends to what they profess do,
whilst capable thereof, find it their incumbent Duty diligently to attend
Meetings, both on First-days and other Days of the Week; so it is their Care
both to observe, as much as they well can, the Hour appointed for the Gathering
of the Meetings, and also when there, to sit under a fervent and inward
Concern, that they may be made sensible of the fulfilling of Christ's gracious
Promise abovesaid, that Christ will be in the Midst of them that meet in his
Name; while, on the other hand, many careless and lukewarm Professors are both
slack in meeting together, and when they do come, often come very late and
straggling, and when met, sit too much unconcerned, if not sleeping, whilst the
Honest-hearted are in a deep Travail, and perhaps weeping; to whom those
negligent Professors are so far from being Helpmeets, that they are too often a
Burden to others truly concerned, yet, alas! the greatest Loss and Disadvantage
is to their own Souls; so that, though they go at Times to religious Assemblies,
they don't reap that spiritual Benefit that they might do, because they do not
diligently sow to the Spirit. Therefore, as faith (...) Friends, truly
concerned to improve their Time and Talents, find Meetings of Worship, Times
and Places of Improvement, Pleasure and Profit; and, therefore, are like
careful, industrious Tradesmen, very desirous, though through some
Difficulties, to attend those Places where the most Gain and Advantage may be
in all Likelihood obtained. But pray how should they, who, through the Neglect of
their Talents of Grace and Truth, find little or nothing of either Profit or
Pleasure in religious Meetings, be desirous to press through Crowds to get to
them? Nay, may we not safely conclude those, who are remiss in getting to
religious Meetings, do not experience (by reason of their own Neglect of the
Gift of Grace) that sweet and excellent Gain of Godliness, which the Faithful
do, and therefore may probably think it scarce worth their while to take much
Pains about such a Matter; when it is very likely the same Persons, in case
they had Ground to hope they could gain a Sum of Money, or make a considerable
Improvement of their temporal Stock, in the Way of their outward Business,
would be very careful not to miss the Opportunity, although they can scarce be
prevailed upon to use such Endeavors for the obtaining the most blessed, most
excellent Company and Presence of Jesus, our glorious High Priest, our Savior,
the King of Salem, and the Prince of Peace, though so lovingly invited by him.
May not they, who slight such a gracious Promise, apply to themselves those
Words of the Almighty, -- 1 Samuel ii. 30. They that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. On the other hand, may not the true and faithful Attenders of
religious Assemblies, by Faith lay hold on that Promise, -- Them that honor
me, I will honor. And likewise receive Consolation and Encouragement from
these Words of Christ, -- Luke xii. 32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your
Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Faithful Friends forecast their
Business so as nothing, so far as in them lies, may interfere and hinder them
from attending Weekday Meetings. Do not we generally know on what Day the
Weekday Meetings will fall? We ought therefore, I say, so to forecast, and as
much as we can, to order our temporal Affairs, that nothing, which may be well
done on another Day, may be suffered to fall in our Way as an Impediment to
hinder us from meeting with Christ and his two or three. If I attend religious
Meetings only on such Days, wherein the very Laws of the Land suffer no Fairs
or Markets to be held, nor will allow me to open my Shop, or to be engaged in
servile Work: If, I say, I serve (or pretend to serve) God in religious
Assemblies on those Days only, on which the Laws of the Land do not allow me
actually to labor for the Things of this World* what Reward have I?

8 thly. As King Solomon advises, -- Prove. xxii. 6. Train up a Child in the
Way he should go, etc. It is fully believed by a large Cloud of living
Witnesses, that as Men should go to, and diligently attend Meetings for divine
Worship; so even Children ought to be trained up in attending such Assemblies,
when in the Wisdom of Truth, pious Parents, Guardians and Schoolmasters may see
convenient and suitable, not at all doubting, but all those that have these
tender Plants under their Care, as they mind their own Conditions and Growths
in Grace, will be moved and helped prudently and gradually to train them
toward (and in due Time in) the real Performance of this so important a Duty;
neither over-driving the little Lambs, nor, through a too fond Indulgence or
Carelessness, leaving them behind, or suffer them to loiter, but always
watching over them with an Eye of Regard, in a due Consideration of their
tender Age, Capacities and Circumstances. Being thus conducted, I don't much
question but they will often find themselves engaged to bring the little Ones
to Meetings at proper Times.

Objection. Some have objected to such Proposals on this wise, -- Let them
first have Sense, and then bring them to Meetings. Answ. He that was
represented by a certain Houshoulder, who went out early in the Morning to hire
Laborers into his Vineyard, has often touched the tender Minds of Children in
the early Part of their Time, and, as it were, in the Dawn and Morning of their
Day; some about the sixth, seventh, eighth or tenth Year of their Age (or some
sooner) have been graciously visited, broken and tendered by the sweet
Influences of him, who blessed the little Children that were formerly brought
unto him, commanding that such should be suffered, and in no wise forbidden. We
cannot fix the Time of Childrens Visitations, whether at the third, sixth, or
ninth Hour he shall be pleased to give them an Invitation out of the
Marketplace into the Vineyard; however, it is firmly believed it is the
indispensible Duty of Parents, Schoolmasters, and those entrusted with the
Nurture of Children, humbly to present them before the Lord in the solemn
Meetings of Worship abovesaid, and fervently to beg his Blessing upon them,
which I am sensible is and will be undoubtedly the Concern of all those
Parents, etc. that are (or shall be) rightly concerned for their own Souls.
But, oh! Friends, how can it be expected, that they who neglect their own
States and Conditions, and their own respective Duties in attending Meetings,
should be effectually concerned for, and rightly bring those up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord, who are under their Care? How should those Parents
who do not weep for themselves, rightly weep for their Children? Weep not for
me, said Christ, to the lamenting Daughters of Jerusalem, but weep for
yourselves and your Children. Nay, some of those Parents, remiss in their Duty
to God and their own Souls (in Regard to attending Meetings, etc.) and
consequently to their Offspring, have too often rejected and taken amiss the
Advice of their well-wishing Friends, with respect to their Negligence,
respecting their own Welfare, and consequently their Childrens Good. Some
Parents, it may be, have gone to Meetings themselves, but have too often left
their Children (or at least too many of them) at Home, exposed, very likely, to
unsuitable Company, and undue Liberties. Nay, some living in the Town where the
First Day and Weekday Meetings were held, have both themselves and their
Children too much forsaken the Assembling themselves together, especially on
the Weekdays, and perhaps some of those irreligious Professors would be
sitting, or walking, or talking in the Street, during the Weekday
Meeting-time, and when admonished to a more becoming Conduct, they have taken
it amiss, and spurned violently against the Advice and the Adviser; and by such
Behavior it has been thought they have hardened their Children against
Friends. But, alas! those imprudent Creatures, both Elder and Younger, have
been attended with manifest Tokens of the great Loss they sustained thereby
diverse Ways. May therefore the Harms of others be our seasonable Precautions.

In Answer to the Objections some have made, or may make, against bringing
Children to religious Meetings, scarce thinking them, perhaps, capable of
receiving Profit therein, I much desire the Words and Observations of our
worthy Friend Robert Barclay, in his Proposition of Worship, Page 359, 360, may
be seriously considered, as follows: And this Power would sometimes also reach
to, and wondefully work in Meetings, even in little Children, to the Admiration
and Astonishment of many.

When honest Parents have done what they could, or can do, on Account of their
own and their dear Childrens Souls Welfare, all may be little enough; but happy
those poor Parents, who being tried with that exceeding bitter Cup, and
Heartbreaking Exercise, of having a Prodigal Son or Daughter, can in Sincerity
appeal unto the Lord, on this wise, -- Lord, thou' know I have done my Best
for my Children, both by humble Prayer and frequent Intercession with thee for
them, as well as by Example and Precept, for their Preservation.

But what will become of those unhappy Parents, who have afforded their
Children neither good Examples nor Precepts, but disregarded the greatest
Business of their Time, that is, of working out their own Salvation, and
therefore have neglected (and by that Neglect rendered themselves incapable) to
bring up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord? What, I say,
will become of such Parents, when they see the Miscarriages and bad Courses of
any of their Offspring, being conscious to themselves of their sinful Neglect
touching their Education, and may be obliged to confess, and sorrowfully
reflect on themselves for this their Deficiency, as being in some sort
accessory to the Ruin of their poor Children.

I find in the Journal of our worthy Friend Thomas Chalkley, that he was
sometimes concerned to exhort Friends to bring their Children to Meetings, and
educate them when young, in the Way they should go, that they might not depart
from it when old; which I am persuaded faithful Friends have all along been
(and still are) conscientiously concerned to do, as being to them not a Matter
of Indifferency, but ^ver esteemed by them as their incumbent and paternal
Duty. Don't we read, Matthew xiv. 2^. that besides the five Thousand Men, Women
and Children who followed, and were fed by Christ, even in a Wilderness or
desert Place, when he appeared amongst them in the Body of Flesh? Shall any
therefore now be so unwise in these calm and quiet Times, wherein we may sit
together peaceably and undisturbed in our religious Mettings, and wait for the
spiritual Appearance of Christ: Can any, I say, be so unwise, as now to neglect
religious Meetings? Should we not by all Means, in Point of Gratitude to our
gracious God, in Point of Justice to our own Souls, our Children, Families, and
our Friends, flock to our religious Meetings, both on First-days and other Days
of the Week, taking our Children along with us, and allowing all reasonable
Liberty to our Servants? But oh! how shall those answer for it at the great Day
of Account, who are, or shall be found negligent in an Affair of so great
Importance! The late and disorderly coming to Meetings of some of the
Professors of Truth, who generally drop in, when those who carefully observe
the Hour appointed have sitten perhaps Half an Hour, or most of an Hour, do not
only interrupt and hurt the Meeting, but is a bad Example to the young People
and others, but the greatest Loss is their own. This irregular Practice of
coming late to Meetings is inconsistent with our Reputation as a religious
Society, and contrary to the Practice of Friends in the Beginning, of whom we
read, that not only those of advanced Years were good Examples in this Respect,
but also that some of their Children, who were left at Home during their
Parents Imprisonment for keeing up this Testimony, were concerned honorably to
attend their religious Meetings, and were themselves also called in question by
the secular Powers for this their Christian Testimony in those trying and
proving Times? Shall therefore any, either Parents or Children, dare, through
Indolence and Lukewarmness, to be guilty of such Ingratitude in neglecting, or
not duly attending religious Meetings in these peaceable Times, wherein there
is, through the Mercy of kind Providence, a great Calm to the Churches.

Here I take Freedom to insert some sensible Expressions of some pious
Children, a little before their Death, touching religious Meetings, as a
convincing Argument that Children have received Benefit in attending them, and
to obviate the Objections that some Parents have made, or may make, against the
Concern of such Friends as advise Father and Mothers professing the Truth, to
bring (...) Children to Meetings whilst young*

I. (...) POST, aged about eight Years, a little before her Death, expressed
her Delight in going to Meetings. Piety promoted, Part V. Page 87.

II. REBEKAH TOOVEY, aged about nine Years, said (near her Death) she loved to
go to Meetings; they were sweet to her. Ibid. Page 143.

III. WILLIAM FENNEL, aged about twelve Years when he died, calling for his
Sisters and Brother, (on his sick Bed) he exhorted them to love Truth, and to
go to Meetings, and think upon God and good Things, and the Lord would love
them.

It Is plain therefore, that young Plants have often been, and may be, truly
sensible of the singular Benefit to be reaped in religious Meetings.

9 thly. It Is admirable to observe what Difficulties, even through Hail, Rain
and Snow, up early, and down late, will some Professors wade through, in order
to attend Markets and Fairs, but what small Matters will sometimes deter them
from setting out to a religious Meeting? I had, said one, intended to have been
at such a Meeting, but there came a Shower of Rain when I was just going off,
and prevented me. May we not say to such a poor cool One, O thou of little
Faith!

Our worthy Friend, Thomas Chalkley, observes in his Journal, Page 324, that
one John Pickering, the Governor of Tortola, made several new Forms to
accommodate the People in religious Meetings in his own House, which he sent
six Miles on Men's Heads, the Roads not being passable by Carriage, by Carts,
etc. This I think worth noting, says he, that their Zeal may be had in
Remembrance, and that ours may be stirred up to a more religious Concern, who
will scarce go six Steps to a religious Meeting, or will not go at all.

10 thly. When we remember and consider, as above observed, the heavy Exercises
and deep Sufferings, Spoilings of Goods, Imprisonments, etc. our Forefathers
were tried with, and mercifully enabled faithfully and nobly to endure and go
through with Christian Patience for their Testimonies Sake, in holding their
religious Meetings. And when we also humbly consider, how our gracious God has
rebuked the Storms of Persecution, and has caused a long Calm to his Church and
People, this mavelous Work of the Lord ought never to be forgotten, but
thankfully, and, in deep Humility, ever to be remembered and duly acknowledged
by all the Professors of Truth, by a Conduct truly religious, circumspect and
agreeable to these invaluable Favors, and in the sincere, diligent and fervent
Performance of all our several Duties we owe unto him the Author and Giver of
all our Privileges.

But oh! Friends, when the Faithful in our Israel, with much Sorrow and Regret
take Notice of the lamentable Lukewarmness of too many under the Profession of
the blessed Truth in diverse Places, who have not only too much forsaken the
Attending of Weekday Meetings, but in some Places have quite dropped them, as
many faithful Brethren think, to the great and certain Loss of themselves,
their Families and their Children, and to the Dishonor of our gracious God, to
the Disadvantage of our Society in general, and the great Affliction of the
living Members thereof, and is like to prove, as many good Friends fear, an
Inlet to other undue Liberties and hurtful Things.

While I am writing these Words, the mournful Expostulation of Moses, with
backsliding Israel of old, springs in my Mind, wherein he movingly cries out on
this wise, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and
unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made thee, and
established thee, etc. Wherefore, with much Concern of Mind, for the Lord's
Sake, for the Welfare of yourselves, Families and Children (that have them) I
cordially and compassionately address you, who may be guilty of this Defection
and Revolt here mentioned and mourned for. Pray consider in time of this your
Negligence, as the certain Effects of your slighting the Reproofs, Teachings
and Operations of the Spirit of Truth ye make Profession of; and I beseech you,
take away the Cause, that the Effects may cease, by timely, diligently and
devoutly retiring to, and obeying this precious Gift of God in your own Hearts,
whereby ye may be helped, before your Day be over, to repair those lamentable
Breaches, and, as I may say, rebuild these very sorrowful Desolations. Oh!
Friends, is this a Time to drop your religious Meetings, when the Lord has so
marvellously opened our Way, so that, through the Clemency of the mild
Government we live under, we, as a People, are not only tolerated, but
protected in attending them? He has wonderfully, as I may say, divided and
opened our Way through the Opposition of secular Powers, penal Laws,
Prisonhouses, etc. Shall any of us now sit down at Ease in any Engagement of
this uncertain World, short of a truly religious Concern and Perseverance in
the Way and Work of Regeneration, when, I say, our Way is thus opened? I beg of
you, by the Mercies of Christ, duly to remember, and practice according to the
Command of the Almighty, when he had opened the Way for his People, saying, --
Speak to my People that they go forward. And, my Beloved, herein earnestly
sought after, and in the good Will of the Gospel treated with, suffer me to
say, as this grievous dropping of Weekday Meetings may justly be called a
Backsliding from the Purity and Integrity of our worthy Ancients, and the
Practice of the Faithful in this Day, and from the repeated Advices and
Directions of many Particulars, as well as our Yearly Meeting from time to
time, who have been engaged to counsel in divine Love; let such remember the
tender Call of the Lord to his backsliding Israel of old, with the
Heart-affecting conditional Promise annexed thereto, Jer. iii. 22. Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings* which gracious and
compassionate Promise, I humbly hope, will be vouchsafed unto you, in case ye
shall rightly observe the gracious Invitation to return, and shall be sincerely
and heartily concerned henceforward to let your past Negligence suffice, and
for the future use your utmost Diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure, and shall, as the Apostle exhorted the Ephesians, Ephesians. v. 15.16. Walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the Time, because the Days
are evil. That when the great and notable approaching Day shall come, wherein
each of you shall be called to an Account, -- Come give an Account of thy
Stewardship, for thou shall be no longer Steward; each of you may receive this
most desirable and welcome Sentence, Mat. xxv. 21. Well done, thou good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few Things, I will make thee
Ruler over many Things; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

But, alas! alas! how can they expect to be then denominated good and faithful
Servants, who in this gracious Toleration are thus ungratefully neglecting or
dropping their Weekday Meetings, and so slighting the encouraging Expressions
of blessed Jesus, the righteous Judge of the Quick and Dead, while they are yet
in Health and Strength, and in a Capacity to meet together with the two or
three?

Again, may it be observed, that when Moses, that faithful Servant of the Lord,
was near leaving the People, being One Hundred and Twenty Years old, he wrote
the Law, and delivered it to the Priests which bore the Ark of the Lord, and
unto all the Elders of Israel, with this positive Command and Charge, saying,
Deuteronomy. xxxi. 12, 13. Gather the People together, Men, Women and Children, and
thy Stranger which is within thy Gates, that they may hear, and that they may
learn and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the Words of this Law:
And that their Children, which have not known any Thing, may hear and learn to
fear the Lord your God as long as ye live in the Land, whither ye go over
Jordan to possess it.

Please to mark here, Strangers, and even Children, were not to be overlooked
or left at Home, but to appear among the Elders at the Time and Place
appointed; neither were the People of the Lord to drop or omit the due
Performance of this Charge so long as they should live in the Land. Shall
Gospel Duties then be dropped in this glorious Gospel Dispensation? How many good
Friends, even upon their dying Beds, have been frequently concerned to advise
their Survivors, diligently and duly to attend religious Meetings?

May we remember that the Jews began their Preparation of the Sabbath, at Three
(...) Clock in the Afternoon of the aforegoing Day, that is, of the Sixth-day
of the Week: Should we not therefore now, as the Meeting-day and Time
approaches, be, after a suitable Manner, abstracting our Minds and Thoughts
from earthly Things, and get into a proper Concern for meeting in the Name of
Jesus, with the two or three, in order to know him in the Midst of us. But
would it not be a very sorry and piteous Case, if any of us should have our
Minds so engrossed and employed with Things of this World, that we should go
talking and communing, on the Meeting-days, about earthly Concerns, almost to
the Meeting House Door, and likewise, Meeting being broken up, resume the same
worldly Subjects of Discourse? If such should in the Meeting receive any Share
of the heavenly Seed into their Hearts (being too much like the Highway Ground)
are they not in Danger of having the same devoured by the Fowls of the Air? Oh!
therefore, how great Care and Circumspection ought we to be found in, both in
going to our Meetings, waiting reverently in them, and awfully returning from
them, and even in the whole Course of our short and uncertain Time? If
therefore an honest Concern of this Kind was come into, and duly observed by
the Professors of Truth, that is, a proper Exercise, a strict Observation of
the Hour appointed, and a suitable Concern and waiting for the sensible
Enjoyment of the divine Presence; all which necessary Steps I am well assured
the Principle we profess would, if rightly obeyed, lead all its Professors
into; our religious Meetings would, in the best Sense, become Times and Places
of Pleasure and Profit united; and as for the most Part, or often, our Meetings
have in them some Children, some infirm Persons, who are scarce able to endure
very long Meetings, though we cannot limit the Continuation of our Meetings by
the Clock or Hourglass, yet, by the Methods abovesaid, through the Lord's
Blessing thereupon, Meetings would be short and sweet, and the Performance of
this our reasonable Duty would be rendered unto the general not grievous, but
joyous and profitable, even to the sincere Weaklings of the Flock, according to
the Assertion of him who has promised his blessed Company, -- My Yoke is easy,
and my Burden is light. And inasmuch as our Profession of the Guidance and
Teachings of the holy Spirit in the Gospel Dispensation, implies an Abrogation
of the typical Ceremonies commanded and practiced under the Mosaic Law, how
greatly it behooves us, and under how close Obligations do we lie, who profess
the blessed Truth, so to demean ourselves at all Times, and in all Places (but
especially in our religious Meetings) that nothing inconsistent with our high
Profession may appear; no scandalous Dullness or Sleepiness, no gaping or
yawning, no wandering Eyes, no unbecoming or restless Postures, may ever appear
in the Times of our Devotion; for, to be sure, whether we watch ourselves
rightly or not, the Eyes of the People are upon us; and if, while we profess to
be come beyond Ceremonies, formal Prayer, premeditated Sermons, formal
Singings, and the like, any of us should be so unhappy and unwise, by an
unprudent Conduct, Lukewarmness, and an unconcerned Frame of Mind in our
religious Meetings, to give Occasion to any that have their Eyes upon us, some
it may be for Good, and some otherwise, to say, we, or any of us, are so poor,
that we have neither Shadow nor Substance, we shall certainly hurt our Souls,
and be bad Examples to others.

Finally, my Friends, having in much Love, Charity and Good Will, not (I assure
you) with a View churlishly to expose the Failings of any weak Brother or
Sister, but rather by Way of Caution to all where these Lines may come, made
the foregoing Remarks, I now most dearly salute you our dear and near Friends,
who have dedicated the Day of your Health and Strength to the Service of Truth,
in diligently attending Meetings, and faithfully discharging your Duties
therein, but now either through Want of Health, or by Reason of old Age, or other
Circumstances are rendered incapable of appearing in religious Assemblies; be
not discouraged, the Lord is with you, his holy Arms are about you. Trust in
the Lord, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting Strength: He, who accepts of a
Man according to what he has, and not according to what he has not, will
accept of your sincere and private Devotions; and you may, I trust, by Faith,
lay hold on these Words of Christ, as if spoken to you, Luke xii. 32. Fear not
little Flock, for it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.
And also, I am satisfied ye may lay hold on that Promise, John xiv. 23. If a
Man love me, he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our Abode with him. O my dearly Beloved, although you
be deprived of appearing personally with your dear Friends in public
Assemblies, you have here each of you, through the most merciful Condescension
of the Lord, a most comfortable, most gracious Promise of the permanent Company
of the Father and the Son, who will make their Abode with you.

In the Love of the everlasting Gospel I greet you, and bid you all Farewell,
who am

Your truly well-wishing Friend, DAVID HALL.
P. S. Some may perhaps have said, or may say, I can have as good a Meeting
with a good Book by my Fireside, as you can have at your public Assembly.
Answ. We must own the Lord is omnipresent, and will undoubtedly own his Peoples
private Devotion, though they cannot personally attend with their Friends; but
whilst they are favored with the Blessing of Health and Strength, it is
according to the Apostle's Exhortation, Heb. x. 25, and diverse other
Scriptures, their undoubted Duty to meet and assemble together, to demonstrate
their Care for the Maintenance of the public Worship of Almighty God. And it
is often observed, that this pretended Fireside Devotion is only an Excuse,
and tends to the Destruction rather than Edification, not only of such
Particulars, but of the Society in general.

I much desire that the worthy and wholesome Advices, lovingly and suitably,
from time to time, recommended to us by our yearly Meeting on diverse particular
Accounts, and especially these that follow, as pertinent to the Matter in Hand,
may be read and duly observed by us all.

Yearly-Meeting's Epistle, 1754.
We farther find ourselves, dearly beloved Brethren, earnestly concerned to
remind you of another Mark of Degeneracy too visible among us, viz. A
Negligence of attending our appointed Meetings for Worship, both on the
First-days and other Days of the Week: A Neglect which calls for seasonable
Reproof, and a pressing Exhortation, that a religious Concern of attending all
your Meetings, and especially of your Weekday Meetings, may grow, increase,
and become more general; this we recommend as the proper Means of renewing your
Strength, and as suitable. Opportunities of abstracting your Thoughts from the
Hurries and Encumbrances of worldly Affairs, and of habituating your Minds to a
serious Meditation on heavenly Things: And, dear Friends, let not the Smallness
of your Numbers discourage you from constantly attending those Meetings,
inasmuch as the Words of Christ remain unchangeably true and steadfast, Mat.
xviii. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in
the Midst of them. And as your Affections come to be set on Things that are
above, your Delight will be in frequent Retirement from the World, its Trade
and Concerns, and your chiefest Care will be to lay up Treasure in Heaven,
secure from the Reach of Corruption and Disappointment; and then where your
Treasure is, there will your Hearts be also. But, on the contrary, it has been
justly observed, that where Remissness and Neglect of attending Meetings for
Worship has prevailed, it has been too often an Inlet to farther Declension,
and an Introducer of such other undue Liberties, as the Truth and its Guidance
do by no Means admit of.

The real and substantial Enjoyment of Peace, increasing in Proportion to your
Progress in Obedience, your Assemblies for the Worship of Almighty God will
become your chiefest Joy; and your own Taste and Experience of the Consolations
therein received, will attract you to those Places of spiritual Feeding and
Refreshment, with an Earnestness of Desire, even superior to that of a natural
Man, when being hungry, he resorts to the Place of receiving his daily Bread.
As you attain this excellent Disposition of Mind, you will rather come before
than after the apappointed Time of assembling, and render the Repetition of the
wholesome Advices often given on that Account, less necessary in Time to come.


Yearly-Meeting's Epistle, 1755.
Let us, we earnestly entreat you, Brethren, under the present Circumstances of
outward Ease and Liberty in Matters of Religion, which God in his Mercy has
influenced the King and Parliament to continue to these Nations, beware of
indulging ourselves, and of sitting down at Rest, or falling asleep, in a State
of Indolence and carnal Security, etc. And, dear Friends, be mindful to attend
your religious Meetings at the Times appointed, and labor diligently to have
your Minds gathered to the Gift of divine Grace in your own Hearts, that so you
may witness a profiting by your coming together. Wherefore, assemble yourselves
in Fear, and hold your Meetings in an awful, humble, and reverent Frame of
Spirit, considering yourselves as under the Inspection of his all-seeing Eye,
who penetrates into the most inmost Recesses of Men's Hearts, and from whom
nothing can be hid.




TO FRIENDS OF KNARESBOROUGH Monthly Meeting, held at ASQUITH, the 29th of the
Fifth Month 1755, with Desires the same may be presented to the next ensuing
Quarterly Meeting at YORK; which, at the Request of the said Quarterly Meeting,
is here printed with the foregoing Treatise.
DEAR FRIENDS,
NOtwithstanding I have sometimes heretofore taken the Freedom to write unto
you in brotherly Love, it may be, in some Degree, to the like Import with the
following Lines; yet, nevertheless, often remembering you in my Prayers, in a
renewed Manner I now find Drawings in my Mind again hereby to salute you in the
Love of the Gospel, even in a dear and near Manner, with earnest Desires that
ye may every one, in your several Stations, Growths and Capacities, whether
Elders or Younger, Parents or Children, Masters or Servants, be truly obedient
to the Dictates and Guidance of the blessed Spirit of Truth ye profess, that
thereby ye may be preserved from every hurtful Thing, and may be guided into
all Truth, both in your temporal Concerns and religious Duties, and in
faithfully bearing your several Christian Testimonies for God (when called
thereunto) against Tithes, and all antichristian Impositions, Customs and
Demands whatsoever, and may be graciously helped to reduce to Practice those
excellent Precepts of the Apostle to the Ephesian Church, viz. Ephesians. vi. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this
is right. Honor thy Father and Mother (which is the first Commandment with
Promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth.
And, ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to Wrath, but bring them up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Servants, be obedient to them that are your
Masters according to the Flesh, with Fear and Trembling, in Singleness of your
Heart, as unto Christ; not with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but as the
Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the Heart; with good Will doing
Service, as to the Lord, and not to Men: Knowing that whatsoever good Thing any
Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
And, ye Masters, do the same Things unto them, forbearing Threatening, knowing
that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there Respect of Persons with
him. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his
Might. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
Wiles of the Devil.

My dearly beloved Friends, in much brotherly Kindness and Charity, I tenderly
sympathize with you that may be under Suffering or Discouragement in any
Respect, and particularly in this, that diverse of the worthy Elders and
Ministers, in some Places, are removed from you by Death, and diverse Meetings
may now be small and reduced: I beg you will not be too much discouraged on
this Account; for the all-sufficient Rock and Root remains, which, as ye duly
observe it, will supply all your Wants, and will qualify and teach Parents and
Elders to be good Examples, and rightly to instruct their Children and young
Generation, by Precept and Pattern, as nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, and
likewise would direct and help Children and Youths to demean themselves aright
toward Parents and Elders, Servants toward Masters, and Masters toward
Servants.

O dear Friends, I beseech you go not out after the Lo-heres, and Lo-theres,
now crying aloud in the Nation, but diligently attend your religious Meetings,
both on the First-days and Weekdays, and other Meetings for Truth's Service,
as you may find your Way opened, while you are favored with the Blessings of
Health and Strength, and there devoutly wait for the spiritual Appearance of
Christ, who has given this gracious Promise, Mat. xviii. 20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the Midst of them.

It is now in my Heart lovingly to address and advise you, concerning two
particular Things, of no small Importance, viz.

1 st. Be sure to watch against the least Appearance of any Thing that would
gender to Discord, and, with all Care and Circumspection, labor to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. 1 Cor. i. 10. Now I beseech you, as
says the Apostle, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same Thing, and that there be no Divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment.
Wherefore, whenever any Matter of Debate may happen to be, wherein Friends may
be of different Sentiments, it is much to be desired, that all Friends would
labor so to keep to and under the Government of the meek Spirit of Jesus, as
that all Animosities, Ill-temper, exasperating Expressions and Resentments, may
be prevented, and that mutual Love, that certain distinguishing Characteristick
of the Disciples of Christ, may ever be in all Cases maintained and retained
among us; which honest Care and Concern would, I firmly believe, greatly tend
to the Praise of him our heavenly Head, and to the Edification of his Church
and People, through the Influence of the divine Spirit, so that we might
thereby really and experimentally know the blessed Efficacy of divine Love,
according to the Apostle's extensive and moving Assertion, 1 John iv. 16. --
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. O
blessed Dwelling! O glorious, and safe, O comfortable Habitation!

2 dly. That all the young and rising Generation, and Children of believing
Parents especially, may carefully wait, and truly endeavor to know and dwell
under the Cross of Christ, and to be acquainted with the blessed Truth, even
the glorious Appearance of Christ in their own Hearts and Souls, being the
Principle of their Education, and the refining, absolutely necessary saving
Baptism thereof, that thereby they may be made truly useful Members of the one
Church and Body of Christ, be serviceable and honorable Instruments therein,
while here (as right Successors of the faithful Ministers and Elders, now gone,
and going off the Stage) and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter. --
Job xxii. 21. Acquaint thyself therefore with him, and be at Peace, so shall
Good come unto thee, says one in Job. If our dear young People would be
persuaded to choose the blessed Truth for their Portion, and the God of Jacob
for the Lot of their Inheritance, then would the enriching Blessing of God
attend them in all their Enterprises; then would the Lord bring up many that
are low, to sit as among Princes, and would provide for them, and supply their
Wants, according to the gracious Promise of blessed Jesus, -- Mat. vi. 33. Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these Things shall
be added unto you: And as the royal Psalmist says, -- Psalm. lxxxiv. 11. The
Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory, no good Thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. And thus would they be
preserved from the various Snares and Gins that are cunningly laid by our
common Adversary for the Feet of the Youth, especially in this afflicting Case
of mixed Marriages, wherein so many of our careless, disobedient Youths have so
often fallen, and alas! yet are falling, to the inexpressible Sorrow of their
honest Parents, and to the great Trouble and Exercise of their truly
wellwishing Friends, and the Society in general; but alas! the greatest Loss is
their own. And verily, we have many Instances at this Time of the miserable
Situation such poor, resolute, inconsiderate Creatures have brought themselves
into, by their imprudent and disagreeable Proceedings and Contracts on Account
of that very momentous Affair of Marriage. Let, therefore, I beseech you, my
dear young and unmarried Friends, the Harms and By-steps of others, with the
dismal Consequences thereof, be your timely Cautions.

Faithful Friends, in these sorrowful Times, can but deeply lament to see so
many of our young Men and Women so far straying from the Principles of their
Education, and the settled and well known Rules of our Society in diverse
Respects, but in particular, I say, in that (which is now weightily before me
and many others) even that disagreeable, dangerous Error of mixed Marriages,
whereby Confusion and Perplexity are ushered into Families, Meetings, and the
Society. How many that might probably have been of singular Service in the
Society many Ways, have forfeited their Unity with Friends, rendered themselves
lame, and rather Causes of Affliction, than Help to the Community; have
involved themselves in many Inconveniences, by resolutely deviating from the
said wholesome and safe Rules agreed upon by the Society in the Wisdom of
Truth, in this very afflicting Case? Wherefore, in the Bowels of Love, once
more I earnestly entreat you, that are not yet enthralled in that dismal Yoke
of Bondage, Stand upon your Guard; watch and pray, that ye enter not into
Temptation of any Kind, and especially that ye be not allured into these Snares
of being unequally yoked in these Kinds of unsuitable Marriages, which have
perhaps seemed pleasant to some at the first, but generally have, and do prove
bitter Cups afterward, it having long been, and yet is, the Sense of solid and
judicious Friends, that the Hand of divine Providence is against such
disagreeable Matches. -- Prove. xx. 17. Bread of Deceit is sweet to a Man, but
afterward his Mouth shall be filled with Gravel, says wise King Solomon.

Finally, my dearly Beloved, who have at Heart the Prosperity of Zion, as the
present State of Affairs, with regard to the Church, and the secular Powers,
seems loudly, in an especial Manner, to call upon us, as in Times past on a
certain Occasion, -- Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel! I humbly and fervently
beg, that we may dwell so inward with the Lord, so humble ourselves under his
mighty Hand, that we, being ourselves preserved in Covenant with him, may in
true Brotherly Love, and Christian Sympathy, be helped rightly to remember and
pray for our Brethren all the World over, and particularly for those our dear
Friends who may now be under Sufferings and Probations, occasioned by the
Commotions of War, which we in these Parts do but, as yet, hear the Rumors of,
that the Everlasting Arms may be underneath their Souls, that they may be by
him directed, protected and supported through, and under all the Trials they
may, by divine Permission, meet with; and, with the Exhortation of the Apostle,
1 Cor. xvi. 13, 14. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like Men, be
strong. Let all your Things be done with Charity, I bid you Farewell, who am

Your Brother in the Unity of the Spirit, and Bond of Peace, DAVID HALL.
Skipton, the 24 th of the Fifth Month, 1755. P. S. I beseech you, dear
Friends, bear this further Caution and following Word of Exhortation, that is
to say, Carefully beware of, and avoid that vile and antichristian Practice of
Evil-surmising, backbiting, or spreading evil Reports of any Brother or Sister
behind their Backs; but rather, if any of us should hear something amiss
concerning any Friend, let such who hear of it, in a friendly and brotherly
Manner, go to the Person of whom the Report is raised, lovingly enquire into
the Truth of the Case, and friendly admonish, as the Case may require, pursuant
to that cordial and Christian Direction of the Apostle, -- Gal. vi. 1.
Brethren, if a Man be overtaken with a Fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be
tempted; ever mindful of Christ's excellent Precept, -- And as ye would that
Men should do to you, do ye so to them likewise.

D. HALL.



FINIS.

