Mr. Frink's SERMON On the Anniversary Election of Counselors, May 31. 1758.

A King reigning in Righteousness, and Princes ruling in Judgment.

A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY THOMAS POWNALL, Esquire; GOVERNOR, The
Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL, And House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province
Of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND, May 31. 1758.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL, for said
Province.

By THOMAS FRINK, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Rutland.

Psalm. 2. 6. -- I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion. Prove. 8. 15, 16.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles
-- In hoc Reges, sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt, in quantum
Reges sunt, si in Regno suo Bona jubeant, Mala prohib^ant, non solum quae
pertinent ad humanam Societatem, verum etiam, quae pertinent ad divinam
Religionem. August. Cont. Crescon. Gram. Pietate sublata, Fides etiam et
Societas humani Generis, et una excellentissima Virtus, Justitia tollitur.
Cicero de Not. Deor'. BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, by Order of the
Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES. 1758.

In the House of Representatives, June 1. 1758.
Ordered, THat Col. Murray, Col. Watson, and Col. Dwight, be a Committee to
return the Thanks of this House to the Rev. Mr. Thomas Frink, for his Sermon
Preached Yesterday, before the General Court, being the Anniversary for the
Election of Counselors; and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

T. HUBBARD, Speaker.

AN Election SERMON.
THE joyful Anniversary is now arrived, the happy Day, on which the Tribes of
the Lord, the Heads of the Tribes, the Representative Body of this People,
assemble in the City of our Solemnities, according to the Royal CHARTER of
WIILLAM and MARY, of glorious Memory, to Elect his Majesty's Council, the
second Branch of the Legislature of the Province. -- The auspicious Day is
come, when first our Eyes behold with Joy, the most worthy Representative of
our most gracious KING, in the chief Seat of Government, and at the Head of our
Tribes, directing, moderating, and ruling, in the great and important
Religious, Civil and Military Affairs of the same. -- And let us be glad, when
they say unto us, Let us go into the House of the Lord -- Our Feet shall stand
within thy Gates, O Boston, the New-English Jerusalem, whither the Tribes go
up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of the New-English Israel, to
give Thanks unto the Name of the Lord: for Here are set the Thrones of
Judgment, the Representative Thrones of the House of the British David -- The
highest Judicatory of the Province.

At the Invitation of the Honorable House, One among the least of Christ's
Ministers, is drawn out of his beloved Obscurity, and stands this Day in the
sacred Desk to Preach before the General Court -- And after solemn Invocation
of the Supreme Ruler of the World, in the Name of the Son of God the only
Mediator, He humbly asks the Attention of this August Assembly to the Sermon on
that illustrious Prediction of the Prophet,

ISAIAH, Chap. xxxii. 1, 2. Behold, a King shall Reign in Righteousness, and
Princes shall Rule in Judgment. And a Man shall be as an hiding Place from the
Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest: as Rivers of Water in a dry Place, as the
Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land.
THERE is no Part of the Bible that more deserves the Thoughts of inquisitive
Men, than the Writings of the Prophets; and Persons of very high Endowments,
may find sufficient Employnemt in unfolding the Types and Figures of the Jewish
Economy, and in searching into the Depths of the Prophetical Predictions. And
the metaphorical Style of the Prophets is very proper to inspire the Minds of
the Attentive, with noble Ideas of God's Wisdom and Providence, and to affect
us with the most lively Image of the glorious Kingdom of God and Christ, the
Happiness of those that shall have a Share in the Triumphs of it, and the
Terribleness of the Punishments which are denounced against such as will not
have Him to Rule over them.

The Books of the Prophets unfold the Methods of Providence in many remarkable
Instances. -- Such as -- God's Disposal of Kingdoms and Governments, and making
Use of wicked Princes and Nations to be the Instruments of his Justice in
punishing others, as bad or worse -- The gradual Discovery of the Coming of the
Messiah, and the several Steps and Advancements by which God introduced his
Kingdom into the World, and will still carry it on, 'till the Consummation of
all Things. -- And there is a Treasure of heavenly Wisdom contained in the
Writings of the Prophets, that can never be exhausted; and it is most reasonable
to believe that some Parts of these Prophecies reach to the End of the World;
and it is also reasonable to expect, that in every Age, Providence should open
some new Scene, which will give further Insight into the Meaning of these
sacred Books. -- And to extend the Prophetic Views to the End of the World,
seems most agreeable to that Description of God's Prescience, which is given us
in Isaiah, Chapter 46. ver. 10. viz. That He declares the End from the Beginning.
-- So that even when the whole Mystery of God's Dispensations shall be
finished, it will appear that Nothing is contained in them, but what God has
formerly declared to his Servants the Prophets; as it is expressly affirmed, Rev.
10. 7.

Isaiah deservedly holds the first Rank in that noble Order of Prophets; as he
foretells the future State of the Church more frequently and fully than the
others, and in the loftiest Language, and boldest Metaphors. -- His
supernatural Gift of Prophecy added a new Luster to the greatness of his Birth,
and his liberal Education furnished him with a noble Eloquence, and suitable to
the Dignity of his Argument. -- "His Style is great, noble, sublime and florid:
He paints Things to the Life, but with the strongest and liveliest Strokes."
Dupin Can. Scrip. Vol. 1.


It has been observed, that the Commentaries on this Prophet fall short of a
full Explication of his Book, on Account of his Profoundness of Though It,
Loftiness of Expression, and Extent of Prophecy; and therefore may it not be
said, that I, so inferior in divine Knowledge, need an Apology for attempting
a Sermon on so remarkable a Passage of his Prophecy as my Text, especially on
this solemn Occasion, and before so great and learned and honorable an
Assembly.

Isaiah lived and prophesied under four Kings of Judah, Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz
and Hezekiah -- If we suppose (for it is not certain) that the Prophecies etc.
of this Book are put in the same Order in which they were at first written and
published, the Book may be divided into four Parts or Sections. The five
Chapters from the Beginning, contain the Prophecies which he made in the Time
of Uzziah. -- The Vision of the sixth Chapter happened in Jotham's Reign; and
the following Chapters from the seventh to the thirty fifth inclusively,
contain his Prophecies under the Reign of Ahaz. -- And then follows an Account
of Sennacherib's Invasion, Hezekiah's Sickness and Recovery, Chap. 36, 37, 38.
(that History being a Key to open several Passages in the foregoing Prophecies)
with a brief Prediction of the Jews Captivity by the Babylonians, on Occasion
of the King of Babylon's Embassage to Hezekiah etc. in Chap. 39. -- And the
40th Chap. and those that follow to the End of the Book, do not only concern
the Jews Return from Babylon, and the Restoration and Establishment of their
Ecclesiastical and Political State, but also the Call of the Gentiles, the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and flourishing State of the Church under his
Government, and the Prophet describes the future Glories of the Church, with a
Loftiness of Expression suitable to the Dignity of the Subject.

And not only in this last Section, but also in the preceding Parts of this
Book, the Prophet in foretelling and describing sundry remarkable Events
relating to the Jewish Nation, takes Occasion to set forth the several Advances
of Christ's Kingdom in Aftertimes. And the glorious State of the Church
toward the End of the World, when the Fullness of the Jews and Gentiles shall
come into the Church, is evidently predicted in the former Part of Chapter 2. and
in 6, 7, 8, 9.. of the 11th Chapter and that inimitable Description of the new Face
of Things, in Chapter 35. cannot with Propriety be applied, in its utmost Latitude,
to any other than the Golden Age of the Gospel, or Millennial State.

The Prophecies which foretell the Visibility and Universality of Christ's
Church, accompanied with perfect Peace, Prosperity and Holiness, cannot with
any Probability, be said to have as yet received their Accomplishment, as,
neither have those Predictions, which foreshew the flourishing State of the
Jewish Church and Nation in the latter Times.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that under the Old Testament, the most
considerable Persons and Transactions there mentioned, were typical, and
prefigured the State of Things under the Messiah. In the Characters given us in
the Old Testament of Moses and Joshua, David and Solomon, Cyrus and Z^rubbabel,
and others I might mention, they are plainly described as Figures of Christ,
several Circumstances of their Lives did foreshew the most remarkable Passages
of his Life, and the Deliverances some of them wrought for God's People, were
Earnests of a greater Redemption to be accomplished by the Messiah: And from
hence we may conclude, that there is a Resemblance or Correspondence between
many of the Transactions mentioned in the Old Testament, and those which should
come to pass under the New; and consequently, that the Prophets when they spoke
of some Events near their own Times, probably had more distant Views, which
might reach even to the latter Ages of the World. And it seems to have been a
Maxim, in interpreting Prophecies, received among the Jews before Christ's
Time, that whenever they observed an imperfect Completion of a Prophecy in the
historical Event, which no way answered the lofty Expressions, and extensive
Promises, which the natural Sense of the Text imported, then they supposed the
Times of the Messiah to be ultimately intended, in whom all the Promises of God
are Yea and Amen.

And among this kind of Prophecies, this thirtysecond Chapter of Isaiah, is an
eminent Example, especially the former Part of it, in particular the Verses of
my Text, and the two following Verses --

My Text, in the primary Sense, is to be understood of Hezekiah, and the
Princes or Magistrates under him. The Character of that excellent Prince, and
the subordinate Rulers, is here exhibited; but there are several Expressions,
particularly those in the 3d and 4th Verses, that relate to happier Times than
Hezekiah ever lived to see, and therefore we may justly say, that the
Reformation made by Hezekiah, was but a Shadow or Image of those greater
Improvements in Grace and Holiness, which properly belong to the Gospel Times,
under the Government of Christ, and the Assistance of his Spirit. And the Eyes
of them that see, shall not be dim, and the Ears of them that hear, shall
hearken -- The Heart also of the Rash shall understand Knowledge, and the Tongue
of the Stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly. God shall plentifully afford
the Light of his Truth, and give them Grace to make a good Use of the
Instructions he vouchsafes unto them. Those that are weak in Faith shall come
to more perfect Degrees of Knowledge; and the most rude and illiterate, such as
could not speak so as to be understood, shall discourse clearly and
intelligibly of God and of their Duty; -- the barbarous Nations being converted
to Christ, shall give Praises to God in their several Languages." See Lowth's
Comment.


And indeed my Text and Context have never yet been fulfilled, since the Coming
of Christ, in their most sublime Sense, nor shall be, until the Millennial
State advances, when the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and of his Christ. And therefore there is not only a primary but a
secondary Sense of the Prophet to be attended: To which may be added, with
Propriety, an accommodated Sense, the particular Illustration whereof will
comprise all I propose to offer from my Text on this great Occasion.

I. This Prophecy of a King to Reign in Righteousness, and Princes to Rule in
Judgment, is primarily applicable to King Hezekiah, and the Prime Ministers of
State under him, and was fulfilled in Him and Them.

The first King of Israel by God's Permission and Designation was Saul. Till
this Time, God had governed the Nation by Judges, whom He raised up, and
extraordinarily inspired, when he saw Occasion. He reserved to himself the sole
Power of establishing Laws, appointing Magistrates, and making War. -- Josephus
(in his Book against Apion) makes the Government of the Israelites before they
had a King different from all other, which he calls by a new Name THEOKPATIA (a
Greek Word made by him to express the same) Theocracy, that is, the Government
of God. For God exercised the supreme Authority among them by his express
Command.

On Occasion of the bad Conduct of Samuel's Sons (their taking Bribes and
perverting Judgment) the Elders of Israel came to Samuel, and demanded a King
to be set over them, like the other Nations, 1 Samuel Chapter 8. ver. 1, -- 4. God is
offended at it as an interpretative throwing off his Authority, who was their
King, but tells Samuel to consent to their Demand,. 7. at the same Time,
ordering him to show them the Manner of the King that should reign over them,.
9. (which Samuel faithfully relates to the Elders,. 11 -- 17.) that they might
know what Kind of Government they chose in Stead of God's. Samuel from God
gives them a Description of a most arbitrary and tyrannical Government, such as
the Kings of the Nations had acquired, for they desired such a King as their
Neighbors had, who were all under the absolute Dominion of their Princes,
which is called by Aristotle (Politic. Lib. 5.) a Despotick Government.

The People of Israel had hitherto lived under Governors, raised up by Divine
Instinct, who had exacted no Tribute from them, nor put them to any Charges.
With which Government they being not contented, but desiring to have a King
like other Nations, that should live in Pomp and Splendour, and keep standing
Forces about him, to be ready to resist any Invasion: Samuel informs them, what
it was they desired, that they might consider, when they understood it, whether
they would persist in their Choice: If they would have a King magnificently
attended, then he tells them, the King will take their Sons, and put them in
his Chariots, etc.. 11. If they would have him keep up constant Forces, then he
must appoint them for Colonels and Captains, and employ those in his Wars, who
were wont to follow their Family-Business, ver. 12. And since after the Manner
of other Kings, he must keep a stately Court, they must be content that their
Daughters, ( ver. 13.) should serve in several Offices; which the King would
think below the Dignity of his Wives and Daughters. Many Ministers also in
several Employments both in War and Peace, must have Salaries to support them,
which must be paid out of their Fields and Vineyards, ver. 14. For which
Services, he tells them, the King will expect the Tenth of all belonging to
them, that he may maintain his Royal Expenses, ver. 15, 16, 17. In one Word, if
they will have a King, he must be maintained, after a royal Manner, out of
their Estates. Puffendorf de Rebus Gestis Philippi in Patricks Comment.


Far be it from us to suppose, that Samuel here speaks of a just and honest
Right of Kings to do these Things, for their Right is quite otherwise described
in that Part of Moses's Law, which concerns the King's Duty, in Deuteronomy Chapter 17.
ver. 18, 19, 20. Moses there commands, that the King, when he sat on the
Throne, should write him a Copy of the Law in a Book from the Original, or
authentic Copy in the Sanctuary, under the Custody of the Priests, and that he
should diligently study it, and learn his Duty therefrom, that he might be
preserved in the true Religion, and be acquainted with his whole Duty, and
perform it accordingly: not imagining himself to be above all Laws, nor
slighting his Subjects, but taking due Care to promote their Happiness.

God had given Israel in the Wilderness, a Body of Moral Political and
Ecclesiastical Laws, when he formed them into a National Commonwealth and
Church, or Political and Ecclesiastical State, and their Kings are by Moses
enjoined to govern themselves and their People by these standing ^aws.

From what is said in the latter Part of the 20th Ver. ( To the End that he,
that is, the King may pro^ong his Days in his Kingdom, he and his Children in
the midst of Israel) it appears that God intended to establish a successive
Right in that Family, to which he gave the Kingdom, if they continued in a
constant Observation of his Laws.

Saul their first King, disobeyed God, and disregarded his Laws, and therefore
the Kingdom was taken from his Family, and given to David, who was a strict
Observer of the Divine Laws (except in the Matter of Uriah, which Sin on his
Repentance, God pardoned) and the Kingdom was transmitted to his Son Solomon.
He, though highly favored of God, yet in sundry Instances rebelled against him,
and trampled on his Laws. For he not only gave himself up to the wanton
Embraces of many Women, but of many strange Women, such as were not Israelites
by Nation or Profession, but of idolatrous Nations, with whom the Lord had
expressly prohibited Israel in general, but more especially their Kings, to
contract Marriage; and by their Allurements, he was seduced to worship filthy
and abominable Idols of the Neighbor Nations. And in Punishment of his
Idolatry and Apostasy, God rent away ten Tribes from his Son Rehoboam, and gave
them to his Servant Jeroboam, the first Founder of the new and distinct Kingdom
of Israel. God says, Solomon's Son shall have one Tribe, for his Servant
David's sake, and Jerusalem's sake, which he had chosen. 1 Kin. Chapter 11. 31, 32.
-- That David my Servant may have a Light always before me in Jerusalem -- ver.
36. By a Light, is meant a Succession of Kings. Asa and Jehosaphat only of all
the Kings of Judah from Solomon to Hezekiah, had the Character of pious and
virtuous Kings, and though God in strict Justice might have rent the whole
Kingdom from the Family of David, when they turned aside from God and Obedience
to his Laws, yet for his Oath's sake to David, he continued the Kingdom in his
Family, and to his Posterity, and thereby Jerusalem was preserved, and
continued the Place of Worship, according to the Divine Institution.

King Ahaz, the Father of Hezekiah, was a very impious Prince, yet when the
King of Israel and the King of Syria, were in a Confederacy to cut off the
Royal Family of Judah, God remembered his ancient Promises to David, and sent
Isaiah to assure him, that their evil Counsel should not stand, or come to
pass. See Isai. Chapter 7. ver. 3 -- 7. The House of David was exceedingly moved at
that Time, ver. 2. God offers Ahaz a Sign (which he himself should choose) of
the Truth of what he had declared and promised, ver. 10, 11. but Ahaz refused
to ask a Sign, because he was in Despair, and disbelieved God's Word, ver. 12.
Isaiah thereupon directs his Speech to the Royal Family in general, to comfort
them under dismal desponding Apprehensions, and assures them that God's
Promises to the Family of David, should never fail, but should have their full
and final Completion in the Messiah, who should be born of a Virgin, ver. 13,
14. This Prophecy, concerning a Virgin's conceiving and bringing forth the
Emanuel, (God with us) was now delivered to raise and support the drooping
Spirits of the House of David, who seeing so great a Force armed against them,
were under terrible Apprehensions of their utter Extirpation near at Hand, from
which this Prediction did relieve them, by giving Assurance, that their House
should stand and continue, 'till this promised Emanuel should be born of their
Race.

Ahaz, instead of being reformed by the Mercy of God in breaking the
Confederacy of the two Kings, became more wicked than he was before, for he
cleaved to the worst Abominations of the heathen Nations round about him. See 2 Chronicles. Chapter 28. ver. 2, 3, 4. And therefore God for his Punishment, brought upon
him again the two confederated Kings, from whom he had delivered him the former
Year, who made terrible Havoc and Destruction. See ver. 5, 6. and soon after
the Land was invaded by the Edomites and Philistines, and exposed to their
Ravages. After all this he continued hardened in his Impiety, and would not
seek to God, nor turn from his wicked Ways, but putting his Confidence in Man
(and not in God) engaged the King of Assyria, by a sacrilegious Present, to
come for his Assistance, who rather distressed than helped him.

After this, he gave himself up to Idolatry, and worshipped the Gods of the
Syrians, as well as of the other Nations, and filled Jerusalem and Judah with
Idols, and their Altars.

And upon the whole it is evident that the Reign of Ahaz was a most calamitous
Time, and the People of Judah and Jerusalem were in an evil State, and all
Things considered, a more dismal Scene was opened than ever before. He who
apostatized from God, and bid open Defiance to his sacred Institutions, it is
easy to suppose, did conduct in Violation of the political or civil Laws, as
well as the Moral and Ecclesiastical. -- He reigned in Unrighteousness, and the
Princes or Magistrates under him, by his Command, or wicked Example, ruled with
Injustice. In Addition to the Calamities of War and Devastation from without by
foreign Armies, Tyranny and Oppression were triumphant within.

Now in this gloomy and tempestuous Time, the Prophecy of my Text and Context
is published by Isaiah, in the Name of the Lord, to support the sinking Spirits
of his People, to raise in them a comfortable Hope, and to give them a joyful
Prospect of a Time soon to come, when God would graciously give them a
religious and righteous King and good Magistrates, under whose wise and just
and mild Administration of Government, they should have some Respite, and be
protected and saved from the terrible Evils that hitherto had come upon them,
and almost overwhelmed them.

This Prediction is introduced with a Word demanding Attention to what should
be spoken, as a Matter of great Importance for the People to hear and
understand -- Behold -- a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall
rule in Judgment -- "Under the Government of so good a King as Hezekiah,
inferior Princes and Magistrates shall execute their Office with Integrity and
Faithfulness." Lowth's Comment.


Righteousness and Judgment are often used in Scripture the one for the other,
and to express the same Thing, and yet we may suppose that sometimes they
express Ideas distinct or somewhat different.

The 72d Psalm Beginning may be considered as a parallel Place with my Text --
Give the King thy Judgments, and thy Righteousness to the King's Son, ver. 1.
As if David had said, "O God, bestow upon Solomon (who now sits upon my Throne)
such a right Judgment in all Things, and such Uprightness and Integrity of
Heart, that he may govern thy People according to thy Laws, and tempering
Justice with Mercy, may be a worthy Successor of me." He shall judge thy People
with Righteousness, and thy People with Judgment, ver. 2. q. d. "He needs thy
special Guidance and Assistance, by which he may be able to administer all
Affairs with such impartial Justice and Clemency, that his poorest Subjects may
be as dear to him, as they are to Thee; and recover their Rights, or be
preserved in them, from the Power of those who would oppress them." Bp
Patrick's Paraphr.


It follows in the second Verse of my Text, And a Man shall be as an hiding
Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry
Place, as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land: That is, "This Man the
Prince, the King, shall be a Refuge to us, when the Storms of Calamities
overtake us, or the Oppressions of our Enemies, like excessive Heat, do scorch
and consume us." Lowth's Comment.
A like metaphorical Expression we have in Isai. 25. 4. directed to God the
great King -- For thou have been -- a Refuge from the Storm, a Shadow from the
Heat, when the Blast of the terrible Ones is as a Storm against the Wall."
Which may be applied to the Protection and Deliverance which God vouchsafed to
the Jews from Sennacherib and his Army.

"The Prophet compares the Oppressions of those Strangers and Infidels to an
excessive Drought which parched up every Thing, and ver. 5. He says, God will
over-shadow his People, and protect them 'till this Tyranny be overpast." A
like manner of Expression we have in Chapter 4. 6. And there shall be a Tabernacle
for a Shadow in the Daytime from the Heat, and for a Place of Refuge, and for
a Covert from Storm and from Rain. That is, God will protect his People, defend
and secure them from Calamities, Oppressions and afflicting Evils.

When Hezekiah set on the Throne, he reformed the Abuses and Evils that had
sprung up and flourished in the Reign of his Father: And whereas Shebna, who
had not a good Character, was Prime Minister of State in the Reign of Ahaz,
this King removed him, and put Eliakim, in his Place. Compare Isai. 22. 15.
with Chapter 36. 3. This Eliakim was a Father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
to the House of Judah, i.e. had a tender Care of those who were under his
Government, Chapter 22. ver. 20, 21. -- He was a Prince that ruled in Judgment.

The King began his Reign with the Reformation of Religion; he opened the House
of God, and restored the true Worship of God, according to the Divine Law; he
ordered the Priests and Levites to attend their Duty at the Temple. He caused
his Father's idolatrous Altar to be removed, and restored the Lord's Altar to
it is Place, and purged the Temple of all other Pollutions, with which it had
been profaned. -- The House of God being sanctified, the King, the Rulers and
great Men of his Kingdom went thither, with the People, and offered Sacrifices
of Atonement and Peace Offerings. And the Service of God was fully restored, as
it had been performed in the purest Times.

And the King called the People together from all Parts of the Land, to
solemnize the Passover, at which there was a very great Congregation -- and was
the greatest Passover that had been kept for many Generations past: -- and when
this Solemnity was ended, by the Command and under the Direction of the King,
the People went out into all the Coasts of Judah and Benjamin, and brake the
Images in Pieces, and cut down the Groves, and threw down the high Places and
the Altars, and utterly destroyed all the Monuments of Idolatry, which were
found in Jerusalem and Judea, and the Coast thereof; and those of the other
Tribes, on their return home, did the same in all other Parts of the Land; and
so the true Worship of God was universally restored. And even the brazen
Serpent made by Moses in the Wilderness, was not spared; which had been (in the
Times of Corruption and Apostasy) made an Object of idolatrous Worship. -- Thus
Hezekiah reigned in Righteousness, according to the Divine Law.

And not only was he a religious and righteous Prince, but he was a Father of
his People, in providing for their Defense against the Assyrian Army.

When Jerusalem was threatened with Invasion by Sennacherib, the King appeared
in the Character of a courageous and magnanimous, as well as faithful Ruler. He
made all manner of Preparations for the Defense of the City and Annoyance of
the Enemy, in Case of a Seige. He caused the People to be enrolled and
marshaled, that were able for the War, and placed over them Captains of
Experience, to instruct them in all military Exercises, and to lead them forth
against the Enemy. And above all these Preparations for Defense, he put his
Trust in God, as appears by that excellent Speech (...) made to the military
Officers, 2 Chronicles. 32. 7, 8. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor
dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all his Multitude that is with him,
for there be more with us than with him -- with him is an Arm of Flesh, but
with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our Battles. -- And it is
said, The People rested themselves upon the Words of Hezekiah: i. e. relied
upon what he said, as if it had been spoken to them by God himself. And God
rewarded Hezekiah's Piety and his religious Regard to the Law of God in his
Administration of Government, with a prosperous Reign, and a very signal
Deliverance from the violent Attempts of the Assyrians; for when the Army was
on a full March toward Jerusalem, with a Purpose to destroy the City and
Inhabitants, God sent a terrible Destruction upon them, 2 Kin. 19. 35.

And upon the whole, it is evident, that this pious and righteous Prince, under
God, was a hiding Place from the Wind, a Covert from the Storm of War, and
Devastation thereof, as refreshing Waters to the thirsty, as a Shadow of
Defense from the violent and scorching Heat; a Protector and Defender of his
People from the destructive Evils, with which they were threatened.

And this King of Judah is exhibited as a Pattern of Piety and Justice, exerted
for the Honor of God, and his Laws, and for the Safety and Felicity of the
People under his Government: He is set forth as a Pattern, for the Imitation of
all Christian Kings. Religion, in the first Place, ought to be the Concern of
every Christian Prince. He that rules over Men, must rule in the Fear of God,
2 Samuel 23. 3. i. e. in the exact Observance of all the Divine Laws. And
accordingly (as you have heard) Kings were enjoined to copy out the Law, and
read therein all the Days of their Life, ( Deuteronomy. 17. 19.) that they might have
a Sense of Religion and Piety on their Hearts, and manifest it in their
Practice. Hezekiah was eminent for Piety toward God, and a zealous Regard to
his Laws and Worship, and therefore he reigned in Righteousness, and the
Magistrates under Him, ruled in Judgment. His Eyes (as David's) were upon the
faithful of the Land, to dwell with him. i. e. to be of his Council, and he
chose them who were of a perfect Way, (i. e. honest and upright) to serve him
in the Administration of Government. All good Kings are mindful of God and his
sacred Laws, and they think themselves obliged to promote the religious
Observance due thereunto. -- It is the Province of Rulers to be Patrons of
Religion, to be nursing Fathers of the Church. And God is pleased to shower
down his Blessings upon pious Princes, and He makes them great Benefactors to
the People. A People are safe and happy, by the Favor of Heaven, under Rulers
who, above all Things, have a strict and zealous Regard to the Honor of God
and Obedience to his sacred Institutions.

And now, having considered the primary Sense of my Text, in Application to
King Hezekiah; it follows,

II. To show, that there is also a secondary Sense of the Words to be attended,
for the fuller Illustration of them.

This Sense is very evident in a great many Prophecies of the Old Testament. It
is called a secondary Sense, not as if it were less principally intended by the
Prophets, but rather with Respect to the Time, because it is the last and
ultimate Completion of their Predictions: Which is also called the mystical or
figurative Sense, by which is meant a more remote, but a natural and necessary
Signification, in Contradistinction to the literal or immediate Signification,
which is a Type or Figure of the other. "All Types or Figures being to have a
Respect to the Things figured; if we consider them as Figures, we speak at the
same Time of that which they represent; so that which is said, has necessarily
two proper and natural Senses; one that agrees to the Figure, and another to
the Thing figured: Sometimes the Figure is more evidently spoken of than the
Thing figured, but sometimes also such Words are purposely chosen, as agree
better to the Thing figured than the Figure, to show that what is said is but a
Figure, and ought not to be rested in. The Old Testament is a Figure of the
New, and all those Things which befell the Jews, were Figures of whatever
should happen to Jesus Christ, and his Disciples." Dupin's Canon of Scripture,
Vol. I.


The Apostle Paul thus expresses himself, in 1 Cor. 10. 11. Now all these
Things happened unto them for Examples, or Types or Figures ((...)) according
to the Greek, speaking of Israel's being under the Cloud, and passing through the
Sea etc. and their eating the Manna and drinking Water out of the Rock; all
which were Types or Figures of Gospel spiritual Blessings. See ver. 1 -- 4.

"But though the chief Persons, and principal Events of the old Testament are
Figures, yet some are more evidently such, and others more obscurely; some are
written only as Histories, and left to be interpreted, and others are written
so that we may plainly see they are but Figures, and their Relation naturally
and necessarily carries the Mind to something more lofty: Such are many of the
Prophecies of the old Testament concerning Jesus Christ, and his Church: They
are capable of two Senses, that of the Figure, and that of the Thing figured;
this latter is not an arbitrary, but a proper and necessary Sense, because the
Words themselves show that the Design of the Writer was to represent by a
Figure something more sublime. As for Example, when the Kingdom of David, and
the Marriage of Solomon is spoken of in such lofty and magnificent Terms, it is
visible, the Writer intended to speak of something more sublime; i. e. of the
Kingdom of Christ, and his Union with the Church, to which what he says of the
Kingdom of David, and the Marriage of Solomon, much more naturally agrees."
Dupin' ibid.


And of this Kind is the Prophecy of my Text and Context, which though primarily
relating to Hezekiah, and the Jewish Church and State, yet secondarily relates
to Jesus Christ, of whom that King was a Type; and though it might have, and
hitherto has had a Fulfillment by several Steps and Degrees, since the Times of
the Gospel commenced, (as I shall show under the third general Head, when I
shall consider this Prophecy by Way of Accommodation) yet as I observed in my
Introduction, this Prediction has never yet been fulfilled since the Coming of
Christ in its ultimate and most sublime Sense, nor shall be, till the
Millennial Period arrives. And therefore I consider this Prophecy as typical of
that happy State of the Church and World in the latter Days. And in the just
Latitude of its secondary or mystical Sense -- 1. Ahaz was a Type or Figure of
Antichrist, that apostatised from the true Worship of the true God to Idolatry
etc. -- 2. Hezekiah was a Type of Christ in one of the last glorious Displays
of his kingly Power and Office, in a thoro' Reformation of the Church, and
cleansing the Christian Sanctuary from all Antichristianism. And 3. Senacherib
with his Assyrian Army, was a Type of Gog and Magog, that shall arise at the
End of the Millennium and compass the Camp of the Saints or New Jerusalem.

(1.) Ahaz was a Type or Figure of Antichrist that apostatized from the true
Worship of the true God to Idolatry and Idolatrous Worship. -- It Is said Ahaz
made molten Images for Baalim, 2 Chronicles. 28. 2. which was a general Name of the
Gods of the Nations round about (...) in particular, it is said, ver. 23. that
he sacrific^^ (...) the Gods of Damascus, that is, the Syrian God which were
called Baalim; and setting up Image Worship, according to the Practice of the
Nations, he sacrificed and burnt Incense in the high Places, ver. 4. i. e. unto
his Idols. And suppressing the Worship of God according to his Law, by shutting
up the Temple, he took Care the People of Judah should not go up to Jerusalem,
by erecting high Places in every City, wherein to perform divine Worship and
Service to Baalim, ver. 24, 25. These Baalim called by the Greek Philosophers
and Poets Demons ((...)) were an inferior Kind of deify'd Powers, as Mediators
between the sovereign Gods and mortal Man; and these Baalim or Demons were the
Souls of Men (Kings, Heroes and others) deify'd or canonized for Gods after
their Death. This appears from Hes^od, Plato, and others.

These deceased Men thus turned into Gods had the Name of Baalim from Bell or
Baal, the first King of Babel, after Nimrod, or rather Nimrod himself, Vosius
de Idolol.
who is supposed to be the first Man who was deify'd or reputed as a God after
Death, and accordingly worshipped. -- And afterward many other deceased Heroes
and Kings were added and put among the Number of the Gods. -- Baal, whose
Worship Jezebel of Tire, brought into Israel, was a deify'd Phenician King of
that Name. This Order of Demons had Place in the Religion of the ancient
Romans, who called them Penates, Lares, and Dii Manes. See Danet's Dict.
And when they canonized their deceased Emperors, (which began at the Death of
Augustus) they called them Divi, that is, Gods of a second Rank. -- This was
the Doctrine of Baalim, a middle Sort of divine Powers; their Office was to be
Mediators or Agents between the sovereign Gods and Men, and the Way of
worshipping them, was by consecrating Images, in which to have and retain the
Presence of these Demons at their Devotions. This Worship of Baalim or Demons
was bro't into Judah and Jerusalem by King Ahaz, as it was b^o't into Israel
200 Years before by Ahab and Jezebel. See 1 Kin. Chapter 16. 30, 31, 32.

And now let us see, how the Pagan Doctrine of Baalim and the Worship thereof
is imitated by the Romish Church.

The great Apostasy of the Christian Church began in departing from the Faith,
and giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, (Gr. (...)) or
Demons, which is foretold by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 1.

As the Reign of Antichrist began in Boniface the Third, Bp of Rome, whom,
(with his Successors) Phocas, Emperor of Constantinople, made Supreme Head of
the Church, and universal Bishop over all Churches whatsoever, A.D. 606, so his
immediate Successor Boniface the 4th, in two or three Years after, by Leave
from Phocas, opened the Pantheon at Rome, i. e. the Temple of Cybele, and all
the Gods, and instead of the Pagan Deities, commanded the Virgin Mary, and all
Saints and Martyrs, to be worshipped in that Temple, and consecrated it for
that Purpose. Platin. Vit. Bonifac.


The Heathens generally worshipped one supreme God, but with him they set up
other inferior Gods, created Deities, whom they styled Demons or Heroes; these
were subordinate Divinities, Mediators and Intercessors with the supreme God.
This was the Worship of Baalim, which Ahaz introduced into his Kingdom, in his
great Apostasy from the God of Israel, and his true Worship.

So it is in the Church of Rome, and this was the great Apostasy of the
Christian Church, when from being the Spouse of Christ, she was turned into a
Harlot, being guilty of spiritual Adultery, even as Israel and Judah. See Hos.
Chapter 2. ver. 2, 4, 5. Though the Papists acknowledge the One true God, yet they
have introduced Angels and Saints, as the Objects of Worship, to whom they
pray, and before whom they prostrate themselves, and pay religious Adoration,
which is correspondent to the Daemon-Worship of the Pagans. -- It is worthy of
Observation, that when Ahaz caused an Idolatrous Altar (in Form of Baalim's
Altar which he saw at Damascus) to be made and set up in the Place of the Altar
of the Lord in the Temple, which he therefore caused to be removed. I say, when
Ahaz did this, at the same Time he said to Urijah, that the Brazen Altar (i.e.
the Altar of the Lord) should be for him to enquire by, 2 King. 16. 15. Though he
made a solemn Injunction that all the public Sacrifices of what Sort soever
they were, whether made by himself, or by the People, should be constantly
offered upon his Altar, which he calls the great Altar, (because it was much
bigger than the Altar of God) ver. 15. yet, he would not have it thought, that
he intended wholly to lay aside the Altar made by Solomon, but rather to do it
great Honor, by reserving it for his private Use, when he pleased to enquire
of God, or at least he pretended some Regard to it, though he had degraded it.
See Bp Patrick's Comment.


And this is the Language and Practice of Antichrist; for the Pope of Rome
causes Shrines and Altars to be made and set up for the Virgin Mary and the
Saints, the Christian, or rather Antichristian Baalim, and orders solemn and
divine Adoration and Worship to be given unto them; and at the same Time
pretends to have a religious Veneration for God and the Lord Jesus Christ;
though hereby Christ is excluded his Office, as the one only Mediator between
God and Man. -- So the true Christian Altar is removed, and the refined Altar
of Baalim, with a Christian Name is put in its Place. And as Ahaz in Conformity
to the Pagans, worshipped the Syrian Gods in and by Images and Statues or
Idols, accounting them as Representations and Symbols of the Gods to whom
divine Worship was paid, (for neither He nor the wiser Heathens though it these
Images to be Gods, yet the worshipping them, and the Gods in and by them is
true Idolatry) -- So the Papists, who make and set up Images of God and Jesus
Christ, the Virgin Mary and the Saints, and do not take these Images to be
Gods, but only Representations of them, and erected to their Honor, are
nevertheless justly charged with Idolatry, because they fall down before them,
and pay religious Worship unto them. And thus it appears, that the Apostasy of
Ahaz from the true Worship of God to Idolatry, and the Worship of Baalim, was a
Figure or Type of the great Apostasy of the Christian Church to
Antichristianism.

2. Hezekiah was a Type of Christ in one of the last and glorious Displays of
his Regal Power and Office, when he shall thoroughly cleanse the Christian
Church from all Antichristian Idolatries and Impurities.

"Jesus Christ, the true and eternal God, has an essential Kingdom, coeternal
with himself, and inseparable from his Being. And He has a Kingdom, and is
King, as God-Man, and Mediator between God and Man, and the Church is more
peculiarly his Kingdom, as consisting of that Part of the World which owns his
Authority, makes a visible Profession of Fealty to him, and Submission to his
Laws: And as for the other Parts of the World, they are all of Right his
Subjects, by Virtue of that universal regal Authority where with God the Father
has invested him, but in Fact are Slaves to the Prince of Darkness, whose
Dominion in the World is no other than a Usurpation on the Kingdom of Christ.
-- But the Church is that Part of the World, that has thrown off the Yoke of
this Usurper, and by a solemn Profession, surrendered up it self to the
Authority of Christ its rightful Lord and Sovereign: and hence the Members of
the Church are said to be translated out of the Kingdom of Darkness, into the
Kingdom of the Son of God. See Col. 1. 13." And this Church or visible Kingdom
of Christ may be thus defined: -- It is one universal Society of all Christian
People incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism under Jesus Christ its
Supreme Head, and distributed under lawful Governors and Pastors into
particular Churches, holding Communion with each other in all the Essentials of
Christian Faith and Worship and Discipline. Scot's Christian Life, Vol. 3.


The visible Body or Church of Jesus Christ on Earth, comprehends all the
Professors of his Name throughout the whole World, who retain the Purity of the
Faith and the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Love. King's Crit. Hist.
Apost. Creed,


Now for this visible Church or Kingdom on Earth, and the Government thereof,
Christ the King has prescribed Laws, first by himself personally, and
afterward by his Apostles under the Inspiration of his Spirit, and as King
over his Church, he defends it against the Attempts of its Enemies. -- "And for
this End, He appoints Kings and Governors the Nursing Fathers of his Church, as
was anciently predicted, Isai. 49. v. 23. who in Analogy to that Name are to
protect it, in the Profession and Exercise of the true Religion, to secure its
Peace and good Order by wholesome Laws, to chasten and correct its irregular
Members, and to make proper Provision for the Decency of its Worship, and the
Maintenance of its Ministers, or spiritual Pastors. These are also of his
Appointment (as King of his Church) to preach his Gospel, to administer his
holy Sacraments, to offer up the public Prayers of Christian Congregations, and
to perform all other Acts and Offices in the Church, according to the Gospel
Institution."

Jesus Christ has had such a Kingdom on Earth, since his Ascension into Heaven,
but hitherto his visible Kingdom has not had a large Spread upon the Earth. --
"The Infidel Part of the World is very vast and large -- The greatest Kingdoms
of the Earth are Tartary, India, China, Persia and Turkey, which are Strangers
to the Religion of Jesus, except a small Number in Turkey. -- If we divide the
World into six Parts, we shall find that five of them know not Christ, but are
either the idolatrous Pagans (which are the greatest Number) or Jews or
Mahometans; and of the remaining sixth Part, Popery has spread it self through
the most flourishing Kingdoms of Europe, and has got Footing in Asia and
Africa, and America; and among the Churches which disown Popery, some are
grossly ignorant, erroneous and superstitious, as the Churches of Muscovy,
Abyssnia (or Upper-Ethiopia) and those called the Greek Churches, both in Asia
and Europe; so that they hardly deserve the Name of Christian Churches" -- Not
to speak of the Ignorance, Infidelity, Heresy, and Immorality that seems to
cover the Protestant Churches: So that the true Church of Christ is at this Day
(as it has been in preceding Times) a little Flock. -- But if we look into the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, we shall find they speak of the vast Extent of
Christ's visible Kingdom on Earth, and seeing those Prophecies have never yet
been accomplished, we must conclude that there is a Time yet to come, before
the Consummation of all Things, wherein our Savior will once more display the
glorious Banner of his Cross, and like a mighty Man of War, march on conquering
and to conquer, 'till he has completed his Victory over all the Powers of the
Earth, and brought all the World into a State of Subjection and Obedience to
him and his Gospel: When the Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of
the Lord and of his Christ.

There are a great Number of Texts in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and
the minor Prophets, which speak of this universal Kingdom of the Messiah. I
shall name only one or two. It Is said in Dan. Chapter 2. 34, 35. that the Stone cut
out of the Mountain without Hands, (by which all agree the Kingdom of Christ is
signified) should become a great Mountain, and fill the whole Earth. And in
Zech. 14. 9. it is said, the Lord shall be King over all the Earth. But the most
signal and renowned Place of Scripture, concerning the future glorious State of
the Christian Church on Earth, is in the New Testament: Rev. Chapter 20. begin.
where is (in Vision) expressly foretold the Binding of Satan a thousand Years,
and the Saints living and reigning with Christ a thousand Years.

That this happy Period is not past, we may satisfy our selves, by considering,
that from the Beginning of Gospel Times, to this Day, there never has been a
thousand Years that deserve the Name, or answer the Characters of this blessed
Millennium.

This last State of the Church and the World is expressed by new Heavens and a
new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. which (says the Apostle
Peter,) we look for according to his Promise, evidently referring to the
Prophet Isaiah, for this is his Style in expressing the glorious Times of the
Gospel; For behold (says God) I create new Heavens and a new Earth, Chapter 65. 17.
And again, Chapter 66. 22. -- The new Heavens and the new Earth which I will make
-- And from him (not only Peter) but the Apostle John borrows and uses the same
Metaphor of a new Heaven and a new Earth, (Rev. 21. 1.) in describing the
Millennium mentioned in the Beginning of the preceding Chapter.

This cannot be meant of the Church triumphant and State of the blessed in
Heaven; for the new Heavens and the new Earth, ver. 1. are the same with the
holy City, the new Jerusalem, ver. 2. into which the Kings of the Earth bring
their Glory and Honor, ver. 24. i. e. the gentile Kings being converted to
Christianity, shall come with all their honorable Retinue, to submit to the
Scepter of Jesus, to own themselves his Subjects, and ambitious to be Members
of this glorious Church on Earth.

It is very evident, and I suppose universally agreed, that Jerusalem the
Metropolis of Judea, was a Type of the Christian visible Church (as the Temple
and Sacrifices and other ceremonial Services thereof, were a Type of the pure
Gospel Service and Worship) and David under this Figure, celebrates the Beauty
and Glory of the Gospel Church in the latter Days, Psalm. 48. ver. 1, 2. -- The
City of our God -- beautiful for Situation, the Joy of the whole Earth, is
Mount Sion, the City of the great King -- i.e. the Christian Church in her
visible and glorious State, the City of Christ the great King. And in the Book
of Ezekiel, from Chap. 40th to the End of the Book, we have a Description of
the Millennial State of the GospelChurch, represented under the Figure of the
City of Jerusalem and the Temple.

The Prophet was in Vision brought into the Land of Israel, and was set upon a
very high Mountain, by which was the Frame of a City on the South, i.e. on the
South Side of Mount Sion. He saw to the South ward of him, a Representation of
the City and Temple standing upon an Eminence, And John's Vision of the new
Jerusalem (though it is to be observed there was no Temple there) is formed upon
the Plan of Ezekiel's Vision. See Rev. 21. 10, 11. And he carried me away in
the Spirit to a great and high Mountain, and showed me that great City, the
holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God, having the Glory of God. Now
to prepare for this blessed State, the Lord Jesus will come a second Time, (not
personally, but by his Spirit) with his Fan in his Hand, and will thro'ly purge
the Floor of his visible Church from all the Chaff of Superstition, and
Idolatry, Schism and Heresy, Irreligion and Immorality, with which it is almost
totally covered. And he shall be as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver, and he
shall purify the Sons of Levi (the Ministers of the Gospel) and purge them as
Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in
Righteousness. See Mal. 3. 3. At this Time, that most corrupt Faction of
Christians, or rather most wicked Cabal of Antichristians (called in Scripture
the mystical Babylon and Antichrist) shall be utterly broken, and the Kings and
Princes of the Nations (the ten Horns) who had before been Partakers with the
Romish Church in its soul Impostures and Corruptions, will be turned to hate
the antichristian Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat
her Flesh, and burn her with Fire, Rev. 17. 16.

This is the happy Time when Antichrist's Reign, i.e. domineering persecuting
Power shall come to an End, which (as it began A.D. 606, and must continue 1260
Years) is at 108 Years Distance from the present Time. Then shall begin the
cleansing of the Sanctuary predicted and in Type foreshewed in Daniel, Chapter 8.
Though it may take up half a Century or more for the thorough purging the Church
from all antichristian Impurities.

To prepare for the pouring out the 5th Vial on the Seat of the Roman Beast:
The 4th Vial shall be poured out on the Sun: That is, the grand Supports of the
Papacy shall be removed, the House of Austria, and the House of Bourbon --
These Powers of Europe shall be broken and their Empires overturned. After the
Ruin of Antichrist, follows the Downfall of the Turkish Empire, foreshewed by
the pouring out the sixth Vial on the great River Euphrates (Rev. 16. 12.) i.
e. the People inhabiting there, the Turks who dwell in that Part of the World
-- and the Water thereof was dried up, i. e. the Turkish Empire is overturned.
It follows, -- that the Way of the Kings of the East might be prepared. Some
great Potentates of the eastern Nations shall come over to the Christian
Church, and the Gospel shall be preached to those Nations. The 6th Vial shall
demolish the Turkish and Persian Empires, and destroy the Mohammedan Religion,
in which Empires it now flourishes. This will prepare the Way for gospelizing
all the Nations of the East. -- The 7th Vial poured into the Air is the
immediate Forerunner of the Millenium, when a great Voice came out of the
Temple of Heaven from the Throne, saying, it is done, ver. 17.

Then the Gospel shall be preached to all the Nations of the Earth. -- The Jews
shall be converted to Christ and gathered in, from all their Dispersions, and
the Fullness of the Gentiles shall come in with the Jews to the Christian
Church. See Romans 11. 25. -- This is the Time spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah
(Chap. 11. 9.) when the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as
the Waters cover the Sea. And when every thing that offends is taken out of the
Way, the Earth shall be blessed with an universal Peace, which is clearly
predicted by the evangelical Prophet, Isai. Chap. 2. 4. Nation shall not lift
up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more: Which peaceful
State is also foretold in many other Places of the Prophets. Universal
Righteousness and Holiness shall be an Attendant of this last Dispensation --
Thy People shall be all righteous, says the Prophet, Isai. 60. 21. And they
shall not defile themselves any more with their detestable Things, Ezekiel. 37.
23. Religion shall appear in it is native Purity, the Influence of the holy
Spirit on Men's Hearts, shall be conspicuous in their Lives -- then in a more
eminent Manner, than ever before the blessed Jesus shall be exalted and
glorified. "In these blessed Days there shall be no new Religion, but new
Hearts -- Religion and Piety shall be in high Reputation, Goodness and Holiness
shall be esteemed most honorable, all Perfidiousness and Falsehood shall cease
and disappear -- Truth, Sincerity, Integrity and Open-Heartedness shall
universally prevail -- All sinister and base Designs, all unworthy Aims and
vicious Ends shall be laid aside, and the Glory of God and the Honor of Christ
shall have a mighty and most prevailing Influence in the Hearts and Lives of
Men.

This shall be the latter End of Christ's Kingdom on Earth. And this happy
State of Things shall be enlivened and enlightened, though not with Christ's
personal Presence, yet with his Presence by the Influence of his Spirit, in an
high and very uncommon Measure; for so we read in the apocalyptic Vision, that
upon the new Jerusalem's coming down from Heaven, a great Voice was heard
saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and He will dwell with them;
and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them and be their
God." -- By the powerful Aids of Heaven, Men shall be enabled to subdue their
Lusts, to conquer their Vices, and with Exactness to conform their Lives to the
Rules of the Gospel.

"And as to the outward Means and Instruments, God will make Use of to bring
about this great Work on Earth, it is most reasonable to suppose it shall be
effected by active and zealous Governors. Persons of that Character have been
heretofore raised up, in order to great Revolutions and Alterations in Church
and State. This is evident in Cyrus and Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, and Charles the great, the Founder of the German Empire, in former
Times: And in the Electors of Saxony first John and then Maurice at Luther's
Reformation in Germany. And at the Beginning of the Reformation in England,
what great and wonderful Things did the resolute and courageous King Henry 8th
bring to pass? -- Much more may be done in England and Europe, and all the
World over* by God's inspiring the Hearts of some Christian Kings and Princes
with Valor and Resolution, especially by adding Virtue and Holiness to their
Courage, by touching their Hearts with a real Sense of Religion. Kings and
Governors thus qualified, can under God, accomplish wonderful Things. Impious
and debauched Rulers are the greatest Mischiefs and Plagues of the Earth; and
accordingly it has been the Stratagem of Satan throughout all Ages to procure
such Magistrates as will abet and further his Design, i.e. who will patronize
Irreligion and Vice, and if possible establish it by Law: this has been the
Cause of that Deluge of Vice and Debauchery which has broke into and overspread
Cities and Countries. But when God will vouchsafe to stem this mighty Torrent,
he will set up some eminent Persons in high Places, who by their powerful Laws
as so many Walls and Ramparts shall effectually stop its impetuous Course.
Edward's Survey, Vol. II.
" High Enthusiasts and Fanatics make the Reign of Christ inconsistent with the
Reign of Kings, and Rule of Princes. When Fifth-Monarchy-Men set up King Jesus,
they pull down all other Kings -- But they forget that in the same Place where
it is said by the Prophet, Behold a King shall reign in Righteousness, meaning
Christ and this Kingdom I am now discoursing of, he adds, and Princes shall
Rule in Judgment. So speaks my Text: i.e. Kings and Potentates of the Nations,
under Christ the great King.

The Monarchy of Christian Princes is not incompatible with the Kingdom of
Christ. "And so far are we from giving any Countenance to the Fifth Monarchy
Enthusiasts and their Doctrine, that as we firmly believe, so we confidently
aver, that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in the Millennial State (of which I am
now speaking) shall be set up and maintained by the Kings and Governors of the
Earth; and I think we have good Ground for this, from Rev. 17. 16, 17. where we
are expressly told, that those who formerly gave their Kingdom to the Beasts,
shall afterward hate the Whore, and make her desolate etc."

"And this great Work shall be also advanced by the Help of Gospel Ministers,
whose Ability, Zeal and Faithfulness, are as requisite in this great Affair, as
of the Civil Magistrate. -- Ministers shall discharge their holy Function,
according to the Christian Law, shall make all Men see, that they make the
Honor of God and Christ, and saving Men's Souls, the grand Design of their
Ministry. Magistrates and Ministers will go Hand in Hand toward accomplishing
that great Work of reforming the Church and the World. Zerubbabel the
Governor, and Jeshua the Priest, were joined in building the Temple, and in
these happy Times to come there shall be no Disagreement between the State and
the Church. -- In former Times very great Things have been done for promoting
Religion and Virtue, by the hearty Concurrence of pious Magistrates and
Ministers -- When they have acted jointly for the Advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, wonderful Effects were visible, as in the Times of those religious
Emperors Constantine and Theodosius the elder. When Jesus Christ shall send
such Princes and Leaders as Zerubbabel, and such Ministers of Religion as
Jeshua, such Teachers and Scribes as Ezra, the Building of God's House will
soon be finished. -- When He appoints such publick-spirited, pious and zealous
Governors as Nehemiah, the Walls of the new Jerusalem will soon be built up.
Such great and noble Spirits being set on work, will by the divine Assistance
easily bring the Work to Perfection. Then the Gospel will be completely
established, Christianity universally propagated, and evangelical Righteousness
will every where prevail upon the Earth."

And the Reformation begun and brought to Perfection by Hezekiah, an eminent
Type of Christ, in this glorious Display of his regal Power does most
graphically set forth in Figure, this wonderful Reformation of the Church and
of the World in the latter Days.

This pious King ordered the Priests to cleanse the Sanctuary from all its
idolatrous Pollutions -- restored the Altar of the Lord to its Place; removed
and destroyed the idolatrous Altars, and all Monuments of Idolatry; resettled
the Worship of God, according to the Law of Moses; renewed the usual
Sacrifices, and caused the Passover to be kept with great Solemnity; resettled
the Courses of the Priests and the Levites according to their Service; and in a
Word, restored the ancient Worship in all its Order and Solemnity; a full
Account of which we have in 2 Chronicles. Chapters 29. 30, 31. A most lively Emblem
of what shall be done in the latter Times, when the Christian Church shall be
restored to its pure State and Worship, according to the Gospel.

It remains to show,

3. That Sennacherib with his Assyrian Army, was a Type of Gog and Magog, that
shall arise at the End of the Millennium, and compass the Camp of the Saints,
or the new Jerusalem.

At the close of the Millennium, the World again degenerates, and in a short
Time becomes very impious and wicked, by the Influence and Seduction of Satan,
now comeforth from the bottomless Pit. At that Time, there shall be a woeful
Apostasy of a great Part of the World from Christianity to Antichristianism;
Papism, Mahometism, Paganism and Devilism -- There shall then arise a deadly
Generation of Vipers, a cursed Increase of the most profligate Sinners, who
having separated from the Church, will invade and endeavor to destroy it, and
root out the Christian Religion from the Earth. An Account of this we have in
Rev. Ch.20. ver. 7, 8, 9. when the thousand Years are expired, Satan shall be
loosed out of his Prison; and he shall go out to deceive the Nations which are
in the four Quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to
Battle, the Number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea, and they went up on the
Breadth of the Earth and compassed the Camp of the Saints about and the beloved
City, i. e. the new Jerusalem. It Is prophesied in Ezekiel, Chapter 38, 39. that a
little before the Beginning of the Millennium (figuratively described in the
following Chapters) Gog and Magog (i.e. the Turks) shall beset the Jews, at
their Return from their Dispersions to Palestine, with all their Force and
Cavalry, and this for their Destruction. And the dreadful Overthrow of these
Enemies of the Jews is there also foreshewed. Soon after which that blessed
State shall commence.

But that Gog and Magog is quite different from this in Rev. 20. Chapter For this
Gog and Magog shall arise and invade the whole Christian Church, Jews and
Gentiles at the End of the Millennium. But John in other Instances, forming his
Vision on Ezekiel's Plan, as was noted before, so here, he takes from Ezekiel
the Names of the last and most implacable Enemies of the Church, the Apostates
from the Christian Profession; and so great shall be their Number when gathered
in an Army, that they shall (as it were) cover all the Earth, and shall lay
close Siege to the beloved City; by which is meant the whole Church of Christ,
the visible Body and Society of Believers, which shall at that Time remain on
Earth.

But observe the tragical Close of all -- Fire came down from God out of
Heaven, and devoured these Armies of Gog and Magog, ver. 9. All which is
represented in Figure by Sennacherib's Army, and the Destruction thereof.

The Assyrian Army went up on the Breadth of the Land of Judea. The whole Host
came up against the City, and begirt it with a close Siege, on Design to take
and utterly destroy it, and the Inhabitants thereof. God had promised that the
King of Assyria should not possess himself of the City, nor so much as shoot an
Arrow into it. See 2 Kin. 19. 32. Isai. 37, 33. and so it came to pass. "In the
very Night after the Army sat down before Jerusalem (as the Jews say in Gemara
Sanhedrin) and were so weary, that they made no Attempt upon the City; the
Angel of God went out, and destroyed the whole Army. That is, as the Targum
says, (which is related after the same Manner in the Babylonish Talmud) the
Word of the Lord (the Messiah) sent Gabriel to do this Execution, who in the
Passover-Night smote them with Lightning." Patrick's Comment.


A very lively and illustrious Figure of the amazing Destruction of the last
Enemies of the Church by Fire from Heaven, or Lightning. And upon the whole we
see, that there is a Resemblance or Correspondence between many of the
Transactions mentioned in the old Testament, and those which should come to
pass under the new, and that the Prophets when they spoke of some Events near
their own Times, had more distinct Views, which might reach even to the latter
Ages of the World.

And having considered and illustrated the secondary or mystical Sense of our
Text.

I proceed,

III. To consider and illustrate our Text by Way of Accommodation. -- And the
accommodated Sense may with a Propriety be added to the primary and secondary
Senses.

I have considered the secondary or mystical Sense of my Text, as the ultimate
Completion of this Prophecy -- But then we are to observe, that this Prediction
(as many other of the old Testament) is not limited to one single Event, but
may have different Views, and be capable of being fulfilled by several Steps
and Degrees.

"In the Interpretation of Prophecies, that Latitude must be allowed which is
proper and familiar to divine Prophecies, that their Accomplishments may be
both perpetual and punctual, for they resemble the Nature of their Author, to
whom one Day is as a thousand Years, and a thousand Years as one Day. -- And
though the FulnessandHeight of their Complement be many Times assigned to some
certain Age or Period of Time, yet they have nevertheless certain Stairs or
Scales of Accomplishment throughout diverse Ages of the World." Bacon's Advanc.
of Learning, B. 2. Chapter 2.
And the observing the Distinction between the different Times wherein the
Prophecies relating to the Gospel State shall be fulfilled, facilitates our
understanding the prophetical Writings, and discovers to us a pleasing Harmony
between the Prophecies of the old and new Testament, and the State of the
Christian Church in the past Ages and Periods.

My Text understood by Way of Accommodation, is an Application thereof in
Periods and Times of the Gospel, to Christian Kings and Emperors, who (under
Christ) reigned in Righteousness, and to Princes or chief Magistrates under
them, who ruled in Judgment: -- and were as an hiding Place from the Wind, and
a Covert from the Tempest.

And for Illustration, I will name Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, who
have reigned in Righteousness, or ruled in Judgment, who were a Refuge and
hiding Place to the People of God from the Storms of Calamities, and the
Violence and Oppression of its Enemies.

1. Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor, was eminently a King
raised up by God, to perform wonderful Things for Christ and his Church, and to
Him may our Text be applied and accommodated with an Emphasis.

The Christian Church had been for above two Hundred Years assaulted and
afflicted by the furious Storms, and scorching Heat of Persecutions, raised by
the Pagan Emperors, and prosecuted by the Governors of the Provinces. The ten
Persecutions of the primitive Church are famous in Church History. The tenth
and last, began under Dioclesian and Maximian A. D. 303, and continued under
some of their Successors, was the most furious of them all, as well as of the
longest Duration. In this dismal Time, and most tempestuous State of the
Church, God raised up Constantine to be a Protector of his Church, against the
Outrage of its Enemies, a Deliverer from her Agonies and Terrors.

Constantine the Son of Constantius Chlorus (Emperor of the western Provinces)
and his Wife Helena a British Lady, was born in Britain. -- As the first
Christian King in the World ( Lucius) was a Briton, so was the first Christian
Emperor. "O happy Britain (says Eumenius Rhetor in an Oration to Constantine)
and blessed above all other Lands, which did first behold Constantine Caesar
-- And in another Oration -- "Your Father Constantius did free the British
Provinces from Slavery, and you have enobled them by taking thence your
Original." -- " Britons do justly boast of Constantine their Countryman, one
among a thousand and ten thousands, who quenched the Fire, and overturned the
Furnace of Persecution, and ensranchised Christianity through the Roman Empire."

No wonder that Britain is ambitious of having such a Worthy born in her. This
blessed Emperor, marching with his Army from Gaul to Italy, for the Suppression
of the wicked Usurper. and most execrable Tyrant Maxentius, and for the
Deliverance of the Romans from his horrid Barbarities and Debaucheries, as he
was on his March, after Midday, had a wonderful Vision: He saw in the Heavens
a Pillar of Light in Figure like a Cross, with an Inscription thereon (in Greek
Letters EN TOU NIKA) In this overcome; and the Night following, Jesus Christ
appeared to him in his Sleep, and ordered him to make a Standard or Banner,
like to that which appeared to him in the Heavens, and thereupon promised him
Success, and Victory over his Enemies.

Constantine according to the divine Command, made a Standard, and put upon it
the Sign of the Cross. -- He gained an entire Victory over Maxentius, and put
the Standard, as a Trophy in the middle of Rome. -- Being instructed in the
Christian Religion, he embraced it, and made an open, public Profession of
Christianity; and as a Nursing Father of the Christian Church, he made many
Edicts in Favor of Christians, and the Christian Religion. -- He first granted
to Christians the free Exercise of their Religion, and restored to them their
Churches, and conferred many Privileges on them: He exhorted all his Subjects
to quit Paganism, and embrace the Religion of Jesus Christ. He caused most of
the Heathen Temples to be shut up, or thrown down, and enacted Laws against the
Heathen Religion. He ordered magnificent Churches to be built, and endowed
them, and granted Immunities and Privileges to the Clergy. He manifested a
fervent and unfeigned Love to Christ, and his Religion: He showed extraordinary
Kindness for the Christian Church and the Ministers of it, as became so great
and good a Man: and so zealous was he in Christianity, that his Palace
resembled a Church. He personally invited the Ministers of Christ to him, and
his Palace, and treated them with great Veneration and Honor; and by Deeds as
well as Words, he gave them a most kind and courteous Reception. He made many
Laws from Time to Time, for the Support and Emolument of the Church. He granted
to all Clergymen and their Families, a Freedom from Taxes and Tribute; and in
his Reign, and by his Example and Encouragement, the Church was enriched by
Gifts and Offerings. In his Reign the Church enjoyed Peace; and under the Laws
of Constantine, Christians being freed from Persecution, and persecuting
Powers, had a full and free Enjoyment of their civil Rights, and Christian
Liberties.

Constantine manifested a just Concern for the true Faith of the Gospel, and
the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion; and therefore when Arius
broached his damnable Heresy, concerning Jesus Christ the Son of God ( viz.
that there was a Time when the Son of God did not exist, that he was created
out of Nothing, and is of a different Substance from the Father) Constantine
called a Council at Nice -- the first General Council, composed of the Bishops
of the whole Roman Empire East and West. He honored this Council with his
Presence, and by his Authority and Moderation, he preserved Order and Peace. --
This Council drew up a Creed (the famous Nicene Creed) in which it declared,
that the Son of God was consubstantial with his Father; and anathematized Arius
and his Doctrine.

And though Constantine was afterward deceived into a good Opinion of Arius by
the Jugglings, and Prevarications of that Heretic, and his Partisans, yet he
always adhered to the Omoousian Faith declared by the Nicene Fathers, and
detested the Doctrine of Arius -- Thus Constantine reigned in Righteousness --
and his Mother Helena Augusta is celebrated by the Historians of those Times,
Eusebius and Socrates.
for her eminent and unaffected Piety, Zeal for Christ and his holy Religion.
-- And as she was rich in Faith, so in good Works -- She was the liberal Soul,
that devised liberal Things; and continued in Liberality and Beneficence.

In Constantine and his Mother Helena was eminently fulfilled that Prediction
of the Prophet, Isai. 49. 23. -- concerning the happy Times of the Gospel, when
Kings and Queens gave up their Names to Christ, and supported the Church -- And
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers -- It
is very evident that this Prophecy was first remarkably accomplished in the
Favors which Constantine, and his Mother Helena showed to the Church, and had
a further Accomplishment afterward in other Emperors, Empresses, Kings and
Queens. The latter Clause of the Verse, They shall bow down to thee with their
Face to the Earth, may be justly applied to denote the great Honor and
Deference which the Christian Kings and Emperors should pay to the Church,
submitting themselves to the Laws of Christ, and owning themselves his
Disciples -- but to none may it be accommodated and applied with so great a
Propriety, and Eminency, as to Helena and Constantine.

2. Theodosius the Elder, who also merited the Title of Great, is renowned in
History, for his mighty Achievements, and Victories over Tyrants and Usurpers,
and delivering the Empire from their Outrage; and is justly celebrated on
Account of his Piety, his Zeal in the Cause of Christ, his Care of the Church
and extraordinary Affection to the Ministers of Christ. He was famous for his
Orthodoxy in Religion, and called the second General Council, at
Constantinople, against Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.
Which Council, in their first Canon confirmed the Nicene Creed, and
Anathematised the Arian and Macedonian Heresies. Theodosius is illustrious, and
his Memory precious for his perfecting that good Work began by Constantine
against Heathenism. Constantine was not able to finish so mighty and arduous an
Affair, as the Extirpation of Paganism; but that idolatrous Religion was quite
expelled by Theodosius A.D. 390. after which Time, it was never publicly
maintained in the Roman Empire, He purged Rome from pagan Superstition, and
Idolatry, and gave Order that all pagan Sacrifices and Festivals should be
abolished, and the Statues and Images of the Gods, broken in Pieces; and the
pagan Temple of Serapis at Alexandria in Egypt, which remained to that Time,
and had been so famous in the World for the Stateliness of its Structure, and
Solemnity of its Worship, was by the Emperor's Command, utterly destroyed.
Theodosius reigned in Righteousness, and was a Covert from the Tempest, as
Rivers of Waters for Refreshment etc.

3. Alfred (Alured) King of England (from whom King GEORGE is lineally
descended) Grandson of Egbert the Founder of the English Monarchy, and the
first anointed King in Britain, is one of the most famous Kings in all History,
for his Wars and Victories, for his Administration of Justice* his Learning and
Religion. He so discharged all the Offices of a King, and of a Christian, as
perhaps no One in any Age can be found so eminent. I must account him (human
Frailties excepted) a perfect Character. England may boast of an Alfred, as
Britain of a Constantine.

In his Reign the Danes invaded England, and he was to his Subjects a Covert
from the Danish Tempest, and as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. In
all Bartles he was present every where, striking Fear and Terror into the
Hearts of his Enemies* and giving new Courage to his own Men. He alone would
expose his Breast to the Swords of the Enemy: He alone would restore the Fight
when his Army was ready to flee, and by his own Example, he constrained his
Soldiers to repel the insulting and pursuing Pagans. Fifty-six set Battles he
fought against the Danes by Sea and Land, and of these, eight in one Day: And
by his miraculous Courage and Conduct, he so afflicted and worried his Enemies,
though they came in fresh Numbers upon him, that they were forced to give up what
Hostages he demanded, and submit to such Conditions as he thought fit to impose
-- And that these are no Flourishes, the universal Consent of Historians bears
Witness: All celebrate him as an Hero* and by an unparalled Example tax him
with no Vice. -- And though Egbert is generally accounted the first Monarch of
the English Saxons (our Ancestors) yet in Truth, he only marked out or began
what was perfected by his Grandson Alfred.

He was admirable in the Administration of Justice, wherein to relieve the poor
and distressed, he traveled Night and Day through his Kingdom; for besides
him, the People had in a Sense no Protector. There was such Partiality among
the inferior Judges of the Land, that the King was perpetually troubled with
Appeals from their Decision of Causes, into which he so diligently enquired,
that all Villainy was ever bro't to Light. If he found his Judges unskilful, he
gravely admonished them, and in Case they did not improve in Knowledge of
Justice, they were to lose their Places.

The King himself being the superior Judge (not only as to Authority but
Administration of Justice) took Care that his People should be furnished with
able Ministers: He also provided them with good Laws, and for the better
Government of the whole English Nation, brought up several laudable Customs,
which continue to this Day.

As to his Learning, he was the Wonder of his Age -- He had a vehement Desire
after Knowledge: and by reading Night and Day, or hearing some learned Men, he
had a thoro' Knowledge of Books, and such Improvement did he make, that he
became an excellent Grammarian, Philosopher, Rhetorician, Historian, Musician,
and Poet: And he was a perfect Architect, and Geometrician; and that Learning
might flourish in the Land, he laid a Foundation for the Improvement thereof
among his People: He founded a School at Oxford (since a famous University) for
training up Youth in the liberal Arts, and endowed it with a Part of his
Revenue.

As to Religion, he excelled more than in Learning. He made a Vow to dedicate
to God, in solemn Meditation and Prayer, the one half of his Time, except the
Time of Sleep and necessary Refreshments.

I close with a summary View of him, by a learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman.
in this Exclamation:

"O Alfred, the Wonder and Astonishment of all Ages! -- If we reflect upon his
Piety and Religion, it would seem that he had never gone out of a Monastery --
if on his Warlike Exploits -- that he had lived no where but in a Camp -- if on
his Writings and Studies -- that he had spent his whole Life in a University --
and lastly, if we consider his Administration of the Affairs of his Kingdom and
Subjects, one would think, that his whole Time had been employed in nothing
else but enacting Laws, and promoting Justice in his Courts, and Tribunals." --
Behold here in Alfred, a King that Reigned in Righteousness. Sir Richard
Blackmore in his Prince Arthur, B. 5. introduces King Uter deceased, appearing
to Prince Arthur in a Dream -- representing to him the most illustrious Persons
who should succeed him, with their Characters, and the Revolutions in their
future History -- "See Alfred there, all shall his Praises sing,
A pious Soldier, and a humble King.
Hero and Bard, able in lotty Verse,
His own great Deeds. *and Triumphs to rehearse.
Revered by all, while his resistless Arms,
Shall to their Coast repel the Danish Swarms.
Amidst the Seas, swept by his potent Hand,
Those northern Locusts, leave the afflicted Land.
Then his wise Laws, and Discipline shall smooth
Unpolished Manners, and rough Nature sooth.
On the fair Plains, where Isis' limpid Streams,
Haste to the Embraces of delightful Thames.
This mighty Prince shall a famed Empire found,
Where Science with unfading Laurels crowned,
With all her sacred Arts and lettered Train
In stately Schools shall uncontested reign.
BLACKM. P. Arthur.




4. Henry Earl of Richmond, afterward the seventh of that Name, King of
England, must not be passed over in Silence. -- This mighty Prince at the
Invitation of an affrighted, afflicted and distressed People came over from
Britany, and by the Blessing of God, delivered the Nation from the Outrages of
that most cruel Tyrant, and bloody Caitiff Richard, who had murdered his own
Nephews, and usurped the Crown. -- The Battle on the Plain of Bosworth is
famous in the English Chronicles, and the complete Victory obtained by the
young Hero over the infamous Usurper. In the Field of Battle, he kneeled down
and gave Thanks to Almighty God for this signal Favor. -- In him concentred
the royal Saxon (...) Norman and British Lines; for by Owen Tudor (ap Theodore)
his Grandfather, a Welchman, he descended in a right Line from Cadwallader the
last King of Britain 700 Years before. And to this Henry Tudor is by some
applied, what is spoken by Anchises to AEneas, concerning Augustus: Hic Vir,
Hic est, tibi quem promitti sepius audis.
This, This is he, the Man whom thou have heard
-- so often promised.
"Our Blood the Royal Channel now regains,
Derived through our brave Offspring Tudor's Veins.
Which with the Norman joined, the confluent Tide
As long as that of Time, shall downward glide:
From their Embrace, to rule Britannia, springs
A glorious Series of puissant Kings.
See the first Tudor, who revered shall reign
After the hardy Deed on Bosworth's Plain.
He shall the Scepter sway with great Applause,
And guide the Isle with wise and equal Laws.
BLACKM, P. Arthur.


For it had been foretold to Cadwallader, that in Aftertimes his Race should
set upon the Throne; and King Henry VIth plainly foreshewed that he should be
King, even when he was a Child. He joined the two Roses in one, i. e. united
the contending Houses of York and Lancaster, by marrying Elizabeth eldest
Daughter of King Edward 4th. He laid the Foundation of uniting the two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland under one King, by giving his eldest Daughter Margaret,
in Marriage to James 4th King of Scots, from whom descended our King James 1st
of Great Britain. He manifested his Regard to the Church, by employing Bishops
Morton and Fox, and his Chaplain Urswike, in the greatest Part of his
Negotiations. He put an End to all Civil Wars, and settled the Nation in Peace.
He with his Parliament, enacted excellent Laws, in particular one for Admission
of poor Suitors at Law (in Forma Pauperis) without paying Fee to Attorney or
Clerk.

As he was reputed an Oracle in his Time, so his Parliament was treated by him
as his Oracle, for in all Matters of Importance, he would ask their Advice, and
he sometimes put even his Prerogative into their Hands; which is to me an
Evidence of his great Wisdom. The City of London was his Paradise, for what
good Fortune soever befell him, he though it he enjoyed it not, 'till the Citizens
were made acquainted therewith. -- He reigned in Righteousness, and to England
he was eminently as a hiding Place from the Wind, a Covert from the Storm, as
Rivers of refreshing Waters, and as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land.

5. Queen Elizabeth shines among the Potentates of England, with the brightest
Rays. She was the Wonder of her Age, the Glory of her Sex, and the greatest
crowned Head of Britain, from King Alfred to King William the Third. She
delivered England from Popery, and bloody Persecution, and re-established the
Protestant Religion. -- By the Blessing of Heaven with her Wisdom, and
Magnanimity, and the Courage and good Conduct of her Sea-Captains, she saved
the Nation from the Spanish Invasion, in which the Protestants were marked out
and doomed to utter Destruction. -- Her religious Respect to God in the Defeat
and Ruin of the Spanish Fleet was apparent, when immediately thereupon, she
came into the City, attended with the Nobility, as it were in Triumph, and in
the Cathedral of St. Paul, in a most humble Manner, gave Thanks to the
Almighty, in the great Congregation. -- She ruled over the Nation in
Righteousness, and her Princes or chief Magistrates in Judgment; she had always
a wise and faithful Council, and her great Officers were excelling Patriots,
Lovers of the Nation, and ever seeking its Prosperity and Peace. -- She was the
Protector of Holland from the Rage and Fury of that execrable Tyrant Philip of
Spain, and by her powerful Aids, the united Provinces were established a
flourishing and happy Republic. -- She so held the Scepter, that her Subjects
regarded her as the kindest Mother: The neighboring Princes esteemed her as
the wisest Queen; her Enemies feared her as a righteous Avenger, and the whole
Christian World with Admiration beheld her as the Preserver of the Peace of
Europe. She has been justly compared with Augustus for the Length and
Felicities of her Reign. -- Let her Name never be forgotten by Britons, by
Englishmen. Her Memory is blessed. "There see, Eliza does august appear,
Enlight'ning with her Beams the British Sphere.
The indulgent Mother of her People, she
Shall love and feed Britannia's Family.
Heaven's and her People's Rights she shall protect
And for her Kingdom's Ease, her own neglect.
Her Sons she shall defend with pious Care,
And from her Coasts drive back the Iberian War.
Blessed Times, when she that wears the Imperial Crown
Regards her People's Safety as her own.
BLACKM. P. Arthur.


6. James the 6th of Scotland, and first Monarch of Great Britain (in whom were
united the Royal British, Saxon, Norman, and Scottish Houses) makes a grand
Appearance, by his Granddaughter Sophia (the most accomplished Princess in
Europe) as the great Progenitor of the illustrious Princes of
Brunswick-Hanover, and Brandenburg-Prussia, the Protectors of the Protestant
Nations, and the nursing Fathers of the Protestant Churches. Ernest Augustus,
Duke of Hanover, Brunswick and Lunenburg, created the 9th Elector in 1692
(descended from Henry IId. King of England, by Maud his eldest Daughter,
married to Henry Duke of Saxony, by which, the illustrious House of Hanover is
of the Royal Blood of England, as well on the Father's, as on the Mother's
Side) married Sophia, Daughter to Frederick Vth. Elector Palatine and King of
Bohemia (by Elizabeth only Daughter of King James I. of Great Britain) and
Mother to King George I. of Great Britain. Frederick Elector of Brandenburg,
and the first King of Prussia married the Sister of King George and Daughter of
Sophia. His Son and Successor married the Daughter of King George I. and Sister
of King George II. Mother to the present King of Prussia.


True Protestant Calvinists behold him as a Defender of the Faith, zealous in
the Cause of the true Religion, against the Blasphemies and monstrous Doctrines
of Vorstius the Socinian, whom the Arminian Faction in Holland had procured to
succeed Arminius as Professor of Divinity at Leyden. He powerfully interposed
to save both State and Church from the Ruin threatened by that fanatic and
tumultuous Cabal.

By this King's repeated pressing Instances, joined with Maurice Prince of
Orange, the States General at last agreed to call a National Synod, and to
invite all the Reformed Churches to send Deputies to it -- which brought
forward the renowned Synod of Dort, at which were present famous Calvinistical
Divines by the King's Appointment to represent the Church of England. In this
Synod the Five Articles of Arminius and the Books of Vorstius were condemned:
The Belgic Confession of Faith, and the Palatine Catechism were approved --
And the States General giving their Sanction to the Canons of the Synod, the
Arminian Faction was broken, and Peace restored and established both in Church
and State -- And King James (by the Blessing of Heaven) was, to the Dutch
Calvinists, a hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest of
Arminian Fury. But I hasten,

7. To name that illustrious Hero William-Henry, Prince of Orange. -- "The
great Deliverer
Illustrious William, yonder he is in Sight,
In whom Nassovian Blood, and Our's unite.
"And now intent on that great Monarch gaze
So much distinguished by his brighter Rays:
This is the Man, This the Nassovian, whom
I named the brave Deliverer to come:
Succeeding Prophets under your great Name
This our bright Offspring shall aloud proclaim
Raised from a noble Branch of Tudor's Line,
From Thamisis transplanted to the Rhine.
Ages to come, amazed will scarce believe,
The generous Deeds this Leader shall Atchieve.
He shall outshine his own Heroic Race
Europe's Protectors, he shall Tyrants chase.
And Monsters vanquish with Herculean Toil,
And from their bloody Jaws extort the Spoil.
The Blooming Warrior's first prevailing Arms
Shall free his Country from the Gaul's Alarms.
Who of^ subdued with reeking Streams of Blood,
Shall now augment fair Mosa's red'ning Flood.
And now with slaughtered Heaps deform the Rhine,
And with strange Parple stain the generous Vine.
At length the suffering Britons shall invite,
The famed Deliverer to assert their Right:
And with his Arms the Tempest to repel,
Which, threatening Albion, rolls from Rome-and Hell.
Then Liberty her drooping Head shall rear,.
And blessed Religion on her Throne appear.
BL. P. Ar.


This, this the Man, the great Nassovian Prince,
Offspring of Heroes, destined to restore
The Golden Age in Britain --
Hic Vir, hic est --
Princeps Nassovins, Divi Genus, aurea condet Saecula --
When his Birth under many and great Disadvantages is considered; who could
have thought, that he was born for the Preservation of Europe, and the
Protestant Religion? His whole Life from twenty Years of Age, was one continued
Campaign against Popery and Tyranny.

Louis of France, and Charles of England, confederated in 1671, to enslave
Europe, and introduce and establish Popery in England, and Holland, and the
other Protestant States; and the next Year, the French King with a great Army
invaded the Netherlands, and came down to Utrecht like a Land-Flood, and soon
possessed himself of three Provinces. This struck a universal Terror into the
Dutch; but God raised up this glorious Prince to stem the Torrent of the raging
Waters. With Wisdom and Vigilance above his Years, and amazing Courage and
Presence of Mind, he opposed the Enemy's Force, obtained Victories, retook
important Places, and in a short Time recovered all, drove the French out of
the Provinces, and forced them to evacuate and give up all their Conquests, and
so the whole Face of Affairs was changed.

This was the Beginning o^ the Fifth Crisis, brought on the whole Reformation,
or the critical Time for the Protestant Religion and Liberties. It was but the
Beginning, for Europe was in the Agitations of this Crisis forty Years; i. e.
till the Peace of Utrecht -- And here I will take Occasion to give some brief
Account of the other four.

1. The first Crisis was -- when Charles 5th. Emperor of Germany, by defeating
John Duke of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hesse, and getting them into his
Hands, had subdued the Smalcaldick League, in which the Strength of the
Protestants did then consist: upon that Defeat all submitted to the Emperor.

Maurice now made Elector of Saxony, at the Head of the Imperial Army, at last
resolved not to see the Ruin of Religion, and Liberty, fell so suddenly and
unexpectedly with his Forces upon the Emperor, that he was very near having
surprised and taken him at Inspruck, and so overturned all that Design, upon
which the Emperor had been laboring for many Years, viz. destroying the
Protestant Religion and Liberties -- This brought on the Treaty of Passau, and
a Peace thereupon between the Emperor, and the Protestant Princes and States,
whereby the free Exercise of Religion was secured to the Protestants; and so
that Crisis passed over.

2. "The second Crisis was toward the End of the Reign of Queen Mary, when the
Protestant Religion seemed almost extinguished in England, and the Cardinal of
Lorrain, chief Minister of France, and Cardinal Granvel of Spain designed a
Peace between the two Crowns, that their Masters Henry the 2d, and Philip 2d.
might be at Leisure to extirpate Heresy, as they call it, i. e. the Protestant
Religion, which was then spreading in both their Dominions. But after they had
formed their Scheme, Queen Mary died, and was succeeded by Queen Elizabeth in
England; and soon after that the French King was accidentally killed, and that
Kingdom fell under a long Continuance of a Minority, viz. Charles the 9th, and
a civil War on Account of Religion; and the Netherlands felt from thence and
from Queen Elizabeth, such Encouragement that they made the longest and bravest
Resistance against the Power of Philip, that is to be found in all History; and
the Crisis ended."

3. The Third Crisis of the Reformation began in 1585, and lasted three Years.
-- The Catholic League (so called) of the Papists in France, was fomidable for
a Time to the Protestants; the Prince of Parma was victorious in the
Netherlands; the Prince of Orange was murdered, and the States fell under great
Distractions, and Spain entered into a Design of invading England, and
dethroning Queen Elizabeth, and putting the Queen of Scots in her Stead: In
order to that, the King of Spain was for some Years preparing the greatest
Fleet that the World had ever seen, which came to be called the Invincible
Armada; and with the Disappointment and Ruin of that Fleet, this Crisis went
off.

4. The Fourth Crisis came on in the Reign of Ferdinand 2d Emperor of Germany,
and King of Bohemia -- His Government was severe in that Kingdom, and he
resolved to extirpate the Protestants, and began to break through the
Privileges that were secured to them by the Laws of the Kingdom: This
occasioned a general Insurrection, which was followed by an Assembly of the
States, who deposed him, and offered the Crown to Frederick ^th Elector
Palatine, who accepted it, depending on the Assistance of his Father-in-Law
James King of England, He married Elizabeth only Daughter of King James.
which if he had afforded, here was the most probable Occasion that had been,
or has yet been offered since the Reformation for the full Establishment of the
Protestant Religion in Europe.

The English Nation was much inclined to support Frederick, but he had an
invincible Aversion to War, and was so possessed in Belief of a Divine Right in
all Kings, that he could not bear that even an elective and limited King should
be called in Question by his Subjects, so he would never acknowledge his
Son-in-Law, nor give him any Assistance for the Support of his new Dignity; and
Holland was very backward in giving Assistance. Frederic being beaten by the
Emperor's Army near Prague, was drove out of his new Kingdom; the Palatinates,
his Patrimony or Hereditary Dominions, were taken from him, and so he and his
Wife and Children fled to the States of Holland, for a Place of Residence.

Against the Imperial Army (which was sent into all Parts of Germany to
distress it) the Circle of Lower Saxony did arm it self, under the King of
Denmark their General, but he received a great Overthrow by Tilly the Emperor's
General, and thereupon the whole Power of the Protestants was broken. -- The
Emperor was so elevated with Success, that he did not Question, but for the
future to be absolute in Germany, and with that View published a Proclamation,
enjoining the Protestants to restore to the Catholics all such Church Lands or
Revenues, as were taken from them since the Peace made at Passau, and under
this Pretense he hoped quickly to subdue the rest of the Protestant Princes.
Indeed the Protestant Princes entered into a defensive Alliance at Leipsic, but
without any great Prospect of Success, if young Gustavus Adolphus King of
Sweden, had not come to their Assistance -- This King came with an Army into
Germany, and drove the Imperial Forces out of Pomerania, and the neighboring
Countries, and having afterward joined his Forces with those of the Elector of
Saxony, defeated Count Tilly in the memorable Battle near Leipsick, when the
Emperor at one Stroke, lost all the Hopes he had conceived from the happy
Success of his Arms for twelve Years before: From thence Gustavus marched on to
the Rhine, where he made almost miraculous Progresses -- And though in a Battle
afterward he lost his Life, yet his Army was victorious over the new Army
raised by the Emperor under Wellestein.

After his Death, the Generals and Confederates carried on the War under the
Conduct of Oxe^stiern, Chancellor of Sweden, with good Success, and carried the
War into the Emperor's Hereditary Countries, which brought on a Treaty at
Osnaburg, and a Peace was concluded between the Emperor and the Swedes, by
which the Authority of the States of Germany, and the Protestant Religion, were
established at once, and the Emperor's Power confined within such Bounds that
he could not easily afterward attempt any Thing against either of them; and so
this Crisis passed over by the Blessing of God, on that mighty Hero Gustavus,
and his victorious Army.

And the Fifth Crisis which I touched before, began in 1672, when Louis and
Charles confederated to swallow up the united Provinces, to master England, to
demolish Protestantism both in England and Holland, to pave the Way for the
Extirpation of that Religion through all Europe, and for establishing Popery.

This Crisis, as I said, continued in Agitation forty Years -- The glorious
Prince of Orange broke Louis's-Measures, and overturned his Schemes for that
Time; yet not many Years after, the Crisis rose again, viz. in 1685; when Louis
recalled, and vacated the Edict of Toleration of the Protestants, as he had
been for many Years before weakening the Protestant Interest in France, to
prepare for this fatal Stroke.

"The Year Eighty-five, must ever be remembered as the most fatal to the
Protestant Religion. In February King James II. of England declared himself a
Papist, and went openly to Mass. In June Charles the Elector Palatine (Grandson
of Fredirick) whose Father Charles Louis had been restored to the Lower
Palatinate and Electoral Dignity) dying without Issue, the Electoral Dignity
went to the House of Newburg, a most bigoted popish Family.

In October the King of France recalled the Edict of Nantes, and in December
the Duke of Savoy by the Persuasions or Threats of the Court of France,
recalled the Edict that his Father had granted to the Vaudois; so it must be
confessed, that this was a very critical Year. And at this Time was the Height
of the Fifth great Crisis of the Protestant Religion in the Opinion of Bishop
Burnet." History of his own Times.


"The King of France let loose some Bodies of Dragoons to live upon the
Protestants at Discretion, who were put under no Restraints, excepting Rapes
and Murder. This was begun in Bern, and soon after the same Method was pursued
in Guienne, Languedoc and Dauphine, where the greatest Number of Protestants
were; and not only the Dragoons, but all the Clergy and the Bigots of France,
broke out into all the Instances of Rage and Fury, against all Protestants that
did not change, upon their being required in the King's Name, to be of his
Religion, for that was every where the Style."

"Men and Women who would not yield, were not only stripped of all they had, but
kept long from Sleep, and driven about from Place to Place. Women were thrust
into Nunneries, where they were half starved, whipped and barbarously treated.
Multitudes of Protestants were banished the Kingdom by public Edict, and great
Numbers were chained to the Galleys, and the public Exercise of the Protestant
Religion suppressed throughout all his Dominions -- And upon the whole, here
was one of the most violent Persecutions that is to be found in History, and
has been compared to the Tenth Persecution of the Primitive Church, under
Dioclesian."

And I cannot but account it a Specimen or Pattern of the Slaughter of the
Witnesses foretold in Rev. 11. 7. 8. by which I understand the killing or
banishing all the Ministers and other eminent Confessors of Christ and his
Religion, and the entire Suppression of the public Exercise of the true
Christian Religion throughout Christendom for three Years and a half; and in
this Persecution of the Protestants in France, we may have some Idea of what
will then befall all the Protestant Nations and Churches. But to return,

Popery soon grew rampant in our Nation, and King James proceeded with an
uncommon Zeal and Application to advance the Roman Interest; Britain was then
in greater Danger than ever before; the King being in League with Louis, and
having one of his own Kingdoms of his own Religion -- The Forts and Castles
were in the Hands of Papists, and the Army under popish Officers. The Romish
Worship was set up in several Places of the Nation, and even in its great
Metropolis, Jesuits, those Frogs of the Mystical Egypt ( Father Petre and his
croaking Company) were in the King's Chambers: Monks and Friars appeared
publicly in their Habits: The English Laws were trampled upon, and England was
stripped of their Rights and Immunities. -- In a Word, Hell and Rome were Day
and Night at work to add the finishing Stroke, to what had been so long
contriving.

For the Succor of the most distressed and affrighted Nation, God raised up a
Deliverer, this glorious Prince of Orange, and in Consequence of his Expedition
to England, -- King James's Abdication -- the setting the Crown on the Head of
the Prince and Princess of Orange; and the Reduction of Ireland, the Nations
were for that Time saved from Popery and Slavery.

But the Crisis rose again in the Beginning of this Century.

In 1700, the abdicated King James died in France, and the French King caused
the pretended Prince of Wales, to be proclaimed with great Solemnity, King of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and therein his Design was evident enough.

And a little after in the same Year Charles the Second of Spain died (without
Issue) and by his Will (real or forged) the Duke of Anjou second Son of the
Dauphin was made his Successor to the whole Spanish Monarchy, contrary to the
Treaty of Partition: And upon his declaring that he accepted of the Will, he
was proclaimed, saluted and treated as King of Spain, and thereupon he went to
Spain, and took Possession of his new Kingdom.

And immediately French Troops were sent to take Possession of the Spanish
Netherlands. This unexpected Event threw a dark Cloud over the Face of Affairs
in Europe. France was now possessed not only of the Netherlands, but of the
whole Spanish Monarchy too, and therewith of all the Riches of America. -- And
the Scheme of Louis for an universal Empire, and the Extirpation of what he
called the Northern Heresy was again visible in erecting.

England was disarmed and divided; Holland was encompassed by the French Power;
the Empire was weak, because disjointed, and the Affairs of Christendom were
brought to as dangerous a Crisis, as could easily be imagined.

The vigilant King William was active and busy in opposing the Designs of
France, and perfected an Alliance between the Emperor, England and Holland, and
before his Death projected the whole Scheme of the War, that became absolutely
necessary for the Preservation of Europe: And it is well known, that in the
Reign of Queen Anne, by the wonderful Success of the Arms of the Allies under
the valiant Eugene and Marlborough, that aspiring Monarch Louis 14th, was
humbled and broken -- And that long Crisis came to a full Period, at the Death
of Louis 14th; and when the great Elector of Hanover sat on the British Throne.

The Appearance of King GEORGE, as of the Sun in his Strength instantly
dispelled the Mists, scattered the Clouds, and dissipated the gloomy Terrors,
and filled the Hearts of true Protestant Britons with Joy, as the Light of the
Morning when the Sun rises, even a Morning without clouds.

King GEORGE I. (of blessed Memory) was our Protector and Defender from
Jacobite Outrage, and popish Tyranny -- And our gracious Sovereign now
Reigning, GEORGE II. is as the Light of our Eyes, and the Breath of our
Nostrils: GOD has ordained a Lamp for his Anointed, and upon himself shall his
Crown flourish.

And now to close this Section, which was an Accommodation of my Text to the
Prince of Orange, the glorious King WILLIAM, I will only add, "That this great
Man must be considered by us Protestants, as raised up by God to resist the
Power of France, and the Progress of Tyranny and Persecution.

The Series of the Five Princes of Orange, that ended in him, was the noblest
Succession of Heroes that we find in any History, and the thirty Years from
1672, to his Death in which he acted so great a Part, carry in them so amazing
Steps of a glorious and distinguishing Providence, that in the Words of David,
he may be called the Man of God's right Hand, whom he made strong for himself."
Burnet's History, Vol. 2.


It may be said with great Propriety in the accommodated Sense of my Text, that
King William reigned in Righteousness, and was as a hiding Place from the Wind,
and as a Covert from the Storm of War and Persecution -- as Rivers of Waters in
a dry Place, as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. "All the
Circumstances of the illustrious Life of our Prince (i.e. the Prince of Orange,
King William III.) seem to have conspired to make him the Check and Bridle of
Tyranny; for his Mind has been strengthened and confirmed by one continued
Struggle, and Heaven has educated him by Adversity to a quick Sense of the
Miseries and Distresses of Mankind, which he was born to redress: In just Scorn
of the trivial Glories, and light Ostentations of Power, that glorious
Instrument of Providence moves -- in a steady, calm, and silent Course,
independent either of Applause or Calumny, which renders him if not in a
political Sense, yet in a moral, a Philosophic, an Heroic and a Christian
Sense, an absolute Monarch: who satisfied with this unchangeable, just, and
ample Glory, must needs turn all his Regards from himself to the Service of
Others; for he begins his Enterprises with his own Share in the Success of
them; for Integrity bears in it self, its Reward, nor can that which depends
not on Event, ever know Disappointment.

With the undoubted Character of a glorious Captain, and (what he much more
values than the most splendid Titles,) that of a sincere and honest Man, he is
the Hope and Stay of Europe, an universal Good, not to be engrossed by us only,
for distant Potentates implore his Friendship, and injured Empires court his
Assistance. Sir R. Steele's Christian Hero. published 1751.




I have now considered and illustrated my Text in Accommodation to seven great
Personages (if King James the First may be admitted, by the Courtesy of
England.) And to these I will add,

8. A mighty Man, and the Protestant Hero, another Prince of Orange, Charles
Frederick the present King of Prussia, His Titles are Charles-Frederick by the
Grace of GOD King of Prussia, Margrave of Brandenburg -- Prince of Orange etc.
sprung from noble Ancestors, zealous Protestants and Calvinists, and true
Patriots.

"Frederick-William Elector of Brandenburg (and Father to the first King of
Prussia) who deceased in 1688, had set it up for a Maxim, that the Electoral
Families in Germany had weakened themselves so much, that they would not be able
to maintain the Liberty of the Empire, against the Austrian Family, which was
then rising by their Victories in Hungary -- He observed that the Houses of
Saxe and the Palatine, and of Brunswick and Hesse had done this so much, by the
dismembring some of their Dominions to their younger Children, that these
Houses were mouldring to Nothing, he therefore resolved to keep all his
Dominions entire in one Hand -- This he thought would make his Family the
Balance to the House of Austria, on whom the rest of the Empire must depend.
Burnet's Hist. Vol. 1.


This Passage is very remarkable, and worthy of particular Observation.

It was of God, that Frederick-William had such Sagacity and Foresight; and
it is apparent that by the Blessing of God, in Consequence of his wise Conduct,
his Family is, in less than half a Century, become the Balance to the House of
Austria, and the great Bulwark of the Protestant Religion and Liberties in
Germany.

His great Grandson Charles-Frederick was able in the last preceding War, to
give Law at the Head of a mighty Army, to the Empress Queen, to the King of
France, and the other contending Powers of Europe.

And in the present War, by the Divine Aid, he has cut off one Head of the
grand Confederacy against him, Augustus King of Poland, and Elector of Saxony.
-- This mighty Man, this illustrious Prince is the most renowned of the Age,
for Wisdom and Valor, for Religion and Virtue, and the greatest and most
valiant Leader of Armies in our Times, next to Charles 12th King of Sweden, who
(in my Opinion) was greater than Alexander and Caesar for martial Skill and
Prowess, nor does the Battle of Pultowa, which ruined all his Affairs, lessen
the Hero.

GOD has raised up the King of Prussia to execute his Will, for He has a
terrible Work in doing among the Nations.

This glorious Potentate lives, and wars, and triumphs in the midst of numerous
and potent Enemies -- The popish Confederacy for the Ruin of the Protestants is
formidable: It is indeed a strong Confederacy of Austria and Bourbon, 'till
now, never united.

And this must be accounted the sixth great Crisis of the Reformation, when the
protestant Religion and Liberties are in a very dangerous Situation; and yet,
to me, it does not hitherto appear so dangerous a Crisis as the fifth and last
preceding -- How much higher it may rise, and how long Europe and America
shall be under the Agitations of it, we cannot foresee or foretell without the
Spirit of Prophecy.

God only foreknows the Issue of the present Wars and Commotions that are among
the Nations of Europe.

If I could believe that the fourth Vial shall be poured out (i.e. the grand
Supports of the Papacy removed) before the Slaughter of the Witnesses, I might
suppose that it is now in pouring out by the King of Prussia, but seeing (as
appears to me) the Slaughter of the Witnesses shall precede that Vial, which
will come to pass at or about the End of their Prophecy or the 1260 Years, the
pouring out the Vial must be at a great Distance from our Times -- And
according to my small Knowledge of Scripture-Prophecies concerning the future
State of the Church, I cannot think that any remarkable Prediction is now in
the fulfilling: i.e. in a strict and proper Sense of the Prophecy. Nor do I
suppose, that any great Revolution in Europe will ensue the present War, or any
great Change in North America. At the End of the present War, this sixth Crisis
may go off, as others before, without any remarkable Alteration in the Face of
religious Affairs, whether popish or protestant.

The next or seventh Crisis may issue in the Slaughter of the Witnesses, (i.e.
the total Suppression of the public Exercise of the true Religion etc.) and
not many Years after, Rome Papal will fall, and in due Time the Millennium will
commence.

In the mean Time, and in the present gloomy and tempestuous State of Things,
let the protestant Nations and Provinces look to God and trust in Him -- Let us
know and remember, that when all the Sluices are opened, and the Floodgates
broken up, so that we expect nothing but to be overwhelmed, God can raise up
such Banks, and Ramparts, as shall keep out the raging Waters, and restrain
their Violence.

Indeed it is told us Protestants, that France is confederate with Austria, and
our Heart is moved -- but let us not fear for the two Tails of these smoking
Firebrarnds -- God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble,
therefore let us not fear, though the Waters of the Sea roar, and be troubled,
though the Mountains shake with the Swelling thereof, there is a River, the
Streams whereof shall make glad the City of God: God is in the midst of her;
she shall not be moved; the Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
Refuge.

Having now finished the doctrinal Illustration of my Text, I shall make
Application in a Word of Instruction, respecting civil Government in general --
the British Government in particular -- and the Privileges of Government in
this Province by Royal CHARTER under the Smiles of our gracious Sovereign --
And shall then close with particular Addresses.

I. Let us improve our Text respecting civil Government in general, and duly
acknowledge the divine Goodness in ordaining Magistracy among Men.

Indeed God Almighty, the supreme Lord of Man, has not himself instituted a
civil Government among other Nations, as he did over the Nation of Israel; and
the political Government of that Nation by Divine Institution wholly ceased,
when its national State was utterly broken, and their Commonwealth demolished
-- Nor has Jesus Christ the mediatorial King left any designed Plan or Model
for the political Government of Christian Nations -- Nor does God himself name
and appoint the Person who shall hold the Scepter, in any Nation of the World,
as he did to the Israelitish Nation in the Persons of Saul and David, and
others afterward; nor has God appointed any particular Persons, in any Nation,
to make civil or municipal Laws or Statutes; nor has he named, nor does he name
the Judges that are to interpret the Laws, and put them in Execution; and yet
the Apostle Paul says, that there is NO Power but of God, the Powers that be,
are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1. -- "The Powers he there speaks of must be the
Roman Emperors, and those that ruled under them; for he wrote in that Time,
when Rome was the Mistress of the World, and to Christians living in the
Metropolis, Rome herself." -- "Now the Roman Emperors then in Being were not in
strictness of Speech ordained of God, but were elected by the Roman Armies, or
chosen and confirmed by the Senate." And hence Dr. Whitby (on that Text) makes
this clear Inference, "That an immediate Appointment or Designation of the
Person by God cannot be necessary, to render any Prince, God's Ordinance" --
"And though it be granted that God has made a general Appointment or Ordinance,
in the fifth Commandment, or by a Law of Nature, requiring that all Nations
should have some Government placed over them, yet no individual Person can
claim a Right, to be the higher Power in any Nation, more than others, nor are
the People by it, tied to yield Obedience to this Man, more than that -- This
therefore cannot be sufficient to make a Man the individual Person, who is
God's Ordinance, in Reference to such a Nation. -- It remains therefore that
this Authority be conveyed to this or that individual Person or Family, by
Compact, Consent or Choice of the Persons governed, that such a Person or
Family shall have the supreme Authority in such Nation. It therefore must be
such a Choice, Consent or Contract, that renders any Person the Ordinance of
God to such a Nation. And this is what Men call a legal Right or Title to the
Crown, i.e. a Title by the Laws and Constitutions of the Land." Whitby's Annot.


And this is the Basis of the Establishment of Royalty in the House of Hanover,
viz. by the Representative of the Nation in Parliament. -- And King WILLIAM our
great Restorer, had a clear Title to the British Crown by the Choice and
Consent of the People in Parliament, which is indeed the only good Title of all
lawful Governments; and so both He and his Successors to our present King
GEORGE the Second, have the Title to the Crown more fully and clearly than any
Prince in Christendom.

"But then, as mu^^al Consent and Contract make two Persons Man and Wife, and
yet Matrimony is God's Ordinance, and the Power of the Man over the Wife, and
of the Wife over the Body of the Husband is from God -- and as among us (in
England) one becomes a Master, and another a Servant by Consent and Covenant,
and yet the Master has from God Authority over the Servant; so here the
individual Person becomes the higher Power, by the Consent, the Choice or
Contract original or actual, of the Community, but yet the Power he exercises
in that Station is of God the Fountain of all Power, and he acts in that
Station not as the Minister of Man, but of God." Whitby Ibid.


And so at this Day a King reigns in Britain, and Princes or chief Magistrates
under him rule by the Ordinance and Appointment of God, and under Jesus Christ
the mediatorial King, into whose Hand all Power and Authority is committed by
the Father, for the good of the Church. -- And hence by him (the essential
Wisdom of the Father, as himself speaks in Prove. viii. 15, 16.) Kings reign and
Princes decree Justice, by him Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the Earth. --

This Ordinance of God is well adapted to serve excellent Ends and Purposes of
good to Mankind -- Hereby the just Rights and Properties of Men are secured,
and good Order preserved -- And this is one great End of political Society and
Government, and hereby the true Religion is maintained, for advancing the
spiritual and eternal Interests of Men; but I would not be understood to
insinuate, that the true Religion of Jesus cannot be supported on Earth,
without the Countenance of the Magistrate and human Laws. -- The Church of
Christ is founded on a Rock, and the Powers of Hell shall not prevail against
it so as to overthrow it, even though it had no outward, or Protection of
earthly Powers. -- And the Christian Religion was maintained in the World from
the first founding of the Church for almost three hundred Years, without the
Support of human Laws, or Christian Emperors and Kings, Britain only excepted,
where King Lucius (the first Christian King in the World) toward the latter
End of the second Century, protected and cherished the British Churches, by his
Government and Laws. Bedae Eccl. Hist. Gent. Angl. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
But excepting him, there was not any Christian King or Emperor on Earth, 'till
Constantine the Great; and most of the Emperors before him, were professed
Enemies to the Christian Religion, and with Rage and Fury persecuted the
Professors of it -- And yet the Church was upheld, the holy Religion of Jesus
preserved and propagated; and it was said, the Blood of the Martyrs was the
Seed of the Church -- And afterward when the true Church was under the
terrible Persecutions of the papal Antichrist, yet being founded on a Rock, it
was not demolished, it weathered out all Storms and Tempests. -- But all this
notwithstanding, it must be acknowledged as a great Favor and Smile of Heaven,
when the great Powers of the Earth turned Christian, or openly appeared for the
Protection and Encouragement of the Christian Religion; a special Favor, when
God raised up Kings the nursing Fathers, and Queens the nursing Mothers of the
Christian Church.

When Kings and Emperors turned to be Christians, they were in a Sense
Vicegerents of Christ, who is the Head of the Church, and the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1. 5. Under Christ the mediatorial King, who reigns in
Righteousness over the Church, earthly Princes professing his Religion rule in
Judgment, and are to the Church as a hiding Place from the Wind, and as a
Covert from the Tempest of Persecution; a Refuge of Defense from the Rage and
Violence of wicked Men. And under Jesus Christ the great King, Christian
Princes who understand their Duty, uphold the true Religion, maintain the true
Worship of God, and preserve the Church in the Enjoyment and Exercise of her
Christian Rights and Liberties -- And this Ordinance of God being so well
adapted to serve such excellent Ends and Purposes, let us acknowledge the
Goodness of God in the Ordinance of Magistracy on Earth. I proceed --

II. To make Application of our Text respecting the British Government in
particular, and the happy Establishment thereof.

(1.) Let us thankfully observe the distinguishing Favor of Heaven to our
Nation and Land, in ordaining for them so happy a Constitution of civil
Government, so well adapted to answer the Ends of the Magistracy. "The grand
northern Hive, (from which have issued those mighty Swarms of Goths, Vandals,
Saxons, Angles, Franks, Huns, Danes and Normans, which subdued all the western
Parts of Europe) has been styled by some Authors Officina Gentium, the Shop of
the Nations; and might with as much Justice have been called Officina
Libertatis, the Shop of Liberty. For wherever those People settled, they
established a Government of Liberty, and showed themselves to be greater
Masters of the great Secret of governing ALL by ALL, than those Nations that
had given them the opprobrious Name of Barbarous; and as they were all
Joint-Adventurers in their military Expeditions, so all had a Share in their
civil Government, and the Lands they conquered. For they chose their General
and great Officers, to conduct them in the War (which great Officers were a
Council of War to the Generals in lesser Matters, but in Affairs of greater
Importance, they assembled the whole Army, and consulted with all the Soldiers
or People under their Command. When they came to be settled in Peace, the Lands
of the conquered Country were divided; the General had his Share, the Officers
their's, and the Soldiers or People their's. The General became their Prince,
and when he died, another was chosen to succeed him by a general Election. The
great Officers were now his Council of State in lesser Matters, as they had
been before, his Council of War; but in great Affairs, and Matters of Weight
relating to the Public, all the People were assembled, and advised with in the
Manner they had been during their military Expedition. The Shares of Lands
given to the Officers were afterward called Baronies, and those given to the
Soldiers, Feuda, or Fees.

Wherever these northern Nations settled, they established a Government, framed
out of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. France, Spain, Italy, and Britain,
had all this Sort of Government, which is no other than a limited Monarchy,
though Britain is the only Nation in the World that still retains it. The Founder
of this incomparable Sort of Government very well knew, that Monarchy, when
corrupted, degenerates into Tyranny; that Aristocracy, (i.e. The Government of
the Nobles) being corrupted, turns into an Oligarchy; (i.e. Government by a
few, or a small Number) and that Democracy (i.e. the Government of the People)
was liable to Tumults and Confusions: and therefore to avoid the Danger, that
might arise from either of them separately, composed the most exact Scheme of
Government out of them all, and which in our Language is called King, Lords and
Commons. Each of these have their proper Spheres to move in, and whilst they
continue within them, the Government is easy, and the Constitution safe; but if
the Motion of any one of them interferes with that of the other, the whole
Frame is out of Order, and the Constitution immediately falls into Convulsions,
and without wise and speedy Applications, must expire in an Apoplexy. -- In the
happy Island of Britain, which well deserves the glorious Name of the Capital
of Liberty, the Property of the meanest Subject is so strongly guarded by Law,
that a moderate Fortune here is infinitely more valuable than the highest
Honors, and greatest Riches, a Subject is capable of attaining in any Country
of the World, where the Will of the Prince, (and not the Safety of the People)
is the supreme Law. --

-- But though in Great Britain only, the ancient, generous and manly
Government of Europe survives and continues in its original Luster and
Perfection, and is a most exact Scheme of Politics; yet it may be endangered
by any one of the Branches of the Constitution invading the Province of the
other. And if hereafter this Nation should so far lose its Virtue, as to have
its Lords and Commons become basely servile and mercenary, there will not be
wanting evil Ministers, who will advise the Prince to lay hold of the
Opportunity to purchase from them their Liberty, and bribe them into Slavery."




The British Constitution is a mixed Government or bounded Monarchy -- The
supreme Power of Great Britain, consists of the King, the Nobility, and the
Representatives of the People, called the Commons -- These are the three
Branches of the highest Power in the Nation, who make Laws for the Government
of the Nation; and the putting these Laws in Execution, is in the Hands of the
King, who for the impartial Administration of Justice, erects Courts and
appoints Judges and other Court Officers under them for this Purpose. And the
King and his Officers are obliged to Rule according to the settled and known
Laws and Statutes of the Nation. "The King at his Coronation does solemnly
promise, and swear to govern the People of England, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, according to the Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and
Customs of the same, and to his Power to cau^^ Law and Justice in Mercy to be
executed in all his Judgments; and to the utmost of his Power to maintain the
Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the protestant reformed
Religion as established by Law."
-- And every Man has the Privilege of being tried by his Peers, as we say, or
Equals; and therefore Juries are chosen from among the People, appointed and
sworn to bring in their Verdicts on Cases before them, between Man and Man,
according to Law and Evidence. -- And excepting the common Infirmities of human
Nature, impartial Justice may be expected in general to be dealt out in Court
Processes.

And by this Constitution every Member of the State is treated in such a Manner
as is most rational, most equitable, and most conducive to the public Good --
And this Government requires no unnatural and unjust Precautions, to support
it, but in it is own Nature tends to it is own Preservation.

It is so far from requiring Art or Violence to support it, that both these are
needful in order to disturb it -- There is nothing in this Constitution (in it
self considered) violent or oppressive, but every Thing is founded on Reason
and Justice. All understanding Men will become its Guard, because they see they
cannot possibly have any Interest to make it otherwise -- and its Excellency is
visible in this -- that notwithstanding the Luxury and Corruption of the last
hundred Years, yet the Form of Government is still subsisting, and is seen to
answer the Ends of Government. Indeed it cannot be said that the British
Constitution prevents all Inconveniences; such a perfect Government is not to
be expected on Earth, but this is certain, that these Evils are better guarded
against, or more easily remedied under this Constitution, than under any other.
And it is no rhetorical Flourish, but an honest plain Truth, that the British
civil Government is the best Constitution and Establishment that is now on the
Face of the Earth. "It is a mixed Government -- for here is Monarchy, the first
and best Form of ruling the People, according to the Judgment of Plato and
Aristotle. Here is Aristocracy, that is, the Nobles and chief of the Nation
have a Share in the Government, which was approved by Moses, and by the most
eminent Lawgivers of Greece, as Licurgus and Solon. -- Here is Democracy, that
is, a popular State, wherein the common People rule by their Representatives:
All our Laws are made by the common Consent, as in the famous Commonwealths of
Athens and Rome. The British Government is made up of all these, and resembles
that of the wise Lacedaemonians, which was a mixture of King, Nobility and
Populace, for the Ephori were chosen out of this last. This is the Nature of
our Government, and is certainly more eligible than any unmixed simple Species
of Government. Here the Excellencies of all the individual Models of Ruling
meet together and conspire, the Prerogative of Kings, the Dignity of Nobles,
the Privilege of the People."
-- Most certainly every one will readily grant, that it is unspeakably better
than that of France, and several other Kingdoms of Europe, as well as the
Turkish and Eastern Governments, where their Kings and Emperors have a
despotic, i.e. an absolute arbitrary Power over the Lives, Liberties and
Estates of their Subjects, and so the Condition of the People in all those
Countries, is properly speaking a State of Slavery -- where the Will of the
Prince is the Rule and Law for the governing of his People -- Whereas according
to our Constitution, the British People are in a State of Liberty; i.e. under a
legislative Power, established by Consent in the Commonwealth or Kingdom, and
not under the Dominion of any Will, or the Restraint of any human Law, but what
that Legislature shall enact according to the Trust reposed in it. "The King of
England governs his People by politic Power, which is a mixed Power, and
therefore he cannot make his Will his Law, he cannot alter the Laws of the
Kingdom as he pleases, because his Power is mixed and limited." Sir John
Fortescue de Laudibus Legum Angliae.


It is the happy Freedom of Britons, of Englishmen under Government, to have
standing Laws to live by, common to every one of the Community, and made by the
legislative Power erected in the Nation, as was before hinted. -- And under
this happy Constitution, and the Execution of these Laws, Liberty is preserved,
Property is secured, Order is maintained, and above all, the true Religion is
upheld and promoted, to the Glory of God, the Honor of the blessed Jesus, and
the spiritual Felicity of all honest Professors of Christianity.

II. Let us most gratefully observe the wonderful Appearances of a gracious God
for these Nations, in preserving to them this excelling Constitution of civil
Government, and saying them from Tyranny, Slavery and antichristian Darkness.
Many a Time has the Lord delivered his People when in Danger of sudden
Destruction, and has caused Light to shine out of Obscurity. It will suffice,
if I go no further back than the Reign of King James the Second, who set up his
Will and Prerogative above the Laws of the Land, and endeavored to overturn
the whole Constitution; and upon the Dissolution of the old established
Government, to introduce an absolute despotick Power, in Imitation and
according to the Pattern of Louis 14th of France, and therewith to bring in the
popish Religion, so well calculated for an Agreement with arbitrary Power in
the State, under a Prince wholly Jesuited, and under the Influence of Bigotry
to the Romish Principles almost without a Parallel.

But lo! in the midst of Distress and Perplexity of the British People, God
raised up a Deliverer, the Prince of Orange, afterward the glorious King
WILLIAM, the great Restorer of the English Constitution, and under God their
Savior from Slavery and Popery.

God suddenly broke the Schemes, disappointed and blasted the Designs and
Stratagems of France and Rome for our Ruin. And on the Prince's Arrival, the
golden Phantoms of unbounded Rule and Sovereignty that had so long glittered in
the King's Eyes, disappeared in a Moment, and he found himself standing on a
frightful Precipice, and the Support that bore him broke under him. The happy
Revolution ought never to be forgotten by Protestants, Britons, and Transmarine
English.

The Nations were delivered from an arbitrary popish King and jesuitical
Counsels; and from the Hazard of having a supposititious Heir of the Crown
imposed on them, and educated in the Romish Communion, to the Ruin of their
Religion and Property.

And in the Reign of this our great Deliverer and Restorer, the Succession of
the British Crown was settled in the House of Hanover, the parliamentary
Establishment of the Succession in that illustrious Family, to the Exclusion of
all Papists, though nearer in Blood, was the Consequence of the happy Revolution.

And this indeed is an undoubted and indisputable Title, being done by the
whole Legislature of a wise and free protestant People, jealous of their civil
Liberties, and highly regarding the Protection of their religious Rights, as
protestant Britons. -- And from the Time forward the ancient good and wholesome
Laws and Statutes were restored for the public Weal. And the Nation being
recovered to a State of Freedom, did by their Parliaments make use of their
Liberty, to make such other Laws, and take such other Methods as were most
proper to preserve them from such Dangers in Times to come. "And moreover the
Nations were delivered from a Remnant of Popery, that stuck so long to them,
viz. Persecution of protestant Dissenters, by the Act of Toleration, which
still subsists, and God grant it ever may continue in full Force, according to
the true Intent and Meaning thereof, whereby all Protestants are at Liberty to
worship God, according as they are persuaded in their Conscience is most
agreeable to his Will, without fear of being ruined in their Persons or Estates
by any Faction prompted thereunto by the Court, and without Hazard of having
any Party of Protestants join with Papists to overthrow the established Church
for private Interest." Nor should we overlook the former and late Deliverances
granted by our God from the popish Pretenders both Father and Son. This, this
is an unspeakable Mercy -- For woe, woe to the British Nations and Plantations,
if ever the Pretender, or any of his Race gets Possession of the British
Throne. But we trust in God who has delivered, that He will yet deliver us,
that the King, the Prince, the whole Royal House, with the Nation, may joy in
the Strength of the Lord, and greatly rejoice in his Salvation.

I go on,

III. In Application of our Text to this Province, and the civil Government
thereof, as a Branch of the British State and Empire. -- Let us with deep
Attention consider its peculiar Privileges by the Royal CHARTER, and the Smiles
of our gracious Sovereigns, and let us acknowledge the divine Goodness in
preserving to us our excellent Constitution. --

This People have been favored in former Times with excellent Governors, or
chief Commanders, by the tender Care of our nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers
-- among whom a Dudley, a Belcher, and a Dummer, cannot be forgotten; Gentlemen
of Wisdom, Justice and Goodness, in the Administration of Government -- of
Religion and Virtue, and memorable for their great Regard and Affection to the
Ministers of Religion.

Mr. Dummer will be remembered in the Land, for his most prudent, righteous and
mild Conduct of the public Affairs, so happy for the Province, and so pleasing
to the People. -- He retired from the Government to a private Life, with a
Temper and Behavior so suitable to a Soul that is raised above the World, and
the Honors of it, to a devout Contemplation on heavenly Glories. -- In his
advanced Age, he has the Comfort in Reflection of having served his GOD, his
King and his Country, with Integrity.

We cannot be unmindful of the Smiles from the Throne in the Appointment of so
distinguished and accomplished Gentlemen as Mr. Addington, and Mr. Willard, to
the very important Place of Secretary. -- Mr. Secretary Addington was famous in
his Day for Wisdom, Probity and Fidelity in the discharge of the public Trust.
-- And the Name of Mr. Secretary Willard (the good Secretary) is as the most
fragrant Ointment. The Fame of his good Deeds, his long and saithful public
Services, remains after he is dead, and he will live in a good Report. -- His
Continuance in the Secretary's Office forty Years, and in all that Time
managing the Affairs under his Care, not only without Error and Fault, but with
universal Applause, is without a Precedent, and cannot but raise our Admiration.

He was a Christian of a true primitive Spirit, an Israelite indeed, without
Guile, and a shining Example of Piety and Virtue. This excellent Servant of God
is deceased -- and is it not our Duty to embalm his precious Memory? And can
those who for many Years were acquainted with his eminent Graces and moral
Endowments, refrain dropping a Tear on his Grave? -- O Boston! thy Beauty is
faded -- the Lord has taken from thee -- the Judge, the Prudent, and the
Ancient, the Honorable Man, and the Councellor -- Help Lord, for the godly Man
cease -- and where is the Man to be found among you to stand in the Gap? --
Blessed be God, our Eyes see one of a like Spirit, Piety and pure Conversation,
by Royal Appointment, repairing the public Breach. -- And Mr. Secretary Oliver
excelling in Prudence, Uprightness, and unblemished Virtue, will obtain the
just Rewards of his faithful public Services.

But to return from this Digression, for which I ask Pardon, if I have offended.

As we have in Times preceding been happy under wise and good Governors, so
we hope to be thus happy in Times coming. --

Our good and gracious KING has given us a fresh Mark of his Royal Favor, in
appointing Mr. POWNALL to the chief Seat of Government, at such a Day as this.
--

Your Excellency in your great Goodness, will permit me on this public Occasion
and Solemnity, to congratulate you as the chief Prince among the Princes of the
Province, trusting in God, that you will rule in Judgment under King GEORGE,
who reigns in Righteousness -- that under GOD and the KING, you will be as a
hiding Place, and a Refuge from the Storm, in the present tumultuous and
tempestuous State -- as Rivers of Waters in a dry Place, as the Shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land.

We render our hearty Thanks to God the supreme Governor among the Nations,
that he has directed the KING to a Gentleman of so great Capacity for
Government. -- Though with the aged, by long Experience, there is Wisdom; yet
God gives to the young Man also, Knowledge and Discretion. -- Elihu, though
inferior in Years to Job and his three Friends, yet appeared much superior to
them all in Understanding, in a right Knowledge of God, his Attributes,
Providence and Government of the World: -- And we hope the Understanding of an
Elihu will appear in all your public Conduct.

All civilized Nations and Countries have expressed their Sense of this; that
Governors and Men in Authority ought to be Men of good Capacity and Knowledge.
-- When our Saxon Ancestors gave the Name of Koning (by Contraction King) that
is, a wise Man, to their supreme Magistrate, they taught us, what was a
necessary Property in crowned Heads, which is also a necessary Qualification in
Governors and Magistrates under them. -- The Emperor Marcus Aurelius (Antoninus
Philosophus) had very often in his Mouth that Saying of the great Philosopher
Plato, that then indeed Commonwealths would flourish, when Philosophers
reigned, when Rulers were skilled in Philosophy. Jul. Capitolin.
Such an one was Marcus himself, and such was the Character of some of his
Predecessors, as Augustus, Titus, Adrian, and Alexander Severus. And some of
his Successors, Constantine the Great (as appears by his very learned Oration
to the Convention of the Saints) and Theodosius the Elder, and Charles the
Great -- all good Rulers, as well as learned Princes. -- And therefore may we
not hope for great Felicities under the Government of a Gentleman of polite
Literature, skilled in the liberal Arts, and a Philosopher. -- We are persuaded
such an one will favor Learning, and smile upon Men of that Character.

The Character of a true Philosopher takes in religious Endowments, and moral
Virtues, in which we shall behold you no common Example -- And a generous
public Spirit is also a constant Companion of true Philosophy -- and therefore
we believe, you will aim at the common Good and espouse the public Weal. -- The
true Philosopher prefers the Advantages of the Community, before his private
Interest.

The Emperor Adrian's Motto is an excellent one for Rulers (Non mihi, sed
Populo) not for my self, but the Public, i.e. the Welfare of the People must be
my chief Aim; Princeps existimat, non Re^publicam suam, sed potius se esse
Reipublicae. (...) de Clementia, Cap. 1.

Si consu^^s Populo, remove te a Suspicione al^^^^us Commodi tui* Fac Fidem te
nihil nisi Populi Utilitatem et Fructum quaerere. Cicero.


which well agrees with that Preface or Head to the Laws of the twelve Tables
-- (salus Populi suprema Lex esto) -- Let the Welfare of the People be esteemed
the highest Law -- which must have a governing Power over all Laws.

A true philosophical Soul only, is fit for public Employment, and Government.

We may observe in the fifth Verse of our Context, a happy Change in the State
of Things, when religious, virtuous, public-spirited Men were in civil Rule --
the vile Person shall no more be called liberal, nor the Churl said to be
bountiful, i. e. shall not have the Style and Title of Prince bestowed on them,
for so the Words in the Original import -- "Under a Prince that loves and
honors Virtue, unworthy Persons shall not be advanced to Degrees of Honor and
Dignity." -- There follows in 6, 7 and 8 Verses, an excellent Illustration, For
the vile Person will speak Villainy, and his Heart will work Iniquity -- to make
empty the Soul of the hungry, and he will make the Drink of the thirsty to fail
-- the Instruments of the Churl (that is, the selfish, sordid, covetous Man)
are evil; he devises wicked Devices to destroy the poor with lying Words, even
when the needy speaks right; but the liberal devises liberal Things, and by
liberal Things shall he stand.

"Which Words show the different Temper and Method of the base and
narrow-soul'd Man, and of him that is truly generous and public-spirited. --
The former has no true Sense either of Honor, or Conscience, but makes it his
Business, under specious Pretenses, to prevent Judgment and Justice, Whereas
the Designs of the latter, are truly great and worthy of his Character, and it
is by these only, that he seeks to support his Dignity." Lowth's Comment.


We believe, that under the Direction of such a noble Spirit, this People shall
have Occasion, by many Thanksgivings, to express their grateful Sense of the
divine Favor vouchsafed in that Regard.

Your Excellency will (I hope) ever have a wise and faithful Council, in all
the public Affairs that you shall open before them; who will give their best
Advice for the KING's Honor, and the People's Happiness.

And those Gentlemen that from Year to Year shall be chosen to Represent the
several Towns in the General Assembly, will be Men of Understanding and
Integrity, and will approve themselves Pillars of the State, and ever studious
of the public Safety and Peace.

The Ministry, who are (as well as the Magistracy) most loyal to King GEORGE,
and zealous for the protestant Succession in his Family, and Friends to good
Government, will be incessant in their Prayers to Almighty GOD, that your
Administration may be attended with great Prosperity both to your Excellency
and this People --

Sir, -- we behold you as a true Protestant (a professed Member of a most
illustrious Branch of the Reformation, the Church of England) a true Britain,
and whose Heart is entirely English -- and therefore we persuade ourselves, you
will nourish and cherish true Protestants, and Britains in America -- that you
will naturally love and care for your own Countrymen on this Side the
Atlantic, and ever pursue their best Interests. -- Our small, but very
flourishing Academy (at Cambridge) under the Direction and Government of the
very learned, virtuous and worthy, the President, Professors and Tutors, will
not be neglected by you, as your Excellency has a special Relation thereto,
being Head in the Visitation.

And after a long and happy Administration for the Interest of Religion and
Learning, and the public Weal -- when it shall please the KING to advance you
to a Place of greater Honor, and more extensive Usefulness -- or when it shall
please the Great King to advance you to heavenly Honor and Glory, may the Name
of Governor POWNALL, be more fragrant, and his Memory be more precious than the
Name and Memory of DUDLEY and BELCHER.

As Mr. THOMAS HUTCHINSON This Address, though (by Advice) passed over in
Public, is now offered to his Honor the Lieut. Governor from the Press, as
if it had been spoken from the Desk -- And it is thought there is no Impropriety
therein, as the Royal Commission to Him was published the Day after the
Election.
is by the Royal Commission, advanced to the second Seat of Honor and
Government in the Province, I may with a Propriety address him also as a chief
Prince among the Princes.

I beg your Honor will allow me to join my hearty Congratulations, with the
Rejoycings of all this People, for this great Favor of our God and our King.

Your Honor has for many Years, even from youthful Age, shined in important
Stations, in the House, at the Board, and as a Judge; and by your excelling and
unexceptionable Conduct, have been universally approved and applauded, as a
Gentleman of great Wisdom, Integrity, Publick-spiritedness and Virtue: You have
purchased a good Degree, and merited this further Advancement; wherein you may
by the Blessing of Heaven, still serve God, your King and your Country. The
Voice of the King and the Voice of the People united, must undoubtedly be
deemed the Voice of God; and stimulated hereby, you will continue to make Use
of your great Abilities, and larger Interest, and Opportunity also, as God
shall offer, to seek and promote the Peace and Prosperity of the Province,
civil and religious: that both your Honor and all this People, may hereafter
have Reason to remember GOD and the KING with Thanksgiving.

Among the Favors of God vouchsafed to this People in their political State
and by Charter, some of the greatest are, the free Election of the
Representatives of the People in General Court; the Freedom of the House, even
as the British House of Commons, in all that comes or lies before them of a
public Nature, and respecting the Community they represent; and the Election
of his Majesty's Council, the second Branch of the Legislature: Great and
important Trusts! And we must acknowledge the Divine Goodness, that this our
political Constitution is still preserved, and that the Province has for so
many Years been blessed with a House of Representatives, Fathers of their
Country, Guardians of our Liberties, and who from Year to Year transact our
public Affairs for the common Good. And that such worthy Gentlemen are
annually elected into Council, as under God and our King and his
Representative, have been public Blessings, and Benefactors. -- And may the
Divine Influence be vouchsafed to the Electors on this great Anniversary.

Honored Fathers, the Council and House of Representatives:

This whole Assembly rejoices to see this auspicious Day; and the Language of
those who love their Country is, The Lord direct you; Your God prosper you: And
the Ministers of Christ in his Sanctuary, may be heard to say, We bless you out
of the House of the Lord. -- In the Transactions of this Day, and in all
Concerns of a public Nature, may the highest Judicatory of the Province, be
adorned with the Wisdom that is from above, pure and peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and good Fruits, the Fruits of
Righteousness, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy -- And seeing and
knowing what is their own and this People's best and highest Interest, may they
steadily pursue it, to the general Approbation of the Province, and even to the
Joy of future Generations.

And now, to shut up all, what Nation is there on Earth so great as the British
Nations, and American Provinces? -- What other People is there, that has
Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as the Laws Divine and Human that are set
before us? Only let us take heed to our selves, and keep our Souls diligently,
lest we forget the Lord our God, and his mavelous Loving Kindness -- And let
us keep and do those Statutes and Judgments, for this is our Wisdom and
Understanding in the Sight of the Nations and People that are round about us.

And Oh that there was such a Heart in us, that we might fear the Lord, and
keep all his Commandments always, that it might be well with us, and with our
Children forever.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
PAge 39. l. 3. from the bottom, read Chapters. p. 41. l. 17. f, distinct, r.
distant. p. 51. l. 17. blot out, or, between Saxon and Norman. p. 60. l. 5. r.
Frederick Vth.

A Margin Note omitted in p. 51. l. 17. after -- in him concentred the Royal
Saxon, -- to be read, --

Margaret (Sister to Prince Edgar (Edgar Atheling) and Granddaughter to King
Edmund Ironside) the only Survivor of the Royal Saxon House of Alfred, that had
Children, was married to Malcolm III. King of Scotland, and There the Royal
Seed was preserved. And King Henry I. of England, Son of William the Conqueror,
married Maud or Matilda the Daughter of King Malcolm by this Margaret: And all
the Kings of England ever since (excepting King Stephen Grandson of William the
Conqueror by his Daughter) have derived from this Matilda* and so the ancient
Royal House of Alfred was restored to the Throne of England, and at this Day
possesses it, by the Lines of York and Lancaster, derived from King Edward III*
and united in Margaret eldest Daughter of King Henry VII. and Great
Grandmother to King James I. of England.


