A REVIEW OF THE MILITARY OPERATIONS IN NORTH AMERICA, etc.

A REVIEW OF THE MILITARY OPERATIONS IN NORTH AMERICA, FROM The Commencement of
the FRENCH HOSTILITIES on the Frontiers of Virginia in 1753. to the Surrender
of Oswego, on the 14th of August. 1756.

INTERSPERSED With various Observations, Characters, and Anecdotes; necessary
to give Light into the Conduct of American Transactions in general; and more
especially into the political Management of Affairs in NEW YORK.

In a LETTER to a Nobleman.

LONDON: Printed, for R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall. MDCCLVII.

NEW ENGLAND, Reprinted, in the Year. M,DCC,LVIII.

A REVIEW OF THE MILITARY OPERATIONS IN NORTH AMERICA, etc.
My LORD,
I ESTEEM myself highly honored, Introduction.
when you request of me, a full account of the rise, progress, and present
state, of the military operations in North America; with a just delineation of
the characters of the principal agents in our political affairs. Indeed, my
Lord, you impose a task that will require a Volume, rather than a Letter. As
your Lordship's desire, however, shall always carry with me the force of a
command, I will engage in it with the utmost cheerfulness. Forgive me, my Lord,
for saying I have a still stronger motive for composing these sheets, than a
mere compliance with your Lordship's request; to which I would ever pay the
profoundest regard. When I reflect upon your eminent station -- your excelling
abilities -- your warm and active zeal, for the interest and welfare of the
British colonies; I am prompted by an unfeigned desire of serving my country;
and setting before your Lordship's eyes TRUTH, in her plain undisguised
habiliments: I would strip her of all that delusive coloring, with which she
has been artfully varnished, by (...)-writers from this part of the world;
either to subserve some mean sinister party design, or to promote the views of
some aspiring and ambitions minds. Candor and integrity shall therefore guide
my pen; and amidst the variety with which it is my purpose to present your
Lordship, it shall be my sacred endeavor, to the best of my knowledge, to
attach myself to the strictest -- the most impartial verity.

American colanies too long neglected though of general importance.
THE American colonies, I speak it with submission, my Lord, were too long
neglected by their mother country; though loudly demanding her patronage and
assistance. Those, on the continent, require her peculiar notice: They may be
made an inexhaustible magazine of wealth; and if suffered to fall into the
hands of the French, such will be the accession to their already extended
commerce and marine strength, that Great Britain must not only lose her former
luster, but, dreadful even in thought! cease to be any longer an independent
power. Nay, should every other scheme fail, the success of this will inevitably
accomplish the longprojected design of that aspiring nation, for setting up an
Universal Monarchy (...) for, if France rule the ocean, her resources will
enable her to subject all Europe to her despotic sway. But it is unnecessary to
offer any arguments in support of a proposition, of which the Public seems to
remain no longer insensible. Happy for us, had these sentiments prevailed
earlier, and been more frequently inculcated!

More considered, on the reduction of Louisburg.
THE importance of the colonies, my Lord, was too little considered, till the
commencement of the last war. The reduction of Cape Breton by the people of
New England, was an acquisition so unexpected and fortunate, that America
became, on that remarkable event, a more general topic of conversation. Mr.
Shirley, the governor of the Massachusetts B^y, was the principal projector of
that glorious enterprise: An enterprise, which reduced to the obedience of his
Britannick Majesty, the DUNKIRK of North America. Of such consequence to the
French, was the possession of that important key to their American settlements,
that its restitution was, in reality, the purchase of the last general Peace in
Europe.

Character of Gov. Shirley.
OF all our plantation Governors, my Lord, Mr. Shirley is most distinguished
for his singular abilities. He was born in England, and bred up to the Law, at
one of the Inns of Court. In that profession he afterward practiced, for
several years, in the Massachusetts Bay: and, in 1741, was advanced by his
Majesty to the supreme command of that colony. He is a Gentleman of great
political sagacity, deep penetration, and indefatigable industry. With respect
to the wisdom and equity of his administration, he can boast the universal
suffrage of a wise, free, jealous, and moral people. Though not bred to arms, he
is eminently possessed of these important military virtues -- An extent of
capacity to form and execute great designs; -- profound secresy; -- love of
regularity and discipline; -- a frugal and laborious manner of living; with the
art of conciliating the affections; -- a talent which Hannibal admired in
Pyrrhus, above all the rest of his martial accomplishments. In the first of
these great qualities, Mr. Shirley is universally acknowledged to shine: and it
is, in reality, more estimable, than all other military endowments without it;
consisting, to use the words of that discerning historian Mr. Rollin, in having
great views; in forming plans at a distance; in proposing a design, from which
the author never departs; in concerting all the measures necessary for its
success; in knowing how to seize the favorable moments of occasion, which are
rapid in their course, and never return; to make even sudden and unforeseen
accidents subservient to a plan; in a word, to be upon the watch against every
thing, without being perplexed and disconcerted by any event. But, whether it
arises from his being so far advanced in years, or from his constitutional
disposition and make, he has not, in my opinion, that activity and alertness so
conducive to warlike expedition; and on which the success of an enterprise
frequently depends. This was one of the characteristics of Braddock; a
commander, vigorous in executing, as Mr. Shirly, judicious in contriving a plan
-- sed non ^ia possumus-ownes -- and it is easier, my Lord, to find active
hands, than able heads. Hisattention to colony affairs.
No man perhaps in the nation, has bestowed more attention, upon the state of
the colonies in general: and having their interest sincerely at heart, he has
been perpetually concerting expedients, advancive of their prosperity, and to
check the views of an all-grasping Monarch. Upon the reduction of Louisburgh,
he earnestly recommended to his Majesty's minister, the demolition of that
fortress, and an expedition against the French settlements in Canada. The
reasons why he succeeded in neither of these proposals, Is rewarded with a
regiment and sent commissary to Paris
I cannot take upon me to assign. His Majesty, however, sensible of his
services, gave him a regiment in 1746; and upon the conclusion of the peace of
Aix-^a-Chapelle, ^nt him as one of the British commissaries to Paris, for
settling the controverted limits between the two Crowns in America. (...) midst
all the spendors and delicacies of Ver^arllies, he forgot neither OUR interest,
nor HIS duty. As a proof of his integrity and diligence, during that fruitless
embassy, one need only peruse these judicious and laborious memorials, in
support of his Majesty's right to Nova Scotia which were principally framed by
him; and lately published by order of the Lords of Trade, as a full exhibit of
our title to that part of America. When no satisfaction could, in this way, be
obtained from the Court of France; which was artfully endeavoring to spin out
the negotiation, and at the same time fortifying the places in question, as
well as making new acquisitions; the British commissaries retired from the
French Court, and Mr. Shirley resumed his government in New England in August
1753.

1753.
The French encroach on Virginia
THE French, jealous of the growth of the English colonies, were now meditating
all possible arts to distress them, and extend the limits of their own
frontier. The marquis Du Que^e, an enterprizing genius, was at this time
invested with the supreme command of New France. Our provinces were quickly
alarmed by the French settlements, which he this year began on the banks of the
Ohio. Virginia, appearing more immediately concerned, Message to the commandant.
Mr. Dinwiddie Lieutenant Governor of Virginia.
wrote, on the 31st of October, to the commandant of the French forces there,
complaining of sundry late hostilities: and desiring to know, by what authority
an armed force had marched from Canada, and invaded a territory indubitably the
right of his Brit^nnic Majesty. Major Washington, a gentleman of whom I shall
have occasion in the sequel to make honorable mention, was the bearer of this
letter. He returned with an answer from Mo^s. Legardeur De St. Pierre, dated at
the fort on Beef River, 15 December, 1753; of which the following is an exact
translation:

It is answe^ed.
As I have the honor to command here in chief, Mr. Washington delivered me the
letter, which you directed to the commandant of the French troops. I should
have been pleased if you had given him orders, or if he himself had been
disposed, to visit Canada and our general; to whom, rather than to me, it
properly appertains to demonstrate the reality of the King my master's rights
to lands situated along the Ohio, and to dispute the pretersions of the King of
Great Britain in that respect.

I shall immediately forward your letter to Mons. Le Marquis Du Quesne. His
answer will be a law to me: and if he directs me to communicate it to you, I
assure you, Sir, I shall neglect nothing that ma be necessary to convey it to
you with expedition.

As to the requisition you make (that I retire with the troops under my
command) I cannot believe myself under any obligation to submit to it. I am
here, in virtue of my general's orders; and I beg, Sir, you would not doubt a
moment of my fixed resolution to conform to them, with all the exactitude and
steadiness that might be expected from a better officer.

I do not know that, in the course of this campaign, any thing has passed that
can be esteemed an act of hostility, or contrary to the treaties subsisting
between the two Crowns; the continuation of which is as interesting and
pleasing to us, as it can be to the English. If it had been agreeable to you,
Sir, in this respect, to have made a particular detail of the facts which
occasion your complaint, I should have had the honor of answering you in the
most explicit manner; and I am persuaded you would have had reason to be
satisfied.

I have taken particular care to receive Mr. Washington, with all the
distinction suitable to your dignity, and to his quality and great merit. I
flatter myself that he will do me this justice, and join with me in testifying
the profound respect with which I am,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Legardeur De St. Pierre.


1754.
Virg^man apply for aid to the colouies.
ON the receipt of this resolute answer, Mr. Dinwiddie made instant complaint
to the Court of Great Britain; and by alarming speeches labored to rouse the
Virginians into a vigorous opposition. He wrote also to the neighboring
governors, importuning the aid of the other colonie^ for repelling the
invasion, and erecting a sort at the confluence of the Ohio and Monongahela. An
immediate junction in such measures became absolutely requisite for our common
security. But the colonies, alas! were sunk into a profound lethergy; and,
resigned to stupidity and slumbering, appeared insensible of the threatening
danger. They contemned the power of Canada; confided in the number of their
inhabitants; inattentive were they to the inconveniences of an endless
frontier; and in short entirely unacquainted with the situation of the inland
country. The waters of the Ohio, before this period, were scarce known, save to
a few Indian traders; and the generality deemed those French settlements too
remote to be the object of dread, and a matter of insignificant moment. But
they generally excused themselves.
Accordingly, when application was made for succors to Virginia, conformable
to directions from the ministry, some of our provincial Assemblies,
particularly those of Pensylvania You would not admit, that the French
encroachments and fortifications on the Ohio were within our limits, or his
Majesty's dominions, thereby seeking an excuse to avoid doing what was required
of you. Gov. Morris's messige to the assembly of Pensylvania, 22 Nov. 1755.
and New York It appears, by other papers your honor has been (...) leased to
communicate to us, that the French have built a sort at a place ca^d the French
Creek, at a considerable distance from the river Ohio, which may, but does not
by any evidence or information appear to us to be an invasion of any of his
Majesty's colonies. Address of the general assembly to Lieut. Gov. De Lancey,
23 April, 1754.
, seemed even to question his Majesty's title to the lands usurped by the
French. Others, to avoid their share in the burden, framed the most trifling
excuses. New York, however, voted 5000 l. currency in aid of Virginia; which,
considering her own situation, and approaching distress, was no ungenerous
contribution.

THE Virginians nevertheless proceeded in their resolution of marching a body
of troops to the protection of their frontiers: F^ces raised under Col.
Washington.
and passed an act in February 1754, for raising 10,000 l. and 300 men. The
command was given to Col. Washington, a young gentleman of great bravery and
distinguished merit. By his Majesty's direction, two of the regular independent
companies of foot at New York, were ordered to the frontier of that dominion.
They embarked for Virginia on board the Centaur man of war; which unfortunately
did not sail from thence till the middle of June, and carried the money before
mentioned to the assistance of that colony.

Col. WASHINGTON began his march, Who had a successful skirmish with the enemy.
at the head of his little army, about the 1st of May. On the 28th he had a
skirmish with the enemy, of whom ten were slain, and about twenty made
prisoners. But this publick-spirited officer soon experienced a reverse of
fortune. Waiting for further reinforcements, he was alarmed with an account,
that 900 French and 200 Indians were advancing from the Ohio; who accordingly
in two days after The third of July.
came up, and an engagement immediately ensued. Our troops were but a handful
compared to the number of the enemy, consisting only of about three hundred
effective men. After a vigorous resistance for three hours, But was afterward
subdued by numbers.
in which it was said near two hundred of the French and their Indian allies
were slain; Col. Washington, observing the great superiority of the enemy, who
now began to hemm him in on all quarters, found himself under an absolute
necessity of submitting to the disagreeable terms that were offered him The
terms of capitulation granted by Mons. De Villier, captain and commander of the
Infantry of his Most Christian Majesty, to those English troops actually in
Fort Necessity, which is built on the land of the king's dominions
As our intentions have never been to trouble the peace and harmony which
se^^ns between the (...) princes in (...), but only to (...) alssassination
which has been (...) of our officers, bearer of a (...), as appears by his
wri^^^^; as also to hinder any establishment on the land in the dominions of
the king my master; upon these (...), we are willing to grant protection and
favor to all the English that are in the said fort, upon the conditions
hereafter mentioned

ARTICLE I.
We grant the English commander, to retire with all his garrison, and to return
peaceably into his own country; and promise to hinder his receiving any insults
from us French, and to restrain, as much as shall be in our power, the savages
that are with us

ARTICLE II.
That the English be permitted to march out, and carry every thing with them,
except the artillery, which we keep.

ARTICLE III.
That we will allow the English all the honors of war; and that they shall
march out with drums beating, and with a swivel gun; -- that we are willing to
show that we treat them as friends.

ARTICLE IV.
That as soon as the articles are signed by both parties, they strike the
English colors.

ARTICLE V.
That tomorrow, at break of day, a detachment of the French shall make the
ga^^^ ^ file ^ff, and take p^ssion of the fort: And as the English have a few
(...), they are free to hide their effects, and come and search for them when
they have met their horses: And that they may for this end have guardians,
(...) manner they please, upon condition that they will give their word or
honor, not to work upon any building in this place, or in any part this side
the mountains, during a year, to be accounted (...) this day. And as the
English have (...) in their power an (...) two cadets, and most of the
p^^^^ners made in the assassination of ^iear Desamonville, that they promise to
(...) them back to the Fort De Du Quesne, situate on the Fine River: And for
the secu^ of this article, as well as this treaty, M^ss. Jacob Va^ B^acham and
Robert Stobo, both captains, shall be put as hostages, ^ill the arrival of the
Canadians and French abovementioned. We ^^ige ourselves, on our side, to give
an escort to return in safety these two (...) a duplicate being made upon or of
the post of our blockade. July 3. 17, 4.


IN this action we had thirty killed and fifty wounded. The French were
observed to be assisted by a considerable number of Indians, who had been long
in the English alliance: Not a few of them were known to be Delawares,
Shawanese, and of the Six Nations They are called Mingo^s by the southern
Indians.
. On the surrender of our camp, they fell at once to pillaging the baggage and
provisions; Consequences of his d^^^^^.
and not content with this, they afterward shot some of the horses and earth,
and scalped two of the wounded Among other infractions of the capitulation, the
destruction of the d^^^er's box ought not to be forgotten; by which means our
wounded were ba^ba^ensly distressed.

See Col. Innes's letter of 11 July, 1754.


.

AGAINST this conduct, Co^. Washington remonstrated, but all his arguments made
but little impression upon them. The Canadians delight in blood: and in
barbarity exceed, if possible, the very (...), themselves. Thus the French
rem^int^ masters of the fi^d; the Indians were riveted in their detection* his
Majesty's arms unsuccessful; and our frontiers exposed, through the (...)
p^simony of the provinces. The enemy, on the other hand, wisely improved the
present advantage, and erected forts, to secure to themselves the quiet
possession of that ^^^tile country. How evident then was the necession of
uniting the power of the B^itish colonies! The expediency of a plan for that
purpose had been before considered. Some measures seemed also absolutely
requisite for supporting our Indian interest, and preventing their total
decle^sion.

ACCORDINGLY, agreeable to his Majesty's orders, G^^^^ congress held at Albany.
the 14th of June was appointed for a grand congress of commissaries from the
several provinces, to be held at Albany, as well to treat with the Six Nations,
as to concert a scheme for a general union of the British colonies. Messengers
had been dispatched to the Indian castles The Indians call their villages,
which are only surrounded with pallisades, castles.
to request their attendance; but they did not arrive till the latter end of
the month; Indians Pelay attendance, and the rea^^^.
and the Mohaws, who live but 40 miles distant, came in last. This occasioned
various speculations: some imputed it to fear; lest the French, in their
absence, should fall upon their countries: Others to art, -- imagining that by
exciting our jealousy of their wavering disposition, at so critical a juncture,
the more liberal would be the presents made them by the several governments.
Not a few thought it an artifice of Mr. Johnson's, who expecting to rise into
importance, from the reputation of a mighty influence over the Indians, kept
them from a punctual attendance; being very confident of a public request to
himself from the commissioners, to go up, and hasten their progress. There was
the highest evidence of the like piece of policy at an Indian treaty, during
Mr. Clinton's administration. The Indians however at length arrived, though fewer
in number than was expected, or had been usual on those solemn occasions.
Hendrick, a noted Mohawk sachem A (...) is a warri^, and a man of an
established reputation for his wisdom and (...) the Indians.
, apologized for the delay of that canton, in a speech to this effect. There
was (said he) an interview last fall, between Call. Johnson and the Six Nations,
at Onondaga. Our brethren of the other nations reported, that his speech to us
was concerted by the M^^^^ks: We therefore come last, to prevent any ground for
the rep^tition of such slanders, with the regard to the address now to be made
us by your ^^^^ur.

THE congress having been opened on the 18th of June, Commissioners, and (...)
ranked.
were ready to treat with the Six Nations; and on the 29th, after settling
disputes between the commissioners concerning rank and precedence, Mr. De
Lancey, the Lieutenant Governor of New York, addressed himself in a speech to
the Indians. -- On his right hand, were Most. Murray and Johnson, two of the
council of New York; next to them, M^ss. Wells, Hutchinson, Chan^^^r, Partr^ge,
and Worthington, commissioners from the Massachusetts Bay: Then the gentlemen
from New Hampshire, Mess. Wy^urn, Atkinson, Ware, and Sherourn: And last on
that side, M^ss. Hopkins and Howard, commissioners of Rhode Island. On his
left, were seated, Mess. Chambers and Smith, two other of his Majesty's council
for New York: Then the Connecticut commissioners, Lieutenant Governor Pitkin,
Major W^l^^t, and Col. Williams: After them Moss. Penn, Peter's, Norris, and
Franklin, from Pensylvania: and last of all, Col. Tasker and Major Barnes, from
Maryland.

THE treaty was conducted with great solemnity. Indians pleased with the
presents, but blan^^ our conduct.
The Indians appeared well pleased with the presents from the several
governments; which, compared to former donations, amounted to an immense value:
But in their answer, recriminated upon us the desertion of our fort ^^on the
disbanding of the forces raised for the Canada expedition in 1746, and the
assembly's disinclination to garrison it, the fort, by order of Mr. Clinton,
was burnt and abandoned.
at Saraghtoga the last war; lamented the defenseless condition of our frontier
city of Albany; and extoned the better conduct of the French, in fortifying and
maintaining their garrisons.

THE Indians being dismissed, the conferences were continued till the 11th of
July. The commissioners were, both for abilities and fortune, some of the most
considerable men in North America. The speakers however were not many; but of
those who spoke, some delivered themselves with singular energy and eloquence.
All were inflamed with a patriot-spi^^t, and the debates were nervous and
pathetic. This assembly, my Lord, might very properly be compared to one of the
ancient Greek conventions, for supporting their expiring liberty against the
power of the Persian empire, or that LEWIS of Greece, Philip of Macedon. In the
conclusion, Plan of a union.
a plan was concerted for a general union of the British colonies, and creating
a common fund to defray all military expenses; and a representation of their
present state drawn up; which were agreed to be laid before the King's
ministers. Some of the governments have nevertheless declared themselves averse
to this scheme; Approved by all, except De Lancey.
though approved at the time by every ^ember of the congress, except Mr. De
Lancey. Unaccountable was the conduct of this gentleman to several of the
provincial deputies. But those who were best acquainted with his character and
love of sway, ascribed his aversion from the plan, to an apprehension, that
should the same take place, the supreme officer, who agreeably to it was to
preside in the grand council of deputies from the respective colonies, would
most probably be the governor of the Massachusetts Bay: An apprehension, which
repressed his own aspiring views; and it was imagined, stung him with
unspeakable chagrin.

As the Lieutenant Governor will appear, His character and history.
in the course of this letter, to bear a principal part in our public
transactions, it will be necessary, before I proceed any farther, to present
your Lordship with his picture at full length. Without an intimate knowledge of
that gentleman's history and genius, it will be impossible to comprehend his
conduct, or trace his action, to their genuine source.

HE is the eldest branch of one of the first families in the province. His
father, a French re^ug^e, a gentleman of distinguished rank in this city, and
who here acquired a large fortune, sent him for his education to the University
o^ Cambridge. He was a youth of prompt parts, and made a considerable progress
in learning, espe^alty in the classi^s. In the year 1729 he was, by Governor
Montgomery's recommendation, created one of his Majesty's Council of New York;
but never engaged the public attention, till the time of Mr. Cosby. He became
then very famous. With this governor he took part in most or all of his
measures -- measures extremely arbitrary, and productive of an administration
odious and turbulent. Cosby, in return for his ministerial services, loaded him
with favors. Deposing Chief Justice Morris (the main obstacle to his perilous
projects) he raised him to the first seat on the bench Mr. De Lancey was (...)
educated to the law; but having ^pent some time, after his return from England,
in the and of that science, Goy (...) may appointed him and judge of the
supreme Court of Judicature.
. But though his excellency had the disposition of offices, he could by no means
delegate the affections of the people. Accordingly, our politician was equally
honored and despised. He enjoyed the smiles of the gover^r, which loaded him
with the curses of the people; was caressed by the former, and by the latter
abhorred. Cosby leaving a successor capable of governing without a pro^pter,
the chief justice found it necessary to deface the memory of his former
conduct, by cultivating the arts of popularity. Mr. Clarke, who succeeded In
March, 1736.
, being perfectly master of our constitution, a gentleman of experience and
penetration, and intimately acquainted with the temper of the people, in a
short time reconciled all parties; and by restoring the public trenquility,
rendered Mr. De L^ncey's plo^ding abilities utterly useless. Hence he was at
full ^ure to court the populace. Suddenly he became transformed into a patriot;
and, strange to relate! without a single act of ^^^^^otism. His uncommon
vivacity, with the semblance of aff^b^lity and ease; his adroitness at a just,
with a show of condescension to his inferiors, wonderfully facilitated has
progress. These plausible arts, together with his influence as Chief Justice,
and a vast personal estate at use, all conspired to secure his popular triumph.
To establish such an undue power, and amazing influence, would, in a Grecian
commonwealth, have exposed a man of less ambition and better principles to the
ostracism. Mr. Clarke being superseded by Governor Clinton Mr. Clinton arrived
as Governor, 22 Sept. 1743.
, Mr. De Lancey was presented with a fresh opportunity for the exhibition of
his political genius. Mr. Clinton, a gentleman of but indifferent parts, wholly
resigned himself into his hands. Contenting himself with the title and salary
of Governor, he left the sole direction of affairs to his minister, who by
virtue of his late acquired omnipotence with the assembly, carried all his
points, and even endeared him to the people. This intimacy subsisted no longer
than it was found conducive to his designs. Having obtained from Mr. Clinton a
new commission for his office of Chief Justice during good behavior; and
flattering himself with the hopes of another, appointing him Lieut. Governor,
through the interest of his friends in England, he cared not how soon his
excellency abdicated the province, nor how tempestuous he rendered his
administration; and was therefore prepared for an open rupture. He no sooner
thought himself capable of acting independently of the governor, than like
Sixtus Quintus, who threw aside his cruthes the moment of his exaltation to the
popedom, he put off all that humble devotion, by which he had so fatally
deceived his too credulous master, and openly set himself at defiance against
him. Now he began to dictate, rather than advise: and instead of Sejanus, chose
to be Tiberius himself. Dining one day with Mr. Clinton, and insisting upon
some favorite point with great imperiousness, the Governor, who had hitherto
very cordially suffered himself to be led, refused on this occasion to be
driven. The Chief Justice then arose and left him; declaring, with an oath, he
would make his administration uneasy for the future: His Excellency replied, he
might do his worst. Thus they parted; nor were ever afterward reconciled. This
breach gave rise to the contentions, which so unhappily imbroiled our
provincial affairs, during the remainder of his administration. The assembly
were instantly inflamed. He who before had been able to make them connive at
very unjustifiable steps, could at once stir up an opposition to the most
unexceptionable measures. Remonstrances, warm and virulent, were now drawn up;
unworthy their own dignity to offer, and replete with the grossest language to
his Majesty's representative. Thus was formed against Mr. Clinton a powerful
party, which ceased not, while he continued at the helm, to harrass and perplex
him. To such an exorbitant length did they carry their opposition, as to throw
off the restraint of humanity: They had even recourse to force and violence.
Nay, a partisan of the Chief Justice, in defiance of the sacred rights of the
magistracy and the law -- to show his resentment against Mr. Clinton and his
adherents -- assaulted the mayor; whipped the sheriff; damned the Governor; and
stabbed his physician. My Lord, we became the sport and contempt of our
neighbors; and it is beyond contradiction, that Mr. De Lancey, by blowing up
the coals of contention, did the province more injury, than he will be ever
able to repair. Nor is their any reason to doubt, that the enorm^us power of
this gentleman, and the ferment raised against Mr. Clinton, occasioned the 39th
article of the king's instructions to Sir Danvers Osborn; which appears
purposely calculated to render our future Governors independent on his
influence over the assembly: For a law indefinite, making provision for the
salary allowed by the King to his Governors; and competent salaries to all
judges, justices, and other necessary officers and ministers of government --
such a law, I say, would effectually render a Governor independent of the
assembly, and consequently of any undue influence in it. Nor without such
independence, or an abridgement of Mr. De Lancey's power, by reducing him to
his primitive private station, do I see any probability of the extinction of
that party-spirit, which has so long disturbed the tranquillity, and injured
the public weal of the colony. Mr. Clinton, being superseded by Sir Danvers
Osborn Sir Danvers Osborn arrived at New York the 7th of October, 1753.
, a gentleman of a most amiable moral character, retired into the country; from
whence he proposed to embark for Great Britain. The Chief Justice,
notwithstanding his long declared enmity, and unwearied industry to embarrass
his administration, had now -- the humility, shall I call it? -- to dispatch a
messenger to him, with design if possible to procure an accommodation -- in
order to secure his favor in England, when he could no longer distress him in
America. It were difficult to determine, whether this required a higher degree
of assurance or servility. But it is no uncommon thing, to behold the same
person fastidious and fawning, supercilious and sycophantic. Mr. Clinton, far
from an implacable enemy, began to be softened; when his lady (who if born
among the Scythians, had been the Thalestris of antiquity) unravelling the
secret, frustrated at once all expectations of a composition; and gave the
plenipotentiary such a volley of invective against his constituent, as rendered
all future overtures entirely hopeless.

ON the death of Sir Danvers Osborn This happened on the 12th of October, 1753.
, His appointment to the government and system of politics.
equally unexpected and deplored, Mr. De Lancey published the commission he had
just received, appointing him Lieutenant Governor. He was now to act a part
entirely new, and demanding the full exertion of his political dexterity. In
the first place, he had to convince the ministry of his utmost efforts to carry
the King's instructions in the house of representatives: And in the next, in
order to preserve his popularity with the assembly, and not in the most
flagrant manner counteract his avowed principles, he was to satisfy them, that
in reality he by no means expected their compliance with them. To execute the
former part of this plan -- in his speech of the 31st of October, 1753. to the
council and general assembly, he says, His speech to the council and assembly.
-- You will perceive by the 39th article of his Majesty's instructions to Sir
Danvers Osborn, (copies of which I shall herewith deliver you The 39th
instruction was published in one of our newspapers; and reprinted in England.
The publication of it was thought to have been intended to excite the popular
(...); and it occasioned the resentment of the ministry. It is wo^^ remarking,
that copies of several other instructions were expressly ordered by his Majesty
to be laid before the assembly (...) but no such directions were given with
respect to this.
) how highly his Majesty is displeased at the neglect of, and contempt shown
to, his royal commission and instructions, by your p^ssing laws of so
extraordinary a nature and by such your unwarrantable proceedings, particularly
set forth in this instruction: Hence also his Majesty's royal pleasure as to
these matters with appear, and what be expects from you. On this head, I must
^^s^rve (...) you, that ^y our excellent constitution the executive power is
lodged in the cro^n: That all government is founded on a c^^^^^ence, that every
person will discharge the duty of his station; and if there should be any abuse
of power, that the legal and regular course is to make appu^ation to his
Majesty, who having a paternal tenderness for all his subjects, is always ready
to hear and redress their (...) and then addressing himself to the assembly in
particular -- I must earnestly press it upon you, that in preparing your bill
for the support of government, and other public services, you pay a due regard
to his Majesty's pleasure signified in his instructions; and frame them in such
a manner, as when laid before me for my assent, I may give it consistent with
my duty to his Majesty. What think you, my Lord? could your favorite Garrick
have personated Richard the Third in a livelier manner, than this gentleman the
real advocate for the royal instruction? -- Could the man, who but a day or two
before had intrigued with the members how to elude that very instruction,
preserve his gravity, while acting such a tragi^comical farce? -- for that, my
Lord, was the method in which he performed the second part of his plan. As his
Majesty's representative, he was obliged to urge their compliance with seeming
sincerity and warmth -- but as James De Lancey, Esquire their old friend and best
adviser, it was his real sentiment, that never ought they to submit.

MATTERS being thus previously adjusted, the assembly in their address
studiously avoid a categorical answer with respect to the indefinite support:
But to gratify his honor, and blacken the memory of Mr. Clinton, that he might
not prejudice him in England, they make use of this memorable ^v^sion -- On
reading the 39th article of his majesty's instructions Assem^^^ (...) ^^^e
answer.
to Sir Danv^rs Osborn, your honor's immediate predecess^ we are extremely
surprised to find, that the public transactions of his colony have been so
(...) ^represented to our must gracious (...). We (...) with truth and justice
affirm, that his Majesty has not in his adminions a people more firmly, and
that from principles of ^^l affection, devoted to his person, family, and
government, than the inhabitants of this colony. And we are greatly at a ^^s to
discover, in what instances, the peace and tranquillity of the colony have been
disturbed, or wherein order and government have been subverted. If the course
of justice has been ^ed, or in any case perverted, it has been by the
direction, or through the means, of Mr. Clinton late Governor of this province,
who sent peremptory orders to the judges, clerk, and sheriff of Duchess County,
to stay process, and stop the proceedings i^ several cases of private property,
depending in that court; and who aid, in other counties, commissionate judges
and justices of known ill characters, and extreme ignorance: One stood even
presented for perjury in the supreme court of this province, wh^m he rewarded
with the office of assistant judge; and others were so shamefully ignorant and
^^^terate, as to be unable to write their own names. From whence we greatly
fear, that justice has in many cases been partially, or very unduly administered.

I shall not trouble your Lordship with a vindication of Mr. Clinton; (...) on
the address.
but only observe -- that the suits commenced in Duchess County were by
desert^^s against their captains Captains of the levies raised for the Canada
expedition in (...).
; that the governor, who was no lawyer, assured the house, his letters to the
justices were written unadvisedly, and with precipitation; and that if any man
was injured, he would readily compensate his damages. And as the charge of
appointing ignorant justices, it lies with equal truth against all our
governors, (Mr. De Lancey himself not excepted) who to influence elections,
have gone into an unjustifiable practice of intrusting blank commissions with
certain favorites in the respective counties, empowered to place and displace
civil and military officers at their pleasure. These election jobbers are
generally the court members in assembly: And decency, my Lord, should have
induced them to stifle the ridiculous assertion, that Mr. Clinton rewarded a
man for being perjured; as well as the more pertinent invective against the
dangerous usage just mentioned, for corrupting the house of representatives. --
But to disgrace Mr. Clinton was expedient to the Lieut. Governor; and hence
this attach upon the former.

UPON his honor's advancement to the government, Numerous and (...) addresses
to the Li^^^t. Governor.
the press labored with addresses; and the incense off red upon the occasion,
might have persumed the whole temple of Delphos. It was not enough, that,
agreeable to ancient Usage, he was presented with the compliments of public
bodies alone. It was necessary, from the number of addresses, to display his
extensive influence, and the universal joy -- thereby, if possible, to lay the
foundation of his continuance in the administration. Accordingly, the very
militia officers and supervisors of Queen's County (a motley assemblage!) were
made to groan out their aspirations for this auspicious event -- Oh! -- that
his gracious Majesty would be pleased to confirm and fix you, for a long time,
in this exalted station. Never have I seen an insignificant interjection more
insignificantly employed. To so extravagant a pitch, my Lord, ^id this
exuberant (...) arrive, that we at length found him clothed with an
incommunicable attribute of the Deity himself -- even his i^mutable moral
(...). These things in you, (say they) are not to properly called virtues, as
NATURAL ENDOWMENTS. You will not, you CANNOT act otherwise than you do. With
such sustian can some men be regaled: and by such sustian is oftentimes a whole
nation deluded.

To proceed in the character of this remarkable American -- He is a person of
quick apprehension, and extensive acquaintance with the law; which he acquired
with incredible application, to obliterate the indifferent figure be made, when
first elevated to the chief seat on the bench, to serve the purposes of
Governor Cosby. Without the talents, he has all the am^tion of a R^pper^a. His
thirst after popularity, which in him is a mere eng^^e of st^^e, has almost
banished all public spirit; and the triumphs of power occasioned the exile of
common sense. Apprehensive of the ^^i^ution of his own luster, his jealousy
will not at not a competitor; His jealousy.
but s^ts him at mortal odds with a rising (...) spirit, lest it be rewarded
with popular favor, and the result into popular interest -- in derogation of
his own sovereign influence. Hence, whoever would accomplish a pa^ (...) ^sure,
must either obtain his leave; and then ^^ar ogates to himself the merit ^e to
its author; or carry it by mere (...) without which he may be sure of a
disappointment. In the latter case, he has generally address enough to be
revenged on the projector, by rendering both him and his project universally
o^^^us. Some among us see these arts; many suspect them; few dare mention them;
and fewer still oppose them. Thus a people, who would by no means be forcibly
deprived of their liberties, post into voluntary bondage: and they who would
scorn a v^ssalage to the greatest monarch, become dupes to a dictator of their
own creation.

OF all provincial affairs he is the uncontrouled director. And uni^ (...)
As chief justice, great is his interest in the counties: with that interest he
commands elections: with his sway in elections he rules the assembly: and with
his sovereignty over the house controuls a governor. His influence with the
members of the assembly being the main source of his exorbitant power, never
will he serve the Crown at the risque of a dissension with the house. He will
only stand by a governor while at his devotion, and standing fair with the
people; but in case of a rupture, instantly sacrifice prerogative on the altar
of popularity. His own interest is his Idol, and every thing else made
subservient to procure it veneration and esteem. The men who are his greatest
tools, are generally by himself the most despised; and sometimes treated with
despite and insult. If they discover the least freedom of resentment (which few
of them dare discover), he can with a smile, or a joke, or a promise or a
bottle, at once dissipate the struggling resolution, and reduce them to their
primitive obsequiousness. By hints -- by threa^ and blandishments -- by
em^fl^^es -- by dark insinuasions and private cabels, he is able to render any
measure hateful or popular -- to put down, or raise up, whom, when, and what he
please^. Nay, my Lord, I will venture to affirm -- and every man in the
province must bear me testimony -- that while his ^^duence continues to be
supported with his office of chief justice, no operation, in which this colony
is concerned, can promise success, should this monopolizer of power be
determined to obstruct it.

SHOULD it now be inquired, Reflet^i^^^^ (...) popularme^it.
Must not a man so extremely popular be necessarily possessed of ^^^^ent
virtue, and warmly devoted to the weal of the people, who thus cordially
resound his fame, submit to his (...), and agree to acorn his triumph? The
question can only come from a novice in history, and a stranger to mankind. In
the judgment of your Lordship, who is deepl react in both. I am co^^^^^^nt that
popularity is no in^^^^tion of (...) W^^h the (...) multitude the best men are
often unpopular -- the most p^mcious, extolled and adored. The people are ever
ready to be bewitched, cheated, and e^ by a powerful (...): and, what is worse,
ever ready to (...) would disabuse and re^^^^e them. The same people who (...)
without emotion behold a S^y (...) in de^ence of public ^^^^^rty, could commit
a (...) for p^ching ^ition and subverting the (...). Your Lordship that
Massanello, in the short space of (...) fishermen, -- a popular incen^^^ary, --
a sovereign vi^^^oy, -- st^pped of his honors, -- treated like a (...), --
kn^k^d on the head, -- and thrown into a ^ch. Who, in fi^^, was more popular
than the pe^^lent Claudius, except, (...), the more p^^^^^nt C^raline? 'Twas
therefore well (...) the (...) Cromwell, that the very men who followed (...)
with acc^^^^^^tions and torrents of flattery, would with the same
demonstrations of joy accompany him to the g^^ows.

THUS, my Lord, I have presented you with a faithful portrait of the Lieut.
Governor of New York, who is to bear no small share in the public affairs, of
which I have the honor to transmit your Lordship an account -- a portrait,
under which there had been no need of fixing a name to direct to the original,
those who have the least knowledge of that gentleman's character.

WHILE these things were transacting at Albany, Mr. Pownal, Character of Mr.
Thomas Pownal.
brother to John Pownal, Esquire one of the secretaries to the Board of Trade, was
upon the spot. This gentleman came over to America with Sir Danvers Osborn, in
quality of his private secretary; though it was imagined by many, he was
designed to be an assistant to him in the exercise of the government. He is
something of a scholar, but a confused reasoner; and in his style perplexed;
and in that usefullest of all sciences, the knowledge of mankind, he is a mere
novitiate: without the latter, your Lordship knows that other acquirements are
comparatively of small account, in the management of public business. To be
only learned, is frequently to be vain, ostentatious, and obstinate; such a
one, in a word, as Tertullian describes the most learned among the heathens,
"an animal of glory." This gentleman is fond of being considered in an
important light. Insatiable of praise, he can not only hear himself flattered;
but, what is more unaccountable in a man of tolerable sense, can flatter
himself. He is a person of uncommon application, and a good memory. By dint of
industry, and an access to the papers in the Plantation Board Office, he has
acquired some knowledge of American affairs: but so keen is his appetite for
promotion, that he cannot brook the thoughts of a gradual advancement. He is
for galloping into preferment: and so intent on the contemplation of his future
grandeur, as to lose all patience in earning it. Being more skilled in books
than men, he is very abrupt in giving a scholastic turn to conversation, in
order to display his erudition. Ever ready to contradict: himself impatient of
contradiction. But wonderful is his knack at pluming himself with the schemes
and inventions of others; and, with the daw in the fable, sh^ng in a borrowed
dress: a remarkable instance of which I shall give your Lordship in the
following anecdote; as characteristic of a person, who will appear to have had
some considerable influence in the course of American transactions. During the
sitting of the congress, Anecdotes respecting a piece he published.
it was scarce possible to prevent part of their sentiments from transpiring.
The scheme of a naval armament on Lake Ontario, projected by Lieut. Governor
Clarke, before the late war; submitted to the then ministry; and now strongly
recommended by the commissioners of the Massachusetts Bay; by some means or
other happened to be hinted without doors. Mr. Pownal, intent upon rising into
significance among the colonies, chose not to slip so favorable an opportunity
of distinguishing himself, as he could now lay hold of, from these whispered
intelligences. He accordingly drew up some loose indigested proposals, with
respect to American affairs. Among other trite sentiments, he urged this scheme
as a new unthought-of measure, absolutely requisite to secure the command, and
preserve the furr trade of those inland seas. This he delivered to some of the
members of the congress to be communicated: and afterward transmitted a copy
to England; challenging to himself the sole merit of being the original author
of so useful and necessary an expedient Mr. Pownal had this piece published in
New York in Feb. 1756. It contained an introduction, declaring, that copies of
it were sent by the ministry to the respective governors of the colonies: and
in the spring following, it was republished, with great oftentation, in the
English magazines. With respect to those parts of i^, wherein he talks of
Indian affairs, the sentiments seem to be unintelligible by a North-American
understanding.
.

WHILE the congress was held at Albany, Shirley erects forts on Kennebec.
Governor Shirley, ever jealous of French machinations, proceeded, at the head
of about one thousand men, to the river Kennebec; and erected forts, at
convenient distances, to stop the progress of the French on that quarter; to
secure the possession of that country with the friendship of the eastern
Indians.

THE remainder of this year was principally spent in repeated representations
to the ministry, respecting the dangerous situation of the English colonies;
and the absolute necessity of a powerful assistance from Great Britain, to
defeat the ambitious designs of the Court of France.

1755.
On the welcome intelligence of the success of these representations; and while
(...) were expecting from England; the two regiments or Shirley and ^ppere^
were ordered to be reestablished, and recru^ were raising through the several
governments, to f^rm an army for dispossessing the French from their ^ate
encroachments.

THE general assembly of the Massachusetts Bay being convened, Designs an
expedition against Crown Point.
and the members sworn to ^crecy; Mr. Shirley communicated to them a design of
attacking Fort St. Frederic at Crown Point, the ensuing spring; and his
intention to appoint Col. Johnson to the command of that expedition. The scheme
being approved by the council and representatives of that province, and the
quotas settled, commissioners were charged to the neighboring governments, to
solicit their concurrence and aid, in the prosecution of this enterprise.

WHILE these matters were in agitation. Mr. Pownal was at Boston, intending to
sail from thence to England. He now thought fit to change his resolution; and
Governor Shirley honored him with the embassy to New York, for which place he
set out the beginning of March. Some gentlemen of the council and assembly were
commissioned, on the like errand, to the other colonies of New Jersey,
Pensylvania, etc.

MR. POWNAL's prospects of success at New York were at first not very
encouraging. De Lancey endeavors to obstruct the concurrence of New York.
De Lancey, jealous of Shirley's rising reputation, appeared, with regard to
the expedition recommended, extremely phlegmatic: and though artful enough to
abstain from an open opposition, he made use of Mr. Chambers as his tool in
council, to obstruct the concurrence of the legislature. At this time great
animosities were prevailing in the province, occasioned by a charter just
before granted by Mr. De Lancey, constituting a college for the education of
youth, upon a foundation which happened to enkindle the general disgust. The
majority of the house, apprehending the loss of their seats on a future
election, should they afford it the least assistance, found themselves obliged
rather to countenance the popular resentment. A gentleman of distinction, with
whom Mr. Pownal advised on the subject of his commission, thought it a prudent
step to open his message in part, to those members of the assembly, who, on the
abovementioned account, were then in the opposition. Several of the leading
men were secured by this method: But in vain.
and when the house met, such a disposition appeared to join in the scheme
proposed, that it was beyond Mr. De Lancey's power to obstruct it. Out of pique
however to Mr. Shirley, to whom this expedition was solely committed, he
prevailed upon them to suspend the execution of their vote, until General
Braddock's approbation was obtained: and by this artifice occasioned a
considerable delay in the operations.

GENERAL BRADDOCK, Braddock convenes the governors, and settles the operations.
being now arrived in Virginia, sent expresses to the several governors to meet
him, in order to a consultation on the business of the approaching campaign. --
This convention was opened on the 14th of April It was at first proposed to
have been held at Annapolis in Maryland. Mr. Shirley, who through the (...) of
his affairs did not arrive there till April, has been charged with delaying
Braddock's march near three weeks; though it is (...) us, that delay was
occasioned by the failure of the Virginia contract for the necessary supplies.
The general was (...) to enter into a new one with gentlemen in (...) which was
(...) till the 27th of May, near six weeks from the conclusion of the congress.
, at Alexandia in Virginia. Here it appeared, that through misrepresentations
from Virginia, the general was inj^ined to proceed immediately to Fort Du
Quesne. Those who were well acquainted with the country, could not help
observing, that a march from Potowmac, across the Allegheny mountains, must be
attended with incredible difficulty, hazard, and expense -- that the vicinity
of New York to Canada -- its fort of Oswego on Lake Ontario -- together with
the advantages of water carriage -- rendered that province by far the (...)
theater of action. Braddock's orders were nevertheless positive. -- For the
preservation therefore of Oswego, and the reduction of Niagara, it was at
length agreed, that Shirley's and Pepperel's regiments should proceed to Lake
Ontario, -- while General Braddock attacked Fort Du Quesne -- and the
provincial troops, commanded by General Johnson, marched to invest Crown Point.

THESE resolutions being taken, Shirley returns to Boston, to prepare for the
Northern Expeditions.
Mr. Shirley began his journey to Boston, to prepare for the expedition under
his immediate command; to forward that under Col. Johnson; and to quicken the
departure of the New England troops, now assembled by his Majesty's directions,
for reducing the French settlements in Nova Scotia. On his way, he spent some
time in conference with Col. Schuyler, a gentleman of fortune and courage, who,
out of disinterested love to his country, was engaged to head a regiment of 500
men, raised and maintained by the province of New Jersey. In New York, he was
retarded a few days to consult with General Johnson, and remove some objections
made by Mr. De Lancey to the form of his commission: Mr Johnson had his
commission from the governors of the provinces, which furnished the troops
under his command; the draft of which was settled at Alexandria. The Lieut
Governor of New York now thought proper to repeat those very objections, which
had been there overruled. This unaccountable conduct gave Mr. Johnson great
uneasiness, who could not obtain Mr. De Lancey's commission, till proper notice
was taken by General Shirley of so manifest an obstruction to the operations of
the campaign.
and in Connecticut, to hasten the assembling the troops of that colony
Connecticut had voted one thousand men for the Crown Point expedition and given
assurances of 500 more, if the service so required. New York was to supply 800;
but through the delay occasioned by the suspending clause above men soned in the
vote of our assembly, Mr. De Lancey's brother was sent into Connecticut, to
obtain leave for recruiting the quota we were to furnish, in that colony; as
men might there be raised more speedily than in the province of New York. Mr,
Shirley being at Hartford, during this application, was told h^ Governor Fitch,
that if Connecticut complied, they should consider themselves disengaged from
the assurances given of 500 more than their own quota, did the service demand
it. This, with Mr. Oliver De Lancey's declaration -- that if himself should
accept the command of the New York regiment, he could in ten days raise the
whole number in this province, induced Mr Shirley to oppose the application; it
appearing to him not improbable, that the service might afterward require the
reinforcement offered. In consequence of which, only 300 recruits were
furnished New York from thence -- A lucky incident for M^ Shirley's adversaries
to incense the people of New York against him; to which purpose it was
industriously applied, though his conduct in that affair was prudent and
rational; and though by repeated letters to Lieut. Governor De Lancey, he took
pains to remove any misunderstanding at a juncture so unseasonable.
.

THE necessary dispatches being given to the expedition to Nova Scotia under
Col. Winslow, Mr. Shirley, upon the arrival of the paymaster for the northern
district, returned to New York; And sails for Albany.
and on the 4th of July sailed for Albany, his own Regiment having passed by
for that place, in twenty-one transports, a few days before.

ABOUT this time, Nova Scotia reduced.
the colonies were filled with universal joy, on the agreeable news that the
New England troops were become masters of Beau-sejour and Bay Verte, on the
isthmus of Nova Scotia; whereby a new province was added to the British empire
in America: and that a strong fleet, under Admiral Boscawen, lay before
Louisburgh, to intercept the French supplies; and which had also seized two of
their capital ships, the Lys and Alcide, and sent them into Halifax.

GENERAL BRADDOCK was now on his march toward the Ohio, Braddock marches from
Fort Cumberland
at the head of about 2200 men, in order to invest Fort Du Quesne, and drive
the French from their encroachments on the frontiers of Virginia and
Pensylvania. From Fort Cumberland to Fort Du Quesne, the distance is not less
than 130 miles. Mr. Braddock began his march from the former on the 10th of
June; leaving the garrison under the command of Col. Innes. Innumerable were
the difficulties he had to surmount, in a country rugged, pathless, and
unknown, across the Allegheny mountains, through unfrequented woods, and
dangerous defiles. From the little meadows the army proceeded in two divisions.
At the head of the first, consisting of 1400 men, was the general himself, with
the greatest part of the ammunition and artillery. The second, with the
provisions, stores, and heavy baggage, was led by Col. Dunbar. Never was man
more confident of success, than this brave, though unfortunate officer. Being
advised at the great meadows, that the enemy expected a reinforcement of 500
regular troops, he pushed on by forced marches, with so much dispatch, that he
fatigued the soldiers, weakened his horses, and lest his second division near
40 miles in the rear. The enemy being not more than 200 strong at their fort on
the Ohio, gave no obstruction to the much of our forces, till the memorable 9th
of July -- a day never to be forgotten in the Annals of North America. About
noon our troops passed the Monagahela, and were then within seven miles of Fort
Du Quesne. -- Unapprehensive of the approach of an enemy, at once was the alarm
given, by a quick and heavy fire upon the vanguard, under Lieut. Col. Gage.
Immediately the main body, in good order and high spirits, advanced to sustain
them. Orders were then given to halt, and form into battalia. At this juncture
the van falling back upon them, in great confusion, a general panic seized the
whole body of the soldiery; and all attempts to rally them proved utterly
ineffectual. The general and all the officers exerted their utmost activity, to
recover them from the universal surprise and disorder: but equally deaf were
they to entreaties and commands. During this scene of confusion, they expended
their ammunition in the wildest and most unmeaning fire. Some discharging their
pieces on our own parties, who were advanced from the main body for the
recovery of the cannon. After three hours spent in this melancholy situation,
enduring a terrible slaughter, from (it may be said) an invisible foe, orders
were given to found a retreat, that the men might be brought to cover the
wagons. These they surrounded but a short space of time: for the enemy's fire
being again warmly renewed from the front and left flank, the whole army took
to immediate flight; leaving behind them all the artillery, provisions,
ammunition, baggage, military chest, together with the general's cabinet,
containing his instructions and other papers of consequence. So great was the
consternation of the soldiers, that it was impossible to stop their career,
flying with the utmost precipitation three miles from the field of action;
where only one hundred began to make a more orderly retreat.

WHAT was the strength of the enemy, has hitherto remained to us uncertain.
According to Indian accounts, they exceeded not 400, chiefly Indians: and
whither any were slain, is still to be doubted, for few were seen by our men,
being covered by stumps and fallen trees. Great indeed was the destruction on
our side. -- Numbers of officers sacrificed their lives through singular bravery.
Extremely unfortunate was the whole staff. The general, after having five
horses shot under him received a wound in his lungs through his right arm, of
which he died in four days. His Secretary, eldest son of Major General Shirley,
a gentleman of great accomplishments, by a shot through the head, was killed upon
the spot. Mr. Orme and Capt. Morris, aid-de-camps, were all wounded. Of the
44th regiment, Sir Peter Halket, Colonel, was slain, with several other
officers; and Lieut. Col. Gage wounded. Lieut. Col. Burton, of the 48th
regiment, was among the wounded; and many gallant officers perished in the
field. Our whole loss was about seven hundred killed and wounded.

To what causes this unhappy catastrophe is to be ascribed, To what causes the
defeat was ascribed
has been matter of much inquiry and animated debate. The officers charged the
defeat to the cowardice of the men: but, in a representation they made to Mr.
Shirley, by order of the Crown, they in some measure apologize for their
behavior -- alleging, that they were harrassed by duties unequal to their
numbers, and dispirited through want of provisions: That time was not allowed
them to dress their food: That their water (the only liquor too they had) was
both scarce and of a bad quality: In fine, that the provincials had disheartened
them, by repeated suggestions of their fears of a defeat, should they be
attacked by Indians; in which case the European method of fighting would be
entirely unavailing. But, my Lord, however censurable the conduct of the
soldiery may be thought, Mr. Braddock, too sanguine in his prospects, was
generally blamed for neglecting to cultivate the friendship of the Indians, who
offered their assistance; and who, it is certain, had a number of them preceded
the army, would have seasonably discovered the enemy's ambuscade. The Virginian
rangers also, instead of being made to serve as regulars is the ranks with the
English troops, should have been employed as out scouts. But this step, so
necessary to guard against surprise, was too unhappily omitted; the whole army,
according to the representation above mentioned, following only three or four
guides.

WHEN the routed party joined the second division, (...) re^ats precipitately
to ^t ^mber^
forty miles short of the place of action, the terror diffused itself through the
whole army. Your Lordship might naturally expect to hear, that Col. Dunbar then
entrenched himself, and called on the neighboring colonies for immediate
reinforcements; -- as by such a step the enemy might have been detained at Fort
Du Quesne, prevented from ravaging the frontiers, or throwing succors into
Niagara. But alas! my Lord, an infatuation seemed to accompany all our measures
on the southern quarter. Fearful of an unpursuing foe, all the ammunition, and
so much of the provisions were destroyed, for accellerating their flight, that
Dunbar was actually obliged to send for thirty horse loads of the latter,
before he reached Fort Cumberland -- where he arrived a very few days after,
with the shattered remains of the English troops.

ON Mr. Braddock's unhappy catastrophe, Major Gen (...) l^ssu^ the command
the command of his Majesty's forces in North America devolved upon Major
General Shirley. I before acquainted your Lordship of his return to New York,
and departure from thence to Albany, where he arrived the beginning of July.

ALBANY, my Lord, was the grand theater of all the preparations for the
northern expedition against Fort St. Frederick, as well as that to the westward
for the reduction of Niagara. The general, on his arrival there, found not the
former in the forwardness he had reason to expect. The provincials discontended
with the inactivity of a long encampment, Major General Lyman was obliged to
make short marches, to prevent their disbanding; Is detained at Albany.
and the general was therefore detained awhile in that city, to hinder so fatal
an event. His own troops in the mean time were filing off, in different
division, from Shenectady, toward Oswego.

OSWEGO, along the accustomed route, Route to Oswego.
is computed to be about 300 miles west from Albany. The first sixteen to the
village of Shenectady, is land carriage, in a good wagon road. From thence to
the Little Falls, in the Mohawk River, at sixty-five miles distance, the
battoes A battoe is a light flat-bottomed boat, widest in the middle, and at
each end sharp pointed, of about 1500 weight butthen, and managed by two men,
with paddies and setting poles.
are set against a rapid stream; which too, in dry seasons, is so shallow, that
the men are frequently obliged to turn out, and drew their craft over the rifts
with inconceivable labor. At the battle Falls, the portage exceeds not a mile;
the ground being marshy will admit of no wheel-carriage, and therefore the
Germans who reside here, transport the battoes in (...), which they keep for
that purpose. The same conveyance is used at the Great Carrying-Place, sixty
miles beyond the Little Falls; all the way to which the current is still
adverse, and extremely shift The portage here is longer or shatter, according
to the dryness or we^ness of the seasons. In the last summer months, when rains
are not frequent, it is usually six or eight miles across. Taking water again,
we enter a narrow rivulet, called the Wood-creek, which leads into the Oneida
Lake, distance forty miles. This stream, though favorable, being shallow, and
its banks covered with thick woods, was at this time much obstructed with old
logs and fallen trees. The Oneida Lake stretches from east to west about thirty
miles, and in calm weather is passed with great facility. At its western
extremity opens the Onondaga River, leading down to Oswego, situated at its
entrance on the south side of the Lake Ontario. Extremely difficult and
hazardous is the passage through this river, as it abounds with rifts and rocks;
and the current flowing with surprising rapidity. The principal obstruction is
twelve miles short of Oswego, and is a fall of about eleven feet perpendicular.
The portage here is by land, not exceeding forty yards, before they launch for
the last time.

YOUR LORDSHIP, from this account, will readily conceive, that through such a
long amphibious march an army must proceed with prodigious risque and fatigue;
and the battoes be necessarily conducted by persons skilled in the navigation,
and e^ured to hardships. For this service General Shirley had engaged all the
young men in the county of Albany, who formerly had been employed in the Indian
trade at Oswego: and a vast number of battoes were prepared for the conveyance
of the troops, stores, and provisions.

OSWEGO was formerly garrisoned by twenty five men; but on the commencement of
our present disputes, the number was augmented to fifty. Early this spring
fifty more were ordered up: and about the latter end of May, Capt. Broadstreet
arrived there with 200, besides workmen to be employed in the naval
preparations, pursuant to the scheme concerted in the congress of commissioners
at Albany the last summer.

COL. SCHLYL^R'S New Jersey regiment embarked in two divisions from
Schenectady, the beginning of July. Troops proceed to that garrison.
Shirley's, and Pepperell's were preparing to follow, when the melancholy news
of Genesis Braddock's defeat reached that place. This struck a general damp on the
spirits of the soldiers, and many deserted. Great numbers of the battoe-men
dispersed themselves into the country, and fled to their respective
habitations. To engage the return of above half the fugitives, equally
ineffectual were threats or promises, rewards or punishments. The general,
however, sensible of the importance of the service, pursued his march in spite
of every vexatious disappointment. As he passed their country, he called upon
the Indians of the Six Nations at some of their castles; and sent ambassadors
to the rest, pressing them to join him, with assurances of his protection. Six
Nations averse to the Ni^ara expedition, and why.
But they seemed in general greatly disinclined to our western operations.
Indian affairs had been too long neglected by the province of New York, to
which the principal management of them has always been committed. Neither the
sums allotted for presents to those savages, were always by our governors
fairly expended; nor the presents themselves honestly distributed. And partly
through repeated frauds, and the omission of proper measures to conciliate their
favor, our interest with them amounted to little more than a bare neutrality.
Mr. Johnson nevertheless pretending a mighty influence over them, Johnson holds
a conference with them.
was entrusted with 5000 l. sterling, in order to engage their assistance for
the general benefit of his Majesty's service. For this purpose he h^ld a
congress with some of their principle sachems at Mount Johnson Si William
Johnson's own seat, near the lower Mohawk castle. about 36 miles from Albany
, soon after his return from Alexandria.

YOUR LORDSHIP is pleased to insist upon my descending into a detail of every
transaction, how minute soever, that can give any light into the more secret
springs of our political action. I shall therefore acquaint your Lordship, that
upon the general's arrival at Albany, Anecdote of Johnson and Shirley.
Mr. Johnson laid before him a copy of the minutes of his late treaty with the
Indians. These minutes, it seems, contained some unhandsome reflections upon
his excellency; insinuating, that to treat seperately with them, he had
employed one Lydius, a person of not the most unexceptionable character, either
for loyalty or integrity. The single reason upon which the surmise could be
founded was this. Lydius, who formerly lived near Lake George, and whose Indian
acquaintance was very extensive, had offered the general his assistance, in
procuring the junction of a number of them, on the designed expeditions. Upon
which he wrote to Mr. Johnson, intimating the pleasure it would give him, if he
could make any use of this man in his Majesty's service. On delivering those
minutes into the general's hands, Johnson, sensible of the insinuation, told
him, he entirely disapproved the reflection they seemed to contain, and
appeared ashamed of its insertion. Having perused the paper, Shirley could not
avoid complaining of the ill usage; while the other with solemn vows protested,
he was not privy to it, and importuned him to return the minutes, that he might
erase the obnoxious passage. The former confided in the sincerity of his
protestations, but soon after had abundant reason to distrust his integrity.

THE general had applied to one Staats, who resided near Albany, and had a
considerable interest with the Indians of Stockbridge Stockbridge, by the
Indians called Housat^^ue, lies upon the western confines of the Massachusetts
Bay, in the eastern parts of the province of New York.
. He proposed to him his raising a company of them, as a guard to the battoes
in their passage to Oswego. Privately was this man intimidated from the
undertaking: and Mr. Johnson, to induce him to break through his promises,
offered him a captain's commission, could he engage an Indian company to
proceed on the expedition under his own direction.

YOUR LORDSHIP, being already informed of this gentleman's appointment to the
command of the provincial army, by the interest of General Shirley, will scarce
have patience at the recital of a conduct so astonishing and ungrateful. The
secret, my Lord, was this -- Mr. Johnson was never distinguished for his sense
or penetration. Faction ^ed against the general, and ^^^^son of it.
He had now for his aid-de-camp Capt. Wraxal, a man of art and genius, who a
few years before had been appointed secretary for Indian affairs, and clerk of
the city and county of Albany. Governor Ch^ton had granted a commission for the
latter of those offices, before the date of Wraxal's sign manual. A suit was
therefore commenced, and is still depending between him, and the person in
possession of the office, suspended on the determination of a point of law.
Upon this account Wraxal became a humble dependant on Lieut. Governor De
Lancey, before whom, unless superseded in the chief command, the case must be
determined upon a writ of error: The latter, who had been a declared enemy to
Johnson, throughout the whole of Clinton's administration, and had even
prevented the assembly from discharging a very equitable demand he had against
the province for services and disbursements, now determined to fall in with,
and set him up, in competition with Shirley. Wraxal's post and dependence
afforded a fine opportunity for the purpose: and so Johnson became strongly
attached to the Lieut. Governor. Your Lordship will no longer wonder at his
procuring all the Indians he could prevail upon, Evil effects^ of 11.
to join the provincial troops under his own command; or at his attempts to
excite others to embarrass and obstruct the general's designs upon the Lake
Ontario. In support of a charge so heavy as this, I think it incumbent upon me
to assign the following instances: 1. Not an Indian joined General Shirley at
Schenectady, agreeably to Mr. Johnson's positive assurances. 2. Nor at either
of the castles in the five cantons, as he passed through them to Oswego: but, on
the contrary; 3. One Bant, an Onondaga (three of whose sons were in Johnson's
army) at the head of several other In^ians, declared to Mr. Shirley at Oswego,
that it was a place of trade and peace -- that there should be no war there --
and that he should not disturb the French; adding that he was going with the
like message to Canada. The general having convinced him, that the expulsion of
the French from th^^ encroachments must redound to the advantage of the Six
Nations; he asserted, that Mr. Johnson had sent them upon this embassy to
Canada. Though this appeared utterly incredible, it is nevertheless certain, 4.
several other Indians arrived from the Onondaga castle, with a belt, declaring
it to have been sent them by Mr. Johnson, with his request, that not a man of
them would join the King's troops, under the command of General Shirley. 5.
Others also, from the Seneca, Oneida, and Cayuga cantons concurred in the like
reports; particularly one Redhead, an Indian of great ^ame, and a speaker at
the late congress at Mount-Johnson, came to Oswego, in his way to Oswagatic or
la Gall^tte, and desired the c^ssation of all military designs; affirming, that
with the same request he was going to the French.

IT was with difficulty, my Lord, these Indians were reconciled to our
attempts, detained at Oswego, and thereby prevented from communicating our
operations to the enemy. The general, from these instances, became more and
more suspicious, that the faction at New York were endeavoring to embarrass
and impede his measures. What farther confirmed his suspicions, that the Lieut.
Governor of New York, with that view, made Mr Johnson his instrument, was a
letter, which after his arrival at Oswego he received from the latter wherein
he justified that very aspersion before disavowed, contained in the minutes
above recounted.

MY LORD, we will now leave Mr. Shirley at Oswego; and pursue the course of
transactions, as well at New York, as in the southern colonies.

DUNBAR, Dunbar ma^ches t^ Philadelphia.
having reached Fort Cumberland, dispatched an Indian express to General
Shirley, with an account with the defeat, and the necessary returns respecting
the troops under his command; acquainting him, moreover, with his intention of
marching to Philadelphia, and his hopes of meeting his orders at Shippensburgh.
About the ^ame time Mr. Dinwiddie wrote to Dunbar, proposing a second attempt
on Fort Du Quesne. But a council being thereupon held, the members of which
were Col. Dunbar, Lieut. Col. Gage. Governor Sharp, Major Chapman, Major
Spa^ke, and Si^ John St. Clair, it was unanimously conceived, that Mr. Dinw^'s
scheme was impracticable. The very next day, being the second of August, Dunbar
began his march toward Philadelphia, with 1600 men, four six-pounders,
^^^tiers of Virginia le^t exposed.
and as many con^rns; leaving behind (...) the Virginia and Maryland companies,
and about 400 wounded. At this sudden departure of the forces, the Virginians
were extremely disobliged, as not only exposing their frontiers, and
occasioning the daily desertion of their provincials; but because the enemy, in
flying parties penetrated into the province, and on many of the inhabitants
committed robberies and murder. What judgment ought to be formed of this
retreat, I leave your Lordship to determine. Certainly those southern colonies
ought to have strengthened General Braddock with a large body of provincial
forces, which had doubtless prevented all this effusion of blood and treasure
-- the fatal consequence of their ill judged parsimony ^ Upon the advices
received from Dunbar, Another attempt on Fo^t DuQuesne proposed.
Mr. Shirley gave orders for renewing the attempt, if the southern colonies
would readily afford him a competent reinforcement.

GOVERNOR MORRIS having convened the Pensylvania assembly, But Pensylvania
withholds her Aid.
informed them of the retreat of our army, and in a well-drawn pathetic speech,
pressed them to the most vigorous measures for the defense of their borders.
They proceeded so far as to vote for raising 50,000 l. but offering a bill for
taxing the proprietary-estate, an immediate rupture ensued, of which your
Lordship is long since acquainted, by the ample accounts in sundry late
pamphlets on that and similar subjects. Virginia provides for her frontier
Defense alone.
As to Virginia -- now equally open to the irruptions of the enemy, four
companies of rangers were ordered out, and the assembly voted 40,000 l. for
furnishing a thousand men for the frontier defense. About the same time, met
the council and assembly of New Jersey, and the latter voted 30,000 l. for the
public service: New Jersey only continues her regiment in pay
but as the house proposed to prolong the currency of the bills for nine years,
to which Mr. Belcher, who never swerves from his instructions, not being able
to assent, 15000 l. only was raised, and its use restricted to keeping on foot
her regiment at Oswego, commanded by Col. Schuyler. At New York, the house of
representatives assembled on the 5th of August, De Lancey management with
respect to the reinforcement.
and set out with a generous spirit. Agreeable to the request of the
Massachusetts Bay government, always foremost in military affairs, they
resolved to reinforce the provincial army, destined for Crown Point, with 400
men. The bill was actually passed the house for that purpose; and the council
had determined to conceal from their knowledge, the contents of a second letter
from Genesis Shirley to Col. Dunbar, of the 7th of August, in which he ordered him
to proceed with his troops to Albany, for the protection of that important
post, in case the colony forces should meet with a repulse. By this bill the
assembly proposed to invest the respective captains of the city militia with an
arbitrary power to draught men for the service. The design of this
extraordinary project was suspected to serve a particular purpose, on a new
election of representatives, which, according to custom, it was thought would
immediately ensue the arrival of Sir Charles Hardy, who was soon expected with
a commission for the chief command of this province. It certainly was a
favorite bill; for, contrary to precedent, the Lieut. Governor came to the
council board (...) the (...) of Governor (...), it was customary for the
(...), even when ^tting in their ^(...) they have (...) of that b^anch of the
legislature.
, and pressed them to pass it: but when he perceived an amendment preparing for
a ballot of the recruits in New York, as well as in the other counties, he
immediately laid the general's letter to Dunbar before the house -- in
consequence of which, the design of a reinforcement instantly dropped, and the
assembly adjourned the next day.

AFTER what I have already recounted, His influence over the assembly.
your Lordship will not, I presume, be at all surprised, to find Mr. De Lancey
leaving no device untried, to maintain the sole direction of the assembly. He
knew that on his interest with the representatives depended hi^ credit with the
ministry; and that with the expiration of his power to carry certain points of
prerogative, would also expire their opinion of his importance. His agents in
England, to support their patron, had hitherto amused a certain noble Lord with
many specious promises. They had represented his capacity to serve the Crown in
very magnificent terms; nor forget his rea^ness to procure, whenever an
opportunity presented, the obedience of the house to some favorite
instructions. Hence it is evident, that the ^^s of his ascendancy over that
branch of the leg^slature, must naturally terminate in the extinction of his
grandeur derived from the Crown.

WHILE he held the reins of government, assumed on Sir Danvers Osborne's
decease, the ministry had none to inspect his conduct, or trace him through the
mazy labyrinth of his politics. From himself came all their intelligence, and
hence undoubtedly none in his own disfavour. During these golden days of
security and repose, he resigned himself to pleasure, and indulged his natural
disposition to voluptuousness and ease. The province, the mean while, was
principally governed by his secretary; who like a second Atlas, bore the chief
burden of the state. Thus negligent of his politics, his popularity began to
suffer a manifest declension. (...)
It was moreover notably abridged by his passing the charter before mentioned,
repugnant by his own confession, to the dictates of his judgment. By this step
he incurred such general umbrage, that the very members of the assem^^y could
not be wrought upon to confirm it. Nay, so (...) to the people was this
charter, that a majority of the must reputable inhabitants united against it in
a petition to the house. Civil liberty, and by some, even the rights of
conscience were imagined to be in danger; and the opposition being, as it were,
pro aris and ^^cis, was extremely animated. The Lieut. Governor became now
apprehensive of the consequence. He stood upon the point of resigning his
command to a successor hourly expected; and, without regaining h^ seat as chief
justice, his popularity appeared descending from its meridian: nor, in case of
a dissolution was he insensible his authority with the house must suffer a
total eclipse. Your Lordship cannot therefore but observe, of what moment it
was, to secure the friendship of the next governor. Permit me to mention the
arts, whereby it was accomplished.

SIR CHARLES HARDY arrived in our harbor on the 2d of September 1755. (...)
The council immediately convened themselves for his reception. In the midst of
their consultations, Mr. Oliver De Lancey, without leave of the board, bolts
into the chamber, and modestly interposes his advice, to send a m^s^^ge to Sir
Charles, requesting his continuance in the ship, till the next morning. The
reason assigned was, to gain time for drawing out the militia, to receive his
excellency at (...), with the formality and honor due to his rank. But the
true secret was, to gain an opportunity for the Lieut. Governor, and a select
juncto, to pass the evening with him, in order to conciliate his graces, and
give him early impressions in favor of their party. The next day, the governor
published his commission; and was, by Mr. De Lancey, invited to a public
entertainment. In the evening they conducted him to the common, to hear the
acclamations of the people; and on every occasion, followed him with servile
court and adulation. To impress a high sense of his predecessor's popularity,
they spared no pains. For this purpose also they intrigued with the assembly,
and city corporation, two elective bodies, and thence under his influence. Of
the latter, Mr. Oliver De Lancey, as alderman, was a member; and, with true
fraternal affection, stimulated the board to insert in their address a
compliment to his brother. A modest motion, my Lord! and so vehemently urged,
that it was carried, though not without some opposition. The burden of that
momentous passage, without which the whole had been jejune and insipid, was
discharged in these terms -- We have the greatest reason to expect the
continuation of that wise and happy administration, we have been blessed with
some time past. Still greater was Mr. De Lancey's interest in the assembly, as
I have already had the honor to acquaint your Lordship. But one gentleman in
that house opposed the flattery of their address. He is a man of an affluent
independent fortune, a bold unshackled spirit, and of strong natural parts. The
address was calculated to secure De Lancey's power both with governor and
people: the former, by displaying to Sir Charles his formidable interest in
that house: the latter by preventing a dissolution; than which nothing was the
object of greater dread. It has, Sir, (these are the expressions) been usual in
this colony, at the accession of a new governor, to give the people an
opportunity of a new (...) of (...). If your excellency (...), that such a
measure, in the present state of affairs, will be confident with his Majesty's:
service, and the security of this his loyal colony, it will be agreeable to us,
and to the people we have the honor to represen^

THE importance of the business under our consideration, and the dispatch
necessary to accomplish it, will plead our excuse to your excellency, for not
being earlier in this address.

And here, Sir, we should have ended, were we not in justice bound to pay some
acknowlegement to the administration of your excel^ency's predecessor the
Lieut. Governor; whose upright intentions, as far as we had apportunities of
discovering them, ever tended to his Majesty's honor and service, and the
welfare and prosperity of this colony.

MR. DE LANCEY is one of the most fortunate of men^ While the people
impatiently expected a dissolution, an express arrived on the 12th of
September, with a confused, but alarming account of an action at Lake George.
This rendered it necessary for Sir Charles Hardy immediately to proceed to
Albany. Thither the Lieut. Governor accompanied him, and had thereby a fair
opportunity to ingrose and cajole him. I shall suspend the relation of his
success, till I have laid before your Lordship the progress of the provincial
army, and their repulse of the French.

MAJOR GENESIS LYMAN, being advanced with the troops to the Carrying-Place, about
60 miles from Albany, was waiting the arrival of General Johnson, who set out
from thence on the 8th of August, with the train of artillery. Lyman builds a
fort at the Car^ing^act.
Lyman had begun a fort at the landing, on the east side of Hudson's River, now
called Fort Edward. About the latter end of the month, Genesis Johnson, with the
main body, moved forward 14 miles more northerly, and pitched his camp at the
south end of Lake George, before called St. Sacrament. By some Indians, who had
been sent out as scouts, he received the following advices: -- That they had
discovered a party of French and Indians at Tinonderoge, situate on the isthmus
between the north end of Lake George and the southern part of Lake Champlain,
1^ miles on this side Crown Pea^; but that no works were there thrown up. To
have secured this pass, which commanded the route to Crown Point through the
Lake, had been a measure extremely advisable. Mr. Johnson, informed of its
importance, on the 1st of September wrote to Genesis Shirley, that he was
impatient to get up his battoes; proposing then to proceed with part of the
troops, and seize upon that pass. The French however took advantage of the
delay, and cut out work enough for him at his own camp.

OF the troops which sailed from Breast in the spring, amounting to about 3000,
your Lordship knows, eight companies were taken with the Lys and A^cide men of
war, who fell in with our fleet commanded by Admiral Boscawen. One thousand
were landed at Louisburgh; and the residue arrived at Quebec, with Mons. de
Vand^^^il governor-general of Canada, and Baron Di^skau, commander of the
forces. The French Court, Di^^^^^ (...) to re^^^ Osweg^;
well apprised of the singular consequence of Oswego, had determined to reduce
it. Such being the baron's instructions, he immediately proceeded to Montreal;
from whence he detached 700 of his troops up the river, intending himself
speedily to join them with the remainder. Just before he had made the necessary
preparations, Montreal was alarmed with the news of our forming a numerous army
near Lake St. Sacrament, for the reduction of Fort Frederic, and perhaps to
penetrate into the heart of Canada. (...) is di^ted.
Whereupon a grand council being held, the baron was importuned to proceed
through Lake Champlain, for the defense of that fortress: nor was he without
great difficulty prevailed upon to alter his intended route.

DIESKAU, having in vain waited the coming up of our army, at length resolved
himself to advance toward them; He man to attach G^^e al (...).
and if he proved victorious, to desolate our northern settlement, lay the
towns of Albany and Schenectady in ashes, and cut off all communication with
Oswego. A dreadful resolution, my Lord! And had he succeeded -- I tremble at
the thought -- had he succeeded. But the supreme Disposer of events had not yet
devoted us to ruin; and therefore, like the counsels of A^ite^h^l, blasted the
^anguinary purpose. --

FOR the execution of this design, he embarked at Fort St. Fre^^^^^ with 2000
m^n in battoes, and landed at the South Bay Ab^^t 16 miles from the English
(...).
. Of this movement, Genesis (...) had not the least intimation, till his scouts
discovered their actual departure from the South Bay toward ^ort Edward. By an
English prisoner the baron was told that the Fort was defenseless, and our camp
at the Lake, when he left it a few days before, without lines, and destitute of
cannon. Having approached within two miles of Fort Edward, he opened his design
to his troops, consisting of 600 militia, as many Indians, and 200 regulars.
His irregulars averse to the attack of Fort Edward.
To animate his irregulars, who seemed disinclined to the attack proposed, he
assured them, that inevitable must be their success -- that on reducing this
fort, the English camp must necessarily be abandoned, and their army disperse
in great disorder -- that this would enable them to subdue Albany; and by
starving the garrison of Oswego, superadd to their conquest the absolute
dominion of Ontario. With whatever intrepidity this harangue inspired his
European troops, the Canadians and savages, fearful of our cannon, were utterly
averse to the scheme; but declared their willingness to surprise our camp,
where they expected nothing beyond musquetry Our artillery was got up to the
camp from Fort Edward but a day or two before the action, of which the French
had no intelligence.
. Thus disappointed in his principal design, he changed his route, and began to
move against the main body at the Lake. Genesis Johnson, He moves against our camp.
on the information of his scouts, had dispatched separate messengers to Fort
Edward, with advice of the enemy's approach toward that garrison; of which one
was unfortunately intercepted: the rest who got back, reported, that they had
descried the enemy about four miles to the northward of the fort. Instead of
any attempt to discover the strength of the guard left with their battoes at
the South Bay, which might easily have been cut off, a council of war resolved
the next morning to detach 1000 men, with some Indians, to fall upon, or, as
Mr. Johnson expresses it in ^is letter to the several governors "to catch, the
enemy in their retreat." On this service commanded Col. Williams, a brave
Officer, who met the baron within four miles of our camp.

THE English, my Lord, were encamped on the banks of Lake George, being covered
on either side by a low thickwooded swamp. After the march of the detachment,
Genesis Johnson drew up the ca^non, then at ^00 yards distance from the front.
Trees were also felled to form some fort of breast-work: and this was all his
cover against an attack; having hitherto strangely delayed the proper
retrenchments.

ABOUT an hour after Williams's departure, a heavy fire was heard; and meets
our detachment.
which evidently approaching, Genesis Johnson judged rightly, that our detachment
was retreating for the French were superior in number, amounting to about 1800.
Upon this he sent out a reinforcement to support them; which was very
judiciously conducted on the death of Williams, by Lieut. Colonel Whiting, a
Connecticut officer, who gained much applause at the reduction of Louisburgh.
Genesis Johnson informs the governors, That about half an hour after eleven the
enemy appeared in sight, and marched along the road in very regular order,
directly upon our center: That they made a small halt, about 150 yards from the
breast-work, when the regular troops made the grand and center attack; while
the Canadians and Indians squatted and dispersed on our flanks. This halt was
the baron's capital error: for, amidst the consternation at the camp, had he
closely followed up the detachment, he had easily forced their lines, and
gained a complete victory. But by continuing for some time a platoon fire, with
little execution at that distance, our men recovered their spirits. As soon as
the artillery began to play, Dieskau and his regulars found themselves totally
deserted by the militia and savages, who all skulked into the swamps, took to
trees, and maintained a scattered fire upon our flanks, for some time, with
variable and intermitting briskness. He is defeated, and taken prisoner.
Having now no command of any part of his army, except his handful of regulars,
the baron thought proper to retire; which he did in very great disorder. A
party from the camp followed him, fell upon his rear, dispersed the remaining
soldiers about him, and being himself wounded in the leg, was found resting on
a stump, utterly abandoned and destitute of succor. Feeling for his watch, to
surrender it, one of our men, suspecting him in search of a pistol, poured a
charge through his hips; of which wound he is not yet recovered. Upon his
retreat, the militia and Indians retired in small parties: and as the English
neglected to continue the pursuit, they halted about four miles from the camp,
at the very place where the engagement happened in the morning. Opening their
packs for refreshment, they here entered into consultation, respecting a second
attack. Why the enemy was not pursued, when their retreat became general, no
tolerable reason has ever yet been assigned; and Mr. Johnson, in his letter,
seems very artfully to evade it. Nothing however could be more fortunate than
the gallant behavior of a party consisting of about 200, led by Capt.
M'Ginnes, Gallant behavior of M'Ginnes.
who had been detached from Fort Edward, to the assistance of the main body.
They fell upon the French in the evening, put an end to their consultations,
and gave them a total overthrow. M'Ginne^ died of the wounds he received in
this rencounter, having signalized himself by a spirit and conduct that would
have done honor to a more experienced officer.

MR. WRAXAL, Remark on W^axa^ ^magination.
in his letter to the Lieut. Governor of New York, told him, he stood so near
Genesis Johnson, when the latter received his wound, that "he thought he saw the
ball enter:" which curious piece of intelligence was obliterated before its
publication. I only mention this circumstance to convince your Lordship, that
the most intrepid soldier has not always the same presence of mind.

IF the dusk of the evening was too far advanced, before the repulse at the
Lake, The enemy not pursued.
for an immediate pursuit (which by the way could not be the case, since
M'Ginnes's (...) was subsequent) yet the neglect of it the next day admits of
no colorable apology. Mr. Lyman urged it with great warmth; but the general,
with most of the field officers, are accused of an equal disinclination. Mr.
Johnson, to judge by his letter, seemed well satisfied with his escape, and
determined with this action to close the present campaign. It was probably to
avoid the prosecution of the expedition, that he transmitted no account of the
battle to General Shirley; contenting himself with requesting Lieut. Governor
Phipps to send a copy of his letter from Boston, though his own situation was 200
miles ^igher to Oswego. The gentleman at Albany, to whom his dispatches were
entrusted, suspecting their contents, and conceiving their communication to the
general absolutely necessary for his Majesty's service, broke open the letter
to Governor Phipps, and sent an express with a copy to Oswego.

THE Indians, during the whole of the engagement, The (...) the (...).
some of the Mohawks only excepted, retired from the camp, waiting the event of
the conflict at a convenient distance. Nor indeed was their assistance
expected, by those who knew their boasted fidelity was a mere delusion, and Mr.
Johnson's so much magnified influence, what it has since appeared to all men,
the gr^ss^st imposture. They even declared before their march, they intended
not to engage, but to be witnesses of the gallantry of our troops. And had
Dieskau won the day, equally ready had they been to scalp their brethren the
English, as now they appeared to exercise their brutal dexterity on the French.
Moreover, they came in a body to Albany, immediately after the battle, on
pretense of celebrating the success of our arms, and left our army after it.
and to condole with the widows of those who fell in the action. This, says one
of Mr. Johnson's encomi^sts, is their custom; subjoining prophetically, that
they were in a fortnight after their departure to return to the camp. The
savages, my Lord, observe no such custom, save on the conclusion of an
enterprise; whereas this was scarcely commenced: and as to their return, it is
notorious they never did. Besides, had the general the real interest pretended,
would he not, for once, have induced them to postpone their triumphant
festivity, and untimely condolence, when their presence at the camp, would they
really sight, was of indispensible necessity; and himself in expectation of a
second attack; nor, by the strain of his letter, exempt from a little
perturbation of mind?

To render the luster of this gentleman's character still more refulgent, Major
Genesis Lyman mal^ciously charged with ^dice
by preventing any one's sharing with him the glory of the day, a juncto
combined at the camp, and framed a letter -- Winds that will mount into
superior state,
Climb mischief's ladder --
Richards's Messalina.
, impeaching Mr. Lyman, the second in command, of dastardly carriage, which
they procured one Cole, a fellow of no reputation, to sign, and convey to the
press. A notable instance of the amazing latitude to which an invidious spirit
is capable of proceeding: So true is the poet's observation, -- Men that make
Envy and crooked malice nourishment,
Dare bite the best --
SHAKESP. For, in reality, no man, my Lord, behaved with more magnanimity, than
the unfortunate object of their jealousy: and from his superior merit actually
arose their malignity, as he thence rivalled their deified idol. The reason why
this much injured officer deferred his vindication, was not only the
disgraceful name of his calumniator, but because he expected that justice from
the public; who accordingly, in testimony of his merit, vested him, the next
campaign, with the same important post. But numbers of witnesses -- eye
witness^s, utterly impartial, and not belonging to the camp, are ready to
depose, that by them he was seen fighting like a lion, and exposing his life in
the hottest of the battle: not to mention a gentleman Col. John R^nsalair, of
Albany.
of undoubted veracity, to whom Genesis Johnson, two days after the action,
frankly acknowledged in his tent, that to Lyman was chiefly to be ascribed the
honor of the victory.

I SHALL now, Remarks on Johnson's reasons for not pursuing the enemy, or
prosecuting his expedition.
my Lord, take the liberty to make a few remarks on Mr. Johnson's letter to the
governors; and examine the reasons assigned against pursuing his advantage, as
well as those alleged for not prosecuting the expedition. The repulse of the
French delivered us from such unspeakable calamity, naturally to be apprehended
from the enemy's success, that we have infinite reason to thank the GOD OF
ARMIES, for thus remarkably rescuing us from the jaws of perdition. Nor ought
we to mention either our officers or men, who generally behaved as well as
could be expected, without a suitable tribute of gratitude. But the general's
own letter will enable me to convince your Lordship, that the magnificent
trophies erected to his fame, sprung wholly from the New York cabal; whose
services, when encriculed with his laurels, he was ever after to acknowledge
and retaliate -- sana redemitus tempora lauro
-- veterem Anchisem agnoscit amicum.
By this letter he appears so conscious of deserving reprehension, rather than
applause, that the latter part of his epistle is apparently calculated to
divert all inquiry into the true reason of his not pursuing the enemy, and
breaking up the camp^ign, without paving a visit to Crown Point. Our men, says
he, have suffered so much fatigue for three days past, and are constantly
standing upon their arms by day, half the whole upon guard by night, and the
rest lie down armed and accoutred; that both officers and men are almost
worn-out I cannot help thinking, that had the general begun his breast-work more
seasonably, and not waited for intelligence of the enemy's advancing, before he
ordered up his cannon, his men had been less fatigued by this redoubtable
action. But lest the world should remain in the dark about the real grounds of
his apprehension, he proceeds -- The enemy may rally; and we judge they have
considerable reinforcements near at hand I question, my Lord, whether the whole
circle of history affords a single instance of an army's rallying, after the
slaughter of 1000 men (his own computation) out of about 1800, the whole force
of the enemy. And whence he conjectured they had any reinforcements so near at
hand, as not to be able to join their routed detachment, still remains one of
those arcana of state, which, by common understandings, is not to be fathomed:
or, if the French consisted of 200 grenadiers, 800 Canadians, and 700 Indians
(the baron's account to the general) so great a slaughter as is pretended by
the letter, with the loss of the greatest part of the principal officers, and
Mons. St. Pierre, who had the chief command and influence over the Indians,
must have reduced them to less than 800. From these, one would have imagined,
there was no danger of a second attack. Fat more probable was it, that for so
momentous an enterprise as the reduction of the forts beforementioned, the
French had mustered all the Forces they could spare from Crown Point and
Tinonderoge, where mary of the regular troops were posted; especially, as they
went unfurnished with cannon. And to this, that our army was now flushed with
victory; the enemy, on the contrary, disconcerted; and, according to his
account, most of their principal officers, and many of their men, slain; the
Indians too, by the death of St. Pierre, probably was vering and dissipated.
This, if such were the facts, was a glorious opportunity to dispossess them of
Tinonderoge. But the longer they were suffered to fortify, the more arduous the
task to dislodge them, and the greater the loss of our present advantage,
resulting from their defeat and our success. Besides, was there any probability
of their return the next day, to reassault the camp with ^quetry, when the
effects of our cannon (admitting them to have done the pretended execution The
cannon were so ill served, and highly elevated, that they did, beyond all
controversy, no execution at all; none of the dead being observed to have been
killed by cannon-shot: but amongst the tops of the trees, 30 and 40 feet high,
they made great and useless havoc.
) was still so recent in their memories; and to the Indians, even the first
time, so visibly tremendous? But the cautious general subjoins -- We don't
think it either prudent or safe to be sending out parties in search of the
dead. I agree, it had been more for his Majesty's service to have dispatched
them in pursuit of the living. After a short paragraph concerning the wounded,
his panic returns -- I think we may expect very shortly a more formidable
attack. More formidable than what? Why, than that of their regulars firing at
(...) distance, and the Canadians and Indians running away -- and that the
enemy will then come with artillery. I wonder whither this gentleman expected
to reduce Crown Point without being exposed to the French artillery. But whence
this surmise of a more formidable attack, he thinks not proper to communicate.
It was well known, the whole force sent from France amounted to about 3000: --
that of these, admiral Boscawen took eight companies, and 1000 were in garrison
at Louisbourgh. Admitting therefore that all the rest arrived at Quebec,
without any loss, (a favorable concession) the utmost amount that reached
Canada was about 1700; of which 500 were at Cadaraqui: so that, without any
allowance for those killed at the camp, or in the mock pursuit which ensued,
the whole number of regulars that arrived with Dieskau, and could come against
him, but little exceeded 1100. The gentleman proceeds -- The late Col. Williams
had the ground cleared for building a stockaded fort: our men are so harrassed,
and obliged to be upon watchful duty, that I think it would be both
unseasonable, and I fear in vain, to set them at work upon the designed fort, I
design to order the New Hampshire regiment up here to reinforce us; and I hope
some of the designed reinforcements will be with us in a few days. When these
fresh troops arrive, I shall -- I dare say your Lordship expects at least the
demolution of Fort St. Frederic: nothing like it -- I shall immediately set
about building a fort. Still the strongest symptoms of terror and alarm: for,
it is evident from this passage, he had now laid aside all thoughts of
prosecuting the expedition, should even succors arrive, and in greater numbers
than were necessary. All his puissant purposes terminated now. in setting about
building a fort. And if indeed he thought Crown Point impregnable by the army
then under his command, above 4000 strong, he must necessarily conclude it
would be found so the next year, by double the number: and if then attempted
through another route, his grand fortress at the end of the Lake was absolutely
useless. Nor would it prove any defense to the country between Lake George and
Hudson's River, while the French could penetrate it by two other more usual
passages, the South Bay and Wood-Creek; through the former of which they had
actually marched to his camp. And as to their formidable attack with artillery,
whence could they bring it, but from Crown Point? And if they learnt he
intended, in the present campaign, nothing beyond building a stockaded fort,
that very intelligence was sufficient to induce them to attack the camp with
cannon; against which, I am confident, his fort would make but a very
indifferent resistance. But, in reality, 'twas most probable they would exert
their efforts in streng^hning Crown Point and Tinonderoge; the reduction of
which, for not improving our success at the camp, will cost us a vast addition
of blood and treasure.

THUS, Reflections on the fortune and conduct of this general.
my Lord, ended this expensive expedition in erecting a wooden fort; faulted by
Mr. Montreso Chief engineer.
; and, I dare say, derided by the enemy. So that if ever any man obtained
laurels without earning them, it was this fortunate general; who, by the
splendid representations of his secretary, and the sovereign decree of his
patron, is exalted into an eminent hero. To the panegyrical pen of Mr. Wraxal,
and the -- sic volo (...) jubeo -- of Lieut. Gov. De Lancey, is to be ascribed
that mighty renown, which echoed through the colonies, reverberated to Europe,
and elevated a raw unexperienced youth into a kind of second Marlborough --
Fortunate p^^r, tu nunc eris alter ab illo.

So capracious is fortune, ar^ so fond of sporting with human affairs. The
emperor Sever^s (I think it is Herodean tells the story) when obliged to raise
the siege of Atras, the only attempt in which he had ever been baffled, thought
himself conquered because he did not conquer: but our hero, it seems, is a
conqueror, because he was not conquered. When a general finds himself attacked
in his camp, a very quaker methinks, would forget his principles, and follow,
in spite of Barclay and the meeting, the powerful dictates of nature's
incentive to self-defence. And did the valor of our warrior carry him an inch
farther? Did he pursue an enemy, who by flying, with the loss of about 30 men,
exhibited a full proof of a most extraordinary pusilanimity? Or, if his wound
(which, considering it was made by a ball visible in its flight to his
aid-de-camp, must have been very capacious) rendered his personal pursuit
impracticable; were any orders given to improve the fortune of the day, and
destroy a fugitive army? Was not on the contrary, the noble ardor of those who
offered to pursue, by positive orders repressed; and a poleroon adversary
suffered to escape, whose recent cowardice promised a general slaughter, and
who, in their present panick, had fallen a sacrifice to our victorious arms?

THESE are facts of incontestible notoriety: Why this action was so greatly
exaggerated.
and if your Lordship demands, whence then the accounts that six or eight
hundred, nay a thousand, fell before the camp (when, in reality, the enemy lost
not above two hundred in all the three engagements, which is less than our own
loss) there is no other way of accounting for these glaring misrepresentations,
than that it suited our present system of politics to have this action
exaggerated and magnified. It was necessary to exalt Johnson, in order to
depress Shirley, and they who had represented the expedition against Crown
Point of such prodigious importance, thought it advisable to render every
thing important that was transacted in that expedition. Every man among us knew
it to be an imposition; and yet ran the risque of having his head broke for
offering to doubt it. It was notorious, not above 30 of the enemy were found
slain at the camp; and that the rest of the dead could neither fly into the
air, nor dive into the earth. Where then was the remainder? To anticipate the
question, left any one should have effrontery enough to start it -- they were
carried off by a flying enemy, who took to their heels to save their own lives;
and yet were so anxious about their dead, as to carry them all along. Such
manifest contradictions are we obliged to believe ^

NAY, Shirley absurdly censured.
to excuse this favorite general, the blame of not following his advantage,
has been throne on Mr. Shirley, and attributed to his positive directions.
Besides the absurdity of the accusation, that he could be accessory to an
omission of this nature, it was absolutely impossible for him to know whether
the enemy would at all risk an attack. Your Lordship will consider, the general
was then at least 365 miles from the place of action, nor advised of it till
nine days after it happened. But when he received the intelligence, so far from
directing to the inactivity of a merely defensive conduct, that he dispatched
repeated expresses to Mr. Johnson, urging him in the most pressing terms, to
pursue the advantage already obtained; and if unable to proceed in person, to
commit the charge of the troops to Major Genesis Lyman: or, if he found it
impracticable to invest Crown Point that season, at least to make himself
master, if possible, of the enemy's advanced post at Tinonderoge. -- But all
was ineffectual: the laurel being already acquired, fortune was not again to be
put to a desperate venture.

WE will now, if your Lordship pleases, return to Oswego, where General Shirley
arrived the 21st of August, and take a view of the course of his proceedings in
that quarter.

YOUR LORDSHIP may remember, Course of proceed(...) Oswego.
that the troops marched from Schenectady, with scarce half the number of
battoemen, which contracted for the service; and these by frequent desertions
gradually decreased. Hence the transportation of provisions, through this long
tract of country, was so much impeded, that until the latter end of September
it was impossible, upon that account, to move from Oswego.

THE general however had, in the mean time, A council of war held there.
made all the necessary preparations for the expedition to Niagara: and as the
arrival of a large convoy with provisions was then hourly expected, he held a
council of war at his camp on the 18th of September; at which were present

His Excellency the GENERAL. Lieut. Col. Ellison, Lieut. Col. Mercer, Col.
Schuyler, Capt. Patten, Major Littlehales. Major Bradstreet, Adj. Genesis Capt.
Barford, Capt. Broadley, Com of the vessels on the Lake.
THE general informed this council, The ^eneral represents the state of
affairs, and informs the council of his intelligences.
that through the great desertion of battoemen, the scarcity of wagons on the
Mohawk River, and the desertion of sledgemen at the Great Carrying-Place, the
conveyance of provisions and other stores had been so much retarded, that there
had not been at any time since his arrival, a sufficient quantity of dry
provisions to enable him to go upon action: but as a large supply would
probably very soon arrive, he was determined to proceed immediately. He thought
proper to inform them of his intelligence concerning the situation and strength
of the enemy -- which was to this purpose -- That before he left the Oneida
Carry-Place, two trusty Indians, with as many Albany traders, were sent as
spies to Niagara; who, after fourteen days absence, returned with an account --
That the Indians had been two days in the French fort there, which was built
partly of stone, but principally of logs, being in a weak and ruinous condition
-- that the garrison consisted of about 60 French and 100 Indians, who said
they had for some time expected 900 Indians and a quantity of stores from
Canada; but were apprehensive their vessels were taken -- that letters came in
frequently from Fort Du Quesne, whence also they expected a considerable
reinforcement. The spies added, that the Indians were disgusted at the division
of the spo^^s, on the defeat of General Braddock, and that the French had lost
30 men in that engagement -- that they saw many English scalps, with a large
quantity of clothes and furniture -- that the French had there 70 or 80 large
battoes, with which they intended to meet and board our vessels: and this
article was confirmed by another Indian, who set out after the spies, and
meeting one of our row galleys, cautioned the commander against a nearer
approach to Niagara.

HIS EXCELLENCY also informed the council, that an Indian spy had been with the
Outawawas, who assisted the French in the action at Monongahela -- that they
had declared their inclination to lay down the hatchet; and that others more
westerly gave the like intimations; which had induced him to dispatch four
messengers with belts of wampum, to invite them into our alliance, or at least
to engage their neutrality.

UPON the general's arrival at Oswego, he thought it necessary to procure
intelligence from Frontenac; and for that purpose sent out a party of white men
and Indians, who returned about the 8th of September, with information -- that
they landed upon an island, about six furlongs from the fort, from whence they
had a full view of it -- that it was built in a bay, near the edge of the
water, and surrounded by a stone wall; the land behind it cleared, and rising
in a gradual acclivity -- that two vessels, of about 40 tons each, lay moored
in the harbor, unrigged, and without guns -- that at the east end of the fort
there was a regular encampment, and six marquis tents; from the extent of which
they imagined it contained about 3 or 400 men. -- Upon the side of the bay,
opposite the fort, the land projected about half a mile: between this and the
island they were upon was another little island, about three quarters of a mile
from the fort, inhabited by about twenty Indian families. The spies added, that
there were several other adjacent islands; but they discovered no battoes. His
excellency farther acquainted the council, that an Indian that came to Oswego
about the time of his arrival, and had left Frontenac nine days before,
declared there were 30 French within the fort; a considerable quantity of
powder, and many guns mounted on the surrounding wall, which was about six feet
thick; and the encampment without consisted of 600 soldiers. The information of
Redhead, to the same effect, was also laid before the council, with the
addition -- that there were two encampments, one of Canadians, and the other of
regulars, in a hallow, indiscoverable from the island; and that he was told by
the commandant, of a much larger number of troops expected with the general,
lately arrived from France; when they proposed to invest Oswego. Genesis Johnson's
l^tter of the 1st of September, signifying, that his scouts informed him of the
departure of 300 canoes to Frontenac, was also considered: and from these
articles of intelligence -- the account of the arrival of the French troops --
the suspension of all intercourse between Frontenac and Niagara -- and their
lying still so long at the former; his excellency observed, it was not
improbable their design might be to make a descent on Oswego, if the whole
force proceeded on the expedition to Niagara, which was about 150 miles to the
westward; and from whence, at that advanced season, they could not return in
less than 30 days. That this was the more probable, as Oswego was of the
greatest importance for securing the frontiers of the western colonies,
maintaining the British dominion over the great lakes, and the country beyond
the Apalachean mountains. He also took notice of the defenseless state of
Oswego, which would render it necessary to leave a strong garrison there: that
the number of effectives at that time in the three regiments and independent
companies, including sergeants and corporals, amounted to 1376; and that the
irregulars, who were Albany men and Indians, procured by his own emissaries,
consisted only of 120. For the better security of the place, the general had
ordered to be built, with all possible dispatch, a strong wooden fort, capable
of mounting cannon, with pickets and a ditch, on a high point, commanding the
old fort on the east side of the river. This he observed was already begun, and
would soon be completed: and that for the proposed enterprise, he had built
and equipped a sloop and schooner of sixty tons each, two row-gallies, each of
twenty tons, with eight whale-boats, each capable of carrying sixteen men. He
then informed them of his intention to embark for Niagara, as soon as the
expected convoy arrived, with 600 regulars, including gunners and matrosses,
besides the Albany and Indian irregulars, one 18 pounder, four 12 pounders, a
ten-inch mortar, a seven-inch hoyet, two royals, and five small swivel-hoyets,
the vessels, whale-boats, and a competent number of battoes; leaving behind him
700 effectives, two 12 pounders, ten 6 pounders, six 3 pounders, and eight
cohorns.

THE council, upon this representation, were unanimously of opinion, in answer
to the several questions proposed, that the force intended for the Niagara
expedition was sufficient: but with respect to Oswego, some imagined it would
not be defensible: the majority, however, were of contrary sentiments. All
agreed, that a feint upon Frontenac, while his excellency was gone to Niagara,
was by no means advisable. They universally concurred in opinion, that a fort
ought to be erected on the west side of the old fort: and that it would be for
his Majesty's service to prepare materials for building one or more vessels,
larger than any of those already upon the lake, capable of mounting ten 6
pounders, besides swivels, two more row-gallies, and a 100 good whale-boats.

IN consequence of this advice, Preparations to proceed on the Niagara
expedition
600 regulars were draughted, the artillery and ordnance-stores shipped on
board the sloop Ontario, part of the provisions on board the sloop Oswego, and
the residue was ready for the row-gallies, whaleboats, and battoes. While these
preparations were making, the weather was extremely wet and tempestuous. The
rains began to fall so heavily on the 18th of the month, that on the best
chosen ground the tents of the soldiers were overwhelmed. As 400 of the troops
must have gone in open boats, it was impossible to pass the lake with any
safety, till the storm abated; which was on the 26th of the month, when orders
were immediately issued for the embarkation of the troops: but these could not
be carried into execution. Though the rains ceased for a short space of time,
Which could not be prosecuted from the badness of the weather.
the western winds began to blow with redoubled fury; and were again succeeded
by continual rains for thirteen days together. During this boisterous weather,
numbers fell sick, whose tents were an insufficient shelter: and the Indians,
well acquainted with the climate, went off, declaring the season too far
advanced to admit of an expedition upon the lake.

IN the midst of these difficulties another council, Another council of war
held.
consisting of the same members who composed the last, was called on the 27th
of September. The general acquainted them with the untoward state of affairs,
and some of his latest advices. He observed as follows -- That the preceding
day, eight battoes were arrived, with 48 barrels of flour, and 13 of bread; so
that there was then 14 days full allowance of those species of provisions for
2000, being the number then in his camp -- That he thought it necessary to take
with him 21,000 weight of bread and flour, which for 700 men, forty days,
amounted only to three-fourths of the usual allowance -- that, in such case,
there would be lest with the garrison only 8000 weight of bread and flour, at
half allowance for only 12 days: but, by advices received from the
Carrying-Place and Mohawk River, he had the greatest reason to expect such a
quantity of provisions, in a few days, as would be a full supply for some
months -- that a party of men with two officers, in whale-boats, sent seven
days before to Frontenac to discover the enemy's motions, were returned, with
the following report -- That they went into the harbor, and saw the fort,
which appeared to be a regular square faced with stone, having four embrasures
in the front -- that the encampment consisted of above 100 tents -- that two
brigantines of about 40 tons each, and a small sloop lying then at anchor, were
rigged, and the sails of one of them bent: and a number of battoes lay near the
walls of the fort. He communicated to them also a copy of the orders and
instructions given to the French regulars sent thither; which were taken from
baron Dieskau, in the action at Lake George: whence it appeared, that ten
companies of the Queen's battalion marched from Montreal to Cadaracqui, in two
divisions, upon the first and second of August, together with 250 Canadians,
exclusive of Indians: the number of men therefore at Frontenac, including the
garrison, might amount to 1000 effectives, originally designed, as appears from
those papers, for an attack upon Oswego. He farther took notice of the
departure of some of our Indians, and their unanimous opinion, that the attempt
against Niagara could not succeed this season: on which account the remainder
were resolved to return to their respective castles; giving nevertheless the
highest assurances of their willingness to join us in much greater numbers in
the spring -- that the Albany traders were of the same opinion, that the
battoes, though well adapted for the navigation of small rivers, could not live
on the lake in such tempestuous weather as had continued for a fortnight past
-- they Lieut. Holland, who had resided there above three years, d^cl^^^ it was
commonly windy and wet, with sew fair days intervening, during the fall. --
That it was besides now impracticable for the vessels and battoes to sail in
concert: and as the vesse^s and whale-boats would not contain all the supplies,
there was the atmost danger of spoiling that part of the provisions and
a^munition, which must be conveyed in the battoes; i^ consequence of which many
of them might be cut off; it being more than probable, from the weakness of
their fort, the enemy would attack them on the lake -- that from the returns of
the director and surgeons of the hospital, the number of the sick amounted to
about 300, exclusive of officers; which they imputed to the excessive rains,
and want of barracks. His excellency informed them, he proposed the erection of
barracks, and a strong redoubt on the hill, west of the old fort, before the
winter was too far advanced.

THESE matters, Their opinion, and advice to lay aside the expedition, and
strengthen Oswego.
my Lord, were attentively considered: and the council of war prayed leave to
add to the general's representation -- That Major Bradstreet, since his
residence there, was persuaded 1650 Canadians had passed by from Cadaraqui to
Niagara, for the Ohio; a great pa^ of whom, through scarcity of provisions, he
conceived must then be upon their return to Canada; and that a considerable
number of French traders go annually from Canada to Detroit, and other French
settlements to the westward, who, at this season, are generally upon their
return: -- that their passage home is by the way of Niagara, where, it is very
probable, they and all the French will tarry, as long as their provisions
admit, for the defense of so important a post. That there were then but few
proper battoemen at Oswego: nor could they be provided with a sufficient
number, as those who understood the management of battoes were chiefly employed
in the transportation of provisions from Schenectady to Oswego, and from Albany
to Lake George; and that the soldiers were unable to conduct them to Niagara,
the lake being turbulent generally five days in six.

THE advice of the council, my Lord, was unanimously to this effect -- That the
arrival of the battoes with provisions, though hourly expected, was by no means
to be depended upon, there being scalping parties in the neighborhood; one of
which, since the last council of war, had actually killed three, and captivated
two of the workmen employed in building the new fort on the east side of the
river: and the cutting off the battoes was the more to be apprehended, as the
Indians in our alliance were now returning to their castles. Nor did they think
it advisable to risk the troops in battoes upon the lake, at so advanced a
season of the year. They approved his excellency's intention of raising
barracks for the soldiers without delay; and thought the fort on the east side
of the Onondaga River ought to be completed as soon as possible; and again
advised the erection of a work for mounting cannon on the eminence west of the
old sort -- all which, in there opinion, could not be effected before the
winter was too far set in, without employing the whole strength than at the
place. They were also unanimously and clearly of opinion, that his excellency
ought to defer any attempt on Niagara or Frontena^, till the next spring; when
they had great reason to expect the junction of a large body of the Six
Nations, and some of the French allies, who had taken up the hatchet against
the English, and were concerned on the banks of the Monongahela. Besides, he
might, in the ensuing campaign, have a greater number of troops, whale-boats
instead of battoes, and a more powerful naval force, which they conceived ought
to be provided against the next spring.

THIS advice, my Lord, Which was carried into execution.
the general proceeded immediately to carry into execution. Completing the
fort on the east side of the river, was a matter of principal attention,
because situated on a high point of land, at 100 yards distance from the lake,
commanding the ground round about it -- the old fort at 450 yards distance --
and the entrance of the harbor. Its circumference was 800 feet, being built of
legs from 20 to 30 inches diameter, and the outer wall 14 feet high. Round it
was to be a ditch 14 feet broad and 10 deep. Within, a square log-house to
overlook the walls, and barracks for 300 men. -- This fort, called Ontario, was
to mount 16 pieces of cannon. Another, called Oswego, was immediately begun,
upon an eminence 450 yards west of the old fort. It was a square of 170 feet,
with bastion^, and a rampart of earth and masonry; which, besides the parapet,
was to be 20 feet thick, 12 in height, with a ditch 14 feet broad and 10 deep.
The barracks within were to contain 200 men. This was to mount eight pieces of
cannon; being made the more defensible, as it commanded a good landing, distant
150 yards on the edge from the lake.

WHILE these works were carrying on, The general labors to establish the
Indians in our interest.
the general employed himself in a necessary attention to Indian affairs. He
labored to establish some of the principal Onondagas, who were through
negligence become wavering; and dispatched messages to those who were gone from
us, and settled at Oswegatie, and to the Messasagues and Chippawees on the
North side of the Lake Ontario. Others were sent to foment the dissaffection of
the Outawawas, gisgusted at the French partition of the plunder, on Braddock's
defeat. With the Senecas, the remotest from our settlements of all the five
cantons, and therefore the most debauched by the French, he succeeded so well,
that they now dismissed Jon^aire, one of their emissaries, whose father had
been long suffered to reside among them, in spite of our repeated
remonstrances; and was the chief preserver of the fort at Niagara They also
engaged to meet him, the next campaign, with 100 of their warriors, and
promised for the future to refuse the assistance they had formerly given the
French, in transporting their furrs, with horses and sleds, across the Niagara
Carrying-Place -- as necessary there, as at any of our portages between
Schenectady and Oswego. And returns to Albany.
When nothing further could be prosecuted, the general retired from Oswego the
24th of October, leaving 700 men in garrison, under the command of Lieut. Col.
Mercer; with orders to continue the works projected for its defense.

HAVING, my Lord, taken up too much of your time in a circumstantial relation
of the proceeding in this quarter, I shall not trouble you with any reflections
upon them. Your Lordship has seen the insurmountable difficulties attending
this western expedition; and will doubtless approve our not hazarding the loss
of Oswego. Frenchsigned to cut off Oswego.
That such would have been the event, had Mr. Shirley left the place about the
beginning of October, was wisely foreseen, from the advices he had received:
and baron Dieskau, just after the action at Lake George, assured a gentleman of
distinction in the army, he questioned not the English general would make
himself master of Niagara; but that the French had half the forces he brought
with him from Breast, with a number of Canadians and Indians, at Frontenac,
ready, immediately on his departure, to invest Oswego, and cut off his retreat.

WHILE the general was at Albany, Sir Charles Hardy calls in the militia on a
false alarm.
after his return from the lake, forwarding the supplies for the garrison at
Oswego; preparing for the operations of the next campaign, and examining into
the state of the troops arrived there under Col. Dunbar; the city was alarmed
by expresses from General Johnson, informing, that 8 or 9000 of the enemy were
advancing toward him. Sir Charles Hardy, then at Albany, called in the
militia: and a detachment of the regular troops, with a train of artillery,
held themselves in readiness to march at a moment's warning. But another
express gave reason to believe those apprehensions were ill-grounded, and
General Johnson's fears in some measure abated. It seems a few Indian scouts
had discovered the tracks of a large army; but Capt. Rogers, the brave officer
beforementioned, came into the camp soon after them, and declared, the enemy
were employed, as the general had predicted in his letter to Mr. Johnson of the
19th of September, in throwing up works at Tinonderoge. Upon which, the militia
were dismissed to their respective habitations.

OF the malignity of the New York faction against the general, I have already
acquainted your Lordship: permit me to present you with another instance of the
same spirit. A mercenary scribbler, of whom I shall soon take more particular
notice, is pleased to inform the public, that Col Dunbar with his forces, were
obliged six weeks to lie encamped at Albany, in the rain and snow, till
barracks were built for them. That they were entirely obliged to Sir Charles
Hardy, that they got a stick of wood to burn. So (says he) were our forces
disposed of.

ALBANY, my Lord, is an old compact city, consisting of 3 o^ 400 w^ll
^uil^^ouses: and at about 16 miles N. W. from it, is the town of ^nectady,
consisting of about 150 houses. The inhabitants are far from being indigent:
the adjacent country abounds with provisions; and in such quarters, your
Lordship is sensible, his Majesty's troops will not want necessaries;
especially fuel, in a country covered with timber. Where then the probability,
that the forces, which consisted of 1200, would suffer in a post like this? As
to the affair of barracks, my Lord, there was a council held at New York, on
the first of August, when the news arrived of Col. Dunbar's retiring into
winter quarters, after Braddock's defeat. It was composed of Mr. De Lancey the
Lieut. Governor, Mess. Alexander, Kennedy, Murray, Holland, Chambers, and
Smith; and the opinion of that board then was, That not only the King's forces
to the southward, but else those that could be spared from Nova Scotia, should
quarter near Albany, for any future operations. This resolve Mr. De Lancey
transmitted to the general at Oswego; and as Dunbar's troops were ordered to
Albany, for the defense of that Country, and particularly to make a stand, in
case the provincials were defeated; they had, methink, the highest reason to
expect favor from the inhabitants, and the special countenance of the
government, even had they been quartered upon them as usual: and which at
present is actually the case, by express orders of my Lord Loudon. The general,
I say, had no reason to expect, upon this head, any opposition from the civil
magistrate. But Sir Charles Hardy, on his arrival at Albany, about the 26th of
September, signified to him by letter, his apprehensions of uneasiness arising
among the inhabitants, should the soldiers be quartered upon private families;
and wished to have his excellency's orders for building barracks, both there
and at Schenectady; lest his assembly should not choose to put the province to
that charge. He also expressed his hopes, if such an expense was saved them, of
their greater readiness to raise more men, should the service require it, the
next campaign. The general's answer to this letter equally demonstrated his
integrity to the crown, and concern for the troops. He intimated his fears,
that the construction of barracks would be thought an extraordinary expense;
but it being necessary for the service, that Dunbar's, and the regiment of the
late Sir Peter Halket, should winter in Albany and Schenectady, he complied
with Sir Charles's request; and desired him to provide barracks for those
regiments with all possible diligence, that the troops on their arrival in his
government, might not find themselves destitute of quarters. To relieve the
crown in the expense, he farther took notice to Sir Charles, of the request
made by his own government for drawing these troops to Albany -- that they
would in a special manner cover the frontier of New York -- be of service to
Oswego in the ensuing spring -- and that the inhabitants would draw very large
sums from their residence amongst them. Nor did he forget to recommend an
imitation of the Massachusetts Bay; who thought it reasonable to erect barracks
for his own regiment though they knew their continuance among them would be
short, destined as they were for the western expedition. But that there might
be no delay in building the barracks, arising from any doubt of the expense
being paid by the province of New York, Mr. Shirley informed Sir Charles, that
if they would not, after these considerations, take that expense on themselves,
he would defray it out of the contingent-money in the hands of the deputy
play master. Thus, my Lord, if any ground for complaint of the want of barracks,
Mr. Shirley it is clear was entirely unsensurable: and if the troops, as this
libeller informs us, did suffer in their tents, -- I submit it to your
Lordship, whose province it was to have found them better quarters. But the
fact is, that the barracks were finished, and the troops quartered in them
before the first of December, fuel provided for them sufficient for the winter,
and all at the expense of the crown.

THE winter now approaching, commissioners were appointed by the governments
concerned in the Crown Point expedition, to ascertain their respective quotas
for garrisoning the forts Edward and William-Henry, and disbanding the rest of
the army. After this was completed, the general and Sir Charles Hardy returned
to New York; where the former convened a grand congress of governors and field
officers, to deliberate on a plan for the operations of the succeeding
campaign. But before I enter upon their transactions, I shall briefly lay
before your Lordship those between Sir Charles Hardy and his assembly; which
was opened on the second, and continued sitting till the 23d of December.

I HAVE already observed, that the ministry, Transactions in New York between
Sir Charles Hardy and his assembly.
from the time of Mr. Clinton's departure in 1753, had been solicitous about
procuring the consent of our assembly to a law establishing a permanent
provision for the governor, and other necessary officers. When Sir Danvers
Osborne arrived, he brought with him (...) instruction for that purpose; from
the terms of which it (...) apparent that the ministry had it much at heart;
and Sir Danvers, before he left England, was made to believe that Mr. De
Lancey, by means of his great popularity, would enable him to carry it into
execution. This I had from a gentleman, to whom Sir Danvers opened himself, and
whom he consuited before his embarkation for his government. The gentleman is a
person of the first figure in these colonies; and being acquainted with the
system of politics in New York, he informed Sir Danvers, that those promises
were by no means to be depended upon: that Mr. De Lancey was inexpressibly
jealous of his ascendancy over the assembly, who were utterly disinclined to a
perpetual support: that he would join in no measures that might weaken the
confidence they reposed in him: that as long as he maintained his influence in
their counsels, he would virtually be the governor of the province; and
therefore upon the whole, his interest and ambition would infallibly lead him
to keep every governor in a state of dependence upon him. Sir Danvers disliked
so disagreeable a prediction; and many are of opinion, that its accomplishment
hastened his unhappy fate. Excuse me, my Lord, for troubling you with a
relation of facts, Anecdote of Sir Danvers Osborne.
a little out of the strict order of time. There is an anecdote of Sir Danvers,
of which I would not have your Lordship uninformed. He arrived here on the 7th
of October, 1753, under very discouraging apprehensions of the people; and
indeed not without reason, the opposition against Mr. Clinton having been
carried beyond all decorum. Governor Osborn^'s commission, through Mr. Clinton's
absence, remained unpublished till the third day after his arrival. This is
usually done, first privately in the council chamger; and immediately after, in
the most public manner at the city-hall. To wait on his excellency thither, Mr.
Clinton came abroad; an astonishing crowd being assembled at the Fort Gate, to
attend the procession. Mr. Clinton's enemies were very assiduous in exciting
the popular acclamations; and the huzzas of the mob were scarce intermitted for
a moment. There appeared, in short such a profusion of joy, accompanied with
some indecent expressions respecting himself, as gave Mr. Clinton just reason
to suspect more open indignities. He therefore soon took his leave of Sir
Danvers, who expressed his displeasure at the conduct of his enemies. This, my
Lord, proved a day of general festivity and Bacchanalian frolic. In the
evening, the city was illuminated: the common blazed with bonfires: great was
the consumption of Madeira; and every company rung with maledictions against
the late commander in chief, who was charged as the sole procurer of the new
instruction; an account of which could only have transpired from some of the
council. Sir Danvers alone appeared unaffected with our intemperate revels; and
on his countenance sat a melancholy gloom. He convened the council on Thursday
the eleventh of the month; and prayed their sentiments on the probability of
obtaining a permanent support, according to his instructions. That the point
was unattainable, they all delivered as their unanimous opinion. He then
required the solution of the same question from each member severally; and
still from each received the same reply. Upon this, he turned himself about in
apparent distress, uttered a deep sigh, and reclining his head against a
window, in a disponding accent said, What then am I come hither for? The next
morning -- But I desist. This instruction, as your Lordship will be please to
recollect, remained unrevoked all the time of his successor: and it is natural
to expect, that the people of this province were very inquisitive whether it
was continued to Governor Hardy -- They were so. But Sir Charles did not follow
the example of Mr. De Lancey, in laying his instructions before the assembly.
The article relative to the support has undergone, as I am credibly informed,
very few alterations, and those only in the preamble. That it was in substance
the same, is evident from his speech to the house, on the 3d of December, at
the opening of that session. His words are these: I am commanded by his Majesty
to recommend in his name without delay, Sir Charles Ha^dy's speech to his
assembly.
to consider of a proper law to be passed, for setting a permanent revenue upon
a solid foundation, for defraying the necessary and established charges of
government; taking care that such law be indifinite, without limitation of
time; and that provision be made therein for a competent salary to the captain
general and governor in chief of this his Majesty's province; and likewise for
competent saleries to all judges, justices, and other necessary and usual
off^cers and ministers of government: and also for a certain permanent fund,
for repairing and maintaining the fortifications, for making annual prosents to
the Indians, and for the other contingent expenses attending that service: and
in general, for all such other charges of government, as may be fixed or
ascertained. The assembly in their address, after a justly-merited compliment,
for his activity in proceeding to Albany, and their approbation of the measures
for garrisoning the frontiers, Their answer.
for subjoin this emollient paragraph: We wish we could, with equal
satisfaction, reconcile to ourselves your excellency's recommendation of an
indefinite support: but humbly beg leave to inform your excellency, that we
have no permanent funds, on which to establish such a revenue; nor do any occur
to us, without very apparent inconveniences to our constituents. We therefore
most humbly hope we shall stand acquitted in the eyes of our most gracious
Sovereign, if we decline a measure so directly opposite to the sentiments of
almost every individual of the colony. We cannot leave this subject, without
disclosing to your excellency the concern it gives us, that this his Majesty's
loyal colony, which though small in numbers, has cheerfully bore very heavy
expenses, and particularly supported its governors and other officers of
government, in a more liberal manner than most others on the continent, should
be requested to pursue measures hitherto unknown to it, whilst the rest, almost
without exception, are left to practice the very measures denied to us.

MR. CLINTON, my Lord, Their behavior different from what it was in Clinton's
time, and the reason.
asked of this same assembly only a support for five years and it was refused
with indignation and virulence. Sir Charles here demands much more; and we see,
that he is answered with the most commendable decency. To help your Lordship in
accounting for this contradictory behavior -- Mr. De Lancey was bent upon
expelling that governor from the province: and to gain his point, continually
fomented the quarrel he himself excited. But Sir Charles was to be treated in a
different manner, and measures more lenient were to be pursued. An ascendancy
over him would ensure to his lieutenant many advantages; and enable him to
procure the governor's assent to a bill, for paying him a large sum, now due
for his salary and other perquisites, while he had the chief command. He might
indeed, but durst not pass such a bill himself, and therefore it was not
offered. Accordingly, the house, at their very next meeting, sent up a bill to
the council, on the 4th of February, 1756, for paying the debts of the
government; in which he was a creditor for near 4000 l. But of this I shall
have occasion to take more particular notice. Thus, my Lord, I will forfeit my
honor, if, upon a faithful perusal of the journals of assembly, your Lordship
does not find -- the conduct of the house, and the interest of Mr. De Lancey,
for ten or fifteen years past, perfectly to tally.

LET us now take a view of the transactions in the grand council of war, Grand
council of war convened at New York for settling the operations for 1756.
which the general had convened at New York, for settling a plan of the future
operations. It was opened on the 12th of December, and continued sitting for
the space of two days. Though the invitation to the governors was universal, it
consisted only of these members: His Excellency General Shirley, commander in
chief of all his Majesty's forces in North America: His Excellency Sir Charles
Hardy, Knight, governor and commander in chief of the province of New York: The
Honorable Horatio Sharp, lieut. governor and commander in chief of the
province of Maryland: The Honorable Robert Hunter Morris, lieut. governor and
commander in chief of the province of Pennsylvania: The Honorable Thomas
Fitch, governor and commander in chief of the colony of Connecticut. Col.
Thomas Dunbar: Col. Peter Schuyler: Major Charles Craven: Sir John St. Clair,
deputy quartermaster general: Major John Rutherford.
After adjusting several points of rank, the members took their seats in the
order mentioned; and the general opened the conference, by laying before the
council the King's instructions to General Braddo^k. He then delivered his
sentiments to the board, The general delivers his sentiments to the council;
to the following purpose: That our only entrance into Lake Ontario was through
the Onondaga River to Oswego. No other harbor had his Majesty upon that lake,
capable of receiving vessels of force: That Oswego was situate in the country
of the Onondagas, the center canton of the Six Nations, and famous for the furr
trade: no other mart could we ^^^st, for commerce or correspondence with those
numerous tribes of savages inhabiting the western country, on the banks of the
great lakes Erie, Huron, Michigan, and the many rivers which r^ll into them:
That the Lake Ontario was only accessible to the Canadians* through the river
Cadaracqui, formerly called by the ^rench Fleuve Iroquois but in their late
maps, calculated to countenance their exorbitant claims, distinguished by the
name of St Lawrence. At the head of that river was their entrance into that
^ake; and near Fort Frontenac, situated on its north-eastern edge, about 50
miles from, and nearly opposite to our fort at Oswego: That while the enemy
kept possession of Frontenac, with the harbor at Front^, and a free passage
through the Irequ^is River, they would always be able to build and maintain
vessels of force upon the lake: That his Majesty would therefore be
necessitated to support a naval armament there, at least equal to that of the
French. Without this, they might annoy any forts we could erect at the
north-east end of the pass at Niagara; and Oswego itself be lost. The
inevitable consequence of which would be^ the defection of the Six Nations, the
loss of the whole country for near 300 miles from Oswego to Schenectady, and
perhaps the reduction of Albany itself. The general added, That all the French
forts at Niagara, upon the lake Erie, and the river Ohio, those also upon lake
Huron, at the Streights of ^iss^^makinac, and the Lake Michigan still more
westerly, received all their supplies by water-carriage from Montreal, through
the River Irequois, and the Lake Ontario: That the French settlements at the
mout^ of the Mississippi furnished these northern garrisons neither with
provisions nor stores; being not only at 2000 miles distance from any of them,
but embarrassed with insuperable difficulties, by a laborious navigation
against a rapid stream Hence on excellency concluded. That could the French be
^^s^^dged from Frontenac and the little fort at Fronto, and their entrance into
Lake Ontario obstructed, all their other forts and settlements on the Ohio, and
the western lakes, were deprived of their support from Canada, and must ere
long be evacuated.

IMPRESSED, and pro^s his plan of ^ations
my Lord, with these views, the general proposed, as a plan of operations for
the next year -- That 5000 men should be very early aff^ed at Oswego, and 4000
of them sent to attack Frontenac an^ La Gall^tte; which being reduced, an
attempt should be made upon the forts at Niagara, Presque Isle, Riviere^u Beuf,
Detr^it, and Missilimakinac: and that in the mean time, 3000 provincial troops
should march from Will's Cr^k, for the reduction of Fort Du Qu^e: That a bo^y
of 10000 should proceed to Crown Point, build a fort there, and launch one or
more vessels into Lake Champlain: And that (...) of Canada might be farther
divided, he proposed, that 2000 men should (...) and sword up Kennebec River,
fall upon the settlements adjoining to the River Chandiere, and proceed to its
mouth, three miles distant from Quebec; and by dividing themselves in small
parties along the banks of the river St. Lawrence, and destroying the scattered
settlements there, keep that part of Canada in continual alarms.

HE then observed, that if the several attempts upon Crown Point, the forts
upon the lakes, and the Ohio, were not prosecuted at the same time, very
perilous might be the consequences: That if in particular, while Frontenac and
Niagara were attacked, no attempt was made against Crown Point, the whole force
of Canada would march to oppose us; which would defeat the design, and require
so large a body of troops, as to render the transportation of necessaries to
Oswego impracticable. So numerous an army might also march against Albany, as
effectually to cut off the retreat of our forces, or at least totally obstruct
their supplies: That should, on the contrary, our whole strength be destined
for Crown Point, and the western operations neglected; Oswego, the grand object
of the French, was in the utmost danger of falling into their hands. A loss
irreparable and beyond estimation -- The loss of the whole country down to
Albany, with that of the Six confederate Nations; and to the French the
acquisition of an absolute dominion on the lakes, and the whole southern
country.

HIS EXCELLENCY finished, with informing the council of his late intelligence
-- That the French were building three large vessels, of superior force to
ours, in the harbor of Frontenac: and upon the whole prayed their advice.

A PLAN so well digested, and so clearly stated, Which was approved, with some
little alterations.
required but little consideration; and accordingly it was in the main
unanimously approved. The council advised the general, to give orders for
building three or more vessels at Oswego. They were of opinion, that 10,000 men
were necessary for the Crown Point expedition, and 6000 for that on Lake
Ontario. The attempt against Fort Du Quesne, by the western governments, 'twas
thought would answer very good purposes, especially in securing the fidelity of
the western Indians. The feint against Quebec was approved, if it interfered
not with the other expeditions. The operations on Lake Ontario, they conceived
ought to begin with the attack on Frontenac -- and upon the whole, were of
opinion -- that an additional number of regular troops would be necessary for
effectually recovering and securing his Majesty's rights and dominions on the
continent.

THE council having finished their business, the governors soon after returned
to their respective provinces. Design against Tinonderoge in the winter
defeated.
But the general continued his head quarters at New York, 'till the 21st of
January, to prosecute an expedition against Tinonderoge, this winter: and as
the French garrison was le^t very weak, it had doubtless succeeded, had not the
want of frost and snow prevented the transportation of the stores. Before he
left New York, he had a fresh instance of the unwearied and ill-natured
industry of his opposers; The cabal against the general strengthened and by what
causes.
of which, because important in its consequences, I shall give your Lordship an
ample detail. The principal agents were Mess. De Lancey and Pownal, who now
formed a kind of duumvirate, to perplex the service, in order to ruin the
general. Without question, my Lord, you are as much surprised, after what has
already been said concerning these gentlemen, to find Mr. Pownal among the
general's enemies, as you would have been had I told you that Mr. De Lancey was
not. I am sensible, that a person of your Lordship's high sense of honor, will
recollect Mr. Shirley's favors to him at Boston; and think it incredible to
find him in the catalogue of those combined against his benefactor. But it is a
shining remark of Tacitus Ben^fici^ ^o usque ^aeta (...) videntur exs^lvi
p^sse^ ubi multum (...)
, That benefits are only so far acceptable, as it seems possible to discharge
them; and that when they have exceeded all retaliation, hatred is returned for
gratitude. Mr. Pownal, who was ambitious of recommending himself to a certain
noble Lord in England, by furnishing him with American intelligence, could by
no means brook his being absent from the congress at Alexandria, in the spring
of the present year. He earnestly sought an introduction to General Braddock;
and Mr. Shirley did the office with great politeness. He was then just informed
of his appointment to be lieut. governor of New Jersey, and on that account
pressed for an admission into the council. Mr. Shirley, in a very genteel
manner, declined a task, which might give offense to the general; and if any
resolution transpired, draw himself into a snare^ But Mr. Pownal, being a
stranger to that diffidence and modesty, to suitable to his years and
inexperience, became from this moment disgusted, and was seldom after seen
amongst that gentleman's friends. He ^arried at Phi^adelphia, till General
Braddock's defeat: and toward autumn returned to New York. This change of
temper recommended him to Mr. De Lancey, who failed not to exasperate the
rising resentment: and now his opposition became open and unreserved. Just at
this juncture, arrived Sir Charles Hardy; and Mr. Shirley being then at Oswego,
your Lordship sees how seasonable their opportunity, for sowing the seeds of
prejudice in the breast of the new governor. I will not take upon me to speak
of their success; but doubtless no misrepresentations were wanting to
strengthen the cabal. Yet no sooner did the general arrive from Oswego at
Albany, where M^ss. Pownal and De Lancey attended upon Sir Charles, than the
former, dissembling his enmity, labored to procure his confidence, that he
might pry into his secrets: but from previous intimations of his present
disposition, in a letter to a gentleman then near the general, he failed in
that insidious design. He could now no longer suppres his malevolence, or
conceal his recent connections; and therefore openly traduced the very man, to
whom he was indebted for all his significancy amongst the provinces. My Lord,
it is with reluctance I utter these things. But your Lordship is as determined
to know every transaction which concerns the operations in America, as I am to
discharge the office of a faithful historian. Truth is too sacred to be
violated either out of fear or favor; and whatever your Lordship may think of
this gentleman, such was his conduct. I knew him an avowed enemy to Mr. De
Lancey, and to Mr. Shirley as sanguine a friend. I have since known him to
calumniate the latter, and applaud the former. With a change of residence, or
rather interest, he cha^ges sides; and on this account, no man perhaps ever
multiplied so many adverl^ries in so short a time. He aims at two governments,
without the least prospect of peace, if either of them should fa^ under his
command. I can assure your Lordship, that even in the province of New Jersey he
is so little esteemed, and that principally for intriguing the disbandment of
the regiment under Col. Schuyler, to disoblige Mr. Shirley, that upon his
return to England in February 1756, he was unable to procure a vote of
assembly, desiring his assistance of their ag^nt at the Court of Great Britain;
though he pushed it with an earnestness that would have cost most men a blush of
confusion

DETERMINED to embarrass the general, nothing could have been more agreeable to
Mr. Pownal and the lieut. governor of New York, than an admission into the late
council of war. To a seat at that board neither of them had the least
pretension; and yet both were highly displeased at not being invited. Mr.
Pownal, who has often distinguished himself for pushing a bold point, repaired
to New Jersey, and importuned Governor Belcher, unable, on account of his age,
to attend the congress in person, Mr. Pownal^ h^viour to the governor a New
Jersey.
to depute him in his stead. His excellency very wisely answered, that the
invitation he had received from the general, was merely a personal compliment:
nor could he, with the least decency, insist upon an appearance by proxy. His
lieutenant, impatient of a denial, called in a menancing tone for pen, ink, and
paper, thinking to operate on the infirmities of age by commination and
outrage. The council were astonished at this indecent attack upon an ancient
and faithful servant of the Crown, and withheld their advice. But the governor,
conscious of the propriety of his refusal, firmly adhered to his first
resolution; and Mr. Pownal abruptly quitting the board, returned with
disappointment to New York.

THIS gentleman, He pro^es one Evans to Publish inve^ (...) against the general
my Lord, became acquainted at Philadelphia with one Evans, who, for a Among
other gentlemen of distinction in the colonies, Mr. Pownal became acquainted
with Mr. Alexander, of New York; a person of friendly d^^position and ea^y
access. Mr. Alexander had now the surveyor general's office of New Jersey: and
Mr. Pownal to procure the fulsome dedication from Evans ^^^^^ed him that
office, upon his accession to the government This, Evans frequent^ declared in
his illness to one of his most intimate f^ds; who concealed it till after his
death. Such an anecdote will scarcely be credited by those unac^inted with Mr.
Pownal's in^a^^able ambition to (...) in America. There was another instance of
his canduct equally surprising. While this gentleman was at New York,
discha^ging his em^ass. from Boston in the spring 1755, he had the ^an of a
(...) of the country from Crown Point to Montreal; which was composed by
William Alexander, Esquire a gentleman well ^led in the geography of America. Mr.
Pownal, who had occasion to lay this cha^t before the assembly of New York,
having erased the name of (...), very modestly inserted his own. And though his
plag^ism was de^ct^ (...) the time, he neglected to return^, and afterward
produced ^he same (...) the mini^try, claiming to himself the honor du^ to Mr.
Alexander alone.
valua (...) consideration, dedicated to him his map of the middle British
colonies, with an encomium, that he esteemed him the best judge of it in
America. This man having, in the public streets o^ Philadelphia, not only
presumed to accuse Governor Morris of high treason, but to asperse two of his
Majesty's ministers as pensioners to France, fled from justice there, and took
sanctuary in New York. Mr. Morris however commenced an action against him in
this province, more for his own vindication, than a reparation of damages;
which the poor fellow would never have been able to make. Upon this he was
committed to Goal, till Mr. Oliver De Lancey so far befriended him, as to
become his security. These were his circumstances, when he published a pamphlet
full of invectives against Genesis Shirley. I will not affirm, that he wrote it at
the instance of the cabal in New York. I leave your Lordship to judge how far
they were concerned in it, after adding, that it contained their repeated
remarks; that Mr. Pownal was frequently at his lodgings about the time of its
publication; and did actually accompany him to a printer, to hasten the
impression, before he sailed for Upon the news of the loss of Oswego part of it
was republished in the New York G^^^^tte, to lead the populace to impute this
calamity to General Shirley. It was appe^ed to, as an indis^utable authority,
by the very persons to whom po^ Evans was i^debted for his ma^^^^^; and without
whose dictating it would never have seen the light, (...) a b^k in another'
^ame and (...) to q^te it as an authority, (...) of ^^^of, with which (...) to
have been utterly unacqua^^^d
England. I shall not trouble your Lordship with any particular observations
upon this libel. If ever it should fall into your Lordship's hands, this letter
will assist you in detecting its falsehoods, and forming a proper judgment both
of its author and his abettors.

THUS, Great pains taken to prejudice Mr. Shirley both in England and America.
my, Lord, was every opportunity embraced by the cabal to prejudice the general
in the opinion of the people: and happy for the colonies, had their
misrepresentations been confi^ed to this side the Atlantic! Bent on Mr.
Shirley's removal, all imaginable pains were taken to defame his character.
Here, they questioned his integrity. But in England, they endeavored to create
a suspicion of his judgment. General Johnson was set up as his compe^^or; and
to his renown were blown all the trumpets of fame. Shirley's deep sense of the
importance of Oswego, was made the object of buffoonry and ridicule. The
reduction of Crown Point represented as a matter of superior moment. Three
hundred men Mr. De Lancey often declared to be a suffi^nt garrison for Oswego.
The general was therefore charged with squandring the King's money, in making
it the main object of his attention: and out of mere opposition, a scheme was
recommended for turning our whole force toward Crown Point. Upon this errand,
my Lord, Mr. Pownal went home in February 175^. I need not inform your Lordship
of the success of the faction. The sequel will show with what consequences it
was attended. Reflections an^ he fruitless operations of 1755.
Thus ended the year 1755. A year never to be forgotten in America. It opened
with the fairest prospects to these distant dispersions of the British Empire.
Four armies were on foot, to remove the encroachments of (...) perfidious
neighbor; and our coasts honored with a fleet for their security, under the
command of the brave and vigilant Boscawen. We had every thing to expect --
nothing to fear. The Enemy was despise; and we only desired a proclamation war,
for the final destruction of the whole country of New F^ce. But, my Lord, how
unlooked for was the event! General Winslow indeed succeeded in Nova Scotia^
but Braddock was defeated -- Niagara and Crown Point remained unreduced -- the
Barbarians were let loose from the wilderness -- many thousand farms abandoned
-- the King's subjects inhumanly butchered, or reduced to beggary -- one of the
Penasylvania.
provinces rent by intestine broils -- in another, a potent faction laying the
foundation for new disasters, in the course of the ensuing year.

1756
The New England colonies, The importance of the New England colonies in
military matters.
my Lord, take the lead in all military matters. Your Lordship is too well
acquainted with history, not to know, they chiefly owed their origin to the
disputes which involved the nation in all the calamities of a civil war. The
first planters encountered innumerable difficulties, and were long engaged in
sepeated wars with the Indian natives. Their descendants retain the martial
prowess and spirit of their ancestors: and for wisdom, loyalty, and an
enterprising genius, are a people of renown. In these governments lies the main
strength of the British interest upon this continent. Besides their above
advantageous character, they are very considerable for their numbers. The
Massachusetts Bay contains about 40,000 capable of arms. The m^li^ia of
Connecticut is about 27,000. Rhode Island and New Hampshire are not so
populous. Shirley ob^ to (...) own go^vernment.
His Majesty's service therefore rendered it necessary for the general,
according to the plan of operations, to visit his own government, in order to
^o^^cit the succors, without which the expedition proposed against Crown Point
must inevitably have failed. For this purpose he set out for New York on the 21
of January: and, but for his presence and solicitations at Boston, no
provincial troops wound this year have entered the field. -- That colony was so
extremely disobliged at the conduct of General Johnson, in neglecting to pursue
his a^vantages, after the memorable rout of the French at Lake G^orge, And with
difficulty obtains their concurrence in another expedition
as to be in general ^verse to a new campaign: and with the utmost difficulty
did the general procure their concurrence in another expensive attempt. --
There let us at present ^eave him, promoting the public service of the
colonies: and returning again to New York -- suffer me, at this inactive season
of the year, to entertain your Lordship with one or two instances of Lieut.
Governor De Lancey's more private political feats.

NEVER was any man more impolitic than Governor Clinton. (...) he kept the
chief justice dependent on his favor, he would have governed his province with
ease and tranquillity: but by g^^^ting him a new commission for his office,
a^ring good behavior, he set him at liberty to act at pleasure: and in
consequence of this fatal error, the province was thrown into violent
convulsions. Nothing therefore, my Lord could be more desirable to his
successor, than to hold that gentleman under proper restraint. Sir Charles
Hardy had this advantage: his office of chief justice, I^m informed, became
extinguished the moment the government devolved upon him by the death of Sir
Danvers Osborne. Lieut. G^v. De Lancey resumes his leat on the be^ch though his
office of chief jus^i^^ was (...) me extinct.
From the time of Sir Charles Hardy's arrival, Mr. De Lancey had impatiently
expected a new commission: but the governor neglecting the offer, to the
astonishment of most in the province, he notwithstanding ventured to resume his
^eat on the bench in January term; when two felons were arraigned before him.
This bold stroke at the prerogative, most men imagined would have drawn down
the resentment of the new governor: and why it was passed by without
observation, I must leave to your Lordship's conjectures. That De Lancey had,
in reality, no right to the exercise of that office, has been strongly insisted
upon by gentlemen of the law, though in an extr^ju^^^al manner. I pretend not
myself to any knowledge in that intricate science; but beg leave to present
your Lordship with an opinion, relating to the p^ant, cont^ned in the following
letter from a gentleman of the pro^ession to his friend in this city; with a
copy of which I have been favored --

Philad. 21 Oct. 1755. SIR,
YOU say you're informed, that your lieut. governor designs to exercise his
former office, The opinion of a gentleman of the law with respect to it
in virtue of the commission issued by your late governor Clinton. I cannot
think your information well grounded; because I am clearly of opinion, that
office was extinguished by his acceptance of the lieut. governor's commission:
and I conceive Mr. De Lancey will hardly venture to dispute the matter with the
crown. The main reason I go upon is, that those two offices are incompatible.
To make this plain to you, you must understand -- that to every office there
are duties annexed. The same person cannot exercise two offices, inconsistent
with one another. One of them must therefore be lost; because as every office
is pro bono publico, its use lies in the exercise of it: and the inferior
office is that which is lost; because it is most for the public good, teat the
officer should hold the superior office; as the law presumes every man capable
of the office which the King, who is the fountain of offices and honor, is
pleased to confer upon him. Agreeable to this, we find many resolutions in our
books: I Will mention one or two A man cannot be forester and judge eo instanti.
Rolls Rep. 452, etc. -- Nor judge of the Com. and King's Bench simul and semel.
Dyer's Case. 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. The first patent is determined, th^' the
second was granted pro illa vice, and surrendered the next day. Br. N. C. 5
Mar. Br. Commissions pl. 25.

NOTHING now remains but to show, that the office of chief justice and governor
of your province are inconsistent. To explain this, I must inform you, that
your supreme court is a court of general jurisdiction, established by an
ordinance of governer and council; claiming the like power here in all pleas
civil and criminal, as full as they are taken cognizance of by the King's Bench
and Common Pleas in England. Superior to this, is the Court of Governor and
Council -- a court instituted by one of his Majesty's instructions to your
governor. In virtue of this instruction writs of error are returned from the
supreme court, before the governor and council. The inconsistency then of the
two offices becomes very apparent. By the instruction, the governor in the
court above it a (...); and to suppose him at the same time judge in the court
below, and must a^sregard the a^^urd^ty of the governor's sending a writ to
command himself; (...) of his just^ (...) his judgment as chief justice to
himself in council as governor: and yet be excluded from a voice in the
judgment above; which nevertheless cannot be given without him. You see then
the incompatability is much stronger, than if a man should be judge both of the
King's and Common Bench in England There the other judges of B. R might correct
the error in the Common Pleas -- but here the course of public justice might be
entirely stopped.

IF it should be said, his power was only suspended, while in the chair of
government; I answer with the observation before -- that an office is a duty,
as the very word itself implies: and I know of no sleeping and
not-to-be-exercised office Every office is instituted for the public good: the
officer is therefore obliged to exercise his duty; for, without that, he cannot
serve the public -- and to be obliged to act, and at the same time obliged not
to act, is nonsense. It would be more specious to say the instruction is no
law; as your assemblies have often said in other cases; but then, Sir, Mr De
Lancey, in obedience to it, has (...) acting as judge, ever since the death of
Sir D. Osborne: and why has be (as I have been informed) rejected a writ of
error, because, according to this very instruction, the damages in demand did
not exceed 300 l. sterling? Besides this court of Governor and council, I am
told, has long exercised its power, under this and former instructions to your
governors, of the like tenor, without the least opposition.

THE offices will further appear to be inconsistent, if you reflect -- that as
governor he is also chancellor. The Court of Chancery often restrains the power
of the law courts: and it is the spirit of every court to enlarge its own
juri^a^^ition Upon both these accounts the two offices must inevitably clash I
know that Knevet was formerly chief justice and chancellor: but the propriety
of that double investiture was never solemnly considered. It was long ago, in
the time of (...) III There has been no instance of the like in later times;
nor do I believe it would be suffered. But the case is much stronger here --
and I cannot conceive, for the reasons above, that your lieut governor will
attempt to sit as judge, by virtue of his old commission It is more probable,
he will prevail on your governor, l^ttely arrived, to grant him a new patent.

I am, etc.


PERHAPS, my Lord, no higher evidence can be assigned of a man's influence,
than such a bold invasion of his Majesty's prerogative. Mr. De Lancey was
determined not to lose an office, which he knew to be the grand source of his
popularity, and the main prop of his power. For, whoever is chief justice of
the province, unless a very device, must be the second man in the government.
Governor Hardy made no opposition to this large stride of ambition: and the
other not long after, by his wonderful artifice, subjected him to his absolute
dominion. It was effected in the following manner -- Your Lordship will be
pleased to recollect, De La^c^y obliges the governor to pass two acts of
assembly.
that Mr. De Lancey had the address to prevail upon the assembly to send up a
bill to the council, on the 4th of February, entitled, An Act for the Payment
of the Debts due from this Colony; and other purposes therein mentioned By
this, payments were to be made to many creditors of the government, for
services done this colony, without speci^ying what those services were. The
lieut governor was to receive 378^ l. 16 s and several other sums were payable
to his brother. It was in reality a bill for discharging the arrears due to the
ordinary officers of the government. To render it the more palatable to the
governor, provision was made for paying him also large sums for presents to the
Indians, and the expenses of his voyage to Albany, after the French repulse at
Lake George. When it came up to the council, it obtained a majority only by one
voice: and of these, my Lord, two gentlemen, besides lieut. gov. De Lancey,
were themselves interested in the bill. They were the puisne judges of the
supreme court, Mess. Horsemanden and Chambers, whose arrears of salary were now
by the act to be discharged. Moss. Colden, Alexander, and Smith looked upon it,
as a mean invasion of the King's instructions, which, until they resigned their
seats at the council board, they were bound in honor to regard with sacred
punctuality. -- It was besides evidently partial; no provision being made for
other creditors, whose demands were indisputable. They also conceived it
derogatory to the dignity of that board, to pass an act, excluding themselves
from any knowledge of those services, for which the respective sums were made
payable. For these reasons, among others, they opposed the bill; and prayed
their dissent might be entered, as a vindication of themselves to his Majesty^.
The governor to whom it was sent up, detained it for farther consideration;
though he passed several other bil^s on the 19th of the month. This circumstance,
my Lord, could not but chag^in his lieutenant, who had the bill much at heart;
not only on account of the large sums thereby payable to himself and brother;
but because the passing it into a law, would be the fullest evidence of his
ascendancy over the governor; and if he could bring him into disgrace with the
ministry, by leading him into a breach of instructions, it was plain he would
have nothing to rely upon, but his own popularity. This was an important card,
and to be skilfully played off. So indeed it was: and when I finish the story,
I am persuaded your Lordship will entertain to very mean opinion of American
politicians. -- The spring was now advancing; and it became necessary to pass a
law for levying forces, not only to join the eastern colonies, on a new
expedition against the French fortress at Crown Point, but for the protection
of our western frontiers, in conjunction with Pennsylvania and New Jersey,
which were become fields of blood, by the daily ravages of inhuman barbarians.
The bill for this purpose originated with the assembly: and Mr. De Lancey, who
was now closeting the members, was its principal constructor. When it came
before the council on the 28th of March, that board immediately objected to it,
according to his expectations: and the governor declared, that if the council
approved, he should himself give it a negative. According to the tenor of this
bill, the forces designed for the western expedition were to serve but forty
days, when the province of New Jersey had ordained their quota, to be
disbandable by Mr. Belcher: and Sir Charles Hardy insisted, that the like
confidence ought to be reposed in his judgment. The two houses now engaged
themselves in a dispute, at a time when, of all others, every contention should
have been avoided. Mr. Oliver De Lancey, appointed by the house to provide the
supplies for the regiment designed as our quota toward the Crown Point
expedition, now gave orders to stop all farther preparations, an open rupture
between the governor and assembly being daily expected. The members began
freely to speak against him. The council labored to procure an alteration of
the bill -- but all to no purpose. The principal thing aimed at, was the
passing of the debt-bill: and a leading member in the house plainly intimated
their designs to the governor. Doubtless your Lordship will wonder he did not
dissolve them with indignation. Believe me, my Lord, it would have been a step,
at this time, extremely unadviseable. Forty days intermission between the test
and return of the writ of summons for the election of representatives, being
required by law; the public exigencies were too pressing to admit of any delay.
Mr. De Lancey knew all his advantages: and that Sir Charles Hardy might be at
no loss to conjecture that the house was now acting at his beck, nor himself
under the necessity of joining with the council against the ^ill, absented
himself from the consultations of that board. The ne^^^bouring colonies in the
mean time were urging the dispatch of our preparations for opening the
campaign. Reduced at length by these perplexities, he was obliged to send for
his lieutenant, and gave him his promise to pass the favorite bill for payment
of the public debts. The house then privately took back the quota-bill; and
after a few alterations, the council passed it on the 31st of March. To both of
them Sir Charles gave his assent the following day: and they were enrolled
among our laws. I leave this affair to your Lordship's own reflections;
observing only, that from this period, the lieutenant governor's influence
became more apparent than before -- and that as it always was, so it will ever
continue to be, his ruling passion, and the grand engine of his politics, to
crush or control the King's governors in this province.

THE plan of operations, Intelligence from England.
concerted at New York in December, was a few days after transmitted to Sir
Thomas Robinson, to be laid before his Majesty, for the royal approbation Mr.
Pownal importuned Mr. Shirley to be made the bearer of these dispatches. The
general very civilly thanked him fear the offer of his service; but chose
rather to confide in Major Rutherford and Capt. Staats Mortis. Mr. Pownal
followed soon after them to England.
. Upon the arrival of the first vessels from Europe in April following, we were
surprised with these remarkable articles of intelligence: That the action at
Lake George had been magnified in England into an almost decisive victory --
that Mr Johnson was advanced to the dignity of a baronet, and 5000 l. sterling
voted by the commons, as a farther reward for his great services -- that Eyres,
his engineer, was raised to a majority -- and Wraxal, his secretary to the
command of a company. To crown, in fine, the utmost wishes of his adversaries
-- that Mr. Shirley's conduct having been entirely disapproved, his Majesty had
been pleased to remove him from the command, agreeable to Mr. Shirley's
adversaries, and why.
and appoint the right hon. the Earl of London general of all his forces in
North America. Than these particulars, nothing could have been more pleasing to
the New York cabal; as they were shortly to reap the fruits of all those
calumnies of which they had been the original authors. A change of the general
at once gratified their revenge and ambition, and facilitated the execution of
an affair earnestly solicited, and greatly advancive of their interest.

I will not assert, The general arrives at Albany, and calls a council of war;
that Mr. Shirley had yet received his Majesty's orders with respect to the
late plan of operations. I believe he had not -- because on the 7th of May he
arrived at Albany, and continued his preparations for carrying that plan into
execution, until the 25th of the month, when a council of war was there held,
consisting of the following members: His Excellency the GENERAL.
Lieut. Col. Ga^^. Lieut. Col. Bu^ton, Major Chapman, Major Sparks, Sir John
St. Clair, John Montreser, Esquire chief engineer.
Mr. Shirley laid before them the minutes of the congress in December, and
acquainted them with the state of affairs. and acquaints them with the
situation of affairs.
With respect to the western expedition the naval force upon the lake
consisted, he observed, of two vessels of ten carriage-guns each; two
row-gallies, each of ten swivels; and that he had three months before issued
orders for building three other vessels, one of eighteen, another of sixteen,
and a third of twelve carriage-guns. Besides which, there would be 250
Whale-boats upon the lake, each of them capable of containing 16 men. The land
forces then at Oswego, and on their march for preserving a free communication
between that place and Albany, where his own and Pepperell's regiments, with
that raised and supported by the province of New Jersey, and the four
independent companies of New York. As there was a magazine of provisions and
stores at the Canajohary Falls, about 35 miles from Schenectady; his excellency
proposed posting there 100 men out of those forces: as many more at the German
Flats, to secure another magazine, guard the portage, and convoy the provisions
through the Wood Creek: and as the fall near Oswego occasioned another small
portage, a fort was there also to be erected, for a garrison of fi^ty men at
least. It was, my Lord, of the greatest moment to keep open the communication
between Albany and our fort on the lake; his excellency was therefore intent
upon raising four companies of sixty privates each, to be employed in scouting
along the passage, and harrassing the French settlements between Frontenac and
Montreal.

THE general gave them also an account of the strength of Oswego, when he left
it the last fall -- adding, that he had sent up Mr. M'Keller, the engineer in
second, and Mr. Sewer, a practitioner engineer, with orders to make such
additional works, as they should think necessary for the security of that
important post. And your Lordship will be pleased to take notice, that these
orders were issued very early in March, before the Mohawk river was open; and
that the engineers actually arrived at Oswego in April. At these several
garrisons were to be deposited six months provisions for 7000; and he observed
to the council, that for that purpose, 200 whaleboats and 500 battoes had been
dispatched since the first of April from Schenectady. The remaining quantity
would have been transported by the middle of July, had his designs been carried
into execution.

As to the provincial expedition, he informed them -- that the troops voted by
the several colonies amounted to 8800 men, including the officers and garrisons
at the sorts Edward and William-Henry. One, or perhaps two hundred Indians
might be expected to join them* besides a company which his excellency had
raised, to harrass the enemy upon lake Champlain, and procure intelligence of
their motions in Canada; and three more, for the like service, were intended to
be chosen out of the whole force destined for Crown Point.

ABOUT this time one Rogers, of New Hampshire, capt. of a ranging company, Capt
Rogers, an active officer, gains intelligence; of which the general informs the
council.
gave repeated demonstrations of his activity in the neighborhood of Crown
Point. He made many incursions upon the enemy, fell on their scattered parties,
and scarce ever returned to Fort William-Henry without scalps and prisoners.
The general took particular notice of him; and he became singularly serviceable
in procuring intelligence. By a cadet, whom he took on the 20th of May, we were
informed, that the whole number of men at Fort St. Frederic, Tinonderoge, and
at an advanced post, were 1100, composed of the regiments of Languedoc, the
Queen's regiment, two companies of the colony troops, and the militia. Besides
these, there were Indians; but their numbers uncertain: that at Tinonderoge the
French had twelve pieces of ordnance mounted, and carriages preparing for an
additional number; but that the retrenchment at the advanced post was without
any cannon. These troops wintered at Montreal and Chambly; and arrived at the
south end of the lake about the middle of April, being plentifully supplied
with provisions and mil^tary stores. -- These intelligences the general laid
before his council; and then observed that the 50th and 51st regiments, the
four independent companies, and the regiment of New Jersey, were scarce a third
part of the number of troops designed by the general plan for the operations
upon Lake Ontario: that the provincials were also not only deficient of the
complement thought necessary at the congress, but even of the number voted by
the provinces concerned in the enterprise against Crown Point; and that it was
impracticable, even with the junction of the 44th and 48th regiments, then at
Albany, to carry on both the northern and western expeditions at the same time:
that he had no dependence upon the Indians of the Six Nations; Sir William
Johnson being unable to procure scouting parties; and that upon this account he
proposed raising four companies for that service.

YOUR Lordship may hence observe, what reason the congress in December had for
their opinion, that more troops were necessary for his Majesty's service in
America. No reinforcements being yet arrived from England, for carrying the
general plan into execution, the council were of unanimous opinion -- that 1300
ought to be posted at Oswego, 50 at the Falls, Their opinion and advice.
200 at the Oneida Carrying Place, 150 at the German Flatts, and as many more
at the Conejohary Falls. They advised therefore, -- that the 50th and 51st, and
the New Jersey regiments, the independents, and the North Carolina provincials
(all which amounted to about 2000 men) should be employed in that service. The
44th and 48th regiments, with the colony troops, were thought sufficient to
reduce Crown Point. Accordingly, they recommended their junction: advising,
however, that the regulars should continue for a time in their encampment at
Albany. -- The ranging companies, proposed by the general, were highly
approved; and the raising of others strongly recommended. They also concurred
with him in sentiment -- that a road ought to be made from the German Flatts to
Oswego: and declared, it appeared to them very necessary to strengthen Fort
Edward, and erect another at the South Bay, The former was a deposit for
stores, and at the concurrence of all the routes from Crown Point to Albany.
The latter would command the route taken by baron Dieskan for his designed
attack upon Fort Edward -- a route through which incursions were frequently made
upon our northern frontier. A fort at the South Bay was conceived requisite, to
cover our convoys of provisions for the nothern expedition from the insults of
the enemy, who in flying parties infested the passage from Albany to For the
building of a fort at Fouth Bay preparations were making when Mr. Shirley
resigned the command of the arm^: but the work has since been neglected; and
(...) ^ssage them Fort Edward to our ^^mp at Will (...) Henry (...) all this
summer, and many of our people out (...) was fo^e^een by this council.
William-Henry. The propriety of this advice, my Lord, must be evident to every
man of a tolerable acquaintance with the country; and these were the very
sentiments which the general repeatedly communicated to Sir William Johnson, in
his letters, after the action at Lake George; which were then slighted by the
cabal, who studiously opposed him in all his measures.

THUS I have shown your Lordship the reasons why the general plan continued to
be unexecuted, till the sitting of this last council of war. Mr. Shirley,
however, in hopes of the arrival of the expected reinforcements, and loath to be
diverted from his favorite designs upon Lake Ontario, continued to throw large
quantities of provisions and stores into Schenectady, and all the magazines
between that place and Oswego. This, it was supposed, was done to induce his
successor, from these ample supplies, to act upon this quarter; it being
universally imagined, that Crown Point was now become the main object of the
ministry. Till the arrival of General Webb on the 7th of June, this was only
conjecture, and general report. The effects of the misrepresentations of
American affairs in England, then became evident to all; for the stores laid in
at Schenectady were now reconveyed to Albany for the nothern expedition; and
fresh clamours excited against Mr. Shirley, for his supplies toward the
western operations. On the 15th of June, Major General Aberc^mbie takes the
command of the army.
Major General Abercrombie landed at New York; and ten days after at Albany;
where he immediately took upon himself the command of the army. Shirley
continued there no longer than to deliver over to the new general the proper
returns, and communicate such information as appeared necessary, with respect
to the present situation of affairs.

THE whole force, of which General Abercromble now took the command, consisted
of the 44th, 48th, 50th, and 51st regiments, four independent companies, the
New Jersey regiment, four companies raised by the province of North Carolina,
Otway's, and the Highland regiments These two regiments arrived with him, and
consisted of about 900 men.
, and the provincial forces destined against Crown Point.

INSTRUCTIONS had been given to Sir William Johnson, to procure a large body of
the Six Nations, Sir William Johnson holds a conference at Onondaga.
, to join in any attempt that might be made upon the Lake Ontario; and to
engage 100 more, for the assistance of the provincial army. To effect which, he
was then holding a conference with the deputies of the Six Cantons at Onondaga;
from whence he was to proceed immediately to Oswego. Mr. Shirley had, besides,
raised a company of Indians from Stockbridge, to be employed in ranging the
woods between Fort William-Henry and Montreal: and that his Majesty's service
upon Lake Ontaric might be free from the obstructions, by which it has been
the year before greatly embarrassed, he had inlisted 40 companies of battoemen,
each of 50 men, Forty companies of bart^e men raised, and their great
usefulness.
a captain and an assistant, for transporting stores and provisions to Oswego.
These were put under the direction of Capt. Bradstreet, an active vigilant
officer, inured to the hardships to which that service inevitably exposed him.
This, though one of the most judicious measures that could have been taken, was
made the subject of low invective. The faction at New York labored to
represent it as a project to involve the Crown in a needless expense: but time
has given the fullest evidence of the propriety of this step; and proper it
will appear to your Lordship, before the conclusion of this letter. General
Shirley wisely foresaw, that the Indians of the Six Nations, whatever influence
over them Sir William Johnson might pretend, could not be engaged even to
protect the King's troops in the passage through their own country; and that
unless the communication was kept open to Oswego, nothing could be effected
upon the Lake, no^ the garrison itself preserved from falling into the hands of
the enemy. Accordingly, A small post cut off in the Indian countries
no sooner did the spring open, than a little blockaded post, with 25 men, at
the Carrying-Place, in the very center of the Oneida country, was cut off; the
Oneidas themselves being unquestionably concerned in the massacre. Nothing
could secure us against the repetition of these insults, but passing through
the country with large squadrons of battoes: and to facilitate the
transportation, Mr. Shirley, who canvassed every expedient for the preservation
of Oswego, employed a working party of 80 men, under a director, to remove the
obstructions in the Wood Creek; by this means, the portage from the Mohawks
River, across the great Carrying-Place, was reduced from eight miles to one.
Nor did he omit observing to his successor, that an attempt upon Niagara was of
the last importance; the loss or preservation of our Indians depending upon the
success of the operations on Lake Ontario.

RELATIVE to the Crown Point expedition, he recommended the march of part of
the army, in a new discovered route, on the west side of Lake George, to the
enemy's advanced works, five miles short of Tinonderoge. Which being carried,
the heavy artillery and stores might be there landed, and transported through a
road to Tinonderoge and Fort Frederic: and after the reduction of those
fortresses, he advised General Abercrombie immediately to construct armed
vessels, to secure the command of Lake Champlain.

YOUR LORDSHIP may remember, Governor Sharpe's designed attempt on fort Du
Quesne fails.
that an attempt was proposed, at the congress in December, against Fort Du
Quesne, with an army of 3000 provincials. Gov. Sharp was to have commanded in
that enterprise; but there remained now no hopes of its prosecution. Virginia
chose to be entirely upon the defensive. -- Maryland was wholly inactive; her
frontier being covered by the adjoining provinces -- and as to Pensylvania, she
raised indeed 1500 men, but only with a view to protect her out-farms; nor
probably would thus far have consulted her own safety, but for the daily
murders and horrid cruelties perpetrated upon her borders.

WITH respect to the circumstances of Indian affairs to the northward -- While
Mr. Shirley was at Oswego, Circumstances of Indian affairs to the north ward.
and upon his return, as I before observed to your Lordship, he proposed to the
Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, and Oneidas, the erection of small forts for the
protection of their respective castles. The two last tribes consented, desiring
also, that the forts might be mounted with cannon: and the Tuscoraras
afterward sent deputies to him, with the like request: -- the Senecas and
Cayugas had also lately signified their acquiescence to Sir William Johnson;
and the general transmitted him the plan of a fort, directing the prosecution
of the work with all possible dispatch, as a most effectual means to secure the
Indian country to his Majesty.

BEFORE Mr. Shirley left Oswego the last year, he proposed to the Six Nations
their convening this summer, in a grand council there, the Indians on the north
side of lake Ontario, and round lake Erie, to consult their common interest,
and maintain a correspondence by annual councils at Oswego. And to draw off the
latter from their attachment to the French, recommended to the Six Nations
their concurrence, in opening a free trade with the foreign Indians, at the
entrance of the Onondaga river, upon terms more advantageous to all the Indians
than any hitherto pursued. This spring Sir William Johnson informed his
excellency, that the Six Nations were extremely well pleased with the projects
relating both to the trade at Oswego, and the construction of forts in their
cantons. To accelerate the latter, the general supplied him with 5000 l.
sterling, in addition to 5000 l. advanced to him by General Braddock: and yet,
my Lord, he was constrained to confess, in a subsequent 10 May, 1756.
letter, that unless his excellency could engage several companies of rangers,
he despaired of the preservation even of a free passage through their country:
and whether he has to this day built a single fort, as the general proposed, I
have not been able, after much inquiry, to discover.

EQUALLY unpromising was the situation of our affairs with the southern
Indians. Situation of our affairs with the southern Indians.
Some hopes indeed were entertained of the fidelity of the Cherokees -- a
people warlike and powerful; in whose territories the Virginians were erecting
a fortress. The Shawanese nevertheless continued their eruptions into that
province: and Governor Dinwiddie was obliged to draft the militia, to oppose
their progress, and preserve the town of Winchester. These Indians also, with
the Susquehanas and Delawares, committed frequent hostilities upon the
Pensylvanians. Governor Morris, for the protection of the country, carried a
line of forts on the west side of the Kittatiny mountains, all along the
extended frontier of that colony, from Delaware to the river Potowmac. The
government of New Jersey proceeded even to declare war against the Delaware
Indians; and would have penetrated into their settlements, had not assurances
been sent by Sir William Johnson from the council at Onondaga, that the
Delawares and Shawanese, in obedience to the Six Nations, were under renewed
and possitive engagements, to refrain from any farther outrages upon the
southern frontiers. If any such promises were really made, it is certain they
were immediately broken, many of our inhabitants having since been murdered and
captivated by the savages of those very tribes. Whence we may fairly conclude,
that either the Six Nations connived at these infractions of their commands; or
that their ancient sovereignty is become the contempt of their tributaries. In
fact, my Lord, the matter is still worse. Too much reason is there to believe
the truth of both these alternatives.

I INFORMED your Lordship, Sir William Johnson's conduct considered.
that Sir William Johnson was ordered to proceed from Onondaga to Oswego, with
as many Indians as could be persuaded to march with him; not only for the more
effectual preservation of that post, but to execute the plan which Genesis Shirley
had concerted, for the establishment of an annual council there, with those
Indians who had been long in the French interest, and seemed ready to listen to
proposals for an alliance with us. It was expedient, my Lord, that he should
have complied with these instructions, nay it was his duty; but no sooner was
he acquainted with Mr. Shirley's resignation of the command of the army, than
he returned from Onondaga to Albany, at the head of about 60 Indians; leaving
Capt. Patten with his company of grenadiers, to wander through a forlorn
wilderness, in search of Oswego. Whether this instance of his conduct was not
intended to raise his reputation with the new general, as a leading man among
the Indians, I leave to your Lordship's conjecture. By arts like these, he
acquired his Indian fame: and the influence of the faction at New York so
powerfully sustained it, that few persons doubted his ability to procure
several hundred warriors for our assistance, though every day exhibited fresh
proofs of their melancholy defection. Besides the destruction of our post in
the very country of the Oneidas mentioned before, the enemy infested the parts
about Oswego, and the whole passage thither, without the least opposition from
the Six Nations. Alarms indeed were frequently given of the approach of their
flying parties; and it was observable, that Sir. William Johnson, on those
occasions, as Colonel of the county, raised the militia of Albany, and
proceeded to the spot; though every man acquainted with Indians well knows, that
of all places, these are the most unlikely for finding the enemy. By such sham
expeditions have our northern inhabitants been impoverished and distressed: nor
could they answer any other end, than to raise a bruit through the colonies; and
with parade and ostentation set the gazetteers upon sounding his applause. --
Even in these wild romantic excursions, but few Indians attended him: and yet
if we credit our news writers, hundreds were in his train.

MR. SHIRLEY had scarce resigned the command to Major General Abercrombie,
Account of a gallant action of our batto^ men under Capt. Bradstreet
when the good effect of the battoe service became so irresistibly evident,
that his very enemies recollected their ungrounded calumnies with shame and
confusion. -- I allude, my Lord, to the action between the French and our
battoe men, on the 3d of July. Sensible of the importance of Oswego, the enemy
collected themselves about the latter end of May in a large body, not many
miles to the eastward of that garrison; from whence detachments were
perpetually sent out to fall upon our workmen, and infest the passage through the
Onondaga River. Capt. Bradstreet, who had the direction of the battoes, was
apprized that small parties lay in ambush, waiting a favorable opportunity to
attack him. Accordingly, when he left Oswego, he ordered the several divisions
to proceed as near each other as possible: but so numerous and irregular a body
could not without difficulty be kept to any tolerable order. He was at the head
of about 300 battoe-men, in the first division, upon his return to Schenectady;
and about nine miles from Oswego, when the enemy, who were 700 strong, rose
from their ambuscade, and fired upon his front. Near the place of attack, was a
small Island, by which the enemy might easily have forded the river. Bradstreet
in an instant landed upon the island, to prevent being enclosed between two
fires; and with six men maintained his possession, bravely repelling twenty of
the enemy, who attempted to seize that advantageous post. He was then
reinforced with six others; and even compelled a second party of 40 French to
give way. Enraged at this shameful disappointment, the enemy, to the number of
70 men, thought proper to make a third attempt; but the battoe-men, who did not
exceed 20, with redoubled bravery still kept their ground, and again forced
their adversaries to retire. During these skirmishes, which lasted near an
hour, the battoe-men in the rear landed, without loss or confusion, upon the
south side of the river. Four hundred of the enemy now advanced up the north
side of the stream, intending to ford it about a mile higher, and surround us.
Bradstreet, aware of the design, left the island, and with two hundred men
marched on the other side to oppose them. But they had actually forded over,
before he came up, and posted themselves in a swamp. Dr. Kirkland, with the
second division of battoes, was now advancing to his assistance; but Bradstreet
ordered, and Capt. Butler, who commanded the third division, to keep their
posts, and cover the batt^^s in the rear. Being arrived at the swamp, an
engagement ensued in the Indian manner of fighting and continued above an hour
with dubious success. Bradstreet, at length animating his men, rushed into the
thicket through twice his number, and gallantly pushed them into the river, where
many of them perished. Another attempt was made, in the mean time, to ford the
river a little higher; but those being also repulsed, the whole party was
entirely routed and dispersed.

JUST after the defeat, Capt. Patten, with his grenadiers from Onondaga, fell
in with our battoes; and the next morning a reinforcement of 200 men came up
from the garrison, and but for the excessive rains, which began soon after the
action, and continued all the next day, these brave battoe-men would probably
have cut off the whole party. Had Sir William Johnson, as was expected,
accompanied Capt. Patten to Oswego, with the Indians from Onondaga, Bradstreet
might have made immediate pursuit, and many of the enemy must have been
overtaken: but this pacific plenipotentiary was then hastening to Albany (a
safe situation) with the important minutes of his late conference. A conference
full of affectionate Indian speeches, and large promises of their assistance;
when scarce a man of them could be prevailed upon to turn out of his hut for
the defense of the common cause. Bradstreet had but 3 Indians of the Six
Nations with him at this attack. Of these, one took to his heels; a second
fought bravely; but the third went over to the enemy, and assisted in pointing
out our officers. In these several actions we had about 30 men killed and
wounded. How many of the French were slain, is not certainly known; though it is
generally said, they lost about 120. Eighty Arms were brought to Schenectady;
and about 70 men found in the woods, and carried to Oswego. The French fled in
the utmost disorder, and some of their regular soldiers, being strangers to the
country, got bewildered in the desert, and perished for want of sustenance.

BRADSTREET arrived at Schenectady on the 11th of July; Bradstreet gives
intelligence of the enemy's design to attack Oswego.
and the next day acquainted General Abercrombie at Albany of the state of
Oswego. -- That he learnt from his prisoners, the French were preparing to
attack it, having 1200 men for that purpose encamped not far from the
easternmost fort. Upon the receipt of this intelligence, orders were issued to
Major General Webb, to hold himself in readiness to march for its defense with
the 44th regiment. My Lord, Mr. Shirley had, several days before On the 26th of
June, the day after he was superseded.
, advised General Abercrombie to reinforce that garrison with Such a
reinforcement could easily have been spared for that purpose, Otway's and the
Highland regiment being now landed at Albany. And that this necessary step
might not be obstructed, General Shirley had, before their arrival, dispatched
an express to Oswego, ordering Bradstreet to quicken his return to Schenectady.
two battalions at least: and they might have marched immediately, as
Bradstreet was ready to convoy the troops, and every magazine, along the
passage, plentifully supplied with provisions. But not to anticipate my story;

MR. SHIRLEY arrived at New York on the 4th of July, Lord London arrives.
and waited the arrival of my Lord London, who landed there on the 23d of that
month, with Mr. Pownal in his train: but in what character the latter returned
a second time from England, was a subject of doubtful conjecture. -- His
Lordship, regardless of his ease, and the fatigues of a tedious voyage, tarried
there but three days; and on the 29th of July reached his head quarters at
Albany, when he took upon himself the command of the army.

THE garrison of Oswego consisted now of 1400 men, and about 300 workmen and
sailors. Four hundred and eighty-five were posted, in small parties, between
that place and Burnet's Field, to maintain an open passage through the country of
the Six Nations. The 44th and 48th regiments at Albany and Schenectady, with
the British troops just arrived, consisted now of 2600 men; and the
provincials, under the command of General Winslow, were about 7000, and ready
to march from Fort William-Henry. -- Of the naval force of Oswego, I have
already given your Lordship an account: and as to the strength of the enemy at
Tinonderoge and Crown Point, according to the latest intelligence obtained by
Capt. Rogers, they did not exceed 3000 men.

FROM his Lordship's known abilities for war, Our present force, and that of
the (...)
the colonies were in great hopes, that notwithstanding the delay of the
British reinforcements, some coup d'eclat would very speedily be struck at
Crown Point. But alas! while we were intent upon this favorite design, the
enemy were heading their main force, not to oppose us at Tinonderoge, but to
secure what was to them a matter of much more importance, I mean the exclusive
dominion of the great Lakes -- Accordingly, they laid siege to Oswego; Oswego
(...).
and after two or three days contest, obliged the garrison, on the 14th of
August, to surrender themselves prisoners of war. This melancholy account was
first brought (...) Albany by several soldiers, some of whom had formerly
deserted the French service; and remained many days unconfirmed, till the
arrival of two sailors, who made their escape after the reduction of the forts.
An universal sho^k was now given to the whole continent: and to increase our
distress, the Indians reported, that the whole garrison was put to the sword,
and the dead bodies of our country men denied even the sacred rite of sepultre.
But this, by subsequent advices, was contradicted: and the spies, dispatched
for observation, inform us, that the works are entirely demolished, and the
enemy departed. In what manner, Circumstances of the siege unknown.
and by what numbers, it was taken, or upon what terms surrendered, I cannot
give your Lordship any satisfactory account. How many were killed on either
side is also unknown; though certain it is that Lieut. Col. Mercer, the
commanding officer, is among the slain.

IT is much to be wished, my Lord, that Mr. Shirley's advice to General
Abercrombie had been followed: and equally to be regretted, that Sir William
Johnson returned with such precipitation from Onondaga to Albany. Battoemen
imprudently discharged
Nor ought the discharge of 400 battoe-men, after Bradstreet's return, to pass
without some remark. They arrived at Schenectady, as I observed before, on the
11th of July; and methinks the recent proofs of their courage, and the account
they gave of the strength and designs of the enemy, might have been a
sufficient antidote against the poison of that council for their discharge;
which was unquestionably designed by Mr. Shirley's enemies for throwing an
odium on his measures. General Webb's march delayed.
To the same influence, my Lord, it was undoubtedly owing, that General Webb's
march, with the 44th regiment from Schenectady, was delayed till the 12th of
August, but two days before the garrison was actually surrendered. He had
proceeded no farther than Burnet's Field, with his regiment of 900 men, and the
remaining 800 battoe-men, when the deserters brought him the news of the siege.
Upon the receipt of which, he made a forced march to the Oneida Carrying-Place;
where he immediately felled trees into the Wood Creek to prevent the approach
of the The French were equally apprehensive of his advancing toward them, or
of (...) Oswego (...) prudently improving the (...) advantage, began where
General Webb left (...) continued the (...) into the Oneida Lake; which
^en(...) to pass through the Wood C^^ek, 40 miles in length. General Webb not
long after abandoned the Carrying-Place, after ^^^^ing down the forts, much to
the dissatisfaction of the indians.
enemy.

THESE, my Lord, were great oversights: but the loss of Oswego must principally
be ascribed to a more distant cause -- to a ^uncto, who have all along
embarrassed every part of his Majesty's ^ervice on the Lake Ontario. By their
misrepresentations, the public has been drawn into a dependence upon the Six
Nations, merely to exalt Sir William Johnson: and that nothing might be wanting
to procure a change in the command of the army, and destroy all confidence in
Shirley's judgment, Oswego the great object of his attention, has been slighted
as an unessential post; and the reduction of St. Frederic represented as a
point of far superior moment.

MY LORD, Unhappy consequences of the lost of this important post.
by these intrigues our country bleeds -- Oswego is lost -- lost perhaps for
ever, -- with the naval armament -- above 60 pieces of ordnance, and a rich
supply of stores and provisions, laid in at a vast expense, for several
thousand men, during the whole campaign. -- Would to God this was all, and we
had nothing worse to apprehend! -- Our furr trade, which has long been the
principal object of the national attention, and the support of our frontier
city of Albany, is at an end. The French can now with the utmost facility
secure the inland country, and confine us to the very brinks of the ocean -- a
free communication is opened between Canada and Louisiana; and all our
intercourse with the Indians totally rescinded. The enemy, on the other hand,
may, without opposition or restraint, render these innumerable tribes of
savages their allies and dependants. The Six Nations are more wavering than
ever: and should they no longer think it expedient to preserve their
neutrality, the whole continent must inevitably become a field of blood.
Whatever may be thought of these colonies, which of late have been magnified
for their numbers and opulence, The colonies not so powerful as imagined.
I do assure your Lordship, that a short war will effectually exhaust them.
Their settlements are scattered; their frontiers extensive; the inhabitants but
few, generally in very moderate circumstances, and still luxurious, and without
resources. The irruption of a few Indians into Pennsylvania, had already
occasioned the loss of several hundred souls, and the desolation of near two
thousand farms. The frontiers of the neighboring colonies are equally
defenseless: and the power of the native savages, at present in the French
interest, is of itself sufficient, by slow but inevitable means, to reduce us
to extreme beggary and distress.

THUS, my Lord I have finished the relation of what has hitherto been
transacted in America. General (...) the whole.
I have not only presented you with a series of the most interesting events,
but brought your Lordship acquainted with the characters and designs of the
principal agents in our political affairs. If I have erred, I am persuaded it
is not in any article of importance, nor purposely in the minutest. -- Every
line of this letter has been penned with the most sacred veneration for truth,
and a mind equally unbiassed by resentment or affection. -- For obtaining an
intimate acquaintance with the matters rehearsed, few in the colonies have had
superior advantages: nor in collecting proper materials, has any one been more
assiduous. Add to this, that I had no other interest in the public measures,
than the interest of every man on the continent. I am unconnected with all
parties; neither enjoying any post myself, nor standing in the least relation
to a single officer in the army. The love of my country was the sole spring of
my curiosity; and so far, indeed, I was not an unconcerned spectator of the
public transactions. If I have made honorable mention of General Shirley, it
was owing to my approbation of his schemes, as conducive to the commonweal of
the british plantations: and if my judgment was in this regard erroneous, I
have the pleasure to find myself in very respectable company. Except New York,
or rather a prevailing faction there, all the colonies hold him in very high
esteem. Some have made public declarations of their sense of his great merit;
and that too, at a time when he appeared descending from his meridian of glory.
But he needed no other than the testimonials of his own province; for he, my
Lord, whose conduct is approved by the people of the Massachusetts Bay, must be
distinguished both for his abilities and his virtue. They are too numerous and
wise to be deceived, too free and independent to be driven. An undue influence
can never be obtained by the governor of a colony, who has neither power nor
places to bestow. -- Their assemblies are annual -- the members elected by
ballot, in number near 200. -- The council, or middle estate, chosen yearly by
the assembly; -- and as all the offices are elective, not a man in the province
is dependent on the smiles or the frowns of the King's representative: -- and
yet so wise, free, and loyal a people have approved his judgment; confided in
his integrity; testified in his favor; and publicly lamented his departure
from the continent. I would by no means, my Lord, be understood, by these
favorable sentiments of Shirley, to disparage his noble Successor in the
command. He yet has not, at least he deserves not to have, a single enemy
amongst us: and I hope it will serve the purposes of no man to be his enemy. I
could only have wished, that at this critical juncture, a gentleman so
thoroughly versed in American affairs, had been continued in America for his
Lordship's assistance. We have to contend with a subtle enterprising foe -- a
foe, rapacious, martial, and bloody, committing murders, rather than waging
war^ Though the French colony contains perhaps not 30,000 men capable to bear
arms; yet these are all under the despotic command and sole direction of their
governor-general; and experience teaches us, that in spite of our navy, they
may be annually reinforced. The strength of our colonies, on the other hand, is
divided; and the concurrence of all necessaries both for supplies of men and
money. Jealous are they of each other -- some ill-constituted -- others shaken
with intestine divisions -- and, if I may be allowed the expression,
parsimonious even to prodigality. Our assemblies are diffident of their
governors -- governors despise their assemblies, and both mutually misrepresent
each other to the Court of Great Britain. Military measures demand secrecy and
dispatch: but while the colonies remain undivided, and nothing can be
transacted but with their universal assent, it is impossible to maintain the
one, or proceed with the other. Without a general constitution for warlike
operations, we can neither plan nor execute. We have a common interest, and
must have a common council, one head, and one purse. -- The French service is
unexposed to those embarrassments; and hence they project without discovery,
and we scarce collect their designs, till we are attacked and defeated.
Hitherto they have prosecuted the war with superior advantage; and yet the
militia of the province of the Massachusetts Bay alone, undoubtedly exceeds, by
some thousands, all the troops of Canada. Since the commencement of the present
hostilities, his Majesty has lost above 3000 loyal subjects: and as all the
Indians are at the devotion of the French, and Oswego is now lost, many
thousand farms before the opening of the next spring, will probably be
abandoned; and the interior settlements deluged with the innocent blood of all
ages and sexes. Indeed, my Lord, it is not beneath the most elevated station, to
indulge the benevolent feelings of humanity; nor, retiring awhile from the pomp
and gaiety that surrounds you, to shed a pitying tear over families inhumanly
bereft of their substance, or more inhumanly sloughtered in their beds. -- It
is a celebrated saying, and does honor to human nature, Homo sum, et nihil
humanum a me alienum puto.

WHAT the present or the next campaign will bring forth, it known only to the
Omniscient Governor of the universe. The colonies are nearly exhausted, and
their funds already anticipated by expensive unexecuted projects: and whether
they will still continue their efforts, or resign to a listless despair, is
uncertain. I fear the worst -- and yet you know, my Lord, I am not of a
melancholy cast. There is too much reason for general concern: and I venture to
predict, what every judicious person foresees, that unless some successful blow
is struck -- and speedily struck, at the power of France, Britain must
inevitably lose her possessions in America. An event my Lord, of the most
tremendous consequence to us -- to you -- to the Protestant religion -- to the
peace of Europe -- yes -- and to the peace and happiness of all mankind.

HITHERTO we have wasted our strength in lopping off branches, when the axe
should have been laid to the root of the tree. Canada, my Lord, Canada must be
demolished -- Delenda est Carthago -- or we are undone. Strength sufficient
have we left, with proper assistance, for a decisive struggle: but a lingering
consumption will infallibly enervate and destroy. France has been, ever can,
and will be annually, throwing over fresh troops into her colony, in defiance
of our great maritime force: and should peace ensue, even before our ruin is
completed, what will be the state of these provinces upon the next rupture
between the two crowns, when the inland country is filled with our enemies? --
As you therefore value, my noble Lord, the cause of liberty; the glory of the
British name; the honor and dignity of the best of Kings; and the preservation
of these colonies from bloody carnage and total ruin; exert, I beseech you,
exert your influence, to extirpate this brood of French savages from the face
of the continent. In a scheme so decisive, and in no other, will the provinces
heartily unite; and if well concerted, and our unfortified seacoasts at the
same time sufficiently protected; it will doubtless succeed -- humble the pride
of France -- and close the present war with a lasting and honorable peace.

I am, MY LORD, With the profoundest respect, Your Lordship's most obliged and
obedient servant.
New York, Sept. 20, 1756.

