THE MINUTES OF TREATY

HELD AT EASTON, in Pennsylvania, In October, 1758.

BY The Lieutenant Governor of PENNSYLVANIA, AND The Governor of NEW JERSEY,

WITH The Chief Sachems and Warriors of the MOHAWKS, ONEYDOS, ONONDAGAS,
CAYUGAS, SENECAS, TUSCARORAS, TUTELOES, NANTICOKES and CONOYS, CHUGNUTS,
DELAWARES, UNAMIES, MOHICKONS, MINISINKS, and, WAPINGS.

Woodbridge, in New Jersey: Printed and Sold by James Parker, Printer to the
Government of New Jersey, 1758.

At a Meeting held at EASTON, on the Seventh Day of OCTOBER, 1758.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of PENNSYLVANIA. Esquires.
LAWRENCE GROWDON, RICHARD PETER'S, LYNFORD LARDNER, BENJAMIN CHEW, JOHN MIFFLIN,



THE Governor and Council coming to Town this Afternoon; Teedyuscung,
accompanied with Moses Tetamy, Daniel Teepiscawen and Isaac Stille, waited on
his Honor, and made the usual Salutations,

BROTHER,

I AM very glad to see you here again; you may remember that we have already
made Peace, and you desired me to Holloo loud, and give Notice of it to all the
Indians round about.

I have spoke loud, and raised my Voice, and all the Indians have heard me, as
far as the Twightwees, and have regarded it, and are now come to this Place.

I bid you welcome, and join with me in casting up our Eyes to Heaven, and
praying the Blessing of the Supreme Being on our Endeavors.

According to our usual Custom, I with this String wipe the Dust and Sweat off
your Face, and clear your Eyes, and pick the Briars out of your Legs; and
desire you will pull the Briars out of the Legs of the Indians that are come
here, and anoint one of them with your healing Oil, and I will anoint the other.

A String.

The Governor returned him Thanks for the Visit, and his good Advice, which he
promised to comply with; and appointed a Meeting in the Morning for that
Purpose.

At a Conference held at the Town of EASTON, on the Eighth Day of October, 1758.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieut. Governor, Esquires, Members
of the Governor's Council.
LAWRENCE GROWDON, WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, LYNFORD LARDNER, BENJAMIN
CHEW, JOHN MIFFLIN,
Esquires, Committee of the House of Representatives.
ISAAC NORRIS, JOSEPH FOX, JOSEPH GALLOWAY, JOHN HUGHES, DANIEL ROBERDEAU, AMOS
STRICKLAND,
Esquires, Commissioners for Indian Affairs, in the Province of New Jersey.
CHARLES READ, JACOB SPICER,
A Number of Magistrates and Freeholders of this and the neighboring Province,
and of the Citizens of the City of Philadelphia, chiefly of the People called
Quakers. GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire, Deputy Agent for Indian Affairs, under Sir
WILLIAM JOHNSON. INDIANS of several Nations, viz.
MOHAWKS: Nichas, or Karaghtadie, with one Woman and two Boys. In all 4
SENECAS: Tagashata, alias Takeaghsado, alias Sigachsadon, Chief Man, with 7
other Chiefs, 37 other Men, 28 Women and Children. In all 83 ONONDAGAS:
Assaradonguas, with 9 Men, 9 Women and Children. In all 19 ONEIDOS:
Segughsonyout, alias Thomas King, Anagaraghiry, Assanyquou, with 3 Warrior
Captains, 6 Warriors, and 33 Women and Children. 45 CAYUGAS: Toka aio, with 8
Men, 11 Women and Children. 20 TUSCARORAS: Nichaquantaquoah, alias Jonathan,
with 5 Men, 12 Women, and 2 Children, 20 NANTICOKES: Robert White, alias
Wolahocumy, Pashdomokas, alias Charles, with 16 Men, 20 Women, and 18 Children.
56 CONOYS: Kanakt, alias Last Night, with 9 Men, 10 Women, and 1 Child. 21
TUTELOS: Cakanonekoanos, alias Big Arm, Asswagarat, with 6 Men, and 3 Women. 11
CHOGKNOTS: Ten Men, 20 Women and Children. 30 CHIHOHOCKIES: alias Delawares,
and UNAMIES: Teedyuscung, with diverse Men, Women and Children. 60 MUNSIES or
MINISINKS: Egotchowen, with sundry Men, Women and Children. 35 MAWHICKONS:
Abraham, or Mammatuckan, with several Men, Women, and Children. 56 WAWPINGS, or
POMPTONS: Nimham, Aquaywochtu, with sundry Men, Women, and Children. 47 In all
507
CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Provincial Interpreter. Captain HENRY MONTOUR, Interpreter
in the Six Nation and Delaware Languages. Stephen Calvin, Isaac Stille, Moses
Tetamy, Delaware Indians, Interpreters in the Delaware Language.


The Governor opened the Conferences with the following Ceremonies, addressing
himself to all the Indians present, of every Nation.

Brethren,

IT gives me great Pleasure to see so many of you, and of so many different
Nations, at this Council Fire. I bid you heartily Welcome.

Brethren,

With this String, I wipe the Sweat and Dust out of your Eyes, that you may see
your Brethren's Faces, and look cheerful. With this String, I take all
Bitterness out of your Breast, as well as every Thing disagreeable that may
have gathered there, in Order that you may speak perfectly free and open to us.
With this String, I gather the Blood, and take it away from the Council Seats,
that your Clothes may not be stained, nor your Minds any ways disturbed.

Three Strings.

Mr. Weiser interpreted the Substance of this Speech, and saying, his Memory
did not serve him to remember the several Ceremonies in Use on this Occasion,
he desired Nichas, a Mohawk Chief, to do it for him; which he did; and all was
afterward interpreted by Captain Henry Montour, in the Delaware Language, to
Teedyuscung and the Delawares.

After a short Pause, Tagashata, the Seneca Chief, rose up, and repeating, as
usual, each Paragraph distinctly, as spoke by the Governor, he returned Thanks,
and went through the same Ceremonies to the Governor, Council and People of the
Province; adding on the last String, That their Great-Grand-Fathers had told
them, that they had made a Road for them to travel to their Brethren the
English, and that whenever it should be stopped, they would become a poor
People. They were very glad to find the Road open to their Brethren, and should
take Care to preserve it so on their Side.

Three Strings.

After Mr* Weiser had delivered this in English, and it was interpreted in the
Delaware Language, by Moses Tetamy; Tagashata proceeded:

Brother ONAS,

By this Belt you sent an Invitation to us to come to Pennsylvania, which
reached our Towns about the Time that the Leaves put out last Spring; but we
were then so much alarmed by the French, who were near us, that we could not
then leave our Country. Some little Time ago we received another Belt from Sir
William Johnson, which he informed us was sent to him by you, to be forwarded
to us, to enquire into the Reasons why we did not come to you, according to
your first Invitation; and Sir William Johnson desired us to come here, to meet
you in Council; upon which we immediately arose, and came as soon as we could,
to your Council Fire, and now we are here, as you see.

Two Belts.

Brother,

Here is another Belt by which we were invited lately to come to a Council Fire
that was kindled in an Island near the Sea. This surprised us, as we never
heard of a Council Fire in an Island. We know of no Council Fires, but the Old
Council Fire at Philadelphia, and the Great Council Fire in Albany.

Here he laid the Belt on the Table.

Then taking four other Strings of Wampum, he said, These were sent by Nichas,
the Mohawk Chief, with a Message that he was arrived in this Province, and
desired we would comply with the Invitation and come down. Here he laid the
four Strings on the Table. Nichas having acknowledged the Message, and taken up
the Strings, Tagashata concluded, saying, These are your Belts, by which we
were invited to come to this Council Fire; and as we are now come, we return
them, and desire to see the Belts that were sent by us, particularly one, on
which were several Images of Men holding each other by the Hand.

The Governor replied, that he would enquire for the Belts sent by them, and
they should be returned.

The Substance of these last Speeches of Tagashata was interpreted to
Teedyuscung and the Delawares.

October 9 th, 1758.
This Morning his Excellency Governor BERNARD arrived at Easton, and desired a
Meeting of the Indians, that he might make them the usual Complements; but was
made acquainted by Mr. Weiser, that they were then in Council, deliberating on
Matters necessary to be adjusted before the Meeting.

October the 10th.
This Day the Indian Chiefs were again in Council, and continued together the
greatest Part of the Day.

October the 11th.
This Morning the Indian Chiefs communicated to the Governors, by Mr. Wieser,
the Business they had been consulting upon, and said they had concluded to
speak to them this Forenoon.

The Governors waited till one o'Clock, expecting the Indians to meet them,
being told that they were gathering together for that Purpose; but they not
coming, after several Messages sent to hasten them, it was agreed to meet them
punctually at four o'Clock.

At a Conference held at EASTON, with the Indians, on the 11th of October,
1758. P. M.
PRESENT, Governor DENNY, with his Council, and the several Pennsylvania
Gentlemen, As before. The Indians, etc. As before. His Excellency FRANCIS
BERNARD, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief of his Majesty's Province of
New Jersey. Esquires, Commissioners of New Jersey, for Indian Affairs.
The Honble. AND RUE JOHNSTON, The Honble. CHARLES READ, The Honble. JOHN
STEVENS, The Honble. JACOB SPICER, The Honble. WILLIAM FORSTER,



Tagashata, the Seneca Chief, intending to speak first, on Behalf of the
Indians, had laid some Belts and Strings in Order on the Table.

As soon as the Company sat down, Teedyuscung holding out a String, said, he
had something to deliver, and desired he might be heard first of all. Mr.
Groghan requested to know, if what he was going to say was the Result of the
Delaware Council, and if it was their Desire it should be spoke first; but no
Answer was given him as to this.

Governor BERNARD signifying his Desire to bid the Indians welcome, and just
mention to them the Business he came upon, it was agreed he should speak first;
which he did as follows.

Brethren,

I AM glad to see so many of you met together, to cultivate Peace with your
Brethren and old Friends the English. I heartily bid you welcome, and wish that
the good Work for which you are now assembled, may prosper in your Hands, and
have that Success, which your wise Men, and all that wish you well, must desire
as a Thing much to your Advantage.

The Situation of the Province over which I preside, and the Disposition of
it is People, have hitherto afforded very little Occasion for Treaties with the
neighboring Indians; but having some Months ago sent a Message to the
Minisinks, I received a Message from our Brethren the Senecas and Cayugas,
wherein they take upon them to answer my Message to the Minisinks, and desire
that I would meet them at the Council Fire burning at this Place.

It is not usual for the King's Governors to go out of their Provinces to
attend Treaties; but I am glad to have an Opportunity of showing my good
Disposition to establish Peace and Friendship with my Neighbors, and therefore
I have waved a^^ Forms, and am come here according to the Invitation I received
at Burlington.

To you therefore, our Brethren the Senecas and Cayugas, and your Nephews the
Minisinks, I now speak, and desire that you would take into your most serious
Consideration, my Message to the Minisinks, your Message to me, and my Answer
thereto, and let me know what we are to expect from you.

What is past we are willing to forget; but I must remind you, that if you are
disposed to be our Friends for the future, you should give us that Proof of
your Sincerity which I have desired in my Answer to your Message, and return us
the Captives that have been taken out of our Province, and are now within your
Power: This should be one of the first Steps, and will be the best that can be
taken toward restoring and confirming that Brotherly Love and Friendship
between us; which, I am convinced, will be for the mutual Benefit of all
Parties.

This was interpreted in the Six Nations Language, by Mr. Weiser, and in the
Delaware, by Mr. Stephen Calvin, the Indian Schoolmaster in West Jersey.

Then Teedyuscung spoke,

Brethren,

I desire all of you who are present will give Ear to me. As you, my Brethren,
desired me to call all the Nations who live back; I have done so. Now if you
have any Thing to say to them, or they to you, you must sit and talk together.

Brethren,

I sit by, only to hear and see what you say to one another; for I have said
what I have to say to the Governor of Pennsylvania, who sits here; he knows
what has passed between us. I have made known to him the Reason why I struck
him. Now, I and the Governor have made up these Differences between him and me;
and I think we have done it as far as we can, for our future Peace.

A String.

The above Speech was interpreted in the Six Nation Language.

Tagashata then rose up, and spoke,

Brethren, the Governors, and your Councils,

IT has pleased the Most High, that we meet together here with cheerful
Countenances, and a good Deal of Satisfaction: And as public Business requires
great Consideration, and the Day is almost spent, I choose to speak early
Tomorrow Morning.

The Governors answered, That they should be glad to give all the Dispatch
possible to this good Work they were engaged in, and desired the Chiefs would
fix the Time of Meeting; but they declined it, saying, They were unacquainted
with Hours, but would give Notice when they were ready.

At a Conference held at EASTON, on the 12th of October, 1758.
PRESENT, The Governors; the Gentlemen of their Councils, and others, as before.

Tagashata, the Seneca Chief, taking the Strings and Belt of Wampum, which
Governor BERNARD gave Yesterday, repeated according to the Indian Custom, the
Particulars of his Speech, and then added,

Brethren,

We approve of every Article mentioned to us Yesterday, by the Governor of
Jersey; all that he said is very good: We look upon his Message to us, as a
Commission and Request from him, that we should bring Matters to a good
Conclusion with our Cousins the Minisinks. They themselves sent for us to do
the same Thing, on their Behalf; and at their Request we came here, have taken
it in Hand, and will use our utmost Endeavors to bring about the good Work
which Governor BERNARD desires, and do not doubt but it will be done to his
entire Satisfaction.

Brethren,

I now speak at the Request of Teedyuscung, and our Nephews the Delawares,
living at Wyomink and on the Waters of the River Sasquehannah.

Brethren,

We now remove the Hatchet out of your Heads, that was struck into it by our
Cousins the Delawares: It was a French Hatchet that they unfortunately made use
of, by the Instigation of the French: We take it out of your Heads, and bury it
under Ground, where it shall always rest and never be taken up again. Our
Cousins the Delawares, have assured us they will never think of War against
their Brethren the English any more, but employ their Thoughts about Peace, and
cultivating Friendship with them, and never suffer Enmity against them to enter
into their Minds again.

The Delawares desired us to say this for them by this Belt.

A Belt.

Brethren,

Our Nephews the Minisink Indians, and three other different Tribes of that
Nation, have, at last, listened to us, and taken our Advice, and laid down the
Hatchet they had taken up against their Brethren the English. They told us they
had received it from the French, but had already laid it down, and would return
it to them again.

They assured us, they would never use it any more against you, but would
follow our Advice; and entreated us to use our utmost Endeavors to reconcile
them to you their Brethren, declaring they were very sorry for what they had
done, and desired it might be forgotten, and they would forever cultivate a
good Friendship with you. These Declarations were made by the principal
Warriors of four Tribes of the Minisink Indians, at giving us this Belt.

A Belt.

Then taking eight Strings of black Wampum, he proceeded;

Brethren,

We let you know, that we have not only brought about this Union with our
Nephews on the Waters of the River Sasquehannah, but also have sent Messages to
our Nephews the Delawares and Minisinks, and to those likewise of our own
Nations who are on the Ohio, under the Influence of the French. We have told
all those, that they must lay down the French Hatchet, and be reconciled to
their Brethren the English, and never more employ it against them. And we hope
they will take our Advice. We the Mohawks, Senecas, and Onondagas, deliver this
String of Wampum to remove the Hatchet out of your Heads, that has been struck
into them by the Ohio Indians; in order to lay a Foundation for Peace.

Eight Strings of black Wampum.

Tagashata sat down, and then the Cayuga Chief, Toka aio, arose, and said,

Brethren,

I Speak in Behalf of the younger Nations, Part of, and confederated with the
Six Nations, viz. the Cayugas, Oneidas, Tuscaroras, Tutaloes, Nanticokes and
Conoys.

A Road has been made from our Country to this Council Fire, that we might
treat about Friendship; and as we came down the Road, we saw, that by some
Misfortune or other, Blood has lately been spilt on it. By these Strings we
make the Road wider and clearer; we take the Blood away out of it, and likewise
out of the Council Chamber, which may have been stained; we wash it all away,
and desire it may not be seen any more; and we take the Hatchet out of your
Heads.

Gave three Strings.

Brethren, the Governors, and all the English,

I now confine myself to the Cayugas, my own Nation.

I will hide Nothing from you, because we have promised to speak to each other
from the Bottom of our Hearts.

The French, like a Thief in the Night, have stolen away some of our young Men,
and misled them; and they have been concerned in doing Mischief against our
Brethren the English.

We did not know it when it happened, but we discovered it since. The Chiefs of
our Nation held their young Men fast, and would not suffer them to go out of
their Sight; but the French came and stole them away from us, and corrupted
them to do Mischief: We are sorry for it; we ask Pardon for them, and hope you
will forgive them: We promise they shall do so no more: And now, by this Belt,
we take out of your Heads the Hatchet with which they struck you.

A Belt of Ten Rows.

He added, he had found out, That some of their young Men had been concerned in
striking the English four Times.

At a Conference with the Indians, held at EASTON, on the Thirteenth of
October, 1758.
PRESENT, Governor DENNY, Governor BERNARD. The same Gentlemen, Indians,
Interpreters, etc. As before.


As soon as the Indians had taken their Seats, Governor DENNY made the
following Speech;

Brethren, Chiefs and Warriors of the United Nations, and others, your Brethren
and Nephews, now met here,

AGREEABLE to your Request at our first Meeting, I now return you the Belt
which the young Seneca Indian brought me, with your Answer to the Invitation I
gave you, to come down to this Council Fire.

Here his Honor returned the Belt.

Brethren,

I invited you to come down to the Council Fire kindled at this Place by me and
your Nephew Teedyuscung, with a Design to lay before you Matters of the
greatest Consequence to you and us: I am now about to communicate them to you,
and to answer all that has been said by you to me, since our meeting together:
I therefore by this String open your Ears that you may hear clearly, and
carefully attend to what I shall say to you.

A String.

Brethren,

I must first put you in Mind, that perfect Peace and Friendship subsisted
between you and your Brethren the English in this Province, from our first
Settlement among you, and that whatever little Disputes happened between your
People and Ours, they were amicably settled and adjusted by our wise Men at our
Council Fires, according to an Agreement made by our first Proptietor, WILLIAM
PENN, and your Fathers. Had this wise Agreement been carefully observed, as it
always ought to have been, our late unhappy Differences had never arose. But
what is past cannot be recalled, and shall be forgotten. Let us both resolve
never to be guilty of the like Error for the Future.

A String.

Brethren,

You gave us Yesterday these two Belts, in Behalf of your Nephews the Delawares
and Minisinks, and joined with them in taking out of our Heads the Hatchets
with which we had been struck, acquainting us, that these Hatchets were given
to your Nephews by the French, and that they would not use them any more
against us, but were heartily disposed to cultivate a firm Friendship with us
for the Future.

Brethren,

We accept your Belts: We thank you for the Pains you have taken in enquiring
of your Nephews into the true Cause why they struck us.

Now, that the Hatchets are taken out of our Heads, and we are reconciled; we
desire, that your Nephews the Delawares and Minisinks, will conceal nothing
from you and us, that ever did, or now does, he heavy on their Minds, that the
Intent of this Meeting may be answered; which was with your Assistance, to put
Matters that have at any Time disturbed their Minds, on such a just and
reasonable Footing, that the Peace between us may never be interrupted, but
continue firm to the remotest Ages.

Two Belts.

Brethren,

By these Eight Strings of black Wampum, you, the Mohawks, Sonecas and
Onondagas, told us, that you had not only brought about an Union with the
Delawares and Minisinks, on the Waters of the River Sasquehannah, but had also
sent Messages to the Indians now on the Ohio, as well those of those two
Nations, as those of the Six Nations under the French Influence, desiring them
to lay down the Hatchet, and enter again into Friendship with their Brethren
the English; and on their Behalf, you have taken the Hatchets out of our Heads,
so far as to lay a Foundation for a future Peace.

Brethren, the Mohawks, Senecas and Onondagas,

This was a very friendly Part, and we flatter ourselves they will hearken to
you, as there are now Deputies here from those Indians on the Ohio, with
Messages to us, which will be delivered in Public.

We accept your Strings, and approve your taking the Hatchet, on the Behalf of
the Ohio Indians, out of our Heads, so far as to make it the Foundation of a
future Peace.

Nine Strings.

Brethren, the Cayugas, Oneidos, Tuscaroras, Tuteloes, Nanticokes or Conoys,
the younger Nations who are Parts of, and united with the Six Nations,

By these Strings you say, that as you came down the Road, which has been
opened from your Country to this Council Fire, you saw Blood lately spilt upon
it, and have washed it away, not only out of the Road, but out of the Council
Chamber, lest that should have been stained.

Brethren,

We join, by these Strings, with you, in removing the Blood, we bury it deep in
the Earth.

Three Strings.

Brothers, the Cayugas,

With this Belt you justly lament the Folly of your young Men, who have
suffered themselves to be stolen away from you by the French, and then at their
Instigation, to strike us. You take the Hatchets out of our Heads; you ask
Pardon for them, and desire we will forgive the Mischief they have done us, and
both you and they promise never to hurt us more."

Brethren,

We accept the Belt in their Behalf, and give you this Belt, in Token of our
Friendship and Reconciliation.

A Belt.

Brethren,

You may remember that the Day before Yesterday, your Nephew Teedyuscung, told
me by this String, Th^^ he had already said to me at our former Meetings every
Thing he had to say, and had made me acquainted with the Cause why he had
struck us, and that I knew what had passed between us. That we had made up all
Differences, and had done it as far as we could, for our future Peace.

That at my Request he had given the Halloo, and brought down to this Place,
you who heard him and are now present; and that he would sit by, and hear what
we said together,

Brethren,

As there are a great many of you here who were not present at our former
Meetings, I think it proper for your Information, to give you a short Account
of what has passed between your Nephews the Delawares and us.

About three Years ago, your Brethren the English living on the Borders of this
Province were struck on a Sudden, at a Time when they were in profound Peace
with you and following their Business suspecting no Danger: Many were killed,
and others carried away Captive.

We were surprised and did not know who struck us, but sent Messengers up the
Susquebannab, as far as the Country of the United Nations, to enquire whence
the Blow came and for what Reason.

On the Return of these Messengers, we were informed that the Hatchet had been
struck into our Heads by our Countrymen the Delawares and Shawanese.

Some Time after this Discovery was made, a Cessation of Hostilities was
brought about by the United Nations, at our Request made to them for that
Purpose by Sir William Johnson; and upon our Invitation, our Brother
Teedyuscung came down with a Number of Delawares and other Indians to a Council
Fire kindled at this Place, where we have since had several Meetings.

At one of these Meetings Teedyuscung told us that the Cause of the War was,
that their foolish young Men had been persuaded by the false-hearted French
King, to strike their Brethren the English; and one Reason why the Blow came
harder was that the Proprietors of this Province had taken from them by Fraud,
the Ground we now stand on, and all the Lands lying between Tobiccon Creek and
Wyomink, on the River Susquebannab.

At last all Blood was wiped away and buried under Ground; and Peace Belts were
exchanged between us and our Brother Teedyuscung, who then told us, he acted in
Behalf of ten Nations, and promised to bring in and restore to us all our
fellow Subjects that had been carried off Prisoners by them. For the Truth of
this short Relation I refer you to our Brother Teedyuscung, who will confirm it
to you more particularly.

A Belt.

Brethren,

To continue our Friendship it is absolutely necessary to preserve Faith and
keep the Promises we make with each other. I will speak plainly to you and from
the Bottom of my Heart, as one Friend ought to another, that Nothing may lie
heavy on my Mind to disturb me hereafter; and I expect the same Openness and
Freedom on your Parts.

I desire therefore to know the true Reason, why our Flesh and Blood who are in
Captivity and in your Power have not been delivered to us, according to the
Promise made us by our Brother Teedyuscung, in Behalf of all the Indians he
represented; and what is become of those Belts we gave him to confirm the
Peace, and that Promise. For till that Promise is complied with, we can never
sleep in Quiet or rest satisfied in the Friendship of those who detain our
Children and Relations from us.

A Belt.

After the Governor had done speaking, the United Nations, being eight in all,
gave the usual Cry of Approbation with great Solemnity, each Chief according to
his Rank, crying Yoban; which was answered by all the Indians present, in a
solemn, musical and unisonal Tone.

Then Goveror BERNARD delivered the Belts requested by the Senecas, Cayugas and
Minisinks, and spoke as follows;

Brethren,

The Governor of Pennsylvania has given a particular Answer to what has been
said to us both. So far as his Answer relates to the Province over which I
preside, I confirm what has been said by this Belt.

A Belt.

Previous to what follows, it is necessary to observe, that Pisquetomen and
another Ohio Indian having come to Philadelphia last Summer, acquainted the
Governor, that the Indians in those Parts had not received any Account of the
late Transactions with this Government nor any Message from it; nor had any
Thing been done that they might be persuaded to lay down the Hatchet. The
Governor therefore took that Opportunity to send a friendly Message to those
Indians by Pisquetomen, and appointed Mr. Frederick Post, a German, who
understood the Delaware Language, to attend him and acquaint the Indians at
Ohio, of the Peace made by the Susquebannab, Delawares and other Indians, and
the Disposition of this Government to forgive what was past, if they would
return to their ancient Alliance. This Message was accordingly delivered, and
an Answer returned by Frederick Post, Pisquetomen, and Thomas Hickman, an Ohio
Indian, who having come down together as far as Harriss's Ferty, Frederick Post
went to wait on General Forbes, and left the two Indians to proceed with the
Message; who being now arrived at Easton, Pisquetomen, who had the particular
Charge of it, introduced it as follows.

BRETHREN,

WHEN I was at Allegbeny, the Chief Men sat together as we do here now. I was
employed by the Governor, Teedyuscung and Israel Pemberton, these three Men,
pointing to them: And the Chief Men told me, that when I should come among the
English Inhabitants, I must shake Hands for them with the Governor, Teedyuscung
and Israel Pemberton; [Here he shook Hands with them] and that what they had to
say, was written down in a Paper, which he then produced, and said they desired
it might be read in Public. Now, you Gentlemen, who are Head Men, sent
Frederick Post with me, desiring me to take and carry him in my Bosom there,
and when I came there, to introduce him to the public Council. I did this, and
have brought him back sat to you again.

Then taking a Belt and three Strings of Wampum, which were delivered with the
Paper, he said, he would interpret them; but as all that was said was truly set
down in the Writing, it was not necessary. Let it be read. Then Pisquetomen
delivered the Paper, with the Belt and three Strings of Wampum; and, on being
asked afterward to whom they were sent, answered, one was sent to the
Governor, another to Teedyuscung, and another to Israel Pemberton.

The Message was read in these Words.

The Indians speak now.

Brethren, Hear what I have to say.

Brethren, It is a good many Days since we have seen and heard of you from all
Sorts of Nations.

Brethren, This is the first Message which we have seen and heard of you; we
have not yet rightly heard of you.

Brethren, You have talked of that Peace and Friendship which we had formerly
with you.

Brethren, We tell you to be strong, and always remember that Friendship which
we had formerly.

Brethren, We desire you would be strong, and let us once more hear of that
good Friendship and Peace we had formerly.

Brethren, We desire you to make haste, and let us soon hear of you again.

Gave a String.

Brethren, Hear what I have to say; look Brethren, since we have seen and heard
of you, of all Sorts of Nations, we see that you are forty that we have not
that Friendship we formerly had.

Look Brethren, We at Allegbeny are likewise sorry that we have not that
Friendship with you we formerly had.

Brethren, We long for that Peace and Friendship we had formerly*

Brethren, It is good that you have held that Friendship, which we had formerly
amongst our Fathers and Grandfathers,

Brethren,

We must tell you, we will not let that Friendship quite drop which was
formerly between us. Now Brethren, it is Three Years since we dropped that Peace
and Friendship which we formerly had with you. Now Brethren, that Friendship is
dropped and lies buried in the Ground where you and I stand, in the Middle
between us both. Now Brethren since I see you have dug up and revived that
Friendship which was buried in the Ground, now you have it, hold it fast. Do be
strong, Brethren, and exert yourselves, that that Friendship may be well
estabilshed between us.

Brethren, If you will be strong, it is in your Power to finish that Peace and
Freindship well. Now Brethren, we desire you to be strong, and establish and
make known to all the English this Peace and Freindship, that it over all may
be well established, as you are of one Color and one Nation in all the English
Governments.

Brethren, When you have made this Peace, which you have begun, known every
where amongst your Brethren, and have finished and agreed every where together
on this Peace and Friendship, then you will be pleased to send it to me at
Allegheny.

Brethren, When you have settled the Peace and Friendship and sent it to me, I
will send it to all the Nations of my Color, when I receive of you the Answer,
and have looked that every thing is well done, so that I can send it, and to
all the Nations of my Color; They will all join to it, and we all will hold it
fast.

Brethren, When all the Nations join in this Friendship, then the Day will
begin to shine clear over us. When we once more hear of you and we join
together, then the Day will be still and no Wind or Storm will come over us to
disturb us.

Now Brethren, you know our Hearts, and what we have told you in this, all the
Nations agree to join and what we have to say: Be strong; if you do so, every
Thing will be well, and what we have told you in this, all the Nations agree to
join.

Now, Brethren, let the King of England know what our Minds is, as soon as
possibly you can.

Gave a Belt of Eight Rows.

Received the above Speech from the Underwritten, who are are all Captains and
Counselors, viz.

Beaver King. Shingas, Delaware George, Pisquetomen, Tassacomin, Owahanomin,
Cockquacaukeheton, Cushawmehwy. Kekeknapalin, Captain Peter, Alacomals Popauco.
Washaocauta^t, John Hickoman. Kill Buck.
The above are all Captains and Counselors.

After this was interpreted in the Six Nation and Delaware Languagues, the
three Strings were delivered to the Governor, Teedyuscung and Israel Pemberton.

As the Governor was going to close the Conference, Nichas the Mohawk Chief
spoke for some time with great Vehemence, pointing frequently to Teedyuscung;
and Mr. Weiser was asked to interpret it; but he desired to be excused, as it
was purely relating to the Indians themselves, and desired Mr. Montour might
interpret it: After some Pause, he said, perhaps it might be better if it was
interpreted to the Governors, Councils and Commissioners, in a private
Conference; And Mr. Weiser was desired to mention this to the Indians, and know
of them, what they would choose should be done, whether it should be interpreted
now or at a private Conference; and they answered now. But soon after, they
said, that, at the Request of Mr. Weiser, they consented that it should be
interpreted in the Morning at a private Conference.

14th October, 1758.
The Indians declined Meeting Today.

At a private Conference on the 15th of October, 1758.
PRESENT, Governor DENNY, His Council, and the Committee of Assembly. Governor
BERNARD, and the Jersey Commissioners. The Chiefs of the Mohawks, Senacas, and
Onondagas, and the Chiefs of the Oneidos, Cayugas. Tuscaroras, Nanticokes and
Conoys, and Tuteloes. With the Interpreters, etc.


Nichas, the Mohawk Chief, stood up, and directing his Discourses to both
Governors, said;

Brethren,

WE thought proper to meet you here to have some private Discourse about our
Nephew Teedyuscung.

You all know, that he gives out, he is the Great Man and Chief of Ten Nations:
This is his constant Discourse. Now I, on Behalf of the Mohawks, say, we do not
know he is such a great Man. If he is such a great Man, we desire to know who
has made him so. Perhaps you have; and if this be the Case, tell us so. It may
be the French have made him so. We want to enquire and know whence his
Greatness arose,

Tagashata, on the Behalf of the Senecas, spoke next.

Brethren,

I, for my Nation, say the same that Nichas has said; I need not repeat it. I
say we do not know who has made Teedyuscung this Great Man over ten Nations;
and I want to know who made him so.

Assarandungas spoke next on Behalf of the Onondagas.

Brethren,

I am here to represent the Onondagas, and I say for them, that I never heard
before now, that Teedyuscung was such a Great Man, much less can I tell who
made him so. No such Thing was ever said in our Towns, as that Teedyuscung was
such a Great Man.

Thomas King spoke,

Brethren, The Governors and all present.

Take notice that I speak in Behalf of five Nations, who have their Deputies
here present, viz. The Oneidos, Cayugas, Tuscaroras, Nanticokes and Conoys, who
have joined together and now make one Nation, and Tuteloes. We five are all
connected together, and if any Thing is said to one of us, it is communicated
to all the rest.

On their Behalf I now tell you, we none of us know who has made Teedyuscung
such a great Man. Perhaps the French have, or perhaps you have, or some among
you, as you have different Governments, and are different People. We for our
Parts entirely disown that he has any Authority over us, and desire to know,
from whence he derives his Authority

A Belt.

Toka aio, the Cayuga Chief, spoke,

Brethren,

I speak to you, on Behalf of the Nations just now mentioned. You may remember,
that you said the other Day, you could not be easy without your Prisoners were
returned. We have considered this, and I now assure you, that they shall be
returned.

We speak from the Bottom of our Hearts; we will look carefully into all our
Towns for them: You shall have them all; we will keep none. If there be any of
them that have gone down our Throats, we will throw them up again. You told us
a tender Father, Husband, Wise, Brother or Sister, could not sleep found, when
they reflected that their Relations were Prisoners. We know it is so with us,
and we will therefore use our Endeavors to make your Hearts easy, and we give
you this Belt, as a Promise that we will perform our Words.

A Belt.

Nichas spoke next in Behalf of the Mohawks, Senecas and Onondagas.

Brethren,

I speak now in Behalf of my own Nation, and my two other Brethren, Deputies of
the Senecas and Onondagas. We remember you desired us to leave Nothing in our
Hearts, but speak open on every Matter, and you said you would do the same to
us.

You told us that you could not sleep found whilst your Prisoners were detained
from you, nor could you have any Confidence in the Friendship of those who did
detain them.

We of these Three Nations promise, that we will use our best Endeavors to
make you easy. When we return, we will enquire of every Town for the Prisoners.
We will call our Councils, and lay what you have said before them, and make
diligent Enquiry for them through all our Towns, and all that we can find you
shall see.

If any of them are gone down our Throats, we will heave them up again.

A String of Seven Rows.

Then Nichas, in the Behalf of the Three elder Nations, and Thomas King, on the
Behalf of the five younger Nations, gave the Yoban; which was returned by
Conrad Weiser twice on the Behalf of the Governors.

At a Conference with the Indians, on the 16th of October, 1758.
PRESENT, The Governors and Gentlemen of their Council, and c.

The Minutes of the preceding Conference were read, and approved.

Those of Yesterday's private Conference were read at the particular Desire of
the Chiefs of the united Nations, and interpreted to Teedyuscung and the
Delawares, by Mr. Stephen Calvin.

The Governors then spoke separately; Governor DENNY beginning as follows:
Brethren, the Mohawks, Onondagas, Senecas, Oneidas, Cayugas, Tuscaroras,
Naticokes and Tuteloes;

IN a Conference held with you Yesterday, you told me, that we know your Nephew
Teedyuscung gives out, that he is the great Man, and Chief of Ten Nations, and
that this was his constant Discourse; by this Belt therefore you denied him to
be so great a Man, and desired to know of me who made him so, or gave him any
Authority over you.

Brethren,

I will answer you truly, and tell you in a few Words, all that I know of the
Matter; I have already informed you, that after the Delawares had struck us,
you, our good Friends, the United Nations, advised them to sit still and do us
no more Mischief; and that soon after this, we invited the Delawares to meet us
at a Council Fire kindled at this Place.

We received an Answer to our Message from Teedyuscung, as a Chief among the
Delawares: At the Time appointed he came and told us that he represented ten
Nations, amongst which the United Nations were included; that he acted as a
Chief Man for the Delawares, but only as a Messenger from the United Nations,
who were his Uncles and Superiors, to whom he would faithfully carry every
Thing that should be transacted between us, that they might do as they saw
Cause.

We believed what your Nephew told us; and therefore made him a Counselor and
Agent for us, and desired him to publish to all Nations of Indians what we did
at our Council Fires, and to let them know we were sincerely disposed to be at
Peace with them.

Brethren,

I can only speak for myself, and do assure you, that I never made Teedyuscung
this Great Man, nor ever pretended to give him any Authority over you; and I
must do him the Justice to declare to you, that at our former public Treaties,
Teedyuscung never assumed any such Power, but on many Occasions, when he spoke
of you, called you his Uncles and Superiors.

I never shall attempt to nominate or impose a Chief on any Indian Tribe or
Nation, but, on all Occasions, will pay due Regard to those who are chosen by
their Countrymen.

If any others have made Teedyuscung so great a Man, as to set himself above
you, I am sorry for it. It is more than I know; and they who have done it, must
answer for themselves.

I should be greatly concerned, that any Uneasiness shoud arise among you; and
hope you will guard against it, and preserve that Harmony which ought to
subsist between Friends and Relations.

Brethren,

By this Belt and String, you promised me, to make diligent Search in your
Towns for our Flesh and Blood, who are Prisoners among you, and return them to
us.

Brethren,

We have always found you honest and punctual in the Performance of your
Promises; your Words therefore give me great Comfort, and fill all our Hearts
with Pleasure. We rely upon you, that no Time may be lost in fulfilling an
Engagement on which our Peace and Quiet so greatly depend.

A Belt and String.

Then Governor BERNARD spoke,

Brethren of all the confederated Nations,

AS you proposed your Questions concerning Teedyuscung separately, I think it
proper to give you a separate Answer thereto.

I know not who made Teedyuscung so great a Man; nor do I know that he is any
greater than a Chief of the Delaware Indians settled at Wyomink. The Title of
King could not be given him by an English Governor; for we know very well, that
there is no such Person among Indians, as what we call a King. And if we call
him so we mean no more than a Sachem, or Chief. I observe in his Treaties which
he has held with the Governor of Pennsylvania, [which I have perused since our
last Meeting] that he says he was a Woman, till you made him a Man, by putting
a Tomhawk in his Hand; and through all of those Treaties, especially in the last,
held at this Town, he calls you his Uncles, and professes that he is dependent
on you; and I know not that any Thing has since happened to alter his Relation
to you. I therefore consider him to be still your Nephew.

Brethren,

I am obliged to you for your kind Promises to return the Captives which have
been taken from us. I hope you will not only do so, but will also engage such
of your Allies and Nephews, as have taken Captives from us, to do the same.
That you may be mindful of this, I give you this Belt.

A Belt.

After the Governor had done speaking, and their Answers were interpreted in
the United Nations and Delaware Languages, the Indian Chiefs were asked if they
had any Thing more to say. On which Tagashata arose, and made a Speech to his
Cousins the Delaware and Minisink Indians, directing his Discourse to
Teedyuscung.

Nephews,

YOU may remember all that passed at this Council Fire. The Governors who sit
there have put you in Mind of what was agreed upon last Year: You both promised
to return the Prisoners. We your Uncles, put you in Mind of this Promise, and
desire you will perform it: You have promised it, and must perform it. We your
Uncles, have promised to return all the English Prisoners among us, and
therefore we expect that you our Cousins and Nephews will do the same. As soon
as you come home, we desire that you will search carefully in your Towns for
all the Prisoners among you that have been taken out of every Province, and
cause them to be delivered up to your Brethren. You know that this is an
Article of this Peace that was made between you and your Brethren: In
Confirmation of which you received a large Peace Belt; of which Belt we desire
you will give an Account, and let us know what is become of it, and how far you
have proceeded in it.

A Belt.

After this was interpreted in the Delaware Language, it was observed, that
there were no Minisink Indians present; the Governors therefore desired, that
Mr. Peter's and Mr. Read would procure a Meeting of the Chiefs of the United
Nations, Delawares and Minisinks, and cause the Speech of Tagashata to be
interpreted to the Minisinks in the Presence of their Uncles.

Robert White, the Nanticoke Chief, arose and said, he was going to speak in
Behalf of Seven Nations, and directing his Discourse to the Governors, he
delivered himself in the English Language as follows,

Brethren,

It is now more than two Years since we heard of our Cousins the Delawares
taking up the Hatchet against the English. At the first, Sir William Johnson
sent a Message to the Head Nations, and when they received it, they sent to us
at Otsaningo; telling us, that as we lived close by our Cousins, they desired
we would invite them to meet at our Town, and accordingly we invited them, and
they came to a great Meeting at our Town of Otsaningo. We then gave our Cousins
a Belt of a Fathom long, and Twenty-five Rows in Breadth, and desired them to
lay down the Hatchet that they had taken up against the English, and to be easy
with them: And if they would follow this Advice, we told them, that they would
live in Peace, until their Heads were white with Age; otherwise, it might not
be so with them.

Not hearing from our Cousins for some Time, what they did in Consequence of
this Belt, we sent to them two other Belts, one of Sixteen and the other of
Twelve Rows, desiring them once more to be easy with their Brethren the
English, and not to strike them any more: But still we heard nothing from them:
Indeed some Time afterward we understood the Delawares should say, that the
Indians at Otsaningo had gray Eyes, and were like the English, and should be
served as Englishm^^; and we thought we should have had the Hatchet struck into
our Heads. We now want to know what is become of these Belts: May be they may
be under Ground, or they have swallowed them down their Throats.

Brethren,

As our Cousins have been loath to give any Answer to these Belts, we now
desire they may let us know, in public Conference, what they have done with
them.

A String.

17th October, 1758.
The Indians were in Council all Day; and acquainted the Governors, that they
could not be ready to meet before Morning.

At a Conference held at Easton the 18 th October, 1758.
PRESENT. The Governors, Council, Gentlemen and Indians, with the Interpreters:
As aforesaid.

MR. Peter's and Mr. Read acquainted the Governors, That at a Meeting of the
Chiefs of the older and younger Nations, with the several Tribes of the
Delaware and Minisink Indians, on Monday Night, the Speech of Tagashata,
delivered that Morning in the public Conference, respecting the giving up the
Prisoners, was interpreted in the Delaware Language by Stephen Calvin; and
another Belt, on the Part of the Governors, being joined to Tagashata's Belt,
they were both delivered to the Delaware and Minisink Chiefs, to enforce the
subject Matter. When this was done, Tagashata spoke to the Minisink Chief
Egotchowen, saying, we were told by you, that you had delivered up the English
Prisoners, and we believed you; but our Brethren have told us, that they were
not delivered up, and therefore we earnestly desire that they may be made easy
on this Article. You know; Cousins, that their Hearts will always be in Grief,
till they see again their Flesh and Blood: It is natural that they should be
so: It would be so with us, if it was our Case. We desire you will be extremely
careful to perform this Matter fully and soon. Let there be perfect Peace over
all the English Country. And let it now be published, that we may all live in
Peace, and with Satisfaction, now and for ever. I told you, Egotchowen, when
you was in my Town, to bring with you the English Prisoners, and that our
Brethren would expect it. I wish you had done it. But however, do it now with
all Speed, and it will be well.

That Egotchowen answered, It is true, I was at my Uncles Fire, and I believe
he desired me to bring the Prisoners down; but I suppose it was not interpreted
to me; for I did not understand it clearly; but I now understand it.

That the Minisink and Delaware Indians were desired to collect all their
Warriors together, and give them their Belts, and receive from them their
Answer, it being necessary they should concur heartily in whatever should be
concluded.

Then Nichas, the Mohawk Chief acquainted the Governors, That, as Counselors,
they had finished, having Nothing to propose at this present Meeting. The
Warriors were to speak now, and Thomas King was appointed to deliver their
Words; who thereupon arose, and began with an Exhortation as well to all
concerned in public Affairs, Governors and their Councils, and Indian Chiefs
and their Councils as to the Warriors of all Nations, White People and Indians,
desiring all present to attend carefully to what was going to be related, as
Matters of great Consequence, which would serve to regulate the Conduct of the
English and Indians to each other. He added, that the Relation going to be made
had taken a great deal of Trouble to put it into Order, and it was made on
Information given by the several Indians now present, who were acquainted with
the Facts.

Brethren,

WE the Warriors have waited some Time, in Hopes our Counselors would have
taken this Matter in Hand; but as they have not done it, we have, at their
Desire, undertaken it, and they have approved of every Thing. I say, the
Counselors of the five younger Nations, as well as the three older Nations,
have approved of what the Warriors are going to relate; and take Notice that
the Speech is not only the Speech of all the Warriors of the elder and younger
Nations, but of our Cousins the Delawares and Minisinks.

This was interpreted in the Delaware Language; and Thomas King then proceeded,
directing his Speech to the Governors, and all the English upon the Continent.

Brethren,

YOU have been inquisitive to know the Cause of this War; You have often
enquired among us, but perhaps you did not find out the true Cause of the
Bitterness of our Hearts, and may charge us wrongfully, and think that you were
struck without a Cause, by some of our own Warriors, and by our Cousins. But if
you look a little about you, you will find, that you gave the first Offense.
For in Time of profound Peace, some of the Shawanese, passing through
South Carolina to go to War with their Enemies, were taken up and put into
Prison. The English knew they were going to War, and that they used to do it
every Year: And yet, after they had persuaded them in a friendly Way into their
Houses, they were taken up, and put into Prison; and one who was a head Man of
that Nation lost his Life, and the others were severely used. This first raised
Ill Will in the Minds of the Shawanese, and as the French came a little after
this happened to settle on the Ohio, the Shawanese complained of it to them,
and they made an artful Use of it, set them against the English, and gave them
the Hatchet. Being resolved on Revenge, they accepted it, and likewise spoke to
their Grandfathers the Delawares, saying, Grandfathers, are not your Hearts
sore at our being used so ill, and at the Loss of one of our Chiefs? Will not
you join us in revenging his Death? So by Degrees our young Men were brought
over to act against you. On searching Matters to the Bottom, you will find,
that you in this Manner, gave the first Offense. This we thought proper to let
you know: It may be of Service for the future. You may be induced by this, to
take better Care in conducting your Council-Business, so as to guard against
these Breaches of Friendship, or as soon as they happen, in corresponding
immediately with one another, and with the Indian Nations, who are in any wise
concerned on such Occasion.

Eight Strings of black Wampum.

Brethren,

This was the Case of the Shawanese that I have just now related. Another of
the like Nature has since happened to the Senecas, who have suffered in the
same Manner.

About Three Years ago, eight Seneca Warriors were returning from War through
Virginia, having seven Prisoners and Scalps with them. At a Place called Green
Briar, they met with a Party of Soldiers, not less than one Hundred and Fifty,
who kindly invited them to come to a certain Store, and said they would supply
them with Provisions: And accordingly they traveled two Days with them, in a
friendly Manner; and when they came to the House, they took their Arms from the
Senecas: The head Man cried out, Here is Death, defend yourselves as well as
you can;?? which they did, and Two of them were killed on the Spot; and one, a
young Boy, was taken Prisoner. This gave great Offense, and the more so, as it
was upon their Warriors Road, and we were in perfect Peace with our Brethren.
It provoked us to such a Degree that we could not get over it.

Brethren,

You have justly demanded your Prisoners; it is right; and we have given you an
Answer: And therefore, as we think this young Boy is alive, and somewhere among
you, we desire you will enquire for him. If he be alive, return him; if you
have swallowed him down your Throats, which perhaps may be the Case, let us
know it, and we will be content. His Name is Squissatego.

Six Strings of white Wampum.

Brethren,

We have one Word more to mention of the same Nature, and which was the very
Cause why the Indians at Ohio left you.

Brethren,

When we first heard of the French coming to Ohio, we immediately sent Word to
the Governors of Virginia and Pennsylvania; we desired them to come, and
likewise to supply us with such Things as were proper for War, intending to
defend our Lands, and hinder the French from taking the Possession of them: But
these Governors did not attend to our Message; perhaps they thought there was
no Foundation for our Intelligence. The French, however came, and become our
Neighbors; and you neither coming yourselves, nor assisting us with warlike
Stores, our People of Necessity were obliged to trade with them for what we
wanted, as your Traders had left the Country. The Governor of Virginia took
Care to settle on our Lands for his own Benefit; but when we wanted his
Assistance against the French, he disregarded us.

A Belt.

Brethren,

At this Treaty you justly demanded to see your Flesh and Blood. We have
pressed this on our Cousins the Minisinks; and they by this String, desired us
to assure you, the Governors, that they would make strict Search in their
Towns, and sincerely comply with your Request, and return all the Prisoners in
their Power.

Two Strings of black and white Wampum.

Then directing his Discourse to the Governor of Jersey, he proceeded,

Brother, the Governor of Jersey.

Our Cousins the Minisinks, tell us, they were wronged out of a great deal of
Land, and the English settling so fast, they were pushed back, and could not
tell what Lands belonged to them. They say, if we have been drunk, tell us so:
We may have forgot what we sold; but we trust to you, the Governor of Jersey,
to take our Cause in Hand, and see that we have Justice done us. We say, that
we have here and there Tracts of Land, that have never been sold. You deal
hardly with us; you claim all the wild Creatures, and will not let us come on
your Land to hunt after them. You will not so much as let us peel a single
Tree: This is hard, and has given us great Offense. The Cattle you raise are
your own, but those which are wild, are still ours, or should be common to
both; for when we sold the Land, we did not propose to deprive ourselves of
hunting the wild Deer, or using a Stick of Wood when we should have Occasion.
We desire the Governor to take this Matter into his Care, and see that Justice
be done in it.

Two Strings of white Wampum.

Brethren,

All that has been said has been of one Nature, that is of Matters that are
Subjects of Dispute; this that I am now going to speak upon, is of another
Nature.

Then directing himself to the Governor of Pennsylvania, he said:

We must put you in Mind, that four Years ago, you bought at Albany, a large
Tract of Land over Susquehannah, extending from the Mouth of John Penn's Creek
to the Ohio: The Proprietors Agents then paid One Thousand Pieces of Eight for
that Part which was settled by your People, that have been since driven off and
killed. We acknowledge to have received Payment for those Parts that were
settled: But for the other Part that we have not received Payment for, that we
reclaim. Our Warriors and Hunters, when they heard that we had sold such a
large Tract, disapproved our Conduct in Council; so now we acquaint you, that
we are determined not to confirm any more than such of the Lands as the
Consideration was paid for, and were then settled, though the others were
included in the Deed; they are our hunting Grounds, and we desire this Request
may be granted, and Notice taken, that it was made in open Conference.

Three white Strings.

Then Thomas King sat down.

The Confederate Chiefs, being asked if they had any Thing to say, answered,
That they had done; and having eased their Minds of all that lay heavy upon
them, they would return Home.

The Governors promised attentively to consider what was said, and give them an
Answer.

Teedyuscung then arose and spoke.

Brethren,

I SHOULD have said something at the Time our Uncles laid before you their
Grievances, or Causes of Complaint, in Behalf of my Countrymen, who lived near
Goshen. About three Years ago, nine of their People were killed at Goshen, when
they were in Peace. I will not take upon me to say, that the Land had never
been sold; but there was no Dispute about this at that Time: I verily believe,
that they killed those nine Indians for no other Reason, than because they were
hunting on that Land. I speak to all the English, when I mention this, as what
was very wrong.

Three white Strings.

Brethren,

One of the Waping Tribes, or Goshen Indians, tells me, that, as soon as those
nine Men were killed, he went with Three Belts and Tears in his Eyes, to George
Vreeland, in order to have the Matter made up: But he never received any Answer
to this Day, though he told him, he would send the Belts to the Governor; and
as soon as he should receive his Answer, he would send for him, and let him
know. But he had never yet received any Answer.

Brethren,

I give you this String, to enquire what became of the three Belts, and what
Answer was made to them.

Three Strings of white Wampum.

Brethren,

You may remember we made Peace last Year, and a Peace Belt was made a Fathom
long, and of Fifteen Rows; Mr. Croghan was present, so were some of my Uncles,
and the Minisinks; they all saw it. You have asked me, what is become of that
Belt, and how far it went. I will tell you: I sent it up the Susquebannah to
Diabogo; from thence it went to Assintzin; thence to Secaughkung. The chief Men
there got together, to consider what was best to be done with it: They all
concluded, that it should be sent to our Uncle: He is a Man, and often told us,
he ought to see Things first, and consider what is to be done. The Senecas had
the Belt first; and then all the United Nations afterward; they had it almost
a Year. Now it is come back, and is in Lapachpeton's Hand, who is one of the
Delawares, and lives at Secaughkung. How far the Peace Belt went, I don't know;
but I suppose it went through all my Uncles: And I assure you, I will do as my
Uncle does. He has promised you, he will deliver up all your Captives; and I
assure you, I will do so, wheresoever I find them, in all my Towns. Four
Tribes, now present, have agreed to this, viz. The Delawares, Unamies,
Mohiccons and Wapings, who are settled as far as Secaughkung, This Belt
confirms my Words.

A Belt.

Brother, the Governor of Pennsylvania,

I did let you know formerly what my Grievance was. I told you, that from
Tobiccon as far as the Delawares owned, the Proprietors had wronged me. Then
you and I agreed, that it should be laid before the King of England: For you
said he was our Father, and he should see what were our Differences; for, as
you and I could not decide it, he should do it. Let us not alter what you and I
have agreed: And now, let me know, if King GEORGE has decided the Matter
between you and me. I don't pretend to mention any of my Uncles Lands, I only
mention what we, the Delawares, own as far as the Heads of Delaware. All the
Lands lying on the Waters that fall into the Susquebannah belong to our Uncles.

A Belt.

Teedyuscung then took up another Belt, designing to speak to his Uncles the
United Nations, but whilst he was delivering the above, their Chiefs had one
after another left the Council, seeming much displeased: He therefore declined
speaking it.

On the 19th October, 1758.
The Governors being ready to give their Answers, desired the Indians to meet;
but they continued holding private Councils among themselves all that Day, till
late in the Afternoon: And, as the Governors were going to the Place of
Conference, the Indians sent Mr. Weiser out of Council, to desire they would
defer meeting till the next Morning, their own private Business not being
finished.

On the same Day. At a private Conference with the Indians, held at EASTON.
PRESENT, His Excellency Governor BERNARD. The Commissioners of New Jersey. The
Chiefs of the United Nations, and of the Minisinks and Wapings. GEORGE CROGAN,
Esquire Captain HENRY MONTOUR, and STEPHEN CALVIN.


His Excellency reciting the Request of the United Nations to him, to do
Justice to their Nephews the Minisinks, concerning their Claim to Lands in
New Jersey, said, he would make diligent Enquiry, what Lands were remaining
unsold by them: But as that would be a Work of Time and Expense, he wished that
some Means could be found to give them Satisfaction at this Meeting. The People
of New Jersey said, they had bought all, or the greatest Part of the Minisink
Lands; and the Minisinks said they had a great deal of Land unsold. He could
not tell who was in the Right; but would suppose there were some Lands unsold:
And upon that Supposition would give them some Money, by way of Consideration
for them, if they would propose a reasonable Sum; and desired they would advise
about it, and give an Answer.

The United Nations said, it was a very kind Proposal, and recommended it to
the Confideration of the Minisinks.

At a Conference with the Indians, held at EASTON, on the 20th of October, 1758.
PRESENT, The Governor, Councils, Gentlemen and Indians, with the Interpreters,
as before.

Governor DENNY, desired to know of Teedyuscung, if he proposed to speak, as
the abrupt Departure of the Chiefs of the United Nations, from the last public
Conference, had prevented him from finishing what he had to say.

Then Teedyuscung arose, and addressing himself to the United Nations, said,

Uncles,

ACCORDING to our old Custom, we used to speak to one another at Home: But as
we are now met here on Business, I must speak to you in the Presence of the
English Governors; and what I shall say, I desire both you, the English, and my
Uncles who are here, will attend to.

A Belt.

Uncles,

I take this Opportunity of speaking to you, in the Presence of our Brethren
the English, and two of their Governors: Please to take Notice of what I am
going to say.

Uncles,

You may remember, that you have placed us at Wiomink and Shamokin, Places
where Indians have lived before. Now I hear since, that you have sod that Land
to our Brethren the English: Let the Matter now be cleared up, in the Presence
of our Brethren the English.

I sit there as a Bird on a Bough; I look about, and do not know when to go.
Let me therefore come down upon the Ground; and make that my own, by a good
Deed; and I shall then have a Home for ever. For if you my Uncles, or I die,
our Brethren the English may say, that they have bought it from you; and so
they may wrong my Posterity of it.

A Belt.

Governor DENNY then requested the Attention of the Indians; and spoke,

Brethren, Chiefs and Warriors of the United Nations, and your Nephews here
assembled.

I Am much obliged to you for the Account you, gave me the Day before
Yesterday, of the true Cause of the Bitterness of your Hearts toward us, and
the Reasons which induced some of your young Men first to strike us, and others
to side with the French on the Ohio.

The Advice you give us, to take better Care and guard against any Breach of
Friendship between us for the future, is very kind and wholesome: We will join
with you, and endeavor to prevent the like Evils for the Time to come.

I promise you, that I will, immediately, send to the Governor of Virginia, to
enquire after the Seneca Boy Squissatego, who you say was left a Prisoner in
his Country; and if he is alive, you may depend on his being returned to you.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By these Strings, you put me in Mind, that the Proprietors, four Years ago
bought of you at Albany, a large Tract of Land over Susquebannah, from the
Mouth of a Creek called Kayarondinbagh, or John Penn's Creek, to the Ohio, and
were paid by the Proprietor's Agents, One Thousand Pieces of Eight, as the
Consideration Money, for such Parts as were settled by our People; but that, as
your Warriors disapproved of your Conduct in Council, for making that Sale, you
now reclaimed such of the Lands contained in that Grant, as you have not
received a Consideration for.

Brethren,

The Proprietors of this Province, have on all Occasions manifested their
particular Regard for you: They prefer your Friendship and the public Good to
their own private Interest. Their former Conduct gives you no Room to doubt the
Truth of this; what I am about to tell you is a further Confirmation of it:
therefore give me your Attention, and listen to what I shall say. You may
remember, that, at a Treaty you held with your good Friend Sir William Johnson,
three Years ago, some of your wise Men told him, that there were some among
them who were dissatisfied with the Sale of the above Lands, made by them at
Albany, and were desirous that Part of it should be reserved for them; though the
Proprietors had purchased it fairly of them, and paid One Thousand Pieces of
Eight; which was all they were to receive, till our People settled to the
Westward of the Allegheny, or Apalachian Hills. Sir William Johnson represented
this Matter to the Proprietors, in your Behalf: Whereupon they cheerfully
agreed to release to you all that Part of the Purchase you have reclaimed, and
by a Letter of Attorney, empowered Richard Peter's and Conrad Weiser, to execute
a Deed to you for those Lands, on your confirming to them the Residue of that
Purchase. On this Subject therefore you will please to confer with them, and
settle the Boundaries between you, that they may release the Lands to you
accordingly, before you leave this Place, and set your Minds at Ease.

A String.

Brethren,

I thank you for the Pains you have taken with your Nephews, to prevail with
them, to return us such of our Brethren as are Prisoners among them; and we
depend on the speedy Performance of their Promise.

Brethren,

I have something to say to you, which is of the utmost Importance to us all;
it requires your particular Attention and Consideration. Providence has brought
you and your Nephews together at this Meeting, Face to Face with us, that every
Thing may be settled, and nothing remain, not so much as a Doubt, to create any
Uneasiness in our Hearts hereafter. You know, Brethren, that there is an old
Agreement between the Proprietors and you, that you will not sell any of the
Lands lying within this Province to any one but them; and they never take
Possession of Lands till they have bought them of the Indians. You know also,
that the United Nations have sold Lands to the Proprietors, which your Nephews
the Delawares now claim as their Right. This is the Case with regard to some
Part of the Lands lying between Tobiccon Creek and the Head of Delaware River,
which Teedyuscung, it your Hearing the Day before Yesterday, said the
Proprietors had defrauded him of. The Proprietors are desirous to do strict
Justice to all the Indians; but it cannot be supposed they can know in which of
you the Right was vested. It is a Matter that must be settled among yourselves;
till this is done, there will probably remain some Jealously and Discontent
among you, that may interrupt both your and our future Quiet, which we should
guard against by all Means in our Power.

A String.

Brethren,

I now acquaint you, that a Store of all forts of Goods fit for your Use is
opened at Shamokin, where the Indians may be supplied at the most reasonable
Rates, with any Goods they want; and the best Prices will be given to you for
such Skins, Furrs and Peltry as you shall bring. Another Store is intended to
be opened at Fort Allen; and you may depend upon it, that such Persons will be
placed there, as shall use you with the strictest Justice in all their Dealings.

A String.

Brother Teedyuscung,

As I understood at our last Meeting, that you were prevented at that Time, by
the Absence of some of the Chiefs of the United Nations, from finishing what
you then had to say, I defer answering, for the Present, such part of your
Speech as relates to me. But I shall soon take an Opportunity of doing it.

After the Governor had done speaking, Tagashata and Nichas arose, and said,
They did not rightly understand that Sentence relating to the Lands, and
requiring them to settle Matters among themselves: They said, the Governor had
left Matters in the Dark; they did not know what Lands he meant: If he meant
the Lands on the other Side of the Mountain, he knew the Proprietors had their
Deeds for them, which ought to be produced and shown to them. Their Deeds had
their Marks, and when they should see them, they would know their Marks again.

Then Conrad Weiser produced the Deed of 1749; and the United Chiefs looked at
it, and said, This Deed we well remember: We knew our Chiefs who signed it;
some of them are present now. We sold the Land, and were honestly paid for it:
The Land was ours, and we will justify it. They then laid the Deed before
Teedyuscung, and all lest the Council, and the Conference broke up.

Teedyuscung having Yesterday requested of the Governor, that two Belts, which
he then presented to him, might be sent as their joint Belts to the Ohio
Indians. This Day, the Chiefs of the United Nations and Teedyuscung had a
Meeting with two Members of Governor DENNY'S Council; at which the following
intended Answer, from Governor DENNY to the Ohio Indians, being first
interpreted to the Indians, was considered, settled and approved by all present.

Governor DENNY's Answer to the Message from the Ohio Indians, brought by
Frederick Post, Pisquetomen and Thomas Hickman.

BY this String, my Indian Brethren of the Six Nations, and Delawares, join
with me, in requiring of the Indian Councils to which these following Messages
shall be presented, to keep every Thing private from the Eyes and Ears of the
French.

A String.

Brethren,

We received your Message by Pisquetomen and Frederick Post, and thank you for
the Care you have taken of our Messenger of Peace; and that you have put him in
your Bosom, and protected him against our Enemy Onontio, and his Children, and
sent him safe back to our Council Fire, by the same Man that received him from
us.

A String.

Brethren,

I only sent Post to peep into your Cabbins, and to know the Sentiments of your
old Men, and to look at your Faces, to see how you look. And I am glad to hear
from him, that you look friendly, and that there still remain some Sparks of
Love toward us. It is what we believed beforehand; and therefore we never let
slip the Chain of Friendship, but held it fast on our Side, and it has never
dropped out of our Hands. By this Belt we desire you will dig up your End of the
Chain of Friendship, that you suffered, by the Subtlety of the French, to be
buried.

A Belt.

Brethren,

It happened, that the Governor of Jersey was with me and a great many Indian
Brethren, sitting in Council at Easton, when your Messengers arrived: And it
gave Pleasure to every one that heard it; and it will afford the same
Satisfaction to our neighboring Governors, and their People, when they come to
hear it. I shall send Messengers to them, and acquaint them with what you have
said.

Your requesting us, to let the King of England know your good Dispositions, we
took to Heart, and shall let him know it; and we will speak in your Favor to
his Majesty, who has for some Time past, looked upon you as his lost Children.
And we can assure you, that as a tender Father over all his Children, he will
forgive what is past, and receive you again into his Arms.

A Belt.

Brethren,

If you are in E^^nest to be reconciled to us, you will keep your young Men
from attacking our Country, and killing, and carrying Captive our back
Inhabitants; and will likewise give Orders, that your People may be kept at a
Distance from Fort Duquesne, that they may not be hurt by our Warriors, who are
sent by our King, to chastise the French, and not to hurt you. Consider the
commanding Officer of that Army treads heavy, and would be very sorry to hurt
any of his Indian Brethren.

A large Belt.

And, Brethren,

The Chiefs of the United Nations, with their Cousins, our Brethren the
Delawares and others now here, jointly with me, send this Belt, which has upon
it two Figures, that represent all the English, and all the Indians now
present, taking Hands and delivering it to Pisquetomen; and we desire it may be
likewise sent to the Indians who are named at the End of these Messages; as
they have all been formerly our very good Friends and Allies; and we desire,
they will all go from among the French to their own Towns, and no longer help
the French.

Brethren,

If you take the Belts we just now gave you, in which all here join, English
and Indians, as we don't doubt you will; then, by this Belt, I make a Road for
you, and invite you to come to Philadelphia, to your first old Council Fire,
which was kindled when we first saw one another; which Fire we will kindle up
again, and remove all Disputes, and renew the old and first Treaties of
Friendship. There is a clear and open Road for you; fear therefore Nothing, and
come to us, with as many as can be of the Delawares, Shawanese, or of the Six
Nation Indians. We will be glad to see you; we desire all Tribes and Nations of
Indians, who are in Alliance with you, may come. As soon as we hear of your
coming, of which we desire you will give us timely Notice, we will lay up
Provisions for you along the Road.

A large white Belt, with the Figure of a Man at each End, and Streaks of
Black, representing the Road from the Ohio to Philadelphia.

Brethren,

The Six Nation and Delaware Chiefs, join with me in those Belts, which are
tied together, to signify our Union and Friendship for each other; with them we
jointly take the Tomhawk out of your Heads, and bury them under Ground.

We speak loud, so as you may hear us; you see we all stand together joined
Hand in Hand.

Two Belts tied together.

The Indian Chiefs being asked, if it would not be proper to insert in the
Message, an Account of the Situation of our Army to the Westward, and desire
them to join General FORBES against the French, replied, that they would by no
Means advise this Government so soon to press them to take up the Hatchet,
because their Wounds were not yet healed, nor Peace made, which must first be
done. They said further, that as the French had many Indians fighting for them,
and they by Intermarriages were related to the Indians who sent the Messages,
it could not be expected they would easily be persuaded to join the English,
lest they should kill their own Flesh and Blood; adding, that the only proper
Measure, that could now be taken, was to advise them to sit still and keep out
of the Way: And this Advice they believed would be hearkened to.

They then desired, that, at least two of our Inhabitants might accompany
Pisquetomen, and Thomas Hickman, the two Messengers to the Ohio. The
Confederate Chiefs promised to send two of their own People with them, and
Teedyuscung said he would send one, if not two Delawares.

At a private Conference with the Indians, held at EASTON, the 21 st October,
1758.
PRESENT, His Excellency Governor BERNARD, And the Jersey Commissioners. THOMAS
KING, Chief of the Oneidas. TAGASHATA, Chief of the Senecas. TOKA, AIO, Chief
of the Cayugas. EGOHOHOWEN, Chief of the Minisinks. AQUAYWOCHTU, Chief of the
Wapings. With other Indians of the several Nations. GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire Deputy
to Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON. Captain HENRY MONTOUR, His Majesty's Interpreter to the
United Nations. Mr. STEPHEN CALVIN, Interpreter of the Delaware and Minisink
Languages.


His Excellency informed them, that he met them to agree about a Consideration
for the uncertain Claims of the Minisinks, Wapings and other Indians, Claimants
of Land in the Northern Parts of the Province of New Jersey, and desired that
it might be considered, that they knew not what they sold, and he knew not what
he bought; therefore the Price ought not to be large.

That they might propose a Sum to him, or he would make an Offer to them; or it
should be left to their Uncles to consider of a Price, as would please them
best.

The United Nations, by Thomas King, said, that they had no Claim to the Lands
of the Minisinks, or others their Nephews, on the East Side of Delaware, and
should therefore leave the fixing a Price to them.

Then the Minisinks and Wapings withdrew to consult upon it, and being
returned, Egobobowen, the Minisink Chief, said, they would choose the Governor
should make an Offer, as they might perhaps demand too much.

His Excellency having consulted the Commissioners, offered them Eight Hundred
Spanish Dollars for their Claim in New Jersey, as an extraordinary Price.

The Minisinks said, they should be glad of the Opinion of their Uncles in the
Matter.

The United Nations, by Thomas King, said, it was a fair and honorable Offer,
and that, if it was their own Case, they would cheerfully accept of it: But, as
there were a great many Persons to share in the Purchase Money, they
recommended it to his Excellency, to add two Hundred Dollars more; and, if that
was complied with, the Report of it would be carried to all the Nations, and
would be a great Proof of the Affection and Generosity of their Brethren the
English, on this Occasion, and would be very agreeable to them.

His Excellency desired to know of the Minisinks, and other Claimants, if they
approved of the Proposal of their Uncles; and they informed him, that they did.

The Governor after consulting the Commissioners, said, it was more than he had
intended to give; but as the United Nations had given themselves the Trouble of
being Mediators between them, he could not refuse their Recommendations, and
was glad of the Opportunity he had of showing his Regard to the United Nations,
and his Benevolence to the Minisink and other Indians, who had resided in the
Province where he presided, and therefore complied with their Request.

His Excellency then desired them to remember, that this Consideration Money,
was to be in full for the Claims of all the Minisink and Waping Indians, and
all others who claim any Lands, in a Map, which was laid before them at the
same Time, which included all the Lands from the Line between the Provinces of
New York and New Jersey, and down Hudson's River, to the Mouth of Rariton up
the same to Alametung Falls, on the North Branch of Rariton River, thence on a
straight Line to Paoqualin Mountain, where it joins on Delaware River, and
thence up the Delaware to Cusbytunk; and recommended it to them to have Respect
to this in the Division of the Consideration Money.

Then Tagashata, the Seneca Chief, arose, and addressing himself to the
Minisinks and other Indian Claimants, spoke as follows.

My Nephews,

I desire you will now give over all Thoughts of your Land, and that we may
hear no more Complaints about it.

Now you must remember the Friendship between you and your Brother, and
transmit to your Children, and make them acquainted with the Transactions of
this Day. I recommend this to you, not from my Lips only, but from the Bottom
of my Heart: I hope it will also make a deep Impression in your Hearts.

It seems, as if your Grandfathers had not told you of the Treaties they used
to have with their Brethren, but carried them with them to the Grave. But we
hope you will not do so, but carefully inform your Children of your Agreements.
We have given you this Advice, and hope you will follow it. We also expect you
will take Care of your young Men, that they do no more Mischief to their
Brethren the English.

Egohohowen, then addressed himself to the Governor, and desired to be heard.

Brother,

We are now thoroughly satisfied, and we still retain a Friendship for our
Brethren the English, and we desire, that if we should come into your Province,
to see our old Friends, and should have Occasion for the Bark of a Tree to
cover a Cabin, or a little Refreshment, that we should not be denied, but be
treated as Brethren: And that your People may not look on the wild Beasts of
the Forest, or Fish of the Waters, as their sole Property; but that we may be
admitted to an equal Use of them.

The Governor answered, that, as soon as he got Home, he should issue a
Proclamation, to notify to the People of his Province, that he had made a Peace
with them, and to order, that, for the Future, they should be treated as
Brethren, which he hoped would be done: But desired they would not go into
those Parts, where they had lately committed Hostilities, till the People's
Passions were cooled; for he could not be answerable for his People's
Behavior, whilst their Losses were fresh upon their Minds.

The 21st October.
The Members of the Pennsylvania Council received a Message from Mr. Weiser,
that the Chiefs of the United Nations were met in Council, with their Nephews
the Delawares, at the House of Nicholas Scull, and that the Delawares had
something to say to their Uncles, which they desired some of the Members of
that Council, and Commissioners should be Witnesses of, and hear.

Messieurs Crowden, Chew and Misslin, attended accordingly, with Messrs.
Gallaway, Fox, and Hughes, Commissioners, and Israel Pemberton, Isaac Zane, and
some other Quakers, who were present at the particular Request of the Indians.

PRESENT All the Confederate Chiefs. TEEDYUSCUNG, NOWALKEEKA, alias FOUR STEPS,
AWEHELA, alias JAMES DAVIS, EGOHOHOWEN, Munsey Chief. TAPISCAWEN, alias SAMUEL
DAVIS, PHILIP COMPASS, LAPPINK, MOSES TETAMY. CONRAD WEISER, HENRY MONTOUR,
ISAAC STILLE, Interpreters.


Teedyuscung, on Behalf of the Delawares, arose and spoke as follows.

Uncles,

I desire you will hear me. We have gone so far at this Treaty, as to talk of
Lands, I therefore thought proper to meet you here, to let you know, that I
have consulted with all my Brethren, your Cousins here present, about the Deed
you, our Uncles, signed to the Proprietors of Pennsylvania, shown to us
Yesterday, for the Lands beyond the Kittachtinny Hills.

We have seen the Deed, and know it well. Nutimus, one of our chief Men has
signed it, and here sits one of our Men, named Philip Compass, who was present
when the Sale was made, and remembers, that Nutimus our Chief received
Forty-four Dollars, as his Part or Share of the Consideration Money. We agree
to it, and acknowledge the Land was fairly sold. We give it up, and now confirm
it, that there may be no Difference, nor any Thing more said about it. This is
not the Land I have disputed with my Brethren the English. That Land lies
between Tohiccon Creek and the Kittachtinny Hills.

Gave a String.

Tokaaio, the Cayuga Chief, stood up and spoke as follows, addressing himself
to Teedyuscung.

Cousin,

I thank you for your Openess and Honesty on this Occasion, freely to declare
the Truth. We wish our Brethren the English, naming the Governors of
Pennsylvania, Virginia, Carolina and Jersey, were so plain and precise. They
have called us down to this Council Fire, which was kindled for Council
Affairs, to renew Treaties of Friendship, and brighten the Chain of Friendship.
But here we must hear a Dispute about Land, and our Time is taken up from Day
to Day; but they do not come to the chief Point.

The English first began to do Mischief; we told them so: They only thanked us
for our Openness and Advice, and said they would take Care for the Future, but
healed no Wounds. In short, when they speak to us, they do it with a shorter
Belt or String, than that which we speak to them with; though they can make
Wampum, and we cannot.

They ought not thus to treat with Indians on Council Affairs. Several of our
Strings and Belts are lost in their Hands entirely. I fear they only speak from
their Mouth, and not from their Heart.

On the same Day, P. M. Pisquetomen and Thomas Hickman came to take their Leave
of the Governor, accompanied with Captain Bull, jun. William Hayes, and Isaac
Stille, the Persons appointed to attend them to the Ohio, who were particularly
recommended to their Care and Protection, by a String of Wampum.

The Belts and Strings were numbered, as well in the written Paper containing
the Messages, as on Labels tied to each of them, and delivered to Pisquetomen,
and the written Message was delivered with the Passports to Captain Bull.

The 22d of October.
The United Nation Chiefs held a private Council, and named two of their People
to send to the Ohio, viz. Tojenontawoby, a Cayuga Chief, and the youngest Shick
Calamy, who joined Plsquetomen, and set off this Afternoon.

As they were setting out, Mr. Frederick Post arrived with News from General
Forbes, that a large Body of French and Indians, having attacked his advanced
Post at Lloyal-Hanning, were repulsed with great Loss on their Side; which News
was communicated to the Indians.

The Governors proposed a Meeting of the Indians, but they desired it might be
deferred till the Morning.

The 23d of October.
This Morning one of the Seneca Chiefs died, and after making the usual
Condolence, Ceremonics and Presents, he was decently interred, a Number of the
Inhabitants attending the Funeral. This took up the Forenoon.

At a Conference with the Indians, the same Day, P. M.
PRESENT, The Governors, and the Gentlemen of their Council, etc. as before.

The Minutes were read and approved, to the End of the public Conference on
Friday last, after which Governor DENNY, for himself and Governor BERNARD,
spoke.

Brethren,

By this Belt, we heal your Wounds; we remove your Grief; we take the Hatchet
out of your Heads; we make a deep Hole in the Earth, and bury the Hatchet so
low, that no Body shall be able to dig it up again.

A Belt.

Brethren,

Now we have healed your Wounds, we, by this Belt, renew all our Treaties; we
brighten the Chain of Friendship; we return to our first Affection; we confirm
our ancient Union; we put fresh Earth to the Roots of the Tree of Peace, that
it may bear up against every Storm that can blow, and live and flourish to the
End of Time, whilst the Sun shines, and the Rivers run. And we desire you would
publish it among your own and all other Indian Nations, who are your Friends
and Allies, and engage them to join with you in a firm Peace with his Majesty,
and all his Subjects; in whose Behalf we give you this Belt

A large Peace Belt delivered by the two Governors to the confederate Chiefs,
and by them banded round to all the Indians present.

Brethren,

We now open a Road to the Old Council Fire, which was kindled by your and our
Fathers in the City of Philadelphia: Be assured, that you will always find this
Road open, easy and pleasant to travel in, and for the Future whenever Occasion
calls, we shall be glad to see you there.

A Belt.

Brethren, of the United Nations, and all our other Brethren, your Cousins and
Nephews.

We thank you, for the Care and Diligence with which you have attended to the
several Matters recommended to you in these Conferences, which have yielded us
Abundance of Satisfaction. This Treaty will convince all our Enemies, that we
are now united in the firmest Band of Amity; and whilst we join our Strength
together, it will not be in their Power to hurt either you or us.

A Belt.

Brethren,

As a Token of the Love we your Brethren of this Province bear you, I shall
make a Present of a Quantity of Goods, which we have prepared for you, and
desire your Acceptance of them; sensible of the approaching Season, and of the
many Difficulties you live under, from the present War. We give them with an
hearty good Will.

Here his Honor delivered a List of the Goods, and desired Mr. Weiser and Mr.
Montour would interpret it to them at a proper Time.

Then Nichas, on the Behalf of the three elder Nations; Thomas King, on the
Behalf of the five younger Nations, and Teedyuscung, on the Behalf of the other
Nations, gave the Yohan, and Conrad Weiser returned it twice on the Behalf of
the Governors: After which Governor DENNY said,

Brother Teedyuscung,

BY this Belt you put me in Mind, that we formerly referred our Dispute about
Lands to our Father King GEORGE, and you desired to know if he has decided it.

Brother,

You should consider the Circumstances of the Affairs of your Father King
GEORGE: His Majesty lives at a very great Distance from us, is now engaged in a
War with the French; and the Business of War takes up a great deal of Time and
Attention: Besides, in Time of War, we have but few Opportunities of hearing
from him.

As yet I have had no Answer relative to your Affairs. You may depend upon it,
as soon as I receive one, it shall be communicated to you. And I can assure
you, the Proprietors have pressed Dispatch, and will do every Thing they can,
to bring it to a speedy Determination.

A Belt.

Then Governor BERNARD, requesting the Attention of the Indians, addressed them
as follows,

Brethren, of the United Nations,

BY this String, you spoke on Behalf of our Brethren the Minisinks, and said,
"That they were wronged in their Lands; that the English settled so fast, they
were continually pushing them back; and when they asked for their Lands, they
were told that they had sold their Lands, and had got drunk and forgot it. If
they had swallowed their Lands, they must be content; but they did not believe
that they had swallowed all, but that some was left. They desired, that I would
enquire after their Lands that were left, and to them Justice.

Brethren,

I am glad I have an Opportunity, in the Presence of so many Nations, to
express the Desire I have of doing Justice to every one. The Throne of the
Great King is founded on Justice: And I should not be a faithful Servant to
him, if I neglected to give Redress to all Persons, that have received Injuries
from the People, over whom the Great King has placed me.

I have therefore had a Conference with the Minisinks, in the Presence of some
of their Uncles; and have come to a full Agreement with them, the Proceedings
of which are now ready to be read to you.

Brethren,

I have another Proof to give you of the Uprightness and Justice of our
Province. We have come to an Agreement with the Delawares, and other Indians
for the uncertain Claims they had on the Southern Parts of our Province. I
hereby produce the Deeds, that have been executed on this Occasion, that the
Subject of them may be explained to you, and be had in perpetual Remembrance by
all the Nations present: And I desire, that you may all remember, that, by
these two Agreements, the Province of New Jersey is entirely freed and
discharged from all Indian Claims. In Confirmation of which, I give you this
Belt.

A Belt.

Brother Teedyuscung,

By this String you tell me, that, after the Killing the nine Indians near
Esopus, you carried three Belts to George Vreeland, who undertook to give them
to the Governor, and you ask what is become of those Belts.

Brother,

I can only say, that I never heard of those Belts before; nor do I know what
Governor George Vreeland undertook to carry those Belts to. The proper Governor
was the Governor of New York; for in his Province was this Mischief committed.
And probably the Governor of New York had these Belts; for I have heard that be
issued a Proclamation for apprehending the Perpetrators of this Fact. This Fact
has been blamed by all good and wise Men; and I am glad it was not done by the
People of my Province. I will acquaint the Governor of New York with what you
have said upon this Occasion, and I will enquire after those Belts, and give
you an Answer.

A String.

Governor DENNY, being obliged to return to Philadelphia, on urgent Business,
took his Leave of the Indians, saying.

Brethren,

IT gives me great Pleasure that the Business of this Treaty has been carried
on with so much Satisfaction.

I am sorry, I am now to inform you, that I am obliged to leave you, having
received last Night an Express from General Forbes, who is now near the Ohio.
My Business calls me to Town; I shall therefore leave Mr. Logan and Mr. Peter's
to transact the Remainder of the Business, and doubt not but they will act to
your Satisfaction. I assure you of my Affection for you, and wish you all
Manner of Happiness.

Teedyuscung arose, and desired to be heard on Behalf of the Wapings, living
near AEsepus, and produced a short broad Belt of white Wampum, having in the
Center, two Hearts of a reddish Color, and in Figures 1745, wrote after the
following Manner, 17 45. The Belt had a round Circle Pendant, representing the
Sun: He then produced two Certificates, One from Governor CLINTON, and the
other from Governor HARDY, both which were much in Favor of the Waping
Indians. He said the Belt was given them by the Government of New York, and
represented their Union, which was to last as long as the Sun should continue
in the Firmament.

Teedyuscung addressed Governor BERNARD, desiring by a String of Wampum, that
he would extend his Protection to the Wapings; and as their Chief was old and
infirm, he requested the Favor of a Horse to carry him Home; which was readily
granted.

Tagashata made the same Request to Governor DENNY, which was likewise granted.

The Six Nation Chiefs consulted together, and in a little Time, Nichas, in
their Behalf, returned an Answer to the Speeches of the Governors, laying the
Belts and Strings upon the Table, in the Order they were delivered, and
repeating distinctly what was said on each of them. At the End of every Article
he returned Thanks, and expressed the highest Satisfaction, particularly on the
ratifying the Peace, and the large Belt given thereupon, which he said should
be sent to all the distant Nations of Indians, to whom it would be very
agreeable; he likewise promised, that every Thing transacted in these
Conferences, which he again said had afforded them great Pleasure, should be
laid before the great Council at Onondaga, whose Answers should be carefully
transmitted.

He thanked Governor BERNARD for making up all the Differences between that
Government and (...) Minisink Indians so much to their Satisfaction.

He made an Apology for the Want of Wampum, and the Exchange of other Belts to
give in Confirmation of their Performance of the several Things mentioned in
the Governors Speeches, agreeable to Indian Customs. And then wished Governor
DENNY a good Journey.

The 24th of October, 1758.
Mr. Peter's and Mr. Weiser the Proprietary Agents, held a private Conference
with the Chiefs of the United Nations, at the House of Adam Joke in Easton.

At which were PRESENT,
WILLIAM LOGAN, Esquire of the Council. GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire Deputy Agent to Sir
William Johnson. CHARLES SWAIN, Esquire Prothonotary of North-Hampton County.
Captain HENRY MONTOUR, Interpreter, And, Mr. JOHN WATSON, Surveyor in the
County of Bucks.
And there were likewise PRESENT, the following Indians.
KARACHTADY, Chief of the Mohawks. SEGUGNSONYOUT, Chief of the Oneidas.
ASSARADUNGUAS, Chief of the Onondagas. TAGASHATA, Chief of the Senecas.
TOKAAIO, Chief of the Cayugas. NICHAQUANTAQUOAH, Chief of the Tuscaroras.
CANNIACHT, Chief of the Conoys. And ROBERT WHITE, Chief the Nanticokes, And
many other Indians.
Mr. Peter's and Mr. Weiser, in Virtue of a Power of Atto^ney from the
Proprietors of Pennsylvania to them, under the great Seal of the said Province,
having previously settled with the Indian Chiefs, the Limits of the Lands to be
released by the said Proprietors, and of the Lands to be confirmed by the
United Nations; the Proprietary's Release, and the Indians Deed of Confirmation
were read and interpreted, and the Indians expressing their Satisfaction at
every Part thereof, and particularly with the Limits, as described in the
Draught annexed to their Confirmation Deed, they were both executed in the
Presence of William Logan, George Croghan, Henry Montour, Charles Swain, and
John Watson, who subscribed their Names as Witnesses thereto. A Belt was given
to the Indians at the Delivery of the Release, and it was agreed that both
Deeds should be produced at the next public Conference, in order to be
acknowleged.

On the 25th of October, 1758.
The Indians were employed all Day in dividing the Presents among their several
Tribes.

At a Conference with the Indians, held at EASTON, on the 26th of October, 1758.
PRESENT, His Excellency Governor BERNARD, Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, ANDREW JOHNSTON, CHARLES READ, JOHN STEVENS,
GEORGE CROGHAN, CONRAD WEISER, CHARLES SWAIN,
Major ORDNT, The SHERIFF of NorthHampton County, JOHN WATSON. The Chiefs of
the United Nations, and of the other Nations, and the Interpreters, as
aforementioned.


Mr. Secretary Peter's having observed to the confederate Chiefs, that the
Governors were by Tokaaio, charged with having omitted some Things in their
Answers, and desired to know what they were. Thomas King said, that in Regard
to some Things, they had been since supplied, and recommended that some other
Things should be more particularly taken Notice of than they had been.
Wherefore agreeable to his Advice, the following Speech was spoke by the
Members of the Pennsylvanian Council, Governor BERNARD assenting thereto.

Brethren,

AS we have now settled all Differences, and confirmed the ancient Leagues of
Amity, and brightened the Chain of Friendship; we now clean the Blood off your
Council Seats, and put them in Order, that when you hold Councils at Home, you
may sit in your Seats with the same Peace and Tranquillity as you formerly used
to do.

A string consisting of a Thousand Grains of Wampum.

Brethren,

With this String of Wampum, we condole with you for the Loss of your wise Men,
and for the Warriors that have been killed in these troublesome Times, and
likewise for your Women and Children, and we cover their Graves decently
agreeable to the Custom of your Forefathers.

A String of a Thousand Grains of Wampum.

Brethren,

We disperse the dark Clouds that have hung over our Heads, during these
Troubles, that we may see the Sun clear, and look on each other with the
Cheerfulness our Forefathers did.

A String of a Thousand Grains of Wampum.

Then Mr. Peter's and Mr. Weiser produced the Confirmation Deed, executed by the
Chiefs of the United Nations, as before set forth, which the Indian Chiefs
acknowledged to have been their voluntary Act and Deed, and that they clearly
understood the Contents thereof, together with the Limits described in the
Draught annexed to it; and the same being handed from Indian to Indian, all
round the House, it was delivered to the Proprietor's Agents.

After which the Indian Chiefs produced the Proprietary Deed of Release,
executed by Mr. Peter's and Mr. Weiser, the Proprietary's Agents; who
acknowledged it to be their Act and Deed, in Behalf of their Constituents, as
well as their own, and re-delivered it to the Indians, together with the Belt.

His Excellency Governor BERNARD produced the following Deeds: One Deed (...)
the (...) executed by five Indian Attorneys, appointed by a Council of the
Delaware Nations, for all the Lands lying in New Jersey, South of a Line from
Paoqualin Mountains at Delaware River, to the falls of Alamatung, on the North
Branch of Rariton River, thence down that River to Sandy-Hook; dated the 12th
of September last, with Endorsements thereon, made by Teedyuscung, Unwallicon
and Tepascawen, signifying their Agreement thereto, and Acknowledgment of their
having received Satisfaction thereon; Witnessed by three Chiefs of the Six
Nations, who in Behalf of the Six Nations, approved the Sale, and also by
several English Witnesses. And another Deed, dated the 23d October, Instant, at
Easton; from the Chiefs of the Munsies, Wapings, Opings, or Pomptons, Sixteen
in Number, and including all the remaining Lands in New Jersey, beginning at
Cushytunk, and down the Division Lines between New Jersey and New York, to the
Mouth of Tappan Creek at Hudson's River, and down the same to Sandy-Hook,
thence to the Mouth of Rariton, thence up that River to the Falls of Alamatung,
thence on a strait Line to Paoqualin Mountains, where it joins on Delaware
River, thence up the River Delaware to Cushytunk; endorsed by Nimham a Chief of
the Opings or Pomptons, who was sick at the Execution thereof, and approved by
the Six Nations, which was testified by three of their Chiefs, signing as
Witnesses thereto: And Governor BARNARD desired that all present might take
Notice of the same, and remember that the Indian Titles to all the Lands in
New Jersey, were conveyed by those two Deeds.

Which being intepreted in the Mingo and Delaware Languages; His Excellency
addressed the Indians, as follows.

Brethren,

I AM very glad this good Work has been so happily finished. I came among you
wholly unacquainted with your Forms, and therefore, if I have omitted any
Ceremonies, you will readily excuse me. But in whatever I have been deficient,
I am sure, I have not wanted a good Heart toward you.

The Circumstances of our Province, have hitherto rendered us unable to give
you any great Proofs of our Regard for you. But I shall endeavor to persuade
my People, to do you good Service for the future, by opening a Communication
with you; which if rightly managed, will be much to the Advantage of both
People. And for my own Part, I shall be always ready to do you Justice; and
desire that whenever you have Cause of Complaint against my People, you will
take care to signify it to me.

A String.

The Five Nation Chiefs, laid all the Belts and Strings on the Table, that were
delivered at this and the last Conference. Tokaaio, the Cayuga Chief, desired
the Governor and all present, would take Notice of what Thomas King was going
to say, on Behalf of the United Nations.

On which Thomas King arose, and taking up the first Belt which was given by
Teedyuscung, when he requested a Deed for the Wioming Lands, he addressed the
Delawares, ( Teedyuscung not being present) as follows.

Cousins,

By this Belt, Teedyuscung desired us to make you the Owners of the Lands at
Wioming, Shamokin and other Places on the Susquehannah River; in Answer to
which, we who are present say, That we have no Power to convey Lands to any
one, but we will take your Request to the Great Council Fire, for their
Sentiments, as we never sell or convey any Land, till it be agreed on at the
Great Council of the United Nations. In the mean Time, you may make use of
these Lands, in Conjunction with our People, and all the rest of our Relations,
the Indians of the different Nations in our Alliance.

Which being interpreted into Delaware, the String of Wampum was given to Moses
Tetamy and James Davis, to be delivered to Teedyuscung, as he was not present.

Then taking up each Belt and String in the Order it was delivered in this, and
the last Conference, he proceeded to repeat distinctly, what had been said
under each Article, returning Thanks for all those good Speeches, which he
said, were extremely agreeable. He made particular Mention of the large Peace
Belt, saying, The Nations are greatly pleased, that all the ancient Treaties
made here, at Albany, and elsewhere, are renewed, as well as that the Old
Council Fire at Philadelphia, is kindled again, and a good Road made to it,
that may be traveled without any Danger: These in particular, as well as every
other Matter transacted at these Conferences, we will make known to our own
Nations, and to every other in Friendship and Alliance with us, and we are sure
they will be very well received.

Then addressing Governor BERNARD, he thanked him for his farewell Speech,
(...), It was a very kind one, and that they were much pleased with his having
^een present, and given his Assistance at this Treaty, which had given them an
Opportunity of gaining an Acquaintance with him, which they would ever remember
with Pleasure. After a Pause he desired to be excused for mentioning some Thing
that had been omitted by the Governors and their Councils.

They have forgot to bring with them Ammunition, of which we always used to
receive a sufficient Quantity, not only to serve us in our Journey, but to
support us in our hunting Season, that we might be enabled to make Provision
for our Families. They have given us Gunlocks without Guns, which are of no
Manner of Use to us; and therefore this must have surely been forgot, as it is
impossible for Indians to subsist without Guns, Powder and Lead, of which we
have received none.

As many of us are old and infirm, we desire our Brethren, will be so good as
to furnish us with a Number of Wagons, to convey such of us, as are not able
to walk, and the Goods you have been pleased to give us, as far as Wioming,
where we have left our Canoes, and then we will discharge the Wagons, and they
may come back again.

We further desire a Supply of Provisions may be put into the Wagons, enough
to serve us till we get to our respective Habitations.

He then took up the Proprietary Release, and returned Thanks for it. He said,
When the United Nations first made the Request to Sir William Johnson, to be
transmitted to Onas, they had no doubt but Onas would comply with it, having
always found him ready to grant all their Requests. With him we have never had
any Difference, he has always settled our Affairs without giving us any
Trouble, and to our Satisfaction. We heartily thank Onas; this Act confirms us
in the good Opinion we always had of him.

Then addressing himself to the Delawares, with a String of Wampum, he spoke as
follows,

This serves to put Teedyuscung in mind of his Promises, to return the
Prisoners: Remember, Cousins, you have made this Promise in our Presence; you
did it indeed before, and you ought to have performed it: To tell Lies, does
not become a Great Man: A Great Man always keeps his Word and performs his
Promises. Cousins, You must not now fail to keep your Word: We are all now one
People, and we must all be punctual in the Performance of our Engagements.

This was interpreted into the Delaware Language, and the String was given to
Moses Tetamy, to be delivered to Teedyuscung.

Then he said, the United Nations had finished what they had to say.

Some Wine and Punch was called for, and mutual Healths were drank, and the
Conferences were concluded with great Satisfaction.


