MEMOIRS OF THE Principal Transactions OF THE LAST WAR BETWEEN THE English and
French in North America. FROM THE Commencement of it in 1744, to the Conclusion
of the Treaty at Aix la Chapelle. Containing in Particular An ACCOUNT of the
Importance of Nova Scotia or Acadie, and the Island of Cape Breton to both
Nations.

The THIRD EDITION. LONDON, Printed. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND; Reprinted and Sold
by GREEN and RUSSELL, at their Printing-Office in Queen Street. MDCCLVIII.

To His GRACE the Duke of NEW CASTLE, First LORD Commissioner of His MAJESTY's
TREASURY, KNIGHT of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER, etc. etc.
MY LORD,
THE Events, which are the Subject of these Memoirs, had their Rise in North
America, when your Grace's particular Department, as one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, put the Affairs of that Continent under your
Grace's more immediate Direction: And those, who are acquainted with the first
Springs and Movements, which set these Expeditions on foot, and with the
Character of the Person in America, who was chiefly instrumental in conducting
them there, must be sensible, that the Success was wholly owing to the
Influence of your Grace's Administration, and ought therefore to be reckoned
among the other happy Effects of it.

These, my Lord, together with the Ambition, which the Author has of making his
public Acknowledgments to your Grace for personal Obligations, are the Motives,
which have induced him to take the Liberty of addressing the following Sheets
to your Grace; and encourage him to hope, that they will be honored with your
Grace's Protection.

I am sensible, my Lord, that the Success of the last War in North America was
not equal to the great Idea formed in your Grace's Mind at that time for the
Service of your King and Country.

Had your Grace's Plan transmitted to New England in 1746 for the Reduction of
Canada been carried into Execution that Year, as it would have been, if it had
not been frustrated by unforeseen, inevitable Accidents in Europe, against
which it was not in the Power of Human Policy to provide; that would have
crowned the War with the most important Conquest to the Interests of Great
Britain, that was ever made upon the Continent of America.

But, my Lord, short as the Events of the War fell of your Grace's Scheme; yet
the Consequences were, not only the Preservation of Great Britain's most
essential Territory in North America for securing to her the Possession of all
her other Colonies there (at a time when the Enemy had reduced it to such
Extremities, that its Fate seemed to depend upon as slender a Thread, as it
could possibly do; but an Acquisition to his Majesty's Dominions, which, in all
Appearance, accelerated the Extinction of a most expensive War to Great
Britain, and laid the Foundation for restoring at that time the public
Tranquillity of Europe.

May your Grace's unwearied Counsels for the Nation's Welfare be constantly
attended with Success, equal to the Patriot Views, with which they are formed;
and your King and Country long reap the salutary Fruits of them.

I have the Honor to be with the highest Respect, My LORD, Your GRACE's most
obliged, and most devoted Servant.

MEMOIRS OF THE Principal Transactions of the Last War between the English and
French in North America.
THE two first Objects of the War in North America were Nova Scotia or Acadie,
and the Island of Cape Breton: against the former of these the French, soon
after the Declaration of War in Europe, made three Attempts; in the first of
which they surprised the Island of Canso, burnt its Forts and other Buildings,
destroyed the Fishery there, and carried the Garrison Prisoners to Louisbourg;
and in the two last reduced Annapolis-Royal, the principal Fort and ancient
Metropolis of the Province, to great Extremities: In the Year following the
Colonies of New England prosecuted an Expedition against Cape Breton; in which
they took it, and brought the Inhabitants of the Island of St. John's, situate
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, to make their Submission upon the same Terms with
those granted to Louisbourg, and to give Hostages for delivering Possession of
the Island to the English.

As an Account of the Importance of the two firstmentioned Places to both
Nations will throw Light upon the several Operations and Incidents of the War,
it will be proper here briefly to state it.

Nova Scotia is the Key of the Eastern Colonies upon the Continent of
North America; it has about ninety Leagues of Seacoast upon the Atlantic Ocean
extending from Cape Canso Eastward, which lies at the Entrance into the Gut or
Streights of that Name (through which there is a Passage into the Gulf of St.
Lawrence) to Cape Sables Westward, which forms one Point of the Entrance into
the Bay of Funda: This Coast abounds with most commodious Harbors for capital
Ships of War, and Banks of the best Cod-Fish in NorthAmerica; and is very
advantageously situated for commanding the Navigation of that Part of the
Ocean: Its Eastern Side forms Part of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, along which it
lies extended about 110 Leagues from the Gut of Canso, at it is Entrance into
the Gulf, to Cape Rozier, which forms the South Point of the Mouth of the River
St. Lawrence, through which the whole Country of Canada receivs all its
Supplies and Supports from France: This Coast also has several good Fisheries
and Harbors, particularly the Bay of Gasp, Bay des Chaleurs, and Bay Verte,
the latter whereof is separated by a narrow Isthmus, about 18 Miles long, from
the Bay of Funda, which is about 50 Leagues deep, and comprehended within the
Province: In this Bay are the three Basins of Annapolis, Minas or Les Mines,
and Chiegnecto; the Coasts whereof and Banks of the adjacent Rivers abound with
Salt Marshes, which by the Force of a rich Soil, constantly recruited with
marine Salts, and so, not to be impoverished by constant Tillage, produce large
Crops of English Grain, with little Labor to the Husbandman; and among other
Rivers, which fall into it, lies that of St. John's through which the City of
Quebec has a Communication with the Bay, and across the Head of that, through
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, with Louisbourg: The North Side of the Province is
bounded by the Southern Bank of the River St. Lawrence, along which it is
extended from Cape Rozier to Le Bik, about 80 Leagues; and the Western Side by
the River Pentagoet or Penobscot, which separates it from New England: Its
inland Parts afford a Plenty of Pasturage, with all Kinds of Roots, produces
good Oak Timber for Ship Building, and white Pine Masts, and has a large Store
of Mines in the Distrist of Minas or Les Mines, which derives its Name from
them.

Thus situated, it is evident, that Nova Scotia, when in the Hands of the
English must be a Barrier to the British Colonies in North America; and the
Command it gives them of the Navigation of the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Bay of
Funda, puts it into their Power to cut off the Communication between France and
Canada, through the River of St. Lawrence, which empties itself into the
former, and St. John's that falls into the latter; which leaves the French no
Entrance into it, except by the Missisippi; the Passage through which, the
River Ohio and the great Lakes and Rivers beyond it, to Montreal, is a most
difficult Navigation of 2000 Miles, for the greatest Part against the Stream,
and encumbered with Falls, so that it is impracticable for France to give her
Colonies in Canada an effectual Support through this Route; and consequently in
such Case she must hold them at the Will of Great Britain.

On the other hand, whilst Nova Scotia is in the Possession of the French, it
puts it into their Power, by the Command it gives them of the Navigation to and
from the British Northern Colonies, particularly those of New England, to
harrass and distress them exceedingly; and by its near Situation to the Eastern
Parts of the Massachusetts Bay, and the Province of New Hampshire, to deprive
Great Britain of the Naval Stores, which are now drawn from the King's Woods
there for masting the Royal Navy: And whereas the cold Climate and unfruitful
Soil of Canada and Cape Breton yield only a bare Sustenance for their present
Inhabitants, and make those Colonies incapable of supporting a large Number of
Troops; in which Circumstance consists very much the Security of the British
Colonies against the Encroachments of France; if France was augmented with the
Province of Nova Scotia, which is fertile of every Species of Provisions, she
would then be able to maintain in North America a numerous standing Army.

The New England Colonies, in every Period of this Provinces's Subjection to
the French, continually felt most pernicious Effects from it, in Depredations
upon their Trade, and Incursions into their Territories; so that in 1654 Oliver
Cromwell, for their Protection, was obliged to seize on all its Forts and
dispossess the French of the whole Country: After the Restitution of it to them
by the Treaty of Breda, New England again experienced the same mischievous
Consequences from their Possession of it, which always threatened Destruction to
her Colonies: And not to mention the intermediate Expeditions formed against it
from those Governments, and the alternate Change of Possession, it has
undergone; when France was sunk to its lowest Ebb of Power in Europe, by a long
Series of adverse Campaigns, during Queen Ann's Reign, yet even then the
New England Governments were so distressed by this Province's remaining in the
Hands of the French (though the Number of its Inhabitants did not exceed 4000),
that they twice addressed the Crown in the strongest Terms to sit out an
Armament from England for the Re-conquest of it; in consequence of which an
Expedition was formed against it, under the Command of General Nicholson, who
took it: And the Negociations at the Treaty of Utrecht, by which it was ceded
to Great Britain, will show with what extreme Reluctance France made the
Cession; and that nothing but the feeble State, she was then in, could have
reduced her to submit to it.

By the Cession of this Province, and Placentia in Newfoundland, to the
English, the French were left without any Harbor, or Sea Coast in that Part of
the Atlantic Ocean; in Consideration of which the Land of Cape Breton, which
lay within the ancient Limits of Nova Scotia or Acadie, but was excepted by the
Treaty of Utretcht out of the Cession, was yielded to France.

This Island, or rather Collection of Islands, called by the French Les Isles
de Madame, which lie so contiguous, that they are commonly supposed to be but
one, and comprehended under the Name of the Island of Cape Breton, or L' Isle
Royale, has a Sea Coast upon the Atlantic Ocean extending from the Gut of
Canso, the Eastern Boundary of Nova Scotia, about 34 Leagues E. N. E. to the
Entrance into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, between the Easter most Part of the
Island, and the West of Newfoundland, from which it is about 17 Leagues
distant: Its Western Side forms Part of the Gulf; and the Importance of it to
the French may be estimated from the Advantages which they have reaped from it
since it has been in their Possession.

Although the Harbor of Louisbourg is not a very good one for Shipping, and the
Island is barren; and but a small Number of Ships fish there, in Comparison of
those which are employed in the French Fisheries on the Banks of Newfoundland,
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and the neighboring Shores, Bays, Harbors, etc. yet
the Situation of it is such, that all their fishing Vessels can repair thither
on any Danger or Emergency; especially those which fish in the Gulf, on the
Main, or at the Northwest of Newfoundland, none of which are above one or two
Days Sail, at most, from Louisbourg; as may also those Vessels which load with
Mud-Fish on the Banks; so that this Island is the Center and Protection of
their whole Fishery: And of what Value that has been to them will appear by the
following Computation taken of it from Persons intimately acquainted with every
Branch of it, according to the State, in which it was carried on, this Year
before the War.

According to this Computation the Quantity of their Fish caught that Year was
1,149,000 Quintals of dry Fish, and 3,900,000 Mud-Fish; the Value of both
which, including 3,116 Ton of Train Oil drawn from the Blubber, amounts to
926,577 l. 10 s. according to the prime Cost of the Fish at Newfoundland; and
with the Addition of its Freight to the several Markets, where it is sold,
makes 949,192 l. 10 s. Sterling; and, if to this is added the Consumption,
which is made of their coarse Woollens by the Men employed in the Fishery,
reckoning for each a Blanket, Watch Coat, Rug, Pea-Jacket, etc. in the Whole 30
s. per Man, as also the Brandy they consume, together with the Canvas, Cordage,
Nets, Hooks, Grapplins, Anchors, etc. that the Ships and Shallops of this
Fishery must expend at Sea and on Shore, the Value of it will amount at least
to one Million Sterling per Annum, at which it is generally computed.

But in order to form a just Estimate of the Value of this Branch of Trade to
the French, the Consideration of its beneficial Consequences should be taken
in; these consist principally in the following Articles:

1st, The Train Oil produced by it is necessary to the French in their Woolen
Manufactory; in which they have already rivaled us with too much Success; and
their Sugar Colonies abroad, which cannot do without it, are supplied with it
from France out of this Fishery.

2dly, The Trade, it opens for them into the Mediterranean, and all the Roman
Catholic States, where they carry their Fish to Market, and by the Means of it
force a Vent for other French Manufactures; which has been found so beneficial
to their commercial Interest, that they have been indefatigable in the
Cultivation of it, sparing no Pains nor Cost, and using every Art to monopolize
it; for which Purpose, from the Beginning they have used their utmost
Endeavors in time of War between the two Nations, to procure a Neutrality in
North America, so far as relates to the Fishery there; that they might even
then carry it on, and prosecute their Voyages unmolested.

3dly, The great Increase of their Navigation and Seamen arising from this
Fishery; in which 564 Ships, besides Shallops, and 27,500 Seamen are employed;
Circumstances, especially the latter, which considered with regard to their
maritime Force, are of themselves as valuable to France as the Revenue of the
Fishery itself: Well therefore might Pere Charlevoix in his History of
New-France observe, That this Fishery was a more valuable Source of Wealth and
Power to France, than even the Mines of Peru or Mexico would be.

And this great Branch of Trade may be said to depend upon their Possession of
the Island of Cape Breton, as it is impossible for them to carry it on without
some convenient Harbor of Strength to supply and protect it; and Louisbourgh
is the only one, they have in this Part of the Atlantic Ocean.

Besides the Fishery, there are likewise other Advantages which arise to the
French from their Possession of this Island; France has not one Sea Port for
the Relief and Shelter of her trading Ships either to, or from the East or West
Indies open to them any where in North America, to the Northward of the River
Missisippi, except Louisbourg; and of consequence, that whole Trade would be
exposed to the English Privateers from the Northern Colonies in time of War,
without any Place to retreat to; and in time of Peace, they would be without
any Sea Port, they can call their own, or lay any Pretensions to in those Seas;
but Louisbourg serves them as an Harbor for their Ships employed in this Trade
to resort to for Wood and Water, to clean or repair, for Convoy from thence to
Old France, and on occasion of any Distress; as it likewise does to their
Vessels to and from Canada, by having the Cover and Command of great Part of
the Gulf of St. Lawrence; without which Protection and Retreat their Trade from
thence, and even the Country itself, would not be worth the Expense, which
France is at for the Maintenance of them.

To all this must be added, that the Possession of this Island puts it into
their Power to annoy the Trade of the British Northern Colonies in time of War
with their Privateers from this Harbor, to so great a Degree, that it has ever
been called by the English, the Dunquerque of North America.

From the foregoing Enumeration of the Advantages accruing to the French from
their Possession of this Island, it is obvious of what Importance the
Possession of it would be to the English. -- The English, when the French are
entirely excluded from the Cod Fishery; which they must be, when they lose Cape
Breton, and are not allowed any Privilege at Newfoundland, would have the whole
Benefit of it to themselves; in which Case all the Roman Catholic States must
then depend on the English solely for their Baccalio; which, besides the
Profits arising immediately from it, would give them almost the whole Trade of
the Mediterranean, with an Increase of 27,000 Seamen for the Royal Navy, and
put it absolutely in their Power to cut off all Communication between France
and Canada, except through the Missisippi (as is before observed) and threby
not only render Canada of little or no Utility to the French, but deprive it of
all effectual Support from France, against any Attempts of the English for the
Reduction of it.

From the State of these two Colonies it is clear, what the Difference would
have been to Great Britain in the Course of this War, if instead of the
Preservation of Nova Scotia and Reduction of Cape Breton, she had lost the
former to the French, and they had kept Possession of the latter: In that Case,
France by gaining the principal Key of the Northern Colonies, extending her Sea
Coast 90 Leagues further upon the Atlantic, and augmenting her Territories in
Canada, and the Island of Cape Breton with so large a Provision Country as Nova
Scotia, lying contiguous to both of them, would have had it in her Power to
introduce and support a Body of regular Troops there, which in Conjunction with
the Militia of Canada and the Indians upon the Continent (every one of which,
the Six Nations not excepted, would soon then have gone over to their Interest)
would overrun the British Colonies already surrounded with a Line of French
Forts carried on upon the Back of them for that Purpose.

If ever Great Britain should receive such a Blow in her American Dominions, it
would be in vain to hope to retrieve it by her superior Naval Force; on the
other hand, if it is considered, how much the Strength of the French Marine
would be thereby increased, and that of the British diminished, little doubt
can be made, that the present Superiority of the Naval Force of Great Britain
to that of France would survive the Loss of her Colonies but a few Years.

Upon the Cession of Nova Scotia to Great Britain at the Treaty of Utrecht, it
was garrisoned with nine Companies of the late Lieutenant General Philips's
Regiment of 31 privates each, five of which were posted at Annapolis Royal and
four at Canso.

As to the French Inhabitants (whom for distinctionsake I shall call Acadians)
which were found in the Province at the Reduction of it, they were by the
Treaty allowed their Option either to retire with their moveable Effects to any
other Place within a Year, or to remain there and be subject to the Kingdom of
Great Britain, and to have the free Exercise of the Catholic Religion, as far
as the Laws of Great Britain would allow.

Much the greatest Part made their Election to remain in Nova Scotia, but could
not be induced to take the Oath of Allegiance, pleading in Excuse, that if they
bound themselves to take up Arms in defense of the English Government, they
should be exposed to be made a Sacrifice to the Ravages of the Indians in the
French Interest: Upon this Plea General Phillips, then Governor of the
Province, permitted them to stay there for some Years without giving this Test
of their Allegiance; but at length, to bring them to comply, he indulged them,
(though without being authorized, as appears, by the Crown,) with an Exemption
from bearing Arms upon any Occasion whatever; they were likewise not only
allowed the public Profession of the Romish Religion, but suffered to be
supplied with French Missionaries from Canada, who under the Bishop of Quebec
exercised Rule over them in secular as well as spiritual Matters, enforcing an
Obedience to their Decisions and Mandates by the Infliction of Ecclesiastical
Penalties; whilst the only, or at least principal Act of Government exercised
by the English Governor among them seems to have been, the Appointment, or
rather Allowance from time to time, of Deputies chosen by and among themselves
for their several Districts; and even those frequently behaved in the Execution
of their Office, as if they thought themselves scarcely accountable to the
English Government for the Exercise of that Authority.

By this means, though these Inhabitants became English Subjects by Virtue of
the Treaty and their Oath of Allegiance; yet the French Governor in Canada
preserved the chief Influence and Command over them, and cultivated in them
their former hereditary Attachment to the French King; so that they continued a
distinct Body of French Roman Catholics, exempted by the English Government
from bearing Arms in Defense of it; and kept by their Priests so unmixed with
and separate from the English, that but two English Families could settle among
them, though several had attempted it; the Consequence of all which was, that the
Increase of these Acadians, instead of strengthening the King's Government, as
they naturally ought to have done, became dangerous to it; and by remaining in
the Province were of much greater Service to France, than if they had removed
into the French Government immediately after the Treaty of Utrecht, as they
were a growing Stock in Nova Scotia for settling it with French Inhabitants,
even whilst it was in the Hands of the English; and at the same time
contributed to the Growth of Cape Breton by supplying it with Provisions;
whereas by removing into Canada, they would have been rather burdensome to it
by occasioning (for some Years at least) a Scarcity of Provisions among the
Inhabitants there.

In the mean time the Island of Cape Breton, which it appears from the
Negotiations of the Treaty of Utrecht, France had it much at Heart to obtain
the exclusive Possession of, was immediately begun to be fortified and settled
with French Inhabitants, in doing which no Costs or Pains was spared: A new
Colony was set on foot to consist of Fishermen only with suitable
Encouragement; the Town of Louisbourg was built and garrisoned: the Harbor
made at an immense Charge almost impregnable; and the Place became so national
an Object, that it was valued by France equal to any one other of her Colonies;
and the Fishery flourished so fast, that they could soon afford to undersell
the English at foreign Markets: for the Protection of this Trade, Ships of War
were annually sent from France, to visit and supply the Settlers and Fishery
with what they wanted, and had Orders not only to protect and defend the Sea
Coasts of this Island and the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and their Vessels upon the
Banks of Newfoundland, etc. from Insults, but to keep up their Pretensions to
the several Banks either within or without their Line, and make to themselves a
Privilege of Fishing where they pleased, by force of Custom: And so early were
these Encroachments on the English at Canso, and upon the fishing Banks along
the Sea Coast of Nova Scotia (from which France was wholly excluded by an
express Article in the Treaty of Utrecht) that it was found necessary to have
one of the King's Ships sent every Year from England, and station'd at Canso to
guard against them: And to such a Pitch had the French advanced the Trade,
Shipping and Settlements of this Island by the Year 1744, that upon the
breaking out of the War, Mr. Duquesnel then Governor of the Colony, within
three Days after the Declaration of it arrived from France, fitted out an
Armament under the Command of Mr. Duvivier from Louisbourg (being favored
therein by the casual Absence of the Canso Station Ship, omitted to be sent
that Year, as was likewise the usual Station Ship to Boston) which entering the
Harbor of Canso about 20 Leagues distant by Night, surprised the Fort, burnt
it with the other Buildings there, destroyed the Fishery (as is before
observed) and carried the Garrison, which consisted of about 80 private Men fit
for Duty, to Louisbourg; where, by the Terms of their Capitulation they were to
remain Prisoners of War for one Year from the 24th of May 1744, at the End of
which they were to be sent by the French Governor, either to Annapolis Royal or
to New England.

Among the Artifices practiced by the French of Canada, for paving their Way to
regain the Possession of Nova Scotia, and seize the first Opportunity for that
Purpose; the following may serve as a remarkable Specimen: A short Time before
the Declaration of War, and when the Colonies were in full Expectation of it,
the French procured the Indians of St. John's River to send a Deputation of
their principal Men to the Commander in Chief of Annapolis Royal, on pretense
of renewing the Covenant of Peace and Amity with his Government (which was
accordingly done with the usual Indian Formalities) but in reality to lull the
Governor into a false Security with respect to the Indians, and at the same
time gain Admittance into the Fort, in order to discover the State of it, and
hold themselves in readiness to attack it, upon the first Summons; which they
did, and together with the other Indians of their River composed Part of the
Body, which invested the Fort under the Command of Le Loutre.

The first Notice, the English had of Canso's being taken and burnt, was
brought to Boston by a Fisherman, who had descried, as he was fishing upon a
Bank opposite the Island, a Cloud of Smoke rising from some Ruins; and at the
same time missed the Sight of the Block-house and other Buildings there, which
used to be seen off at Sea from the Bank, he was upon; and this was in a Day or
two confirmed by another Massachusetts Fisherman, who after being chaced by a
French Vessel, went on Shore upon the Island, where he found all the Buildings
in Ruins, and that the Garrison, Inhabitants and and Cattle were removed off.

This Intelligence left the Governor and Council of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay no room to doubt from what Quarter the sudden Blow must come,
and that the War, which before was expected to break out soon between
Great Britain and France, had been proclaimed in Europe.

For this Success Te Deum was sung at Paris, and public Rejoicings made, and a
pompous Account of it was published in the French Papers; which, as the
Conquest considered in itself appeared but small, was imputed to a Vanity of
magnifying the slightest Actions to the World; but France estimated it from the
Importance, which the Destruction of the English Fishery, and the Reduction of
the whole Province of Nova Scotia would be of to her; and looked upon her
Success against Canso as a sure Forerunner of the Reconquest of the one, and
the utter Destruction of the other; both which they had in View to accomplish
and that her Hopes were not without Foundation will appear from the State of
the Province at this Juncture: The whole Defense of it, after the Reduction of
Canso, consisted in the Fort of Annapolis Royal, the Works of which were of
Earth revested with Timber, but so ruinous in several Parts, that the Cattle
could walk over them into the Fort; and the Garrison had not above 80 Men fit
for Service, the rest being superannuated, or Invalids.

The following Circumstances increased the Alarm upon this Occasion: A few
Months before the Arrival of this Account, the Governor Shirley.
Massachusetts Governor had received Letters from the Lieutenant Governor
Mascarene.
Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of the Province of Nova Scotia,
acquainting him, that his Majesty's Fort at Annapolis Royal was in so
defenseless a Condition, and the Garrison so weak, that in case of a sudden
Rupture with France, they should, without speedy Assistance from Boston, be in
Danger of falling into the Enemy's Hands: It was also known that his Majesty's
Engineer for NovaScotia had, in the preceding Winter received Orders from the
Board of Ordnance, to build a new Fort of Stone at Annapolis Royal; as soon as
the Season would permit, and that he was preparing to lay the Foundation of it;
which would make the Garrison less attentive to repair the Works of the old
Fort.

This Account therefore of the Motions of the French gave just Grounds to dread
their following the late Blow, they had given Canso, with an immediate Attempt
against the Fort of Annapolis Royal; the Reduction of which would have put them
into the Possession of the whole Country of Nova Scotia, with about 16,000
French Inhabitants, who were justly suspected of a Disposition to join with
them against the English.

Wherefore to prevent the Garrison at Annapolis Royal from being surprised by
the Enemy, and to apprize Mr. Mascarene of the Necessity of repairing the old
Fort in the best manner, the ruinous State of its Works, and the short time he
had to do it in, would admit; the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay dispatched
an armed Vessel in the Service of the Province, to Annapolis Royal, with an
Account of the Motions of the French, and a Promise to send the Garrison a
speedy Reinforcement.

Upon this Emergency likewise he represented to the Assembly the imminent
Danger, his Majesty's Fort at Annapolis-Royal, with the whole Province of
NovaScotia, was in; and pressed them to enable him to send it immediate
Succors; whereupon with their usual Readiness to exert themselves upon all
Occasions for his Majesty's Service and the common cause, they granted a Bounty
and other Encouragements for four Companies of Volunteers of 60 private Men
each to in list, together with three Months Provisions, and the Costs of their
Transportation; but as the Charge of maintaining the Garrisons of that Province
appertained to the Crown, they left the Pay for the Officers and Men to be
provided for by the Governor; who accordingly proceeded to raise them with the
utmost Expedition, upon the Faith of his Proclamation: but as the Urgency of
the Service would not admit of staying till the whole Complement could be
raised, and the Fate of the Province was brought to a Crisis; as soon as 80 of
them could be got ready to embark, which was within a few Days, he sent them
under Convoy of the Massachusetts Snow of 16 Carriage Guns to Annapolis Royal,
where upon their Arrival they found the Fort had been invested eleven Days by a
Body of about 700 Indians mixed with a few French Inhabitants in Indian
Disguise, and the Priest Le Loutre at their Head: This Enemy, though without
Artillery for making regular Breaches, yet as the Works were ruinous and
assailable almost on every Side, attacked it without Intermission, but chiefly
in the Night; whereby the Garrison was kept in a continual Alarm in every
Quarter, and both Officers and Men were so harrassed and worn out by constant
Fatigue of Duty and continual Watches, that they could not have held out many
Days longer: And it was perhaps in some degree owing to the Barbarity of a
savage Foe, and the Reproach which would have arisen from the King's Fort's
being given up, by a Garrison of regular Troops, to an undisciplined Indian
Rout, with a Priest at their Head, together with the daily Expectation of
Succors from Boston, that they held out in Defense of the Fort so long as they
did.

Upon the Appearance of this Reinforcement in the Basin of Annapolis, and the
Snow's saluting the Fort with a Discharge of its Cannon, the Indians were
thrown into such Confusion and Panic, that they not only made a precipitate
Retreat, and gave the Troops an Opportunity of landing and marching into the
Fort, without the least Opposition, but soon after dispersed, and could not be
brought back to give the Garrison any Molestation, till Mr. Duvivier's Attempt
against it two Months after.

This Relief gave the Garrison time to breathe, and repair the Works of the
Fort, and kept the French Inhabitants, who by this Visit from Boston were
persuaded that the Garrison would be effectually supported, in such respect,
that upon the Departure of the Indians they renewed their Communication with
it, and readily furnished whatever Materials and Workmen were wanted for
strengthening the Fort; and supplied the Garrison with Refreshments.

Soon after this the Massachusetts Governor sent to Annapolis Royal a second
Party of 100 of the new raised Succors, with an armed Brigantine belonging to
the Province; which Reinforcement put the Garrison into a State of Security
against an Indian Enemy, and the Fort by this time was so much strengthened,
that it was not to be reduced without a Train of Artillery.

The fourth Company was designed to be composed wholly of Indians, if possible,
to be employed in scouting Parties, through every Part of the Peninsula both by
Land and Water, for which Service they were to be provided with two
Row-Gallies, so that the raising and fitting this Company out took up more Time
than the other three.

Whilst these Operations were carrying on, Mr. Duvivier, who commanded the
Armament upon the Descent against Canso, was sent by Governor of Cape-Breton.
Mr. Duquesnel, immediately after his Return from that Expedition, upon another
against Placentia in Newfoundland: This Attempt, in which he was disappointed
by contrary Winds, made a very happy Diversion in favor of Nova Scotia; where
it was apprehended he would have immediately proceeded upon the Reduction of
Canso; had he done that, he would have surprised the Fort and Garrison at
Annapolis Royal as he did that at Canso; before they had got any Notice of the
Declaration of War, or were in the least apprised of his coming.

It was indeed an Error in Mr. Duquesnel's Conduct, that he did not strike his
first Blow at Annapolis Royal; his Forces, in conjunction with Le Loutre's
Indians, must at that Time have secured the Conquest of it, before any other of
the English Colonies, or even the Garrison at Canso could have gained
Intelligence of the Attempt; this would have put him in Possession of the whole
Province, except Canso, with 4 or 5000 fighting Men ready to join him; and the
Reduction of Canso after that could not have been a matter of the least
Difficulty; his Omission to avail himself of so favorable an Opportunity for
making an Acquisition of this important Province at one Stroke, seems to have
proceeded from his too eagerly grasping at Placentia, and the Destruction of
the English Fishery at Newfoundland, almost at the same Instant; but to
whatsoever Cause it was owing, it was certainly the Preservation of Nova Scotia
by giving an Opportunity for relieving it with Succors from Boston.

Upon Mr. Duvivier's Return from the Expedition against Placentia, which was
toward the latter End of August, Mr. Duquesnel lost no Time for making an
Attempt against Annapolis Royal; and for that Purpose dispatched Mr. Duvivier
with some Troops from Louisbourg to Beau Basin; there he landed, and being
joined by the Indians, who waited his Arrival at Minas, proceeded with a Body
of about 700 Men to Annapolis Royal, and invested the Fort, in Expectation of
being soon followed up the Bay of Funda by three French Men of War of 70, 56
and 30 Guns, with 280 more Land Forces, and a large Train of Artillery and
Ordnance Stores, that Mr. Duquesnel then depended upon sending him out of the
Squadron, which at that Time lay in Louisbourg Harbor, and was destined to
convoy the West India Fleet in their Return to France: These did not follow
him; if they had, it would have enabled him to form a regular Siege by Land and
Water against the Fort, and in all Probability to have carried it: However Mr.
Duvivier, by assuring Mr. Mascarene in a Letter, that the French Ships were
already got to the Mouth of the Bay, and that though he should fail of this
expected Rein for cement, he was determined to spend the Winter in the Siege,
so far succeeded, as to bring Mr. Mascarene to treat with him about a Surrender
of the Fort, in case of the Arrival of those Ships, with the Land Forces and
Ordnance Stores which he assured him, they had on board; but this Treaty
breaking off upon Mr. Duvivier's insisting at last, that the Fort should be
immediately put into his Hands upon his Promise to redeliver Possession of it,
if the expected Armament did not arrive by a Time limited; and the Garrison
most opportunely receiving a further Reinforcement by the Company of Indian
Rangers about the same Time from the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay, the
French Commandant despairing of the Arrival of the Vessels with the Troops,
Artillery and Stores, decamped and retired to Minas, with an Intent (as it was
then apprehended) to winter there, and work upon the Inhabitants to join with
him in an Attempt against the Garrison early in the Spring; of their readiness
to do which, their Behavior ever since the Time of his having entered Minas,
they had given great Reason to suspect them.

To prevent this by dislodging Mr. Duvivier and his Party from their Winter
Quarters, and guard the Basin of Annapolis' Royal against an Attempt by Sea
with any small-Vessels of War, which might be fitted out from Louisbourg, the
Governor of the Massachusetts Bay (who was then unacquainted with the Arrival
of the French Squadron there) determined to send to Annapolis-Royal, though it
was very late in the Year, an armed Snow, Brigantine and Sloop belonging to the
Province, with Orders to take in some small Cannon and Mortars, with such a
Detachment of Soldiers from the Garrison, as Mr. Mascarene could spare, and
proceed to Minas, in order to land them with a Party of Seamen and drive Mr.
Duvivier from thence; and in the mean time acquainted Mr. Marcarene with this
Design.

Whilst these Preparations were making at Boston in the latter End of October,
the Governor had Intelligence brought him by a Fisherman from the Isle of
Seals, that he had seen forty Hours before three French Vessels standing up the
Bay of Funda; these were found afterward to be a Banker of about 400 Ton with
a Brigantine and Sloop, which Mr. Duquesnel upon being disappointed of
Assistance from the Men of War had fitted out from Louisbourg in a warlike
Manner, and ordered to proceed up the Bay of Funda with Ordnance Stores for
attacking the Fort at Annapolis Royal by Sea, whilst Mr. Duvivier, whom he
supposed they would find before the Fort, attacked it by Land; whereupon the
Governor of the Massachusetts Bay dispatched, the Day following, a Schooner to
Mr. Mascarene with Advice of the Designs of the French, and Assurances that he
would send the three armed Vessels beforementioned, all well appointed, in
four Days to his Assistance.

The French Vessels accordingly arrived at the Narrows below the Basin of
Annapolis, where they came to an Anchor till they could get Information whether
Mr. Duvivier, was still before the Fort: Two Days after, the English Schooner,
which carried the Dispatches for Mr. Mascarene, incautiously fell in among them
in the Night Time; and the Master in his Surprise suffered the Governor's
Dispatches to fall into the Enemy's Hands; the Effect of this was, that the
French Commodore finding Mr. Duvivier had retired from before the Fort, and
that a Naval Force was coming after him from Boston, cut his Cable and
immediately quitted the Bay, and by that means escaped the Massachusetts
Vessels, which entered the Bay soon after he had got out of it.

The Massachusetts Vessels upon their Arrival at Annapolis Royal attempted to
look into the (...) of Minas and Schiognecto in quest of Mr. Duvivier and his
Party, according to their Orders from Boston; and to assist the Inhabitants in
such manner as Mr. Mascarene should direct: But the Season being very
tempestuous, the Navigation of the Bay exceeding dangerous, and Mr. Mascarene
having received certain Advice, that the Indians were dispersed, and Mr.
Duvivier gone with the Remainder of his Party to Louisbourg (as in Fact he was)
after staying at Annapolis till the latter End of January to countenance the
Garrison, and keep the French Inhabitants in a proper Respect and Awe, reurned
to Boston.

Mr. Duvivier having retired to Minas, the Company of Rangers was posted
without the Fort, under the Cover of the Cannon, and secured by such further
Defense, as could be immediately raised with Pickets and other slight Works;
which manner of posting them was better adapted for the Service they were to be
employed in, at the same time, that it was more agreeable to them than to be
lodged in Barracks within the Fort.

Before their Arrival, the Garrison was confined within the Walls of the Fort,
so that the Spot upon which it stood might justly be said to be the only one in
the Province, which they were Masters of: But these Indians under the
Management of Officers who understood the proper Use of them, and to whose
Orders they were perfectly obedient, soon freed it from that Restraint, and
were in many other Respects of infinite Service to it: By their sudden
Excursions (frequently made in the Night Time) into different Parts of the
Province either by Land Marches, or Descents in their Row-Gallies, they gained
Intelligence of the Motions of the Enemy, and secret Correspondence kept up
between them and the Inhabitants, and, when Occasion required, seized such of
the latter, as appeared to be Ringleaders and the most dangerous among them; by
which means, and sometimes by surprising Parties of the Cape Sable Indians,
which were found in the neighboring Woods, they not only became a Terror to
the French Inhabitants, but to the Indians too; and the Garrison Troops, by
going out with them in Parties, were likewise made serviceable in that Duty.

To these timely Reinforcements and Succors, the Governor and his Majesty's
Council of Nova Scotia in their Letter of Thanks to the Governor of the
Massachusetts Bay impute the Preservation of his Majesty's Garrison and the
whole Province from falling into the Enemy's Hands that Year; and his Majesty,
upon having an Account of the Proceedings for the Preservation of the Province
laid before him, was pleased in Council to declare his Royal Approbation of his
Conduct therein, and that his Majesty would stand to the Engagements which he
had made upon this Occasion in his Name; and a Copy of his Majesty's Royal
Declaration was accordingly transmitted to him at Boston under the Seal of the
Council Office.

Whilst these Matters were in Agitation, a Flag of Truce arrived some Time in
August at Boston from Louisbourg with English Prisoners to be exchanged, and
Dispatches from Mr. Duquesnel to the Massachusetts Governor, who learned from
the former, that the Cans^ Soldiers were confined very close in unwholesome
Prisons, and suffered great Hardships, by which some had died, and others been
forced into the French Service; and in the Letter, Mr. Duquesnel proposed to
him a Neutrality between the French and English Colonies, so far as related to
the Fishery; as also that for the future the fishing Vessels of each Nation
should carry on their fishing and prosecute their Voyages unmolested by the
other; in Answer to this Proposal, the Massachusetts Governor told him, he
could not avoid expressing some Surprise, that after he had taken and burnt
Canso, destroyed the whole English Fishery along that Coast, and made the
Fisherman Prisoners, contrary to the Treaty of Neutrality concluded in 1686
between the two Kingdoms, he should propose one upon the Foot of a private
Convention between the Governors of two Colonies, and even without offering to
indemnify the English for the Damages they had already sustained by his
Hostilities from Louisbourg; that he was obliged likewise to acquaint him, he
was sorry to hear, his Majesty's Troops which were made Prisoners at Canso by
Capitulation for one Year only, underwent such Hardships in their Confinement
at Louisbourg, as destroyed some of them, and forced others, for Relief, to
engage in the French King's Service; whereby the Articles of the Capitulation
were frustrated, and his Majesty was lilely to have few or none of his Troops
left to be returned at the End of the Year; that as he doubted not of Mr.
Duquesnel's Disposition to have the War carried on with Moderation and Humanity
toward those, who should have the Misfortune to be made Prisoners on either
Side, and a due Regard to the Rights of each Crown in its Subjects, who should
be made Prisoners by Capitulation, he would propose that the Cans^ Troops
should be sent to Boston as soon as might be, and he would be answerable that
both Officers and Soldiers should perform the Conditions, upon which they
surrendered; and he hoped Mr. Duquesnel would have no Objection to the
Proposal, as his sending them away would ease the Government of France of the
Expense of maintaining them, the Remainder of the Year.

The French Governor, upon receiving this Proposal, acquainted the English
Officers with it; and let them know, he should accede to it, upon their giving
their Parole, that neither they nor the Soldiers should serve against the
French for the Space of one Year after the Expiration of that, for which they
had agreed by the Articles of Capitulation to remain Prisoners: And upon their
objecting to it, he told them, that as their remaining at Louisbourg would be
inconvenient, he should, if they did not accept of these new Terms, be obliged
to send them to Quebec, from whence it would be impracticable for them to get
Home long before the Time, he proposed to them.

Though the French Governor's exacting from the Officers this new Agreement,
whereby the King was to be deprived of the Service of his Troops one Year
longer than they had surrendered themselves for, was a manifest Infringement of
the Articles of the Capitulation, and what the Officers had no right to consent
to; yet they thought it for his Majesty's Service to submit to it; and
accordingly gave their Parole; upon which the Troops were sent to Boston.

Upon the Arrival of the Officers there the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay
gained such Intelligence of the State of Louisbourg, as with other Motives
induced him to entertain a Design of forming an Expedition against it early in
the succeeding Year.

These Motives were as follows:

With regard to the State of Louisbourg, it appeared that the Garrison and
Inhabitants must be distressed in a short Time for want of Provisions, having
been a few Weeks before exhausted by furnishing the East India Fleet and
Squadron, which convoyed it, with Supplies for prosecuting their Voyage to
France. -- That the Troops of the Garrison, which consisted only of six
Companies of Marines and one Swiss of 100 Men each were short of Complement,
and badly disciplined, the whole greatly discontented, and the Company of Swiss
very mutinous; that the Inhabitants were but few, and most of them unacquainted
with the Use of Fire Arms; that several Parts of the Fortifications were out of
Repair, particularly the Grand Battery, which had one End almost open,
occasioned by a new Work's being unfinished, and many other Parts of it
extremely low, and the whole commanded by a Hill close behind it. -- That Mr.
Dutchambon, who succeeded Mr. Duquesnel, then lately dead, as Governor of the
Colony, was wholly unskilled in the Defense of a Fortification, the Engineer
absent, and the other Officers not much used to military Discipline; and that
their Number of Troops was so small, as put it entirely out of their Power to
defend the several Parts, they were liable to be attacked in. -- That though
the Harbor was strongly fortified, there were many convenient Places in
Chapeau Rouge Bay for landing Troops, Cannon and Stores on the back Side of
Louisbourg, free from any Annoyance, and laying up the Transports in such
manner, that the Troops might have it in their Power to Retreat to them upon an
Emergency; that the City of Louisbourg had no Batteries upon the Land Side; and
the Extent of it was so small, that every House in it was exposed to the Bombs
and Cannon of the Besiegers; which must oblige both Inhabitants and Soldiers
when off Duty, to retire into the Casmates, that were extremely damp and
unwholesome. -- That the Grand Battery, which could not make any Defense by
Land, and from the beforementioned State of it appeared not to be tenable,
when attacked on that Side, would probably be deserted on the first Approach of
an Enemy; and that by getting Possession of it, and erecting Fascine Batteries
near the LightHouse, and in other convenient Places, it would be difficult, if
not impracticable for any Ships to enter the Harbor against the Fire from
them. -- Upon all which Accounts it was extremely improbable that the Place
should hold out long against a Body of 3 or 4000 Men without Succors from
France, which might be prevented from receiving Intelligence of its
Circumstances in Time to send it Relief, by the armed Vessels, which might be
collected in the Colonies, and would be a sufficient Force to intercept
whatever might come from Canada, as also any Merchant Ships with Provisions
from France in the Spring.

The other Motives, which induced the Governor to think of forming an immediate
Expedition against it, were -- That Mr. Duvivier was sent by Mr. Duquesnel, a
short Time before his Death, to France, in order to represent to the Government
the weak Condition of Annapolis Royal, and State of the whole Province of Nova
Scotia; and to procure an Armament from thence early the next Year to make an
Attempt against it: -- That the New England Fishery was wholly destroyed; as
would likewise the Trade of the Northern Colonies be by the French Ships of War
and Privateers from Louisbourg the Year following; that the Reduction of
Louisbourg would be the most effectual Means of securing Nova Scotia, restoring
the English Fishery, and destroying that of the French, and protecting the
Trade of the Colonies; and would facilitate the Conquest of Canada itself, if
that should be thought proper to be attempted in the succeeding Year: But in
case the Success of the Expedition should fall short of the Reduction of Cape
Breton; yet the certain Effects of it would be the recovering of the Island of
Canso, and the whole Fishery along the Coast as far as Newfoundland by
destroying the Buildings, and breaking up all the Settlements and Fishery upon
the Island of Cape Breton; the causing such a Diversion as would probably
secure Nova Scotia for the following Year at least; and the disarming the
Harbor of Louisbourg of the Grand Battery; which would make it more
practicable for the King's Ships to enter it, in case a naval Armament should
be sent against it from England; all which would greatly overpay the Expense of
the Attempt.

It was not doubted, that the French would form another Attempt from Canada
against Annapolis Royal early in the Spring; but as the Fort was then in a much
better Posture of Defense by the Repairing of its old Works, and the Addition
of new ones, and its Garrison strengthened with the several Reinforcements sent
from Boston, and it appeared probable to the Massachusetts Governor, that the
Expedition against Cape Breton, which he had determined to set on Foot, would
make a considerable Diversion in favor of it, he sent no further
Reinforcements to it that Year: Early in the Spring 1745, Mr. Marin, as was
expected, invested the fort with about 1100 French Indians from Canada, but
could make no Impression upon it; he continued however his Hostilities there,
till the Landing of the New England Troops upon the Island of Cape Breton,
whereupon the French Governor found means to send for him to come to his
Assistance; which broke up the Siege of Annapolis Rayal, and ridded the
Province of the Enemy for sixteen Months.

About the Middle of January 1744-5 the Massachusetts Governor recommended it
in a Message to the Assembly to prosecute an Expedition against the Island of
Cape Breton early in the Spring.

The Assembly, upon the Secretary's laying the Message before them, bound their
Members to Secrecy; and after three Days close Deliberation upon it, sent him
an Answer; the Substance of which was, that they were sensible of the Necessity
there was for making an Attempt, as soon as possible, for the Reduction of the
Island of Cape Breton; but the Undertaking was too great for the Abilities of
the Province, and prayed him to represent to his Majesty, how essential it was
for the Security of the Colonies and his Service in North America, that an
Expedition should be fitted out from England against this Island, and that they
were ready to contribute toward the Prosecution of it to the utmost of their
Power.

If every Advantage proposed by the Governor in this Expedition had depended
upon effecting the Reduction of the Island, the Measure recommended by the
Assembly must have been more eligible to him than setting on foot, without the
Sanction of the King's Orders, an Attempt of that Consequence; which, if it had
failed of Success, might have been condemned as imprudent and rash; but as he
was fully persuaded of the high Probability, or rather Certainty of succeeding
at least in the other Points beforementioned, particularly the Preservation of
his Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia from the Danger, it appeared to be
threatened with that Year from France; the recovering the English Fishery, and
Destruction of that of the French; and that the same Advantages, which
presented for effecting this early in the Spring, could not be expected
afterward in the Course of the War, he thought it incumbent on him to avail
himself of that Opportunity for promoting the National Interests as well as
those of the Northern Colonies; which must have been lost, if he had waited
till he could have received his Majesty's Pleasure thereupon.

The Subject of the Assembly's Deliberations, and the Result of them,
notwithstanding the Care taken to keep them secret, had so far transpired, that
Marblehead, the principal fishing Town, and Boston the chief trading Town and
Metropolis of the Province had determined to Petition the General Court to have
the proposed Expedition set on foot; and the Governor thereupon moved the
Assembly in two other Messages to resume the Consideration of this Enterprise;
and the more effectually to induce them to come into it, recommended to them to
examine the Persons, from whom he had received his Intelligence, concerning the
Practicableness of it.

The Assembly immediately entered into a second Consideration of the Affair and
after spending three Days more in examining the Persons, whom the Governor
referred them to, with the closest Attention, came to the following Resolves.

That it was incumbent upon the Massachusetts Government to embrace the
favorable Opportunity, which then ossered, for attempting the Reduction of the
Island of Cape Breton.

That the Captain General should be desired to issue his Proclamation for the
inlisting 3,000 Volunteers (which they increased after to 3,250), for that
Purpose, under such Officers as he should appoint.

That Provision should be made for furnishing the necessary warlike Stores for
the Expedition.

That four Months Provisions should be laid in.

That a Committee should be appointed to procure fit Vessels to serve as
Transports, to be ready to depart the Beginning of March.

That a suitable Naval Force should be provided for their Convoy, as the
General Court should thereafter order.

And that Application should be forthwith made to the Governments of New York,
New Jersey, Pensilvania, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, to
furnish their respective Quota's of Men and Vessels to accompany or follow the
Forces of the Province.

From these Resolves it appears, that this Expedition was undertaken by the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay before it was known, whether any of the other
Colonies would assist them in it; and upon this Circumstance in a great Measure
depended the Success of it; neither the Dispatch nor Secrecy, with which it was
to be pushed on, would admit of a Participation of Councils with the other
Colonies in the Formation and Direction of it: The Length of Time, it would
have taken up before all the Governments concerned would have agreed, first
upon the Expediency of the Attempt, afterward upon their respective Quota's of
Troops and other Expense, the Plan to be formed, the Partition of Command in
the Execution of it, and other Points, would in all Probability have rendered
the Scheme abortive; whereas, when the voting of every thing requisite for
carrying the Attempt on in the best manner centered in the Assembly of one
Province, whose Governor had the Direction of the whole, there was a fair
Prospect of succeeding in it: It was besides an easier Task to bring the other
Colonies to accede to an Expedition, in which they were deeply interested,
after it was resolved upon, and undertaken by the Massachusetts Government, than
to induce them to a Concurrence in it at first, as Principals: But if every one
of the other Governments had failed to assist in it, as some of them in fact
did, the Massachusetts was determined to have taken the whole Burden of
prosecuting it upon themselves.

The Governments, which joined with the Massachusetts Bay in this Expedition,
were those of Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island; the first voted 500
Men for the Service, upon Condition that the Massachusetts Governor would give
the commanding Officer of their Forces the second Commission in the Expedition,
which he accordingly did by his Commission: The Province of New Hampshire voted
300, and the Colony of Rhode Island the same Number.

The Colony Naval Force for this Enterprise consisted of 3 Frigates of 20 Guns
each, a Snow of 16, a Brigantine of 12, and 5 armed Sloops mounting from 8 to
12 Carriage-Guns, provided at the Expense of the Massachusetts Bay; and of the
Connecticut and Rhode Island Sloops, both of 10 or 12 Carriage Guns, and a
small armed Vessel from New Hampshire.

The Train of Artillery collected by the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay
consisted of 8 Cannon of 22 lb Ball, 12 of 9 Pound, 2 Mortars of 12 Inches
Diameter, one of 11, and one of 9, taken from his Majesty's Castle William in
the Massachusetts Harbor, being all that could be spared from thence without
weakening the Fort too much, and ten Cannon of 18 Pound Ball borrowed by him
for this Occasion of the Governor of New York: This is the whole, which could
be procured in Time, and the Massachusetts Governor depended upon its being
increased with some Pieces of Ordnance from the Grand Battery in Louisbourg
Harbor, soon after the landing of the Troops upon the Island; in Confidence of
which a suitable Quantity of 42 Pound Ball was transported from Boston with the
rest of the Ordnance Stores for the Siege.

As the Massachusetts Assembly at first entered into the Expedition upon the
coolest Deliberation; so did they on the other hand exert themselves with
uncommon Vigor in the Prosecution of it: As soon as the Point was carried for
undertaking it, every Member which had opposed it, gave up his own private
Judgment to the public Voice, and vied with those, who had voted for the
Expedition, in encouraging the Enlistment of the Troops, and forwarding the
Preparations for the Attempt.

The Bounty, Pay, and other Encouragements allowed by the Massachusetts
Government to both Officers and Men, especially the former, was small; but the
Spirit, which reigned through the Province, supplied the Want of that; the
Complement of Troops was soon Inlisted; not only the Officers, who served in
this Enterprise, were Gentlemen of considerable Property; but most of the
Non-commissioned Officers and many of the private Men had valuable Farms, and
entered into the Service upon the same Principles that the old Roman Citizens
in the first Consular Armies used to do, with a Resolution to behave like Men,
who were to fight pro aris et focis; which they were persuaded was the Case in
this Enterprise.

The Vote of Assembly for undertaking the Expedition was not passed till the
25th of January, when intense cold Weather begins to set in; yet all the
Vessels of War were got ready for the Sea, (the principal one of which was but
then lately put upon the Stocks), the Transports were provided, the Provisions,
Artillery, Ordnance, and other Stores shipped, the whole Armament equipped, and
the Troops embarked at Boston, within seven Weeks after the Governor had issued
his Proclamation for setting it on foot, and several of the armed Vessels were
upon their Station before Louisbourg, many Days before, in order to hinder
Intelligence or Supplies from getting in; and to prevent it is being sent from
the Colonies Embargoes were laid, and every Precaution taken; and the
Preparations were conducted with such Secrecy, that the first Notice, which the
French had of the Attempt, was given them by the Appearance of the English in
Chapean Rouge Bay.

The Massachusetts Governor, from the Beginning. depended on the Assistance of
some of his Majesty's Ships in North America, and as soon as the Expedition was
determined upon, sent an Express Boat to the late Sir Peter Warren, then
Commodore Warren, at Antigua, acquainting him with it, and desiring his
Assistance in it with such Ships, as could be spared from his Majesty's Service
in the Leeward Islands; at the same Time he informed the late Sir Chaloner Ogle
of it, who was then upon the Point of returning Home from Jamaica with a
Squadron of his Majesty's Ships, and proposed to him to make Louisbourg in his
Way; and as soon as the Troops were embarked, he acquainted his Majesty's
Ministers with the Expedition, and his Motives for setting it on Foot,
informing them, that 4000 New England Forces would be landed upon the Island of
Cape Breton in April, if no unforeseen Accident prevented; but that in case it
should not be his Majesty's Pleasure to support the Expedition, he had
concerted Measures in such manner, as to provide a safe Retreat for them; that
though he could not take upon him to promise the Reduction of the Island, yet
he would be answerable for the Success of the Attempt so far, as that Canso
should be recovered for his Majesty, all the Buildings in the Town of
Louisbourg, and upon the whole Island destroyed, the French Fishery depending
upon it broke up; and the English Fisheries upon the Bank of Nova Scotia, and
all along the whole Coast as far as Newfonndland restored; and that at least
the Grand Battery in the Harbor of Louisbourg should be taken, so that the
Advantages gained in the Expedition would abundantly recompense for the
Expenses incurred in it, even though it should fail of the Reduction of the
Island to the Obedience of his Majesty; and he desired particular Directions,
whether in case a Conquest should be made of the Island, he should cause the
Fortress and Works in the Harbor to be demolished, or kept to be garrisoned by
his Majesty's Troops.

Upon the Arrival of the Express sent to England, it was determined there to
support the Expedition, and in consequence of it his Majesty's Ships Pincess
Mary, Hector, Chester, Canterbury, and Sunderland were dispatched with Orders
to join Mr. Warren's Squadron at Louisbourg, which they did during the Siege;
in Answer to the Dispatches sent to Sir Chaloner Ogle at Jamaica Admiral Davers
who relieved him, acquainted the Governor, that he had pressed him much to
comply with the Proposal of his Letter, but could not prevail on him to do it:
And in Answer to his Letter sent to Mr. Warren at Antigua, he received one from
him, dated the 24th of February, enclosing a Copy of the Consultation of the
Captains then present, held on Board the Launceston the 23d of February, in
which was set forth, That Commodore Warren having laid before them a Letter
from Governor Shirley of his Majesty's Province of New England, together with a
Scheme for attacking and surprising the Fort and Town of Louisbourg and Cape
Breton, requesting some of the Ships from that Station, to his Assistance, they
had taken the same into their mature Consideration, and it appearing the said
Scheme had been undertaken without first receiving his Majesty's Approbation,
and that no Orders had been sent by the Lords of the Admiralty for any Ships
giving their Assistance, and that the taking any of the Ships off those
Stations (in the Room of the Weymouth, which had been unfortunately lost) would
be a great weakening of those Islands, and could be of no great Service in such
an Undertaking, and it might be attended with bad Consequences, as a Squadron
of the Enemy's Ships were daily expected at Matinique.

They therefore unanimously agreed and gave it as their Opinions, that it would
be most for his Majesty's Service for Commodore Warren to send the North
America stationed Ships away to their respective Stations, and remain there
himself in the Superbe, till Answers could return to his Express from England
by the Mercury, whom, it was their Advice to send away immediately with the
Account of the unhappy Accident that had befallen the Weymouth, and Copies of
Governor Shirley's Letters and Schemes, in order to receive their Lordships
Directions thereupon.

This Packet arrived at Boston the Day before the New England Fleet failed
from thence for Louisbourg, at which time the Governor was not certain that the
Expedition would be supported with any of his Majesty's Ships; and as the
Contents of it, if publicly known, could have had no good Effect for his
Majesty's Service at that critical Conjuncture, he did not think it advisable
to communicate them to the General Assembly, or any Person whatever except the
Commander in Chief of the Expedition, and the General Officer then next in
Command to him.

A few Days after Mr. Warren had dispatched the Express Boat back to New
England, his Majesty's Sloop Hind arrived at Antigua with Orders for him to
repair forthwith to Boston with such of the Ships under his Command, as could
be spared from his Majesty's Service in the Parts where he was stationed, in
order to concert Measures with Governor Shirley for the Protection of the
Trade, Annoyance of the Enemy, and his Majesty's General Service in
North America.

Pursuant to these Orders, Mr. Warren forthwith sailed from Antigua in the
Superbe, taking with him his Majesty's Ships Mermaid and Launceston, with an
Intention to proceed directly to Boston; imagining that Mr. Shirley upon
receiving the late Answer to his Letter desiring the Assistance of some of the
Ships under his Command in the Expedition against Cape Breton, had let drop all
Thoughts of proceeding in it; but upon getting Intelligence in his Passage,
that the New England Armament had sailed from Boston for Louisbourg, and was to
stop a short Time at Canso Island, he changed his former Sentiments concerning
the unadviseableness of prosecuting the Enterprise without his Majesty's
express Orders; and by a Schooner, which he took up at Sea, acquainted Mr.
Shirley, that instead of coming to Boston he should proceed directly to Canso,
there to consult with the General, and from thence go before Louisbourg and
assist in the Expedition; and as he was short of Provisions, Ammunition and
other Stores for that Service, he desired Mr. Shirley to send him thither the
Quantities expressed in his Letter, as speedily as he could.

What rendered this News still more agreeable to the Massachusetts Government
was, the great Esteem they had for Mr. Warren on account of his known
Disposition for promoting his Majesty's Service in the Northern Colonies, the
Opinion they entertained of his Vigilance and other Qualifications for the Sea
Command upon that Expedition, and the good Understanding, which subsisted
between him and the General of the Land Forces.

On the 24th of March 1744-5 the Massachusetts Troops amounting to 3250,
exclusive of Commissioned Officers, embarked at Boston, and sailed under the
Convoy of the Shirley Galley, Captain Rous Commander, and arrived the 4th of
April at Canso Island, which was appointed by the Governor to be the Place of
Rendezvous for the Transports and Cruizers, and for a Communication of
Intelligence between himself at Boston, the General of the Land Forces before
the City of Louisbourg, and the Commander of the Ships before the Harbor; as
also for lodging all Stores not in immediate Use in the Camp and Fleet: Here
they found the New Hampshire Forces, consisting of 304 Men and Officers, had
arrived four Days before them; and on the 25th they were joined by the
Connecticut Troops, amounting to 516, inclufive of Commissioned Officers: As to
the 300 expected from Rhode Island, they did not join the Forces of the other
Governments till after Louisbourg was taken.

Chapeau-Rouge Bay, which was the Place appointed for landing the Troops, being
so filled with Ice as to make that impracticable before the latter End of
April, the Forces were detained until then at Canso; where the General formed
the Detachments ordered to be employed in the several Attacks proposed to be
made immediately after the landing the main Body at Flat Point Cove, according
to the Plan of Operations which had been concerted at Boston, and there given
him in Charge by the Governor's Instructions.

During the Stay of the Troops at Canso, a Blockhouse was erected upon a Hill
there picketed round, and defended by eight Cannon of nine Pound Ball; and two
armed Vessels sent into Bay Verte in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, to take or
destroy some Vessels which, according to Information, lay there in order to
take in Provisions for Louisbourg.

In the mean Time, April 18th, the Renommee, a French Ship of War of 36 Guns
nine Pounders with 300 Seamen and 50 Marines, charged with public Dispatches,
sell in with the armed Vessels in the Service of the Massachusetts Government
before Louisbourg Harbor, where she maintained a running Fight with them, but
got clear by outsailing them: This Ship afterward fell in with the Connecticut
Troops under the Convoy of their own Sloop, and that of Rhode Island, the
latter of which she attacked and damaged considerably; but finally the Sloop
got off, as did the Transports and other Sloop, during the Engagement: And
after making two more Attempts to push into the Harbor without Success, she
returned to France without having delivered her Pacquets, from whence she
sailed again the Beginning of July, with six Ships more, being the Breast
Squadron destined against Annapolis Royal.

April the 22d his Majesty's Ship Eltham of 40 Guns arrived at Canso from
New England, under Orders from Mr. Warren; and the 23d Mr. Warren in his
Majesty's Ship Superbe of 60 Guns, with the Launceston and Mermaid of 40 Guns;
and after staying there some Hours, and conferring with the General by Letter
sailed to Louisbourg in order to cruize off the Harbor.

On the 29th of April the Troops embarked in four Divisions of Transports, and
sailed for Chapeau-rouge Bay, with an armed Snow and two armed Sloops in the
Service of the Massachusetts Government, under the Fire of whose Cannon they
were to land: And at the same time a Detachment of 270 Men, under the Command
of a Colonel, and Convoy of an armed Sloop in the Pay of New Hampshire
Government, were sent to St. Peter's, a small French Settlement on Cape Breton,
with Orders to take the Place, burn the Houses, and demolish the Fort; which
was accordingly effected.

On the 30th of April, between Nine and Ten in the Morning, the Fleet having
the main Body of the Troops on board came to an Anchor in Chapeau-rouge Bay, at
the Distance of about two Miles from Flat Point Cove: Upon the Discovery of
this the Enemy fired some Cannon, and rang their Bells in the Town to alarm and
call in their People living in the Environs, and sent out of the Town a
Detachment of about 150 Men, under the Command of Mr. Boularderie, late an
Officer in one of the Regiments in France, to oppose the landding of the
Troops; whereupon the General made a Feint of landing a Party of his Men in
Boats at Flat Point Cove, in order to draw the French thither (which had its
Effect) and upon a Signal from the Vessel those Boats returned, and joined
another Party under his Stern, from whence were landed two Miles higher up the
Bay, about 100 Men, before the Enemy could get up there; whom they briskly
attacked, though under the Advantage of being covered with their Woods, after
killing six of them upon the Spot, taking as many Prisoners, (among whom was
Mr. Boularderie), and wounding several others, forced the Remainder to make a
precipitate Flight toward the Town, in which some others were taken Prisoners,
with the Damage sustained on the Part of the English, of only two Men being
slightly wounded: On the same Day about 2000 more of the Troops were landed
without Opposition, and the Remainder, being near 2000, the Day following.

On the Day following a Detachment of 400 Men marched round to the North-east
Harbor, behind the Range of Hills there, and burnt all the Enemy's Houses and
Stores in the Neighborhood, at the Distance of about a Mile from the Grand
Battery; whereupon the Enemy deserted it the same Night, leaving the Artillery,
consisting of 28 Cannon of 42 Pound Ball, and two of 18 Pound, with the
Ordnance Stores (except their Powder, which they threw into a Well), so
precipitately, that they only spik'd up their Cannon in a slight Manner,
without knocking off the Trunnions, or doing other Damage to them, and but very
little to the Carriages: The next Morning a Party of sixteen Men discovered,
that the Enemy had abandoned the Grand Battery, and drove off a Party of them,
as they were attempting to reland there that Morning in Boats.

As soon as the New England Men had taken Possession of the Grand Battery, the
French kept an incessant Fire against it with their Cannon and Bombs both from
the Town and Island Battery; the former of which is distant 5913 Feet from it,
and the latter 4800; notwithstanding which three Cannon in the Grand Battery,
which pointed against the Town, were cleared by the Day following, and the
Enemy's Fire was returned upon the Town from them, as was that from their
Island Battery soon after, by other Cannon, which pointed against it, and were
drilled within a few Days.

The New England Troops, within the Compass of 23 Days from the time of their
first landing, erected five Fascine Batteries against the Town, mounted with
Cannon of 42 lb. 22 lb. and 18 lb. Shot, Mortars of 13, 11, and 9 Inches
Diameter, with some Cohorns; all which were transported by hand, with
incredible Labor and Difficulty, most of them above two Miles; all the Ground
over which they were drawn, except small Patches or Hills of Rocks, was a deep
Morass, in which, whilst the Cannon were upon Wheels, they several times sunk
so deep, as not only to bury the Carriages, but their whole Bodies: Horses and
Oxen could not be employed in this Service, but all must be drawn by Men, up to
the Knees in Mud; the Nights, in which the Work was done, were cold and foggy,
their Tents bad, there being no proper Materials for Tents to be had in New
England, at the Out-set of the Expedition: But notwithstanding these
Difficulties, and many of the Men's being taken down with Fluxes, so that at
one time there were 1500 incapable of Duty, they went on without being
discouraged, or murmuring, and by the Help of Sledges transported the Cannon
and Mortars over these Ways, which the French had always thought impassable for
such heavy Weights; and besides this, they had all their Provisions and heavy
Ammunition, which they daily made use of, to bring from the Camp over the same
Way upon their Backs.

To annoy the Besiegers in making their Approaches, and carrying on their
Batteries, the Enemy erected now Works, from which, as well as from the Cannon
of other Batteries, and their Mortars, they continually maintained a strong
Fire, till they were silenced.

The most advanced of the New England Batteries (which was finished the 17th of
May) was within the Distance of 250 Yards from the WestGate of the Town; so
that from this Battery several of the Enemy were killed by the Musquetry of the
Besiegers, as were some of their Men by the Enemy from the Walls; and indeed
this Battery was so near the Enemy's Works, that the Men were obliged to load
the Cannon there under the Fire of their Musquetry, which was very sharp on
both Sides, the French generally opening the Action every Morning with the Fire
of their small Arms for two Hours; which was constantly returned with
Advantage: The Execution done from the Batteries of the Besiegers was very
considerable; the West Gate was entirely beat down, the Wall adjoining very
much battered, and a Breach made in it at about ten feet from the Bottom of the
Wall: The circular Battery of 16 Cannon, 24 Pounders, near the West Gate (and
the principal one against Ships next to the Grand Battery, and Island Battery)
was almost entirely ruined, and all the Cannon but three dismounted: The
North-east Battery, consisting of two Lines of 42 and 32 Pounders, in all 17
Cannon (another principal Battery against Ships) was damaged, and the Men drove
from their Guns; the West Flank of the King's Bastion belonging to the Citadel,
and the Battery there of six 24 Pounders, which pointed to the Land Side, and
greatly annoyed the Works of the Besiegers, was almost demolished: Two
Cavaliers of 24 Pounders each, raised during the Siege, and two other Cannon of
the same Weight of Metal, run out at two Embrazures cut through the Parapet
near the WestGate at the same time, (all pointing against the New England
Batteries, were silenced: The Citadel was very much damaged: several Houses in
the City entirely demolished, and almost every one, more or less hurt; and
Maurepas Gate, at the Eastermost Part of the City, shattered: And as cross
Fires from the Cannon and Mortars of the Besiegers ranged through the Streets
in every Part of the City, and through the Enemy's Parades, whereby many were
killed, it drove the Inhabitants out of their Houses into Casmates, and other
covered Holds, where they were obliged to take Refuge for some Weeks: And
besides this, the Fire from the Grand Battery annoyed the Barracks of the
Island Battery.

During this Time the New England Parties of Scouts so thoroughly ranged the
Woods, that they seldom returned without bringing in some Prisoners; which very
much consined the Enemy within their Walls, who were constantly worsted in all
Skirmishes, and repulsed in every Sally, which they made, frequently by an
inferior Number of Men, and with very little loss upon these Occasions
sustained on the Part of the New England Men.

On the 26th of May, after some ineffectual Preparations for making an Attack
upon the Enemy's Island Battery, which is a strong Fort built on a rocky
Island, at the Entrance into the Harbor, mounted with 30 Cannon of 28 Pound
Shot, and having some Swivels upon its Breast Work, and two Brass 10 Inch
Mortars, with 180 Men, it was at Night attempted by a Party of 400 Men in
Boats; but from the Strength of the Place, and the Advantage which the Enemy
had by being under Cover, and the Assailants exposed in open Boats, the Surf
running high, the Men not being thoroughly acquainted with the best Place for
Landing, and the Enemy besides (as is most probable) being apprized of their
Design, they were repulsed with the Loss of having about sixty killed and
drowned, and one hundred and sixteen taken Prisoners; however several of them
got within the Enemy's Battery and killed some of them.

It being judged extremely dangerous for his Majesty's Ships to enter the
Harbor, till the Enemy could be annoyed in that Battery; and thought after the
last Attempt impracticable to reduce it by Boats, it was determined to erect a
Battery near the Light-House opposite to it, and at 3400 Feet distance from it;
and the same was by the 11th of June, notwithstanding the almost insuperable
Difficulties, which attended the Drawing of the Cannon up a steep Bank and
Rock, raised in such a Manner, as not to be exposed to more than four of the
Enemy's Cannon, and at the same Time to flank a Line of above 20 of their Guns;
and two 18 Pounders were on that Day mounted, and began to play; by the 14th of
June four more Cannon of 18 Pound Shot were added, and on the 15th a Mortar of
13 Inches was removed thither out of which 19 Bombs were thrown, 17 whereof
fell within the Island Battery, and one of them upon the Magazine of Powder;
and this, together with the Fire from the Cannon of the Besiegers, which
flanked the Enemy's Cannon and Line of Barracks, so annoyed them, that they
could not remain with Safety in any Part of the Fort.

And now the Grand Battery being in the Possession of the New England Men, the
Island Battery (esteemed by the French the Palladium of Louisbourg) so much
annoyed from the Light-House Battery, that they could not entertain Hopes of
keeping it much longer; the North East Battery damaged, and so much exposed to
the Fire from the new advanced Battery, that they could not stand to their
Guns; the circular Battery ruined, and all its Cannon but three dismounted;
whereby the Harbor was disarmed of all its principal Batteries; the West Gate
of the City being demolished, and a Breach made in the adjoining Wall; the West
Flank of the King's Bastion almost destroyed; and most of their other Guns,
which had been mounted during the Time of the Siege, being silenced; all the
Houses and other Buildings within the City (some of which were quite
demolished) so damaged, that but one among them was left unhurt; the Enemy
extremely harrassed by their long Confinement within their Casmates; and their
Stock of Ammunition being almost exhausted, Mr. Duchambon sent a Flag of Truce
to the Camp on the 15th Day of June in the Afternoon, desiring Time to consider
of Articles of Capitulation; which was accordingly granted till next Morning,
when they sent Articles which were rejected, and others proposed in their
Stead, and accepted by the Enemy: And Hostages being exchanged on the same Day
for the Performance of the Articles, on the Day following, being the 17th of
June (49 Days after the New England Men landed upon the Island) the City was
surrendered, and the Garrison, consisting of about 650 Regular Troops, and the
Inhabitants of the City, being about 1300 effective Men, besides Women and
Children, made Prisoners by Capitulation, with the Loss of no more than 101 Men
killed by the Enemy, and all other Accidents from the Time of their Landing to
the Reduction of the Place, with about 30 who died of Sickness.

In the Articles of Capitulation proposed by Mr. Duchambon Governor of Cape
Breton.
, it was provided, that upon his Surrender of the Island the Inhabitants should
have their Option either to transport themselves and their Movables to France
or Canada, or to remain in Cape Breton, and enjoy their Estates there with the
free Exercise of their Religion; but former Experience of the mischievous
Effects of the like Indulgence to the Inhabitants of Nova Scotia or Acadie by
the Treaty of Utrecht, occasioned the latter Part of the Proposal to be
rejected, and they were only permitted, by the Ratification of the Articles
finally concluded on, to transport themselves and their Effects either to
France or Canada; but not to remain in the Colony.

Upon the Surrender of Louisbourg the Inhabitants of the Island of St. John's
made their Submission, desiring to be included in the Articles of Capitulation
granted to those of Cape Breton, and delivering Hostages for the Performance of
them on their Part, which was accordingly granted.

During the Siege some of the New England Cruizers made a Descent upon the
Island of St. John's, in which they burnt some Houses, and committed other
Ravages; and Parties of the Besiegers broke up all the Fishing Settlements at
Cape Breton; and on the 19th of May, the Vigilant, a French Ship of War of 64
Guns, bound for Louisbourg with Ordnance Stores, fell in with the Mermaid of 40
Guns, Captain Douglas, who was cruizing at a small Distance from Louisbourg,
and by maintaining a running Fight decoyed the French Commander to follow him
till he got in among Mr. Warren's Ships, who took him after an Engagement of
some Hours, in Sight of the Camp at Louisbourg; which cut off from the Enemy
all Hopes of any Succor, and gave great Spirit to the Land Forces in carrying
on the Siege; and on the 14th of June, it was determined by the General and
Commodore to make an Attack by Land and Sea, as soon as his Majesty's Ships
Sunderland and Canterbury, which were then daily expected, should arrive;
accordingly the next Day all the Transports were ordered off to take out the
spare Masts and Yards, and other Lumber of the Men of War; and the Soldiers
employed in gathering Moss to barricade their Netting, and 600 of them were put
on Board the King's Ships at the Commodore's Request to assist in the Attack by
Sea; but the intended Assault was prevented by the French Governor's sending
out a Flag of Truce, as is before mentioned, on the 16th, and the Surrender of
the Fort and Batteries in the Harbor the Day following.

The Attempt against Louisbourg not being yet known either in France, or any
part of the West Indies, the English, after they were in Possession of it, kept
the French Flag flying in the Port for a Decoy to the French Ships bound
thither; this had its Effect in drawing several valuable Prizes to it;
particularly three homeward bound Ships from the South Sea and East Indies,
having rich Cargoes on Board, to the Amount of above 600,000 l which were
prevented from entering the Harbor, as they were making it, by some of Mr.
Warren's Squadron then lying there, which just went out to make Captures of the
French Ships before they could get in.

It seems dubious, whether the taking of these Ships under such Circumstances
was a Capture within the Intent of the King's Proclamation, and entitled the
Captors to the Benesit of them: If it was not, the Ships and their Cargoes
belonged of Course to the public Treasure; and, in such Case, would of
themselves have more than doubly paid the Nation's Expense in the Reduction of
the Island; but this Point not being moved in the Court of Admiralty, where
they were condemned, the Captures were treated as ordinary Captures at Sea, and
the Ships and Cargoes adjudged as Prizes to the Officers and Crews of the Ships
concerned in taking them.

Upon Mr. Duvivier's Arrival in France the preceding Winter, and representing
to the Court of Versailles the weak State, he left Nova Scotia in, upon which
Commission, as has been observed, Mr. Duquesnel, the late Governor of Cape
Breton, had sent him, it was determined to fit out an Armament from Breast for
the Reduction of it; and a Squadron of seven Ships accordingly sailed from
thence for Annapolis Royal, the Beginning of July 1745; but upon gaining
certain Intelligence from a Vessel, which they took in their Passage, that the
English were in Possession of Louisbourg, and had a strong Squadron there, they
desisted from prosecuting their Enterprise against Nova Scotia.

The immediate Consequences of the Expedition were the recovering the
Possession of the Island of Canso, restoring the English Cod Fishery, and
breaking up that of the French; the Capture of the greatest Part of the French
Trade, which that Year passed through the Atlantic Ocean; the freeing Nova
Scotia of the Attempts with which it had been continually harrassed from Canada
the Year before, and the Preservation of it against the Armament, which was
fitted out from Breast in July following.

Soon after making this Acquisition to his Majesty's American Dominions, a new
Scene of Difficulties opened in providing for the Preservation of it, till
Troops could be sent from Europe to garrison it; which was not done till the
Spring following.

Match the greatest Part of the New England Forces, especially those of the
Massachusetts Bay, were (as has been observed) Farmers, who owned valuable
Freeholds in the Country, and entered into the Service with an Expectation of
returning home as soon as the Siege was ended, without considering the
Necessity of staying to keep Possession of Louisbourg, till they could be
relieved by other Troops; that Zeal and Ardour, which made them the foremost to
engage in the Expedition and encounter all Difficulties in making the Conquest,
when that was made, sooner abated in them, than it did in those who had no
Property in the Country, and were only Mercenaries in the Service: The Thoughts
that their Husbandry Business and Families were both suffering by their
Absence, made them uneasy at being detained at Louisbourg; and this increased
by the inactive Garrison Duty, which succeeded the Toils of the Siege, and a
salt scorbutic Diet (both which they had been unaccustomed to) made them
sickly, and soon grew into Discontent; which spread so much, that the General
acquainted the Massachusetts Governor, his Presence was necessary to allay it;
and, in the mean time, to pacify the great Numbers, which daily pressed him for
Discharges, referred them to him, telling them that he had represented their
Case to the Governor, who only had Power to discharge them, and would come to
Louisbourg in a short time; and desiring them to cease their Importunity for
being dismissed only till his Arrival.

Other Calls likewise required the Governor's Presence at Louisbourg; a Notion
that the Captors were entitled to the Soil of the Island had so far prevailed
there, that Mr. Warren, in his first Letter to him from thence after the
Reduction of it, desired his Opinion upon that Point.

Though this Mistake was very palpable, as the Expedition was at first set on
foot under a Proclamation of the King's Governor, issued by Virtue of his
general Authority received from the Crown; carried on by Officers under his
Commission, issued by the same Authority; the Soldiers inlisted expressly into
his Majesty's Service for the Expedition; both Officers and Men subjected to
Courts Martial erected by his Governor upon that Occasion; and paid with the
King's Money (for such was every Sum used to defray the Expense of the
Expedition, being granted by Act of Assembly to his Majesty for that Service)
all which was signified to the Commodore in Answer to his Letter; yet so
strongly had the Opinion been adopted, that it was still entertained, and a Day
thought of for proceeding to make a Distribution of part of the conquered Lands
among such of the Officers and Soldiers, as would engage to settle upon them.

It was evident how ill concerted a Measure this would prove, if in the End of
the War his Majesty should think sit to make a Restitution of Cape Breton to
France; both on account of the Disappointments it must have occasioned to
those, who should have Lands assigned them, and the public Murmurs it might be
attended with: A Court of Vice Admiralty was likewise appointed at Louisbourg
(in derogation of the Jurisdiction of his Majesty's high Court of Admiralty in
England) for the Condemnation of the French Ships and their Cargoes; and Notice
sent to the several British Colonies upon the Continent, that Sale would be
made of them under such Condemnation at a Time prefixed; all which Proceedings,
if carried into Execution, would probably have produced great Confusion; and it
was therefore incumbent upon the Governor, under whose Commission this
Acquisition was made for his Majesty, and to whom consequently the Exercise of
his Majesty's Government within the new Colony appertained, until his Majesty's
Pleasure should be known, to use his utmost Endeavors to prevent or rectify.

Another forcible Reason for the Governor's repairing to Louisbourg was; the
Commodore had at first taken and kept Possession of one or more of the Land
Batteries, with his Marines; and once taken the Keys of the City Gates into his
Custody, and interfer'd in the Naval Office: These Acts, though gone into by
him on the sudden, and but of a very short Continuance, were aggravated to the
Massachusetts Assembly by inflammatory Reports from Louisbourg; and, together
with other Steps he had taken, which they conceived derogatory to the Honor of
the Province in the late Expedition, gave such Umbrage, that they were urgent
to the last Degree with the Governor to proceed directly to Louisbourg, and
take the Government of it upon him; promising in his Absence to encourage and
forward the raising Recruits for relieving the Troops, which had been employed
in the Siege; and to use every other Measure for supporting the new Conquest
from Boston; all which, in the Temper they were thrown into, they would have
been slack in doing, if the Governor had not complied with their Desire; and
besides, the Troops at Louisbourg were impatient for his Arrival there: He
therefore determined to proceed thither in his Majesty's Ship Hector, which Mr.
Warren had sent to Boston for that Purpose, and waited for him.

Before he embarked, the commanding Officer of the Rhode Island Troops, which
were then just raised, arrived at Boston; with Dispatches from the Governor of
that Colony, acquainting him, that the Troops were ready, and he had sent the
Officer to him for his Orders: This being an acceptable Corpse de reserve
toward relieving the Troops at Louisbourg, and, as it happened, most
opportunely raised than if they had assisted in the Siege, he ordered directly
thither.

Upon the Governor's Arrival at Louisbourg a general Joy appeared in the
Troops, which was still highten'd in the Men by an Expectation of having a
short Day fixed for their being relieved: on the other hand, the Necessity
which the Governor was under of disappointing these Hopes in a grert measure,
was no small Embarrassment to him: It was thought most advisable upon this
Occasion, that he should speak to every Regiment separately, and that Regiment
spoke to first, which was thought to be the least discontented; he observed to
them, that it was a most unreasonable Notion, which he heard some had
entertained, that the Expedition was to end with the Siege and Surrender of
Louisbourg; that they had entered into it, in order to make a Conquest (which
to their Honor they had happily effected) for the Service of their King and
Country, not to abandon it immediately after to the Enemy: That for securing
the Benefit of it, it was necessary a sufficient Number of them should keep
Possession till they could be relieved by other Troops, which he hoped would
soon be done by some of his Majesty's Regiments from Europe; and in the mean
time, till they should arrive, Recruits were raising in the Colonies for the
same Purpose; that as fast as they were transported to Louisbourg the Soldiers
of the present Garrison should be sent Home; and that he should discharge as
many of them in present, as was consistent with the Safety of the Place; that
before he left Boston, he had taken care to get their Bounty enlarged, and
other Votes of Assembly passed in their favor; and for those, whose Lot in
should be to remain in Garrison some time longer, nothing in his Power should
be wanting for their Ease and Comfort in that Situation,

The Regiment first spoken to expressed their Satisfaction in the Assurances
given them, by the usual Acclamations on such Occasions; which Example was
followed by the rest; and their late Uneasiness so greatly subsided, that for
five or six Weeks they went through every Part of their Duty with great
Chearfuiness and Alacrity; particularly upon an Alarm of a French Squadron's
having passed by, supposed to be destined for Annapolis Royal, on which
Occasion 600 Soldiers were wanted on board Mr. Warren's Squadron, which was
upon the Point of sailing to the Bay of Funda in quest of it, that Number
entered as Volunteers into the Service, and came on board his Ships in 14 Hours
Time.

At the End of six Weeks an Uneasiness again broke out among them, and grew
much higher than the former, toward raising which many Circumstances concurred.

A Sickness, which swept off in the whole 15 or 1600, daily increased among
them: The Massachusetts Troops, which made three fourths of the Garrison, had
been disappointed in their Expectations of several things from the Assembly;
the Clothes and Woollens, they carried with them, were soon worn out in hard
Duty during the Siege; and a sufficient Quantity was not to be purchased in the
Massachusetts Province for relieving their immediate Wants, as the Assembly had
undertaken to do, that they might have them at the prime Costs; the Pay allowed
them had from the Beginning been much less than the Establishment for the
Connecticut Troops; and their Families, according to the usual Course of Colony
Pay, could receive no Part even of that till the End of their Service: And
further, a new Notion had been infused into all the Troops, that three Months
being elapsed since the Surrender of the Place, they had a Right to demand
their Dismission; which the greatest Part of them had entered into a
Combination to do early the next Morning upon the public Parade before the Fort.

Late in the Afternoon before this Design was to be put in Execution,
Information was given of it to the Governor; whereupon two or three of the
Ringleaders were secured, and the Men off Duty ordered into their Barracks.

In a Council of War called upon this Occasion it was the unanimous Opinion,
that the Pay of the Massachusetts Troops ought from that Day to be raised to
the Connecticut Establishment; that if the Governor would give them an absolute
Promise, that that should be done, it would be satisfactory to them; but that
if he proceeded no further than to assure them he would exert his best
Endeavors with the Assembly to have their Pay raised, their present Temper and
Discontent were such, as that it would have no effect upon the Men.

Orders were given the same Night, that an extraordinary Number of Officers
should continually walk the Rounds till Morning; and that the several Regiments
should be very early drawn up at their respective alarm Posts for the Governor
to speak to them: Accordingly the Day following he promised the Massachusetts
Troops, that their present Pay of 25 s. per Month of the new Tenor
Massachusetts Currency, should from that Day be raised to 40 s. to all such of
them as should be detained at Louisbourg till Spring; acquainted them that for
providing Clothes for them, as far as was in his Power, he had, two Months
before, desired the Governor of New York and Pensilvania to procure for him
what Woollens they could at NewYork and Philadelphia upon his own Bills, in
addition to what the Assembly should be able to buy up in Boston; that he had
lately received Advice that a large quantity of Woollens were shipped for him
from Philadelphia, and that he expected a supply of Clothes of all Kinds, and
Bedding for them would speedily arrive at Louisbourg; that he had ordered the
Muster-Rolls of every Company to be made up, and each Man's Account stated; and
would take care upon his Return to Boston, that whatever was due to any of
them, should be forthwith paid to their respective Orders: And he informed the
Troops in general, that he expected a considerable Number of Recruits were now
upon their Passage to Louisbourg; that he would discharge by the Middle of
October as many of those, who had served at the Siege as would reduce the
Garrison to 2000; which Number, it was absolutely necessary he should retain
during the Winter for the Security of the Place; and he would besides permit a
Number, not exceeding thirty, such as the Army should pitch upon, to go to
New England upon Furlow, in order to procure such Necessaries or Conveniences
for them, as they should desire.

Upon these Assurances they were pacified, and no Discontent appeared
afterward among them during the whole Time of their Service at Louisbourg.

After the Governor's coming to Louisbourg all tho'ts of a Distribution of the
conquered Lands among the Captors were laid aside; a Stop was put to the
Proceedings of the new Court of Vice Admiralty, and intended Sale of the French
Ships and Cargoes; all Points were settled to general Satisfaction, and an
Harmony subsisted, the whole time between the Governor, General and Commodore;
the latter of whose Conduct with regard to the several Points, upon which the
Massachusetts Assembly had conceived some Disgust, the Governor stated in so
just a Light to them, that upon his recommending a Letter of Thanks to be sent
him by the General Court for his public Services, a Vote was accordingly passed
for paying the Compliments of the Province to him, at the same time that they
voted the like to be sent to the General.

The Conquest of Cape Breton afforded the English great Advantages for
attempting the Reduction of Canada, as the Possession of it together with Nova
Scotia, gave them the entire Command of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and Entrance
into the River Canada, so that they had it then in their Power to cut off
Quebec, in which consists the principal Strength of the Country, from receiving
any Support from France: Many other Circumstances likewise concurred to favor
an Attempt against it the next Year.

It appeared from undoubted Accounts, that Niagara and Cadaraqui (Frontenac)
were then so weak, that the French were apprehensive, the first News, they
should hear would be, that the English had taken those Forts; especially as
they could not send a sufficient Number of Men from Canada to defend them for
want of Provisions.

The Weakness of the latter of these Places was a most material Circumstance;
as the safest and best Way then for carrying Troops into the Enemy's Country
was by Oswego, across Lake Ontario, and down the River Iroquois (called by the
French St. Lawrence) the Passage through which to Montreal being with the
Stream, may be made in four Days, and affords good Places for encamping every
Night free of Ambuscades, with a safe Landing for the Men upon the Island of
Montreal; from an Eminence on which, it is said, it may be easily reduced in a
few Hours; and there is besides a small Island within Cannon Shot of the City,
which was at that time without any Fortifications, and with not above twenty
Inhabitants upon it, and being taken would have greatly favored the Attack of
that Place; so that a Descent made on Montreal by 2000 Troops through this
Route, at the same time that a like Body of them made another by Chambly,
across the Lake Champlain, must have absolutely secured the Reduction of it.

According to the best Information, the Number of fighting Men in all Canada,
including their regular Troops, did not then exceed 12,000; nor their Indians,
which they call Domicilies, or Resident within Canada, 900: And what were
esteemed two very favorable Circumstances were, that the Government of Canada
was, at that time, so jealous of the Indians of the Six Nations, that the
French Traders were strictly forbid to employ any of them in carrying their
Goods over the Niagara Carrying-place, for fear they should take away their
Powder, and then seize upon the Fort; and that upon the Reduction of Cape
Breton, Canada was looked upon by the Inhabitants to be in so desperate a
State, that it was thought, if it was made known there, that such of them, as
would not take up Arms against the English, should be permitted upon the
Reduction of the Country to remain there, and enjoy their Estates and Fortunes,
and that such, who did take up Arms, should be obliged to leave Canada, and
forfeit their Estates, not one Man in ten would appear in Arms.

The Governor therefore concerted Measures with the General and Mr. Warren,
then lately made Admiral Warren, who both agreed with him in Sentiment, for
forming an Attempt against it the next Year; and before his leaving Louisbourg,
he and the Admiral proposed the making one in a joint Letter to his Majesty's
Ministers for their Consideration.

November the 30. The Governor having stayed at Louisbourg as long as the
Season of the Year would permit, and the Occasions of his Majesty's Service in
his Government of the Massachusetts Bay would allow of his Absence, and done
every thing in his Power for the Security of the new Acquisition, until his
Majesty's Troops, which were expected very early in the Spring, should arrive
to take possession of it, embarked for Boston; where he landed in the beginning
of December.

The Spring following an Expedition by Land and Sea was formed by his Majesty's
Orders in England for the Reduction of Canada, under the Command of Lieut.
General St. Clair, to be attempted with eight Battalions of regular Forces in
conjunction with such Troops, as could be raised in time for it in North
America; together with a Squadron of his Majesty's Ships under the Command of
Rear Admiral Warren.

Upon this Occasion the general Plan, which had been concerted in England for
that Service, was transmitted to the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay, with
his Majesty's Orders to him, that upon the Arrival of Lieut. General St. Clair
at Louisbourg he should proceed thither with such Troops, as he was able to
raise by that Time within his own Government, in order to consult with the
General and Admiral upon the most advisable Scheme for effecting the Conquest
of Canada; and acquainting him that in case they and he should think, that any
other Plan might be more practicable, it would be left to them three to do as
they should think proper.

By the Plan sent from England it was proposed that the Troops to be raised in
the Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island should
rendezvous at Louisbourg as soon as possible, and proceed up the River St.
Lawrence with his Majesty's Ships and the regular Troops to Quebec; and those
raised in the Colonies of New York, Pensilvania, Maryland and Virginia should
rendezvous at Albany, in order to proceed from thence across the Country by
Land to Montreal, as soon as they should receive Intelligence that his
Majesty's Ships had entered the River St. Lawrence, and form the Siege of that
Place.

As to the particular Number of Men to be raised in any of the Provinces, that
was not limited by his Majesty; but it was signified in his Instructions to his
Governors, that his Majesty hoped the Troops, which should be raised in the
several Colonies, would amount in the whole to at least 5000.

Whilst Preparations were making in England and the the British Colonies in
North America for prosecuting this Enterprise, the French were employed in
fitting out an Armament from Breast and the West Indies, which, in Conjunction
with a Body of Land Forces to be raised in Canada, was destined for the
Reduction of Nova Scotia.

The Quota's of Troops raised in the several Colonies concerned in the
Expedition against Canada were as follows; the Massachusetts Bay, which is ever
the leading Province in all Enterprises for his Majesty's Service and the
common Cause, set the first Example upon this important Occasion; and
notwithstanding it had lost near 2000 of its fighting Men in the Service of the
preceding Year, granted a Bounty for encouraging the inlisting of 3500, with
such a Sum as should be necessary for defraying the Expense of Transports and
Provisions for them: A Bounty was given by the Province of New York for
enlisting 1600; by the Colony of Connecticut for 1000; by New Hampshire for
500; by Rhode Island for 300; by the New Jersies for 500; by Maryland for 300;
by Virginia for 100; and 400 Men were raised in Pensilvania; amounting in the
whole to 8200, exclusive of the four Independent Companies of New York, whose
Complement is 100 Men each.

The Colony Troops were raised with great Dispatch; and, though the Packets
containing his Majesty's Orders for the several Governors did not arrive at
Boston till the latter End of May, yet the Massachusetts Forces with their
Transports were got ready to proceed to Louisbourg by the Middle of July.

The most commodious Route for the March of Troops with Artillery from Albany
to Montreal being over the Lake Iroquois, commonly called Lake Champlain, by
Fort St. Frederick upon Point de Cheveux, called by the English Crown Point;
the Reduction of that Fort was thought very material; though it should not
prove any great Obstruction to a large Body of Forces in passing by it, yet it
was not advisable to leave it on their Backs; especially as the Passage across
the Lake ought to be open for a Communication of Intelligence between the
Colonies and Army, is also for the Transportation of Provisions, Stores, and
even Reinforcements, which it might be necessary to send after it in Support of
the Siege of Montreal.

Exclusive of this, there were two other very strong Reasons for making this
Attempt; the Western Frontiers of New England and the Province of New York as
far as the City of Albany, had experienced most mischievous Effects from this
Fort; it served the French as a Place of Rendezvous to fit out Parties from,
both of Canadeans and Indians to make Incursions and Depredations upon the
adjacent Territories of the English, which they had greatly galled even during
that War, burning and destroying the whole Village of Sarahtoga, and Fort
Massachusetts itself; and was likewise a Place of Safety for them, upon their
Retreat from any of these Enterprises: It was besides absolutely necessary to
employ as soon as possible the Indians of the Six Nations, who were much
depended upon for their Assistance in this Attempt; as the English had lost
their good Opinion and Respect, together with their former Attachment to their
Interest in nothing more than suffering the French to build this Fort, so
nothing could more retrieve their Influence over them, and all the Indians
dependent upon them, than the Reduction of it: The Acquisition therefore of
this Fort, in case even of the other Parts of the Expedition's being dropped or
attended with Misfortune in the Prosecution of it, would in a great measure, of
itself, recompense the Northern Colonies for their Expense in it.

As therefore the Season of the Year was advancing, the Armament from England
not arrived at Louisbourg, and an Attempt for the Reduction of this Fort before
the English Fleet had entered the River St. Lawrence was not a material
Variation from the general Plan formed in England, and would redeem Time for
carrying on the Siege of Montreal, the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay
proposed to Admiral Warren, who was joined with him and General St. Clair to
settle the Plan of Operations for the general Expedition, to employ in present
a sufficient Part of the Colony Troops, as well those of New England as of the
Southern Provinces, in an Attempt against the Fort at Crown Point; which was
accordingly agreed upon, and the necessary Dispositions concerted between them,
and the Governor of New York, who then had the chief Command of the Southern
Troops, and was hearty for the Enterprise.

In August 1746 Mr. De Ramsay entered Minas with a Body of 1700 Canadeans and
Indians with Design, as was then apprehended, to work upon the Acadians to take
up Arms against the English, and in case he could not effect it that Year, to
winter there, and prepare them for it against the ensuing Spring: But it
afterward appeared, that his principal View was to be ready to join in an
Attack upon the Fort at Annapolis Royal, as soon as the Armament fitted out
from Breast the same Year under the Command of Duke D' Anville for the Reduction
of Nova Scotia should arrive in the Bay of Funda; in expectation of which he
proceeded to the District of Annapolis River, and encamped within one Mile and
an half of the Fort.

The Massachusetts Governor, upon receiving Intelligence from Mr. Mascarene of
Mr. 'De Ramsey's Motions, determined to send 1500 of the Massachusetts Troops to
Annapolis Royal, to prevent the Execution of his Designs, the Remainder of them
being then destined to make an Attempt against the French Fort at Crown Point,
in Conjunction with those of New York and the Southern Governments; and ordered
600 of them to be forthwith embarked; Admiral Warren, who was then at Boston,
ordered at the same time his Majesty's Ship Chester from thence to reinforce
the Ships in Annapolis Harbor: The Chester arrived in a few Days at Annapolis,
and 400 of the New England Forces soon after.

About the same time Mr. Conflans arrived before Chebucto (now Halifax) with
four capital Ships from Cape Francois under Orders to join Duke D' Anville; but
after cruizing there some Days without hearing any thing of his Squadron, and
imagining that the Destination of it was altered, quitted the Coast; Notice of
the Appearance of these Ships was soon brought to Boston by Fishermen off those
Banks; but as they disappeared so soon, the Alarm, they occasioned, lasted not
long.

Some Days after the Departure of Mr. Conflans, Duke D' Anville arrived in
Chebucto Harbor with a few Ships, after a tempestuous Passage, which had
dispersed his Squadron at Sea; and not finding any of the rest there was so
much affected with that and other Disasters of his Voyage, that he destroyed
himself in two or three Days, and was buried privately upon a small Island in
the Harbor. The Remainder of the French Ships except one or two, which were
lost upon their Passage, arrived by degrees at Chebucto, a few Days after, in a
shattered Condition, with the Men in a very-sickly State; the Number of these
Ships was so large, and their Force so great, that they had the Appearance of a
very formidable Armament, and gave a general Alarm along the whole Coast as far
Westward as New York: A Visit being daily expected from them at Boston, the
Governor within three Days, drew 8 or 10,000 of the Militia of the Province
thither to oppose the landing of Troops; and the Assembly, upon this Occasion,
gave him an unlimited Power to strengthen the Works at Castle William, and do
whatever he should think necessary for the immediate Defense of the Harbor; in
consequence of which, Preparations were made for blocking up the Entrance of
the Channel there, and to give the Ships a proper Reception in their Approach
to the Town; and within a few Weeks such additional Works were made to Castle
William, as have rendered it, for its Extent, the most considerable Fortress by
Sea in his Majesty's American Dominions.

An English Admiral then lay in Louisbourg Harbor with seven of his Majesty's
Ships of the Line well appointed and strongly manned; and at the same Time the
Arrival of Admiral Lestock with the English Squadron and Armament from England,
destined to be employed up the River St. Lawrence in the Expedition of Canada,
was daily expected on the Coast; the Massachusetts Governor, to give the former
of these Admirals the best Intelligence, that could be obtained of the Strength
of the French Squadron, sent a small Schooner to reconnoitre it in Chebucto
Harbor, and carry him a distinct Account of it; which was executed; and from
the Condition, in which it was found, it was thought by the best Judges, that
the Ships, which the English Admiral had with him at Louisbourg were of
sufficient Force to have attacked and destroyed the French Ships in Chebucto;
which he was much pressed to attempt by a Sea Commander of great Distinction,
then Governor of Cape Breton; and at the same time the Massachusetts Governor
sent three small Vessels to cruize on several Parts of the Coast, in order to
fall in with Admiral Lestock's Squadron, which was still expected in America,
to give him Information of the French Ships, and pilot him into Chebucto; which
must have secured the utter Destruction of the French Squadron.

During the Consternation, which the Appearance of the Breast Squadron at first
occasioned, Nova Scotia, and the Garrison of Annapolis Royal, with the Ships in
the Harbor were in the general Opinion given up for lost; whereupon the
Massachusetts Governor desisted from sending more Troops to Annapolis; but it
afterward appeared, that the Detachment of Troops sent last from Boston, and
the Chester eventually proved the Preservation of the Garrison and Province;
for soon after their Arrival at Annopolis, Mr. De Ramsay who had then advanced
within less than a Mile and half of the Garrison, and encamped in open View of
it, apprehending the Number of Troops to be double what they were, and that
another large Embarkation of them, with a greater Sea Force was soon to follow,
and despairing of the Arrival of the French Armament that Year, (the time by
which it was expected upon the Coast being long elasped) suddenly decamped,
sent 1200 of his Troops back to Canada, and retired with the Remainder to
Minas; from whence he communicated the false Alarm, he had taken at Annapolis
Royal to Mr. La Jonquiere, who succeeded Duke D'Anville in his Command at
Chebucto; which, as it afterward appeared from the Examination of several
intelligent Merchants and others, who had been carried Prisoners into Chebucto
by French Cruizers, (whilst the Armament lay there) and were conversant with
the French Officers, prevented Mr. Jonquiere from sending some light Frigates
up the Bay of Funda with Troops, Ordnance Stores and Artillery; as indeed it
cannot be reasonably doubted that he would have done, had not the Reinforcement
been sent to Annapolis, and Mr. De Ramsay had remained with his Party before
the Garrison; in which Case, he must have infallibly made himself Master of
Nova Scotia.

In the Beginning of November Mr. La Jonquiere, after having spent about eight
Weeks in Chebucto Harbor in recovering his Men from their sickly State, and
repairing his Ships, some of which he burnt in the Harbor, partly for want of
Men to navigate them without too much weakening his other Ships, and partly for
want of the Means of repairing them, sailed out of the Harbor, steering his
Course for the Bay of Funda; but upon his making Cape Sable, with an Appearance
of a Design to send at least some of his Ships up the Bay to look in at
Annapolis, an excessive hard Gale drove him off the Coast, and dispersed his
Ships: However, a few Days after, two of them returned, one of which, a 50 Gun
Ship, went up the Bay, expecting (as was supposed) to find the rest there, as
high as the Narrows, but being discovered from the Fort, and thereupon chaced
by the Chester, she escaped out of the Bay.

Thus ended this Expedition of the most formidable Armament, that was ever
fitted out against the Coast of North America, and which, including the four
capital Ships Mr. Conflans brought from Cape Francois, was computed to consist
of near half the naval Force of France: To complete their Series of
Catastrophes, some of them were lost, and others taken in their Return Home;
and another mischievous Effect of their Expedition was, that Mr. La Jonquiere,
by his Presents of the Clothes of the Seamen and Soldiers, who died on board
his Ships of a contagious Distemper, to the Cape Sable Indians in the French
Interest, communicated the Infection, and destroyed near two-thirds of them.

In the mean time Dispositions went on for preparing the Attempt against Crown
Point, in forwarding which at Albany, supplying Necessaries for the Southern
Troops, and engaging the Indians of the Six Nations in it, the Governor Clinton.
Governor of New York had many Difficulties to struggle with, which he
surmounted; and Preparations had proceeded so far, that Battoes were provided
for the Transportation of the Men, Artillery, and Stores across Lake Champlain;
Ordnance Stores and Provisions were sent from Boston, and a Train of Artillery
from New York to the Fort at Saratoga; and by the Middle of October 1500 of the
Massachusetts Troops were upon their March from Albany to join those of the
Southern Governments.

However, the general Alarm which had been occasioned by the Appearance of the
French Armament upon the Coast of Nova Scotia had suspended the Prosecution of
the intended Attempt till the Season of the Year was so far advanced, that one
or more of the Colonies concerned in it judged it too late to proceed, and
refused to join with the Province of the Massachusetts Bay; and a Disunion of
Councils in this Point finally prevented its being carried into Execution.

Mr. De Ramsay still remained in Nova Scotia, with about 500 Canadians and
Indians, Part in Chiegnecto and Part at Minas; the Inhabitants of the former of
these Districts were openly devoted to the French Interest, those of Minas and
Annapolis River at that time wavering; his Scheme was to Winter in the
Province, and gain over the whole Body of Acadians to take up Arms, and join
with him in an Attempt upon the Fort at Annapolis Royal early in the Spring: To
compass this he summoned the Deputies of all the Districts to attend him; told
them he had Intelligence that the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay was sending
a large Body of Troops from New England to force them off their Possessions,
and exhorted them to join him, and stand upon their Defense; and he had
proceeded so far with them as to induce them to promise to make Report of what
he had proposed to them, to their respective Principals, and let him know their
Resolutions by a limited time.

There appeared Danger in this Scheme; had Mr. De Ramsay been suffered to go on
unmolested in his Practices upon the Inhabitants during the whole Winter, what
Effects he might have wrought on some of them by his Persuasions, upon others
by Menaces, was uncertain; but if he had succeeded, it must have hazarded the
Loss of the whole Province by the ensuing Spring: To counteract therefore Mr.
De Ramsay and frustrate his Designs, the Massachusetts Governor determined,
though the Winter was then far advanced, to attempt driving him out of Minas,
as soon as a fresh Recruit of Troops could be sent to Annapolis Royal.

In the mean time, to prevent him from making any Progress in gaining over the
Inhabitants, he immediately transmitted from Boston to Governor Mascarene a
Number of printed Copies of a Declaration translated into French, and signed by
himself, to be dispersed throughout the Districts of Minas and Annapolis River;
wherein he assured the Deputies and Inhabitants, that such of them as should
remain firm in their Allegiance to his Majesty should be protected in the
Possession of their Lands and just Rights, according to the Treaty of Utrecht;
letting them know at the same time, that he should very soon send a sufficient
Force to Minas to remove Mr. De Ramsay and his Party from thence, and protect
them from the Insults of the French and their Indians; and in particular
assuring them, that the King's Soldiers should not live upon free Quarter, nor
be suffered to commit Acts of Violence or Maroding among them, but that they
should be fully satisfied for all the Provisions and other Necessaries, which
they should supply the Troops with during their being quartered among them.

These Declarations arrived very seasonably at Annapolis; Mr. Mascarene found
means to disperse them among the Deputies and Inhabitants before the Day, by
which they were required to give Mr. De Ramsay their Answer, and they had the
Effect to make them unanimous in declaring to the French Commander their
Resolution to trust to the Assurances given them by the Governor of the
Massachusetts Bay, of being protected in the Enjoyment of their Estates by the
King of Great Britain, and absolutely refusing to take up Arms and join with
the Canadians: And they immediately signified the same to Mr. Mascarene, with
their several Addresses to Mr. Shirley, thanking him for the Protection he had
promised them, and declaring their Resolutions to be loyal Subjects to the King.

In the latter End of November and Beginning of December, the Troops destined
for Minas embarked at Boston for Annapolis Royal; one of the Transports with
the greatest Part of the Soldiers on board was lost in its Passage upon the
Rocks near Monts Deserts, the Remainder arrived safe; and in a few Days, being
strengthened with a Party from the Garrison, embarked for Minas, and entered
Grand Pre, the chief Town in that District, about the latter End of December.

The French Commander upon having Intelligence of their Arrival at Annapolis,
and their Embarkation for Minas, had quitted the District and retired with his
Party to Schiegnecto, the extreme Part of the Peninsuln: The Season being
extremely severe hindered the New England Men from immediately following him
thither, as the commanding Officer had Orders to do; so that they determined to
wait till the Rigor of it was abated.

On the last Day of January the French Commander having gained Intelligence of
their being distributed in Quarters at a great Distance from each other, and
being secretly encouraged with the Promise of Assistance from some of the
Inhabitants, made a March, which was though it impracticable in that Season of the
Year, through the Woods with a Party of Canadians and Indians; and taking the
Advantage of a violent Snow Storm, which had lasted 36 Hours, entered the Town
immediately after, at Midnight, and surrounded most of them in their Quarters;
the greatest Part of whom were killed, wormded or taken Prisoners: In the mean
time, those Parties which were not surrounded, marched out and forced their Way
through the Enemy to the Guard-House, being a large defensible Stone Building,
situated in the middle of the Town; and some others, which had been surrounded,
beat off the Party which attacked them and recovered it: The next Morning two
Companies marched out of the Guard-House to make an Attempt upon the Enemy's
head Quarters, but having been surprised without their Snow Shoes, and finding
in the March, that the Snow was too much drifted for them to reach the Enemy,
after having made two Discharges of Musquetry upon them, they were obliged to
desist from their Attempt: The Day following Mr. La Corn, who then commanded
the French and Indians, proposed a Parley, which was agreed to; and afterward
that each should bury their Dead; Terms of Capitulation were then offered to
the New England Men; the Substance of which was, that upon surrendering the
Fort, they should have leave to march out with Drums beating and Colors
flying, and other usual Honors of War; a sufficient Quantity of Ammunition and
Provisions allowed to serve them in their March back to Annapolis; and
Necessaries for carrying off their Sick and Wounded; the New England Troops to
quit Minas, and not to take up Arms in any Part of Nova Scotia during the Term
of one Year.

Upon this a Council of War was held, and the Garrison submitted to the Terms
proposed.

The killed, wounded and Prisoners taken in this Action by the French amounted
to about 160, and the Number of Canadians and Indians killed and wounded by the
New England Men was computed at between 50 and 60.

The New England Men being thus obliged to retire, Mr. La Corn quitted Minas
in afew Days, leaving the Command of a small Party there with an inferior
Officer.

Upon gaining this Advantage Mr. De Ramsay sent Declarations to the French
Inhabitants in the Name of the Governor of Canada, which were publicly posted
up, requiring them to take up Arms, whenever they should be called upon by him,
against the English, on pain of Death, having their Houses burnt, and their
Estates confiscated; and with these he published the Bishop of Quebec's
Declaration, pronouncing them absolved from their former Oaths of Fidelity to
the King of Great Britain: On the other hand the Governor of the Massachusetts
Bay, to cut off all Pretensions of a Right of Conquest to the District of
Minas, which might be grounded on the Capitulation at Grand Pre, recommended it
to Lieutenant Governor Mascarene to send there what Troops he could spare out
of the Garrison, who were not restrained by the late Capitulation from bearing
Arms, to repossess themselves of the District of Minas, and bring as many of
the French Deputies as they could to Annapolis Royal to renew their Oaths of
Fidelity to his Majesty.

Accordingly, soon after, Mr. Mascarene sent out a Party of Rangers with orders
to land at Grand Pre; pursuant to which the commanding Officer landed there and
surprised some of the Inhabitans, who informed him that the Canadians
apprehending that another Descent might be made upon them from Annapolis by a
fresh Party of Troops, and not thinking themselves safe at Minas, had abandoned
it and marched back to Schiegnecto; which the Officer upon entering the Body of
the Town found true; and after taking Possession of the District by erecting
the English Standard upon the GuardHouse, etc. and seizing such of the Deputies
and Inhabitants, as he thought most proper to carry to Annapolis Royal,
returned thither.

Soon after this, Mr. De Ramsay evacuated the Province of all his Troops, and
returned with them to Canada; and the Province, being thus cleared of the
Canadians, remained quiet from any Attempts of the French, during the Remainder
of the War.

In September 1747, the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay received his Majesty's
Orders, signifying his royal Approbation of the Preparations, he had made for
the intended Expedition against Canada, and directing him in Conjunction with
Admiral Knowles, then Governor of Cape Breton, to disband the American Troops
raised for that Service, retaining such a Number of them as they should judge
necessary for the Protection of Nova Scotia; to collect and liquidate the
Accounts of the Expense incurred by the several Governments on account of the
Expedition, and transmit them to be laid before his Majesty.

Pursuant to the former Part of these Orders Mr. Knowles and he retained 6
Companies of 70 Men each for the Defense of Nova Scotia, and it appearing
necessary for the Protection of the Province that some Ship of War should be
stationed at Annapolis Royal the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay sent the
Massachusetts Frigate, the Province Guard-Ship of 20 Carriage Guns upon that
Service.

Upon this Occasion Mr. Mascarene, whose singular Prudence and Vigilance
omitted no Opportunity of reminding the Acadians of their Duty, and exhorting
them to consult their own Interest by their Fidelity to the King's Government,
wrote the following Letter to the Deputies of the three Districts.

Messieurs,
Though I am much pressed and embarrassed with Business, I will not however let
this Opportunity slip without writing to you, lest some ill intention'd Persons
should have room to spread false Reports among you, which might occasion you
some Trouble.

Mr. Shirley has received from Court express Orders to watch over the Safety of
this Prevince, and to employ all the Means and all the Forces that his
Excellency shall judge necessary, but always with the Dispositions conformable
to the Assurances the Inhabitants have received, that whilst they shall behave
themselves as good Subjects to his Britannick Majesty (as they are bound to it
by their Oath) they shall be treated as his Majesty's own natural Subjects; in
consequence of these Orders there is arrived here a 20 Gun Ship, and we expect
another soon with Transports and Troops besides those already arrived; this is
what I thought, I ought to let you know, and to join my Exhortations that you
may behave in such a manner as is convenient for you reaping the Benefit of the
good Dispositions, his Majesty has toward you, to which you will always find
me ready to contribute as much as is in my power, and you will give me Occasion
by your good deportment to do.

I am, etc.


The Massachusetts Governor had had the Care of the Government of Nova Scotia in
a great measure committed to him during the War; and his Majesty having
approved of his Proceedings for preserving the Acadians in their Allegiance,
and preventing them from revolting to the French, was pleased to ratify all the
Promises and Declarations Mr. Shirley had made them, and authorize him to issue
a Declaration in his Name to them, to assure them of his Performance of what he
had promised them, and to add such other Matters therein as Mr. Shirley should
think most conducive to his Majesty's Service in that Province.

In the same Year the Massachusetts Governor received his Majesty's Orders to
form a Plan of Civil Government for the Province of Nova Scotia, and to draw up
such a Scheme for fortifying it, as he judged was requisite for putting it into
a State of Security; and to transmit them to the Secretary of State's Office to
be laid before his Majesty.

The Inhabitants of Schiegnecto had ever since the Treaty of Utrecht
distinguished themselves above those of the other two Districts of Nova Scotia,
by a refractory Behavior toward his Majesty's Government; in which they were
encouraged by their remote Distance from Annapolis Royal, and constant
Intercourse with the French of Canada, and were now become justly suspected and
dangerous to the Safety of it.

The Massachusetts Governor therefore, in his Plan for fortifying the Province
proposed that this District, which lay most exposed to the sudden Attacks of
the French, and the furthest from being succored in case of an Assault, should
be secured as soon as might be, by a strong Fortress upon the Isthmus, capable
of holding a large Garrison, to be built upon the Spot, where the French
afterward built Beau Sejour; and the whole Isthmus between the Basin of
Schiegnecto and Bay Verte secured with a Line of Block-Houses placed at
convenient Distances; and that the Inhabitants of the District should be
removed either to some Parts of the Province more under the Inspection and
Check of his Majesty's Governor at Annapolis Royal; or into some other of his
Majesty's Colonies, where they should have equivalent Lands given them; and
that Protestant Settlers, whose Fidelity and Attachment to his Majesty's
Government might be depended on, should be transplanted to Schiegnecto in their
Room; which was not disapproved of.

It will be difficult to strike the Line between the Ratification of the Treaty
of Aix la Chapelle, in which it was stipulated, that the controverted Limits of
this Province should be determined by Commissaries appointed on the Part of
Great Britain and France, and the French's seizing several Parts of the Country
which were in dispute.

No sooner was the Treaty concluded, than they sent a Party into St. John's
River to take Possession of it; and their Encroachments grew so fast in every
Part of the Peninsula, that after the narrow Escapes and signal Deliverances,
it had during the War, if Providence had not again interposed in its Favor, by
raising up a The Earl of Halifax.
British Minister for the immediate Settlement and Protection of it; to whose
peculiar Talents, Vigilance and Spirit for effecting the great Service, the
Nation owes its present Possession of Nova Scotia, the whole Province would
have been swallowed up and lost in French Encroachments, even during the short
Interval of the late Peace.

If any thing after observing these Encroachments, which followed so close upon
the Treaty, can be wanting, to show that France, at the Time of making the
Peace, had determined to take the first favorable Opportunity of violently
seizing upon the Province; and was preparing every Measure, which could pave
the Way for it; the Behavior of the Governor of Canada, and Bishop of Quebec
at this Juncture must put it out of question.

As their Proceedings will be best disclosed by the Insertion of the Governor
of the Massachusetts Bay's Letter, upon that occasion to the Marquis la
Gallissioniere.
Governor of Canada, Copies of which got abroad at the time of its being sent,
I shall here insert it.

Boston, May 9, 1749. Sir,
Two Days ago I received from Mr. Mascarene a Copy of your Letter to him, dated
at Quebec the 15th of January; wherein (among other Demands) you call upon him
to acquaint you, whether he intends to comprehend the Abenaqui Indians in the
Peace, without requiring any kind of Submission from them; and desire that in
such case he would engage me to let them resettle in their Village, and their
Missionaries remain there with them unmolested, as they did before the War;
observing to him that those Indians entered into the War, only as your Allies,
and therefore when the War was finished with you, it ought to be so with regard
to them; and you proceed to say, Sir, that if they thought otherwise in New
England, you shall be obliged to assist those Indians, intimating that it is of
Importance to the Safety and Tranquillity of the Frontiers of the Massachusetts
Bay, that you should have a speedy and positive Answer, and that you shall not
be surprised, if the Indians should proceed to Acts of Violence.

To this, Sir, which is the fourth Demand in your Letter, Mr. Mascarene having
referred you to me upon it, I shall comply with your Request in giving as
speedy and positive an Answer as may be.

The River of St. John's, upon which that Part of the Indians, to which you
chiefly refer, is seated, has been ever deemed to be situated within the Heart
of Nova Scotia, and consequently that Tribe of Indians, together with the
French Inhabitants upon the same River, are within his Majesty's Territories;
and accordingly, Sir, the latter have acknowledged themselves ever since the
Treaty of Utrecht, to be the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain by taking
the Oaths of Fidelity and Allegiance to it; and have had the Protection of his
Majesty's Government in common with his other Subjects in that Province: This
being the case, these Indians when the Advice of a Rupture between his Majesty
and the King your Master was hourly expected, under the Pretext of sending a
Deputation to Mr. Mascarene, to desire they might remain in Peace and Amity
with the English, notwithstanding War should happen between the two Crowns,
gained Admission into Annapolis Royal for some of their Tribe, who were in
reality (as it afterward proved) Spies; and having obtained Mr. Mascarene's
Agreement to what they pretended to propose in behalf of their Tribe, and being
honorably treated and dismissed by him, returned in three Weeks after, among
others of their Tribe with the Missionary Dr Loutre at their Head, surprised
and killed as many of the English at Annapolis Royal, as they caught without
the Fort, destroyed their Cattle, burnt their Houses, and continued Acts of
Hostility against the Garrison, till the arrival of the first Party of Succors
which I sent it from New England; such was the Entrance of these Indians, Sir,
into the War with us, and their Alliance with you.

For this perfidious Behavior I caused War to be declared in his Majesty's
Name against them at Boston in November 1744, and, so far as it depends upon
me, they shall not be admitted to Terms of Peace till they have made a proper
Submission for their Treachery, unless they should be already comprehended in
the Definitive Treaty of Peace and Friendship lately concluded at Aix la
Chapelle, which I shall on my Part strictly observe in every Point.

As to what you have thought fit to declare, Sir, in your Letter concerning
your Intentions to support the Indians in Acts of Hostility against us, unless
we give them Peace upon the Terms there prescribed by you, and the Danger which
the Frontiers of the Massachusetts Bay in particular may be in, unless you have
a speedy and positive Answer upon this head; what I have to say in Answer is,
that I shall be sorry for a new Rupture between us, and am very desirous to
have perfect Tranquillity restored to the Province under my Government; but if
the latter is not to be the Case, and you think fit to make yourself a Party in
an Indian War against us; I doubt not but his Majesty's Subjects upon this
Continent will be able to make just Reprisals upon Canada, when it shall be his
Majesty's Pleasure to have them do it.

I cannot avoid expressing great Surprise at the other Parts of your Letter,
whereby you take upon you to call Mr. Mascarene to account for expelling the
Missionary from Minas, for being guilty of such treasonable Practices within
his Majesty's Government, as merited a much severer Punishment than that of
Expulsion from the Province.

The Right, you claim of sending Missionaries from France to reside among his
Majesty's Subjects of Nova Scotia as their Priests, and in consequence of that
your forbidding his Majesty's Governor to make any Alteration in the State of
Religion and its Ministers there is still more extraordinary; and I must not
omit upon this Occasion to remark to you, that I think the Letter which the
Bishop of Quebec lately wrote to Mr. Mascarene concerning his intended
Visitation of his Majesty's Subjects in that Government, in such terms, as
showed, he looks upon them as part of his Cure of Souls, and within his
Jurisdiction, was likewise an extraordinary Attempt, and cannot be admitted.

Your interfering in his Majesty's Punishment of his Subjects in Nova Scotia
inflicted for rebellious and treasonable Practices against his Crown, and his
requiring others of them to renew their Oaths of Fidelity; and in one Word,
your treating the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain in that Province, as
if you looked upon them as Subjects of his most Christian Majesty, and being
under his Allegiance, is, if possible, still more surprising; and as these
Attempts are manifest Invasions of the undoubted Right, which every Prince has
over his Subjects, I cannot but look upon them as Insults upon his Majesty's
Government, which require no further Answer.

After these Attempts, Sir, upon his Majesty's Right of Government over his
Subjects in Nova Scotia, I am less surprised at your Encroachments upon the
Limits of his Province, which you are pleased to call in your Letter
Dependencies of the Government of Canada.

As to your Demand for the Release of the two Indians carried off by Captain
Gorham, I cannot allow, Sir, that you have a Right to interpose in that Affair,
and Mr. Gorham has satisfied me that he committed no Breach of public Faith in
doing it.

I cannot conclude without making use of this Opportunity to acquaint you, that
we look on Fort St. Frederick at Crown Point, as an Encroachment on his
Majesty's Territories; and in case you proceed to settle the Country round it,
I shall esteem those Settlements so too, unless that Tract has been ceded to
you by the late definitive Treaty at Aix la Chapelle.

I am sorry, Sir, that the first Fruits of the Peace on your Part have so
unpromising an Aspect; and beg you will be persuaded that nothing shall be
wanting in me to preserve the good understanding, which ought to subsist
between us in time of Peace, having the Honor to be with the most perfect
Regard,

Sir, Your most humble, and Most obedient Servant.


FINIS.

