THE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISMS, Reduced from its Ancient and Modern CORRUPTIONS; And
restored to its PRIMITIVE SOUNDNESS AND INTEGRITY: According to the WORD OF
TRUTH; the SUBSTANCE OF FAITH, and the NATURE OF CHRIST's KINGDOM.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Caius
College, in Cambridge.

ISAIAH lii. 15. That which has not been told them, they shall see; and that
which they have not heard, they shall consider.

The FIFTH EDITION.

LONDON Printed: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted, by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. 1759.

To the READER.
THE Doctrine of Baptisins has been dark and obscure in the Church, from the
very primitive Times, and has had more of human Notion, than of divine Truth
in it; and therefore Zuinglius, writing touching this Point, speaks thus, in
the Beginning of his Book, entitled, De Bap. Tom. 2. f. 57. Illud mihi ingenue
circa Libri Initium discendum est, fere omnes eos, quotquot ab ipsi Apostolorum
Temporibus, de Baptismo scribere instituerunt, non in Paucis (quod Pace omnium
Hominum dictum esse velim) a Scopo aberravisse: That is, In the Beginning of my
Book (says he) I must ingenuously profess, that almost all those that have
undertaken to write of Baptism, even from the very Time of the Apostles, have
(which I desire may be spoken with the Favor of all) not in a few Things erred
from the Scope. And as he affirms, that almost all before him had erred in many
Things touching Baptism, so did he himself also err, as well as they, not in a
Few: And it is as free for me, or any Body else, to differ from him, and other
late Writers; especially if that be true which godly and learned Chemnitius
affirms out of Augustine, that these Things are not Tanquam Articuli Fidei, a
quibus diversum sentire Piaculum sit Anathemate dignum, Chemnit. Examen Council.
Trident. l. de Bapt.

And therefore, Reader, I acquaint thee beforehand, that in this Point, I shall
speak much otherwise than all former, or latter Writers whatever, that I have
met with; and though I do not, without some Fear and Trembling, dissent from so
many worthy and gracious Men, that have been, and are, otherwise minded; yet it
is the less grievous to me, because I differ from them (I can say it in Truth
before the Lord) not out of any Desire to be singular, or for any worldly or
carnal End whatsoever, but only that I might cleave to the clear and evident
Word of God alone, even there where I see the very Faithful to leave it; seeing
I am rather to join to the Word without Men, than to join to Men without the
Word; and where I find the holiest Men in the World, and the Word parting, I am
there to leave them, and to go along with the Word.

And so, in all Love and Meekness, I tender this Discourse to thee; desiring
that if thou can not at the present agree to what is therein contained, yet
that thou would not rashly judge and reproach it, seeing, through God's
Goodness, it may come to pass, that what thou know not now, thou may know
afterward.

But because I see this present Generation so rooted and built up in the
Doctrines of Men, I have the less Hope that this Truth will prevail with them;
and therefore I appeal to the next Generation, which will be farther removed
from those Evils, and will be brought nearer to the Word; but especially that
People whom God has, and shall form by his Spirit for himself; for these only
will be able to make just and righteous Judgment in this Matter, seeing they
have the Anointing to be their Teacher, and the Lamb to be their Light.

THE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISMS, etc.
THE Lord, foreseeing how great an Evil it would be in the Church, to leave Men
either to their own, or other Men's Opinions and Judgment, in the Things of God,
did, in the very Beginning of the Gospel, command and bind all the Faithful, to
hear Christ alone; saying from Heaven (that we might give absolute Credit to
his Voice) This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him; And the
more the Faithful have kept to the Word of Christ, the more they have been free
from Error, and the more they have left this, and turned aside after the
Doctrines of Men (though Men in some Measure faithful and holy) the more have
they been perverted and seduced; insomuch that the true Church of God, and the
very Faithful themselves, have received, held and maintained, diverse Errors,
and false Doctrines, and Opinions, even for many Ages and Generations; yea, and
have not been altogether free from some, from the very Apostles Time: And
because many, or most, godly Men, in former Ages, held such and such Opinions;
therefore the following Ages have taken them upon Trust from them, and have
entertained them as sure and certain, though not at all consulting, in those
Points, with the great Doctor and Apostle of the New Testament, Jesus Christ.
And thus have the very Elect themselves been drawn into much Error, though they
have still had Christ for their Foundation, and were built on him so firmly by
Faith, that the Gates of Hell could not prevail against them.

Now, to free the Faithful from the former Mistake (and consequently from all
Error) there is no other Way than this, wholly to forsake the Doctrines of Men,
and to lay by all those Opinions that we have sucked in from our very Cradles,
and which are now become even a natural Religion to us; I say, utterly to lay
by, and wholly to forget all these Things, and to come immediately to the pure
unerring Word of God, and to the Voice of Jesus Christ himself, by his Spirit,
wherein all Things are true, sincere and perfect; and not bring Hearts to the
Word, that are prepossessed with Doctrines and Opinions learned of Men, but to
come thither with Hearts and Consciences free and unengaged, and in all
Meekness, Uprightness and Simplicity of Heart, to hear what Jesus Christ, the
faithful and true Witness, will say by his Spirit, which also is the Spirit of
Truth; and to receive and believe that alone, though never so differing from
the Opinions and Doctrines of this present Age, as well as of the former, and
though perhaps the whole Nation would be offended with it.

And this is the Course that I have observed, to come to some clear and certain
Knowledge in the Doctrine of Baptism: For, having read much, and discoursed
with many touching this Point, and having seriously considered what they say,
as one that searched after the Truth, for itself only, and for the Satisfaction
of my own Soul; I do profess I could not find any Thing almost spoken, for my
Spirit boldly and safely to lean on, as perceiving most of what they said, to
be but the Apprehensions and Thoughts of Men, and that they spoke very much by
Conjecture, and at Uncertainty in this Matter; and thereupon I resolved, wholly
to withdraw from such Discourse, and to lay down whatever Opinions I had before
entertained, touching this Point, and to come to the plain and manifest
Scriptures; and from thence (after much seeking God) to learn whatever the Lord
should please to teach me; choosing rather to build on the clear Word, though
alone, than on any uncertain Inferences, and blind Conjectures of Men, though
embraced and magnified by all the World.

Now, in this Enquiry from the Word, I met with that Place, Heb. vi. 2. where
the Apostle, speaking of some of the first and initial Points of Christian
Religion, names the Doctrine of Baptisms; whence I perceived that, in the
primitive Church they had the Doctrine of Baptism in the Plural Number; and
therefore did apply myself to search from the Word, what these Baptisms might
be, and so met with the Baptist's own Doctrine, touching Baptisms, mentioned
Matthew iii. Mark i. Luke iii. and John i. (for all the Evangelists make
Mention of this, it being a Matter of so great Concernment) and Luke makes
Mention of the Ground of this Doctrine of the Baptist, Chap. iii. 15. As the
People were in Expectation (says he) and all Men mused in their Hearts of
John, whether he were the Christ or not, John answered, saying, etc. The
People, it seems, had great and high Thought of John, because he was the Son of
the High Priest, conceived after an extraordinary Manner, his Parents being
both well stricken in Age, and past Children, by the Course of Nature; and then
the Manner of his Life was strange, for he lived in the Wilderness out of the
ordinary Converse of the World; and his Apparel and Diet were unusual, being
Raiment of Camel's Hair, and a leathern Girdle about his Loins, and his Meat
Locusts and wild Honey; but especially his Ministry was mighty, being in the
Spirit and Power of Elias; and his Baptism new and famous; so that all the
People stood in great Expectation of some Work or Event from him, that should
manifest him to be the Christ; wherefore John, to take them off from that gross
and dangerous Mistake, plainly told them all, and that openly, That he was not
the Christ, but that there was a great Deal of Difference between himself and
the Messiah, and that both in Regard of his Person and Office.

First for his Office. For he begins to show the Difference from thence,
because the Newness of his Baptism, was the Occasion of the Peoples conceiving,
that he was the Messiah; whereupon he vilifies his own Baptism, in respect of
Christ's, saying, I indeed baptize you with Water; that is, my Baptism is but
Water Baptism, that washes the Body only with a corporeal Element; but one
mightier than I comes, for I am but a Creature, he the Power of God; I but a
Servant, he the Lord of all, and one so infinitely excellent above all that I
am, that the Latchets of his Shoes I am not worthy to unloose; that is, I am
unworthy to perform the meanest and lowest Office for him. And having thus
first spoken meanly of his own Baptism, and then magnified Christ's Person
above his own, He (says he) shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit, and with
Fire; that is, I that am a Servant do baptize with Water; but he, that is, the
Son, baptizes with the Spirit; my Baptism washes but the Body from the Filth of
the Flesh; but his, the Soul from Filth of Sin; so that how much the Spirit
excels Water, and God the Creature, so much his Baptism transcends mine.

Now hence I gather clearly, even from the Baptist's own Mouth, that John's
Baptism and Christ's were distinct Baptisms, the one Water Baptism, the other
Fire-Baptism; and though our late Writers and Teachers have, and do affirm,
that John's Baptism and Christ's make up but one entire Baptism; yet all
generally of the ancient Christians apprehended them to be distinct; one
whereof says, Illud manifestum est, alium fuisse Johannis Baptismum, alium
Christi. August. contra Liter. Petil. c. c. 37. And I could produce many more
Testimonies besides, but it is not my Meaning to entangle any Body with the
Authority of Men, and therefore I shall make it plain by clear Scriptures, and
Evidences from them, that John's Baptism and Christ's, are distinct.

1. John's Baptism and Christ's are distinct in their Appellations in
Scripture; for John's Baptism was still so called, even when the Apostles used
it; and it was not called by their Names who administered it, but was still
called John's Baptism: Yea, after Christ's Baptism came in, John's still
retained its Name, as being distinct from it; and therefore, Acts xviii. 24,
25. it is said, Apollos taught diligently the Things of the Lord, knowing only
the Baptism of John.

2. The Scripture says, that Christ's Baptism was to follow John's, and did
not accompany it at the same Time; for Matthew. iii. John says, I do baptize you
with Water, but he that come after me, i. e. in Order of Time, he shall baptize
you. And in Luke iii. I have baptized you, but he shall baptize you; which
Places plainly declare Christ's Baptism did not go along with John's, but was
to follow it, and that he was to baptize with the Spirit, after John's
Water Baptism had had its full Course, to wit, when he was risen from the Dead,
and ascended into Heaven. And therefore Christ, after he was risen from the
Dead, and immediately before he was to ascend into Heaven, though his Disciples
had used Water Baptism, or John's Baptism, for above three Years, yet affirms
that which John had said of him, touching his Baptism with the Spirit, was not
yet fulfilled, but was shortly to be fulfilled, as appears, Acts i. 4, 5.
Christ being assembled with the Apostles, commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father, which, says he,
you have heard of me; for John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Spirit, not many Days hence; and this was fulfilled at the
Day of Pentecost, whence it is evident, that Christ's Baptism did not go along
with John's, and make that up one entire Baptism with itself, seeing it
followed almost four Years after, an therefore John's Baptism and Christ's must
needs be distinct.

3. It is evident, that Christ's Baptism and John's were distinct, in as much
as the Baptism of Christ was necessary for those very Persons, who had before
been baptized with the Baptism of John; whereas, if John's Baptism had been one
and the same with Christ, that only had been sufficient; but now, those whom
John had baptized with Water, Christ was to baptize again with the Spirit, as
in that Place before mentioned, I have baptized you with Water, but one comes
after me, who shall baptize you with the Spirit; even you whom I have before
baptized with Water: And this was not a second Baptism, but the first Baptism
of the New Testament, John's Baptism being more legal than evangelical; and
evangelical only, in so much as it pointed out this Baptism of Christ at Hand.

Again, the Baptist himself says, I have Need to be baptized of thee; so that
the very Author, or chief Minister of Water Baptism, stood in Need of spiritual
Baptism himself: Paul also, Acts xix. when he found certain Disciples baptized
only with the Baptism of John, he baptized them again in the Name of Christ,
because they had not received the Spirit; and this Baptism into the Name of
Christ, was not the repeating of any Water, but merely the Gift of the Spirit;
for Paul preached to them largely the Doctrine of Faith in Christ (for the Text
relates but the Abstract of the Thing) and laid his Hands on them, and through
his Ministry the holy Spirit came upon them, and this was Christ's Baptism
indeed, and no renewing of Water at all, as the Anabaptist would fain enforce
from this Place.

By these Things it is evident, that Christ's Baptism and John's are distinct;
and therefore as what God has joined, no Man ought to put asunder, so what God
has put asunder, no Man ought to join; as if the Baptism of Christ was
insufficient and incomplete, except we should add to it the Baptism of John;
which is exceedingly to eclipse the Brightness of the Son of God, as to draw a
Vail over the greatest Glory of the New Testament, which is the Baptism of the
Spirit.

Obj. If the ordinary Objection shall be offered against this, to wit, that
John's Doctrine was the same with Christ's, and therefore his Baptism also was
the same with his;

Answ. I answer, it is most true, that John did preach Christ clearly, both in
Regard of his Person and Offices; but this was not his proper Work, as he was
the Baptist, but in so much as he preached Christ in the Spirit, he belongs
to the Kingdom of Christ, which is spiritual, as also, Abraham, Moses, David,
Isaiah, and all the Prophets, did in the same Sense: But so far forth as he
preached the Doctrine, and administered the Baptism of Repentance, and both
these not really and spiritually, but only in the Letter and Sign, so far he
belonged to the Old Testament, rather than to the New: Here was John in his
proper Office. I say, so far as John preached Christ spiritually, he did not
that as John the Baptist, but as John a Believer; and so the same John, in
Regard of his Baptist's Office, belonged to the Old Testament; but according to
the Revelation which he had from the Father, touching Christ, and his Faith in
him, and Confession of him, he belonged to the New. And except we learn thus to
distinguish of John's Doctrine, to wit, what he preached as Baptist, and in his
proper Office, and what as a Believer, who had the Revelation of the Father, we
shall never understand his Baptism aright: For John's Baptism was the Seal of
his Old Testament Doctrine, and not of his New, or of his own immediate
Ministry, and not of Christ's; at the highest, John's Ministry and Baptism
pointed out Christ, but neither of them were the same with Christ's.

And thus having cleared from the Word, that John's Baptism is distinct from
Christ's, I shall proceed to speak of each of these Baptisms apart by
themselves, and to hold forth to others what myself have learned touching them
from the same Word.

And first I begin with John's Baptism, as being the first in Order of Time.

Now the Baptism of John was brought in besides the Rite and Manner of the Law,
and so was a Sign of a great Change to follow: The Jews indeed had their
Baptisms in the Law, for they washed their Members, Garments, Vessels, etc. and
by this they were cleansed from legal Pollutions, but not from any Sin or Stain
that did cleave to their Conscience; but John was the Author, or first Minister
of a new and unwonted Baptism, calling all Men to Repentance for Sin, and to
flee from the Wrath to come, and awakening them to Confession of Sin, and
Amendment of Life, and also pointing out one to come, and now at Hand, who
should do all these Things for them indeed, which neither he nor his Baptism,
could do.

Now touching John's Baptism, I shall show,

First, The Honourableness of it in itself.

Secondly, The Weakness and Imperfectness of it, in Reference to Christ.

And Thirdly, The Continuance and Duration of it.

1. For the Honourableness of itself, it appears in several Passages.

First, That though the Baptism of John, in itself, was more legal than
evangelical, yet in this it did excel all the former legal Baptisms, that it
pointed out Christ's Baptism near at Hand; for as John himself was greater than
all the former Prophets, because he pointed out, with his Finger, Christ the
true and great Prophet of the Church; so his Baptism was more excellent than
all the former Baptisms, because it pointed out Christ's great and glorious
Baptism now at Hand, as he says, I baptize you with Water, and he that comes
after me, shall baptize you with the Spirit.

2. John's Baptism was from Heaven, and not from Men; it had its Institution
from God, and was not an Ordinance he took up of his own Head. Luke iii. 2. it
is said, that at the Beginning of John's setting forth to his Baptism and
Ministry, That the Word of God came to him in the Wilderness; that is, he was
inspired, instructed and taught by a Word from God himself touching his
Ministry-Baptism, and the Discovery of Christ's his was to make; and John i. 6.
There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John, and Verse 33. He that sent
me to baptize with Water, said unto me. He went not of his own Accord, but God
sent him to baptize; so that as God was the Author of those inferior Baptisms
of Moses, so of this more high and excellent Baptism of John; and hereupon the
Publicans, that received John's Baptism, are said to justify God; and the
Pharisees and Lawyers that refused it, to reject against themselves; that is,
to their own Harm, the Counsel of God, Luke vii. 29.30.

3. Christ himself, who was born under the Law, and subject to the Law,
submitted himself also to the Baptism of John, as the last and liveliest
Ceremony, Matt. iii. 13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan, to be
baptized of him, and so Christ, who had submitted himself to the Circumcision
of Moses, submitted himself also to the Baptism of John; and as he submitted
himself to all the Ceremonies of Moses, not for his own Sake, but for ours; so
also to the Baptism of John. For seeing Christ was free from Sin, he stood in
no Need of Repentance, and so not of that Baptism, which was the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of Sin; but there the Head, who was free from Sin,
was baptized for the Body, which was full of Sin, that he might fulfill all
Righteousness in his own Person. And this was a great Honor to the Baptism of
John, that Christ (though in Reference to our Flesh more than his own)
submitted himself to it.

Thus it appears, that the Baptism of John was very Honorable, and of high
Account in its Time, so that the very Disciples of Christ took it up, and
Christ himself suffered them, because John's Baptism was the Sign and
Forerunner of his, and because the Time of his own Baptism was not yet come;
but Christ himself used it not, as John witnesses, Chap. iv. 2. saying, Jesus
himself baptized not, but his Disciples; to wit, with John's Baptism, which was
Water Baptism. For it became not the Son of God to baptize with a Creature; nor
the Lord of all, to use the Baptism of a Servant.

And thus, having showed how Honorable John's Baptism was in itself (wherein I
conceive I have not done him, though a Servant, the least Prejudice, but have
fully attributed to his Office, whatever the Word, or he himself, a Messenger
from God, attributes to it) I shall now proceed to show, That the Baptism of
John, how honorable and excellent soever, is yet far beneath and below Christ
's; yea and most weak and imperfect in Comparison of his.

For first, John's Baptism was with a Creature, with the Element of Water, for
the Creature could baptize but with the Creature; that is, John with Water; and
so this was far beneath the Baptism of Christ, which was the Work of God by
God, the Work of the Father by the Son, and of the Son by the Spirit.

2. John's Baptism was tantum exterius Lavacrum, but outward, and reached the
outward Man only; the Baptism of Water reached but the Body, and it could
pierce no deeper; and after all the Washing of the Body with Water, the Soul
still remained as full of Filth, Sin, and Corruption as ever; and so it was far
beneath Christ's, which reaches the Soul: The Baptism of John was the Baptism
of Bodies, but the Baptism of Christ the Baptism of Souls; and only the Baptism
of the Spirit reaches the Spirit, and attains to the Soul, Conscience and inner
Man, to purge and purify them.

3. The Baptism of John was but a Sign and Ceremony, though it had more Life
and Light in it than any of the Signs of the Law, as being nearer to Christ,
and more newly revived by God; and so thought useful in its Season, yet the
Efficacy of it (after the Manner of all Signs) was but weak.

For First, It did not give the Spirit one Drop of the Spirit; yea, some who
were baptized with John's Baptism, did not know the Way of the Lord perfectly;
that is, had no certain Knowledge of Christ, the only Way to God, as Apollos,
Acts xviii, yea, some of them did not so much as know, whether there were any
Holy Ghost, or no, as those twelve Disciples, Acts xix. much less had received
the Spirit.

Secondly, Neither did it give Repentance and Remission of Sin (for what was
the Plunging of a Man in cold Water toward Repentance and Remission of Sin?)
but these were the Works of Christ's own Baptism, which is the Baptism of the
Spirit; for no Man can repent of Sin, but by the Presence of the Righteousness
of God in his Heart, which is the Work of that Spirit, which is given in
Christ's Baptism; neither can any remit Sin, but God: Our Sins are never
forgiven by God, till God dwell in us through Jesus Christ, by the Work of the
Spirit; so that Repentance was given, and Sin forgiven, not in Hope only in
John's Baptism, but really and truly in Christ's, which was the real Baptism of
Repentance and Remission of Sins.

Thirdly, Neither did it give Entrance into the the Kingdom of God; for the
Kingdom of God is a spiritual Kingdom, and no earthly or corporeal Thing can
give Entrance into it: The Baptism in the Water of Jordan could deliver no Man
up into the Kingdom of God, but the Baptism in that River that makes glad the
City of God, Psalm. xlvi. 4. in that River clear as Crystal, that proceeds from
the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, which is the Spirit, which delivers up all
that partake of it, first, into the Kingdom of the Son, and after, through that
into the Kingdom of the Father The Baptism of John left Men in that old World,
wherein it found them, but the Baptism of Christ delivers them up into the new
World, or the Kingdom of God.

Now, in all these Regards, it appears that John's Baptism did not do the Work
of the Baptism of the New Testament, for then that only had been sufficient,
and there had been no Need of Christ's to come.

And thus you see that the Baptism of John, as it is distinct from Christ's, so
it is far inferior to his. And therefore great has been the Mistake of many,
for several Ages, who have made John's Baptism equal to Christ's; for what is
this, but to make the Servant equal to the Lord, and to set down the Creature
in the Throne of the only Begotten of the Father? Yea, and it is the quite
perverting of John's Office, for John was to be a burning and shining Light, to
usher in Christ the true Light; he was to be as the Morningstar, to usher in
Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, and was not to be so much Clouds and Darkness
to obscure him; he was but to point out Christ, and depart again, and not to
sit in equal Glory with him, on his Throne, in the New Testament. John said, he
was not worthy to bear his Shoes; and therefore they do not well, who have
prepared an equal Crown for him with Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords.

Wherefore we must take great Heed that we do not so magnify John's Office, as
to entrench on Christ's, and to make the Son, out of the Bosom of the Father,
to take up the Baptism of John, a Servant, and to administer one entirely his
own; surely this would not have been suitable to the Glory of the only begotten
Son of God.

The third Thing I propound to speak to, touching John's Baptism, is the Time
of its Durance, or Continuance, and that was but very short; for John's
Baptism, as all the Ceremonies of Moses, was but for a Time; yea, this being
nearer the Truth and Substance than they, was of less Duration; as the Morning
Star, though brighter than the Rest of those heavenly Lights, shines less While
than they, because the hasty Appearance of the Sun swallows it up. And so
John's Baptism was of great Use a little before Christ's Manifestation to
Israel, and continued till the Time of his Ascension; and then when Christ's
Baptism began, the Shadow was to give Way to the Substance, and the Sign to the
Truth, and the Letter to the Spirit, and the Servant to the Son; so that
Christ's Baptism put an End to John's, Free-Baptism to Water Baptism, and
Spirit-Baptism to Creature-Baptism: For as all the Prophets were until John, so
John was until Christ; and John must no more exceed his Bounds, than Moses and
the Prophets theirs; but as the Prophets gave up to John, so John must give up
to Christ. John's temporary Ministry had a temporary Baptism; but the
everlasting Gospel (which is that Word in our Flesh) has an everlasting
Baptism, which is the pouring out of the Spirit. So then, John being a Servant
and Forerunner of Christ, Christ was not to take up his Baptism, but John was
to resign up his Baptism to Christ; yea, and as a Servant, to deliver up all
Things into his Hands, as Heir and Lord: And so John's Water Baptism was to
last but till Christ's Fire-Baptism should come in, and then the Fire should
lick up the Water; and as Spirit-Baptism should increase, Water Baptism should
decrease. So that John's Baptism, or Water Baptism (which is all one) belongs
not to Christ's Kingdom, which is a Kingdom not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit, not of Signs and Shadows, but of the Truth; and therefore we leave it
where we found it, even without the Bounds and Reach of Christ's Kingdom; for
John's Office and Baptism reached unto Christ's Kingdom, but has no Place in
it; and to bring Signs and Ceremonies into the Kingdom of Truth, is (if rightly
understood) to act against Christ glorified.

Object. But some will say, this is strange indeed, that Water Baptism should
have no Place in the Kingdom of Christ: and therefore pray stay a little, for
we have many Things to object against it.

Object. 1. Why this should rob us of our Christendom.

I answer, No; for it is not Water, but Spirit-Baptism that makes us
Christians; and Water Baptism has been an unlawful blending or mixing of the
Church and World together; so that hitherto they could not be well differenced
from each other, to the great Prejudice of the Congregations of Christ.

Object. 2. But have so many Ages erred, who have used Water Baptism?

Answ. For the Errors of former Ages, and their great Mistakes in many of the
Truths of God, I have nothing to say, but that of the Apostle, How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out.

Object. 3. But you are the first Man, for ought we know, that ever opposed it.

Answ. One single mean Man, with the Word, may very justly and lawfully
contradict the whole World without it; Truth is not to be judged by Multitudes,
or an Unity, but by the Word.

Object. 4. But Christ himself was baptized with Water, and surely that
perpetuates it in the Church.

Answ. Christ's being baptized with Water under John, no more perpetuates
Water Baptism in the Christian Church, than his being circumcised under Moses,
perpetuates Circumcision in the Christian Church; or his submitting to other
Mosaical Ceremonies, perpetuates them; Christ brings no temporal or carnal
Thing into his everlasting or spiritual Kingdom, though himself submitted to
them under their several Dispensations in the Season of them.

Object. 5. But Christ justifies and commands Water Baptism in John iii. Except
a Man be born of Water, etc. And Mat. xxviii. Teach and baptize.

Answ. I confess these are Places that many have mistaken, to justify the
Practice of Water Baptism; but shall show you, that they do indeed
misunderstand them. For that first Place, John iii. 5. Except a Man be born of
Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; I confess, many
of the Ancients have, by Water here, understood material Water, and have
interpreted the Place of external Baptism, which was John's only: And hereupon
diverse of them have exceedingly magnified Water, and ascribed it to the Washing
of Souls, and the Regeneration of Christians in some Measure, they not
considering, in the mean time, what Christ says in the very next Verse, That
which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is
Spirit; by which they might have learned, that outward and corporeal Water can
do nothing but outward and corporeal Things, and can contribute nothing to the
Cleansing of Souls and Consciences from Sin.

So that this Place cannot be understood of corporeal Water; and I could
produce the Testimonies of many godly Men, of good Note, to this Purpose, but
do forbear, because I would not have our Faith built upon the Authorities of
Men; but the Thing is evident from the Text itself, for it says, Except a Man
be born of Water, which shows the Water he speaks of, must be such as is able
to give a new Birth, and to make a Man anew, that is, a spiritual, holy,
heavenly Creature; and no Water can do this, but the Spirit; and therefore
Christ adds to Water the Spirit, by Way of Explication; as if he had said, No
Man can enter into the Kingdom of God, except he be born again of Water; but
the Water I speak of is no material Water, but the Spirit, which is able to
produce in us a heavenly Nature, through which only we can have an Entrance
into an heavenly Kingdom, seeing Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God; so that the Water Christ means in this Place is the Spirit; and many other
Places give Witness to this, John iv. 10. If thou did know who it is that
says unto thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would
have given thee living Water. And Verses 13, 14, Jesus said unto her, whosoever
drinks of this Water (meaning the Water of the Well, called Jacob's Well) shall
thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well
of Water, springing up unto everlasting Life. and John vii. 37, 38, 39. Jesus
stood and cried, saying, if any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; he
that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow
Rivers of living Water; but this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that
believed on him should receive.

Now by Water, in all these Places, is not meant material Water, but the
Spirit, as Christ himself explicates; and sure his Testimony alone is
sufficient.

But again, if in this Place, except a Man be born of Water and Spirit, you
will needs understand material Water; why then, upon the same Ground, you must
needs understand that Place in Matthew of material Fire, where it is said, Mat.
iii. 11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit, and with Fire; which is
absurd to very Reason to think; but Water and Fire, in each Place, added to the
Spirit, show only the Efficacy of the Spirit; and so you may as well bring in
the Use of material Fire in Baptism, from the Text in Matthew, as of material
Water, from the Text in John. So that this Place in John proves no Authority of
Christ for Water Baptism in his Kingdom, which is the Church of the
New Testament.

Now the other Place, Matt. xxviii. 19. Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, is also
of as little Force as the former, to prove Water Baptism to be an Institution
of Christ. Indeed I find, that where ever Men have met with the Word Baptism or
baptize in the Scriptures, presently their Thoughts have descended to material
Water; th^^ not so well considering or understanding that Water, which is the
Spirit, which is the only Water that performs all the Baptism in the Kingdom of
God.

Now for that Place, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, they understand it
thus, teach them, and baptize them with material Water, using this Form of
Words, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc. But herein they err from
the Mind of Christ; for by these Words Christ leads his Disciples from John's
Baptism to his own; as if he had said, John indeed baptized with Water, and ye
have hitherto used his Baptism, but I shall now shortly baptize you with my own
Baptism of the Spirit; and from that Time I would have you go teach all
Nations, and by the Ministration of the Spirit, not baptize them, or dip them
in cold Water (as John did in his own Baptism, and you in his) but baptize
them, or dip them into the Name of God the Father, Son and Spirit; and note,
that he says not here, in the Name, but, in the Name of the Father, etc. and
by the Name of God, is meant the Power and Virtue of God, or God himself; as
Mark xvi. Christ says, in my Name they shall cast out Devils; that is, in my
Power and Virtue; so that the Sense lies thus, teach the Nations, and baptize
them into the Name, etc. that is, by your Ministry, which shall be of the
Spirit, and not of the Letter; you shall baptize them, or dip them, or interest
them into the Name of God, who is the Father, Son and Spirit, as he has
discovered himself, in his last and most glorious Discovery of himself in the
Gospel; you shall (I say) dip them into his Name, or sprinkle his Name upon
them, that they may be holy, just, true, merciful, righteous, good, etc. that
is, your Ministry, after you have received the Spirit, shall have such
Efficacy, that it shall clothe Men with the Name of God, and transform them
into his very Nature.

So that this Place cannot be understood of Water, but instead of baptizing in
material Water, as John, he tells them, they should baptize into the Name of
God, in such Sort, that they that were before sinful, corrupt, and evil Men,
should now be taken up into the Glory of the Name of God. Neither can this
Place be understood of a Form of Words, which the Apostles and their Successors
should use in baptizing, as most Men have thought and taught, seeing no Place
of Scripture can be named, wherein the Apostles, in baptizing, used this Form
of Words, saying, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit,
which they had undoubtedly done, if Christ had commanded it as an absolute
Form. And because many will presently be ready to be enraged at this Assertion,
I will a little cool their Heat with what Zuinglius says of this Place, who
was one of the greatest Enemies to the Anabaptists, that was in his Time;
Christus Jesus (says he) Baptismi Formulam, qua uteremur his Verbis, non
instituit, quemadmodum Theologi hactenus falso tradierunt, Zuing. Lib. de Bap.
P. 56. Tom. 2. Oper. that is, Jesus Christ did not in these Words institute a
Form of Baptism, which we should use, as Divines have hitherto falsely taught;
and he affirms it upon the same Ground I have mentioned before.

Again, if by this Place, go teach and baptize, be meant Water Baptism, Paul
did very ill observe the Command of Christ, who baptized but two or three
believing Families at the most, with Water Baptism, and yet preached the Word
in a Circuit from Jerusalem to Illiricum, Acts xv. 19. through many Kingdoms,
Countries, Villages, People; but I say Paul, though he used not Water Baptism,
yet did punctually fulfill the Command of Christ, and did teach them, and
baptize them into the Name of God. So that, no Question, there were many
Churches planted in Paul's Time, who believed in Christ, and received the
Spirit, and walked in Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and with one
another in the Father and the Son, who never were washed at all with
Water Baptism; but Paul knew well, that no outward Thing is of any Account in
the Kingdom of God; and that as Circumcision and Uncircumcision were nothing,
so neither Water Baptism, nor the Want of it, were any Thing, but a new
Creature is ALL; and if there be Faith and the Spirit, they are sufficient to
the Kingdom of God, without any outward Ceremonies whatsoever.

So that neither of these two Places prove any Institution of Water Baptism of
Christ, but that still remains John's Baptism, and not Christ's.

Object. 6 The last, and that which seems the strongest Objection, is, that the
Apostles practiced Water Baptism, not only before Christ's Baptism came in, but
after; and this is most evident in very many Places in the Acts of the Apostles.

Answ. I answer, true indeed, the Apostles did practice Water Baptism, but not
from Christ, but from John, whose Baptism they took up; and an outward Ceremony
of Honor and Account, is not easily and suddenly laid down; and hence some of
the Apostles used Circumcision, and that after the Ascension of Christ; for
Circumcision was an honorable Ceremony, used from Abraham's Time, and so they
could not (no not in the Time of the New Testament) suddenly and abruptly leave
it off, but they did use it for a Time, for their Sakes who were weak, well
knowing, that the Circumcision without Hands, would by Degrees put an End to
the Circumcision made with Hands. For Ceremonies are best laid down, and old
Customs best laid aside, by the Essicacy of the Spirit, and Power of
Righteousness. And so in like Manner the Apostles used the Baptism of John, or
Water Baptism, it having been of high Account in the Dawning of the Day of the
Gospel, and for the present still continuing so; but they knew that Spirit, or
Fire-Baptism, would by Degrees consume Water Baptism, and lick up all the Drops
of it; for so John himself intimates, saying, he must increase, but I must
decrease; that is, the Truth must eat out the Ceremony, and the Substance the
Sign, and the more his Ministry and Baptism come in, mine shall go out; and the
Ministry of the Son shall swallow up the Ministry of the Servant, as the
Sun-light does the Moonlight; and the Baptism of Fire shall devour the Baptism
of Water, and his Spirit-Baptism, by Degrees, shall put an End to my
Water Baptism; and therefore Paul (as you have heard) after he had used this
Baptism twice or thrice, quite forbore it, and yet planted many Churches of
Christ; and probably by Degrees did other Apostles too; for they knew that
Christ's Baptism included John's, and was fully sufficient of itself without
it; and therefore we find Paul teaching in Christ's Kingdom but one Baptism,
and this the Baptism of the Spirit, Ephesians. iv. from which the Church of the
New Testament, both Jews and Gentiles, was to take its Beginning, and not from
outward Elements, or Water-washing.

Wherefore, seeing these Things are so, the Anabaptists have extremely
mistaken, who have made their Water-washing so essential a Work of the
New Testament, that they would neither hear the Word, nor have Christian
Communion with any one that was not so washed; yea, though they were convinced
touching them, that they had received the Spirit; this, I say, has been the
great Error of very many honest and well meaning People, through
misunderstanding the Word, to make washing with material Water so necessary a
Thing in spiritual Worship; yea, and more essential to the Communion of Saints,
than the very Spirit itself, whom I do not therefore judge, but pity.

And thus much for Water Baptism, which was John's, and belonged only to that
middle Ministry, betwixt the Prophets and Christ.

Now the other Baptism I am to speak of, is Christ's, which is Spirit, or
Fire-Baptism; and this is the one and only Baptism of the New Testament, as we
find Paul affirming, Ephesians. iv. 6. where he says, that in Christ's Kingdom,
where is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, and one
Lord, and one Faith, there is also but one Baptism; and this is the Baptism of
the Spirit, as the Apostle elsewhere shows, saying, 1 Cor. xii. 13. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body; and have been made all to drink into
one Spirit.

Now this Spirit-Baptism did not go along with John's Water Baptism, but
followed it about four Years after (as you have heard) and as appears by the
forementioned Place of Christ, Acts i. 5. where he tells his Disciples,
saying, John verily baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy
Spirit, not many Days hence; and this Promise of Christ, and of the Father, was
fulfilled at the Day of Pentecost, when the Apostles being all met together,
there came a Sound from Heaven, as of a mighty rushing Wind, and it filled the
House where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven Tongues,
like as of Fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they (...) all filled with
the Spirit. Here was the first Beginning of Christ's, or Spirit-Baptism, for it
began not till after the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, and his sitting down
on the Throne of God; and John the Apostle also witnesses to this, Chap. vii.
saying, the Spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet glorified; but
as soon as he was glorified, then did he begin to baptize with the Spirit; not
the Apostles only, but also the Jews and Gentiles, and all Sorts of People that
did believe in his Name, through the Word of the Gospel: So that then Christ's
Baptism began to take Place, and to prevail, as you may see, Acts viii. When
the Apostles that were at Jerusalem, had heard that Samaria had received the
Word of God, by the Preaching of Philip, they sent unto them Peter and John,
who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Spirit, for as yet he was fallen on none of them (only, says the Text,
they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, i. e. they had only been
baptized with John's Baptism, who only baptized with Water, saying, that they
should believe on Christ that was to ^^me after; for John's Baptism was yet
usual, in as much as Christ's Baptism was but new begun.) Then did the Apostles
lay their Hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit; so that here now
was the Progress of Spirit-Baptism. And after, when Peter preached to
Cornelius, and his Family and Friends, the holy Spirit fell upon them, Acts x.
And Peter gives this Account to those of the Circumcision at Jerusalem, Acts
xi. 15. And as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them as on us at the
Beginning; then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that he said, John
indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit; so
that Peter evidently declares the Gift of the Spirit, by the Ministry of the
Gospel, to be the Baptism of Christ, or the Baptism of the Holy Spirit and
Fire, which Christ promised at his Ascension into Heaven.

And this is the only Baptism wherein all the Church of the New Testament are
to partake with Christ, I say, not the Baptism of Water, but of the Spirit; he
and we drinking into one Spirit, and the same Spirit descending on us as it did
on him. The pouring out of the Spirit on the Flesh of Christ, was his
New Testament Baptism, and it is ours too; and all our true and sound Comfort
and Happiness lies in this, that we are baptized with the same Spirit that he
was; for it would be as little spiritual Comfort to be dipped in the same Water
with Christ, as to eat with him at the same Table, or to drink with him in the
same Cup, or to go along with him in the same Ship, as Judas did, and diverse of
the unbelieving Jews; but to drink with him in one Spirit, is to partake of one
Flesh with him, and to be one Christ with him; and this is a Comfort indeed.

Now the outward Instrument of Christ's, or Spirit-Baptism, is not material
Water, but the Word, as Christ shows, Matt. xxviii. where he says, teach and
baptize, showing that teaching the Word, is the outward Means of baptizing with
the Spirit. And again, John xvii. Now are you clean through the Word, not which
Moses, but which I have spoken to you (and therefore is the Gospel called the
Ministration of the Spirit, because it proceeds from the Spirit, and
communicates the Spirit, and Christ baptizes with the Spirit, through the
Ministration of the Spirit, which is the Preaching of the Gospel) and Ephesians. v.
26. Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it,
with the Washing of Water by the Word; that is, Christ cleanses his Church by
such a Washing of Water, as is brought about by the Word and the Water with
which the Word washes in the Spirit; for by the Word the Spirit is given; and
the Word cleanses by the Spirit, and the Spirit by the Word; and therefore it
is also said, 1 Cor. vii. 1. Having these Promises, let us cleanse ourselves
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit.

From all this it appears, that Spirit-Baptism is not to be performed by Water,
but by the Word; and no Man, under the New Testament, receives the Spirit
through the Baptism of Water, but through the Ministry of the New Testament,
which is the only Ministration of the Spirit.

To conclude; this Baptism of the Spirit, that is performed only by the Word,
is that Baptism of which so many excellent Things are spoken in the
New Testament; as,

1. This Baptism of the Spirit gives a new Nature, and this Nature is a divine
Nature, or the Nature of God; and hence it is said, except a Man be born of
Water, and the Spirit; so that the Baptism of the Spirit gives a new Birth, and
so a new Nature. And again, that which is born of the Spirit, it Spirit; so
that the Baptism of the Spirit makes us Spirit, and through the Baptism of the
Spirit, we become that which the Spirit itself is; and so the true Foundation
of Christianity, begins from Faith and a new Creature, and not from
Water-washing. 2. This Baptism gives a new Name, not John or Thomas, etc. but
as Christ says, Rev. iii. 12. I will write upon him, my new Name: Our own Name
is Sin, and Ignorance, and Pride, and Injustice, and Envy, and Covetousness,
and Uncleanness, and all Evil; and this is the Name which the first Adam wrote
upon; but the Name the second Adam writes on us, is Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Truth, and Love, and Meekness, and Wisdom, and all Good, and this
the Name the second Adam writes on us, or his own new Name; for Christ himself
was baptized by the Spirit into the Name of God; that is, was taken up into
God, and the Things of God, which are himself, as into the Truth, Wisdom,
Justice, Mercy, Power, etc. and all the whole Flesh or Humanity of Christ, even
all his Members are baptized into the same Name of God with him, and so are
called by his new Name; so that this Name of Christ, this new Name which is
given us by God through the Baptism of the Spirit, is infinitely better than
that Name which is given us by Parents or Godfathers, in Water Baptism. 3.
Christ's Baptism translates us into a new World: Except a Man be born of that
Water which is the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. No Man can
possibly enter into the Church of the New Testament, which is the Kingdom of
God, but through the Baptism of the Spirit; the Baptism of the Spirit makes a
new Creature, and this new Creature enters into a new World, which is the new
Jerusalem, that comes down from God out of Heaven. 4. Spirit-Baptism enables us
to the same Work with Christ; that is, to the Ministry of the New Testament,
says Christ, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me to
preach Isa. lxi. 1. And he began his Ministry (...) Spirit-Baptism, which, did
immediately (...) his Water Baptism, but was in no Sort one Baptism with it;
and having, through the Opening the Heavens, received the Spirit which taught
him the Name of God, he presently began to teach the Name of God to others; and
Christ himself was not a Minister of the New Testament but through the Baptism of
the Spirit. Now all Believers that are anointed with him in his Unction, or
which is all one, are baptized with him in one Baptism of Spirit, are anointed
and baptized to the same Ministry; for the Anointing of the Spirit, is the
Teaching of God, and they that are taught of God themselves, ought also to
teach others; and the Spirit of Christ is the Spirit of Prophecy, and they that
have received that Spirit must prophecy, as it is written, it shall come to
pass in the last Days, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your
Sons and Daughters shall prophecy; which very Place Peter, Acts ii. applies to
the Baptism of the Spirit; so that this Spirit-Baptism of Christ makes all
Prophets, that partake of it. 5. Spirit-Baptism makes all those one with Christ
the Head, who partake of it, Gal. iii. 27. As many as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ; so that by the true Baptism of the New Testament,
we do actually put on Christ, and are made one with Christ; and this is not
done by any Water-washing, but by the Spirit; for through the Gift of the
Spirit only are we made one Flesh with Christ; yea, through this we necessarily
become one Spirit with him too, as it is said, he that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit; so that not through Water, but Spirit-Baptism, do we put on Christ,
the Spirit carrying us into Christ, and bringing Christ into us, and being one
and the same Spirit in both; and this is to be baptized into Christ.
Now this Baptism that makes us one with Christ, makes us to partake both of
his Death and Resurrection.

1. Through Baptism of the Spirit, we are dipped into the Death of Christ, Romans
vi. 3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are
baptized into his Death? And this is, as the Apostle unfolds it, Verse 6. The
crucifying of the old Man with him, that the Body of Sin may be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve Sin. And all this is done, not through any
Water-wash, but through the Gift of the Spirit; for it is through the Spirit
only, that we are able to mortify the Deeds of the Flesh; and nothing but the
Presence of the Spirit in us is the Destruction of Sin; so that the Spirit of
Christ baptizes us into the Death of Christ.

2. Spirit-Baptism makes us partake of his Resurrection as well as of his
Death, yea, therefore do we die with him, that we may live a better Life, Romans
vi. 3, 4. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism (that is, Spirit-Baptism)
into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the
Father, i. e. the Spirit, so should we also live in Newness of Life; for if we
have been planted together in the Likeness of his Death, we shall be also in
the Likeness of his Resurrection. Where you see the same Baptism of the Spirit
that makes us die with Christ, does also quicken us into his Resurrection, and
depriv^^ us of our own Life; not that we remain dead, but that it may
communicate to us a better Life than our own, even the Life of Christ himself,
that we that are Men may live the very Life of the Son of God in our own Souls
and Bodies, and may be quickened with him, and raised up with him, and set in
heavenly Places in him.

6. As Spirit-Baptism makes us one with Christ the Head, so with the Church the
Body, 1 Cor. xii. 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit; so that by drinking into one Spirit with the
Church, we become one Body with it, and no otherwise; I say, not by being dipped
into the same Water, but by receiving the same Spirit do we become one Body
with the Church; and it is not being of one Judgment, or Opinion, or Form, or
the like, that makes Men one true. Church or Body of Christ, but the being of
one Spirit; and there are no more of that Church, which is the Body of Christ,
than they that are baptized with that one Spirit of Christ.

7. Spirit-Baptism, it truly washes and cleanses from Sin; what Water Baptism
does in the Sign, this does in the Truth, even cleanses from all carnal and
spiritual Filthiness; and no Man is cleansed from Sin, but by the Washing of
the Spirit; the pouring forth of the Spirit on all Flesh, is the killing of Sin
in all Flesh, 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10, 11. Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were some of you, but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of
our God: So that Spirit-Baptism cleanses from all Sin whatever it is, and there
is no Man cleansed from Sin, but through this Baptism.

And again, Ephesians. v. 26, 27. Christ gave himself for the Church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the Washing of Water by the Word, that he might
present it to himself, a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any
such Thing, but that it should be holy, and without Blemish; and nothing does
thus purify the Church, till it be without Spot, Wrinkle or Blemish, and till
it be perfectly holy, but the Baptism of the Spirit. And therefore, though the
Baptism of John was administered but once, yet the Baptism of Christ is a
continued Baptism; for as long as Corruption is in the Flesh, the Baptism of
the Spirit is in Use; so that the Nature and Life of a Christian are under a
constant and continual Baptism, God every Day pouring forth his Spirit upon a
Believer, for the purifying and sanctifying of him, and making him meet for the
immediate Presence of God, whither no unclean Thing comes, nor the least
Uncleanness in any Thing.

8. Spirit-Baptism saves: Whatever in us is washed with the Spirit, is saved as
well as sanctified; and how much any one has received of the Spirit, so much
is he already saved, Tit. iii. 5. According to his Mercy he has saved us by
the Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Spirit, which he shed on
us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: Where the Apostle teaches us
how God saves, and that is not by John's Batpism, or Water-washing, but by the
Laver of Regeneration; which is the renewing of the holy Spirit, poured on us
abundantly through Christ; so that he calls the Baptism of the Spirit, the Laver
of Regeneration; such a Laver that renews the old Nature; yea, and begets a new
one; so that a Man through this Baptism is wholly changed, not in a few good
Works, but in his whole Nature; and from his Newness of Nature flows Newness of
Life; so that he is no more as he was, but is, and lives, and loves, and
thinks, and speaks, and acts otherwise than he was wont, and this cannot be the
Work of Water in any Measure, but wholly of the Spirit, for where Men are
destitute of the Spirit, though washed with Water a thousand Times, there is no
Change of Nature in them; but the Change of Nature, wrought by Spirit-Baptism,
is so much present Salvation, even in this present World. There is another
Scripture witnesses the same Thing, and it is 1 Pet. iii. 20, 21. A Few (that
is, eight Souls) were saved by Water, to which Figure Baptism answering, does
now also save us, not that whereby the Filth of the Flesh is cast away, but
whereby a good Conscience answers well to God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, Peter having said, that Baptism answers to the Flood, and saves the
Church now, as the Flood did the Church then; yea, says he, but I mean not the
outward Baptism, or the Washing away of the Filth of the Body, but the Answer
of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: Which
Place is difficult; but I thus conceive it, the Efficacy of Christ's
Resurrection is the Gift of the Spirit; and the Spirit of Christ, in a
Believer, rectifies his Conscience, and makes it good, so that it can return a
sweet Answer to God upon every Word of his; for the Work of the Spirit in the
Heart answers every Word of Faith spoken from God; particularly it can say to
God, I was indeed filthy and unclean throughout, but I am now washed, and
justified, and sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
my God; and this Spirit-Baptism is that that saves, and not the Water, which
puts away the Filth of the Flesh only, but leaves the Filth of the Spirit as
much as ever.

So that, in this Place, Peter puts an End to Baptism in the Flesh, as Paul,
Romans ii. 28. puts an End to Circumcision in the Flesh, saying, He is not a Jew
that is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the
Flesh; but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the
Heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of
God; that is, says Paul, in the Kingdom of Christ, where all Things are
spiritual; Circumcision in the Spirit puts an End to Circumcision in the Flesh;
and in the same Kingdom of Christ, says Peter, Baptism in the Spirit puts an
End to Baptism in the Flesh; for he is not a Christian, who is one outwardly,
neither is that Baptism which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Christian
who is one inwardly, and Baptism is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and not in
the Letter, whose Praise also is not of Men, but of God. For under the Gospel,
which is the Ministration of the Spirit (as ye have been often minded) we can
find nothing among all outward Things, through the Use and Exercise whereof we
may attain the Cleanness and Purity of Righteousness in our Natures; and
therefore Christ has put an End to all outward, carnal and earthly Things of
the first Testament, by the inward, and spiritual, and heavenly Things of a
second, and better, Testament; and by his own Death and Resurrection only, not
without us, but within us, through the Power and Efficacy of his Spirit, all
the Baptism of the New Testament is fully and perfectly performed.

And thus, in all these Particulars, you see the infinite Excellency and Glory
of the Spirit-Baptism above Water Baptism, and this only is sufficient in the
Days of the Gospel, as being the true and proper Baptism of the New Testament;
for as Christ himself only is sufficient to the Faithful without John, though
John were of Use in this Season, to point out Christ, so the Baptism of Christ,
only is sufficient to the Faithful, without the Baptism of John, though the
Baptism of John were of Use in its Season, to point out the Baptism of Christ;
and the Baptist himself was of this Judgment, who said to Christ, I have Need
to be baptized of thee; which he means not of Water Baptism (for so Christ
himself, as you have heard, did not baptize) but with the Baptism of the
Spirit, and so the Baptist himself, who was never baptized with Water, neither
by Christ nor the Apostles, nor any Body else, yet was baptized with the
Spirit; and the Baptism of the Spirit was sufficient for the Baptist, without
any Water Baptism; and so Christ's Spirit-Baptism, by the Word, is sufficient
for all the Faithful now, without John's Water Baptism; for he that is truly
washed from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and has the Holy Ghost in him,
to renew his Nature, and to conform him exactly to Christ's own Image, and to
work him in this present World into the true Similitude of Heaven, and to be in
him a Fountain of Water springing up unto everlasting Life; what Need has he
of cold material Water to be poured on his Body, under the Pretense of any Sign
whatever, either of Moses or John, when as he has the Truth, Substance, and
heavenly Thing itself?

Now this, it may be, may seem strange and dangerous to some of low, and
fleshly, and customary Religion, but let all such (if it be possible) consider,
that where the Substance comes the Shadow is at an End, and the Ceremony where
the Truth comes, and the Creature where God comes: And if they understand not
this for the present, I hope they may understand it afterward, for we speak
not at Uncertainties in this Point, but what we have in some Measure seen, and
felt, and handled of the Word of Life, that we deliver to you, that ye may have
Fellowship with us; and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ, through the Spirit.

FINIS.

