Mr. Throop's Election SERMON, May 11 th, 1758.

RELIGION and LOYALTY, the Duty and Glory of a People* ILLUSTRATED in a SERMON.

From 1 Peter 2. 17.

Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Colony of Connecticut, at
Hartford, On the Day of the Anniversary Election, May 11 th, 1758.

By Benjamin Throop, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Norwich.

Render to Caesar the Things that are Cesar's, and to GOD the Things that are
GOD'S, MARK 12. 17. Been dicere ad paucos, been autem vivere ad omnes. LACTAN.
L. 1. (...). NEW LONDON: Printed by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and
COMPANY, M DCC LVIII

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, Holden at Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, Anno Domini,
1758.
Ordered, THAT HEZEKIAH HUNTINGTON and JABEZ HUNTINGTON, Esqrs. return the
Thanks of this Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN THROOP, for his Sermon
Delivered on the 11th Day of May Instant, before this Assembly, and desire a
Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

An Election Sermon.
1 PETER 2. 17. -- Fear GOD: Honor the King.
THE Principal and most Noble design of our being made Rational Creatures, is
to Capacitate us for Religion; and thereby to Qualify us for Usefulness in the
World, and for the Enjoyment of our Maker: An End, truly worthy of it is Author,
and our Existence. So that some have though it, that a Religious Creature, or a
Creature capable of Religion; a better Definition of Man, than merely a
Rational Creature or a Creature Endowed with Reasonable Understanding: Because
what ever Resemblance of Reason may appear in some parts of the Sensitive
Creation; yet none of Religion. And by how much the more we exert ourselves in
the Practice of Religion and Moral Virtue; By so much the better do we Conform
to the Injunction in our Text. Fear God, Honor the King. Loyalty being
Dictated as an Essential part of Duty, both by the Light of Nature and
Revelation. And nothing is more Evident, than it is being strictly Enjoined in
our Christian Profession. I need not go from my Text and Context to Confirm
this. The Apostle in the 9th verse of the Context Reminds those to whom He
wrote, of their peculiar Privilege and Dignity as Christians and Saints; and
the Obligations they were under to Conduct, accordingly: But ye are a Chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People; that ye
should show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness into
mavelous light. In the 11th and 12th verses, He besecheth them to be
extreemly careful of their Moral conduct and Conversation: that they give no
Occasion to the Gentiles to reproach them with Licentiousness and Disloyalty:
But to Submit to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake: whether it be to
the King as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are Sent by him for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. i. e. To
be Subject to Civil Government, out of Conscience, and Obedience to God, who
has Ordained the Civil Magistracy, and Commands Obedience unto it. There are
two things employed in this, (1.) That Disobedience to Civil Authority proceeds
from Men's Lusts, (2) That such Disobedience, would open the Mouth of
Unbelievers against the Gospel: and that a Loyal behavior will put to Silence
the ignorance of Foolish Men; as in verse 15. In the next words the Apostle
seems to prevent a secret Objection. Some might Reply, we are free in Christ,
and therefore owe no Obedience to any above us. The Apostle grants the
Anticedent, understanding it of their freedom from the burden and curse of the
Law, and the bondage of Sin and Satan; but withal he Admonish^s them not to
withdraw their Obedience to the Magistrate, under this pretense: As free and
Not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the Servants of
God. But says He, in the next words, Honor all Men, according to their State
and Calling: Love the brotherhood, as becomes Saints; and to include all in a
word, Fear God* Honor the King. i. e. Let your Religious and Civil deportment
be such as becomes your Profession as Christians: Examples of Virtue and Piety,
and a Bar to every Objection.

I shall improve the words more fully under this DOCTRINAL Observation, viz.

That Religion and Loyalty is the Duty and Glory of a People.

These things are employed in the words; in as much as the Fear of God includes
the whole of Religion, and Honoring the King all Loyalty and Subjection that
is due to Civil Authority.

1. I say the Fear of God, is often put to Express the sum of our Religion, and
the whole of Duty, as in Job 28. 28. And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of
the LORD, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. Psalm. 111.
10. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have
all they that do his commandments. And Eccl. 12. 13. Let us hear the conclusion
of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole
duty of man. Now the Reason why this is put for the whole of Religion, seems to
be, because Fear is so powerful a Principle, and has so great an influence upon
men to make them Religious. For ( Dr. Tillotson.
as one observes) it is a Passion that is most deeply rooted in our natures,
and flows immediately from that Principle of self-preservation which God has
planted in every Man. Every one desires his own Preservation and Happiness, and
therefore has a natural Dread and Horror of every thing that can destroy his
Being, or Endanger his Felicity: and the greatest Danger is from the greatest
Power, and that is Omnipotency. So that the Fear of God is an inward
acknowlegement of a holy and just Being, which is Armed with an Almighty and
Irresistible Power. God having hid in every Man's Conscience, a secret awe and
dread of his Infinite Power, and Eternal Justice. Now Fear being so intimate to
our Natures, it is the strongest Bond of Laws, and the greatest Security of our
Duty. For however much we have lost the relish of true Happiness, yet not the
sense of Pain and Misery; So that what Love does not attract, Fear may excite.

2. That other Expression of Honoring the King; includes all Loyalty and due
Obedience to the Civil Magistrate: for as the King is the Head and Fountain of
Civil Power, so Subordinate Authority, are streams issuing there from. This by
a Metanimia a Figure often used in Scripture, is sufficiently expressed.

My Method shall be, I. To show that Religion is the greatest concern of all
Orders of Men, and the chiefest Glory of any People. II. That a Spirit of
Loyalty is Essential to the Peace and Happiness of a People. And III. To
Improve the Subject, and Apply the whole to the present Occasion.


I. Religion is the greatest Concern of all Orders of Men, and the chiefest
Glory of a People. This is of universal extent; it reaches, (or should do) from
the King on the Throne, to the Maid behind the Mill. There is none above it,
nor any beneath it. Policy, Power, or Opulency, is the assignment of but few,
but Religion is incumbent upon all: and it is as Beneficial in its Nature, as
it is Extensive in its Regards. It includes the Knowledge of the greatest
Things. -- The Possession of the best Good; -- and the Enjoyment of the most
lasting Tranquillity.

1. Religion includes the Knowledge of the Greatest things. To Know God and
Christ, Ourselves, and the way to be for ever happy, is certainly the most
extensive and useful Knowledge. Our Irreligious and unhappy Estate by Nature,
is justly called a state of Ignorance and Darkness; Ephesians. 4. 18.
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance which is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts. Now the very Nature and Design of Religion, is To open our eyes, and to
turn us from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that we
may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith in Christ. Acts 26. 18.
The Knowledge of God in his Nature and Perfections, is truly Excellent and
Desirable: It gives the greatest Delight and Satisfaction to the Soul, to
Discover and Contemplate those his Perfections: For whatever is Beautiful and
Amiable, as it is dispersed and scattered in the Creature, is Complete and
Centers in God: and not only so, but it Exceeds our Comprehension and
Conception: and there is an agreeable satisfaction in gazing upon, and adoring
Incomprehensibility; and being swallowed up in the Immensity of the Divine
Perfections.

Again, To Know God in his Communications, in the Manifestations which he has
made of himself in the K^ngdom of Nature and Providence; but especially in the
Dispensations of his Grace: This is Useful, Enriching and Ravishing. All thy
works do praise thee, and thy saints shall bless thee! The works of Creation
and Providence, do plainly show forth the Being of a God; But the work of
Redemption shows what Kind of Being, God is: One Glorious in Holiness, fearful
in Praises, doing Wonders. The Knowledge of God in Christ, and in the work of
Redemption through him, is an Happiness which even the Angels seem to be
surprised at, 1 Pet. 1. 12. -- Which things the Angels desire to look into. It
is the great Mystery of Godliness, the Design of Eternal Wisdom, the chiefest
of all God's Works: What contains the Glorious wonders of his Mercy and Power;
wherein he renders himself most worthy of our supreme Veneration and Affection:
our most raised Thoughts are Infinitely beneath it is Dignity. The Light of the
Gospel (says Dr. Bates.
one) has clearly Revealed so much as is Requisite to be Known in our earthly
State; yet the Sublimer parts are still Secret, and reserved for a full
discovery by the Brightness of our Savior's Appearance. -- It is the most
excellent Knowledge, as that alone which can satisfy the immortal Appetite; and
the most Important; for it is no less than our Recovery from Extreme and Eternal
Misery, and the Restoring of us to the Enjoyment of the Blessed God: a Felicity
without Comparison or End: And in proportion to the Regard we have to
Salvation, will be our Delight to Know the Means by which we may obtain it.

Therefore, in the next place; To Know Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, and consequently of our Salvation, must needs be the most Necessary
and Excellent Knowledge. For it is of absolute Necessity that we Know God in
Christ in order to our being happy: For this is Life Eternal to Know thee, the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. We must Know him to be
more than merely the Messenger of God, to Publish the glad Tidings of
Salvation, and to Direct in the way of Life: we must Know him to be the Wisdom
of God and the Power of God; by the Effectual Application of his Grace to us by
his Holy Spirit. But to know him after this manner, we must at the same time
know our own Misery and Unworthiness, together with the need we have of a
Mediator. Cognosce te ipsum, Know thy Self; was esteemed a Divine Sentence, by
the Learned Heathen, and is known to be of the greatest importance by the
experienced Christian. We ought by no means to separate those two parts of
Knowledge; because each alone, is not only unprofitable but dangerous. For as
Monsieur Paschal observes, The Knowledge of God without the Knowledge of our
own Misery, is the Nurse of Pride: The Knowledge of our own Misery, without the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ is the Mother of Despair. But the true Knowledge of
Jesus Christ exempts us alike from Pride and from Despair; by giving us at once
a Sight, not only of God, and of our own Misery, but also of the Mercy of God
in the Relief of our Misery, We may Know God without Knowing our own Misery; or
we may Know our own Misery without Knowing God; or we may Know them both
without Knowing the Means of Obtaining from God the Relief of our Misery: But
we cannot Know Jesus Christ, without the Knowledge of our Miseries and their
Cure. In as much as Jesus Christ is not only God, but he is God under this
Character, the Healer and Repairer of our Miseries. Thus all they that seek God
without Jesus Christ can never meet with such Light in their enquiries, as may
afford them true Satisfaction, or solid Comfort; because God is Known and
communed with, but in and by a Mediator.

2. Religion puts the Subject into the possession of the best Good. Here I
would be understood, what I mean by Religion, when I say, it includes the
Knowledge of the greatest Things, and the Possession of the best Good, etc.
viz. a Divine Principle implanted in the Soul which Disposes and Qualifies it
for the Service and Enjoyment of God. The unhappy mistake which mankind so
generally labor under with respect to the Nature of Religion, is the sad
Occasion of its being so much Neglected or Perverted. The conception of its
being an Exterior Business, is the Occasion of its being made an Engine of
State, or a Nose of Wax that may serve every purpose. But as Mr. Shaw observes,
It is not so much given of God, as itself is something of God in the Soul: as
the Soul is not so properly said to give, as to be the Life of Man. As the
Conjunction of the Soul with the Body, so verily the Life of the Soul stands in
its Conjunction with God, by a spiritual Union of Will and Affections. The
nearness to God, which a Soul Enjoys by Religion is called a Cohabitation. Thus
it is expressed in Scripture; Isa. 57. 15.
I Dwell in the high and holy Place, with him also that is of a humble Spirit.
2 Cor. 6. 16.
As God has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them. Ephesians, 3. 17.
That Christ may dwell in their Hearts by Faith. 1 Cor. 3. 16.
Know ye not that ye are the Temples of the Lord, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you, etc. By all which Expressions, it is evident, that there is a
most agreeable Intercourse between God, and the Religious Soul; and that hereby
it actually Possesses the greatest and best Good. For his Favor is Life, and
his Loving kindness is better than Life itself. Which brings me to the last
Thing under this Head, viz.

3. It is the Enjoyment of the most lasting Tranquillity. There is not all that
Advantage and Comfort in a Dignified State, that we are ready to apprehend at a
Distance: Good and Grand, are different Things. The Great and the Opulent are
ordinarily Envied, as the most Comfortable and Happy part of Mankind: But those
who possess this Station, find they have their Difficulties, which at Times are
so Pressing, that they deserve Pity rather than Envy. But the Soul that
possesses that Divine Principle of Religion, is sure of Comfort, let its
external Circumstances be as they will. This Teaches how to be Abased and how
to Abound, and in every State to be Content. It enlightens the Understanding,
informs the Judgment, influences the Will, regulates the Passions and
Affections, and gives the Man the entire Possession of himself, in the midst of
Hurry and Tumult. It is like that benign Stream, of which the Psalmest speaks
in Psalm 46. We will not Fear, though the Earth be Removed, and though the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; though the Waters thereof Roar,
and be Troubled; though the Mountains Shake with the Swelling thereof: There is
a River the Streams whereof shall make glad the City of our God. To be at Peace
with God, and our own Consciences, is the most stable Peace, and affords the
most lasting Tranquillity: and with all its present Advantages, it is but a
prelude and foretaste of what we may Expect to possess and enjoy, in a future
and eternal State. There is nothing we have now Observed of Religion in its
Nature and Influence, but what is accomodate to all Men; and peculiarly
Incumbent upon those in Authority and Power; as we shall have Occasion to
consider more particularly hereafter.

II. That a Spirit of Loyalty, is Essential to the present Comfort and
Happiness of a People: and really comes within our Religious Profession and
Engagement.

A just discharge of the Duties of the second Table, are as Incumbent as those
of the first. For as we are to Love the Lord our God with all our Heart and
Strength, and Might, so we are to Love our Neighbor as our Selves: and in the
discharge of Relative Duty (under which comes that of Loyalty) consists, no
small part of our Religion, and the Comfort and Happiness of the present Life.
A due Obedience to all proper Authority, is not only the Beauty, but Strength
and Glory of a People. But Mutiny and Rebellion, are as distructive to the
Political Body, as Sword and Pestilence to the Natural. There is a certain
Mechanic Order, which is Requisite to adjust the movements of every kind of
Body; which if disconcerted, will destroy the modle of the whole; and
incapacitate the same for proper action. Where Pride and Vanity is so
prevalent, as to render Men uneasy in their proper Station, and troublesome to
their Superiors* it fills the State with Disorder and Confusion* It marrs its
Beauty, and saps its Strength: The most effective method for preventing or
correcting of which is, to comply with the Injunction of the Apostle, viz. For
every Man to abide steadfast in the calling where with God has called him; and
be content with the assignments of Providence. God's Israel of Old, was never
so Renowned and Happy, as when under proper restrictions with respect to their
Order and Government. When there were Wise (...) Faithful Men at Helm, and the
People were Subject and Loyal, things went well in Judah. They were then the
envy of their Neighbors, and a terror to their Enemies: But as soon as ever,
there comes an Arbitrary Prince on the Throne, and a mutinous and rebellious
Spirit prevails among the People, they immediately become a Pray to the Enemy,
a Reproach to their Neighbors, and Pest to themselves. This is evident by
comparing the state of this People, under the Reign and Government of David,
Solomon, and Hezekiah, who were Wise, Judicious and Prudent Men; and the People
were quiet and easy under their Administration: and that of Saul, Rehoboam,
Ahab, Jehu, and Jehoiakim. As these Kings were Despotick and Arbitrary in their
Government, so the People were continually uneasy and mutinous; and the State
kept in a perpetual Fermentation. And as the Apostle Observes, (in another
Case) these Things were Written for our Example and Warning. Difficulties in a
State, are not so much owing the particular mode of Government, as to the
conduct of Rulers, and the disposition of the People. e. g. The Empire of
Persia, has been kept in regular state, that is, Free from Insurrections and
Rebellion, and have acquired great Repute, as well as Conquests under the
Government of Naidar Shab, their late Prince; who was a very Arbitrary and
Sovereign Monarch; but a Man of great Sagacity and Penetration. While some
other People under the mildest Government, and best Constitution, have been
distressed by intestine Jarrs, and rebellious Practices: So that Loyalty, more
than mere Policy, Happifies a People. And indeed, a Mutinous, Uneasy, and
Disloyal Conduct, would be the most inexcusable in this People of any under
Heaven. For the World knows not a more just and happy Constitution, or a more
mild and faithful Administration than ours is. For with respect to our
Liberties and Privileges, both Civil and Sacred; God may say, as of his People
of old; What could I have done more that I have not done for it. Isa. 5. 4.
But notwithstanding; it is often the Case of the best Constituted States, to
be infested with Malcontents, and troubled with pestiferous Incendiaries.
There were some of this Temper, as early as the Apostles Days. St. Jude, calls
them, Filthy Dreamers, who despise Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities,
raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own Shame; wandering Stars, to whom
is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. Ju^. 8. 9.
And it is observable, that St. Peter as well as St. Jude, speaks of this as
the most bold and audacious Crime: 2 Pet. 2. 10. Presumptuous are they;
Self-willed, they are not afraid to speak Evil of Dignities; whereas Angels
which are greater in Power and Might, bring not a railing Accusation against
them before the Lord. -- Whoever is acquainted with the English Annals, must
needs see the Difficulties and Dangers which our Nation has often been reduced
to, by the prevalency of this unhappy Spirit: And indeed, we are not altogether
Strangers to it, here. But wherever it prevails, it is (as one justly observes)
like a Mutiny in an Army, or a Gangreen in the Body, that will soon prove
Fatal, if not seasonably suppressed: It is a Fire that will Consume even to the
Foundations of Zion. As this is pregnant with every Evil; so on the contrary, a
Spirit of Loyalty, Peace and due Subjection, is productive of every Good:
Amiable in its Nature, and Excellent in its Consequences. Behold how Good and
how Pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! It is like the
precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard, even Aarons
Beard, that went down to the skirts of his Garment; as the Dew of Hermon, and
as the Dew that descends upon the Mountains of Zion. Psalm. 133.


III. I proceed now to Improve the Subject, and to Apply the same to the
present Occasion.

1. If Religion and Loyalty be so much the Glory of a People; we may hence
learn the Occasion of the present Abject State of our Nation and Land. These
Graces are much wanting: There is an awful decay of Religion, and an
unreasonable Spirit of Jealousy and Disquietude prevailing* the fear of God is
amazingly cast off in this day: While some are disputing the Personallity of
the Godhead, and denying the Lord that bought them; others are ridiculing the
important Doctrine of Atonement, and casting contempt upon the efficacious
Merits of a Glorious Redeemer; many are exploding the Doctrine of free and
sovereign Grace, and exalting humane Nature under all its Depravity, to a
situation equal to all its Necessities; thereby perverting the Designs of the
Gospel, and frustrating as far as may be, the Means of our Salvation: If such
Error in Theory, no wonder there is so much Iniquity in Practice. Alas for the
many crying Evils wherewith our Nation and Land Abounds! too many now to be
Numbered; I shall only in general mention, our Infidelity, Formality and
Profanation of God's holy Name and Day; our Abuse of a Savior, and the
Operations of his holy Spirit, together with a Contempt of the Gospel and its
Ordinances; our Rebellion and Disobedience to just Authority; our Pride,
Enmity, Luxury and Profuseness; our Impurity and Intemperance; our Avarice,
Oppression and Injustice; False-swearing, Lying, Slandering, Reviling, Envying
and Defaming of others. For this the Land Mourns, and for these Things our God
who is highly Dishonored and Offended, has been answering his People by
Terrible Things in Righteousness; and is justly bringing on us many grievous
Calamities, and especially the present distressed War, which is full fraught
with many Evils; such as great decay of Trade, heavy Debts, Plunders,
Barbarities, Captivities, loss of Estates and Lives, with a vast variety of
other distressing Troubles. -- And after several expensive Campaigns we have
little to boast of, but much to be humble under. -- The advantages the Enemy
have gained upon us, in the Demolition of several of our Fortresses, the loss
of our Artillery, Provisions and Military Stores; together with the Capture of
so many of our Forces, carries a very humbling Aspect. And notwithstanding the
Mighty Armament sent us from Europe, by our most Gracious King, for our Relief,
both by Sea and Land; may we not, in the Language of the affectionate Prophet,
be wail our State, and in some Measure say? The Harvest is past, the Summer is
ended, and we are not Saved. Jer. 8. 20.
May God of his Mercy prosper and succeed his Majesty's Arms in the current
Year; and Save a sinking Nation and Land from impending Ruin; wipe off the
Reproach that is cast upon us, and suffer us not to become a Taunt and a
Proverb!

Use 2. Hence see the Necessity of a Reformation. As Religion and Loyalty is
the Glory and Safety of a People; so the want of Religion and Virtue, is always
proportionably their Disgrace and Disadvantage: For as Righteousness Exalts a
Nation, so Sin is the Destruction of a People. But the Necessity of a
Reformation is peculiarly Obvious at this day. The Most High is manifestly
Controverting with us: And the Consequence we may expect will be in the
Reformation or Destruction of this People. We have had previous and sufficient
Intimations of the Divine Displeasure: But now God seems to be dealing out the
Cup of Trembling, Red with Indignation. He has Righteously drawn forth the
Sword of the Wilderness against us, to avenge the Breach of his Holy Covenant;
in letting loose a Numerous, Savage and Blood-Thirsty People, to make Spoil of
us, and lay waste his Heritage. Like the Medes of old, They regard not Silver,
and as for Gold, they do not desire it; Their Bows do dash the young Men to
pieces, and they have no pity on the fruit of the Womb, and their Eyes spare
not the Children. Isa. 13. 17, 18.
These in Combination with a perfidious and antichristian Nation, are God's
Scourge, wherewith he is Correcting of us: And if, what we have reason to fear,
should come upon us; How Miserable is our Condition What but a Principle of
Religion, a steadfast Trust in God could support us? This indeed, like an Anchor
to the Soul, is sure and steadfast: For in the multitude of my Thoughts within
me, Thy Comforts delight my Soul. And to enforce this, let us consider what we
have at Stake. Were we inured to Slavery, and used to Bonds; were it barely
changing Masters, and going but from one State of Servitude to another, it were
not so much: But it is changing Liberty for Slavery, and the most free and
generous State, for the most vile and abject. Who that has ever enjoyed the
benign Shade, and tasted the sweet Fruits of the British Vine, can bear the
thoughts of being Tom with the Gallic Bramble? How shocking are the tho'ts of
being a Conquered People; of becoming a Province of France! and how dreadful
must the Consequences needs be! Could we bear to see our Nobles bound in
Chains, and our Rulers with fetters of Iron? Our Elders sitting upon the
Ground, girded with Sackloth, and covered in Dust? Could we bear to see our
Young Men slain with the Sword, and our Maidens Ravished in the Streets? Our
Children and Sucklings swooning for want of Sustenance, and pouring out their
Souls in their Mothers bosoms? -- Dare we Renounce our Faith, and abandon our
Profession? Or can we Suffer (...) our Religion! One of which, it seems we must
soon be bro't to, should we be so unhappy, as to fall into the hands of our
Enemies. We surely could have but little hopes of a Toleration, since it is not
allowed to Homeborn Subjects: And the absolute Will of that Arbitrary Monarch,
is, that all his Subjects shall have but one Religion. While I look into the
train of Evils, which it seems must be the inevitable Consequence of such a
disaster, I must say with the Poet.

Obriguere com^, vox Faucibus h^sit.

My Hair stiffens with Horror, and my Voice faulters in my Jaws. Or, rather
with the affectionate Prophet: Mine Eyes do fail with Tears, and my Bowels are
troubled within me. But as we would avoid those Calamities, we must Renounce
our evil Practices, and forsake our Iniquities: For after all that has yet been
done, God's Anger is not turned away, but his Hand is stretched out still. Though
by the many Gracious Interpositions of Providence for our Relief, when in the
most extreme Danger; God shows a desire of our Reformation and not Destruction.
His Bowels yearn, and his Compassion is kindled toward us: (and speaking after
the manner of men) He seems loath to give us up a Prey, and to deliver us into
the hands of the Enemy, to be Consumed and Destroyed. How shall I make thee as
Admah, I how shall I set thee as Zeboim! Wherefore let us be persuaded, to
break off our Sins by Righteousness, and our Iniquities by showing Mercy ^o the
Poor, if it may be a lengthening out of our Tranquillity.

3. For Application of what has been said; I would Observe, that Religion which
is so universally necessary, is peculiarly incumbent upon Rulers, and those in
a Dignified State. And that especially as it has the most direct and powerful
tendency to Assimilate them to the likeness of the Divine Original of all
Power: and Qualifies them for the most happy way of Governing. It fills Men
with Noble, Generous, and Heroic Principles; and disposes them to answer the
ends of their Exaltation. It cures them of what is Little, Mean and Selfish;
and puts them upon seeking the Good of others more than themselves. It will
certainly correct their inordinate Affection of exorbitant Power, and
unreasonable Greatness; by teaching them the Honor and Advantage, of
Self-Conquest. The same holy Principle, will polish their rough Natures, and
sweeten their Tempers, and make them Amiable, as well as Honorable in the
sight of their Brethren: Whereas Irreligion and Impiety, does strangely lessen
Greatness, and secretly and unavoidably derive some Weakness, even upon
Authority itself. But Religion will greatly strengthen their Authority, as it
naturally procures a Veneration, and commands Reverence. This will put them
under a double Advantage; that whiles they adorn their Posts, they best serve
the People; and are themselves Examples of what they enjoin others by Precept.
It will set them above the flatteries of fawning Sychophants, or the
unreasonable murmurs of a giddy Populace. In a word, it will be the best
Support under the present Weight of Government, and the only Title to a future
and glorious Reward. Now then, this being the happy Effect of Religion in
Rulers, what may we not Expect from our Honorable Legislature. And since his
Honor, has assigned it as my Province to Officiate on this public and solemn
Occasion, (Conscious indeed I am of my own Inequality and Insufficiency for the
Business) but notwithstanding, I trust I have Liberty to Address myself to your
Honors, the Legislature of this Government, now convened in this Place.

Honored and much Esteemed;

I am sensible you are called in Providence to take the Conduct of this People,
in as Difficult and Critical a Season, perhaps, as our Land has ever yet Known:
And will therefore see the Necessity of what I have been Urging, and will not
be wanting in your Places to Enforce the same, as the most effective Method for
the lengthening out of our Tranquillity -- It has pleased the Most High to
raise you up for such a Day as this; a Day wherein all the Liberties and
Privileges of this People, both Civil and Sacred are struck at; and all that
is worth Enjoying is at Stake; even Life itself not excepted. And whiles we are
Invaded by so Numerous, Potent and Crafty an Enemy, who have already obtained
to many Advantages against us, and are still exerting their whole Posse to
subject us: And withal so many intestine Jarrs, shrewd Suspicions and
Jealousies, unreasonable Murmurings and Repinings, it surely requires a steady
Hand and a gallant Heart at Helm. Wherefore gird up the Loins of your Minds and
be Strong: only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may observe to
do all that the Law of the Lord Requires thee, turn not from it, to the right
Hand or to the left, that thou may Prosper, whither soever thou go. And
by how much the more Pressing and Difficult our Circumstances are, by so much
the more Active and Vigorous, may your Zeal and Attention be. Your Honors are
very Sensible the present Season is on some Accounts, the most Critical and
Important, which this Country ever saw. We are pursued by an Active,
Perfidious, Savage Enemy, with such Vigor and Rage, as exceeds all their past
Diligence, Courage and Resolution. They give us sufficient Reason, to be
Convinced, they are Resolved to execute a Plan which was long since laid by the
ablest Statesman they ever had; and which if God shall please to allow them to
Execute; this Country is like to be a Theater of War and Misery, in succeeding
Times; or the fair Patrimony which has been left us, become a Prey of the worst
of Men. We have now for Years past, with small and weak Efforts, and the Groans
of great Burdens and Expense, been laboring in doing nothing, but expose
ourselves to the Scorn and Reproach of the World.

I think it my Duty now to Congratulate your Honors, and my Country; that God
has put it into the Heart of the King, and his Ministers to Appoint, and to
Call and Encourage us to such Measures, as present us with the fairest Hopes
(humanly speaking) that we ever had, of curbing and bringing to Reason, the
most Inveterate, Ambitious and Restless Enemy in the World; and obliging them
to let us live in Peace. These Measures, for Substance, are such as all Wise,
Discerning Lovers of their Country, have been wishing for. -- We Congratulate
ourselves, that God has disposed the Hearts of our Rulers so Readily and Amply
to Provide for the exerting the Strength of this Colony, so that nothing may be
wanting on our Part, to the carrying the King's wise and kind Purposes for us
into Execution. -- I believe it is the sincere Wish of every Honest Lover of
his Country, and of a King who greatly Deserves the Love and Revererence of all
his Subjects, that nothing may Hinder, Discourage or Retard your Resolutions in
this Interesting Affair; and that you may be Successful in your Endeavors to
Excite and Prevail with the other Colonies to do their just Proportion, to rid
these British Governments from the Hands of strange Children; and that the
backwardness of Others, may not be the Means of our being again made a Prey to
deceitful Men; and rendering our Efforts Unsuccessful. And while it is the
general Cry of this People, Delenda Est Carthago; How unhappy will it be, if
those who are greatly Concerned, and ought to exert themselves with Vigor and
Cheerfulness, should by withholding the Help they ought to afford in this
Exigence, expose their Brethren, and in the End themselves to Ruin? and bring
the Angel's Curse upon them, Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, Curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the Mighty. All the Help they can Afford, will be little
enough in this Trying Time. The want of the two great Things required in my
Text, Fearing God, and Honoring the King, will be the most certain Means to
hinder our Success. If we Repent in Earnest, and by a thorough Reformation
return to God; if we faithfully exert ourselves in obedience to the King's
Demands; if the Measures proposed, be steadily and vigorously pursued, we have
the fairest Prospect of Success we ever saw. -- We trust your Honors will not
be wanting in either of these, to do your part. It is easily foreseen, that the
Consequence of the present Campaign, is like to be Happy or Fatal to this
Country. We trust you will to your utmost, promote a Reformation in the Land,
and discourage Profaneness, Wickedness, and Indolence in the Army. -- How can
we expect to Conquer our Enemies, when by Irreligion and Stupidity at Home, and
Profaneness, Impiety, and Contempt of the God of Hosts, in the Army, we are
daily provoking Heaven and Arming divine Vengeance against us!

But however much the Important Affairs of the War, may engross your Time and
Thoughts; that yet you will not abate of your usual Beneficence both to Church
and State: and in Special that our College may enjoy your Patronage and
Protection: That it may be for a Name and a Praise, and the Cities of our God
may be made glad thereby. And that all Parts of your Administration being duly
Dispensed, not only the present, but future Generations may rise up and call
you Blessed. --

2. If Religion and Loyalty be so essential to the present Comfort, and future
Happiness of Mankind; then surely it becomes us, my Reverend Fathers and
Brethren, to be Examples to the Flock, as well as Zealous Teachers of these
important Doctrines. For of all Men, we are under the most peculiar
Obligations, so to walk as to please God: and consequently to have the
Principles of Religion, and Holiness wrought in our Souls, so as to Influence
the whole of our Ministrations: and what we inculcate by Precept, we enforce by
Example. -- We may remember, that one Aggravated Circumstance in that Notable
Rebellion of Chorah and his Accomplices; is, that it was Headed by Levites, and
the Principal Incendiaries, were of the Holy Order; which brought a swift and
strange Destruction, on those Miserable Mutineers.

As Ministers are like to be useful according to their Influence, so it highly
Concerns them to make a proper Use of what Influence they have. Our Nation yet
feels the sad Effects of unreasonably urging the Doctrines of Passive
Obedience, and Non-Resistance, in the Support of a Jacobite Party, and the
Encouragement of Numbers of Malcontents. I wish there were no Danger from the
opposite Extreme. But as New England, has hitherto been justly Famed for
Loyalty as well as Zeal; so let us not be wanting in our Places to give all
suitable Encouragement and Example of it: and as far as possible to instill
into our People the principles of Loyalty and Obedience. And in such a Day as
this, when Things bear so threatening an Aspect in Providence, let us not
neglect to enforce the necessity of Repentance and Reformation. We are now
especially to cry Aloud and spare not, but lift up our Voice like a Trumpet,
and warn the People of their Sins, and Professors of their Transgressions.
While God in his Providence is giving so many Tokens of his Displeasure, He
justly Expects, that his Ambassadors do urge and enforce them, to excite
Reformation and Amendment, in his People. And may it not be well to encourage
and continue the Practice of devoting some pittance of Time in every Week to
social Prayer; for the Revival of Religion, and the Success of his Majesty's
Arms, both in Europe and America: Agreeable to the Example of many of our
Protestant Brethren in Europe, who, (it seems) are much Encouraged, from the
gracious Returns they have already received. For the Language of Providence,
seems very expressly to Concur with that of Scripture. (...).
Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the
Altar, and let them say, Spare thy People O Lord, and give not thine Heritage
to Reproach, that the Heathen should Rule over them; wherefore should they say
among the People, where is their God? Upon the faithful and conscientious
Discharge of this our Duty, we have the Encouragement to be Answered, as in the
next Words, viz. Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his
People* Let us be Importunate at the Throne of Grace, at this Day, for the
Divine Presence with our Authority, both Supreme and Subordinate: Aaron and
Hur, must support Moses's Hands while the Armies are contending; for if they
fall, the Enemy prevails: This we must do, until the Victory is obtained, and
the Cause decided. And don't let any Thing be Wanting that is within our Power
to do. -- And until God in his Providence shall prohibit, and say, Pray not for
this People; let the Language of our Practice concur with the Reply of Samuel;
God forbid that we should Cease to Pray for you.

III. And to Conclude* I must Observe, that Religion is of the greatest
Importance to the People, (as well as Rulers) to dispose them to Subject
becomingly to proper Authority; and yield Obedience from Principles of
Conscience, more than merely of Fear. For if Laws were as well adjusted as
those of Solon, or as possitive as those of the Medes and Persians of old; they
would prove ineffectual without something more Coercive than merely their own
Restrictions. But he that is Actuated by Religion, will cheerfully comply with
Duty, and be afraid of Rebellion, because he believes that whosoever resists
Authority, resists the Ordinance of God; and that they who resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation. But then, Religion, really fits Men for this,
as well as enjoins them to it: It Mortifies their Lusts of Pride, Hatred,
Revenge, etc. It furnishes them with a Meek and Quiet Spirit, and Convinces
them of the Reasonableness of that great Rule of Equity; Whatsoever ye would
that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them: And it Endowes them with
Principles of Truth, Honestly and Loyalty. -- And in as much as the Most High,
is pleased to Indulge us with those Privileges and Liberties, whereby we are
favored above many of our Brethren; in that we have our Rulers as at the
first, and our Judges as at the beginning* And not only have the Liberty of
Choosing our Rulers from among ourselves; but those that are Chosen, are and
have been, so much an Honor to their Station, and a Blessing to the People;
concerned for the Cause of God, and the Public Good: Men that fear God, and
eschew Evil; That have Served the State with Faithfulness and Conducted with
Honor. Since this, I say, is our Case, it shows us the peculiar Obligations we
are under, to live quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty:
paying a just Defference to their Authority; and to esteem them very highly in
Love, for their works sake. To be Generous in their Support, and Tender of
their Character, and Good Name; and above all to Pray earnestly to God for
them, that they may be Directed in Duty, Supported in Government, and Endowed
with the Blessings of his Grace and Goodness, which shall abundantly fit them
for the Rewards of the Faithful.

And upon this joyful Occasion, of our ANNIVERSARY ELECTION; While our Eyes do
see all those Great and Good things, which the Lord has done for us, and yet
continues to us; Should not our Hearts be raised in peculiar Strains of
Gratitude and Thankfulness? And pay our Acknowledgments in the Language of
David* 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12, 13. Thine, O LORD, is the greatness, and the power,
and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven,
and in the earth, is thine; thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art exalted
as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over
all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee,
and praise thy glorious Name* -- And let us Remember that in the midst of all
these Civil Privileges, our Ingratitude is enhanced and aggravated; while we
remain Irreligious; Rebels to the Throne and Dignity of Heaven; and all this
goodness of God, has no Effect to lead us to Repentance: For if like Capernaum,
we have been Exalted with Privileges, like them, we must expect to be cast
down, if we Misimprove and Abuse them.

FINIS.

