Mr. GAY's SERMON AT THE ANNUAL DUDLEIAN-LECTURE AT HARVARD-COLLEGE in
CAMBRIDGE, MAY 9. 1759.

NATURAL RELIGION, AS DISTINGUISHED FROM REVEALED: A SERMON PREACHED AT THE
ANNUAL DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, AT HARVARD-COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE, May 9. 1759.

By EBENEZER GAY, A. M. Pastor of the First Church of CHRIST in Hingham.

Lex Communis in publicis Mundi, et naturalibus Tabulis scripta.

TERTULLIAN. BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by JOHN DRAPER, 1759.

Natural Religion, as distinguished from Revealed.
ROMANS ii. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature
the Things contained in the Law; these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves: Which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts, their
Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or
else excusing one another.


THE Belief of GOD's Existence is most essentially fundamental to all Religion,
and having been at the first of the Dudleian Lectures established; the moral
Obligation which it induces upon the Nature of Man, may be the Subject of our
present Inquiry.

A DEVOUT Hermit being asked, How he could profit in Knowledge, living in a
Desert, without Men and Books? answered, 'I have one Book which I am always
studying, and turning over Day and Night: The Heavens, the Earth and the
Waters, are the Leaves of which it consists.' The Characters of the Deity are
plainly legible in the whole Creation around us: And if we open the Volume of
our own Nature, and look within, we find there a Law written; -- a Rule of
virtuous Practice prescribed.

RELIGION and Law (divine) are Words of promiscuous Use; denoting in the
general Signification thereof, An Obligation lying upon Men to do those Things
which the Perfections of God, relative unto them, do require of them. In this
Definition (whether exact and full, or not,) I mean to imply all Things
incumbent on such reasonable Creatures as Men are, toward all Beings with which
they are concerned, GOD, the supreme, one another, and themselves; and which
are incumbent on them, by virtue of the Perfections of God, in the Relation
there is betwixt Him and them: other Obligation which can be supposed to any of
the same Things, not being of the religious Kind. And in the doing those Things
to which Religion is the Obligation, are included, besides the actual
Performance, the Principles, Motives and Ends thereof; all that is necessary to
render any Acts of Men, whether internal or external, such as the Perfections
of the Deity require.

RELIGION is divided into natural and revealed: -- Revealed Religion, is that
which God has made known to Men by the immediate Inspiration of his Spirit,
the Declarations of his Mouth, and Instructions of his Prophets: Natural, that
which bare Reason discovers and dictates: As it is delineated by the masterly
Hand of St. Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, in the Words of holy Scripture
now read -- Which I take as a proper and advantageous Introduction to my
intended Discourse on this Head, Viz.

THAT Religion is, in some measure, discoverable by the Light, and practicable
to the Strength, of Nature; and is so far fitly called Natural by Divines and
learned Men. The Religion which is possible to be discovered by the Light, and
practiced by the Power of Nature, consists in rend'ring all those inward and
outward Acts of Respect, Worship and Obedience unto God, which are suitable to
the Excellence of his all-perfect Nature, and our Relation to Him, who is our
Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, Lord, and Judge; -- And in yielding to our
Fellow-Men that Regard, Help and Comfort, which their partaking of the same
Nature, and living in Society with us, give them a Claim to; -- And in managing
our Souls and Bodies, in their respective Actions and Enjoyments, in a way
agreeable to our Make, and conducive to our Ease and Happiness: And doing all
from a Sense of the Deity, imposing the Obligation, and approving the Discharge
of it. For it is a Regard to Him in every moral Duty that consecrates it, and
makes it truly an Act of Religion. These Things, indeed, are contained in the
Revelation of God, which affords the chief Assistance to our knowing and doing
of them; and yet they belong to the Religion of Nature, so far as Nature
supplies any Light and Strength to the Discovery and Practice of them.

I. THAT Religion is in some measure, discoverable by the Light of Nature. The
Obligation lying on us to do those Things which the Perfections of God, as
related to us, require, is discernable in the Light of natural Reason. This
Faculty of the human Soul, exercised in the Contemplation of the universal
Frame of Nature, or of any Parts thereof; and in the Observation of the general
Course of Providence, or of particular Events therein, may convince Men of the
Existence and Attributes of God, the alwise, powerful and good Maker, Upholder,
and Governor of all Things. It may be questioned whether the reasoning Faculty,
as it is in the Bulk of Mankind, be so acute and strong, as from the necessary
eternal Existence of the Deity (which is as evident and incontestible, as that
any Thing is) to prove all other Perfections do belong to God in an infinite
Degree. If it be not easy to their Apprehension, that the Idea of necessary
Self-existence includes every Perfection, and every Degree thereof, which can
possibly be, or which implies not a Contradiction; yet it is plain to the
lowest Capacity of those who, with a little Attention, survey the Works of God,
that He is a Being of such Perfection: And that, since He is their Maker,
Owner, and Benefactor, to whom they are indebted for all that they are, and
have, and on whom they depend for all they need, or can enjoy; they are bound
to yield unto Him, in the Temper of their Minds, and Manner of their Behavior,
toward Him, and his Creatures they are concerned with, all that Regard which
Religion founded in the Nature of God, and in the Nature of Man, and the
Relation there is between them implies. They may perceive their Obligation to
reverence, adore, and worship a Being of such Perfection and Glory, as God is
-- to invoke the Almighty -- pray unto Him, who is able to perform all Things
for them; to give Thanks to Him, from whom they receive all Blessings; to aim
and endeavor to please their Lord and Master, to whom they are accountable for
their Actions, and who is just to punish their Offenses, and bountiful to
reward their Services. -- They may discern the Wisdom and Goodness of their
Maker, in designing and sitting them for a social Life in this World, and
thence the sacred Engagements they are under to mutual Benevolence, commutative
Justice, and all such Demeanor in their various Stations and Relations, as
tends to promote the common Welfare, and the Good of Individuals. -- Their
Souls may know right well, how wonderfully God has made them with Powers and
Faculties superior to any bodily Endowments; which should not therefore be
subjected to the Sway of brutish Appetites and blind Passions. Reason may know
it is divine Right to govern, to maintain it is Empire in the Soul, regulating
the Passions and Affections; directing them to proper Objects, and stinting
them to just Measures. Nature affords considerable Light for the Discovery, and
Arguments for the Proof, of such Parts of Religion. There is an essential
Difference between Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, in many Cases that relate to
moral Conduct toward our Maker, Mankind, and ourselves, which the Understanding
(if made use of) cannot but discern. The obvious Distinction is founded in the
Natures and Relations of Things: And the Obligation thence arising to choose the
Good, and do that which is Right, is not (as I conceive) antecedent to any Law
or Institution, enjoining this upon us. It primarily originates from the Will
and Appointment of the Author of those Natures, and Founder of those Relations,
which are the Grounds and Reasons of it. And his Will is signified by his
apparently wise and good Constitution of Things, in their respective Natures
and Relations. The Law of Nature is given by the God of Nature, who is Lord of
all. He enacted it by creating and establishing a World of Beings in such
Order, as he has done. He publishes it to rational Creatures (as is necessary
to it is binding them) in making them capable to learn from his Works, what is
good, and what is required of them. Natural Conscience is his Voice, telling
them their Duty. This (in part) is the work of the Law in their Hearts. -- It Is
the Engravement of it there, answerable to the Writing of it on Tables, in
order to it is being made known: And so Men are a Law unto themselves, are
supplied with a Rule of Actions within their own Breasts. The Righteousness
which is of Nature (to adopt the Language of Inspiration) speaks on some such
wise, as does that which is of Faith: Say not in thine Heart who shall ascend
into Heaven; or who shall descend into the Deep, to bring us the Knowledge of
our Duty? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Heart, showing thee what thou
ought to do: Conscience also bearing witness, testifying for or against Men,
according as they obey or disobey the Word of Reason, which is the Word of God:
And so their Thoughts -- the general Notions of Good and Evil in them, make
them either to accuse themselves as Transgressors of a known Law, or else
excuse them, as not having culpably done any Thing against it. In the due
Exercise of their natural Faculties, Men are capable of attaining some
Knowledge of God's Will, and their Duty, manifested in his Works, as if it were
written in legible Characters on the Tables of their Hearts. And it is on this
Account, that any Part of Religion is called Natural; and stands distinguished,
in Theology, from that which is revealed.

II. THAT Religion is, in some Measure, practicable to the Strength of Nature.
There is doing, as well as knowing, by Nature, the Things contained in the Law
of it. Knowing them is but in order to the doing them: And the Capacity to know
them would be in vain, (which nothing in Nature is) if there was no Ability to
do them. Whoever observes the divine Workmanship in human Nature, and takes a
Survey of the Powers and Faculties with which it is endowed, must needs see
that it was designed and framed for the Practice of Virtue: That Man is not
merely so much lumpish Matter, or a mechanical Engine, that moves only by the
Direction of an impelling Force; but that he has a Principle of Action within
himself, and is an Agent in the strict and proper Sense of the Word. The
special Endowment of his Nature, which constitutes him such, is the Power of
Self-determination, or Freedom of Choice; his being possessed of which is as
self-evident, as the Explanation of the Manner of it is operating, is difficult:
He feels himself free to act one Way, or another: And as he is capable of
distinguishing between different Actions, of the moral Kind; so is he likewise
of choosing which he will do, and which leave undone. Further to qualify our
Nature for virtuous or religious Practice (which necessarily must be of Choice)
the Author of it has annexed a secret Joy or Complacence of Mind to such
Practice, and as sensible a Pain or Displicence to the contrary. And this
inward Judgment which every one passes on his own Actions, is enforced with
another Principle, which belongs more or less to our common Nature, viz. a
Regard to the Judgment that is passed upon our Conduct by other Beings;
especially Beings whose Favor or Displeasure is of any Importance to us: There
is a secret Satisfaction of Soul, which arises from their Approbation; and as
exquisite a Sense of Pain and Uneasiness from their Censure. -- The Spirit of
Man being thus formed within him, it is (according to the original Design and
wise Contrivance of our Maker) naturally disposed toward Religion: It has an
Inclination thereto implanted in it, which under the Direction of right Reason,
is an inward Spring of Motion and Action, when Reason alone would not give
sufficient Quickness and Vigor in pursuing it is Dictates.

THERE may be something in the intelligent moral World analogous to Attraction
in the material System -- something that inclines and draws Men toward God, the
Center of their Perfection, and consummate Object of their Happiness; and
which, if it is Energy were not obstructed, would as certainly procure such
Regularity in the States and Actions of all intelligent Beings in the spiritual
World, as that of Attraction does in the Positions and Motions of all the
Bodies in the material World. -- "Created intelligent Beings (says Dr. Cheyne)
are Images of the SUPREME INFINITE, as he calls God. In Him there is an
infinite Desire and Ardor of possessing and enjoying Himself, and his own
infinite Perfections, in order to render Him happy: He himself is the sole
Object of his own, and of the Felicity of all his Creatures. There must
therefore be an Image of this his infinite Desire after Happiness in all his
intelligent Creatures -- a Desire after Happiness in a Reunion with Him. An
intelligent Being, coming out of the Hands of infinite Perfection, with an
Aversion, or even Indifferency, to be reunited with it is Author, the Source of
it is utmost Felicity, is such a Shock, and Deformity in the beautiful Analogy
of Things, such a Breach and Gap in the harmonious Uniformity, observable in
all the Works of the Almighty, and that in the noblest and highest Part of his
Works, as is not consistent with finite Wisdom and Perfection, much less with
the supremely infinite Wisdom of the ALL-PERFECT. -- This Principle was most
certainly implanted in the Creation of intelligent Beings, in the very Fund and
Substance of their Natures, tho there remains but few Footsteps and Instances
of it is Being or Effects. --. It wonderfully analogises with that of Attraction
in the material World: As to the SUPREME INFINITE, it may very properly be
called, his Attraction of them; and as to them, their Central Tendency, or
Gravitation (so to speak) toward Him." This Tendency in human Nature, which
that penetrating Enquirer into both the constituent Parts of it, accurately
observes, is an Inclination to Religion -- to many Offices and Acts of it, by
which Men return and reunite to the Author of their Beings; who has so made
all Nations of them, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him. There is in the common Nature, which all partake of, a
Propension to Acts, not only of human Kindness, but also of divine Worship;
which excites to the Performance of them, when proper Occasions of doing them
occur, without previous, express Deliberation and Determination concerning
them: And to forbear them is a painful Restraint upon Nature; and to do the
contrary, is thwarting it is Inclination, and wresting it from it is Bent. --
There is observable in Man (...).
a natural Proclivity (as Origin terms it) toward his Maker; to acknowledge
God; especially on Occasions of Need or Distress to have recourse unto Him. And
from hence arises so universal a Consent of Mankind in paying some Homage to
the Deity, which is not always directed to the true, because so many blindly
follow natural Inclination, without consulting Reason, which should be it is
Guide. There is such a Disposition in human Nature as makes Religion agreeable
to it; so that Divines of great Name have affirmed it to be essential thereto,
and that which raises it above the Brutal; and Philosophers, from what is
innate to Man, have defined him a Creature capable of Religion. -- Whoever
attends to this inward Furniture of our Nature for Religion, may easily
perceive it to be God's Workmanship, primarily created unto good Works, that
Men might walk in them. His Formation of them qualifys them, in a measure, for
religious Practice; as his Regeneration, or Renovation of them does more so.
And his fitting them by Nature therefore, is a Work of his, to which the Work of
Sanctification, in his furnishing them with Grace to evangelical Obedience,
bears Analogy. The former is the Work of the Law written in their Hearts,
that they may do, as well as know, what it enjoins: The latter is the
Impression of the Gospel upon them, that, through Christ's strengthening them,
they may do what it requires. And by doing the Things contained in the Law of
Nature, Men show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts, and are a Law
unto themselves, as truly and plainly, as regenerate Christians, by doing the
Things contained in the Gospel, are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of
Christ, written, not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in
Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart. The Scriptures thus
describing the Religion of Nature and of Christ, clearly distinguish between
them; as the former may be practiced by the Strength of Nature, and the latter
by the Strength of Christ, -- his Spirit helping the Infirmities of our Nature.

How far the Duties of Religion are possible to be performed by the Strength of
Nature, in a lapsed State; and to what Measure of divine Approbation and
Acceptance, Reason, unenlightned by Revelation, may not be able to determine.
-- The Law of Nature is purely a Law of Works, and requires perfect Obedience,
which the Transgressors of it, as all Men are, cannot yield to it: And whether
that which is wanting in their Obedience, may be supplied by Repentance and
Humility in them, and by Mercy and Pardon in God, cannot be certainly known
without a Revelation of his Will, on which it wholly depends. The Goodness of
God, in the general Course of his Providence, toward sinful Mankind, shows
Him to be placable, and leads them to Repentance; but does not assure them of
Pardon upon it, much less of the Reward of eternal Life, for imperfect, though it
should be sincere, Obedience. If Reason does not see and pronounce it
inconsistent with the Perfections of God to pardon Sinners, on the sole
Condition of their Repentance; yet it cannot infer from them, that he will: --
All that it can say, is in the Words of a Heathen King, Who can tell if the
Lord will turn from his Anger, that we perish not? Such Inducement they may
have to repent, and turn from their evil Ways: -- And it may farther encourage
them to better Obedience, by suggesting the Consideration which may be had by a
merciful God of the Frailty of their Nature, and the gracious Allowances He may
possibly make them, whose Strength, so weakened as it is, cannot reach the
Height of their Duty. In the Prescription of Duty, it is not unreasonable, that
what may be required, even in Rigor, should be precisely determined, tho in
Execution of Justice, or Dispensation of Recompense, Consideration may be had
of our Weakness; whereby both the Authority of our Governor may be preserved,
and his Clemency glorified. Men's Thoughts or Consciences accusing them for the
Violation of the Law of Nature, implies a Fear which is not groundless, that
they shall be brought into Judgment: And their Thoughts excusing and approving
of them for doing, in some Measure, what the Law requires, implies a Hope,
which may not be altogether vain, that they shall be accepted. Tho it should
be, as one says, "That all the moral Virtues are so many Ciphers -- unavailing
Nothings, unless the Deity be placed as the principal Figure at the Head of
them;" yet if practiced out of any Sense of Duty to God, and with a View to
pleasing Him, as it is possible they may be, and have been, shall we say, they
are merely splendid Vices in his Eyes; and that the most humble Prayers of
natural Men are Blasphemies in his Ears? May there not be such a conscientious
doing by Nature the Things contained in the Law of it, as, through the Riches of
divine Bounty and Goodness, shall in some low Measure, compared with doing the
same by Grace, be acceptable and rewardable? May not a God of Knowledge, by
whom Actions are weighed, discern some Good in those done by the Strength of
Nature, and approve the honest, tho weak, Efforts thereof, to serve him; and
thereupon, besides outward Favors (of which He is liberal to all both good and
bad Men) grant the Succors of his Grace, enabling them to do the same, and
other Things to better Acceptance, and to the obtaining a greater Reward, even
that which the Christian Revelation proposes; and is thereby differenced and
distinguished from natural Religion?

AND, now, if what has been so imperfectly spoken, be according to the Truth
in Nature, and not inconsistent with the Christian Verity, the proper Use and
Improvement of it is, To form a just Estimate of Natural Religion; and guard
against the dangerous Extremes in our Regards to it -- Not to have a debasing,
nor a too exalted Notion of it.

1. WE should not depreciate and cry down Natural Religion, on Pretense of
advancing the Honor of Revealed -- as if they were two opposite Religions, and
could no more stand together in the same Temple than Dagon and the Ark of God.
Whatever Distinction we observe between them, there is no Contrariety in the
one to the other: They subsist harmoniously together, and mutually strengthen
and confirm each other. Revealed Religion is an Additional to Natural; built,
not on the Ruins, but on the strong and everlasting Foundations of it. Nothing
therefore can be vainer and more preposterous, than the Attempt to raise the
Credit of the one, upon the Discredit of the other; as if to allow any Virtue,
or any Praise, in natural Religion, would be derogatory to the Honor of
revealed: And to represent the former as insignificant to the grand Purpose of
Religion, and chief End of Man; the glorifying and enjoying God: -- As availing
nothing toward Man's Recovery from a sinful State, and his Attainment unto
Holiness and Happiness: -- As if his knowing and doing by Nature the Things
contained in the Law of it, could be no more acceptable to his Maker, nor
profitable to himself, than his Ignorance and Neglect of them: And whatever
Improvement and Progress he made in natural Religion, he was not a Step nearer
the Kingdom of God; nor a sairer Candidate for Heaven than a Heathen-Man, or a
Publican. The Law of Nature, like that of Moses, may be serviceable unto Men,
as a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, for higher Instruction; especially
where the Means of such are afforded; and so usher them into a State of Grace.
Notwithstanding the Insufficiency of natural Religion to their Salvation, yet
it may, in some Measure, prepare them to be Partakers of the Benefit, without
any Diminution of the Glory of the Gospel, which is the Grant of it, or
Detraction from the Merits of our blessed Redeemer, who is the Author of it. It
is only by Grace that sinful Men can be saved; yet, by making some good Use of
their rational Powers (weakened as they be) in the Study and Practice of
natural Religion, they may be in a better Preparation of Mind to comply with
the Offers and Operations of divine Grace, than if they wholly give up
themselves to the Conduct of sensual Appetites and Passions. Whether those
Offers and Operations of divine Grace are designed for, and ever vouchsafed to
such as are not favored with Revelation; and it be possible for them to obtain
Mercy, in the Day when God by Jesus Christ shall judge the Things which they
have done, according to the Gospel; is a Point which Revelation only can
determine; and is not my Province to discuss.

IN the Preference we give to revealed Religion, we should not for the sake of
any particular Truth we apprehend to be delivered in it, hastily renounce a
Principle of natural Religion, seeming contrary thereto. Both should be
carefully examined, before either be rejected: Else we may err, after the
manner which the Sadduces did, Not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of
God. It must be owing to our Ignorance, or Misapprehension of Things hard to be
understood in the Book of Nature, and the holy Bible, that we cannot reconcile
them. No Doctrine, or Scheme of Religion, should be advanced, or received as
scriptural and divine, which is plainly and absolutely inconsistent with the
Perfections of God, and the Possibility of Things. Absurdities and
Contradictions (from which few human Schemes are entirely free) are not to be
obtruded upon our Faith. No Pretense of Revelation can be sufficient for the
Admission of them. The manifest Absurdity of any Doctrine, is a stronger
Argument that it is not of God, than any other Evidence can be that it is. "A
Revelation must be agreeable to the Nature of God, and Possibility of Things."
We are not rashly to determine concerning one that it is not so, because we
don't easily and clearly see it to be so: Nor plead that any may be so, which
contradicts all our natural Ideas of the Attributes of God. To say, in Defense
of any religious Tenets, reduced to Absurdity, that the Perfections of God, his
Holiness, Justice, Goodness, are quite different Things in Him, from what, in
an infinitely lower Degree, they are in Men, is to overthrow all Religion both
natural and revealed; and make our Faith, as well as Reason vain. -- For, if we
have no right Notions of the Deity, (as it is certain upon this Supposition, we
have none,) as we worship, so we believe, we know not what, or why. We don't
know what Respects are due from us to the Perfections of God; or that any are
required of us by Him. For, as well as any other moral Perfections, Truth may
be quite different in God, from what it is in Men; and so there may be nothing
of that which we conceive of as such, in his Assertions and Promises. -- He may
declare one Thing, and mean another; promise one Thing, and do another: -- God
may be True and Faithful, and yet deceive us; as well as Holy and Just, and do
that which is not Right. Revelation gives us the same (though clearer) Ideas of
the Attributes of God, which we have from Nature and Reason: And if it taught
any Thing contrary thereto, it would unsay what it says, and destroy it is own
Credibility. To set the Gifts of God at variance, is to frustrate the good
Design and deprive ourselves of the Benefit of them. Vehemently to decry
Reason, as useless, or as a blind Guide, leading Men into Error and Hell; and
to run down natural Religion as mere Paganism, derogates from the Credit of
revealed, subverts our Faith in it, and dissolves our Obligation to practice it.

2. WE should not magnify and extol natural Religion, to the Disparagement of
Revealed. We cannot say, that the Light and Strength of Nature, how great
soever, in it is original State of Rectitude, had no Assistance from Revelation,
toward the first Man's actual Knowledge and Performance of his Duty to his
Maker. At the first opening of his Eyes and Understanding, he might not by one
intuitive View, have a clear and full Discernment of the Perfections of God
stamped on his Works, and the moral Obligations engraved in his Heart. -- God
made Himself and his Will known to Adam in some other Way beside that of his
Creation. There was some other Voice of the Lord, beside that of universal
Nature's declaring his Being and Pleasure to him; and by which more might be
spoken for his Instruction, than we have an Account of in the Mosaic History.
And perhaps such Manifestation as God more immediately made of Himself to Man,
put his Reason in Exercise for all the Discoveries it was capable of making
afterward from the Works of Creation. Had Man, with all his natural Endowments
in their perfect Order and Strength, been placed in this World, and no Notice
given him of it is Maker, might he not have stood wondering some Time at the
amazing Fabric, before he would have thence, by Deductions of Reason, argued
an invisible Being, of eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness, to be the Author of
it and him; to whom he was therefore obliged to pay all Regards suitable to
such glorious Excellencies? Would he so soon and easily have made those
Discoveries, which are necessary to the Perfection of natural Religion,
understood and practiced by him in Paradise, till he eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil? If his being Created after the Image of God imports
more, than his Formation with a sufficient Capacity in his Nature for, and
entire Disposition to, even the actual Possession and Use of all that
Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness, of which the Religion of Nature,
consists; yet his falling into Sin, and effacing the divine Image in his Soul,
greatly altered the Case, with respect to him, and his Posterity, and made
Revelation a necessary Supplement of supernatural Light and Strength, for the
Discovery and Performance of acceptable and available Religion. And such a
Revelation, in it is first Degree and early Dawn of it, was graciously
vouchsafed to Man, upon his Fall into a State of Darkness and Weakness, Sin and
Misery. -- Which Revelation continued, and gradually increased, to the Church
of God in all past Ages of it from the Beginning, has done more to preserve
and propagate that little even of natural Religion, which there has been among
Mankind, than all the boasted Improvements of Nature's dimmed Light, and
enfeebled Powers have done. The first Parents of Mankind, no doubt, instructed
their Children in the Principles and Duties of Religion, not only those which
concerned them as sinful Creatures, and are founded in the new and encouraging
Relations God stands in to us, which the Gospel, published in Paradise,
reveals, but also in those which are comprehended in the Law of their Creation:
Otherwise they might not soon enough, if ever, have arrived to a competent
Knowledge of them. It might have been long, e're Reason, uncultivated by
Education, would by searching, have found out God -- so much as that He is.
Perhaps of it is own natural Motion, now become so dull and stupid, it would not
have enquired after Him, or have proceeded far in the Discovery of Him. To a
traditionary Revelation, how imperfect and obscure soever, amongst most Nations
that have dwelt on the Face of the Earth, might be owing the Knowledge they had
of God, and divine Things: -- At least the Hint thus given them of such Things,
might awake their rational Powers to any Exercise about them, which otherwise
might have lain dormant in their benighted Minds.

REASON, as well as Revelation, teaches us, that human Nature, in it is
original Constitution, and as it came out of the Hands of a good Creator, must
be Perfect in it is Kind, and that it since, by our Abuse of it, is woefully
impaired. It might not approach quite so near the Angelical, yea, Divine Nature
in it is integral State, as some imagine; nor might it by the Sin of the
Protoplast fall quite so low, as others affirm; and become a strange
heterogeneous Compound of two other Natures, retaining nothing of Humanity in
it. The superior Excellency and Strength of innocent Adam's Soul, might not be
so much above the common Standard, since, as the Talmudists describe his bodily
Stature -- so Tall, that, standing on the Earth, he could touch the Heavens
with his Hand; yet it doubtless had every way the Advantage for the free and
sublime Exercises of a rational Soul. Some appear to have an extravagantly high
Opinion, and others a too debasing Notion of human Nature, even in it is lapsed
Estate: There are still in it, as received by Derivation from apostate Parents,
"some legible Characters, Out-lines, and Lineaments of it is Beauty; some
magnificent Ruins, which show what it had been, enough to demonstrate the
original Impression of the divine Image and Law." It is, however disordered and
debilitated, a rational Nature, capable of religious Knowledge and Practice.
But can we guess, how much thereof it would attain to, in the short Time of
this Life, if it were left altogether uncultivated in Individuals; and Mankind
had run wild, like the Beasts of the Field? How much more would the Generality
of 'em know, than what they know as natural brute Beasts? and in those Things
have corrupted themselves: The higher Powers of their Nature not exerting
themselves for the first Years of their Lives, and so the more subjected to the
Sway of the inferior, might be of little Use toward the Discovery and
Performance of the Things of Religion: Any innate Inclination to them might be
smothered in the Crowd of worldly Lusts; the Attention of the Mind diverted
from them, and all the Essays to do them, be hindered by the Amusements of
sensual Pleasure, the Encroachments of secular Business, the Prevalence of bad
Customs and Examples. The Capacities with which they are made, the Principles
with which they are endowed, in order to their knowing of, and acting agreeable
to, moral Obligations, might be suppressed, and kept down by violent Appetites
and Passions, and lie buried under earthly Affections. Men might have been
absolutely without God in the World; -- without any Sense of the Deity upon
theit Minds; without all Thought of any other Things than such as were just
before them. Their Knowledge and Care might not have extended beyond the Sphere
of Sense: Their Prudence might have appeared only in Matters of a civil Life,
and a temporary Concern; and possibly there would have been no Religion in the
World, but that which consisted merely in, as Atheists say, all was introduced
by, State Policy.

THUS much, I think, may be probably inferred from the History of all Ages of
the World, in which the Nations which have not enjoyed the Revelation which God
from Time to Time granted to his Church, have had so little of Natural Religion
among them, mixed and spoiled with the grossest Errors, Superstitions, and
Abominations. The Glimmerings of Nature's Light, and small Remains of it is
Strength, not being duly improved, were, in a manner, lost from among them, and
they sat in Darkness, and the Region of the Shadow of Death: Tho what might be
known of God, was manifest to them in his Works; and they had moreover some
obscure Traditions, which gave Rise to their heathenish Worship, and according
to which they ordered the Rites of it. While we are amazed at the Stupidity
which they labored under in their reasonable Faculties, it shows us what is
to be expected from savage, undisciplined Nature. We do not argue therefrom the
Incapacity of human Reason, under all the Disadvantages of our lapsed State, to
know and do better; but the Inefficacy of it, in fact, to the Purposes of
Religion, when unassisted by Revelation. -- And were it not for this, we may
guess what a deplorable State of Ignorance and Wickedness, increasing from one
Age to another, all Mankind would have been in at this Day. What has polished
Nature and refined Reason to boast of, in Matters of Religion, among the wisest
and most learned of the Heathens? Did they by Wisdom know God, and glorify Him
as God. Did Athens, that Eye of the World, see the invisible Things of Him,
made visible enough in his Works to the Eye of human Understanding, even his
eternal Power and Godhead? The Altar erected there to the UNKNOWN GOD, was a
Monument of their Ignorance of the true. If they worshipped Him at all, they
did it ignorantly, and were in all Things too superstitious. Was the State of
natural Religion better at Rome, when Learning flourished there, than that of
the Christian is, now Popery prevails? They, who professed themselves wise,
became Fools; as great, as if they had said, There is no God, in changing the
Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like corruptible Man, and to
Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and creeping Things; and, serving the Creature,
more than the Creator; and approving and doing those Things that are contrary,
not only to the Religion, but even the Inclination of Nature. -- Under much
Doubt and Uncertainty have the ablest Writers of them left the first Principles
of Natural Religion. It is enough (says one) to raise the Pity of a Christian,
when he reads Cicero's Discourse of the Nature of the Gods, to find the
Disputants fighting in the dark, puzzling themselves, and one another,
confounding Truth and Error; and at last drawing off almost on equal Terms
without Victory's declaring on either Side. -- Not to mention the Deficiencies
and Errors in any Scheme of Natural Religion, which the learned Heathen ever
presented the World with; I may say, that the Christian Revelation contains one
far more entire and satisfying. The Principles and Duties of it are therein
stated, explained, and enforced, in a Way far above whatever they were before.
And it is not without Reason supposed, that they would not have been propounded
so clearly and fully as they be, in the most celebrated Writings of Morality
among the Heathen, had there been none of divine Inspiration among the People
of God.

THE Gospel of Christ has to be sure been a Light to lighten the modern
deistical Gentiles: For the juster Notions they have of the divine Attributes,
and moral Duties than the ancient, they are greatly indebted to that Revelation
which they decry. Not to say any Thing of those heavenly Truths and important
Duties, which are taught only in the Bible; it is there we learn the Religion of
Nature in it is greatest Purity; which, if there were nothing more to be said in
it is Commendation might be enough to raise our Esteem of it. And the Grace of
God appears in assisting Reason by Revelation in those Discoveries, which it
possibly could, but never did, nor would make, without such Help. -- And the
same is true, with respect to the Performances of Duty: In thy Light we see
Light. It is in the Light of Revelation, added to that of Nature, that Things
are so plain and easy to our discerning, as that we are ready to think bare
Reason must discover them to all Mankind, and that we, un-enlightned by the
Gospel, should have known as much of the Principles and Duties of Natural
Religion. But, if we are thence insensible of, and unthankful for, the tender
Mercy of our God, whereby the Dayspring from on High has visited us, we are
stupidly inconsiderate; and need not (as we are apt) to smile at the odd
Philosophy of the simple Rustic, who thought the World had little Benefit by
the Light of the Sun, "Because it shined in the Daytime." By Means of
Revelation we have the right Use of Reason, in Matters of Religion: And, by the
due Exercise of Reason, so excited and directed, we have the inestimable
Benefit of Revelation. Both are good Gifts, -- Rays from the Father of Lights,
to enlighten every Man that comes into the World. -- The Mind has great
Satisfaction in observing the harmonious Agreement between them, and the Objects
of religious Knowledge and Faith appear the more beautiful and amiable in this
double Light: And the better we understand and practice the Religion of Nature,
the wiser and better Christians shall we be.

IN a just Sense of this, and with a pious View to the Establishment of
Religion, natural and revealed, and the Propagation of it in this Land, free
from impure Mixtures of Heathenish and Popish Errors and Superstitions, by the
Ministry of able, authorized Preachers, was the Anniversary-Lecture, here
founded by the Honorable Judge DUDLEY, whose Memory must be ever precious in
this Society, as his Praise will be in our Churches, as well as Courts.

AND this Discourse may lead the Students of the College, such especially as
are designed for the Work of the Ministry, to reflect on the great Advantage of
a liberal Education, to open and enlarge their Minds for the Knowledge, and
dispose their Hearts to the Love and Practice, and fit them to be Preachers of
Religion. -- Academical Studies, particularly in natural Philosophy and
mathematical Sciences, tend to impregnate your Souls with grand Ideas of the
Attributes of God, displayed in his Works, which are great, sought out of all
them that have Pleasure therein; and help you more clearly to discern the
Foundations of natural Religion. Some other Branches of Literature may seem
more dry and barren, yet are useful to furnish you with the Tongue of the
Learned; and prepare you to the Search of the Scriptures in their inspired
Originals; so that at those Fountains of sacred Truth, your Souls, thirsty of
it, may possibly drink it in purer, than it is conveyed to us in the best
Translations. All the Skill you here acquire in Arts and Sciences, may be
serviceable to you in the Profession of Theology: And the better Scholars you
go from this Place, the abler Divines will you prove, and the more Good may you
do in the World. Having such a Price in your Hands to get Wisdom, may every One
of you have a Head and Heart to it! -- How reproachful will it be to you, and
not a little dishonorable to this School of the Prophets, if, when for the
Time and happy Advantages enjoyed in it, ye ought to be Teachers, you should
then have need that one teach you the Rudiments of natural Religion, and the
first Principles of the Oracles of God?

IT concerns us all to make Proficiency in Religion, answerable to our
Capacities therefore, and the Means and Helps afforded us thereto -- That having
the Foundations of it well laid in our Minds, by convincing Reasons, and
authentic Testimonies of Scripture, we go on to Perfection: Which that we may
do; -- Let us, as the Discourse now had, admonishes us, have a due Respect both
to natural and revealed Religion: And not suffer our Zeal to swell so high, and
move in so strong a Current toward the one, as shall prove a Drain from, and
lower the Regard, which we owe to the other -- Let us faithfully improve all
the Light and Strength which natural Reason and divine Revelation supply,
toward our knowing and doing whatsoever Things are true -- honest -- just --
pure -- lovely -- and of good Report -- in which there is any Virtue, and any
Praise; and so make continual Advance in Religion, 'till we come unto a perfect
Man, in the redintegrated State of Nature -- unto the Measure of the Stature of
the Fullness of CHRIST.

AMEN.
THE CHARACTER OF THE LATE HONORABLE Judge DUDLEY, As it was inserted in the
Boston-News-Letter, February 7th, 1751.
ROXBURY, February 2. 1750, 1.
YEsterday, with great Decency and Respect, were interred here the Remains of
the Honorable PAUL DUDLEY, Esquire Chief Justice of the Superior Court of
Judicature, etc. within this Province: A Gentleman not more distinguished by
his high Station, than by his eminent Virtues and great Abilities, so long and
happily employed for the Good of the Public.

He was born at Roxbury in the Year 1675, was the Grandson of THOMAS DUDLEY,
Esquire one of the first Governors of the Massachusetts Colony, and the eldest
surviving Son of the late Governor DUDLEY, to whose Estate, as he was principal
Heir, so he inherited a large Share of those superior Talents that enriched the
Mind of that great and accomplished Gentleman.

At the Age of eleven Years he was found qualified for an Admission into
Harvard-College, where he proceeded Bachelor of Arts in the Year 1690, and
Master of Arts in the Year 1693. Soon after which he went over to England, and
was entered a Student in the Inner Temple. After he had finished his Studies
there, and had been called to the Bar, he returned to his native Country, to
the Service of which he had early devoted himself.

As his natural Endowments were uncommon, so he had abundantly furnished his
Mind by great Reading and close Study. His Knowledge (far from being confined
to the Law) was great in most Parts of Literature: He was well versed in
Natural Philosophy; an honorable Proof of which was his being a Member of the
ROYAL SOCIETY: He had thoroughly studied Divinity: And in History, both civil
and sacred, he had scarce an equal. These were some of the Accomplishments
which so well qualified him for public Service, which was the constant Business
of his Life.

Upon his Return to New England he was appointed Attorney General for the
Province, and for several Years he served the Public in that Capacity. He was
some time a Representative for his native Town in the General Court; and sat
for many Years at the Council Board: In all which important Offices he
acquitted himself with great Fidelity and Honor. But it was in the Seat of
Justice he was most generally known, and therefore most admired. To that he was
advanced in the Year 1718, being then appointed one of the Justices of the
Superior Court, of which, upon the Death of the Honorable Judge LYNDE, he was
commissionated the Chief Justice: And in this high and important Station he
served the Province till his Death. Here it was that he displayed so eminently
his admirable Talents, especially his quick Apprehension, his uncommon Strength
of Memory, and extensive Knowledge; and at the same time his great Abhorrence
of Vice, together with that impartial Justice which neither respected the Rich,
nor countenanced the Poor Man in his Cause. Thus while with pure Hands and an
upright Heart he administered Justice in his Circuit through the Province, he
gained the general Esteem and Veneration of the People. As his Presence always
commanded Respect, so it might justly be said of him that he scattered Iniquity
with his Eyes, which struck with Awe the most daring Offenders. When he spoke,
it was with such Authority and peculiar Energy of Expression, as never failed
to command Attention, and deeply impress the Minds of all who heard him; and
his Sentiments of Law and Evidence in all Causes before the Court, had
generally a determining Weight with those who were charged with the Trial of
them.

The Powers of his Mind retained their Vigor to a remakable Degree in his
advanced Age; though he labored under great Indispositions of Body: These were
often heavy upon him while attending the Business of the Court, which perhaps
occasioned his discovering some Impatience, when Arguments at the Bar were
drawn out to a great Length, and his expressing himself with some Appearance of
Severity: But if hereby he gave any Disgust in public, he made full Amends for
it in private; where all who enjoyed his Company were charmed with his
entertaining and prolite Conversation: For, with all his other Accomplishments,
he had naturally a most happy Turn for Conversation; in which he always showed
the Gentleman, the Scholar, and the Christian.

As he early made a Profession of the Christian Religion, so he was ever
careful to adorn it by a suitable Conduct in the several Relations of Life. He
always expressed a tender Concern for the Interests of his Country, both civil
and religious, and greatly lamented any ill-boding Aspects upon either. He was
a Friend and Patron to Men of Learning and Religion, especially to the Clergy,
to whom he always showed a particular Respect. The Interests of our College he
tenderly regarded while he lived; and at his Death he enriched it by a generous
Donation.

All who had the Honor of an Acquaintance with him and his Family, knew him to
be one of the most tender Husbands, a kind and indulgent Master, a good
Neighbor, and an affectionate Friend. As in his own House his Behavior was
truly exemplary; so he was an eminent Pattern of just Deportment in the House
of GOD: His unaffected Gravity and devout Attention, while engaged in Divine
Service there, showed him to be what he was at Heart, a Man of real Religion.
This Religion was his Support and Comfort in the Hour of Death. He had the
Exercise of his Reason during the whole of his Sickness; and all along
discovered that Humility, Patience, Charity and Confidence in his GOD and
SAVIOR, which one would wish to see in a dying Friend.

His virtuous Consort, (to whom he owed no small Part of the Happiness of his
Life,) was one of the Daughters of Colonel JOHN WAINWRIGHT of Ipswich. By her
he had several Children, who all died in their Infancy. This Lady still lives
to deplore her great Loss, and mingle her Tears with those of the Public.


