OBSERVATIONS On the Inslaving, importing and purchasing of NEGROES With some
Advice thereon extracted form the Yearly Meeting Epistle of London for the
present Year ALSO Some Remarks on the absolute Necessity of Self-Denial,
renouncing the World, and true Charity for all such as sincerely Desire to be
our blessed Savior's Disciples.

GERMANTOWN. Printed by CHRISTOPHER SOWER. 1759.

Some observations on the Importation and purchase of Negroes.
IN ancient Times it was the Practice of many Nations, when at war with each
other, to sell the Prisoners they (...) in Battle, in order to defray the
Expenses of the War. This unchristian or rather inhuman Practice, after many
Ages continuance, is at length generally abolished by the Christian Powers of
Europe, but still continues among some of the Nations of Asia and Africa, and
to our sad Experience we find it also practiced by the Natives of America. In
the present war, how many of our poor Country Men are dragged to Bondage and
sold for Slaves; how many mourn, a Husband, a Wife, a Child, a Parent or some
near Relation taken from them; and were we to follow them a little farther, and
see them exposed to sale and bought up to be made a Gain of, what Heart so hard
that would not melt with Sympathy and Sorrow: And could we hear the Purchasers,
for the sake of Gain, pushing on the Savages to captivate our People, what
inhuman wretches should we call them, what Punishment should we (...) their
Guilt deserved! But while our Hearts are affected for our Brethren and
Relations, while we feel for our own Flesh and Blood, let us extend our
Thoughts to others, and allow me, gentle Reader! to recommend to thy serious
Consideration, a Practice that prevails among several Nations who call
themselves Christians, and I am sorry to say it, in which we as a Nation are
deeply engaged, and which is of such a Nature, as that nothing can be more
inconsistant with the Doctrines and Practice of our meek Lord and Master, nor
stained with a deeper Dye or Injustice, Cruelty and Oppression, I mean the
SLAVE TRADE, the purchasing and bringing the poor Negroes from their Native
Land, and subjecting them to a State of perpetual Bondage, and that often the
most cruel and oppressive. And this carried on chiefly at the instigation of
those to whom the Promulgation of the merciful, pure, and holy Gospel of Christ
Jesus was committed. Will not the just Judge of all the Earth visit for all
this? Or dare we say, that this very Practice is not one Cause of the
Calamities we at present suffer. And that the Captivity of our People is not to
teach us to feel for others, and to induce us to discourage a Trade, by which
many Thousands are Yearly captivated? Evils do not arise out of the Dust, nor
does the Almighty willingly afflict the Children of Men; But when a People
offend as a Nation, or in a public Capacity, the Justice of his moral
Government requires that as a Nation they be punished, which is generally done
by War, Famine or Pestilence. I know there are many Arguments offered in favor
of the Purchasers, but they are all drawn from Avarice or ill founded, none
will stand the Test of that divine Rule, To do unto all Men, as we would they
should do unto us. Without Purchasers, there would be no Trade; and
consequently every Purchaser as he encourages the Trade, becomes partaker in
the Guilt of it, and that they may see what a deep dye the Guilt is of, I beg
leave to quote some Extracts from the Writings of Persons of Note, who have
been long employed in the African Trade, and whose Situation and Office in the
Factories will not admit any to question the Truth of what thy relate. By these
we shall see, that in order to get Slaves, the Europeans settled at the
Factories in Africa, encourage Wars, and promote the Practice of stealing Men,
Women and Children, which they readily purchase without any Regard to Justice,
Equity or any of the tender Ties of Nature.

William Bosman, Factor for the Dutch AFRICAN Company, at the Factory at
DELMINA, who wrote an Account of that Country, now more than fifty Years past,
tells his Readers That the Booty which the Negro Soldiers aim at in their Wars,
are Ornaments of Gold and Prisoners of War, in Order to sell them for Slaves at
Pleasure, that many of the Inhabitants depend on Plunder and the Slave Trade;
and that when Vessels arrive, if they have no Stock of Slaves, the Factors
trust the Inhabitants with Coods for the Value of one or two Hundred Slaves,
which they send into the inland Country in Order to buy Slaves, at all Markets
even sometimes two Hundred Miles deep in the Country, where Markets of Men were
kept in the same Manner as those of Beasts with us, He farther adds. That, in
his Time, the Europeans furnished the Negroes with an incredible Quantity of
Firearms and Gunpowder, which was then the Chief vendible Merchandise there.
This was the State of the Negro Trade when B^^man wrote his Account of GUINEA,
which, as I have already said, was more than fifty Years ago; Since that Time
the Trade is prodigiously augmented, there being now more than ten Ships to one
that was then employed in it: And as the Demand for Slaves has augmented, so
have the Negroes been the more induced not only to wage War one with another,
but also to put in practice the most base and inhuman Methods, in Order to get
their unhappy Countrymen into their Power, that they may sell them to the
European Traders.

John Barbot, Agent General of the French Royal African Company, in his Acc.
printed 1732 writes as follows. Those Slaves sold by the Negroes, are for the
most Part Prisoners of War, taken either in fight or pursuit, or in the
incursions they make into their Enemies Territories; others are stolen away by
their own Contry-Men, and some there are who will sell their own Children,
Kindred or Neighbors. This has often been seen, and to compass it, they desire
the Person they intend to sell, to help them in carrying something to the
Factory by Way of Trade, and when there, the Person so deluded, not
understanding the Language, is sold and delivered up as a Slave,
notwithstanding all his Resistance and exclaiming against the Treachery.
Abundance of little Blacks of both sexes are also stolen away by their
Neighbors, when found abroad on the Roads, or in the Woods; or else in the
Corn Fields, at the Time of the Year when their Parents keep them there all
Day, to scare away the devouring small Birds,

A Person of Candor and undoubted Credit now living in Philadelphia, who was
on a trading Voyage, on the Coast of Guinea, about seven Years ago, was an Eye
Witness of the Misery and Desolation which the Purchase of Slaves occasions in
that Country, a particular Instance of which he relates in the following Manner
viz. Being on that Coast, at a Place called Basalia, the Commander of the
Vessel according to Custom sent a Person on Shore, with a Present to the King
of the Country, acquainting him with their arrival, and letting him know that
they wanted a Cargo of Slaves: The King promised to furnish them with Slaves,
and in Order to do it, set out to go to War against his Enemies, designing also
to surprise some Town and take all the People Prisoners. Sometime after the
King sent them Word he had not yet met with the desired success, having been
twice repulsed, in attempting to break up two Towns; but that he still hoped to
procure a Number of Slaves for them; and in this Design he persisted, till he
met his Enemies in the Field, where a Battle was fought, which lasted three
Days, during which Time the Engagement was so bloody, that 4500 were slain on
the Spot. Think, says the Author, what a pitiable sight it was, to see the
Widows weeping over their lost Husbands, and Orphans deploring the loss of
their Fathers etc. What must we think of that cruel Wretch who occasioned such
a Scene of Misery, or what of those who for the sake of Gain instigated him to
it.

N. N. Bru^, a noted Traveller, a Narative of whose Travels is to be met with
in a new Collection of Voyages, printed by the King's Authority in the Year
1745, Tells his Readers; That the Europeans are far from desiring to act as
Peacemakers, amongst the Negroes, which would be acting contrary to their
Interest, since the greater the Wars, the more Slaves are procured. He also
gives an Account of the Manner in which the Slaves are got, in the Place where
he then was, in the following Terms viz. When a Vessel arrives, the King of the
Country sends a Troop of Guards to some Village, which they surround; then
seizing as many as they have Orders for, they bind them and send them away to
the Ship, were the Ship's Mark being put upon them, they are heard of no more.
They usually carry the Infants in Sacks, and gag the Men and Women for fear
they should alarm the Villages, through which they are carried: For, says he,
these Actions are never committed in the Villages near the Factories, which it
is the King's Interest not to ruin, but in those up the Country.

Also, Joseph Randal, in his Book of Geography, printed in the Year 1744, in
the Account he gives of the Guinea Trade, after generally confirming the above
Account, adds: That in time of full Peace nothing is more common, than for the
Negroes of one Nation to steal those of another, and sell them to the
Europeans. There has, says he, been Instances amongst the Negroes of Children
selling their Fathers and Mothers, when they have been weary of them, and
wanted to enjoy what they had; which I suppose, says that Author, gave birth to
the Laws, by which the Children are not to inherit the Goods or Estates of
their Fathers and Mothers. Thus, these poor Creatures are brought down to the
Coast to be sold to the Merchants of Europe. When the Price is agreed upon,
which for an able bodied Man, under thirty five Years of age, may be about 5
Pounds, the Women a fifth Part less, and the Children in proportion to their
Age, the European Merchants brand them with hot Irons to distinguish them, and
looks the poor wretches up in some Prison, till they can be sent on board; When
they come to America, they are disposed of, some to the Spaniards to work in
the Mines, (for the English are obliged by the Assiento Contract, to deliver
thirty Thousand Slaves every Year to the Spaniards, and the rest are sold to
the Planters in America.) It is thought that the English transport annually
near fifty Thousand of those unhappy Creatures, and the other European Nations
together about Two Hundred Thousand more. Let but any one reflect that each
Individual of this Number had some tender attachment which was broken by this
cruel Separation; some Parent or Wife, who had not even the Opportunity of
mingling Tears in a parting Embrace; or perhaps some Infant whom his Labor was
to feed and Vigilance protect,; or let any consider what it is to lose a Child,
a Husband or any dear Relation, and then let them say what they must think of
those who are engaged in, or encourage such a Trade. By the fore mentioned
Accounts it appears, how by various perfidious, and cruel Methods, the unhappy
Negroes are inslaved, and that mostly, by the Procurement of those called
Christians, and violently rent from the tenderest Ties of Nature, to toil in
hard Labor, often without sufficient Supplies of Food, and under hard
Taskmasters, and this mostly to uphold the Luxury or Covetousness of proud
selfish Men, without any Hope of ever seeing again their native Land; or an end
to their Miseries. Oh ye cruel Taskmasters! ye hard-hearted Oppressors! will
not God hear their Cry; and what shall ye do; when God rises up; and when he
visits; what will ye answer him? Did not he that made you make them? and did
not one fashion you in the Womb?

Hitherto I have considered the Trade as inconsistent with the Gospel of
Christ, contrary to natural Justice, and the common feelings of Humanity, and
productive of infinite Calamities to many Thousand Families, nay to many
Nations, and consequently offensive to God the Father of all Mankind. Yet it
must be allowed, there are some well minded Persons, into whose Hands some of
the Negroes have fallen, either by Inheritance, Executorship, or even some
perhaps purely from Charitable Motives, who rather desire to Manage wisely for
their good, than to make Gain by their Labor; these I truly sympathize with,
for, considering the general situation of those unhappy People, they have
indeed a difficult Path to tread.

I might next consider the Trade as it is destructive of the Welfare of human
Society, and inconsistent with the Peace and Prosperity of a Country; as by it
the number of natural Enemies must be increased, and the Place of those taken
up who would be its support and security. Or I might show from innumerable
Examples, how it introduces Idleness, discourages Marriage, corrupts the Youth,
and ruins and debauches Morals. I might likewise expose the weakness of those
Arguments, which are commonly advanced in Order to vindicate the Purchasers,
such, as their being Slaves in their own Country and therefore may be so to us,
or that they are made acquainted with Christianity in lieu of their Liberty, or
that the last Purchaser will use them better than they formerly were: But not
to mention, that these are only vain pretenses, that the true Motive of
encouraging the Trade is selfish Avarice; to say nothing of the weakness of the
Argument. That because others do ill, we may do so too; or the absurdity of
recommending the Christian Religion by Injustice and a disregard to the Rights
and Liberties of Mankind, or the Encouragement that every new Purchaser gives
to a Trade altogether unjust and iniquitous. What is already said, will I hope
be sufficient to prevent any considerate Christian from being, in any Degree,
defiled with a Gain so full of Horrors, and so palpably inconsistent with the
Gospel of our blessed LORD and Savior JESUS CHRIST, which breaths nothing but
Love and Goodwill to all Men of every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People.

Extract from the Epistle of the yearly Meeting of Friends, held at London in
the Year 1758.
WE fervently warn All in Profession with us, that they be careful to avoid
being any Way concerned, in reaping the unrighteous Profits arising from that
iniquitous Practice of Dealing in Negroes and other Slaves; whereby in the
original Purchase one Man sells Another, as he does the Beasts that perishes,
without any better Pretension to a Property in him, than that of superior
Force; in direct Violation of the Gospel-Rule, which teaches Every One to do
as they would be done by, and to do Good unto All; being the Reverse of that
covetous Disposition, which furnishes Encouragement to those ignorant People to
perpetuate their savage Wars, in Order to supply the Demands of this most
unnatural Traffic, whereby great Numbers of Mankind, free by Nature, are
subjected to inextricable Bondage; and which has often been observed, to fill
their Possessors with Haughtiness, Tyranny, Luxury and Barbarity, corrupting
the Minds, and debasing the Morals of their Children, to the unspeakable
Prejudice of Religion and Virtue, and the Exclusion of that holy Spirit of
universal Love, Meekness and Charity, which is the unchangeable Nature and the
Glory of true Christianity. We therefore can do no less than, with the greatest
Earnestness, to impress it upon Friends every where, that they endeavor to
keep their Hands clear of this uprighteous Gain of Oppression.

Love not the World, neither the Things that are in the World. If any Man loves
the World the Love of the Father is not in him

1 John 2, 15.
IF any Man will be a Disciple of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He
must deny himself and take up his Cross daily. He must be willing to lose that
Life, those Affections and Desires we naturally have to that which is earthly
and sensual. Hence it appears, that one of the greatest Defection any one can
make from Christianity, is by indulging in them selves a worldly Spirit, a
Spirit that seeks its Joy and Consolation in the Riches, Honors, and
Friendships of this World: And indeed this seems to have been the chief Inlet,
of that stream of Corruption, which in different Ages has overspread the
Christian Churches.

Great Noise has been made about Schisms and Heresies, but the true Foundation
of all these Evils, the Heresy of all Heresies is and has in all Ages been, a
proud, selfish worldly Spirit, more or less cloaked under the Appearance of
Zeal, with which it has not only deceived many, but has often deceived it self.
We are called to love God with all our Heart, and with all our Strength, to
turn from every Thing, that leads not to God and his holy Will; with all the
Desire, Delight and Longing of our Heart, to give up ourselves wholly to the
Light and holy Spirit of God; pleased with nothing in this World, but as it
gives Time and Place, and Occasion of doing and being that, which our heavenly
Father would have us to do and be, seeking for no Happiness from this earthly
fallen Life, but that of overcoming all its Spirits and Tempers.

The ancient Philosophers began all their Virtue in a total Renunciation of the
Spirit of this World; they saw with the Eyes of Heaven, that Darkness was not
more contrary to Light, than the Spirit and Wisdom of this World was contrary
to divine Wisdom: Therefore they allowed of no Progress in Virtue, but so far
as a Man had overcome himself, and the Spirit of this World. This gave a divine
Solidity to all their Instructions, and proved them to be Masters of true
Wisdom. But the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, the last, the highest, the
most finishing Stroke given to the Spirit of this World, that speaks more in
one Word, than all the Philosophy of volumnious Writers, is yet professed by
those, who are in more Friendship with the World, than was allowed to the
Disciples of Pithagoras, Socrates, Plato or Epictetus. Nay, if those ancient
Sages were to start up amongst us with their divine Wisdom, they would bid fair
to be treated by the Sons of the Gospel, if not by some Fathers of the Church,
as dreaming Enthusiasts. But, this is a standing Truth, the World can only love
its own, and Wisdom can only be justified of her Children. The heaven born
Epictetus told one of his Scholars, that then he might first look upon himself
as having made some true Proficiency in Virtue, when the World took him for a
Fool; an Oracle like that, which said, the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness
with God.

If you ask what is the Apostasy of these last Times, or whence is all the
degeneracy of the present Christian Church, it must be placed to a worldly
Spirit. If here you see open Wickedness, there only Form of Godliness, if here
superficial Holiness, political Piety, crafty Prudence, there haughty Sanctity,
partial Zeal, envious Orthodoxy, if almost every where, you see a Jewish
Blindness, and Hardness of Heart, and the Church trading with the Gospel, as
visibly, as the old Jews bought and sold Beasts in their Temple, all this is
only so many Forms, and proper Fruits of the worldly Spirit. This is the great
Net, with which the Devil becomes a Fisher of Men; and be assured of this, that
every Son of Man is in this Net, till through, and by the Spirit of Christ he
breaks out of it. I say the Spirit of Christ, for nothing else can deliver him
from it. If you trust to any Kind or Form of religious Observances, to any Kind
of Learning, or Effort of human Prudence, and then I will tell you what your
Case will be, you will overcome one Temper of the World, only and merely by
cleaving to another: For nothing can overcome or renounce the World, but
singly, and solely the Spirit of Christ. Hence it is, that many learned Men
with all the rich Furniture of their Brain, live and die Slaves to the Spirit
of this World, the Spirit of Christ is not the one only Thing that is the
Desire of their Hearts, and therefore their Learning only works in and with the
Spirit of this World, and becomes itself no small Parts of the Vanity of
Vanities.

Would you know the evil Nature and Effect of a Spirit given up to the World,
and not subjected to the Spirit of Grace: You need only look at the blessed
Effect of a continual State of Watching, a continual humble Application to God
in the true Spirit of Prayer, for the one goes downwards with the same
Strength, as the other goes upward, the one betroths, and weds to an earthly
Nature, with the same certainty, as the other espouses, and unites to Christ.
The Spirit of continual Watchings and Prayer, is a pressing forth of the Soul
out of this Earthly Life, it is a stretching with all its Desire after the Life
of God, it is a Leaving as far as it can, all its own Spirit, to receive a
Spirit from above, to be one Life, one Love, one Spirit with Christ in God.
This Prayer which is an Emptying itself of all its own Lusts and natural
Tempers, and an Opening it self for the Light and Love of God to enter into it,
is the Prayer in the Name of Christ, to which nothing is denied; for the Love
which God bears to the Soul, is an eternal never ceasing Desire to open the
Birth of his holy Word and Spirit in it, and stays no longer till the Door of
the Heart open for Him; and nothing does or can keep God out of the Soul, or
hinder his Union with it, but the Desire of the Heart* turned from it. What the
Soul desires, that is the Fuel of its Fire, and as its Fuel is, so is the
Flame of its Life. As we sow, we shall reap; if to the Spirit, we shall reap
Life and Peace; if to the Flesh, we shall of the Flesh reap Corruption.
Wherever and in whatsoever the Will chooses to dwell and delight, that becomes
the Soul's Food, its Clothing and Habitation. Since this is the Case, let us
stop a While, let our Hearing be turned into Feeling. Let us consider whether
there is any Thing in Life, that deserves a Thought, but how to keep in a
continual State of Watching and Prayer, that we may attain to that Purity of
Heart, which alone can see, find and possess God

The absolute Necessity of Self-Denial, Mortification and true Charity, in
Order to follow our blessed Savior in the Regeneration, is also livingly set
forth in the excellent Writings of a pious Member of the Church of England * of
which I shall here give some Extract: It being a Doctrine, which of all others
appears at this Time the most necessary to be strongly inculcated.
WHat Cause, says that Author, shall we assign for the Opposition to
Gospel Truths that appears amongst us, and for that Dislike to those, who urge
the Necessity of Regeneration and of the spiritual Life? The true Reason is
nigh at Hand, though others are pretended: Such Doctrines are contrary to the
Maxims and Principles that govern the Hearts and Conduct of the Children of
this Generation, are at Variance with the false Interests of Flesh and Blood,
declare open War against the Kingdom of Self, and strike at every Thing that is
most near and dear to corrupt Nature; and therefore carnal Men of every
Denomination think themselves concerned in Character to oppose and discredit
such a Representation of Christianity. They can be zealous for Opinions, Forms,
and an external Worship of any Kind, because they leave them in quiet
Possession of their Ambition, their Covetousness, their Love of themselves, and
their Love of the World: They can readily take up a Profession of Faith in a
suffering Savior, nay bring themselves to trust in an outward Covering of his
Merits and Righteousness for Salvation, because this costs them nothing; but to
be clothed with his Spirit of Humility, Poverty and Self-denial; to renounce
their own Wills in his Lowliness, Meekness, and total Resignation to the Will
of God, to mortify the fleshly Appetites; to be crucified to the World; to
strip themselves of all Complacency and Satisfaction in those Endowments,
whether natural or acquired, which appear great and glorious in the Eyes both
of themselves and Others; and, in a Word, to take up their Cross, and nakedly
follow a naked Christ in the Regeneration: These are hard Savings, they cannot
bear them: But Wisdom is justified of her Children; unacceptable as these
Doctrines are to Others* yet to them, and in them too, they are the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God. It was by such Foolishness of Preaching that
Christ's Kingdom first prevailed over the Kingdoms of this World; and it must
be by the same Doctrine, under the Influence of the same Spirit, that we can
only hope for its Continuance to the End of it.

The Way to any good Degree of Perfection in the divine Life, lies through great
Mortification and Self-denial: Some think it enough to get Doctrines into the
Head; but till the Heart is in some Measure purified by Faith, nothing is
rightly done: And in Order to this, the Children of An^k, (those corrupt
Passions and Inclinations that war against the Soul,) must be driven out, the
Perverseness of the Will broken, the Understanding simplified, the Pride of our
Hearts plukt up by the Roots, and all the Cords that bind us to the World and
the Things of it untwisted; in a Word, our Idols must be cast out, and every
cursed Thing removed that separates betwixt God and us; for the Pure in Heart,
and they only shall see God. It was by this Kind of holy Violence practiced on
themselves, that the Worthies both of the Old and New Testament, in all Ages of
the Church, have laid hold on the Kingdom of Heaven been favored with such
rich Communications from God, and enabled to work such Wonders as surpass the
Belief of Many in this degenerate incredulous Age: And that a preparatory
Discipline of Strictness and Severity is necessary in Order to qualify us for
any extraordinary Vouchsafements of Illumination and Grace, we may learn from
the Schools instituted among the Jews for the Training up of Persons for the
prophetic Office, where they were educated in great Abstraction from the World,
in the Government of their Passions, and the Mortification of their natural
Propensions, that being so disengaged from the common Impediments of a holy
Life, they might be more at Liberty for Devotion and the Contemplation of
heavenly Things, and by such previous Exercises become fit Instruments for the
Holy Spirit, and more receptive of heavenly Wisdom. Thus came they out holy
Enthusiasts, Men of God furnished to every good Word and Work, Scribes well
instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, and fearless of giving Offense in the
Way of Duty, even before Kings, being no less qualified for Reproof and
Correction, than for Doctrine and Instruction in Righteousness: Patterns these
for all Persons of a religious Character, whether they live in Colleges or in
Kings Houses; whether they attend on those who go clothed in Purple and fine
Linen, and fare sumptuously every Day. or are called forth to a more
promiscuous Employment of their Office; for though the Dispensation of Prophecy
as it respects the foretelling future Events, has a long Time ceased in the
Church, yet the Character of Prophets in the Capacity of Declarers of God's
Word and Will, and as Denouncers of his Judgments on all impenitents, even the
most dignified Offenders, is never to cease in it, neither is the Lord's Hand
shortened that it cannot extend Comfort and Courage, Light and Direction for
these Purposes now as formerly: But, Alas! our Hearts are straightened that they
cannot receive it as they ought, and we are so entangled, as to Many of us,
with such an evil Covetousness after the Things of this Life, so studious to
seek the Honor that comes of Man, more than the Honor that comes of God,
that we want Boldness to hold the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ without
Respect of Persons: For let Men be never so highly titled or charactered, let
their Pretensions to Learning be what they will, and their Acquaintance with
Creeds, Canons and Commentators never so extensive, yet so long as they
continue Men of this World, and follow the Things of it, so long as their
Affections are set on Things beneath, and their Hearts unsurrendered to God,
they are no better than dry Bones as to the divine Life, without Marrow or
Moisture; and as they cannot in such a State receive the Things of the Spirit
of God, not having spiritual Senses exercised thereto, so will these Things of
Course appear Foolishness unto them in Others, and they will speak Evil of that
which they know not. A Party Spirit, says the same Author, whether it be in
Religion or Politics, proceeds from Littleness of Mind and Narrowness of Heart,
it puts out both the Eye of the Judgment and the Eye of Charity, and so hinders
us from seeing the brightest Excellence in our Neighbor that is not just as
high or low as our selves, as I heared a Man of Learning once say, that he
could not allow Milton's Paradise lost to be a good Book, because written by an
Oliverian. But the Christian knows no such Straitness; for his Bowels are
enlarged toward All that will come within the Embraces of his Charity, which
is as wide as the East is from the West. He cannot wrangle and hate about
Differences of Opinion, for he is got above them; his Call, his universal Call
is Love, and he has adopted for his Motto that Saying of Luther: In whomsoever
I see any Thing of Christ, him I love. In this Man, wheresoever he lives, and
by what Name soever he is called, the Kingdom of Christ is come; and of such
heavenly Men and Women it will consist in that enlarged glorious State of it
which we are given to look for: And what, if it be already begun on Earth!

The one true Church of Christ is the Communion of Saints, and Charity; true
Charity, i. e. the Love of Christ is the Life and Soul of it: Is then the Love
of God shed abroad in our Hearts, and have we fervent Charity among Ourselves?
For, be it known of a Truth, that as much as we possess of this heavenly
Treasure, so much have we of Christianity, and no more; and that without it,
all Zeal for Religion is but Contention, all Modes of Worship but Formality,
and all Orthodoxy but vain Opinion.

FINIS.

