THE JOURNALS OF THE LIVES AND TRAVELS OF SAMUEL BOWNAS, AND JOHN RICHARDSON.

LONDON PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted, and Sold by WILLIAM DUNLAP, at the
NEWEST PRINTING-OFFICE, in Market-Street, 1759.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE, TRAVELS, AND CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCES IN THE Work of the
Ministry OF SAMUEL BOWNAS

LONDON Printed: Philadelphia, Reprinted, and Sold by WILLIAM DUNLAP, at the
NEWEST PRINTING-OFFICE, in Market-Street, 1759.

To the Performance of which he found himself measurably prepared and
qualified; for his own Experience of the Love of God, and of the Operations of
his holy Spirit, in gradually purging out the Corruptions of his own Heart, did
excite and augment in him a Christian Love to h^ ^^l^^w Creatures, attended
with an Ardency of Zeal, and an incessant Desire, for their Conversion.

An inward Purgation from Sin is so necessary, and so essential a Qualification
of a Gospel Minister, that no Man can be such without it;

Nor does God send any unclean Messengers on his Errand:

It being the constant Method of his divine Wisdom, under this Gospel
Dispensation, through the purging of his holy Spirit, to cleanse and purify the
Inside of every Vessel, which he permits to be made Use of in the Service of
his Sanctuary. Wherefore,

Every unsanctified Pretender to preach the Gospel of Christ, deserves to have
his Mouth slept with that unanswerable Query of our blessed Savior to the
Pharisees of old; O Generation of Vipers, low can ye^ being evil, speak good
Thing^^ for c^^ of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. Mat. xii. 34.

A Practice of this Nature abounds with the grossest of Absurdities, and stands
emphatically exploded, even in the Time of the Mosaicddeck Law, by the Royal
Psalmist, in these Words: Unto the Wicked God faith, What have thou to do to
declare my Statutes, or that thou s^culdest take my Covenant in thy Mouth?
Psalm l. 16.

But alas! Self-Interest prompts Men to turn a deaf Ear even to the most divine
Expostulations, and unholy Persons will, in despite of the most express
Prohibitions, continue to intrude themselves beyond their Bounds; and will be
still busying and employing themselves about external Circumstances and
Ceremonies, while the L^e, Spirit and Substance of true Religion is placed
above their Reach, and unattainable by them, until it shall please God, in the
exceeding Riches of his Grace, to cleanse their Heart from all Unrighteousness;
of which Conversion we heartily wish for a nearer Prospect than we can discern
at present.

We now return to the Author of the ensuing Narrative, who was another Sort of
Preacher; a free Giver o what himself had freely received, a liberal and
open-hearted Communicator of his religious Experiences unto all other Men,
without Respect of Persons.

He directed all the Sheep of Christ to follow the Voice of Christ himself, the
good Shepherd, whose Omnipresence readers his Voice audible to every one of his
Sheep, however separate or dispersed throughout the World.

His Conversation was free, generous and affable; neither did he shun the
Society of those whom he was sent to convert; his Mission being somewhat
correspondent to that of his Lord and Master, who declared concerning himself:
I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. Mat. ix 13.

He was of a grave Deportment, and of a tall, comely and manly Aspect: His
public Preaching was attended with such a divine Authority and majestic
Innocence, as commanded the Attention of his Hearers; and his Voice being
clear, strong and distinct, was capable of conveying his profitable
Exhortations to the Ears and Understandings of a very numerous Auditory; of
which a remarkable Instance appears in his Preaching at Jedburgh in Scotland,
mentioned in Page 46, 47, of his Account.

His literal Accomplishments were but small, extending little farther than to
enable him to read the Scriptures in his Mother Tongue; yet by constant Use and
Application, he became thoroughly versed therein, and enabled by the Force of
their Testimony, to confront and confute the Gainsayers of his Doctrine, which
was in all Points strictly agreeable to, and consonant therewith.

In the religious Society to which he was joined, he conducted himself as a Man
of Peace and Prudence, choosing to walk in the plain and middle Path, without
declining to any Extreme; so that he neither idolized Forms, nor contemned good
Order.

His Estimation and Repute among his Friends and Neighbors, may appear by the
Testimony of the Monthly and Quarterly-meetings of Bridport in Dorsetshire, to
which he belonged, given forth since his Decease, wherein they say, that It
pleased the Lord to endue him with a large Gift in the Ministry, in which he
was a faithful Labourer, and gave himself up for that Service; that he had a
Gift of Utterance superior to many, sound in Judgment and Doctrine, and very
convincing to the Understandings of those that heard him.

This Testimony concerning him is true, and a Man of his Penetration and
Capacity could not but discern his own Improvement in the Gift he had received:
Wherefore he stood upon his Guard, lest through Self-love and Conceit, he
should depart from that Humility, which is the Ornament of every Gospel
Minister, as in Page 38 he has particularly observed.

Which Christian Virtue was generally his Concomitant, during the Course of his
Pilgrimage; and is remarkable in the Composure of this Account, in keeping it
clear from, and unsullied with any the least Tincture or Symptom of
Self-Applause.

As in Preaching, his Declarations proceeded from his Heart, ^o in Writing his
Relations of his Services, and his Exhortations, sprang from the same Fountain.

Wherefore we recommend to thy serious Consideration what he has written, as
comprehended in that excellent Description of a good Men, given by CHRIST
himself, Luke vi. 45. A good Man, out of the good Treasure of his Heart,
brings forth that which is good.

May the Good brought forth out of this good Man's Heart effectually reach unto
^hine, and through the divine Blessing operate to thy spiritual Benefit, Growth
and Improvement in that which is good.

So shall the Design of the deceased Author, in leaving behind him this Account
of his Life and Travels, be in some degree answered, and the Prefixer of this
Preface shall have the End he aims at, who with sincere Desires for the saving
Health and Welfare of thee and all Mankind, takes his Leave, and bids thee
heartily Farewell.

J. BESSE.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE and TRAVELS OF SAMUEL BOWNAS.

I Was born in Westmoreland, within the Compass of great Strickland
Monthly Meeting, about the Year 1676, and was entered in that Register; and my
Father dying before I was one Month old, I never knew him, but I have been
informed, that he was very honest and zealous for Truth in his Time, having
been a considerable Sufferer for the Cause of Religion, both in Loss of Goods
and Liberty, the Meeting being kept in his House in some of the hottest Time of
Persecution in King Charles the Second's Reign. Being last so young, and my
Mother having but a scanty Subsistence of about 4 l. 10 s. a Year, with a
Dwelling for herself and two Children, I was about Thirteen put to learn the
Trade of a Blacksmith, with an Uncle who used me unkindly; I was afterward put
an Apprentice to a very honest Friend belonging to Brigflatts Meeting, near
Sedberg, in Yorkshire, his Name was Samuel Parat; but all this Time I had no
Taste of Religion, but devoted myself to Pleasure, as much as my Circumstances
would permit, though my Mother had kept me very strict while I was under her
Care, and would frequently in Winter Evenings take Opportunities to tell me
sundry Passages of my dear Father's Sufferings, admonishing me still so to
live, that I might be worthy to bear the Name of so good a Man's Son, and not
bring a Reproach on myself and Parents; also frequently putting me in mind,
that if she should be taken away, I should greatly miss her, both for Advice
and other Ways to assist me; and advised me to fear the Lord now in my Youth,
that I might be favored with his Blessing; which frequently brought me into
great Tenderness, being afraid that she would die before I was capable to live
in the World; and she took me frequently to Meetings with her, where she often
had some Words in Testimony: Persecution being still very hot, and Friends
locked out of our Meeting House at Strickland, we met at the Door, and I
remember at two several Times when I was a Child, and came to Meeting with my
Mother, the Informers came, the first Time the Meeting had been over about half
an Hour, the second Time not quite so much, so that we escaped their Hands both
Times; but sundry Friends were in Prison at Appleby for attending that Meeting,
whom my dear Mother went to visit, taking me along with her, and we had a
Meeting with the Prisoners, several Friends from other Places being likewise
there by Appointment. What I observed was, though very young, how tender and
broken they were; and I was very inquisitive of my Mother, why they cried so
much, (which we called Greeting) and thee greet too, (said I) why did thee? She
told me that I could not understand the Reason of it then, but when I grew up
more to Man's Estate I might.

Now to return to my Apprenticeship; I had a very kind loving Master and
Mistress, and I had Meat enough, and Work enough, but had little Consideration
about Religion, nor any Taste thereof. On First-days I frequented Meetings, and
the greater Part of my Time I slept, but took no Account of I reaching, nor
received any other Benefit than being there kept out of bad Company, which
indeed is a very great Service to Youth. I took much Liberty in Discourse, and
was taken Notice of as a witty, sensible young Man: But often on my Bed I
ruminated on my Way of Life with Reluctance, yet frequently fell into the same
Way again: I never was given to Swearing, nor any very gross Vice, but what I
gave way to the most, was Jesting, and Turns of Wit to provoke Mirth, which
gave me often (after it was over) a heavy Heart; and thus I went on for near
three Years; but one First Day, being at Meeting, a young Woman, named Anne
Wilson, was there and preached; she was very zealous, and fixing my Eye upon
her, she with a great Zeal pointed her Finger at me, uttering these Words with
match Power, A traditional Quaker, thou come to Meeting as thou went from it
(the last Time) and g^est from it as thou came to it, but art no better for thy
coming, what will thou do in the End? This was so pat to my then Condition,
that, like Saul, I was smitten to the Ground, as it might be said, but turning
my Thoughts inward, in secret I cried, Lord, what shall I do to help it? And a
Voice as it were spoke in my Heart saying, Look unto me and I will help thee!
and I found much Comfort, that made me shed abundance of Tears. Then I
remembered what my Mother told me some Years before, that when I grew up more
to Man's Estate, I should know the Reason of that Tenderness and weeping, and
so I now did to Purpose. I went home with a heavy Heart, and could neither eat
nor sleep as I used to do, but my Work never succeeded better in my Hands than
it did at this Time, nor my Mind never less in it; but my Conduct, as well as
Countenance, was much altered, so that several in the Family were doubtful that
I should fall into a kind of melancholy Distraction; but I longed for the
Meeting-day, and thought it a very long Week. When the Time of Meeting came, my
Mind was soon fixed and staid upon God, and I found an uncommon Enjoyment that
gave me great Satisfaction, my Understanding being opened, and all the
Faculties of my Mind so quick, that I seemed another Man; a divine and
spiritual Sweetness abiding with me Night and Day, for some Time, and I began
to see and understand the Scriptures, and the Nature of preaching the Doctrine
of the Gospel in the Power and Spirit, plainly seeing a Difference between a
Preacher of the Letter and of the Spirit, which till then I was wholly ignorant
of, and unacquainted with, not having before that, the least Degree that I
could perceive of divine Understanding; but then upon looking back, and
considering what I had heard such and such Friends preach, which at that Time I
did not understand, but now I understood it clearly, which was a plain
Demonstration to me, that all divine Knowledge is from divine Light, which we
cannot comprehend, until we are assisted so to do by a Visitation from Heaven.

And now the Scriptures, and Ministry from the Openings of the Spirit, seemed
so clear and plain to my Understanding, that I wondered that any Body remained
unconvinced, supposing them to see the Truths of the Gospel in the same Light
that I did; and that Saying of the Apostle, 1 John v. 20
wherein he asserts his Knowledge of the Son of God being come, from their
receiving an Understanding from him, was clearly discovered to me, so that now
I plainly saw a Distinction between the Children of Light, and of this World;
the spiritual, and the natural Man; and that the natural Man could not receive
the Things of the Spirit of God, being Foolishness to him; he cannot know them,
because they are known only by the Spirit, as the Apostle asserts; 1
Corinthians ii 14.
and I found myself much improved in divine Wisdom and saving Knowledge. As I
was going to Meeting walking alone, it came very livingly into my Mind, that if
I was but faithful and obedient to the heavenly Vision, I should soon be
qualified to teach others, and more especially, as I saw by Experience wherein
my shortness had been, in being contented and easy with a Form of Truth and
Religion, which I had only by Education, being brought up in Plainness of both
Habit and Speech; but all this, though very good in its Place, did not make me
a true Christian; I was but a traditional Quaker, and that by Education only,
and not from the Scriptures, because they were a Book sealed to me. And I now
saw plainly that Education, though never so carefully administered, would not do
the Work: although a pious Education ought by no Means to be neglected, but all
Parents and Guardians ought to be stirred up to their Duty in that Respect; yet
we must consider, that it is not in the Power of Parents, or the most pious
Tutors to confer Grace, which is the Gift of God alone; nor can any come into
the true Fold but by this Door, as said our Savior John x. 1, 2, 3.
concerning himself. Thus it plainly appeared to me, there was no other Way but
this, viz. by the Spirit of Christ alone, to attain to true Faith, which works
by Love, and give Victory over our Infirmities and evil Deeds, working such a
Change in us, that we can in Truth from Experience say, we are born from above,
John iii. 3, 4, 5.
and by Virtue of that Birth only, is the true Knowledge of the Kingdom, and
the Things of God attained, and by no other Way or Means although never so well
contrived by human Art: And being experimentally sensible of this Change
wrought in my Mind, it looked the more likely that I might in Time be qualified
to speak to others of my own Experience of the Operation of the Spirit, in my
Mind, not thinking the Time so near at Hand, as it appeared when I came to the
Meeting; for I had not sat long therein, but a great Weight fell upon me, with
some Words to speak; but I considered, (being willing to be my own Carver) it
was too soon to undertake such a Task, being hut an Instant in Religion; not
remembering the small Time between Paul^^ Conversion Acts ix. 20.
and his preaching the Gospel: And my former Conduct with my Companions, (many
of whom were in the Meeting at the same Time) stood much in my Way, for my
Reformation was but three Weeks old that very Day, so that I reasoned thus,
that so sudden a Change would hardly be borne: I could n^^ for that Time, for
these Reasons give up, and the Burden was then taken from me: But after that
Meeting it came upon me again with double Weight, and affected me so very
greatly that I was much alone, and my Countenance so altered with Weeping, that
my Master took Occasion to enquire into the Matter, how it was with me? And I
gave him as plain Account as I was capable of, which he was much affected with
indeed, and broke into Tears: What I feared was, that I had by Disobedience so
much offended, that I should be cast off for ever: But with sundry Exhortations
from Scripture and otherwise, he endeavored to pacify me, not doubting but
that I should have the like Offer made me, putting me in Mind of Gideon's
Fleece, Judges vi.
etc. When next Meeting-day came, I went in great Weakness and Fear, and could
rather have gone elsewhere, than to Meeting that Day; however, some Time after
I was in the Meeting, I felt the same Concern as at the Meeting before, and I
sat under the Weight of it till the Meeting was a most over, and then hardly
knew how I got upon my Feet, but did, and broke out with a loud Voice in these
Words, viz. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.
I say, fear you him who will terribly shake the Earth, that all which is
moveable may be shaken and removed out of the Way, that that which is
immovable may stand. This was all I had to say at that Time. But oh! what Joy
and Sweetness I felt afterward I cannot express, and the Pleasure of my Mind
appeared in my Countenance, so that my Master took Notice, and spoke of it so
feelingly, that plainly demonstrated he was a Partaker with me of the same
Rejoicing in himself, as at the Birth of an only Son: This was about the Year
1696, on that called Christmas Day, it falling that Year upon the First Day of
the Week.

Thus having (as it may be said,) broke the Ice, the next Time was not quite so
hard, but I said very little, and seldom appeared for a Year or two, having
about three Years of my Apprenticeship to serve, which I did with Fidelity and
Truth. The last Year of my Time, I found some considerable wording in my Mind
to visit Scotland, being very rarely without some Degree of divine Virtue on my
Mind, either by Night or Day; therefore I thought, if it was so with me then,
it would be much more so when I had nothing to mind but divine Things; but I
found it otherwise, of which in its Place. I may not omit, that sometime above
two Years after I first spoke in Meetings, I opened the New Testament at that
Passage spoken of by our Savior, Mat. x. 28. to the same Effect with what was
first opened on my Mind, as mentioned above, which then I knew nothing of, as
being the Sayings of Christ to warn them against the Fear of Men; although no
doubt I had read it, but had taken so little Notice of what I read, it was to
me as if it had been never writ. But it was a great Comfort to me, that I was
thus opened in a material Point of Doctrine of our blessed Lord at my first
setting out.

About this Time I had a Desire to visit a neighboring Meeting called Yelland,
it being the first that I ever had a Concern to visit, and desired my dear
Friend Isaac Alexander, to go with me. Agreeing upon the Time, I went to
Isaac's Brother's House the Seventh-day Evening before, where Isaac lived; and
he and I went to visit James Wilson and his Parents that Evening: James was
under Convincement, but not his Parents. We had some Conference, but being
called to Supper, left off abruptly. After Supper I could not be easy without
repeating my Visit, and James's Mother being very quick in the Scriptures, she
desired my Judgment on those Texts in Isaiah and Peter; Behold, I create new
Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. And my Understanding was
opened to preach unto her the new Birth so effectually, that she was thoroughly
convinced, and continued an honest Friend to her dying Day, going to Meeting
the (...) Day, and so held on while able to attend (...)

Now my Time of Servitude being near at an End, and my Master being very
willing to keep (...) in his Service, spoke to me about it, which gave me an
Opportunity to open my Mind to him about any Visit to Scotland; and he then
told me, to acquaint some of the Elders in the Meeting therewith, for it was
needful that I should have a Certificate, to show the Unity of the Brethren
with my journey; and at accordingly I did, and had a Certificate: Isaac
Alexander was my Companion, and had a Certificate likewise. So we set out;
Kendal being the first Meeting, and then to Preston, Yelland, Height,
Hawkeshead, and visited Part of Lancashire, and Yorkshire, in about three or
four Weeks. But the Poverty of my Spirit was so exceeding great and bitter,
that I could scarcely bear it, but cried out aloud, and it was so surprising to
my Companion, that we being by ourselves walking on Foot, he feared it would be
too hard for me, for I complained that I was deceived or mistaken; because,
while I was in my Master's Work, I rarely by Night or Day was without some
Degree of divine Virtue on my Mind, but now I could feel nothing but the
Bitterness of Death and Darkness; all Comfort was hid from me for a Time, and I
was baptized into Death indeed. As we went along, I said to Isaac with a
Vehemence of Spirit. Oh! that I was in my Master's Work again, and favored
with my former Enjoyments of divine Life, how acceptable it would be! We came
at our Journey's End, to one Miles Birket's, who was more than usually kind to
us; but alas! he did not know my State and Poverty. Next Day we went to another
Meeting at Hawkeshead, it was a little better with me, but very poor; and so we
performed our Journey in about a Month, and he returned to his Father's House,
and I to my Master Parat's.

I being very loath to go to Scotland, having been proved with so much Poverty
of Spirit, the Cup was so bitter I could hardly bear it; however, I kept my
Mind to myself, and we set forward on Foot, visiting Part of Cumberland in our
Way, and I thought Isaac had very fine Service, so much superior to mine, that
after him I was afraid to lessen or hurt what Good he had done; and before him,
I was afraid to stand in his Way. He was very much admired indeed, and some
were convinced by his Ministry: We accomplished that Journey in about two
Months Time. At our Return Hay-harvest came on, and I went to Mowing, and on
the Meeting-days went just where my Mind led me, and grew in my Ministry very
much, and the Lord let me see his Kindness to lead me through that State of
Poverty, which was of great Service to qualify me to speak to others in the
like Condition, and that Trials of sundry Kinds were for my Improvement and
Good, tending to my Establishment in the true Root of a divine and spiritual
Ministry, and the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles Matthew v. 3. Romans
vii. 24.
did much comfort me, so that I became, in the Opinion of several, an able
Minister, although but short, seldom standing a Quarter of an Hour. But alas! I
(...) I was but a meet Ba^e or In^ant in the Work.

This Summer past over and by my Harvest-work at Hay and Corn, I picked up a
(...) Money being just penny-less before, so that I traveled to a Meeting
before I got to Work 14 or 15 Miles three Times forth and back on foot all
alone, with three Halfpence, being all the Money I had and thinking to refresh
myself the Way, but when I came near the House of Entertainment, I found myself
(...) strong and chee^ that I thought I might want it more at another Time and
so kept it.

Toward the Fall I bought a House and put myself in a Condition for another
Journey with my (...) Companion Isaac again; and we thought either of us pretty
sufficient to held a Meeting however. I was to go with him through B^ (...) and
Yorkshire, and he was to go with me into the West as to Wilts, Somer^,
Devenshire etc. We had not proceeded far before I was very much that up, and
had no Satisfaction at all in going farther with him; I told him how it was
with me, and we were both willing to part; and I went to be at York on
First Day and meeting with dear John R^. I laid my Concern before him, and as a
(...) Father he spoke very encouragingly to me, and he got Meetings appointed
for me at Wetherby and so forward Toward Doncaster. I went on in great Fear,
And after Meeting at Wetherby, Benjamin Bree^ spoke very encouragingly, that
the Lord would enlarge my Gifts; and when thou (...) said he, don't value
thyself upon it, but give the Honor of it where (...) be, and keep (...) and
God will bless (...), and make the (...) in his Hand. My (...) Meeting was at
(...) was very much to my Comfort and Encouragement. Then to P^ract, where I
had no Cause (...) but there was a Friend that after Meeting did (...) and find
a deal of (...) with what I had said which brought some Uneasiness upon me: But
being after wards told, (...) and that (...) Unity, that brought me off pretty
light and (...) I went from there to the (...) on the Seventh-day it being
Market Day there: I was conducted to (...) Quarter, he being in Town, who (...)
came and looked at me. I thought (...) first enquiring whence I came. and if I
had a (...) To all which I gave proper Answers, and showed him my Certificate;
all this seemed agreeable, and he undertook to appoint Meeting forward and sent
me home with has Son: But not having ever been so every examined before, this
grew in my Mind, and fearing now I should come off. Thomas Adam being noted
Minister, It was some Uneasiness; but at last he came Home and was very tender
and kind indeed. Next Day, being (...), we repaired to Meeting, and I came off
beyond what I expected by much preached almost an Hour, so that I was very
^hearful in my Spirit after it and we had a (...) Opportunity in the Evening,
and all ended brave and well. So the Week following I went to Bi^ and took
Meetings in course as they lay by M^ to Nottingham. At Maple^ there was brave
old living Friend, with when I has great Comfort his Name was John Camn: At
this Place I had the very best Meeting that I had ever had, and it had a very
remarkable Effect upon me; for I began to think the Bitterness and Anguish of
Death, which I had gone through before, might now be over in a great Degree,
and I should go on smoother and with more Ease for (...) to come, for the
Friends showed me much P^ ^^d and I was visited in the Evening, and Morning
(...) them, by sundry that lived nigh: (...) I thought more of myself than I
had done before, that I remember. Two or three of them went with me to
Nottingham, seeming much pleased with my Company; it being Seventh-day, I was
there on First Day at two Meetings, came off tolerable well, but not like as at
Maplebeck. The Third-day following I was at Castle-dunnington, where was a fine
Collection of Friends; I preached some Time amongst them, but found not that
Authority and Life, as I thought, to attend me as before, however, I desired
another Meeting with them that Evening, which was readily assented to, which
was very large, considering that Place. I seemed very poor and low, and blamed
myself much for appointing another Meeting in so poor and weak a Frame of Mind;
the Meeting came on, and proved better than I expected: But I was very low, and
it being a clear Moonlight Night, I walked into the Friend's Orchard behind
his House, bemoaning myself very much, as having lost my Guide, and fallen from
that happy Condition I was in the Week before: The Friend of the House finding
I tarried, came out to meet me, having a Sense of my low State and Condition,
so that, enquiring how I did, he began to speak very much in praise of these
two Meetings, and of the Service I had in them. But all this did not raise my
Spirits: We went ^n but he perceived I was very low, and he and his Wife
endeavored to comfort me, his Wife had a fine Gift of the Ministry, and she
told me some Experiences she had gone through, but all did not do, nor come
near my Condition. Next Day I went to Swannington in Leicestershire, and there
was a fine Body of Friends again, and I had not sat long, before I felt, as I
to ought, as good an Authority to preach as ever, and stood up, not doubting an
open, satisfactory Meeting: But I had not stood above fifteen, if so many,
Minutes, until all was shut up, and it seemed as though both the Sun and Air
were darkened. I sat down under a great Cloud, to think what I should d^,
appealing to God, as having no ill Design, but much otherwise, and earnestly in
secret desiring Help; and immediately, as though a Voice had spoken
intelligibly Thou runs, and God has not sent thee; thou speaks, but God don't
speak by thee; therefore thou shall not profit the People. It may be thought I
was bad before, but much worse now, I being under the very H^ur^ and Power of
Death and Darkness, being at my Wits-end what to do; and under this great
Temptation diverse Ways presented such as my turning myself out of the Line of
Friends, which I found would be somewhat hard to do, by reason I always had a
Guide from one Place to another: Then to turn Home again, and by that Method I
might get rid of Friends as Guides, and make the best of my Way to some Port in
Ireland, sell my Horse, and get Work (where I was not known) at my Trade: But
then the Honor of the Monthly Meeting, that had given me so good a
Certificate, would be affected by my so doing: And having considered of sundry
Ways to take, at last this presented, to make away with myself in some River or
Pond, as though it had been an Accident, and this would cover all. Thus for a
Time I was bewildered, not seeing where I was; but since it plainly appeared I
was under the Influence of the Spirit of Antichrist. Thus begging heartily for
Help, I fell on my Knees, and prayed with that Fervency, that few under the
Roof but were melted into Tears, and it was such a Time as I never had before
nor since in Prayer, as I remember: Thus that Meeting ended. Next I went to a
Town called Hinckley, and there was a considerable Number of Friends and other
People; I was extremely low and poor, but had a comfortable Meeting, that much
healed me, and set me to rights again.

Then I visited Leicestershire pretty generally, and there was a Woman of some
Account (her Name was Jemimah Mountney) who was convinced, and she was with me
at sundry Meetings, and was exceeding tender and loving, being thoroughly
reached and satisfied. When we parted, she was so open-hearted that I was
called aside by her, and after having said something to me about her inward
Condition, she offered me some Pieces of Gold, which I told her, I durst not
touch; she very courteously, and with a becoming genteel Mein, told me, she was
both able and willing, and as she had no other Way, that she could show her
Gratitude for that spiritual Good she had received by my Ministry, she could do
no less than that, beseeching that I would receive it, as the true Token of her
Love and Respect. In answer, I said, it was what I never had done, nor could I
now do it, but all the Reward I desired and expected was, that she might
carefully, with a sincere Heart, endeavor that her Obedience did keep pace
with her Knowledge, the hearing of which would much rejoice my Soul: We parted
in great Love and Tenderness. I heard that sundry others were convinced in that
Neighborhood. A very honest Friend, whose Name was Brooks, took great Pains to
get the seeking People to Meeting, and I was very much enlarged in pertinent
Matter, suitable to the States of such seeking Souls.

Out of Leicestershire, being very well rewarded for the Bitterness I suffered
before I came into it (which, as before, was as much as I could bear) I passed
into Warwickshire, and had some good Opportunities in that Country, as at
Warwick and sundry other Places. I found I often hurt myself by speaking too
fast, and too loud, against which I endeavored to guard as much as I could;
but often, when I felt my Heart filled with the Power of divine Love, I was apt
to forget myself and break out; I found it proper therefore to stop, and after
a short Pause, with some secret snort Prayer for Preservation, and that I might
be supplied with Matter and Power, that might do the Hearers good. Thus I went
on, and grew sensibly in Experience and judgment, and became in some small
Degree skilful in dividing of the Word. I had been straightened in my Mind
respecting searching the Scriptures, lest I should thereby be tempted to lean
upon them, and by gathering either Manna or Sticks on the Sabbath Day, Death
would ensue; but at last I had Freedom to examine the Text, and to consider
where the Strength of the Argument lay, both before and after the Words I had
repeated: By which Conduct I saw I was often very defective, in not laying hold
the most suitable Part to confirm the Subject or Matter I was upon, and this
Conduct did me great Service: But then another Difficulty stood in my Way,
which was this; some former Openings would come up, which I durst not meddle
with, lest that by so doing I should become formal, and lose that divine Spring
which I had always depended upon; but the Lord was pleased to show me, that old
Matter, opened in new Life, was always new, and that it was the Renewings of
the Spirit alone which made it new, and that the principal Thing I was to guard
against was, not in my own Will to endeavor to bring in old Opening, without
the Aid of the Spirit; and that if I stood single and resigned to the divine
Will, I should be preserved from all Error of this Nature.

Out of Warwickshire I traveled into Worcestershire, visiting sundry Meetings
in that County, and found a fresh Supply every Day. I was at Worcester on
First Day, and after the Meeting in the Forenoon, an ancient Friend examined me
very closely, after Meeting was over, from whence I came, and for a
Certificate; to all which I gave him Answers: My Certificate being at my
Quarters in my Saddle-bag, he could not then see it; but I had a very good
Meeting as I thought, and my Landlord William (...), a brave sensible Elder,
advised me not to be (...) at the old Friend's examining me so, for said he, he
does so to every Stranger. We went to Meeting in the Afternoon, which was very
large, and I was largely opened, and had, as I thought, very good Service; but
the old Friend, after the Meeting, was upon me in the same Strain to see my
Certificate, but I had it not then about me neither, at which he seemed much
displeased: I made no Reply, but told him, I was very willing he should see it;
but my Landlord took him up, and told him, he thought the young Man had already
shown us his best Certificate in both the Meetings: but nevertheless (said he)
come to my House in the Evening, and thou shall see it: So we parted. My
Landlord thought he had showed himself disagreeable in his Conduct, and fearing
it would be an Uneasiness to me, spoke very tenderly, and like a nursing Father
encouraged me, by saying I could not show him a better Confirmation that I was
anointed for the Ministry, than I had already done. So in the Evening, alter it
was dark, he and many other Friends came; but my Landlord, the old Friend and
I, went aside, and I let him see what he desired so much to see; he read it,
being much pleased with it, and knowing sundry Friends that had signed it,
enquired after them. We went to our Friends again, who were much increased in
Number, and we had a heavenly Season, being thoroughly baptized together: We
parted in great Love and Sweetness, and the old Friend was exceeding kind.

From thence I went into Gloucestershire, and visited Part of that County, by
Tewkesbury to Cheltenham, Gloucester, Payneswick, Nailsworth, and Tedbury. I
had sundry good Opportunities: One young Woman was convinced at Tedbury, that
became a very good Friend.

From thence into Willshire and Hampshire, as far as Ringwood, and to Pool and
Weymouth; called at Wareham and Corfe, had a Meeting at each Place, but nothing
worthy noting at either of them: So I traveled to Bridport, Lyme, Membury,
Chard and Crewkern, and back to Somerton, Puddimore, Masson to a Funeral, and
to Yeovil on First Day; thus having visited Somersetshire, I went away into
Devonshire as far as Exeter; then turned up toward Taunton, taking Meetings in
my Way toward Bristol, but nothing happened of Weight.

I staid in Bristol, and visited Meetings about the City near five Weeks, and
from thence I found my Mind was much drawn to visit Wales, and I took the
Quarterly Meeting of Hereford in my Way, which was held annually at Amelly, and
there I met with my dear Friend Isaac Alexander: We were glad to see each
other, as well as to hear each other, which when we did, it appeared to me that
Isaac was improved considerably, and he said the same of me, observing, that I
preached the practical Doctrine of the Gospel, he thought, more than he did;
for his preaching was very much in Comparisons and Allegories, which he
apprehended was not so plain and easy to the Understandings of the Vulgar, as
what I had to say. We had now an Opportunity of opening our Minds to each
other, which was of great Service to us both, having sundry Meetings together,
and we had Drawings for the Yearly Meeting at Glannedless in Wales: This
Opportunity seemed very agreeable to us; there were sundry Friends of note,
Benjamin, Bangs, and others out of Cheshire; the People came, in Abundance, and
at Times were very rude, but in the main it was a serviceable Meeting. After
that I visited Wales, appointing from the Yearly Meeting sundry Meetings, as
far as was thought proper at once, and a good old Friend, Philip Leonard,
offered to be my Companion, which was of great Service to me. I was very poor
and low at most Meetings in that Journey, by reason but few of the People could
well understand what I said in sundry Places: But Philip stood up after I had
done, and in part interpreted what I had said, but I did not seem to be quite
easy in my Mind.

Isaac went to Bristol Yearly Meeting, and was very zealous against unnecessary
Fashions and Superfluities in both Sexes, insomuch, that some thought he did,
in his Words against them, exceed the Bounds of Modesty: But he might plead the
Example of the Prophet Isaiah in that respect (...). 16 to the E^^.
. But the chief Objection was, concerning his prophesying of a great Mortality,
which the Lord was about to bring as a Judgment upon the People, for their
Pride and Wickedness; which he thought it his Duty to deliver in their
Yearly Meeting as a Warning for all to mind their Ways, le^t being taken
unprepared their L^ts should be irreparable: Which he did in such strong and
positive Terms, that Friends were afraid he was too much exalted in (...) Upon
which some of the Elders thought proper to converse with, and examine him
concerning this extraordinary Message which he had delivered: But what he said
to them, not being satisfactory, they advised him to proceed no farther on his
Journey, but to return Home; which he did under great Trouble, and was there
received in much Love and Tenderness, and appeared in his Gu^ very excellent,
and grew in divine Wisdom and Power, being of great Service in the Ministry
wherever he came. And he having a Concern to (...) the Churches abroad, and
acquainting some of our Elders therewith, they thought it not proper for him to
go, till something was done to satisfy the Friends of Bristol; and upon their
Enquiry of Isaac, he gave them a single and honest Account how it was with him
at that Time respecting his Concern: So Friends took it in hand, and wrote to
Bristol, neither justifying nor condemning him, but recommended Charity and
Tenderness toward him. And from Bristol, Friends answered, that With upon Arms
they could receive him, believing him to be a sincere young Man, who intended
very well; and they were glad he took their Admonition rights, and had owned it
had been of Service to him. Thus ended this Affair, and Isaac said, he could
not think hard of his Brethren in doing what they did, though he could not then
see that he had missed his Way, in delivering that Prophesy: Thus showing forth
a lively Instance of a warm Zeal, tempered with a due Regard to the Sense and
Advice of his Brethren and Elders, and the Under of the Church, which doubtless
tended to his own Comfort and Preservation.

When I heard of it, I look it so much to heart, that it was almost too much
for me, and a Concern came upon me to go to London with the like Message, but
with this Caution; first, to advise with some faithful Brethren before I
delivered it: And I wrote to Isaac to let him know it, which gave him great
Ease. Accordingly I went to London, and got sundry Brethren together, viz.
James Dickinson, J. B^^^dead, Peter Fearon, B. Bangs, Robert Hardock, and some
others, and give them a plain and honest Amount how it came upon me, which was
not till after I heard how my dear Companion was returned Home from Bristol;
adding, that I had acquainted Isaac how it was with me, that he might know my
Sympathy with him, The Friends seeing what he had wrote, found there was a
strong Sympathy between us, and very justly supposed, that to be the moving, if
not only, Cause of the Concern I was under, and very tenderly advised me to
keep it in my own Breast, till I found how the Lord would order it; for, if he
was the Author, I should find more of it; if not, it would die of course: But
if I found it grew upon me, I should let any of them know it, and they would
consider what Steps to take in a Matter of so great Consequence, as going forth
in a Prophesy of that Nature. And the fatherly Kindness they showed me was very
affecting to me, one or other of them making it their Business to visit me
every Day; and, as they said, I found the Concern went off, and I became easy
without publishing it.

After this I had diverse very acceptable Opportunities in London, during the
Time of the Yearly Meeting, and afterward visited Friends toward Leeds in
Yorkshire, and in my Way thither had very agreeable Service in both the
Counties of Leicester and Nottingham, and at sundry other Places.

From Leeds I went to the Yearly Meeting at York, which was very large, and
many public Friends; but I was hid, as it were, and made very little Appearance
at that Meeting.

From thence I traveled homewards, visiting Friends as I went, and was gladly
received by them. And I found my Ministry very acceptable; as it increased upon
me, I was very humble and low in Mind, knowing therein my Strength consisted,
and Safety from Temptation.

I was new in a Strait, what Course to take to get a little Money; my Linen and
Woolen both wanting to be repaired, I met with a young Man newly set up in his
Trade, with whom I proposed to work, and he was ready to comply with my Offer,
supposing it would be a Means to improve him: So we agreed, and I begun with
him, and found it answered much better than Harvest-work, so that I stored
myself with a little Cash soon, and worked hard all that Summer, and in the
Fall of the Year prepared myself for a Journey with my good old Friend Joseph
Baines.

We set out the latter End of the Sixth Month, and visited some Parts of
Yorkshire, and so into Lincolnshire, Suffolk and Norfolk, and we did very well
together; only I was afraid, that Friends took so much Notice of me, he would
be uneasy; but he was so entirely innocent, and had so much of the Lamb in him,
that he never did, that I could find, show any Uneasiness, more than to give me
a Caution with a Smile; Sammy, said he, (for I was mostly called so) thou had
need take care, Friends admire thee so much, thou do not grow proud; and
indeed the Caution was very seasonable, as well as serviceable to me; which I
saw and did acknowledge. This Joseph was (it might be said) an Israelite
indeed, as meek as a Lamb, not great in the Ministry, but very acceptable,
especially amongst other People, having a meek, quiet, easy Delivery, mostly in
Scripture Phrases, with which he was well furnished, repeating them with very
little or no Comment upon them, which some admired very much; and he had great
Service at Funerals, being in a peculiar Manner qualified for such Services:
But he receiving an Account of some Troubles in his Family, it brought a very
great Uneasiness upon him and he returned Home. But I visited most of the
Meetings over again, and so I returned into Huntingtonshire, Northamptonshire,
and so toward Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire, visiting Meetings as I went
through Part of Oxfordshire. I had many Meetings, sometimes fourteen in a Week,
and generally to Satisfaction. In almost every Parish where a Friend lived, we
had a Meeting, besides which sundry offered their Houses, who were not Friends,
which we embraced. I came through Part of Hampshire and Warwickshire, and to
back again to Hampshire, visiting Friends, and had many Meetings in Places
where none had been, and the People were much inclined, who were not Friends,
to have Meetings at their Houses in many Places, and would desire Friends to
conduct me to their Houses: So that although I was entirely unknown to most,
yet there was very great Willingness to receive the Doctrine of Christ; and
sundry, I found afterward, were convinced, by Accounts I received from
Friends. The Teachers of the national Way, and Dissenters also, were much
disturbed, and threatened what they would do, and that they would come and
dispute; and some of them came several Times, and got out of Sight, where they
could hear and not be seen; but never any gave me the least Disturbance all
that Journey; but some would say I was a Cheat (viz.) a Jesuit in disguise;
others, that I was brought up for the Pulpit, and for some Misdemeanor
suspended; and so they varied, according to their Imaginations: But I was very
easy in my Service, and found my Heart very much enlarged; some of the People
took me to have a good Share of Learning, which, although it was false, served
for a Defense against some busy Fellows, who thought they could dispute about
Religion and Doctrine, which I always endeavored to avoid as much as possible,
seldom finding any Advantage by such Work, but that it mostly ended in
cavilling, and a Strife of Words.

I went through Part of Dorsetshire, and at Sherborne an old Friend was sick,
and expected to get over that Illness, and it came into my Mind he would die of
that Sickness, and that I must be at his Funeral, and preach with my B^ in my
Hand. This made me shrink, as fearing it was the Fruit of imagination, but I
kept it to myself, and had many Meetings about those Parts, as at Yeavik,
Puddimore, Masson, We^on, etc. Besides this, a young Woman, which afterward
became my Wife, had strong hold of my Affections, and I had acquainted her
Parents therewith, and had Liberty from them to lay it before their Daughter,
which I did; although at the same Tune it was upon me to visit America before I
entered into the State of Wedlock, which I also gave her to understand; for I
had reasoned in my own Mind, that it might be better to let it rest until my
Return, if I lived; but in answer to that, thus it appeared, that I might have
some offers there that might be a Snare to me, and by this prior Engagement I
might be freed from all Temptations or Offers of that kind; for if it once was
known there, that I was already engaged, even that would command Silence on
that Account; so on this Consideration I made my Suit to her, who received it
with such Modesty and Sweetness as was very engaging and obliging to me: But
she had an Uncle, on whom she had some Dependence, who seemed much averse to
it, and would have his Niece left at Liberty, that if any Thing offered in my
Absence she might embrace it; Which I very readily complied with; then he was
pleased, only he would have me leave it under my Hand, which also I was very
ready to do; and more, that is, to stand bound myself, and leave her at
Liberty: To which she objected, as unreasonable on her Part to desire such a
Thing from me. So we parted, and I went to Street, Glastonbury, Burnham,
Sidcoat, Clareham, and Bristol, having let slip out of my Memory the old
Friend's Sickness at Sherborne; but I had not been many Hours in Bristol before
a Messenger came to desire Benjamin Cool to attend the Funeral, and Benjamin
came to me to Brice Webb's, where I lodged, and told me how it was, and desired
me to go; but I pleaded sundry Excuses, first, my Horse was not fit, with other
Objections, which were all removed. And accordingly I went to Bruton next Day,
being the Seventh-day of the Week, and was at that small Meeting on First Day.
The Funeral was on Second-day, which was exceeding large. John Beer from
Weymouth being there, had something to say, but not much: Then, as it was with
me, I pulled my Bible out of my Pocket, and opened it; upon which the People
gave most Attention than they had done before, and I had a very acceptable
Time, often in the Course of my Matter referring to the Text for Proof, and
giving an ample Testimony of the Value We put upon the Scriptures, earnestly
pressing the careful reading of them, and advising to consider what they read,
and to seek the Lord, by Prayer, for Assistance and Power, that they might
practice what they read, which was the ultimate End of reading, as well as the
hearing of Preaching, for without Practice, it would avail but little; with
other Advice to the same Effect. And there being sundry Teachers of several
Societies, one of them a Baptist, took hold of me after Meeting was ended, and
desired some Conversation with me: I looked at him earnestly, and desired to
know if he had any Objection against any Part of what I had said? if thou have,
said I, (speaking with an audible Voice, that stopped many of the Company) this
is the most proper Place, the People being present; for they thronged about us
very much: This made him confess, that what he had heard was sound, and
according to Scripture, being very well proved from the Text; but he desired
some private Discourse between ourselves at my Quarters, if I would permit it.
I told him he might, I quartered at Richard Fry's; and Richard being present,
told him he should be welcome to come to his House, and so we parted: And when
I came to Richard's, he said, we should hear no more of him, for that he had in
his Discourses amongst his Hearers, spoken many very unhandsome Things against
the Quakers, endeavoring to unchristian them, and prove them Heathens in
denying the Ordinances: (A common Plea used by all our Adversaries) But this
Upstart carried the Matter farther than some others did, by adding, that we
denied the Scriptures, and also would not allow of a Bible in any of our
Meetings, nor did our Preachers ever use a Bible to prove any thing there from,
that we preached to the People; (with more to the same Purport) and as many of
his Hearers were there, my appearing with a Bible, and so often referring to
the Text for Proof, did no doubt put him and them also upon a Thought, what had
been preached before by him, amongst them, concerning the Quakers, which now
appeared to be a manifest Untruth by what they had both seen and heard that
Day: However, to be short, as Richard Fry thought, so it proved; for he did not
come at all near me, and so that went off well, and Truth was exalted above
Lies and Falsehood.

I returned back to Bristol well contented, being filled with Peace and
Consolation. At my return I gave my Friends Benjamin Cook, and some others, a
Relation of my Conduct, and Benjamin was much pleased I went there, and
repealed what he had said before to persuade me to go, adding, he was pretty
much assured it was my Place to go; but that if he had known how it came into
my Mind to preach with the Book in my Hand, although in the Sequel it proved
right, yet he should have been afraid that more of Imagination than Revelation
was in it; therefore that would rather have backened him, than have been any
Argument for him to have pressed my going so much as he did, by reason that he
had found some Mistakes committed from such Sights, which proved to be but
Imaginations: And he gave me very suitable Advice, to take care how I too
easily embraced such Things for Truth, without a due Trial, and that it was not
displeasing to Heaven, to try the Spirit from whence such Things proceeded.

I staid in and about Bristol three Weeks, Visiting the Meetings round the
City, but on First-days I was mostly in the City, and it being the Winter Fair,
Meetings were very large: But on the Third-day Meeting in the Fair Week, there
was a Man out of Wiltshire, a Separate, named Arthur Ismead, who stood up to
preach, and was speaking of the Light: He put forth a Question about bringing
our Deeds to the Light; adding, do I bring my Deeds to the Light? A worthy
Elder, named Charles Harford, answered, No, thou dest not: If thou did, thou
would not do as thou do. I sat all this Time under a very great Concern,
and the Word was in me like Fire; so I stood up, and with a strong and powerful
Voice began to preach, he crying out, that he had not done; but I took no
Account of that, but went on, and he soon sat down and fell asleep, and we had
a blessed edifying Meeting that Day, and Truth was exalted above Error. After
this Meeting I was clear of the City, and visited some Parts of Glocestershire,
Worcestershire, Darbyshire, Cheshire and Lancashire, but nothing happened
worthy of any great note, save only, in many Places I had very large open quiet
Meetings, and when I found myself very high and full, I then expected low Times
again, for I but very seldom was drawn forth in Doctrine, and enlarged more
than common, but Maplebeck would come in my Way, and the uncommon Temptation
and Trial I underwent after that Meeting, which did not arrive to its Height
until I came to Swannington in Leicestershire, as is before hinted. I reached
Home about the latter End of the First Month, and staid with my dear Friend
Robert Chambers Part of that Summer, helping him and his Brother-in-Law John
Moore at Gale, mowing more Days this Year than I ever did in one before. But
John Bowstead and Peter Fearon had a Meeting appointed for them at a Place
called Goose-green, between Kendal and Millthrop, to which Meeting there was a
very great Resort; and being desired to attend it, I did, and in the Beginning
of the Meeting I spoke something of the universal Love of God to Mankind. After
which a Friend went on with the same Subject, and inferred from the Text
something more than it would bear, so that a young Man who taught School at
Beatham, (a small Parish in that Neighborhood) took him up after the Meeting
was over, and having the Advantage of the Argument, did endeavor to bear the
Friend down. I was with some others gone to see the Horses got ready for our
Return, but being called, got with Difficulty into the House, which was much
crowded, (the Meeting being held in the open Ground without the House) and when
got in and heard them, I soon found where the Pinch was; the Friend had said
what the Text would not bear him out in, in quoting Obadiah the 10th Verse,
compared with Romans the 9th Chapter and 11th Verse: I observed that he went
too far in Expression, when I heard it, and repeating the Words more than
twice, the young Man had them very plain. I waited some Time, and then desired
Liberty of the young Man to ask him a Question, the answering of which might
bring the Argument to a Point; adding, not that I thought myself so capable to
maintain that Argument as my Friend wa^ He gave gave my (...), and my Question
was, Whether he (...) W^on and Mercy, (...) as by his Argument they (...) of,
which because of that (...) He seen very frankly gave Answer, He did not (...)
it. I then asked him, Why (...) argued against his own Faith and Judgment For
although he took Advantage of my Friend's Words, not being so well guarded as
they might have been, yet that was no just Ground to argue against his own
Judgment. And thus this Arguments drops, and then he took up Baptism, But (...)
finding himself not able to support what he undertook t^ prove by the Text,
viz. Infant Baptism he confessed that he was not qualified to maintain his
Argument, and therefore requested that we would favor him to confer on that
Subject on Wednesday next, in the Room where he taught School, with the
Minister of their Parish; withal adding, it might be of Service both to him and
others. My Friends were very much for it, and I was not against it provided
they would go and assist: For I looked on myself very unequal to such a Task as
this was like to be. However, after some Discourse betwixt ourselves. I
consented, on Condition that (...) the Schoolmaster of Kendal would be my
Second, he being well acquainted with, and understanding both the Greek and
Latin Testament, might help me against being imposed upon by any false Gloss or
Interpretation put upon the Text to prove their Argument: (...) told the young
Man we would endeavor to answer his Request, by being with him on Fourth-day
by Nine in the Meaning, he was glad to he discharged for the present, for I had
not seen one went more freely than he did, being in a very great Agony, he
could not forbear thanking as he stood by the Table: And thus we parted for
this Time very good Friends. But I grew uneasy fearing have it would End, and
blamed my Friends for bringing me into this Scrape, and not assisting in (...)
but (...) me to dispute with I knew not who, but all I got was, that they
doubted not but I would be assisted to come off well, of which I was very
(...), and it hindered me of some House Set up.

When the Time come, my Friend John Jepson, and two more were with me; we come
pretty early, rather before than after the Time appointed; and the young Man
had got (...) Room, and two Elbow-Chairs ready, for the Parson and myself, but
I was not willing to sit in either, being (...) than Friend Jepson, but to
avoid Words about it, I sat down in one; the young Man (...) the Parson we were
come, and he came to us, scraping and bowing, and the (...) we (...), because
he saw we did not answer him in the same Way. After he sat down, previous to
what we met about, he would needs have it, that I challenged a Dispute with
him; to which I could not agree: But referring myself to the young Man, I
desired that he would inform his Neighbor of the true Cause of our coming
there; which he did very handsomely, to the Effect following in very decent
Language, viz. Sir, Meeting last Sabbath Day with this Gentleman, we fell into
a Conference about Infant-(...), supposing that I was able from Scripture to
prove that Practice; but on Trial, finding myself (...) able to hold the
Argument, shut it up: Therefore being persuaded, and believing you, Sir, to be
intimately more able to defend the Practice of our Church, than I was, I
desired this Gentleman to favor me to much, as to come and confer with you,
Sir, on this Subject, in my hearing, that I might have this Matter set in a
true Light; and I beg your Pardon, Sir, hoping that this modest Request to the
Gentleman is not offensive to you, and I will assure you, it is a great
Pleasure to me. Thus having made his Apology, the Priest being a hasty
passionate Man, began; You Quakers are not fit to be disputed with, because
that you deny the Scriptures, the Ordinances of Baptism, and the Supper of our
Lord.

I addressed myself to the young Man, to inform the Parson that Infant Baptism
(...) called) was the present Point to be considered; which he did in few
Words, and very well, but it was to no Purpose: The Priest would go on in his
own Way, calling us Her^cks, Schls^cks, Heathens, and what not, bestowing
freely such Reflections upon us as came into his Head; and having gone on in
this rambling Way for some Time with his unbecoming Language, I requested, that
he would hear me without Interruption as I had him; and then I put him in Mind
of his old Age, (he having a comely Personage, and fine white Locks) and that
he had more Experience, it might with Reason be supposed, than we young Men
had; and supposing that thou may be right, and that may be in Error, yet
(...) this, in my Opinion, thou must be wrong in thy Conduct toward us, in
being so liberal to give us hard Names, and show no Reason for thy to doing.
Here I was broke in upon with a kind of Violence, That all the Disciples and
Apostles had a Commission to teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
Father, Son and Holy G^^d. Do you confute this or own it? I urged, No water is
named in that Text; and besides, that Text should be rendered, into the Name of
the Father, Son, etc.

Here the young Man, and my Friend Jopson, searched both the Latin and Greek,
agreeing that it was more proper to render it into the Name, than in the Name,
etc. Then, if that was right, as it was my Opinion it was, it was plain to me,
that the Materials of that Baptism could not be elementary Water, therefore I
could see nothing in this Text to prove the Practice of sprinkling Infants, or
Infant Baptism. Here I war interrupted with great Warmth again: The Parson
urging, that the Disciples, primitive Ministers, and Apostles, all had a
Commission in Matthew xxviii. which by Succession was to continue to the End of
the World; and this Baptism was with Water, for the Apostles could not baptize
with the Holy Ghost. In Answer I said, When Peter, at the House of Cornelius,
Acts xi. 15.
began to speak, (as appears by his own Account) the Holy Ghost fell on them,
as on us at the Beginning, said Peter; from which it is plain, that Teaching by
Direction of the Spirit being prior to Baptism the Baptism of the Holy Ghost
was the Consequence of such Teaching. But this did not please the Parson; but
he in Answer said. Thus undoubtedly the Commission in Mat. xxviii. was Water,
it could be nothing else: What are you wiser than all our (...), who have
understood, ever (...) the first Ministers, this Text to mean no other but
Water? accordingly we have so Practiced. I queried, if he thought the Text
meant outward elementary Water: He said, he did. I desired to know his Reason
for so believing. He answered, The Practice of the Apostles in pursuance of
that Commission which all had. I then queried, if he thought Paul, was included
in that Commission? He granted that he was, and by Virtue of his Commission be
baptized many. But I desired they would turn to the Text, 1 Cor. 1. 17. where
the Apostle plainly says, Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel; and in the foregoing Verses he thanks God, he baptized no more, etc.
Besides, allowing that they did baptize with (or more properly in) Water, yet
this argues nothing in proof of sprinkling, nor is there any, either Precept or
Precedent for it, in all the Bible. At this the Parson stood up in a Passion,
told us we were no Christians, nor fit to be conversed with as such, and left
us in a Rage without any Ceremony.

Now the young Man acknowledged, that the Minister (as he styled him) was not
able to defend his own Practice from Scripture, and desired that we would lend
him some Books treating on that Subject, and others, in which we differed from
them and other Dissenters in Point of Religion. We agreed to let him have W.
Penn's Key, R. Barclay's Apology, and some others, upon applying himself for
them to John Jepson, his Brothen Schoolmaster. He was thoroughly convinced,
and likely to make a good Man; he had several Enemies, amongst which the Parson
was not the least: But he shortly after this sickened and died.

And now to return; I was very diligent in following the Harvest Work, both at
mowing and reaping, and diligently observing my Gift, to attend such Meetings
as I was inclined to; and I found I grew in my Gift, that I could see and
discern myself: But then I would check myself for such Thoughts, seeing them by
no means proper to have a Place in my Heart, left that Humility, which is the
Ornament of every Gospel Minister, should be departed from thorough Self-Love
and Conceit, by which I might be brought to have a better Opinion of myself
than any of my Neighbors had; which, if given way to, would eat out all that
Respect that my Brethren and the Church had for me; and by this foolish Pride
and Conceit, the Hearts of Friends would be shut against me, and I should lose
my Place and Interest in them.

Now I had but one Journey more to make into Scotland, before my going, (or at
least intending to go) into America, of which in its Place.

An ACCOUNT of my JOURNEY into Scotland, in the WORK of the MINISTRY, begun the
11th of the Eighth Month 1701.
I Had for my Companion in this Journey, a young Man who had a fine Gift, his
Name was Isaac Thompson: We visited sundry Meetings in our Way to Carlisle,
finding our Understandings much enlarged in the Openings of divine Truths, and
our Service grew upon us, and we went on with Boldness and cheerful Minds,
meeting in our Way with our dear and worthy Friend James Dickenson. who was
intending a Visit into Ireland: And in our Journey from the Border to Dumfries,
we had very profitable Conversation of good Service to us both, because we, by
reason of Youth, and want of Experience, were often very weak, and doubting
whether we were right or not in the Work; so that this our dear Friend, by his
tender and fatherly Care over us, and Advice to us, was of great Encouragement,
in letting us know how weak and poor he often found himself; which so much
answered my Condition, that it was as Marrow to my Bones. When we came to
Dumfries, after we had taken some Refreshment at our Inn, James said to us,
Lads, I find a Concern to go into the Street, will you go with me? For he
thought it might only be to show himself, and was desirous that we might go all
together, being five in Number: so we walked forth, and the Inhabitants gazed
upon us, for the Quakers were seldom seen in that Town so many together; and
several came after us, and James lifted up his Voice like a Trumpet among the
People, who were very quiet and attentive. When he was clear, we retired back
to our Inn, and diverse followed us, who were very rude and wicked, but were not
permitted to hurt us. We had sweet Comfort and Refreshment one in another at
our Quarters. Next Morning we took Leave, and parted, he went for Port-patrick,
and we visited the Meetings, though very small, until we came to Hamilton,
where we were finely refreshed with a small Handfulof living Friends; and so to
Glosgow, where the People were rude, but something better than in Times past,
not being so uncivil to us in the Streets; thence to Kinneel, Lithgew, and so
over the Water on our Journey Northward, taking Boroughstowness and Ury in our
Way to Aberdeen Quarterly Meeting, where we found Friend; in a sweet Frame of
Spirit, being in dear Unity one with another. We had sundry Meetings with them
to our good Satisfaction, and had some other Meetings farther North, as at
Inverary, Killmuke, Aworthies, etc. Then back to Ury by Aberdeen, taking our
Journey to Edinburgh, visiting the small Meetings, and some other Places we
inclined to visit in our Way thither; we had but one little Meeting there, and
then went for Kelso, where we staid with them two Meeting on the First Day of
the Week, and in the Evening Friends there laid before us the Desire they had
for our going to Jedburgh, a Town about seven Miles from them, and not much out
of our Way to England: We considered the Matter, but not the Exercise that
might attend us in going there; so next morning we went, and when we came to
the Town, (Samuel Reason being our Guide) the Landlord at the Inn would not
give us Entertainment; but we went to another (...) the Landlord took us in,
withal telling us, how indecently the Minister had raised against the Quakers
the Day before, asserting they were the Dev^'s (...), and that by his
Assistance they did in their Proceeding what was done, with very many vile
Words; but observing one of his Hearers taking what he said in shorthand, he
called out, charging him not to write what he spoke at random against the
Quakers; with much more to the same Effect. However, we called for some
Refreshment, but my Mind was under so much Concern, I could neither ear nor
drink: We called to pay for what we had, and we gave the Landlord Charge of our
Horses and Bags, whereby he suspected that we were going to preach: he took me
by the Hand, and begged that we would not go into the Street, but preach in his
House, and he would have his Family together, and they would hear us. I looked
steadily upon the poor Man, who trembled very much, telling him, we thought it
our Place and Duty to preach to the Inhabitants of the Town; and think thou
(said I to him) we shall be clear in the Sight of God (whom we both fear and
serve) by preaching to thee and thy Family, what we are required to preach to
the People in the Town? The poor Man I found was smitten in himself, and his
Countenance altered greatly, but he made this Reply; Is this the Case, Sir? I
said it was. Then, said he, go, and God preserve and bless you; but I fear the
Mob will pull down my House for letting you have Entertainment, and kill you
for your good Will. I bid him not fear; for he whom we served was above the
Devil, and that not a Hair of our Heads should be hurt without his Permission.
He then seemed pacified to let us go, and followed at a Distance to see our
Treatment.

The chief Street was very broad, with a considerable Ascent, and near the Head
of the Ascent was a Place made to cry Things on, to which we then walked, where
we paused a little, but I had nothing to do there at that Time; returning back
to the Market-cross, which was at the Foot of the Hill, for that had an Ascent
of three or four Steps, and a Place to sit on at the Top, where we sat down;
but we had not sat long before a Man came to us with a Bunch of large Keys in
his Hand, and took me by the Hand and said, I must go into the Tal^oth,
(meaning the Prison) I asked him, for what? He said, for Preaching. I told him,
we had not preached. Ay! but quoth he, the Provost (meaning the Mayor) has
ordered me to put you in the Telbooth. For what? I again replied. I tell you
for Preaching. I told him, I did not know whether we should preach or not; but
it was soon enough to make Prisoners of us when we did preach. Ay! says he, I
ken very weel that you will preach by your Lords. Thus we argued the Matter, he
endeavoring to pull me up, and I to keep my Place, and when he found I was not
easily moved, he turned to my Companion, who likewise was unwilling to be
confined, and then he went to Samuel Robinson, our Guide, who was easily
prevailed on to go; and the easier, for that he had been there but the Week
before with two Friends, viz. John Thomson and Thomas Brathwaite, both of our
County of Westmoreland. By this Time we had a large Assembly, and Samuel
Robinson supposing we should have a better Convenience to preach to them in the
Prison, as the Friends aforementioned had the Week before, we were conducted
there, just by the Cross where we held the Parley, and put in at the Door: But
Samuel Robinson soon saw his Mistake, for the Week before the Windows of the
Prison were all open, nothing but the Iron Gates in the Way, the Windows being
very large for the sake of Air, but now all made dark, and were strongly
fastened up with Deals. We had been but a short Time there, before a Messenger
came to offer us Liberty, on Condition we would depart the Town without
preaching; but we could make no such Agreement with them, and so we told the
Messenger. A little after he was gone, I wrote the following Lines to the
Provost.

IT is in my Mind to write these few Lines to thee, the Provost of this Town of
Jedburgh, to let thee understand that our coming within thy Liberties, is not
to disturb the Peace of your Town, nor to preach false Doctrine or Heresy (as
is by your Teachers maliciously suggested, whose Interest it is, as they
suppose, to make the People believe it) but in Obedience to our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose Servants we are, for he has bought us with his most precious
Blood; and (...) are no more our own, but h^^ that has brought us, whose Power
is an unlimited Power, and all Power is limited by him, so his Power is not to
be limited by any other Power; therefore we his Servants dare not limit
ourselves, or promise any Man we will do this, or we will do that, but commit
our Cause to him, as his (the Lords) Servants did of old, knowing that if we
please him he can deliver us, but if not, we can make no Promise to any Man on
this Account, because we ourselves know not what he has for us to do; and
therefore we endeavor to stand clear from all Engagements, ready to do what he
requires at our Hands. But I must tell thee, that the Manner of our
Imprisonment looks very rigid and uncommon in these Time of Liberty, so far
below a Christian, that it is hardly humane, that we should be here detained as
Evildoers, before we are examined, or any Breach of Law appears against us.
Does your Scotch Law judge a Man being it hears him? if so, it is very unjust
indeed, and looks very hard, that the King's Subjects may not have the Liberty
to walk in your Streets as elsewhere, which was all we did, besides sitting
down on the Market-cross in a thoughtful Sense of our Duty to God, not openings
our Mouths but to him that violently forced us into Confinement; nor do we know
that we should have spoken to the People in a Way of Preaching at all: But that
is the Work of our Master, and we must wait his Will and Time, to know both
when and how to do it, therefore if thou think to keep us until we promise
thee or any of thy Officers not to preach in your Streets, it will be long that
we must abide here: Therefore I desire thee to take the Matter into a Christian
Consideration, to do as thou would be done unto, and give thyself Liberty to
think for what End the Magistrate's Sword is put into thy Hand, that thou may
use it right, least thou should be found one of those that turn Justice
backwards, so that Equity cannot enter. This is from one that wishes thy
Welfare and Salvation,

SAMUEL BOWNAS.
JEOBURGH Tolbooth, the 18th of the Ninth Month, 1-01.

When I had writ this, it was very hard to persuade my one to carry it to the
Provost, for now they were so affrighted about having any Thing to say or do
with us, that they durst not appear to talk with us; and whether he had it or
not, I cannot be cerain.

The next Day there was a Country Gentleman came into the Town, and sent his
Servant to invite us to his House; to which we replied, We knew not yet, when
we should have our Liberty; but desired our Thanks might be returned to his
Master, for that kind Invitation: He replied, we should soon be at Liberty, for
his Master was gone to the Provost; knowing they had no Pretense to keep us
there. Accordingly in less than two Hours after, we were set at Liberty, and
went to our Inn to refresh ourselves. The Town was very full of Country People,
it being Market Day, and we went to the Market-cross, which was so much
surrounded with People selling their Ware, that there was no Room for us,
without great Damage to them: We therefore, after a short Pause, walked up the
Street to the Place before-named, and the Street and Balconies being filled
with People, with the Sashes and Casements open, and crowded with Spectators,
some computed the Number to be above 5000, but such Guesses at Numbers are
uncertain: But there I stood up (being above the People, both by the Advantage
of the Ground, and the Place where I stood) and opened my Mouth, being full of
the Power and Spirit of Grace, saying, Fear the Lord and keep his Commandments,
who by his Servant said, I will put my Laws in their Minds, and write them in
their Hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.
Now if you be obedient to this Law, you will do well, and thereby become the
People of God; but if disobedient, you will lie under his Wrath and Judgments.
With more, distinguishing between the Happiness of them that obeyed, and the
Unhappiness of the Disobedient. Then I stepped down, in Expectation that my
Companion might say somewhat, but he was willing to be gone; and I was
concerned to step up again, and kneeling down, was fervently drawn forth in
Prayer, but after I had begun, two Men came and took me by the Arms, and led me
down the Street praying, and by the Time we came at the Foot of the Ascent, I
had done praying: After which I took a View of the People, who showed great
Respect indeed, but I was conveyed to thy Prison Door, where was a Centry of
two Soldiers, who stood by and heard what I said to the Officers that brought
me there, which was to this Effect: That the Day before I was forced in there
against my Will, and contrary to Law, but that I would not now go there again,
without first being examined by the Provost, or by their Priest and Elders of
their Church, or other chief Officers in the Town, and i^ men any Thing did
appear that I had broken any Law, or done ought worthy of Imprisonment, having
a Mittimus setting forth my Crime, I would willingly suffer, and not refuse
going there; but without such an Examination I refused to go there again,
unless forced to it by Violence, and that, I hoped they would not be guilty o^.
At which one of the Soldiers, taking his Musket by the small End, advancing the
Butt, said, his Countryman had spoken right, and what he said was according to
Law and Justice, and ought to be observed as such; and therefore if you will
(said he) take him before the Provost in order for Examination, you may; but if
not, ^^uch him that dare. At this ^old Attempt and Speech they both left me,
and I was advanced above the People about six or seven Steps, and turning about
to them, there being a little Square before the Door, surrounded with the Guard
Chamber on one Side, the Tolbooth on the other, and a Wall facing the Street
about four Feet high, I had a very good Opportunity to speak to them, which I
did, about a Quarter or near Half an Hour, and they were very quiet and civil.
When I had done, and acknowledged the Soldier's Kindness and Civility toward
me, who said, it was his Duty to do it, I came down the Steps, the People
crowding very close to see as well as hear me, but they divided soon, making a
Lane for my Passage, showing me considerable Respect in their Way: Some said,
You have dung them, Sir, you have dung them, Sir, meaning thereby I had got the
Victory. All was very quiet, save that one or more would have forced a Ho^^e
over us, but was prevented by the rest: Not the least Unhandsomeness appeared,
save that amongst them. Retiring to our Inn I was full of Peace and Comfort.

By this Time the Day was much spent, and concluding to stay that Night, we
ordered some Refreshment to be got for us, for I found myself in want of it: It
was soon got ready, and we invited our Host to share with us, who willingly
did, the showing his good liking to what had been said; adding, he never saw
the People so struck, and give so good Attention; nor ever did he see so large
a Multitude that heard all so intelligibly down to the very Foot of the Hill,
which was, as he supposed, not much less than Two Hundred Yards in length, and
I took, by Computation, the Street to be upwards of Thirty Yards wide, and all
that Space much crowded. I gave him a Hint of his Fear, putting him in Mind
that our Duty, in preaching to that Multitude, could not possibly be discharged
by preaching to him and his Family, and he acknowledged it was right in us to
do as we did.

By this Time the Evening closed in, and sundry Gentlemen sent Word that they
would gladly pay us a Visit, if we would permit it, and the Landlord, I saw,
earnestly desired that we would, and he had a very large Room, into which we
went, and they soon came to us, and quickly fell into Conversation (for they
are very full of Talk about Religion, and very tenacious in their Opinions upon
it.) The first Article of Dispute was, about the Rule of Faith and Practice;
and this was argued ( pro and con) between them and our Guide Samuel Robinson,
near Half an Hour, who was a very sensible religious young Man, and had a good
Share of Learning also; but I found they made nothing of it. Our Opponents
would endeavor, in their Way, to make out the Scriptures to be the only Rule
of Faith, and that the Spirit we professed to be guided by, must be subordinate
to the Text. I hitherto had said nothing, but now desiring a few Words by way
of Question, the answering of which might bring this Dispute to a Point; I
thought not, said I, that I should take the Argument from my Friend Robinson,
whom I take to be more capable to support it than I am. All were very willing
to hear me; then I began to state the Difference between us, thus: We all
agree, said I, that the Scriptures is a Rule of Faith and Practice: Do we not?
this was granted. The Difference lies here then, if I take it right, we say
it is a Rule; you say, it is the only Rule; this is the Point in Dispute, is it
not? this was likewise granted me. Then I proceeded thus: Allowing what you say
to be true, it must be considered, that all instrumental Rules are made,
whether they relate to spiritual or temporal Affairs, and must be contrived and
adapted to answer the End for which they are made. This was allowed also. And
as the Text is a Rule made, contrived and adapted for spiritual Affairs, who
made it so? since the Text could not make itself. Here was a long Pause; at
last one replied, Holy Men writ as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Here was
a Pause again; And, said I, is this your Mind? It Is the plain Words of the
Text, said another: Granting this; then it must by your Accession be allowed,
that the Spirit gave forth or made the Scriptures, by the Medium of holy Men;
therefore the Spirit gave forth the Text: Now judge you, whether a Rule made,
or the Author that made that Rule, be subordinate? There was a Pause for a
little while, and one of the Company said, You are dung, you are dung, (meaning
they had lost the Victory) the Scriptures must be subordinate to the Spirit
that gave them forth. I replied thus, We believe concerning the Text, that it
is a Rule, and the best external Rule we have; but that the Spirit, which gave
it us by the Medium of holy Men, is the principal Rule of Faith and Practice.
Thus this Debate ended, and they started another about Baptism; but that was
soon ended. Our Friend Robinson was an over Match for them by far, about it.
Then they had a few Words about the Bread and Wine: That held but little Time,
for they allowed these Ceremonies to be external Parts of Religion. Then they
came to Preaching, and stated the Question thus; Our own Teachers, we know how
they come by their Ministry, and by what Authority they preach: (Meaning their
Learning, and the laying on of the Hands, as they term it, of the Presbytery at
their Ordination, etc.) But we want to know, how your Preachers come by their
Ministry? And by what Authority they preach? Here, our Friend reasoned with
them some Time, but they either could not, or would not be convinced with his
Words; so he told the Company plainly, that he never did preach, and therefore
would have it to them that did, to give Account how they came by it themselves.
I was, all the Time that they banded this Affair, under a great Concern,
fearing how we might come off; but when Samuel Robinson had laid the Matter so
justly and fairly at our Door, there was so considerable a Space of Silence,
that they expected nothing from us, but began other Discourse, until I could no
longer withhold; and bespeaking their Silence and Attention, was willing to
relate to them, how I came by my Ministry; at which, they all listened with
close Attention. Then I premised thus, as an Introduction before I came to the
Matter itself, Although in the Thread of my Discourse, something might appear
liable to an Objection, I entreated the Favor of them all to hear me out, by
reason what might say afterward would perhaps solve their Objections, without
giving me or themselves any Interruption. Which, with one Voice, they assented
to, that it was a reasonable and just Request. Then I proceeded as follows,

My Father was a Cordwainer, that lived by his small Trade of making Shoes, who
died before I was a Month old, and left my Mother a small Patrimony to live on
of about Four Pounds a Year, to keep herself, me, and one Son more, who was
about Seven Years old when my Father died.

through, made me enter into Covenant, that if ever the like Offer was made me,
I would give up to the heavenly Vision. The Trouble of my Mind affected my
Countenance so much, that it gave my Master (being of the same Way) Reason to
examine me, how it was? I gave him a candid Account, withal adding, my Fear
that my Offense was so great, I should be rejected as a Castaway: But he
comforted me, with urging various Examples of the like Kind, for my
Encouragement, no way doubting, but that at the next Meeting the same Concern
would come upon me, and to which he advised me to give up, with a sympathizing
Spirit of Love, in various and comfortable Exhortations confirmed by Scripture
Examples: And as he had said, the next Morning, before I had sat there an Hour
and a Half, the same Concern came upon me, which was this; (and I had now to
deliver the same Words with the same Authority as I did when in that Meeting)
Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul: But
rather fear him who is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. I say, Fear
you him who will terribly shake the Earth, that all which is moveable may be
shaken and removed out of the Way; and that which is immovable may stand. This
was the first Appearance, in the Words abovesaid, that I made in public, as a
Preacher: By this Time I found, that the Power of the Gospel was over them, by
their wiping of their Eyes, and I was assisted to go on with Strength of
Argument and Demonstration, further adding, that then I had near three Years of
my Time to serve, which I did with great Faithfulness to my Master; and before
the Time was expired, preaching a little at Times, but not very frequently, yet
to the great Satisfaction of my Brethren, I found a Concern upon me to travel
abroad as a Minister; and I acquainted my Master therewith, who had been as a
Father to me: He told me, Before I went on that Errand I must acquaint the
Elders therewith, and lay it before the Monthly Meeting, (enlarging on the
peculiar End of those Meetings, setting forth the Service thereof, to take Care
of our Poor, and to deal with Offenders who were a Scandal by their ill Conduct
to their Profession, and sundry other Matters cognisable in those Meetings)
that they might judge, whether my Concern was right, and give me a Letter of
Recommendation or Certificate, to signify their Unity and Satisfaction therein:
Which I did accordingly, and with some very suitable Advice to my then present
Infant State as a Minister, they gave me a Certificate or a Letter of
Recommendation, and signed it in the Meeting, as is usual in such Cases: I
accomplished that Journey, and was, at my Return, called upon to give Account
thereof, and to de^^ver up my Certificate.

(...) which, in short Time, I had another Journey before me, and by our
Discipline, or Church Government, was obliged to go to the same Meeting for a
fresh Certificate, which was readily granted; and the Brethren rejoiced at my
Improvement, advising me to render the Honor thereof where due. At my Return,
I was obliged to attend the said Meeting, and give Account of my Travels as
before: This Practice amongst us is judged needful, lest any one should swerve
from their first Foundation, and undertake to preach without a right
Commission, and so impose upon our Friends who know them not.

In a little Time I was concerned to take another Journey, and laid before the
said Meeting my Concern as abovesaid, and had a Certificate. At my Return I
gave Account as before, and delivered my Certificate: After which, I had
another Concern to visit this Nation in this very Journey, and laid my Concern
before the said Meeting, had a Certificate readily granted me (and pulling it
out of my Pocketbook said) and there it is At which, one of them took it, and,
at the Desire of the rest, read it up; and it was returned me with a profound
Silence: So I proceeded to add, that I had visited all that Kingdom, where I
found Drawings in my Spirit to go, and this (so far as I yet see) is the last
Place: And now I must leave you to judge, whether it is not reasonable for you
to conclude, at least that I think myself concerned by an almighty Power, else
how could I have exposed myself to such an unruly Mob as I have preached to
this Day? Here I stopped; and one in the Company asked, if all our Preachers came
by their Ministry this same Way? To which I replied, I could not give Account
how another Man might receive his Ministry, but I have given you a faithful and
candid Account how I received mine.

Here my Companion was full of Matter to relate, by giving them an Account how
he came by his Ministry, but let in a Fear, that what he might add, would hurt
the Cause. One of the Company said, it is enough what we have heard, and so he
was very handsomely excused.

The Night (by the Time this was over) being far spent, it being some Time past
the Middle, a Reckoning was called, and they would not allow us to pay any Part
thereof, but took Leave of us with great Affection; and the Country Gentleman,
that was assisting to our Liberty, gave us a very kind Invitation to his House,
which we received very thankfully; but being engaged in our Minds for England,
had not Freedom to go with him: So we parted in a very loving and friendly
Manner. We being now left to ourselves, I had an Opportunity to reflect on what
had passed, and to examine my whole Conduct all that Day; a Practice I
frequently used, after a more than common Day's Service, and indeed after every
Opportunity of an Enlargement in my Gift, by Experience finding the best
Instructor in my own Bosom, to show where I hit the Matter or missed it: And
considering why I began so low as my Father, setting forth my Manner of
Education and Trade, which seemed to have no Relation to my Call to the
Ministry, I saw the Reason thereof, and found it to be this, that they might
not think my Ministry to have, in the least, any Dependence upon Literature; a
Qualification much depended on for the Work of the Ministry amongst them, and
some of them will not take any Notice of any other Sort; if a Man (for they
will not admit a Woman to have any Part in this Work) be he never ^o divinely
fitted by the Spirit, yet if he want human Learning, it is all nothing with
them. Thus the Wisdom of Truth, which I did not see so plainly at first,
appeared to my Understanding very clearly: And on a close and narrow Inspection
into this Day's Work, I found inward Peace, a Joy spring in my Heart that I
could not set forth by Words. And my Companion had more Ease and true Content
than I feared he could have, by reason of his not coming up in his Service, to
let the Company know how he came by his Ministry, and by what Authority he
preached.

I have been more particular in the Relation of this Day's Work than I
otherwise should have been, as containing in it such signal Marks of
Providence; first, That we should be detained in Hold, just till the People
from the Country were come in. Secondly, and then set at Liberty to say what
the Lord gave us. And Thirdly, That we had so seasonable an Opportunity to
explain our Practice as to the Ministers, viz. the Conduct of the Society
toward them; and likewise the Service of our Monthly-meetings respecting the
Poor, Marriages, admonishing Offenders, making up Differences, granting of
Certificates to such as saw Cause to remove themselves from one Monthly Meeting
to another, as well as to Ministers. Which by their showing so much Kindness,
and raising no Objection to any Thing said on these Heads, did plainly
demonstrate their good liking and Satisfaction therewith.

The next Morning we set out for England, and by the Evening got amongst
Friends in the Border, within the Compass of Sowport Meeting, and had some few
Meetings, as at the Border, Scotby, Carlisle, and some others. I came to my old
Master Samuel Parrot's, having no Place to retire to as a Home, but sometimes I
was at Sedgwick, and sometimes quartered with my Friend Robert Chambers, and
sometimes at Kendal, and at Gateside, at honest William Simpson's, where I did
sometimes help them in their Business, he being a Blacksmith. But I was now
preparing myself for a Journey into America, and was near ready: And I had an
Opportunity to take my Leave of the Neighboring Meetings, as Dent, Garsdale,
Sedburg, Grayrigg, Kendal, Preston, with diverse other Neighboring Meetings
thereabouts; but that at Preston was the most memorable and solid, the Sense
whereof continued with me all over America, at Times; I went thence to Yelland,
and many Friends came to that Meeting from diverse Places to take Leave of me,
so that it was a very large and living Meeting; and I parted with my Brethren
in great Love and Unity. I then came by Wray, Bentham, Settle and Airton, that
great and good Man William Ellis being then living, and full of Power, having
great and solid Experience concerning the Work of the Ministry, who was very
edifying to me, by the wholesome Counsel he gave. James Wilson was then with me,
who was not at that Time a public Minister, yet of great Service in visiting
Families, being closely engaged in Spirit for the maintaining good Order and
Discipline; and we being both very young in those Things, this worthy Friend
gave such Advice to us both, with respect to a faithful coming up in our
Services, that we could with good Reason say, that his Words were like Apples
of Gold in Pictures of Silver; for a long Time after, the Sense and Virtue of
them dwelt on my Mind, to my great Advantage. We stayed with him one Night, and
had a small Meeting, in which the Preference and Value I had for him, together
with an Awe that was on my Spirit concerning his great Services and Experience
as a Minister, took such Place in my Mind, that I was silent before him.

Next Day we took our Leave, and he brought us on our Way a little, heartily
praying at parting, that I might be preserved in my Place, and return with
Safety.

James Wilson came with me as far as Le^ds, and then we parted, and I went
through Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire, visiting sundry Meetings, (where
some Time before I met with great Trials and Afflictions in Mind, as already
hinted) and some were convinced: My Mind was strongly engaged to see them in my
Way, and I had good Satisfaction in that Visit.

Having done this, I went by the Way of Hitching and Hertford, visiting sundry
Meetings, finding Encouragement to go on: But I still expected that I should be
stopped by the Morning-meeting, for want of a Companion. I came to London the
latter End of the Tenth Month, 1701, being by Letters advised, the Ships would
sail in a Week's Time, or very shortly; but a War breaking out between England
and France, an Embargo was laid on all Shipping for two Months, so that there
was no Expectation of getting off. I staid in London about three Weeks,
visiting all the Meetings in and about the City, which gave the Brethren a
thorough Taste of my Service; some of my best Friends advising, that I should
not lay my Concern before the Meeting, that I designed for America, until the
General or Monthly Meeting of Ministers did come round, and in that Time my
Service as a Minister would be generally known. I readily complied; and when
the Time came, I went in great Fear to lay my Concern before that Meeting,
being still apprehensive I should not be permitted to proceed, for want of a
suitable Companion; but as no Objection did arise, they perused the
Certificates that I had from the Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings, and did well
approve thereof; and a Minute was made, appointing some Friends to prepare a
Certificate against the next Meeting; which was accordingly done, brought
there, and signed.

All Things now being clear for my going the first Opportunity, it was thought
proper to see for a Ship, which by the Assistance of some Friends was done, but
no likelihood of going quickly, by reason of the Embargo.

I had some Desire to visit the West, in particular Dorset, Somerset, Bristol,
and Wilts, but at a Loss for a Horse, having sold my own soon after I came to
London; but the Friend to whom I sold him, offered that I should have him that
Journey, which I accepted, and so set out, having in Company a young Man that
had been bred at a College, his Name was Samuel Crisp, a pretty meek spirited
Youth, and rightly convinced. When we got forty or fifty Miles from London, he
had strong Inclinations to go back. I made a kind of a running Visit; and when
I was at Bristol, my Friends there were exceeding kind, and would willingly
have had me gone from thence; but my prior Engagement at London would not
permit it.

I staid there two Weeks at least, and taking my Leave, sundry Friends brought
me on my Way to Bath, Bradford, etc. They returned, and I went on for London,
and quartering at an Inn at Hungerford, (not being easy to take any more
Meetings till I came to London) I fell in Company with a couple of Tradesmen,
who, when we sat down to Supper, complimented each other about which should
crave a Blessing, at last they pulled off their Hats, and one of them did it in
some sort; but my sitting with my Hat on was such an Offense, that they began
to reprove me very sharply: I said but very little for some Time, until they
had spent their Reproach upon me, and then I spoke to this Effect, That the
Appearance they made, just before Supper was brought to the Table, was so very
void of Grace in their Hearts, that I could not think it my Place to pull often
my Hat to their formal Prayer: And besides, as soon as the Words were out of
their Mouths and over, it appeared to me that they were the same, and I saw by
their Conduct that they did not understand the Nature of true Prayer, which is
to be performed both with the Spirit and Understanding; and if you had not
wanted both, you could not pass such silly Compliments on each other about it.
I was now very quiet, and they said no more to me. But as soon as Supper was
over, and the Reckoning paid, they left me with free Consent, for our Company
was unsuitable.

Next Day I went toward London by Newbury, where I stopped at a Funeral, and so
to Reading, and by Maidenhead to the City, but found the Embargo not yet taken
off. It being now pretty near the Middle of the First Month, I visited some
Parts of Hertfordshire, having my dear Friend John Tompkins part of the Time,
and Samuel Crisp, who was a sweet Companion, having received the Knowledge of
the Truth the right Way.

About a Week or two in the Second Month, Orders were given for the Merchants
to get ready, and a Convoy was to go with them: But for all this, it was the
latter End of the Third Month before we got off; so I had an Opportunity to
visit the greatest Part of Kent. And after we sailed from the Downs, we were
put into Portsmouth Harbor by contrary Winds, and lay there two or three
Weeks, which was very tiresome. But all this Time I never considered any Danger
of being taken by the French; it did not so much as enter into my Mind, until I
came into Philadelphia, where hearing that Thomas Story, Richard Groves, and
others, were taken some Time before, and carried into Martinico, a French
Island, I thought of it more closely.

I left England in the Third Month, 1702, about the Time of the Yearly Meeting,
with inward Satisfaction and Peace of Mind, and wrote a few Lines to be sent to
the Meeting of Ministers in Kendal or elsewhere, in Westmoreland, my native
Place; which I here insert, being the first Fruits of that kind to my Brethren.

To the MEETING of MINISTERS at Kendal, in Westmoreland. These.
My dearly beloved Brethen and Sisters,
IN that Love which in Time past we have enjoyed together, do I heartily salute
you, having in mind some few Things to impart, as Counsel and Caution to us
all, including myself therein.

We who apprehend ourselves called into this public Station of Preaching, ought
closely to wait on our Guide, to put us forth in the Work. And dear Friends, I
see great Need for us to carefully mind our Openings, and go on as we are led
by the Spirit; for if we overrun our Guide and Openings, we shall be confused,
not knowing where, or how to conclude: But if we begin and go on with the
Spirit, we shall conclude so, that all who are truly spiritual will sensibly
feel that we are right: Thus will our Ministry edify them that hear it.

And dear Friends, let us be singly and in Sincerity devoted to the Will of
God, whether to preach or be silent; for if we are not sensible of such a
Resignation, it is doubtful, that we may set ourselves at work, when we should
be quiet, and so bring an Uneasiness upon our Friends, and a Burden upon
ourselves: And this Conduct will shut up Friends Hearts against our Service and
Ministry. And my dear Friends, every Time you appear in the Ministry, when it
is over, examine yourselves narrowly, whether you have kept in your Places, and
to your Guide; and consider, whether you have not used superfluous Words, that
render the Matter disagreeable, or such Tones or Gestures as misbecome the Work
we are about, always remembering, that the true Ministers preach not themselves,
but Christ Jesus our Lord. Let us bear this in mind, that neither Arts, Parts,
Strength of Memory, nor former Experiences will, without the Sanctification of
the Spirit, do any Thing for us to depend upon. Let us therefore, I entreat
you, keep to the living Fountain, the Spring of eternal Life, opened by our
Lord Jesus Christ in our Hearts.

I also desire, that you would not neglect your Day's Work, in visiting the
dark Corners of the Counties about you; but be mindful of your Service therein,
as the Lord shall make Way for it.

The Things above written have been on my Mind to communicate to you, my dear
Friends, with Desires that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
with your Spirits, Amen. Hoping also, that I shall not be forgotten by you, in
your nearest Approaches to the Throne of Grace, in your Supplications to the
God of the Spirits of all Flesh; remembering me, that I may be preserved by Se^,
and in the Wilderness, through the many and various Exercises and Baptisms,
that I may he suffered to undergo for the Service's Sake; and that I may be
preserved in Humility, and Self-denial, under the Power of the Cross, the most
beautiful Ornaments a Minister can ever be clothed with; that if it please him
we should meet again, our Joy may then be full in the Holy Ghost, which is the
fervent Prayer of your exercised Friend and Brother,

SAMUEL BOWNAS,


This was written in the Second Month 1702, and left with my Friend John
Tempkins, not to send it until he heard I was gone off.

An ACCOUNT of my TRAVELS in America, the first Time
AS advised by Friends appointed to assist me, I took my Passage on board the
Josiah, John Sowden Master, bound for West-River in Maryland, and we left
England about the 24th of the Third Month 1702, and landed in the River of
Pa^^xent in Maryland, about the 29th of the Fifth Month following.

I visited some Meetings in that Province; but George Keith being there, and
challenging Disputes wherever he came, gave both me and Friends some Exercise:
To me, by challenging a Dispute without my previous Knowledge, in the following
Terms.

To the PREACHER lately arrived from England.
SIR,
I Intend to give Notice after Sermon, that you and myself are to dispute
Tomorrow, and would have you give Notice thereof accordingly.

Sir, I am your humble Servant, GEORGE KEITH.
Dated the 1st SUNDAY in AUGUST, 1702.

He writ this on Occasion of an honest Friend's speaking sharply to him, and
giving him the Title of an Apostate; adding, she could not pretend to dispute
with him, but a Friend that was to be at their Meeting on First Day next,
(meaning me) she did not doubt would talk with him. Well then, said Keith, next
Monday let him (...) and I will prove him, and all the Quakers, unsound in both
Faith and Principle. With more of that kind. The honest Woman being warm, and
zealous for the Cause, replied, He will not be afraid of thee, I Am sure.

The Messenger that brought the Letter, delivered it in haste; as he was
ordered, to John Faulkner, a young Man from Scotland, who was then Storekeeper
in B. Brains and Companies Employ. We were just then a considerable Number of
us in Company, going to a Meeting at Chester in the Woods, some Distance from
any House, and John insisted for me to write an Answer, adding, Keith would
call the Country together, and make much Noise about it, as if we were afraid,
etc. and 'twas best to nip his Expectation in the B^d. And as we knew Nothing
of the Conference Keith had with the Woman Friend two Days before, I writ to
the Effect following.

GEORGE KEITH,
I Have received thine, and think myself no way obliged to take any Notice of
one that has been so very mutable in his Pretenses to Religion; besides, as
thou have long since been disowned, after due Admonition given thee by our
Yearly Meeting in L^, for thy quarrelsome and irregular Practices, thou art not
worthy of my Notice, being no more to me than a Heathen Man and a Publican; in
the needful from

SAMUEL BOWNAS.
Dated the same Day.

John Faulkner carried my Answer, and we went to our Meeting, being at Cl^^ter
in Maryland, as aforesaid: By that Time the Meeting was fully gathered, John
Faulkner came back, and we had a comfortable Meeting: Afterward John Faulkner
told us, George Keith read my Letter publicly amongst his Company, appearing
very angry at the Contents of it; and the Company laughed very heartily, many
of them being much pleased with it: But John Faulkner came out of the Company,
and a substantial Planter followed him, and told him, he had much rather go
with him to our Meeting, than to hear George Keith rail and abuse the Quakers;
but he, being in the Commission of the Peace, must (as Keith was recommended by
the Bishop of London) show some Respect; withal adding, that John Faulkner
should bring me to his House to dine the next Day: which John Faulkner would
have excused, urging, that as they had a Value for me, sundry Friends would be
for bringing me on my Way farther; adding, we should incommode his House. He
urged it the more, saying, we should all be welcome. Accordingly several went
with me there, and he was very kind, giving us an Account of George Keith's
railing against us the Day before, and how disagreeable it was to the Assembly.
Keith left a broad Sheet printed, wherein he pretended to prove the Quakers no
Christians, out of their own Books; I had an Answer thereto in print, which
Friends were glad of, and I left with them several to spread where he had left
his.

After we had dined, we took our Leave, and a Friend, my Guide, went with me,
and brought me to a People called Labadeists, where we were civilly entertained
in their Way. When Supper came in, it was placed upon a long Table in a large
Room, where, when all Things were ready, came in, at a Call, about twenty Men
or upwards, but no Women: We all sat down, they placing me and my Companion
near the Head of the Table, and having paused a short Space, one pulled off his
Hat, but not the rest till a short Space after, and then one after another they
pulled all their Hats off, and in that uncovered Posture sat silent (uttering
no Words that we could hear) near Half a Quarter of an Hour; and as they did
not uncover at once, so neither did they cover themselves again at once; but as
they put on their Hats fell to eating, not regarding those who were still
uncovered, so that it might be about two Minutes Time or more, between the
first and last putting on of their Hats. I afterward queried with my Companion
concerning the Reason of their Conduct, and he gave this for Answer, That they
held it unlawful to pray till they felt some inward Motion for the same; and
that secret Prayer was more acceptable than to utter Words; and that it was
most proper for every one to pray, as moved thereto by the Spirit in their own
Minds.

I likewise queried, if they had no Women amongst them? He told me they had,
but the Women eat by themselves, and the Men by themselves, having all Things
in common, respecting their household Affairs, so that none could claim any more
Right than another to any Part of their Stock, whether in Trade or Hasbandry;
and if any had a mind to join with them, whether Rich or Poor, they must put
what they had in the common Stock, and if they afterward had a Mind to leave
the Society, they must likewise leave what they brought, and go out empty
handed.

They frequently expounded the Scriptures among themselves, and being a very
large Family, in all upwards of a Hundred Men, Women and Children, carried on
something of the Manufactory of Linen, and had a very large Plantation of Corn,
Tobacco, Flax, and Hemp, together with Cattle of several Kinds. [But at my last
going there, these People were all scattered and gone, and Nothing of them
remaining of a religious Community in that Shape.]

I left this Place and traveled through the Country to Philadelphia, and was
there seized with a Fever and Ague, which held me about thirteen Weeks, and I
staid there till the yearly Meeting came on, which was very large, but my
Disorder of the Ague would not admit my being at one Meeting; George Keith with
his Companions came, but the Disturbance they gave was a considerable Advantage
to Friends, and the Meeting ended to great Satisfaction.

Being recovered and pretty strong, I left Pennsylvania, and traveled through
the J^^^ys East and West, and having given Expectation to a Friend, one James
Miller in Scotland, who had a Sister married to one of the Barclay's Family,
that it I came near where the dwelt, I would visit her at his Request. She was
a very zealous honest Friend, but her Husband joined Keith, and left Friends;
and on enquiring about her, where she dwelt? I was told, it would be very
little out of my Way. Then a young Man offered to be my Guide, to pay her a
Visit; and when we came to the House, there were sundry Priests, with others,
met to sprinkle an Infant, the said Barclay's Grandchild: The Ceremony was over
before we got there, we coming from Shrewsbury Yearly Meeting, where Keith also
had been, but gave us no Disturbance, nor did he come to our Meeting at all,
but held a Meeting a small Distance from us for two Days, and then went off.
Our Meeting held three Days, and was thought to be larger by much, in
Expectation that George Keith would be there. It ended well, and it was said,
some were convinced at that Meeting

But to return to my Friend Barclay; she was in an Apartment by herself, and
gave me a short Account of what they were or had been doing; saying they have
sprinkled the Bab^ my Grandchild, and the Ceremony is over, but they have not
yet been to Dinner; to which she added, my Husband will be earnest for thy
Company; if thou have Freedom to go, I shall leave thee at Liberty, but if thou
refusest to go, they will be ready to report, that thou (...) not face them;
adding, I would be pleased with your Company (meaning me and my Companion) to
d^ne with me, but it will be best, I think, for you to dine with them, and I
hope, said she, the Lord will give you Wisdom to conduct yourselves, that they
may have no just Cause to reproach the Principle on your Account. She had no
sooner ended, than (as she had suggested) her Husband came, and after some
Compliments, and Enquiry about his Brother-in-law James Miller, and Relations
at Ury, we were called to Dinner, and by no Means would he excuse me: We went
in, and the Mistress of the Feast, the Mother of the Babe then sprinkled, would
have me sit at her Right Hand, and set George Keith at her Left. We sat all
down, and after a short Pause George Keith stood up with all the rest of the
Company, save me and my Companion, we kept our Places, and Hats on, while he
repeated a long Prayer for the Church and State, Bishops, and all the inferior
Clergy, the Queen, and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, etc. The Grace being ended,
the Mistress carved, and would serve me first; I would have refused, and put it
to George Keith, but he refused it likewise: When she had done helping us and
herself, she began to catechize me in the following manner.

After enquiring about her Relations at Ury in Scotland, and her Uncle Miller,
she then desired to know my Business in Scotland, pretending to suppose me a
Merchant that dealt in Linen to sell in England; but I saw her Design was to
lead me to some unwary Answer, for Keith and the rest to find Matter of
Objection to. This put me upon my Guard, to make Reply cautiously, I freely
owned I had no Concern in buying or selling of any sort of Goods. Pray then,
Sir, what was your Call there; I replied, that I thought it my place sometimes
to advise my Friends and others, to endeavor so to live, that Death, when it
comes, might not be a Terror to them; and doubt not but thou will count this a
good Work, and needful to be done. She readily allowed, that it was very
needful, and the more so, for that the Age was now very wicked. Then she
proceeded to query the Reason of my coming into those Parts, pretending to
suppose it was on account of Trade, as being a Supercargoe, with sundry
trifling and impertinent Questions, as when I was in such and such Places? To
all which I gave her Answers to the same Effect as before, that my designed
Business was the same in this Country as in Scotland. Then she proceeded to
more trifling Questions, as when I landed? and where? and which Way I was
going? All the Company at Table gave ear to our Dialogue, which appeared to me
very weak in such a learned Company as they thought themselves to be, and none
so much as put in a Word between us. Dinner being ended, I desired to be
excused, for that Time called me away, and my Friends would wait for me at the
Ferry, which we had to pass that Evening. Thus Keith and I met and parted.

Then taking Leave, I went to see my worthy Friend in her own Aparment, with
whom we had a short, but very agreeable Opportunity: We took our Leave and went
to Woodbridge, where the next Day we had a Meeting, George Keith preached at
Amboy the same Day, which Places are not far apart; we often interfered one
with the other, but he no more gave me any Challenge to dispute, but took
another Method to put a Stop to my Traveling, as will appear afterward. We
came to Long Island, and a Meeting was appointed for me at a small Village
called Hampstead. where George Keith also was, either by Accident or Design,
and had at the same appointed to preach within our hearing, and between the two
Appointments, there was a very large Gathering; and I being young and strong,
my Voice was plainly heard by the People who were with Keith, so that they all
left his Meeting and came to ours, (for we had Room enough for both Meetings,
it being a very large Barn) except he that exercised as Clerk, and one William
Bradford, who had been a Printer for Friends at Philadelphia, but deserting the
Society, Friends took the Business from him. But some Time after, Keith and the
said Bradford agreed, that Bradford should come and try if no Advantage might
be taken at my Doctrine; accordingly he came, and pulled out of his Pocket a
small Book, with Pen and Ink, and steadfastly (...) in my Face, to put me out of
Countenance if he could; but I was above being daunted at that Time, (...)
Times very incident (...). He opened his said Book and write about two Lines in
(...) then shut (...) again, continuing his staring, to try as some thought
whether he could not da^^t me; but it was past his Skill, for I felt both
inward and outward Strength, and divine Power to fill my Heart, and my Face was
like Bra^^ to all Opposition; he opened his Book, writ about two Line^ (...)
and a little (...) two more, in the whole about six lines in a small (...)
Leaf; and after I had done, he stood up and said, (...) meaning by public
(...). A worthy Friend, John R^ by Name, d^^^^^d him to be quiet, and after
Meeting was ended he should be answered. Accordingly the Meeting concluded, and
he waited for his Answer. To which Friend R^^^ said, William (...) Day to
reduce (...). But he wanted to hear what I would say to the master, and I told
him his Questions being more for Contention than Education, I therefore did not
think myself obliged to answer them; more especially, since for his Contentious
and disorderly walking, he had been dealt with and advised in a Brotherly and
Christian Spirit to repent, but his persisting in the same, had obliged his
Friends to disown him, and for this Reason, I said, I have no more to say to
thee on this Head. He turned from me, and in a very angry manner said, I should
bear of it in another Way. But I called him back, having something to say on
another Subject; which was to deliver some Tokens of Gold sent his Wife by her
Sister from London: This softened him somewhat, (he finding the Pieces to agree
with the Letter, which I requested might be opened before my Friends there) and
brought him to confess, that he believed I was a very honest Man, and he was
sorry I should be under such a Delusion, as to be in Communion with that
erroneous People. But at his Return to Keith, they laid their Heads together,
and trumped up the following Depositions from what he had writ as aforesaid,
viz.

I William Bradford, of the City of New York, aged about forty Years, depose
upon the holy Evangelists. The 21st of November 1702, going into the Quakers
Meeting at Nathaniel Pearsal's deceased, in H^mp^^ead, I heard one Bown, that
is lately come out of England, preach, and the first Words I heard him say,
were the Sign of the Cross; and thus; Friends, having gone through the Papist
Baptism, let us examine the Church of England: Well, what do they do? Why the
Bishop lays his Hand upon those that have learned the Languages, and ordains
them to be Ministers. Well! and what do they do? Why they baptize the Children,
the young Children, and sprinkle a little Water in their Faces, and by this
they make the Child a Christian, as they say, and for so doing the Childrens
Parents must give the Priest 4 d. or a Groat; indeed this is an easy Way of
making Christians for a Groat! And how do they do this? Their own Catechism
tells us the Priest says to the Child, what is thy Name? The Child answers,
Thomas, James, Mary, etc. Well! and who gave thee this Name? The Child answers,
my Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member of
Christ. This is brave to be made a Member of Christ! Who would not have a
little Water sprinkled in their Faces? And what did your Godfathers and
Godmothers then for your? Answer, They did Promise and Vow three Things in my
Name; 1st. That I should renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Ay! did
they so? this is brave. Well! what did they promise more? 2dly. That I should
keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of my
Life: And yet in Contradiction to this, they plead for Sin Term of Life, and
say they cannot keep God's Commandments in this Life. Why! this is strange, that
the Godfathers and Godmothers should promise what they believe they cannot
perform. And does the Godfathers and Godmothers thus promise? Yes, they do.
But this is strange, that their God should need a Godfather and God-mother.
But Friends, our God is the true and living God; in the first of John it is
said, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was God. But the God had no
need of a Godfather or God-mother. Well! and what do the Presbyterians do? Why
they baptize their Infants also; but as I take it, they do not make use of
Godfathers and Godmothers, not the Sign of the Cross: They have thrown away
that piece of Popery.

Next, as to the Lord's Supper, I shall speak very brief; Christ says, that
which goes in at the Mouth defiles not. So I shall make this Application: The
Bread and Wine which they receive, and call the Lord's Supper, goes in at the
Mouth, and so into the Draught, and profit not. They call it a Sign; yea, and
an empty Sign it is. But by these Ways and Forms the Hirelings deceive the
People: But we have had sufficient Proof of these Hirelings in our Day; for
they will turn with every Wind, and every Turn that will answer their Priests
Ends, as we have seen fulfilled largely in our Day.

William Bradford. Coram nobis.
JOSEPH SMITH, Justice. EDWARD BURROWS, Justice.

A true Copy by Thomas Cardall, High Sheriff.

Having patched up the above Deposition in their own Way and Manner, and Form
of Expression, Keith informs, and Bradford was his Evidence; and being at a
Loss for want of another Evidence to conform Bradford's, (without which they
could not proceed) they met with a young Man who was there, and Keith got some
Words out of him, that he said he heard spoken; then they threatened, if he did
not come in for Evidence to what he had heard, what they would do to him;
therefore he was prevailed on, through Fear, to give his Evidence on Oath, in the
Words George Keith had got from him by Guile, before the said two Justices,
which he did as follows, although to no Purpose.

RIchard Smith, aged about 28 Years, deposes upon the four Evangelists: That
on Sunday last, he, this Deponent, was at a Quakers Meeting in Hempstead, where
he heard a Man preach, whose Name he since understands is Samuel Bowne: In his
preaching, he, this Deponent, remembers to have heard him speak these Words, or
Words to the like Effect, viz. That the Church of England in Baptism made use
of Godfathers and Godmothers; but our God is the ever living God, and has no
need of a Godfather or God-mother: And further this Deponent says not.

Richard Smith.
Jurat 24th Die 9bris 1702, coram nobis. JOSEPH SMITH, Justice. EDWARD BURROWS,
Justice.


Having thus laid a Foundation for a Prosecution, a Warrant was issued out. A
Copy of which is as follows.

Queens County, ss. JOSEPH SMITH, Esquire EDWARD BURROWS, Esquire Justices of the Peace
for Queens County, to the High Sheriff of the County, Greeting.

YOU are hereby, in her Majesty's Name, strictly charged and commanded,
immediately on the Receipt hereof, to attach the Body of Samuel Bowne, a
Quaker, if he can be found in your Bailiwick, and to bring his Body before us,
to answer to such Matters of Misdemeanour, as shall on her Majesty's Behalf be
objected against him. And hereof fail not at your Peril. Dated under our Hands
and Seals this 24th 9ber 1702.

Jos. SMITH, Justice. EDW. BURROWS, Justice.

Vera Copia Ex. p. Tho. Cardall, vic.

Thus all Things were ready to be put in Execution, and sundry substantial
People, not Friends, would have had me gone off, but that I could not do;
therefore on the 29th of the same Month, as I was at Flushing in Long Island,
it being the Half-yearly Meeting, which was very large, Keith being expected
there: When the Meeting was fully set, the High Sheriff came with a very large
Company with him, who were all armed; some had Guns, others Pitchforks, others
Swords, Clubs, Halberts, etc. as if they should meet with great Opposition in
taking a poor silly harmless Sheep out of the Flock. The Sheriff stepping up
into the Gallery, took me by the Hand, and told me, I was his Prisoner. By what
Authority? said I: He pulled out his Warrant, and showed it me: I told him that
Warrant was to take up Samuel Bowne, and my Name was not Samuel Bowne, but that
Friend's Name is so; pointing at the Friend by me: We know him, said he, that is
not the Man, but you are the Man: Pray then; What Is your Name? That, said I, is
a Question that requires Consideration, whether proper to answer or not, for no
Man is bound to answer to his own Prejudice; the Law forces none to accuse
himself. Thus we pro'd and con'd a little Time; and I got up from my Seat, and
John Rodman, Samuel Bowne, and sundry other Friends, and walked out of the
Meeting, it not being proper to discourse there at that Time; and they on
conversing with the Sheriff, who in his Nature was a very moderate Man, having
known Friends in England, easily prevailed on him to stay the Meeting, with all
his Retinue; and afterward they would consider what was best to be done. They
willingly laid down their Arms on the outside of the Door, and came in, which
increased the Throng very much: The Meeting was silent a considerable Time, and
the Sheriff's Company queried of one another privately, so as I heard it, Why I
did not preach? others concluding that I should preach no more, being now a
Prisoner; that is enough to silence him, said they: But finding the Word like as
a Fire, I could no longer contain, but standing up, I had a very agreeable
Service, both to myself and Friends, with the rest of the Company; the Sheriff
himself, and his Company also, spoke well of it: It was the first Day of the
Meeting, and the seventh of the Week. After Meeting was ended, sundry Friends
went to Samuel Downe's, to consult with the Sheriff, and he being very
moderate, and in a very good Humor, spoke very mild and courteously, blaming
Keith and Bradford, and gave Liberty that I should stay with my Friends until
Fifth-day following, there being two Days of the Meeting yet to come, and a
Funeral of a noted Friend to be the Day after it ended: The Meeting increased,
and the last was both largest and most open; it was supposed there might be
near 2000 People the last Day, but Keith did not come there.

Now the Time for my Appearance before the Justices being come, sundry,
^ub^tantial Friends went with me, and a great Crowd o^ other People came to
hear; but for want of the Convenience of a large Hall, which they might have
had, but by the Coldness of the Season, as was pretended the Justices would not
go there, so they were deprived of the Opportunity for want of Room to hear my
Examination.

There were four Justices, viz. Joseph Smith, Edward Burrows, John Smith and
Jonathan Whitehead. This last was a very moderate Man, and endeavored much to
have set me at Liberty; but they had a Priest with them, who endeavored to put
the worst Construction on every Thing I said: Besides, they had shut a Man up
behind in a Closet, to take in Shorthand the Examination, that they might
peruse the same to their own Advantage: But the Man was so very drunk, that he
lost his Papers going Home, and a Friend providentially found them, to their
great Disappointment and Shame: Great Enquiry was made about them among the
People in vain. Having done what they thought fit in examining me, they turned
me and my Friends out of the Room, to consult what was to be further done; and
alter a little Time, we were all called in, I to receive my Doom, and my
Friends to hear it; and the Clerk, as Mouth of the Court, said, These
honorable Justices have agreed, that you must enter into a Two Thousand Pound
Bail, Yourself in L 1000. and two of your Friends in L 500. each, or else be
committed to the common Goal. I answered, I could enter into no Bond on that
Account. Here one of the Justices queried, if the Sum was too large? I
answered, that was Nothing to the Matter, if as small a Sum as Three-halfpence
would do, I should not do it, it being a Matter of such a Nature that I could
by no Means comply with. Then the last Justice offered to be bound for me, in
what Sum they required. But not only I, but all my Friends, did oppose it with
all our Might, giving them, as well as him, the Reason for it.

It growing late the Court broke up, and this Justice begged that he might have
me to his House, and he would see me forth coming on the Morrow; which they
readily granted him, and then they adjourned till Ten o'Clock next Day, giving
their Clerk Orders to provide my Mittimus by that Time.

I went with my kind Friend the young Justice to his House, and found very good
and kind Entertainment, his Wife being a very religious, tenderhearted Friend,
and took great Care of me (...) Morning we met again, the Mi^^i^^^ (...) ex^
(...)

(...) ss. JOSEPH SMITH, Esquire EDWARD BURROWS, Esquire JOHN SMITH, Esquire and JONATHAN
WHITEHEAD, Esquire Justices of the Peace for Queens County, etc. To the
High Sheriff of Queens County, Greeting.

WE send you herewithal the Body of Samuel Bownas, a Quaker, brought before us
this Day, and charged with speaking scandalous Lies of, and Reflections
against, the Church of England, as by Law established, and other Misdemeanors
by him done and spoken at a public Assembly in Hempstead, in this County, on
the 21st Day of this Instant 9ber. And therefore these are in Behalf of her
Majesty to command you, that immediately you receive the said Samuel Bownas,
and him safely keep in the common Goal of this County, until that he shall be
thence delivered by the due Course of her Majesty's I ^ws. Dated under our
Hands and Seals at JAMAICA in LONG ISLAND, in NEW YORK Government.
^^^maica, this 30th Day of 9ber, in the second Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lady Queen Anne, of England, etc. Annoque Domini, 1702.

JOSEPH SMITH, EDWARD BURROWS, JOHN SMITH, JONATHAN WHITEHEAD.

A true Copy, by Tho. Cardall.

Now I was delivered up a Prisoner, and my Friends left me, having first got me
a good wholesome Room, and a very good Bed, taking Care that I should want
Nothing necessary for Life. This continued for three Months; at the End of
which, a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and general Goal Delivery was
given to John Bridges, Esquire, Chief Justice of the Province; Robert Miller, Esquire
second; Thomas Whellett, John Jackson, and Edward Burrows; and on the 26th Day
of the Twelfth Month, Bridges and Miller came, attended with much Company, in
great Pomp, with Trumpets and other Music before them, to hold the said Court;
and about the fourth Hour in the Afternoon, they in the same Order went to
Court, which was held in the Hall, read their Commission, and called over the
Jury, to whom they gave an uncommon Charge, adjourning till Monday the 28th, at
Ten o'Clock in the Morning.

At the same Time the Court met, and Proclamation was made as follows.

Crier. O yes! Silence on Pain of Imprisonment.


Called over the Grand Jury, consisting of twenty two Men, and charged them to
retire to their Chamber, and the Attorney General should send them Business.

The Court adjourns.

Crier. O yes! All Manner of Persons that have any Business at this Court of
Oyer and Terminer, let them depart hence, and come Tomorrow Morning at Eight
o'Clock, and they shall be heard.


Accordingly the Grand Jury retired, and had a Bill of Indictment sent them
against me, but I could never get a Copy of it first nor last. I had prepared
sundry Reasons to set Bradford's Evidences aside, which are here omitted, they
being pretty large, but the Grand Jury had the same before them, and they were
of considerable Weight with them. The 29th the Court met.

Crier. O yes! All Manner of Persons that have any Business at this Court of
Oyer and Terminer, let them draw near, and they shall be heard.


The Clerk ordered to call over the Jury.

Richard Cornell, Foreman, Ephraim Goulding, John Clayer, Isaac Hicks, Robert
Hubbs, Reginald Mott, Theodorus Vanderwick, Samuel Denton, jun. Joseph Mott,
Richard Valentine, Nathaniel Cole, jun. Joseph Dickenson, Isaac Doughty, Samuel
Emery, John Smith, John Serin, John Oakey, Samuel Hallet, Richard Allop, John
Hunt, James Clement, and William Bloodgood.

Then it was demanded, what Business the Jury had to lay before the Court? And
they presented two Bills, one against a Woman for some Misdemeanor, and the
Bill against me, both indorsed Ignoramus. Upon which the Judge was very angry;
the other Justices on the Bench being mostly Presbyterians, said little or
Nothing to the Matter, but he addressing himself to the Jury, said thus,
Gentlemen, surely you have forgot your Oaths, and for so doing I could give you
some hard Names, but at present shall forbear: Is this your Verdict touching
the Quaker? for they mattered not the other Bill, if they could have had their
Ends on me.

The Foreman said, It is, Sir.

Judge. I demand your Reasons, why you have not found the Bill against him?


Meaning me.

One, whose Name was James Clement, a bold Man, well skilled in the Law,
answered, we are sworn to keep the Queen's Secrets, our Fellows, and our own;
and for that Reason we declare no Reasons.

Judge. Now Mr. Wiseman speaks, but I tell you, you are not so sworn, and I
could find in my Heart to lay you by the Heels, and a Fine upon your Brethren.


Clement replied, he might if he pleased, but when it was done, it should be
exposed with as much Expedition as the Case would admit in Westminster Hall;
for, adds he, Juries, neither Grand nor Petty, are to be menaced with Threats
of Stocks or Fines, but they are to Act freely, according to the best of their
Judgments on the Evidence before them.

Now the Judge finding he had not Children to deal with, altered his Manner of
Address, and began to flatter, and requested that they would take back both
Bills, and resume their Considerations upon them. On this the Jury was in
Judgment divided, but at last they all consented, and then the Court adjourned
till Nine of Clock the next Day.

Met according to Adjournment.

Crier. O yes! All Manner of Persons that have any Business at the Court of
Oyer and Terminer, let them draw near and they shall be heard.


Crier. Call over the Jury; which being done.


Judge. Foreman, how find you the Bills?


Foreman. As we did Yesterday.


On which Bridges in great Wrath charged them with obstructing the Course of
Justice.

Why? Says Clement! because we cannot be of the same Mind as the Court is: We
would have you to know, that we desire no other but that Justice may take place.

The Judge now threatened to lay Clement by the Heels again. But, Clement, no
Way daunted, told him, he might if he pleased; but if he did, he should hear of
it in another Place.

The Clerk was now ordered to call over the Jury by Name singly, to show their
Reasons, why they could or could not find the Bills. Sundry of them refused to
say any more, than That is our Verdict. Others again, said, How unreasonable,
and against Law it is, that the Court should endeavor to perjure the Jury, by
revealing their Secrets in the Face of the Country. However, it appeared after
the Examination of the Jury, that seven were for finding the Bill, and fifteen
stood firm against them for the Verdict, as signed by the Foreman. Which
angered the Judge to that Degree, that he gave strict Orders to keep me more
close than before; threatening, As Justice cannot be here come at, I Will send him
to London, chained to the A Man of War was then lying at YORK, ready to sail
Convoy for ENGLAND.
Man of War's Deck, like other vile Criminals, with his Crimes and
Misdemeanors along with him, which are of the highest Nature, and most
dangerous Consequence, as tending to subvert both Church and State. When an
Account of this was brought me, I was under a great Cloud, and the Power of
Darkness so very strong upon me that I desired Death rather than Life, fearing
that if I was so served, I should be an Object of Derision to all on board; and
greatly doubting that I should not be able to bear the Suffering which I must
undergo in such a Case, with that Decency and Honor that was requisite in so
good a Cause.

The Friends left me alone, and I having lost all my Faith, which was still
worse than being alone, I thought myself the most wretched among Men, and
scarcely able to live under it, At which Time, an honest old NOTE, he did not
profess with us, but was almost we in Principles
Man (his Name was Thomas Hicks, who had been Chief Justice in the Province
some Years, and well versed in the Law) came to visit me, and on my standing up
to show my Respects to him, he took me in his Arms, saluting me with Tears;
thus expressing himself: Dear Samuel, the Lord has made Use of you, as an
Instrument, to put a Stop to arbitrary Proceedings in our Courts of Justice,
which have met with great Encouragement since his Lordship came here for
Governor; (meaning the Lord Cornbury, who oppressed the People sorely.) But
there has never so successful a Stand been made against it as at this Time: And
now, they threaten to send you to England chained to the Man of War's Deck:
Fear not, Samuel, adds he, they can no more send you there than they can send
me; for the Law both here and in England is such, that every Criminal must be
tried where the Cause of Action is; else, why in England do they remove
Criminals from one County to another to take their Trials where the Offense was
committed? But you may, after the Judgment of the Court is given against you,
bring your Appeal against that Judgment; and you securing the Payment of such
Fees as are commonly allowed in the like Case, they dare not deny your Appeal.
But the Judge frets because he cannot have his End against you: And besides,
the Governor is disgusted also, he expecting to have made considerable
Advantage by it; but the Country's Eyes are now opened, and you are not now
alone, but it is the Cause of every Subject; and they will never be able now to
get a Jury to answer their End, the Eyes of the Country are so clearly opened
by your Case. Had, says he, the Presbyterians stood as you have done, they had
not so tamely left their Meeting Houses to the Church: But that People had
never so good a Hand at Suffering in the Cause of Conscience, as they have had
in persecuting others that differed from them. Here he blamed that People very
much, for being so compliable to all the Claims of the Governor, although never
so unreasonable and against Law.

And this honest Man, as if he had been sent by divine Commission, by his
Discourse raised my drooping Spirits, renewed my Faith, and I was quite another
Man: And as he said, so it proved. They could not get the next Jury to find the
Bill against (...).

But to return, I could never get a Copy of the Mittimus or Indictment against
me, but the Judge gave the Sheriff Orders to keep me more close. And I was
accordingly put up in a small Room made of Logs, which had been protested
against as an unlawful all Prison two Years before; but that made no
Difference: I was locked up there, and my Friends denied coming to me. I was
now advised to demand my Liberty, as a Right due by Law, and I did so; but it
was denied me, without showing any other Reason, than that I might thank the
Gand-Jury for my then Confinement. It was likewise thought proper to lay the
Case before the Governor by Petition, and demand my Liberty of him also; which
Petition is omitted for Brevity's Sake. But all was in vain, for they were
resolved not to be so baffled by the Country, they said, but they would bring
me to Justice. And Keith printed some Sheets, pretending to open the Eyes of
the People, saying, that I had reproached the Church, the Ordinances and
Government; aggravating the Case to the highest. But what he printed with a
Design to make my Case appear the worse, had quite the contrary Effect upon the
People, it being looked upon as no other than the Product of Envy and Revenge
against the Quakers in general, and me in particular.

However, that Court was adjourned for six Weeks; and finding myself more
closely confined than before, and not knowing when or how it would end, I began
to be very thoughtful what Method to take, not to be chargeable to my Friends:
And as I was full of Thought on my Pillow about the Matter, it came into my
Mind to try if I could learn to make Shoes; and applying myself to a Scotch
Churchman in the Neighborhood, one Charles Williams, a good natured Man, I
made a Proposal to buy a Pair of Shoes of him, cut out for me to make up, and
to give him the same Price as if made, withal desiring him to let me have
Materials and Tools to go on with the Work, requesting that he would be so kind
as to show me how to begin and proceed in it: I acquainted him with my Reason
for so doing. He replied, it is very honest and honorable in you: But, added
he, if one of our Ministers was in the like State, they would think it too mean
for them to take up such a diminutive Practice; though it were for Bread: And
your Friends perhaps will not like it. However, he readily fell in with me,
that if I could get my Bread with my own Hands, it was most agreeable with
Paul's Practice; and accordingly next Morning he brought me Leather cut out,
with Materials and Tools to Work with, and with his Direction I closed one of
the Upper-leathers before he left me, and he put it on the Last for me, and by
Night I finished that Shoe; which when he came to see, he admired it was so
well done, showing me how to mend the Faults in the next, which I finished the
next Day: He then supposed I had done something at the Trade before, but was
mistaken: And when I would have paid him, he refused it, and told me, he would
not take any Money of me; so I proposed, that if he would give the Leather, I
would give my Work; and so by Consent we gave the Shoes to a poor honest Man
that did go on Errands for us both. I had then more Work of him, and he was so
pleased with it, that he would allow me half Pay for making it up, and was so
forward to advance my Wages in a few Weeks, that unless I would take full Pay,
he cheerfully told me, I must look out for another Master: I as pleasantly
replied, I did not desire to change: Well then, replied he, I sell the Shoes
you make, for as much as any of the like Sizes made in my Shop.

I made such Improvement in this Business that I could in a little Time earn
fifteen Shillings per Week, being three Shillings their Money for making a Pair
of large Man's Shoes, which was my chief Work. Now their Shilling was about
Nine-pence Sterling. This new Trade was of very great Service to me, by both
diverting Body and Mind; and finding I now could supply my own Wants with my
own Hands, it gave me great Ease indeed: But some Friends were uneasy that I
should do it, as supposing it would be to their Dishonor; but others again
were glad, and thought it a great Honor to the Cause of the Gospel; and they
rejoiced with thankful Hearts that I succeeded so well.

Going on thus some Weeks, my kind Master came one Morning, and did not bring
so much Work as before. I asked him the Reason? adding pleasantly, What does my
Credit sink, that I have no more brought? He smiling said. It Is not best to
trust G^al Birds too far, and I am now resolved you shall work no more for me
after these I have new brought. Why! what is the Matter? said I. He added, you
shall be a Master as well as I. How Can that be? said I. He replied, you shall
have Leather of your own, and by doing that, you may get Eight-pence, Ten-pence
or a Shilling a Pair more profit than you do now. But I told him I had rather
Work Journey-work for him than do to so: For I knew not how to get Leather and
other Materials, and when I had it, I was a Stranger to the cutting it out.
Trouble not yourself about that, said he, for I will do all this for you: And
so he did with much Cheerfulness, delighting to serve me effectually.

I went on thus for several Months, and he came to me every Day once or twice,
and was a very cheerful, pleasant tempered Man, but too much addicted to take
delight in some of his Neighbors Company, who too often were disguised with
strong Liquor, and he would often say, if you were to continue here, I should
overcome it, and I verily believe should be a sober Quaker. I told him he must
leave the Company he too much frequented; which he not Observing, I heard
afterward they proved very hurtful to him. We had very often serious
Conversation about Religion, and it appeared to me, he had been favored with
an enlightened Understanding, and would confess, if there was any such Thing as
preaching Christ truly, it was amongst the Quakers; for both Churchmen,
Presbyterians, Independents, and others, all preach themselves, and for their
own Advantage in this World; so that if there was no Pay, there would be no
Preaching. He frequently attended our Meetings for a Time.

But to return to the Proceedings of the Court, which adjourned from the 4th
Day of the First-Month 1702-3, for about six Weeks, and so continued by several
Adjournments to the last Day of the Eight-Month following. The Occasion of
these Adjournments was this; Judge Bridges was ill, and had been for some time
declining, but was expected to be able to attend the Service of the Court, and
take Vengeance on me and the Quakers, none being thought so fit for that Work
as he; yet he never did, but died some Months before I was set at Liberty.

I had in this Time of Confinement sundry Visits, two of which were more
remarkable than the rest. The first was by an Indian king, with three of his
chief Men with him; and the other by one John Rogers from New London, and he
staid with me from the Time he came about six Days. An Abstract of both
Conferences are as follow, viz.

I shall first take Notice of the Conference with the Indian King, as he styled
himself; but his Nation was much wasted and almost extinct, so that he had but
a small People to rule. However, there was in him some Marks of Superiority
above the other three who attended him, who showed some Regard to him as their
Sovereign.

This Indian, with th^se his Attendants, came to visit me, and staid some Time,
enquiring, the Cause of my Confinement: An Account of which I gave them as
intelligibly as I could, finding they understood English better than they could
speak it. The Conference was mostly between the King and me, the rest but very
seldom put in a Word.

The King asked, if I was a Christian? I told him I was. And are they, said he,
Christians too that keep you here? I said they professed themselves to be so.
Then he and his Company showed their Admiration, that one Christian could do
thus to another. And then he enquired concerning the Difference between me and
them. I replied, it consisted of sundry Particulars. First, my Adversaries hold
with sprinkling a little Water on the Face of art Infant, using a Form of
Words, and the Ceremony of making the Sign of a Cross with their Finger on the
Babe's Forehead, Calling this Baptism, and urging it as essential to future
Happiness: And I with my Brethren, can see no Good in this Ceremony. Here they
talked one with another again, but I understood them not. After which they
asked me, if I thought there was nothing in this Ceremony of Good to secure our
future Happiness? I said, I see Nothing of good in it. I was right, they said,
neither do we; Asking, wherein do you further differ from them? I proceeded,
That they held it needful to take at certain Times, a Piece of Bread to eat,
with a small Quantity of Wine to drink after it is consecrated, as they call it,
which they pretend to do in Remembrance of Christ our Savior, urging this as
necessary to our future Happiness as the former, calling this the
Lord's Supper, He told me, that they had seen both these Ceremonies put in
Practice by the Presbyterians, but could not understand, if it was a Supper,
why they used it in the Middle of the Day; but they looked upon them both as
very insignificant to the End proposed; saying, The The great God they
frequently called so.
Ma^g Monettay looked at the Heart, how it was devoted, and not at these
Childish Things. Asking, wherein do you differ further from them? I proceeded,
that they held it lawful to kill and destroy their Enemies; but we cannot think
that good and right in us; but rather endeavor to overcome our Enemies with
courteous and friendly Offices and Kindness, and to assuage their Wrath by
Mildness and Persuasion, and bring them to consider the Injury they are doing
to such as cannot in Conscience revenge themselves again. He assented, that this
was good: But who can do it? said he; when my Enemies seek my Life, how can I
do other than use my Endeavor to destroy them in my own Defense? My Answer
was, That unless we were under the Government of a better Spirit than our
Enemies, we could not do it; but if we are under the Government of the good
Spirit, which seeks not to destroy Men's Lives but to save them, and teaches us
to do Good for Evil, and to forgive Injuries, then we can submit to Providence,
putting our Trust in the great God to save us from the Violence and Wrath of
our Enemies. The King said, Indeed this is very good; but do you do thus when
provoked by your Enemies? I said, sundry of our Friends had done so, and been
saved from the Rage of their Enemies, who have confessed our Friends to be good
Men. Ay, said he, they are good indeed; for if all came into this Way, there
would then be no more need of War, nor killing one the other to enlarge their
Kingdoms, nor one Nation want to overcome the (...). I then asked him, if this
was not a right Principle; and what would much add to the Happiness of Mankind?
They all four said, it was very good indeed; but feared few would embrace this
Doctrine. I said, all Things have their Beginings, (...) as now our Duty to
embrace this Truth, hoping (...) others by this Example may do the same. They
(...) up their Eyes as a Token of their Assent, showing by their Words their
Desire that this good Spirit might prevail in the World: Then, said they,
Things will go well. But wherein, added he, do you differ more from them? I
said, we held it unlawful to swear in any Case; but our Adversaries did not. I
found they had not any Nation about Oaths, and so they dropped it, being desirous
of introducing another Subject; for having observed our Friends Behavior in
not pulling off their Hats as others did, they wanted to know our Reasons for
it: I said, uncovering our Heads was a Token of Honor we paid to the great God
in our Prayers to him; and we thought any Homage equal to it ought not to be
given to any of his Creatures. They said, it was all very good. Then we sat
silent some Time; and I asked them, what they thought of the Great God? One of
them took a Piece of a Wood Coal from the Hearth, like Charcole half burnt, and
made a black Circle therewith on the Hearth-stone, and said, they believed the
Great God, (or Monettay, as they then called him) to be all Eye, that he saw
every Thing at once; and all Ear, that he heard every Thing in like Manner; and
all Mind, that he knew all Things, and Nothing could be bid from his Sight,
Hearing, or Knowledge. Then I asked, what they thought of the Devil? (or bad
Monettay, as they called him.) They said, they did not look upon his Power
independent from the good Monettay, but that what he did was by Permission; nor
indeed did they think he had any Power at all, but what was given or suffered
for him to exercise over Indians, to bring about some good Designs of the good
Monettay for their Advantage, to reclaim them when they were bad, and
displeased the good Monettay: For they believed the good Monettay had all
Power, yet he employed his Servants or Angels, as we Term them, to execute his
Will. And the Indian that made the Circle, described four several small Circles
on the Edge of the great one, and they showed their Opinion how their little
Gods were employed to chastize the Indians when bad, and to comfort and
encourage them in Good: They likewise supposed the four small Circles to answer
to the four Quarters of the World; that they had Inferiors under them again to
execute their Will when they received a Commission from that great Mind; but
that all derived their Power from the supreme Eye, Ear, and Mind; demonstrating
their Meaning by Comparison thus: As supposing the Indians bad, the good
Monettay sees it, and he gives Orders to that in the North, and by him to them
under him, whereby we are by hard Frosts, great Snows, and cold Winds in the
Winter, very much afflicted with want of Food, and with Cold; and in the
Summer, either extreme Heat or Wet prevent the Fruits of the Earth from coming
to Perfection, until we be made humble and good: Then we pray for Relief, and
Commission is given to the Monettay in the South, and by him to them under him,
whereby we have warm Winds, and pleasant Rains in the Spring, that makes
Yeo-Cod (meaning Bucks) easy to be taken, and Fat, etc. And in the Summer,
fruitful good Weather, neither too wet nor too dry. Thus they account for all
reigning Distempers and common Calamities by Sickness or Famine; and on the
other Side, Health and Plenty, etc. So in like Manner for War and Peace, viz.
When two Nations are both wicked, they are stirred up to destroy each other,
either by the Devil, or by some of these Monettay's by him employed, etc. I
then proceeded to query, what Thoughts they had of a Future State after this
Life? First desiring to have their Opinion. whether they did not think they had
a Part in them that would never die? Which they readily granted, and gave me
their Opinion, what both the State of the good and bad Indians would be in the
other World; that the good Indians would go into the South and South-West,
where it was very warm and pleasant, and Plenty of all Things both for Pleasure
and Profit: As supposing, that they should have the Delight of enjoying the
Comforts of eating, drinking, hunting, and all other Pleasures they enjoyed
here, in a more agreeable Way to sooth and please their Desires, than ever they
could in this World. Thus they described Heaven, as best suited their natural
Senses, endeavoring to instill into their Youth, as they said, Principles of
Virtue and Justice, that when they die, as to this World, they may be sit and
worthy of this good Country or Heaven, where it always is serene and quiet, no
Night, nor Winter in this brave pleasant Country; but all Things are plenty,
very good, well and comfortable. But then, the wicked and bad Indians, when
they die, go into the North and North-West, a Country extreme cold, dark and
unpleasant; no Sunshine; they endeavor to get something to satisfy their
Hunger, but cannot, for the Yeo-Cod are very poor, and they cannot catch them; so
in this Extremity they desire to die, but cannot; nor can they find any Means to
put an End to this misearble and wretched Life, but they must continue in
Sorrow and Trouble without any Hopes of End. Thus they described their Thoughts
of a future State, either in Heaven or in Hell, according to their Notions of
both.

I then turned my Discourse and asked them, what they thought of a good Spirit
that was present with them in their Mind? (finding they had no Notion of
Christ, as to his bodily Appearance) they readily acknowledged, that a good
Spirit attended them, and did reprove, or make them sorrowful when they did
badly: They likewise did believe the bad Monettay, or Devil, did persuade them
in their Minds to Evil, and the more they strove against the Devil, and prayed
for Stength, by and from the good and great Monettay, the more they prevailed
ever these evil and wicked Temptations of the Devil in their own Minds, which
had, they said, no Power to lead them into Evil, but by their own Consent, nor
could do them any Hurt it they did not yield to his alluring and deceitful
Temptations. I further enquired, if all the Indians were much of the same Mind
in these Matters? but they could not resolve me.

I also enquired, whether any amongst them were looked upon as Instructors more
than others? They said, no; but the Head of every Family ought to do their best
Endeavors to instruct their Families, but it was neglected; yet they retained
the Practice of coming all together once in a Year, and the Elder did advise
the Younger, what their Parents and Elders had told them, and thus they
transmitted the Knowledge of former Things from one Generation to another, by
having them repeated in these Assemblies.

Here our Conference ended: And as I could treat them with some Refreshment, I
did, which they thankfully received; and we parted in great Friendship and
Love, after a Stay of one Night and almost two Days.

Some Weeks after this, John Rogers, a Seventh-day Baptist, from New London in
New England, came near two Hundred Miles on purpose to visit me; he was the
chief Elder of that Society called by other People Quaker-Baptists, as
imagining (though falsely) that both in their Principles and Doctrines they seemed
one with us; whereas they differed from us in these material Particulars, viz.
About the Seventh-day Sabbath, and in making Use of Baptism in Water to grown
Persons, after the Manner of other Baptists, and using the Ceremony of Bread
and Wine as a Communion, and also of anointing the Sick with Oil: Nor did they
admit of the Light of Truth, or Manifestation of the Spirit, but only to
Believers; alleging Scripture for the Whole. They bore a noble Testimony
against Fightings, Swearing, (...) Complements, and the superstitious
Observation of Days, for which he had endured sundry long Imprisonments, and
other very great Sufferings besides, both of Body and Goods. He was a Prisoner
when William Edmundson was in that Country, (see his Journal Page 90) and had
by Sufferings obtained so complete a Victory over his Opposers, that now they
took no Notice of him, he might do and say what he pleased: But he thought
himself, that he had carried his Opposition to the Observation of the First Day
as a Sabbath a little too far at Times, so that he would do all Sorts of Work,
yea, drive Goods or Merchandise of sundry Sorts in a Wheel-barrow, and expose
them to Sale before the Pulpit, when the Priest was about the Middle of his
Discourse, if he was not hindered, which sometimes, though but seldom, happened;
and would do any other kind of Labor, letting the People know his Reasons for
so doing, was to expose their Ignorance and Superstition in observing that Day,
which had more of Law that Gospel in it, for Christ was the true Sabbath of
Believers; withal adding, that he was raised up for that very End. They
admitted Women to Speak in their Meetings, (believing some qualified by the
Gift of the Spirit for that Work) and sometimes they had but very little said
in their Meetings, and sometimes they were wholly silent, though not often; for
they admitted any one, who wanted Information concerning the meaning of any
Text to put the Question, and it was then expounded and spoken to, as they
understood it: Any one being admitted to show his Dissent, with his Reasons for
it: Thus, said he, we improve our Youth in Scripture Knowledge. I asked him, if
they did not sometimes carry their Difference in Sentiments too far to their
Hurt? He acknowledged there was Danger in doing so, but they guarded against it
as much as they could.

He gave me a large Account of the Conference he had with William Edmundson,
and told me that Nothing ever gave him so much Trouble and close Uneasiness, as
his opposing William Edmundson at that Time did, desiring me, if I lived to see
William Edmundson, to acquaint him with the sincere Sorrow that he had upon his
Mind for that Night's Work.

At my Return, I acquainted William Edmundson therewith, who desired me, if I
lived to see him again, to let him know that it was the Truth William
Edmundson, bore Testimony to that he opposed, and therefore it was no wonder
that he was so much troubled for his foolish Attempt therein.

He gave me an Account of his Convincement and Conversion, which was very
large, and although at first it was agreeable and very entertaining, yet by his
spinning of it out so long, he made it disagreeable, for he staid with me five
or six Days, and it was the greatest Part of his Discourse all that Time,
although I did sundry Times start other Subjects, which he would soon get off,
and go on about his own Experiences.

I queried, why he was so very stiff about the Seventh-day, and whether, upon a
mild Consideration of the Opposition he gave about their Sabbath, it was not by
him carried too f^r^^ He acknowledged, that he did not at first see clearly
into the true Meaning of the Sabbath, but that the Provocations he met with
from the Priests, (who stirred up the People and Mob against him) might
sometimes urge him farther than he was afterward easy with, in opposing them;
but when he kept his Place, he had inexpressible Comfort and Peace in what he
did; adding, that the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God.

I queried with him, why they kept to the Use of Bread and Wine, and plunging
or dipping into Water, since he taught his People to put no Confidence in those
Ceremonies, by supposing any Virtue or Holiness in them? He replied, that they
did it for the Sake of those who were weak in Faith; adding, that if our
Friends had taken those two Sacraments along with them, they would have driven
all before them. This led us into a long Conference, the Substance of which was
to the Effect following.

^e spoke very much of his Satisfaction and Uni^^ with George Fox, John Stubbs,
John Burnyeat, and William Edmundson, as the Lord's Servants, with sundry
others of the first Visitors of that Country; that he knew them to be sent of
God, and that they had carried the Reformation farther than any of the
P^^t^dants ever did before them, since the general Apostasy from the Purity
both of Faith and Doctrine; first, the Church of England, they did Nothing in
the End but made an English Translation of the Latin Service used before; the
Presbyterians they dissented, and the Independants, but came not to the Root of
the Mat^^; the Baptists dissented from all the other three, but went not
through. Upon which, though I could not wholly agree with him in his Assertions,
I queried, if he thought that all these several Steps of the English Church
from Popery, the Presbyterians and Independants from the English Church, and
the Baptists from all three of them, had not something of Good in them? viz. I
mean, whether the first concerned in dissenting from Popery, though they
afterward rested too much in the Form of Worship in the Episcopal Way, had not
the Aid of Christ's Spirit to assist them in their Dissent? and so for all the
rest. This he did readily grant to be a great Truth; and so allowing, that the
first Reformers were acted by divine Light, and being faithful to what was made
known to them, had their Reward; and their Successors sat down in that Form
their Predecessors left them in, but did not regard that Power and Life by
which they were acted, and so became Zealots for that Form, but opposed the
Power. And this, said he, is the true Cause of the several Steps of Dissent one
from another; and the Reason why there is so little Christian Love, and so much
Bitterness and Envy one against another, is their setting down contented, each
in their own Form, without the Power, so that they are all in one and the same
Spirit, acting their Part in the several Forms of Worship in their own Wills
and Time, not only opposing the Spirit of Truth, but making it the Object of
their Scorn, and those who adhere to it the Subject of their Reproach,
Contempt, and Envy: And this is the Foundation of Persecution, said he. But we
shall, said I, digress too far from what we had in View; Thou allowest the
aforementioned Friends to be Servants of Christ, and guided by his Word, and
that they advanced the Reformation higher than any had done before them; and
it is plain they had a Concern to lay aside Fighting, Swearing, vain
Compliments, as well as Baptism and Bread and Wine, these two Sacraments, as
you call them; and as you continue in the Practice of them, it must be in your
own Will, and not in the Will of God, by thy own Confession. How do thou,
said he, make that but? Thus, said I; first, Thou allowest those of our Friends
to be true Ministers, and declarest thy Unity with them as such, and they had a
Concern to draw Peoples Minds from depending upon these Shadows to trust in the
Substance: Now how could this be so effectually done, as by persuading the
People to discontinue the Use of those Shadows? for whilst they did use them,
though at the same Time they were told, there was Nothing in them, yet weak
Minds would still retain some Regard, as though they had some ^eal Good in
them, when in Truth there was none. But if our Friends had a Concern from the
Lord to do this, how can thou in Reason suppose, that by the same Spirit you
had a Concern from the Lord to continue in the Performance of them, unless thou will suppose contradictory Pinciples and Doctrines proceed from that good
Spirit; which I hope is far from thy Thoughts. Yea, said he, so that is indeed.
Adding, we do not act so, for we say as you do, that there is Nothing in these
Ceremonies but a Sign; it is the Power of an endless Life that we persuade them
to seek for in themselves, and not to look on these as any Advantage in a
spiritual Sense at all. Then, said I, you had better do as we do, wholly lay
them aside; pray remember the brazen Serpent that proved a Snare to Israel,
said I: But he would not yield to this. Then I asked him, if he thought either
of these Ceremonies of more Use than the other: No, replied he; set one aside,
and set both, for there is no more Virtue in one than the other. I then queried
with him, if ever he had seen a small Treatise entitled the Doctrine of
Baptisms, wrote in Cromwell's Time by one William Dell? he never heard of such
a Book, he said. I had it by me, and turning to the Preface in the last
Paragraph, where the Author in a prophetic Way has these Words, But because I
see this present Generation so rooted and built up in the Doctrine of Men, I
have the less Hope that this Truth will prevail with them; and therefore I
appeal to the next Generation, which will be farther removed from these Evils,
and will be brought nearer to the Word, but especially to that People whom God
has, and shall form by his Spirit, for himself, for these only will be able to
make just and righteous Judgment in this Matter, seeing they have the Anointing
to be their Teacher, and the Lamb to be their Light. Having read this
Paragraph, he took the Book and read it to himself, and was ^ilent until I
observed to him, that the Author plainly pointed at our People. He allowed
there was Reason so to think. By this Time it was late, and I desired him to
take the Book, read and consider it, and let me have his Thoughts the next Day.
So for that Time we parted, and he came not till late in the Afternoon next
Day, although (...) lodged hard by the Place of my Confinement. And when he came,
told me he had read it carefully, and considered it closely, confessing that it
was the Language of the Spirit, and true Doctrine. I told him, now I hoped that
he was satisfied, that it was most safe for them to lay these Shadows aside,
and labor to bring their People to the Substance. He allowed that it might be
proper to do so. But, added he, it must be done with great Care and Tenderness,
lest some should be hurt by it. To which I replied, they would be more in
Danger to be hurt by following these shadowy Observations, in which they could
have no Benefit, and continuing in them might be a Means to lead them into
Superstition and Idolatry, and make them sit down and take their Rest in the
Shadows, and seek no farther.

Having said what we could, both of us dropped it by Consent; and after some
short Pause (for he could not long be silent) we fell on the Subject of
Election and Reprobation, he asserting, that saving Light and Grace was only
given to the Elect, or true Believers, and the rest were blinded. I alleged
the contrary: That an Offer of divine Love was made to all, but all did not
make good Use of it: So to Argument we went, and I requested the Reason for his
Belief in this Doctrine? desiring him first to explain himself, whether he
thought that Reprobates were from their Cradles or Births so fixed, that no
Means ordained could alter it? He paused some Time, and at last said, all
Things with God are possible; but from the Doctrine of Paul Romans ix. it plainly
appears, says he, to be so, and that God is glorified by both, as in the Case
of Pharaoh. I replied, Pharoah's Case could not properly be adapted to this
Doctrine, became it was in itself peculiarly intended for the convincing of the
Egyptians, as well as the rest of Mankind, that he (GOD) was the only All
Powerful God, worthy of Obedience, and that the Life and Power of Kings was in
him; and to confirm that weak People the Jews, that if they leaned upon that
God who had done all this before their Eyes, they need not fear the Wrath of
Kings, though accompanied with strong and numerous Armies; for God, who had
chosen them, could soon overthrow their Enemies, and save them by a mighty
Deliverance from their Rage and Wrath: But how this can be brought to support
Election and Reprobation as now it is understood, and preached up by sundry
pretended Teachers, I see not: I therefore desire that thou would explain it
as thou understands it. He then proceeded as follows; first calling for the
Book, and turning to the Text, Romans ix. he began at the 10th Verse, and went
on, expounding very strongly and undeniably, in his own View, to the the 21st
Verse, continuing his Expositions to an uncommon Length; all which I heard with
a profound Silence, and he became silent too at last, and we sat in Silence
some time, and then I spoke to the Effect following: That as it appeared to me,
the 22d Verse took off much of the Edge of what he had said with respect to
Reprobation; which I read, and he confessed it did pretty much so. I further
added, that the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, in the Way it is now
expounded by thee, is very injurious, in reflecting on the infinite Mercy of
God, and point blank opposing the chief End of the Gospel, and coming of our
Savior, who tasted Death for every Man, and offers Life by his good Spirit and
Grace to all. Besides thy Way of expounding the Apostle in this Epistle, makes
him quite contradict himself in other Places, where he clearly sets forth the
Love of God by and through Christ, to be universally offered both to Jews and
Gentiles, in order to Salvation: And last of all, as thou have explained
thyself now upon this Doctrine thou renders that great Duty of Prayer almost
Impertinent, if not quite useless, with all other religious Endeavors, etc. so
that if thou can not make it out otherwise than this is, I may, I think,
without any Breach of Charity, conclude thee unsound in thy Faith and Doctrine
of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for all Men, and was by his
Apostles preached the Savior of the World to both Jews and Greeks: Therefore
we must expound Paul in Romans ix. after another Manner, so as to reconcile Paul
with himself, where he plainly shows, God wills all Men to be saved, and to
come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as in the second of the first of Timothy,
and abundantly elsewhere, that we have already touched upon: But if thou will
give me Leave, without Interruption, I will give thee my Thoughts on this
Subject, which in short are these, viz.

It is beyond all Doubt or Question with me, that God wills all Men to be
saved; and to complete his Will, and Offers of Salvation to all, he has
ordained the Means to procure the End by his own Son, who tasted Death for
every Man, whereby all have it put into their Power, as free Agents, to make
Choice for themselves by applying to the Means ordained by God through his Son
our Lord Jesus Christ, for the obtaining that which he has willed for them,
viz. Salvation! Now, if this is true, as the Scriptures assert, and our own
Experience confims it to ourselves, then it follows, that all who are diligent,
through the Obedience of Faith, endeavoring to make their Calling and Election
sure, by applying to the Means ordained of God, ( viz. that Grace and Truth
that is come by Jesus Christ) for the obtaining that which he has willed for
them, as I have said, we may safely conclude all in this State, to be the Elect
of God in Christ. But then all who contrary to this, neglect and slight, nay,
suffer me to say, rebel against the inward Convictions of Grace and Truth in
their own Minds, (which is the only Guide and Rule for doing better) and
continue herein until they are left and hardened in their Sins and Wickedness,
being given up to a Reprobate Mind, having their Consciences seared with an hot
Iron, are past feeling of any Remorse for their ungodly Deeds. These I take to
be in a Reprobate Condition, and this Reprobation is of themselves, they having
chosen it; for they had the Offers of the same Grace and Truth to assist them
to do better, as the Elect have had, but would not apply themselves thereto,
but did wilfully reject it. Now all this thou know may be fairly proved by
the Scriptures, and thou can, I think, do no otherwise than allow it to be
conclusive to decide this Point; for it is plain, the first are the Children of
God, made so by their co-working with the Spirit of Christ; and the other are
Reprobates and Children of Antichrist, made so by their Rebellion against the
Spirit of Truth and Obedience to the Spirit of Error: And here I conclude with
the Apostle's Words, Romans ix. 22. What if God, willing to show his Wrath, and
to make his Power or known, endures with much long suffering the Vessels of
Wrath, (by their own Rebellion) fitted to Destruction?

Here we closed up the Discourse; and now I shall go on with my Imprisonment
and Clearing from the same.

About the Beginning of the Eighth-Month 1703, the Sheriff had an Order to call
or warn eighteen Men for a Jury, to try their Success a second Time: But
whether they went upon the old Indictment or a new one, I could not understand,
but it was thought by some of the last Jury, to be the same Indictment that the
first Jury went upon; but I was never admitted to see it: The Sheriff had
private Instructions to get such Men put into the Jury, as they thought would
answer their End, which he showed me with Abhorrence, assuring me, he would
never do it; so the Jury was fairly named, and they made no great Matter about
it, but in a short Time (as their Predecessors had done before them) they came
in with their Bill, signed Ignoramus; which gave some of the Lawyers Cause to
say, in a jocular Way, they were got into an Ignoramus Country.

This was on the second Day of the Ninth-Month, and the Court adjourned to the
next Day, at which Time I was had into Court; which I was told, was not regular
nor lawful to bring a Man to the Bar that had nothing laid to his Charge by his
Peers, the grand Inquest; however, I was asked, if I had any Thing to offer to
the Court (...) I desired my Liberty, and Reparation for the Wrong done me in
taking it from me etc: The Judge told me, I might have my Liberty, paying my
Fees. I replied, that I was informed there was no Fees due, as the Case then
was, according to Law; but if there had, I should not pay any, it being to me a
Matter of Conscience. The Judge said, He believed so, and smiled, speaking
something to those near him, that was not heard by me: However I was set at
Liberty by Proclamation; and a large Body of my dear Friends, from all Parts of
the Island, came to see me Cleared, and had me away with them in a kind of
Triumph, not being a little glad that I came off so honorably; and even the
Country People who were not Friends, were there in abundance, and rejoiced
exceedingly at my Enlargement.

I was now at liberty, after having been a Prisoner one Year wanting three
Weeks and about two Days; but having not Freedom to go away, I staid some Time,
visiting every Corner of the Island, and had very large and open Meetings: The
People were thoroughly alarmed, so that I sound by Experience, that my long
Imprisonment had made me more popular and regarded, so that they flocked in
great Numbers to where I was, and Friends were careful that they should have
Notice. They appointed a Meeting for me at a Place called Cow-neck, at one
J^^^h D^ught^^'s, there not having been any at that Place before; and as I lay
in Bed at my dear Friend John Redman's at the Bay-side, the Night before, I
dreamt that an honest Friend was fishing in a large Stone Cistern, with a
crooked Pin for his Hook, a small switch Stick for his Rod, and a Piece of
Thread for his Line; and George Fox came and told me, that there were three
Fishes in that Place, and desired me to take the Tackling of the Friend, for
that he wanted Skill to handle the Matter: Accordingly, methought he (the
Friend) gave me the Rod, and the first Time that I threw in I caught a fine
Fish: George Fox bid me try again, for there were two more in that Place; I
did, and took up another: He bid me cast in my Hook once more; I did, and took
the Third: Now, said George, there is no more there. This Dream was taken from
me as if I had not dreamt at all. The next Day we went to the Meeting, and were
a little late, by Reason the Tide and high Fresh Water obliged us to ride the
farthest Way, and when we came into Meeting a Friend was preaching on universal
Grace; but in a little Time he le^t off, and my Heart being full of the Matter,
I took it up, and we had a blessed powerful Meeting, and all ended well.

I returned with my Friend Rodman to his House, and in our Way my Dream came
fresh into my Memory, and that Evening I told it to my Friend Rodman, and gave
him a Description of George Fox's Features and Bu^k, as he appeared to me; and
he said, I had a very just and right Apprehension of him. He had been much with
George Fox when he was in Barbados, and was well acquainted with him; adding,
this remarkable Dream shows some Good done there There Is a large Meeting since
settled there.
this Day.

Now after I was clear of Long Island, (it being just with me as if I had been
to set out from Home) I found it of Necessity to convenc the Elders, and lay
before them my Concern, as I did when I came from Home; and in a tender and
fatherly Way they took care to examine what I might he in need of, both with
respect to Linen, Woolen, Pocket-Money, and a Horse; (for as yet I had not
bought one, never finding Freedom so to do): But Friends, to their Praise be it
spoken, assisted me from Stage to Stage, and when I was in Prison I saw I had
no want of a Horse, and admired the Kindness of Providence in restraining me
from having one till wanted: And I had Money plenty by the Trade of
Shoe-making, so that I wanted none, nor did I want any Necessaries for the
Journey but a Companion, and then sundry offered themselves very freely to
travel with me: But my dear Friend Samuel Bowne had a Concern to visit the
Eastern Parts of New England, who had a sine Gift, but not very large; I was
very glad of his Company, so we set forward in the Beginning of the
Twelfth-Month, and the Winter not being broke up, we rode over the Ice in
sundry Places in Connecticut Colony, some narrow and some broad Rivers
New London, the biggest, but we had no Meeting ^^r near two Hundred Miles: The
People being mostly rigid Presbyterians, counted it a great C^ime to be at a
Quakers Meeting, especially on the Sabbath Day, as they Term the First Day of
the Week. But coming into Narraganset, we were amongst Friends again. So we
went for Rhode Island, and there Friends were very numerous, and we had large
Meetings indeed: There was a Marriage of a young Man (his Name was Richardson)
with a Daughter of Thomas Redman, a Man of the first Rank in the Island, so
that we had the Governor, (his Name was Samuel Cranston) and most of the chief
Men in the Government at the Marriage, and we had a precious living Time, which
gave me great Encouragement. The Governor was very kind, and queried with me
about my Imprisonment, he being a great Lover of Friends, but not a professed one
himself.

From Rhode Island we went (...) s^^ait toward Hampton and Dover, having some
Meetings, but few, by reason we purposed to return to the Yearly Meeting in
Rhode Island.

When we came to Dover, we had a pretty large Meeting, but we were both silent,
at which I was somewhat amazed, it being new to me: However, another Meeting
was appointed next Day, some little Distance from Dover, which was much larger:
My Companion said something, but very little, and was uneasy that he said any
Thing: I was quite shut up, and after Meeting I was exceedingly comforted,
being filled with divine Sweetness and heavenly Joy, that I was preserved, and
did not force myself to offer. They appointed another Meeting the Day
following, some Distance off, at which I found myself quite shut up, and held
back as it were, from saying any Thing, and my Companion was also silent, who
after Meeting looked upon me very innocently, saying, SAMUEL, What do think
those People will say, that we should come so far to appoint Meetings amongst
them, and have Nothing to say? It just then livingly came into my Mind to
reply, Fear not, have Faith, Nothing doubting but we shall have enough to say
before we leave them.

Our next Meeting was to be in the Center of the Meetings which we had before,
in a considerable large House, but not big enough for the Company by far, and
the Country was all alarmed, so that it was a very large Meeting indeed; and it
being War Time with the Indians, the People brought such Weapons as they had to
Meeting, so that when we came to the Meeting house, I was surprised to see so
many Firearms, and other Instruments of War, standing against the
Meeting House Wall. However, I was before told, that it was the Custom of other
People to do so; and I found that those Firearms, and warlike Weapons belonged
to other People, not Friends, that were come to Meeting: A large Meeting it was
indeed, and very quiet; we sat a long Time in Silence, which put me on
examining my Conduct, and looking back to see how it was with me; but finding
no Cause of Uneasiness from any Thing I had done before, to cause me to be thus
shut up, I came to this Conclusion and Resignation, that I was but a Servant,
and could of myself do Nothing; secretly praying that the Lord would give me
Patience not to be uneasy, if he had Nothing for me to do, and if he had, there
I was ready and willing to do it: And thus I settled down, diligently waiting
for divine Direction. And in a little Time a Word came with Life, (and I stood
up with it) to the Effect following: The Lord's Time is the best Time, and let
us not grow uneasy to wait for it; for when he opens none can shut, and when he
shuts none can open. Enlarging on this Subject a little more; and we had a very
glorious Meeting, in which I was largely opened in sundry Branches of the
Doctrine of Christ; and I had not seen very often greater Tenderness than was
at that Time amongst the People; for the War with the Indians had humbled them
to such a degree, that Truth had a very great Reach upon them indeed, and the
Meeting ended well.

Immediately I found an uncommon and weighty Concern to request the Ministers
to come together which they very readily complied with, and they were an
handsome Number, but not all thoroughly baptized into the Work. My Companion
was very prettily opened, and we had a very suitable Service amonst them, and
saw clearly the Reason why we were so shut up in Silence; some of them were got
into an Extreme in Preaching and Praying, and would continue Meetings to an
unseasonable Length, as likewise in their Preaching and Praying at Table; which
gave great Uneasiness to some sensible Friends amongst them, but they could not
redress it till after this Opportunity. They themselves saw they were wrong in
doing as they had done, and got out of this Extreme, which was a Degree of
Ranterism, being attended with a Spirit of Opposition against the Order of
Friends in Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings.

Having finished our Service, we returned back to Hampton, and had several
Meetings, and so for Rhode Island Yearly Meeting, which was very large, and to
good Satisfaction.

From thence I went by Sea to several Islands, as Martha's Vineyard, Nantucket,
and some others; but in Nantucket I had great Satisfaction, for the People, not
joined with Friends, were moderate Baptists and came generally to Meetings,
their Preacher also with them, who after Meeting raised some Objections against
us, that he had from our Adversaries Books and that which he pitched upon
mostly was about Prayer, that we did not pray to God in the Name of Christ, but
in our own Names. I told him, we looked upon it to be our Duty to pray to God
in Christ's Name, and as his Name is understood to be his Power, we durst not
presume to pray to the Father, but as the Wisdom and Spirit of Christ gave us
Utterance. He said, it was a Gospel Truth in his primitive Purity.

The Governor sent for me, and we had a Time to confer about our Principles,
and after a little Time he seemed much pleased with what I had to say: And
having finished my Service I returned to Rhode Island, and found some were
contriving to have me taken up, by informing the Governor against me, as though I
was a Transgressor, by preaching, as they said, against Baptism, and the Supper
of the Lord, as they call the Bread and Wine. But the Governor being at the
Meeting himself where this supposed Offense was given, quickly saw that the
Arguments used against the Present Practice of the English Church, as well as
Presbyterians and Baptists, had so much Scripture and Reason on their Side,
that it was vain to attempt to confute them; he therefore thought it their
wisest Way to let it alone.

After this, I made another Trip to the Eastward, my dear Companion being
returned, and visited in my Way back to Dover, Meetings as they came in course;
and I visited all the Meetings, where I had been before, and had sat in Silence
in some of them, but I had now large and good Service, and great Satisfaction
amongst them, and the more so, as they now saw it their Places not to preach in
every Meeting, but to wait for the Constraint of the divine Word before they
spoke.

From thence I went to Strawberry-Bank, a Haven where much Shipping resorts for
Masts, and when clear of those Parts, returned to Hampton, Haverill, Exeter,
and sundry other Towns, where Meetings had not been kept, and amongst them to
Newbury: A Man that lived in that Place, being newly convinced, was very
desirous of a Meeting at his House, which I consented to; and when the Time
came, his Wife, not being pleased that we came on the Account of a Meeting,
would not permit us to enter the House, but kept the Doors locked against us,
being, as was said, advised to it by some of their Teachers. I took a Turn
round the House, and happened to have some Conference with her at the Window,
first assuring her, that we had no Design to put her Husband to any Manner of
Charge, but only to let us have House-room for about two Hours to hold a
Meeting; adding, that it did ill become a Wife to keep her Husband out of his
House at such a Time; promising her, that if she would let in her Husband, not
one of our People should come in with him. And by reasoning the Case, she,
after a little while, opened the Door and would have us to go in, but I had not
Freedom. Then the Place to hold the Meeting was got ready, being a large Place
like a Barn, where the Friend and his Men built Boats for the Shipping, that
being his Calling, and we sat down, being a few Friends, and in a little Time
many People came, amongst whom, as it was said, came six Preachers: And in some
convenient Time a young Woman stood up who had a pretty Gift, but the People
behaved very rudely, so that it put the poor Girl out of Countenance, and she
sat down. Then stood up Lydia Norton, a famous Minister, none more so of that
Country, and indeed she had an excellent Gift, and knew how to conduct herself
in it; but all this did not avail, the People grew worse and worse in their
Behavior; and Lydia having a very strong manly Voice, extended it very loud,
but all to no purpose, for the People were as loud as she, calling for a Dram,
and sporting themselves in their Folly, so she sat down; and a young Man,
called Joshua Puddington, stood up; they were rude to the Women, but worse with
him, raking up his former Faults, and calling for a Cann of Flip, for he could
drink as well as they, they said: And he having been a Companion with them in
fishing, they made very free with him, so he shut up. By this Time the Meeting
was exceeding numerous, and continued enlarging very much: It came into my
Mind, to stand up and take out my Bible, which I did, (for I always traveled
with one in those Days, finding a considerable Service in it at times) and
opened it, and put my Finger in it, as though I would take my Text, but I said
Nothing for some considerable Time, till all was quiet, for the People
continued in a great Confusion for a while, till some of them observed my Book;
then they began to quiet and still one another, urging as a Reason for it, that
I had the Word of God in my Hand, such a great Regard they paid to my Bible;
and in a little Time all was quiet and still: Then I opened my Mouth and said,
Behold, I am an Englishman; and enumerated the many Lands and Places I had
traveled in, but had never met with any People of such a Behavior as these
were; referring to them to advise me, what Account I must give of the People of
Newbury at my Return into England? A good comely Gentleman-like Man, in Excuse
for the Behavior of the People, said. Sir, as for Women's Preaching we hold it
unlawful, because St. Paul has forbid it, therefore we think it not proper to
give them a hearing: And as for the Man, we know him perhaps better than you,
and cannot think him qualified for that Undertaking; but you seem to be a
Gentleman of Sense, and we will hear you. I replied, that as for Women's
Preaching, its allowed a disputable Point from Paul's Words, yet nevertheless
if any of you are (after this Meeting is over) willing to hear what I have to
say in Favor of it, I shall be willing to give you the best Account I can why
I think it is lawful: And if any of you can show better Reasons against it, I
shall as willingly hear them. And as for the young Man, I grant you may, as he
is a Neighbor, have had a much better Knowledge of his former Conduct in Life,
than I can pretend to; but allowing that he may have, in Time past, been loose,
that argues not against giving him a Hearing: For how know you, but that as
S^ul did, he might condemn his past Life, and give you an Example, by his
present Conduct, to reform; for which Reasons, you ought to have heard with
Patience what he had to ^ay to you. The same Gentleman replied, I said very
right, they ought to have heard him: But I pray you speak what you have to say
freely, and I charge all present to make no Disturbance or Interruption, if
they do, in the Queen's Name I will commit them. By which Words I found he was
in the Commission of the Peace: And then I began, That Religion without
Righteousness was useless, and could not profit those who professed it. And going
on, I came in the Course of my Service to recite the great Improvement true
Religion made on the Minds of those who lived in it, in giving them Power over
their Lusts and Passions, repeating that of James i. 26. If any Man among you
seem to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart,
this Man's Religion is vain. One out of the Throng said, Sir, you impose upon
us, there is no such Text. I made a full Stop, and turned to it; and there were
many Bibles then appeared. I repeated Chapter and Verse, and they turned to it.
Then I asked them, if they had it? They replied, they had. Then I read both the
26th and 27th Verses, and asked, if it was so in their Bibles? They answered
that it was. I then desired them to consider, whether I that repeated the Text,
or he that said there was no such Text, was most in the right. Then I went on
with my Opening, carefully minding my Guide; and in the Course of the Doctrine
I had in my View, I came to treat of Faith, and distinguished between true and
false Faith, showing, that notwithstanding we might give our Assent to the
Truth of that called the Apostles Creed, or any other made and drawn up by Men,
and that we might be zealous to dispute and contend for the Truth of these
Creeds, in the wording Part of them; yet for all that, if we did not lead
Christian Lives, we were still but Unbelievers; for Faith without Works is
dead, the Text tells us, At which last Words one cries out, you impose upon us,
there is no such Text. I immediately stopped, and turned to it, and quoted it,
and they all who had Bibles made Search. There being a profound Silence, I read
the Text, asking, if it was so in their Books? They all replied, it was. I made
the same Remark as before; and then I went on, distinguishing between true and
false Faith, plainly demonstrating from Scripture, that Faith was much
different from what many took it to be. And indeed Truth was eminently preached
that Day, and there was a considerable Tenderness amongst the People, and the
Meeting ended well.

When I came out, the Gentleman came to me and I acknowledged his Kindness
toward us; and it suddenly came before me to Speak with a loud Voice in the
Street, and to desire, that if any one was at a Loss, and did not understand
any Part of what I had said, or thought I had spoken any Thing not agreeing to
Scripture, I would then desire them to let me know it, and not misrepresent any
Thing I had said when I was gone, the Gentleman made Answer on Behalf of the
People thus; None can have any Objection, for I never heard the Word better
preached in my Time. And then I told them I was ready to let them know my
Reasons, why I thought Women, properly and duly qualified, might preach
lawfully, on Condition I might have their Reasons to the contrary. The
Gentleman, who undertook still to speak on Behalf of the Company (who staid to
hear and see) said. Here is none here will undertake to dispute with you upon
this or any other Point of Religion: But I desire you will favor me with a
Promise to have another meeting here, and I will get some of the best Writers
the Country will afford, to take down your Sermon. But he little knew, that
this was no great Inducement to my coming there again: However he pressed it very
close, which I excused in the best manner I could, as not knowing that I should
or should not: And after some earnest pressing of me to go to his House to
refresh myself, which I likewise desired to be excused in, by reason we gave
Expectation to go to our Inn, and we could not stay much longer, because Night
was come upon us; we parted in good Respect and Harmony to all Appearance, and
my Heart was filled with Thankfulness and Comfort that we got over that Day's
Work so well.

Now being clear of these Parts I returned, visiting the Meetings of Friends,
and sundry other Places, as in particular Cape-Ann, where I met with great
Opposition; the Case was thus.

At Cape-Ann sundry Friends were desirous of a Meeting, and more so, because
that several young Men, who were Friends, resided there while they built a
Ship. Accordingly I went, and several Friends went with me, and we got there
early on a Seventh-day, and gave Notice of a Meeting, which was to good
Satisfaction, and it being a new Thing, it was very large; the People desired
another, which was granted: And between Meetings, some gave their Preacher
Notice, who had but a small Congregation that Day, advising him to look after
his Flock, it being his Duty. Accordingly he came before the Meeting ended,
with several of his Elders, and was very noisy. First, he would prove Water
Baptism, from the Text, to be an Ordinance of Christ. I replied; what Form of
Water Baptism would he prove so? To which he answered evasively, not being
willing to be tied to one more than another. But after some farther Pro's and
Con's he was by his own People pressed to vindicate his own Practice, which was
Sprinkling. Then he said, that was plainly proved by our Savior's Words,
Suffer little Children to come unto me, etc. I showed him his mistake; that
without Perverting that Text, it could not be applied to sprinkling of Infants
in any wise: But our Savior's Words in that Place refered to the State of
Innocence that such should experience, to be like little Children in their
Minds, as free from all Manner of Vice and Wickedness, before they were sit and
prepared for the Kingdom of Heaven, which sprinkling with elementary Water
could not do for them. Opening more at large the State of the New Birth and
Regeneration; in doing which, he would often break in upon me, but his own
People cried Shame, for the Interruption he gave, adding, when I had done, he
should be heard. But he was so much out about the Proof of sprinkling Infants
by our Savior's Words, that I found he was very weary of the Dispute, and
willing to drop it, and would go on upon Perfection. I urged him to clear up
Baptism first, as we were upon it; but he would break off from it, urging, that
both he and his People were satisfied about it; I then asked him, why he did
begin upon it? To show us our Errors, he replied. So finding nothing was like
to come of it, but Tumult and Noise, we pressed it no farther. Then he charged
us wi^h being in an Error about Perfection I desired to know, wherein? he was
very unwilling to show wherein, and f^ew off to Election; in short he would
stick to nothing. So that one of his Hearers reproved him very sharply, for his
abounding in so many charges of supposed Errors, and proving nothing; adding
that it did not suit his Station as a Minister, whose Work it was, or ought to
be, to set People to rights and to show them wherein they were wrong, and not
to heap up Charges of Errors, without showing of any thing of Proof that they
were so, which could by no means be a Way to convince and inform those in
Error. At which pertinent Rebuke he left us, some, though very few, going with
him. I then desired the People to sit down, and be still; which they readily
complied with; and after a short Pause, it was with me briefly to speak to each
Point, explaining, as well as I could, in so short a Time, the Doctrine of
outward Baptism to be but a Figure of the Inward, as outward Circumcision was
of the Inward, viz. of the Heart: And likewise setting forth the new Birth and
Regeneration in as clear a Light as Time would permit; with Perfection and
Election, and Reprobation; all which, though but very briefly touched upon,
took up a considerable Time, so that the Night was above half spent
considerably. When I had done, the People were exceeding quiet and civil, and
declared their Satisfaction, wishing their Minister had likewise staid, for he
could not have gain said what was spoken to each Point. Some few of them stayed
a short Time after, desiring that they might have more such Meetings, and we
parted in much Love and Sweetness; in particular, that Elder who reprehended
the Minister, as he called him, said, Religion could never prosper, so long at
it was made a Trade of to get Bread by; and he seemed convinced, that both the
Doctrine and practice of their People were inconsistent with primitive Religion
and our Savior's Doctrine. And thus we closed our Conference and took Leave.

From thence I returned toward Rhode Island taking my Leave, as not expecting
to see them again this Journey.

I went from Rhode Island to Bl^^k-Island, where were a few Friends, but much
hurt by lewd Company, such as Privateers Men and the like, but all the
Inhabitants came to Meeting, and were very sober and willing to hear. One
E^en^zer Slecum, a fine Minister, was with me in this Island, and we had three
or four Meetings among them: Then I returned to Rhode Island again, and was at
two large Meetings with Friends, then took my solemn Leave; and I had a Meeting
in Connecticut, at which were many Friends from both Rhode Island and
Naraganset; a fine solid Meeting it was. Then I went to Naraganset, and had two
or three Meetings there, and took my Leave and came to New London, and so for
Long Island. and at the East End of it had some Meetings, where both Friends
and others were very glad of my coming. I had many Meetings in several Places,
and there was great ^locking to Meetings, and very great Openness amongst the
People in those Parts. A Friend told me, that George Keith had proposed, as a
Means to prevent the growth of Quakerism, as he called it, the making of a Law
to restrain Friends from traveling, save to their own Meetings; for he said,
it was the traveling Preachers that kept the Quakers up so strong in
Countenance. This was thought by some hot Biggots a likely Way to put a Stop to
the Increase of the Quakers, which had infected almost the whole Country; but
by People of Moderation and Sense it was hissed at. But to the Matter; there
was a very large Meeting at Westbury on the Plain, called. Yearly meeting, to
which most of the Friends of the Island, and many of the better Sort of the
West End of it came, it being known that I should take my Leave there; and I
was very much opened, in setting forth the Difference between the true and
false Ministers, and the true and false Worship; and there being some of
Keith's Friends, they threatened to have me taken up again; but I found that
Truth was over them, and they could do no more than show their Teeth for they
could not bite.

After this Meeting I left the Island, and went into the Jerseys by
Stratan-Island to Woodbridge, Shrewsbury, Crosswicks, and back to Egg-harbour,
visiting Friends, and so back to Philadelphia to the Yearly meeting, which was
very large, and I had good Satisfaction in being there. Here sundry of my dear
Friends from Long Island met me, in particular, my dear Friend Samuel Bowne and
his worthy Wife, who was a good Mother in Israel; with this good Woman I left
fifteen Pounds to defray some Charges my good Friends had deen at about my
Imprisonment, for Chamber Rent, and a Present they made the Keeper, which I was
unwilling to have them pay, having Money plenty, that I earned in Prison by
making of Shoes: But my dear Friends would not permit it, but returned it me by
Samuel Bowne, who used so many Arguments, that it did not look well for them to
suffer it, by reason it would be a Reproach on them, and look as though I did
not Count them worthy to treat me as a Minister; so rather than bring an
Uneasiness upon my Brethren, I took it again.

From Philadelphia I accompanied these my Friends going on their Way Home,
about thirty Miles, as far as Crosswicks, visiting that Meeting and Burlington,
took my Leave there and came to the Falls Meeting, and so visited all the
Meetings on that Side of the River, down through the Welsh Towns to
Philadelphia; and taking my Leave there also, went to Concord and Chester,
visiting sundry Meetings, making toward Maryland: A Welsh Friend, named Ellis
Pugh, who proposed to come over with me to visit his Friends in Wales, was now
with me, and we came into Maryland, and took our Passage Home with a Friend,
whose Name was Daniel Maud, but be could not be ready to sail under two Months;
so my Companion returned to his Family, and I visited Virginia and Carolina,
and had good Satisfaction. I took my Leave and returned to the Ship, and found
my dear Friend Ellis Pugh laboring among Friends in Maryland. In a little Time
the Ship fell down the Bay to Kickatan, where the Fleet made up, waiting for
Convoy, and in a few Weeks the Fleet came together, being very large; but many
Ships had taken so great Damage by staying so long in the Country, that they
could not bear the Sea, and several foundered, and some put back to unload, and
have their Ships repaired. We had a long Passage but arrived safe, landing at
Portsmouth in the Tenth-Month 1706, and visited only a small Meeting at
Portsmouth and took Coach for London, where I staid to visit the Meetings in
the City, and afterward went down to Wiltshire Quarterly Meeting, where was
some Uneasiness amongst Friends, but happily reconciled.

I then went into Somersetshire to visit my Friend, being under an Engagement
of Marriage to her, as before hinted, where I staid a few Weeks, and visited
sundry Meetings in that Neighborhood, and so for Bristol, where I staid a Week
or ten Days, then went pretty directly into the North, which I called my Home,
and glad I was to be amongst my old Friends again.

Having visited the Meetings in our own County, and delivered up my
Certificate, giving an Account of my Travels, at next Monthly Meeting I
acquainted Friends with my intended Marriage, having a few Lines from under my
intended Wife's Hand, as likewise from her Parents, showing all their Consent.
And I desired a Certificate from the Meeting, and Persons were appointed, as is
usual in the like Case, to make Enquiry of my Clearness: And in the Interim the
Quarterly Meeting for Cumberland happened to be at Carlisle, whither I went.
The Meeting was exceeding large, and I had great Satisfaction in being there. I
visited a few Meetings in Cumberland, but was limited for time, being obliged
to be at the next Monthly Meeting to have my Certificate to present in
Somersetshire, in order to proceed toward my Marriage.

By this Time the Spring was advanced, and my Worthy Friend James Wilson
offered his Company to go to my Marriage; accordingly we set forward, and took
in our Way the Yearly Meeting at Middlewich, which was very large, and sundry
weighty Friends were there, I had great Satisfaction and Comfort in being
there. So we took Meetings, as they suited, in our Way: And I found my
Companion under a great Concern to speak something in Meetings, but very
backward and loath to give up to it; but I gave him what Encouragement I could:
And in Tewkesbury Meeting, after some Struggle in himself, he stood up, and
appeared very much to his own, and Friends Comfort, and so in every Meeting
after till we came to Bristol; and indeed he appeared more like an Elder in the
Work than a Babe. But at Bristol he did not get through what he had before him
to his liking, and sat down under very great Discouragement, but I cheered him
up as well as I could, by giving him an Account of my Experiences: And when we
came to the little Country Meetings again, he did finely, and gathered Strength
and Experience in the Work very fast.

We came to my intended Father-in-Law's House, and went to their
Monthly Meeting, where I and my Friend proposed our intended Marriage, which
was taken Notice of. And then Bristol Yearly Meeting coming on, we went
thither, and met our worthy Friend Thomas Camm, who intended to be at our
Marriage. After the Yearly Meeting was over at Bristol, Thomas Camm took a
Meeting or two in the Way, but my Friend James and I returned back, in order
for me to get clear of the Monthly Meeting, and likewise to provide ourselves
Necessaries for the Wedding, which was to be accomplished the Week following,
at a Meeting on purpose at Puddimore, and it was a very large Meeting, sundry
Public Friends besides Thomas Camm being there. The Yearly Meeting at London
coming on, I staid but a few Days with my Wife; I would have had her gone with
me, but her Mother was taken ill of a feverish Disorder, and was very weak, for
which Reason she was not easy to go; so I was obliged to leave her to nurse her
Mother, who in a few Days grew much better, but I had first a sweet Opportunity
with the Family, and one or two Friends more in her Chamber, and the Spirit of
Prayer came or James, and he was drawn forth very largely, and very devoutly.
After which (not without some considerable Reluctance) we parted for a short
Time, and James and I set out for London, and that Meeting was very large, and
Friends there were willing I should give some Account of my Travels, which I
was much afraid of; but being called upon in the Meeting, I did it, and came
off much better than I expected; sundry Friends expressing their Approbation of
it.

As soon as the Meeting was over, dear James and I had a heavy Parting; but as
I was going to my Wife, that helped to cheer my Heart a little. I came directly
Home without taking any Meetings, having my dear Friend James Salter, and
sundry others who had been at the Yearly Meeting, in Company. And now I staid
with my dear Wife, and went very little abroad for more than twelve Months,
having very great Comfort and Satisfaction in my married State, my Wife being a
true Sympathizer with me in all the Exercises which I often was under, of one
Kind or another; as sometimes I feared how we should go on in the World; and
she would often say, if we get but little, we will spend less; and if we save a
little out of our Gettings. we shall do well enough, I am not at all fearful of
it, neither would I have thee. Then I was jealous that my Ministry was not so
living as it had been before I was married; and making my Trouble and
Uneasiness about it known to my Wife, she would endeavor to dissuade me from
such Thoughts, adding, there was no Reason for it; so that I found her to be an
Help-meet indeed.

Then finding a Concern to visit Ireland, I acquainted her therewith, and she
gave me up so freely and cheerfully, that it was a Cordial to me; saying, that
she expected I would often leave her, and that she had resolved in herself
before Marriage, she would never hinder my Ministry if she could possibly avoid
it, and she hoped that the Lord would strengthen her, and make that easy to her.

So accordingly about the Fifth-Month 1708, I applied to the Monthly Meeting
for a Certificate, which I had, and then took Shipping at Minehead, and landed
at Cork, where I staid two or three Meetings to good Satisfaction: Then I went
to Charlevill and Limerick, visiting the Meetings along that Side of the Nation
to Colrain, and I found very hard Work in many Places, and in some Meetings was
quite shut up; but I found, where the People who did not profess with us came
in plentifully, it was not so, but there was an open Door; and that worthy
Friend, and heavenly minded, meek, and divine Preacher, Gilbert Thompson, was
there at the same Time; and when we conversed about it, I found he was, much as
I was, shut up, and found it very hard Work in some Places to get forward; and
as he was in Experience and Age much my Superior, I requested what he thought
might be the Reason, why it seemed more dead amongst Friends in this Nation
now, than in some other Places? He gave this as a Reason, That the Professors
of Truth in that Nation were very strict and exact in some Things, and placed
much in outward Appearance, but too much neglected the Reformation and Change
of the Mind, and having the Inside thoroughly cleansed from Pride and Iniquity;
for thou know, said he, the Leaven of the Pharisees was always hurtful to
the Life of Religion in all Shapes. Yet nevertheless we found a brave living
People in that Nation, and great Encouragement there was to visit fresh Places.

I came from Colrain to Lurgan, Mount Allen, and sundry small Meetings
thereabout, Hilsborough, Lisburn, Ruffer-Island, and so to Drogheda, Friends
having a Meeting House in that Town, but few came to Meeting, there being no
Friends in the Town, except two Men. From thence I went for Dublin, then
visited the Meetings toward Wicklow, Waterford and so to Cork, and had a large
Meeting at Kinsale, it being the first Meeting in the Meeting House that
Friends had built there. Friends in that Kingdom are highly to be commended, in
not sparing Charge for accommodating Meetings, either by building or hiring
Places for that Service.

By this Time the Half-yearly-meeting at Dublin came on, but Nothing very
remarkable happened there. I took my Leave of Friends, and when clear I left
the City, and my dear Friend Joseph Gill accompanied me about three Weeks. He
did not then appear as a Minister in Meetings, but was under great Exercise,
and I was satisfied he was under a very considerable Influence of divine
Goodness, which would be manifested by his coming forth in the Ministry in due
Time, which accordingly came to pass; for in a few Weeks after his Return, he
appeared very acceptably in the Ministry, and became a very serviceable Man in
the Work.

After we parted I went on for Cork, in order to take shipping Home, which I
did, but the Wind not favoring us for almost three Weeks, gave me some
Uneasiness, because I wrote to my Wife, that I intended coming sooner; and I
heard afterward some of our Neighbors had reported, that I with the Ship was
taken into France; but my poor Wife bore up bravely under it. When the Wind
sprung up fair, the Master set sail, but we were just but got clear of the
River before it veered against us; so the Master purposed that we might fetch
Waterford, and thought it would be better to do so than to go back to Cork;
accordingly we all agreed, and got there by the Close of the Evening, being
Seventh-day; I staid the First Day Meeting, which was very much to
Satisfaction, and I was opened in the Excellency of the Gospel. On Second-day
we set sail again, and got into Minehead in about forty eight Hours, and I
posted Home by Bridgwater, and met with a hearty and kind Welcome from all our
Family, more especially my dear Wife, having spent in Ireland somewhat more
than eighteen Weeks. It soon got abroad that I was come Home, and many Friends
from several Neighboring Meetings came to Visit me and we had great Comfort in
one another.

Now I had nothing to do but Visit the Meetings around me, which were pretty
numerous: But one Thing came upon me pretty much, and that was, to put myself
into some Business to get Bread. Some proposed one Way, some another. London
and Bristol were both proposed, but I could not see my way to either of them;
and what I should do in the Country, being ignorant of Farming, I saw not yet.
At last it was proposed that I might with a little Charge make a Convenience to
make a little Malt, in which, when an Apprentice, I had some Experience, being
then used to it. I accordingly did, but my Stock was very small, but some kind
Friends lent me some Money, and I found it answer better than I expected, so
that I was encouraged to proceed; and in about three Years Time, I found it
answered very well, so that I went on with Pleasure, and to took great Care,
and was very diligent in my Business and in attending all Meetings that I could
reach in a Morning's Ride, as I found a Concern so to do; and the Comfort and
Happiness I enjoyed was great, for I could entertain my Friends with a Lodging,
and other Necessaries in a plain Way, which was very agreeable to us both; and
most Friends that came, took a Bed with me one or two Nights, as best suited
their Convenience in their Journey.

But in a little Time a Storm arose: The Parson of the Parish having had
Nothing from our Family for thirteen Years and upwards, of his small Tithes,
and other Church-dues, (as he styled them) got a Summons for me to meet him
before the Justice; but before the Time came I writ him a few Lines, to know
his Demand, and he writ me a long Letter in answer thereto. And I replied to
his Answer. All which are hereunto annexed. The Time came, and some other
Friends were convened by other Priests from other Parishes at the same Time.
When I was called, there were two Justices, one Edward Phillips Esquire of
Montacute, and -- Harben Esquire of Newton: Phillips was very rough and boisterous
in Words, and Harben altogether as mild, using sundry Arguments to persuade me
to pay it myself, or suffer some other Person to pay it, being very earnest
that I should suffer him to pay it for me, and he would not desire to have it
altogether; supposing that I might not so well spare what the Parson demanded
at once. I told him, I was very much obliged to him for his kind Offer,
believing his Intention was to serve me in it, but I could by no means accept
it, without Injury to my own Mind, it being a Matter that concerned my
Conscience, which I was desirous to keep void of Offense toward God. He took
me into another Room, and was very earnest to have it made up; urging, that it
was so much in Arrears, that it was beyond their Power to end it, and it must
be put into the Exchequer, and that would be very chargeable, which, says he,
must fall upon you at last. I told him, that I could do Nothing to make it up:
And having conferred some Time, we went in again, and he spoke to the Effect
following, that he was very sorry he could not serve us, as we were both his
Neighbors and Friends (meaning the Parson and me and told the Parson, it would
be uneasy to us both; and would have us end it between ourselves. I said, if it
were a Matter of just Debt that I was satisfied was any Neighbor's Due, I
should soon end it with my Neighbor Ray, and be as willing to pay, as he was
to receive it; but as it was not of that Nature, I could by no means do it. So
I was dismissed, and in a little Time served with an Exchequer Process, and in
a few Months after, in the next Term, I was taken up in my Way for Bristol,
where I was going about my Business, and put into Goal. But when the Parson had
got me there, he was very uneasy indeed, so that he could not take his Rest,
and told his Attorney. If he lost all his Claim, he could by no means keep me
there, for he had no Rest or Quietness of Mind Night nor Day. So accordingly
the Attorney came to the Keeper in less than ten Days Time, in the Parson's
Name desiring him to let me go Home to look after my Business: Which I
accordingly did, and in a few Days went my Journey to Bristol; and when I had
done my Business there, took a little Turn into Wiltshire, and spent about two
Weeks in visiting sundry Meetings, and so returned Home.

Then I advised my Friends at the Meeting for Sufferings in London, how it
stood; who advised me, that the Parson could not proceed farther, as he had
taken me up and put me into Goal: So I heard no more of it all that Winter: But
in the Spring a distant Relation of our Family came to my Wife when I was from
Home, and desired her to lend him ten Pounds, for he was going to a Fair, being
a considerable Grazier. She had no Thoughts about the Parson's Demands, that
being a much bigger Sum, and he being a Dissenter, and having done me the like
Favor, she lent it him, and he gave her his Note accordingly. My Wife, when I
came Home, told me what she had done, and I said, it was very well, mistrusting
Nothing of any Trick in the Matter; but as he came in my Absence to borrow it,
so in like Manner he came in pretense to pay it, addressing himself to my Wife
to this Effect; Dear Cousin, if you can help me to that Note, I had best pay
it; you know I borrowed it of you, and shall pay it to you. So she very
innocently fetched his Note, and he tore it immediately; and putting his Hand
into his Pocket, takes out and throws her down the Parson's Receipt for the ten
Pounds, in full of all Demands for Tithes to that Time. My poor Wife was under
a very great Surprise, urging, it would be a very great Uneasiness to me. Your
Husband, said he, is, we allow, a Man of Sense, but in this he is a stubborn
Fool; and I would have paid it out of my own Pocket rather than he should have
ruined you and himself, which this Exchequer Suit would soon have done if it
had gone on; for his original Demand is fourteen Pounds and upwards, and he
has been at forty or fifty Shillings Charge already, and you must have paid
that and ten Times more if it had gone on, which now I have cleared for ten
Pounds; I think you are exceeding well off. Ay, but, said she, we look at
inward Peace more than all that, and I shall be blamed for being privy to the
Contrivance, and beget a Jealousy in my Husband about other Affairs. Oh! my
dear Cousin trouble not yourself about that, said he, for I can clear you, that
you are as innocent of it as a newborn Babe: And I know I could not have
brought it about with your Husband, for he would have started so many
Questions, that I could not possibly have brought it about any other Way, than
by ploughing with his Heifer. When my Wife told me of it, which was not
presently, it troubled me, to have my Testimony thus evaded by this undermining
Trick, which was in the Man that did it, designed for our Good no doubt, and
the Note that he gave for the Money being destroyed, I had nothing to show
under his Hand for the Money, and what to do in it I was at a loss: But I
thought it best to convene the Elders, and let them know how it stood, and to
be advised how I might clear my Testimony, and my dear Wife and Self, from
having any Hand in this deceitful Trick; which I accordingly did, and they were
satisfied we were clear of the Contrivance, but did not know what to do to
satisfy others about it; one Friend was for suing him that had thus tricked me
for the ten Pounds: But others thought such an Act would do more Hurt than
Good, and thought it by no means advisable to act any farther, than to go to
my Kinsman and let him know, that what he had done in the Case, though by him
intended for a Kindness, yet it had the contrary Effect on our Minds, so that
although he intended to serve us, it proved a Disservice, and to request, that
for the future he would never serve us so again. In due Time my Wife and I took
an Opportunity, and discoursed the Matter over with him; and he to excuse it
said, he little thought we would take it so much amiss as we had, having, as he
thought, no Reason for it, and wondered that our Friends should be so stubborn
as to contend against Law; and he could not bear to think we should be served
as Mr. Banton and Mr. Tilly were; and indeed, if it were again to do, I should
do the same, said he. Robert Banton and William Tilly were two very great
Sufferers by Exchequer Process, both very honest sincere Friends. Thus was this
Affair ended. The first Letter I writ the Parson, with the Parson's Answer, and
my Reply, are hereunto annexed, viz.

Lymington, the 15th of the Fourth-Month, June, 1712. Neighbor RAY,
SINCE thou art pleased to proceed against me by Justice's Warrant, I desire
thou would be pleased to let me know, what thou demandest else, how shall I
be able to make my Defense. I think thy People this Year and last were very
unreasonable in their Taking, having both Years (modestly computed) taken above
one eighth Part of my Hay: And A little Water Mead of three Acres, called
BROOK'S Mead
Brook's never, as I am informed, paid any in kind till thou came into the
Parish; but now for Nine-pence the three Acres, thou have taken every Year Hay
worth eight or nine Shillings per Annum at least. As for Arguments between us,
for or against, I suppose them needless, but I take it very hard to be so
treated from a Man of thy Pretensions. I believe thou would not, if in my
Case, like such Treatment; not that I murmur or repine because my Goods are
taken away on this Account, being persuaded that it is my Duty actively to
refuse a Compliance with the Laws that command Tithes; and if I must, as I have
already, suffer the Spoiling of my Goods, I hope passively to submit and bear
it. This I conclude with Desires of Good for thee and thine every Way.

SAMUEL BOWNAS.


SIR,
I HAVE been above thirteen Years in the Parish, and have not given your Family
any Disturbance, though the Arrears which are due to me are considerable; so
that you have no Reason to complain of hard Usage from me, but rather to thank
me for my Kindness, in bearing this Injustice so long.

You don't think, when you go to Law with one another, or with some of those
who differ from you, that you spoil their Goods, when you put them to Charges,
that you may force them to do you Justice. And why, pray you, should it be
thought a Spoiling of your Goods, when we do nothing more than you do
yourselves, when you think you are wronged; that is, endeavor to recover our
own? For I demand nothing of you but what I know to be mine before I receive it.

You might as well make an Entry upon our Glebelands, or upon any Thing else we
possess, as to seize upon the Tithes, to which you have no more Title than to
the other, unless you have bought them, as I am sure you have not.

For every Body who understands these Things, will tell you, that when such
Lands as are Tithe-free, are sold or let, they are for that Reason valued at
an higher Price, and the Lord or Seller makes the Tenant or Purchaser pay for
the Tithe, as well as for the rest of the Estate: And that on the other hand,
there is a proportionable Abatement made to the Purchasers and Tenants of such
Lands as are liable to the Payment of Tithes. And there is very good Reason for
it, because in that Case, the Tithes being no Part of the Landlord's Property,
he cannot make them over to another, or demand a Price for that which he has
not sold; and those who Rent or Purchase his Estate, can claim no Title by
Virtue of any Conveyance or Grant of his, but only to what he had a Right to
dispose of himself: So that if you will needs, in this matter pretend
Conscience, you ought not to occupy any Land but what is Tithe free.

But if you think that this would be very grievous and inconvenient, you ought,
when you occupy Tithe-land, to permit us quietly to enjoy our Tithes, which are
a Part of our Freehold, and to which we have the same Title as we have to our
Glebe, wherein you claim no Propriety, as indeed you have no manner of Title to
the Tithe. If you have, be pleased to show it, and let us know from whom you
had it. And if you have none, as I know you have not, don't go to pretend
Conscience for invading your Neighbor's Property.

For my Part, I do not see any Reason, why you should not actively comply with
the Law for Payment of Tithes, as well as with that for Taxes, as your Friends
have done over all the Kingdom ever since the Revolution; and some of them have
been Collectors, though the Title of the Act of Parliament did plainly show
that the Tax was for carrying on a War against France with Vigor: And yet your
Friends, even those who have been of greatest Reputation among you, and the
Champions of your Cause, have declared as much against the Lawfulness of all
War, as they have done against the Payment of Tithes; and sometimes have
carried the matter so high, as to refuse the Payment of Money demanded of them
for that Purpose as Robert Barclay in his Apology tells us, they suffered,
because they would not Pay for Drums and Colors, and other Military Furniture.
And this they did in the Time of Peace, when the Militia met only to make a
Raree-show, and had at the Place of Rendezvous no other Enemies to skirmish
with but Butterflies. Nevertheless, since the War against France began, your
Friends have given the same active Obedience to the Laws for Payment of Taxes,
as their fellow Subjects have done; and I hope, you for the future, will do for
the Payment of Tithes, which, according to your avowed Principles, is as lawful
as the Payment of Taxes for carrying on a War with Vigor.

It is a vain Thing to pretend Conscience to excuse Oppression or Covetousness,
for it must be one or either of these, which makes any Man take Possession of
what is not his own, but his Neighbor's.

If we lived by the Alms-basket, and could claim nothing but what we might
expect from the Benevolence of those from whom we make any Demand of this
Nature, we could not blame you so much: But the Case is otherwise: for we
desire none of your Benevolence, and we know the Tithe is no Part of your
Estate, and that you can claim no Right to it, either by Donation or Purchase.
Therefore don't go to call that your own which is not; and being you disclaim
all Violence against, or Oppression of Men upon the Account of their
Conscience, we may reasonably expect so much Tenderness from you, that you
would not oppress us, because we differ from you, and that you would not, under
a Pretense of Conscience, seize upon our Estates, and then make an Outcry
against us, when we desire the Assistance of the civil Magistrate, for
recovering any Part of our Properties or Freeholds, as often as you unjustly
invade them. Surely we might look for more Equity from you, being we are
Members of that Church which in other Respects permits you the free Exercise of
your Religion, and has confirmed the same by the late Act of Indulgence, agreed
upon by the Bishops, Lords, and Commons of our Communion. An Instance of such
Moderation as was never shown to our Church by any other Sect who had us under
their Power, whether Papists, or some violent and fierce Protestant Dissenters,
who perhaps would handle us as roughly as our Predecessors were by them, if God
should again permit us to fall under their merciless Hands.

You say, You take it hard to be so treated by a Man of my Pretensions, and if
it was from some of the same Cloth, you would think it was like themselves. But
why should it be thought inconsistent with my Pretensions, to demand what I
know to be my own? And why may I not say the same to you, that I take it hard
to be so treated by a Man of your Pretensions, who profess, that Violence
against those who differ from you, merely upon the Account of their Conscience,
is unwarrantable; and yet, contrary to this your Profession, you seize upon
that which is mine, mine by as good a Right as you have to your own Estate: For
you cannot say that you have purchased the Tithes, or that any who had a Title
to dispose of them, did make them over to you; and yet for all that, you
pretend Conscience for the Disturbance you give me, for no other Reason, but
because I am of a different Communion from you. If this was done by some who
maintain, that Violence against Men of another Persuasion is meritorious, and
that Heretics ought not to be suffered to live, I should think it was like
themselves; though from you I might expect other Things. But let that be as it
will, I desire nothing from you but the Profits of my own Estate, which you
unjustly withold from me; and I am resolved, whatever you think or say about
the Matter, that I will have my Right. However, if you are willing to live
peaceably, I shall be as moderate as you can expect, and for that Reason have
referred this Business to Mr. Smith, whom I have authorized to do as he thinks
fit, and am, Sir,

Your Friend and Well-wisher, WILLIAM RAY.
At the Parsonage-house, July 24th, 1712.

Lymington, the 10th of the Sixth Month, August, 1712. Neighbor RAY,
SINCE thou have advanced some Arguments for for thy taking Tithes, I have
somewhat to offer in Answer thereunto, for my Refusal.

1st. Thou art pleased to write, I ought to thank thee for forbearing with this
Injustice so long; but I take the Refusal of paying Tithes to be no Injustice.
Therefore, etc.

2dly. Thou says, when I go to Law with another, (or some that differ from me)
I do not think that Spoiling of their Goods; which I do not take to be a
parallel Case with this: For, first, if I go to Law with any Man, it shall be
for some just Debt owing to me, for which he, whom I so go to Law with, shall
have received some valuable Consideration; but from thee I have received none
for the Tithe of my Increase; therefore it is not a parallel Case.

3dly. He with whom I go to Law shall have no just Plea of Conscience, because
if I can have no plain Demonstration that he had of me a valuable Consideration
for which I make my Demands on him, I will not go to Law at all; therefore it is
not a parallel Case.

4thly. If on such a Foundation I go to Law, and force my adverse Party to
Justice by Law, I conclude with thee, it is not spoiling of Goods. But to go to
Law, and by it take away Peoples Goods, without such a valuable Consideration
as above, is Spoiling of Goods, in my Opinion, with a Witness.

Thou writes me, I may as well seize of the Glebe-lands, or upon any Thing else
we possess, as upon the Tithes. Under Favor, I am of another Mind; because I
have no Title to show for thy Glebe-lands or any Thing else thou enjoys: But
for my Land, the whole I take to be mine, without any Reserve or exception
whatsoever, as the Writings that give me my Title to it, do sufficiently set
forth and declare; and I have given for it a valuable Consideration, which thou
never did for the tenth Part thereof: Therefore, I am sure I have more Right to
it than thou can pretend to, in Justice, Equity and Reason; because I have
bought, without Reserve, the Whole, and manured the same at my own Cost and
Charge; but thou have bought no Part thereof, nor been at any Charge about
improving it, that I know of.

Thou further writes, that every Body that understands these Things, will tell
me, when such Lands as are Tithe-free are sold, for that Reason they are valued
higher. What Argument is that for the Lawfulness of Tithes according to the
Gospel? I conceive none at all.

The next is, that if I occupy Tithe-lands, I ought quietly to permit you to
enjoy the Tithes: That Is the Matter in Dispute, which shall in it is Place be
spoken to.

Now I am come to thy Argument about Taxes, wherein thou endeavors to make us
inconsistent with ourselves, in actively complying with the Law for Taxes, but
refusing a Compliance with the Law for Tithes endeavoring thereby to lay
Tithes and Taxes upon one Foundation: In this also I differ from thee; for I
understand Taxes to be paid as a civil Debt, Tribute or Custom to Caesar: But
Tithes are paid as a religious Act to God, and holy Church, as in its Place
shall be farther shown.

Indeed our Savior said, Render unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's; and
unto God, the Things that are God's Mark xii. 17. Now if we must render to
Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and unto God the Things that are God's,
then it remains to be proved, that Tithes are Caesar's Due, before they be
demanded as his Right.

But here is the grand Objection of Inconsistency; that because we have suffered
for refusing to pay toward the Militia for Drums, Colors, etc. and yet
actively comply with the Law of Taxes, which is to carry on a War with Vigor,
etc. insisting on R. Barclay's Words to strengthen the Objection; we are still
of the same Mind with R. Barclay that Wars and Fighting are inconsistent with
the Gospel Principles; and when it is brought so near to us, that by Law we are
obliged to act both in Person and Estate, we in this Case abuse rather
passively to suffer, than actively to comply, for Conscience Sake. And this is
still our Case, and a Suffering we lie under (with respect to the Militia) in
many Places, being careful to walk by the Rule of Christ's Doctrine; and yet do
not hereby think ourselves inconsistent in actively complying with the Law of
Taxes, in rendering to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and he may do
therewith what pleases him, we may not direct him; therefore, to use thy own
familiar Simile, I take this Argument of Taxes to have no more Weight in it, in
relation to Tithes, it being no parallel Case, than the Enemies that the
Militia met with in their Rendezvous, at their Raree-show.

Thou writest, that it is a vain Thing to pretend Conscience to excuse
Oppression or Covetousness. I am entirely of thy Mind; so that where any Man
pretends to refuse the Payment of Tithes out of Covetousness, believing at the
same Time in his Conscience they are justly due; it is pity, I say, if that be
his only Excuse, but that he should pay smartly for it: But beware of
mistaking, by supposing the Refusal to be from Covetousness, when it is really
Conscience.

Thou addest, if you lived by the Alms-basket, etc. which indeed I think you
ought to do, if your own Hands cannot sufficiently administer to your own Wants:
for a forced Maintenance is not consistent with the Gospel Ministry; and that
thou knows right well, having often confessed it in my House. Thou adds, Tithes
is no Part of my Estate, either by Donation or Purchase. But I say as above, I
have purchased the Whole, without any Reserve or Exception of Tithes. But in
thy own Country, North-Britain, I have been informed, Tithes are excepted in
Deeds and Conveyances, so that they have some Color to use such an Argument
there, but I can see no Foundation for such an Argument in this Country (...).
Thou advises me not to call that my own, which is not: I say, it is my own,
because as above, I have, without Reserve, purchased the Whole, as Witness my
Writings. Besides all that, at my own Charge I have manured and improved it.

Thy next Paragraph is already answered.

I acknowledge thee a Member of that Church, or Society, who have granted us
the Indulgence we now enjoy in the exercise of our Religion; for which I with
the rest of my Brethren, ought to be truly thankful to God and the Government.
But I must tell thee, some of thy Brethren, not of the meanest rank in your
Church, have, like battering Rams, endeavored to break that Chain of
Indulgence we now enjoy, but Providence has hitherto prevented them, and I hope
ever will, unless God shall see meet to try his Church, to discover thereby the
truly Religious, from the Hypocrites.

Thou seems angry, and to resent it, that I should take it ^ll or hard, to be
so treated by a Man of thy Pretensions; but the Reason why I so writ, is this,
because I have more than once heard, that my Neighbor Ray has said in our
House, that it was a Matter of Conscience to him, to force a Maintenance from
such as for the Sake of Conscience could not pay him using that Text, Whose Ox
have I taken, or whom have I defrauded? Which I have sometimes spoke of to
others, and it gained great Credit and good Thoughts concerning my Neighbor
Ray; and for that Reason, and no other, I took such Treatment hard. But
however, if thy Conscience be altered, it will give Reason for my Thoughts
concerning thee also to change.

Now I shall give thee my Reasons, why I cannot actively comply with the Law for
paying Tithes and answer thy last Paragraph in the Conclusion of this.

1st. I was in my Youth very thoughtful touching the Nature and Design of
Religion, and conscious to myself, that an implicit Faith, with a (...)
Obedience, might not be sufficient to bring me to the End intended by it. 2dly,
Observing many under great Sufferings for refusing to pay Tithes, and their
Plea for it was Conscience; but many more I found did pay, and thought they did
right, at least made no scruple of Conscience in doing it; this Contradiction
in Practice made me willing to look into it myself; that 3dly, what I did
herein might not be for Imitation's Sake on either Side, but that I might act
on a Principle of Faith, as knowing, what is not of Faith is Sin. And 4thly and
lastly, these Reasons put me on examining and trying for myself.

This premised, I now assure thee, that it is not out of Stubborness,
Ill-humour or Covetousness, but purely on a Principle of Conscience, for these
Reasons following, that I can neither pay or receive Tithes.

1st. The Dedication of them is grossly superstitious (and I think protested
against by most, unless such as love to suck the sweet of other Men's Labor)
being dedicated and given by King Ethel-wolf (about 855) to God and St. Mary
for the Redemption of his own Soul, with the Souls of his Ancestors; in the
Consideration whereof, the Clergy were to sing such Number of Masses for the
King and his Nobles, etc.

2dly. It is already granted by me, that we must render to Caesar the Things
that are Caesar's, and unto God, the Things that are God's. And I promise thee,
for my own Part, I shall be both ready and willing to pay the Tenth of my
Increase to God, when I am satisfied he requires it of me; or unto them he
shall appoint, when I am satisfied he has appointed them, as he did the Tribe
of Levi; but for me to pay Tithe to a Man claiming it as a Minister of God,
when I know that no such Thing is required of me, (Tithe being no Gospel
Maintenance, that I can understand) it may justly be said unto me, Who has
required this of thy Hands? Yet however, if Tithe be compelled from me by a
human Law, I cannot help that, nor resist the Force of that Demand by Argument
from Scripture; therefore, being persuaded that God requires of me no such
Thing as the Payment of Tithes, but that I am called to protest against all
Superstition and Idolatry, and the Law of Tithes plainly appearing to me to be
such, therefore I cannot, with a safe Conscience actively comply therewith, but
choose rather to please God than Man, although it may be to my Disadvantage in
this World, yet by so doing I hope for future Gain.

3dly, And again, Tithes are required to be paid as a religious Act, viz. to
God and holy Church; and as above, I am persuaded, that God requires no such
Thing, therefore I cannot pay them with a safe Conscience, being a Protestant
against that which I call Popery, not in Word and Tongue only, but in Deed and
Truth also.

Lastly, Tithes are not required by the Gospel, that I can understand; if thou
can make it out, please to do it, for it is clear to me, that Christ came to
finish and put an End to that Law which required Tithes, as well as to the
Priesthood supported by them; therefore to continue in the Practice of Tithing,
is in effect, denying that Christ is come in the Flesh to put an End to them,
according to Scripture and the Practice of former Times; for which Reason, I
think an active Compliance with the Law for Tithes is Sin, and in my Opinion,
he that pays or he that receives, are equally culpable in God's Sight; for
which Cause we can neither receive nor pay, as this Deed of Settlement will
prove, and more Instances of the like kind might be produced from sundry Parts
of the Nation; a plain Demonstration, that as we cannot pay Tithes, neither can
we receive them, when they are as legal a Property to us as they are to you.

I could say more, but what is said may perhaps be tedious, and thought
impertinent, therefore for the present this shall suffice.

To conclude, thou art pleased to give me thy Resolution, viz. to have what
thou calls thy Right; and if I could think it was so too, we should soon
reconcile this Matter.

Thou adds, if I am willing to live peaceably, (and I desire no other than a
peaceable Living) thou will be as moderate as I can expect. But this seems an
odd Way of showing thy Moderation, to employ an Attorney; for thou adds, for
that Purpose thou have referred the Matter to Mr. Smith, to do as he thinks
fit, and that may not perhaps be the best Way to show thy Moderation; however,
be that as it will, I must tell thee, that what I cannot directly pay, for the
Reasons aforesaid, I cannot order or allow another indirectly to pay for me;
for although I might bribe my Conscience, as the chief Priests did the
Soldiers, and lull it asleep in such Hypocrisy, yet an awaking Time will come
on, when every Thought, with every secret Thing, will be brought to Light, and
appear as it is.

This with due Respects from him who shall always be ready and willing to serve
thee and thine, in any Thing I can with a safe Conscience, and in any Office of
Love may command

Thy Friend and Neighbor, SAMUEL BOWNAS.


These Letters were exchanged between us some Weeks before I was made a
Prisoner, and whether they might soften him or not, I dare not say much; but,
as before, he was very uneasy while I was in Prison, and, as I was informed,
told his Attorney and his Wife, if he lost his Debt, he could not keep me there.

This Storm being blown over, I enjoyed Quietness, save that I was prosecuted
for Church Rates, small Tithes, etc. for the Parson would not let his Dues, as
he called them, run on again in Arrears, but would take it in Kind every Year,
so he never had me before a Justice again, but if he could not have it in one
Thing, would take another. I now had nothing but my Business that lay upon me,
save the Attendance of Meetings for Worship and Discipline, with Marriages and
Burials, which took up pretty much of my Time, there being very few to attend
such Services in the Country: So that I had sometimes long Journies on those
Occasions.

An ACCOUNT of my visiting Devonshire and Cornwall.
ON the 21st of the Eighth-Month 1715, I set out from Home, and visited
Taunton, Wellington, Milverton, Spiceland, Cullumpton, and Topsham, where the
Quarterly Meeting for Devonshire was held at that Time: I was at three Meetings
there to good Satisfaction. From thence to Sticklepath, and Launceston, where I
had a very large and good Meeting. From thence to Port-Isaac and Falmouth,
visiting Friends to Penrin: The Quarterly Meeting was held at Falmouth, and I
had very agreeable Service. From thence to Penrin, Market-Jew and Penzance, so
back to Falmouth. From thence to Austel, Tregony, Love and Liskard, Germans,
Plymouth, Kingsbridge and To^ness; had Meetings at all these Places, some of
which were very large and well; and at Exeter likewise: From that to Chard, and
so Home. In this small Journey I had about thirty-eight Meetings, and traveled
about three Hundred and fifty Miles.

In about a Year or two after this, my Wife was taken with a lingering
Disorder, for the recovering her out of which, I applied myself to several
Doctors, but all in vain, for she continued wasting more than two Years and
eight Months, growing weaker apace a few Weeks before she died, which was in
the Eighth-Month 1719. She died in a sweet Frame, often saying, that Nothing
troubled her, but that she was so easily deceived about the Parson's Tithe,
which being done in Ignorance, not designedly, she was the more easy about it.

After which, I was at a strait what Course to take for some Time, being in
Considerable Business, which I kept on that Winter, and in the Spring put it
off to my Servant, and left what little Estate I had to him, putting off all
Business, and went the next Summer into my own Country, the North, to visit my
Friends. I went to the Yearly Meetings at Bristol and London, in course as they
came, and traveled from London through Hertson shire Leicestershire and
Nottinghamshire to Leeds, visiting the Meetings of Friends as I passed along: I
was at sundry very large open Meetings in my Way to the Yearly Meeting at York,
which was very large, and a great Number of Ministers of both Sexes. I had no
Time till the last Meeting, and the Time of that was far spent before I began,
but then I took my Time pretty thoroughly, being opened very largely in the
distinguishing between true and false Religion, setting them as it were Side by
Side, that they might judge for themselves of both the Worship and the
Ministry, with their different Effects upon the Minds of Men and Women in
regulating our Passions, and reforming our Minds; and opened pretty fully the
Danger that Ministers were in, to preach from the Letter instead of the Spirit;
and that our former Openings and Experiences alone were not to be depended
upon, but our safest and best Support in that Work, was the immediate Ability
of the Spirit, opening our Understandings in Matter suitable to every State,
that our Words might be sitly spoken, then they would carry their own Evidence,
and be serviceable to the Hearers: I was very large and particular on these
Heads; and there being sundry Clergymen, and Teachers of other Societies, I did
not hear of any Objection made to the Doctrine they heard: But some of our
Friends thought, what I had to say about the Ministry would have been better
delivered in the Meeting of Ministers; but that could not have answered to
well, as to the Teachers of other Societies, who might want Instruction in
these Things, perhaps more than our own People did. This was a very high Day,
and I found in myself afterward great Satisfaction and Peace.

I now visited Friends toward Kendal, and through Part of Cumberland and
Northumberland, into Scotland, having for my Companion a young Man from
Sedburg, his Name was John Blamore. I found Friends in that Nation very much
decreased in Number, above one Half, and sundry Meetings quite dropped, unless
when a Friend came to visit them.

I spent about six Weeks in that Nation, but Nothing extraordinary happened: I
returned into Cumberland, visiting most of the Meetings in that County. Our
Friends had at Cockermouth appointed a Meeting to be the Day after the Fair, at
the Time called Michaelmas, and it being in the most hot Time of the Opposition
the Pearsons gave to Friends; Job and his Brother being at that Fair on their
Business, they gave out, that they would be at the Meeting the next Day, which
gave an Alarm to both Town and Country People, so that it was a very large
Meeting; and as Job and I had been very friendly before he fell into these
ranting Fits, some Friends thought he would show me some Respect, more than he
had done to some others, having been heard at Times to speak in my Favor: But
James Dickenson being present, whom they had abused so very much, said, I
should be pleased to see a friendly Meeting between Job and my Friend, but I
little expect i^. The Meeting came on, and was very large, and very open, and
quiet, neither Job nor his Brother came, being otherwise employed; having some
Concerns with some Countrymen in the Fair, they went to an Alehouse to settle
their Affairs, and differed so much about them, that from Words they proceeded
to Blows, and this Fray held the Time of the Meeting, so we were free from any
of their Disturbance, and a sweet, comfortable, quiet Meeting we had to great
Satisfaction.

From Cockermouth I visited the rest of the Meetings in that Part of the
County, and so into Westmorland again, visiting all the Meetings in that
County, and through the Dales to Richmond, and York Quarterly Meeting the
Winter Quarter, which was very large, considering the Season of the Year. I had
sundry satisfactory Times amongst Friends, both in Meetings of Business and
amongst the Ministers, in very freely opening, and showing my dear Brethren and
Sisters, in the Openings of divine Life, the Experience and Knowledge that I
had attained to in the Work of the Gospel, finding my Spirit much enlarged in
the setting forth thereof. But the last Meeting I was at in York, was on the
first day in the Evening by Candle light, and the Crowd in the House was so
very great, that the Candles would hardly burn, some died quite out with the
Breath of the People; the excessive Crowd made it very troublesome for want of
Room, and not to edifying as if the Company had been less.

From thence I went to Bridlington Gustwick, North^^^^, visiting Meetings till
I came to Bradford and Leeds: I had some very large open Meetings in that Part,
as at Brighouse, Highflats Sheffield, etc.

I traveled to Nottingham, and had some Meetings in that County, and so on to
(...), had sundry small Meetings thereabout, and some who were convinced in my
first traveling thither, were glad to see me, and I them, so we claimed
Kindred in the Truth.

I now made a kind of a short Visit in my Way to London, which I visited the
thoroughly, staid in the City four Weeks, and had very good Satisfaction:
Returning through Part of Berkshire, I had at Reading two very large Meetings,
and so into Dorsetshire, having no Meetings after Reading, till I came there,
and so to the Quarterly Meeting in Somersetshire, which being the Spring
Quarter, was held at Glastonbury, very large it was indeed. Then back to
Somerton Monthly Meeting, visiting Meetings to and fro, being at sundry
Funerals, both before and after the Yearly Meeting at Bristol, which was this
Year very large. From that Meeting I went toward London, visiting Meetings in
my Way thither, and after Yearly Meeting was over I returned by Alton,
Allsford, Rumsey, Southampton, and the Isle of Wight, and back to Ringwood to
the Quarterly Meeting for Hampshire and to Pool Yearly Meeting, it being there
this Year. After which I came to Bridport, quartering at Caleb Hills, who
married my Niece; and this Summer, before the Yearly Meeting at London, I had
made my Addresses to the Widow Nichols, leaving the Matter to her
Consideration, and now I renewed the Suit. And in the Eighth-Month with sundry
other Friends, went to solicit the Parliament for an Amendment of the
Affirmation, in which Undertaking we were favored with Success, which was of
very great Advantage to the Society, and the good Effects of it soon appeared.

I returned home in the Spring, and then proceed in my Addresses to the Widow,
and we were married in the Second-Month, 1722, and we went to London
Yearly Meeting together, which was to very great Comfort.

I returned directly Home with my Wife, and being in a Coach, had no
Opportunity of visiting Meeting either going or coming. Being got safe Home, I
applied myself to assist my Wife in her Business as well as I could, attending
General, Monthly and other Meetings on public Occasions for three Years: Then
I had a Concern to visit America once more, which my poor Wife could not at
first with Ease consent to, although I had laid it before her when I first made
my Addresses to her, yet when it came to be put in Practice was not easily got
over. But afterward she gave me freely up to go with my Son-in-Law; and I got
ready and went off, before it was thought of by almost any Body but the Friends
in our own Neighborhood. However, that it might not look like stealing away, I
wrote to some of my chosen Friends at London, in the North, Bristol, and
elsewhere throughout this Nation, and to some few in Ireland, being willing to
advise them where to meet me with Letters in that Country. Now having nothing
to do more, my Wife brought me on my Way to Pool, at which Place, before I went
off, I received Answers to sundry of my Letters, some of which, if Brevity did
not require the Contrary, would well deserve a Place here.

I shall now proceed to my last Journey into America, viz.

An ACCOUNT of my TRAVELS in AMERICA, the second Time, being in 1726, and in
the Fiftieth Year of my Age.
I Left my own Home the 22d Day of the Tenth-Month 1726, being accompanied by
my dear Wife, a Kinsman, and a Son-in-Law, to Pool, being to take Shipping
there with my Son-in-Law Josiah Nickleson, but the Ship was not quite ready;
and when it was ready, the Wind being against us, were obliged to stay there
about five Weeks, so I had sundry satisfactory Opportunities both amongst
Friends and others.

All being ready, my Wife also gone Home some Days before, and the Wind fair,
we set sail out of Stutland-bay, the 24th of the Eleventh-Month, with a fair
Wind and pleasant Weather, which carried us a considerable Distance off the
Land; but it held but three Days, and then we had very contrary hard Winds
after that, which made me very sick, and other ways out of Order, so that I
almost despaired of my Life for a few Days, but had great Comfort and Peace of
Mind, being satisfied I was in my Place, and in the Way of my Duty. I recovered
as the Weather grew better, and the Sea quieter, but we had a very long and
tedious Passage, being eleven Weeks and two Days upon the Sea, from Land to
Land; and on the 14th of the Second-Month 1727, we landed at Hampton otherwise
Kickatan in Virginia, and that Evening I got a Passage in a Pool Ship up to
Sleepy-bole, and that Night about the 11th Hour I got to Robert Jordan's, being
very glad, though very weary, that I was got to so good a Place, where I had so
hearty a Welcome, and had so great an Income of Peace and Comfort. This being
on the Seventh-day of the Week, the next Morning I went to a Funeral about
twenty Miles, which was a long Journey on my first Arrival, and considering the
Inhabitants are but thin, there was a great Concourse of People on the
Occasion, and I had a pretty open Time, considering I had not quite recovered
my Weakness; besides, the Motion of the Sea was very much in my Head, so that I
had a great Dizziness and Swimming, that made me to reel like a Drunkard, as is
common in the like Case.

That Night I went with my Friend Robert Jordan to an Inn, near to the Place
where his Son Robert was a Prisoner, who was a pretty Youth, and had a very
serviceable Ministry. The Father and I staid with the Prisoner all the next
Day, and in the Evening went to lodge at the Prisoner's House, his poor Wife
being alone; and although her Husband was confined, she was cheerful. We had a
Meeting in the Prison to good Satisfaction, many People came to it, and were
very orderly.

I then had a Meeting at the Western Branch of Nansemund River, and was at a
Funeral of a young Man who was very much lamented.

I went that Night toward Chuckatuc^, where I had a fine comfortable
Opportunity, and on the Road, I had some Discourse with an ancient Friend,
concerning the Health of the Country, we supposing People did not live so long
in Virginia as in Europe. This Friend told me, the first Man-child that was
born in the Province of English Parents lived eighty Years, and that many since
had lived considerably longer; so that it is not the Climate, but the
Intemperance of the People, that shortens their Days, for Experience made it
appear, that temperate People lived much the same Time as they do in Europe.
But this Firstborn of the Province was very remarkable, for it was said that
he was disaffected to the then government, and had uttered some treasonable
Expressions against it, and for that Cause was tried, and sound guilty, being
condemned to die for that Crime: But when it was made appear, that he was the
first Male-child born in the Province of the English Nation, it was resolved,
that he should be pardoned. Thus he was preserved from that untimely End, to
run out Nature's Race, which was eighty Years.

I went after this Meeting to visit the Prisoner, and next day was at a
Funeral, the People being very humble, by reason of a great mortality, so that
preaching the Gospel had a very great Reach upon them, and several were
convinced: Next Day I went to Levy-neck, had a Meeting, and went next Day to
Surrey Meeting House to a Funeral, having been at four in about two Weeks.
After this I took a Turn round again to Levy-neck, otherwise Pagan Creek, and
had a Meeting. Thence to Raskers-neck, had a Meeting, and so round till the
Quarterly Meeting was at hand; and then came on to the Prisoner's House, viz.
Robert Jordan's, to lodge. Next Day at the Meeting I met a Friend of London,
his Name was Joshua Fielding, who had visited the Island, and South Carolina,
and had traveled by Land to North Carolina, about five Hundred Miles, in about
three Weeks, mostly alone, which was a difficult and hazardous Attempt: Some
thought it too great an Undertaking, and seemed to blame him for it, but he got
safe through, though he had no Provision but what he carried with him, and met
with but about four or five Houses or Plantations in all that five Hundred
Miles Travel, which obliged him to lodge in the Woods frequently; but having a
small Pocket Compass, that was his Guide, when the Sun and Stars were hid from
him. But I have since heard, that some others have traveled over this same
Ground, (Plantations and Settlements being now placed at proper Distances) with
less Hardship, viz. they having a Road marked out by the Government, and now
they may accomplish this Journey without so frequently lying in the Woods, as
when this Friend came from thence. I was at the Quarterly Meeting which held
the Seventh and First Day, and it being very hot Weather, made it a little
tedious to bear, there being a great Crowd of People, but the Meetings ended
well, and were of good Service.

Thence I went to Levy-neck, and visited all the Meetings up to Curl's on the
Bank of James's River, had an open good Meeting there, though small. Thence to
Gerrard Ellison's and had a large and open Meeting. Thence to Rappahannock
Ferry, traveling sixty Miles that Day: I lodged at a poor Widow's House, no
Friend by Profession, but she was exceeding kind. I had something to say in
Prayer before Meat, with which she was greatly affected, and broken into Tears
very much, with some others of the Family. When we left her in the Morning, she
would not be prevailed upon to take any Thing for our Quarters, but desired
that she might be favored with such Guests often. I gave her Children
something, and we left her in much Love and Tenderness. Thence I traveled
toward Maryland, about seventy Miles, and had but one Meeting in the Way,
where lived one William Duff, who was at that Time a very tender and
serviceable Man. The Yearly Meeting in Maryland came now on, which held four
Days, viz. Three for Worship, and one for Business. Many People resort to it,
and transact a deal of Trade one with another, so that it is a kind of Market
or Change, where the Captains of Ships and the Planters meet and settle their
Affairs; and this draws abundance of People of the best Rank to it. It being in
that called the Whitsunweek.

After this Meeting I visited the Province on that Side of the Bay, fully from
Potuxant, and some Places where Meetings had not been, missing no Place till I
came up to the Head of the Bay; but Nothing uncommon happened at those
Meetings, which were about eight in all. Then I ferried over the great River
Susquehannah to Nottingham, in Pennsylvania: Some Friends came from thence into
Maryland to meet me, and conduct me over that large Ferry, which was attended
with pretty much Danger, it being a wide and very rough Sea, and I seemed in
more Danger than I was upon the Ocean in the greatest Storm we met with, but
through Mercy we all got safe over, although with hard Labor and great Care and
Difficulty; and the first Meeting that I had in that Province was in
Nottingham, and I had two in that Township. Then I visited the Meetings as they
came in course, as New-garden, London-grave, Kinnet, Concord, Chester,
Spring-field, and so to Philadelphia. A great Number of Friends came out of
Philadelphia to meet me, which gave me great Uneasiness, fearing I should never
be enabled to answer the high Expectations that were raised by such a Conduct;
and it were better to forbear such Doings, for it is rather a Hurt than a Help.
Now I shall give my Opinion of those Meetings which were so very large, several
of them amounting to fifteen Hundred, and some more, and mostly another
Generation; but very few of the Elders, that twenty Years before were
serviceable, zealous Men, were now living; and many of the rising Youth did
come up in the Form more than in the Power and Life, that their Predecessors
were in; nevertheless, there was a fine living People amongst them, and they
were in a thriving good Way, sundry young Ministers being very hopeful, both
Men and Women.

I was at three Meetings in Philadelphia, exceeding large, more like
Yearly-meetings than common First-day's Meetings; after which I staid but two
Nights, being in haste to reach a Yearly or Quarterly Meeting, near 300 Miles
further North, at New-port on Rhode Island, so I traveled from thence to
Burlington, Crosswicks, Stony-brook, and Woodbridge, and had Meetings at all
these Places. Then to Long Island. I was at a Yearly Meeting, as they called
it, at New-town on the first Day of the Week; it was very large of both Friends
and other People. There I found sundry of my former Friends, as John Rodman,
Hugh Copperthwaite, Samuel Bowne, and sundry others, that had been of great
Comfort and Support to me in my Imprisonment on that Island, and we were truly
glad to see and enjoy each other in the Truth of the Gospel.

Thence I took my Journey through Connecticut, near two Hundred Miles, to
Rhode Island, and I went round from Newport, visiting the Meetings, as at
Seconnet, Cockset, Dartmouth, and back to the Island, and so to the
Quarterly Meeting at Newport, which was very large and continued three Days. I
was largely drawn forth to the Elders and Ministers, there being pretty many of
them, and had very good Satisfaction in all their Meetings. Thence back to a
Monthly Meeting at Dartmouth, which was very large; but a Narrowness of Spirit
did some Hurt amongst them, and produced some Uneasiness, which I endeavored
to remove, which was chiefly occasioned by a young Man's being, as some
thought, too much in the Fashion, although plain, compared with some others;
yet some thought this Reason sufficient to refuse his Proposal of Marriage
among them, although well recommended from the Monthly Meeting where he was a
Member; upon which I showed them, that as he was so well recommended by
Certificate, they could not reject his Proposal according to our Discipline.
The Meeting, after we had some farther Conference about it, let the young
People proceed, and Matters grew easy, and that Cloud of Difference dispersed
and vanished, which was like to hurt both Monthly-meetings.

From thence I went about five Miles to one Joseph Russell's, in order to take
shipping for the Island of Nantucket. We met with some Difficulty in the
Passage, and were obliged to put into the Island called Martha's Vineyard, but
had no Meeting in it. After landing on Nantucket on the sixth Day of the Week,
Notice being given, the next Day we had a very large Meeting in the Forenoon,
and on First Day it was much greater, especially in the Afternoon, the
Inhabitants generally inclining to Friends, there was great Love and Unity
amongst them. I desired a select Meeting of the Elders, to whom I had something
in particular relating to Discipline and the Ministry, which was of good
Service, and well accepted. I staid two Meetings more, and visited sundry
Families on the Island, and then took shipping back again, was two Nights on
board, and being in an open Boat, and the Weather very hot, it was tedious;
several of the Island came with us, and we landed at John R^^^^ll's; and from
thence (having Nathaniel Starbu^k with me) to a small Meeting called Se^pe^^n,
and so to Suckenas^t. Here a Man gave some Uneasiness, by raising Objections
about the Light, as not being universal, rendering the Doctrine, as he would
expound it, against Reason, urging, that the natural Consequence must hold
forth as many Christ's as People, that were enlightened by him. To which I
answered, by alluding to the natural Sun, which enlightens the Earth, and every
Dwelling, so that we frequently say, when the Rays of Light from the Sun come
into the Room, the Sun shines into is; but the Sun is not therefore divided,
but it is the same Sun that enlightens the House here, that does the same to
another elsewhere: Even so is the Light of Christ: He is the true Light that
enlighten's every (...) coming into the World. Thus expounding and illustrating
the Doctrine of the Light, the People who were but a few, seemed much affected
therewith, I had also in my Doctrine that Day laid down, the Kingdom of God or
of Heaven to be within, and that it was equally universal with the Light; but
at that he cavilled likewise, but made Nothing of it, for I had it upon me to
open and set forth what the Kingdom in this Place meant, and how it ought to be
understood, plainly showing, that by the Kingdom of Heaven was meant the divine
Seed in the Heart, otherwise called the Grace of God, which, as every one makes
the Rule of their Actions, in both a moral and religious Conduct, it teaches us
our Duty to God and one another, by which we are brought under the Government
of Christ, and thereby made Partakers of that Peace within, which may be justly
termed the Kingdom of Heaven within. So the Objections thus made by this
forward Man, though weak and impertinent, gave Opportunity to explain the
Doctrine of the Gospel more clearly, so that although such Objectors seldom
intend any Good, yet Good often comes out of their Objections.

From thence I traveled to Sandwich, Yarmouth, Situate, and then to a Meeting
where Michael Wanton lived, and so for Boston, visiting the Meetings to Lynn,
Marblehead and Salem; but nothing happened at any of these Meetings worthy of
Note. I came to Newbury, the Town which I mentioned in my first Journey, but
there were very few Friends here now, not above nine or ten in all. The People
had Notice, but the Room was very small, and the Priest came, and did all he
could to hinder the People from coming in, and made a very great Noise
concerning the Danger of our Principles and Doctrines. I endeavored to press
him to show wherein; but he evaded that as much as possibly he could, and
charged in General; but by being closely pressed upon, at last he pitched upon
our denying the Scriptures, Baptism and the Supper, and the Resurrection of the
Body. I bid him hold, and first prove that we denied the Scriptures, and so the
rest in order, as they came in course: For I asserted, that we owned the
Scripture; and he said, we did not: And I demanded Proof of him, otherwise he
must be concluded a false Accuser. He went about it but could make nothing of
it. When he had said what he could, I told him, his Accusation in this Point
relating to the Scriptures must be (...) for that it was publicly known, that
both in our Preaching, and also in our Writings, frequent Rec^urse was had to
the Text, to prove ^ur Doctrine, and this must be a plain Demonstration and
Proof, that we owned the Scriptures. The People allowed this to be right: And
he coming so (...) first, would proceed no farther in that public Manner, but
would have me go to his House, and t^^k these Matters over in his Closet. I
told him his Meeting House was more proper for such a Conference than his
Closet, and there I would meet him when he pleased; for I told him, that I had
heard that he treated the Doctrines held by us, in his Pulpit, very
unhandsomely, where he knew none d^^d to oppose him, and if he would clear
these Things up, I should be pleased with an Opportunity to hear him do it in
as public a Way as he had de^amed us, either to make Proof of his Charges, or
retract them; but he would not permit any such Things: He had charged Friends
with denying the Scriptures, Christ, the Resurrection of the Body, and that we
pretended to Revelation now, although, as he said, it was ceased some
Generations since But he being a hot, weak Man, just set up in his Trade, did
endeavor to ingratiate himself this Way into the Minds of the People, but he
lost Ground by it greatly, so that as he could make Nothing of it but Noise and
Tumult, we parted; and I was told, that some of his own People blamed him much,
for the Interruption he gave me, and for endeavoring to hinder the People from
coming to hear for themselves.

From thence I went to Aimsbury, Hampton, etc. it was Hampton Monthly Meeting,
which held but one Day. I was concerned to stir up Friends to keep a faithful
Record of all their Sufferings, to be made Use of as Occasion might require,
the Priests Hearers making Spoil of Friends Goods to support their own false
Ministry, with which some People were so uneasy and oppressed, that Complaints
in almost every Township appeared against them.

From thence I came to Dover, it was their Monthly Meeting likewise: They were
very raw, and managed their Affairs but indifferently, chiefly occasioned for
want of some better Hands to write and keep their Books in Order. I was
likewise concerned here to put them upon recording their Sufferings, and in a
Way how to do it; for they were Sufferers not only on Account of the hireling
Preachers, to maintain them in their Pride and Idleness, but also on the
Account of bearing Arms, which was likewise pretty heavy upon them in some
Towns; but then in others their Neighbors were moderate, and made not much ado
about them: But some did compl^ to pay off their Quota about bearing of Arms,
who would not pay a Doit to the Parson, they seeing very clearly, that they
were wrong, and preached themselves, and for themselves. We had a fine
agreeable Time in Conference, and there appeared both great Sincerity and
Innocence amongst them; I was at their First Day Meeting, which was very large,
and to great Satisfaction. After Meeting, finding that some Misunderstanding
was amongst them about the Building of a Meeting House, we got them together,
(my dear Friend Nathaniel Starbuck from Nantucket being still with me) and we
endeavored and persuaded them to Peace and Love, in which we were successful:
We appointed a Meeting to be held there, which was attended by all, or the
greatest Part of Friends of that Monthly Meeting, and a fine comfortable
Opportunity we had, and they seemed all very easy and reconciled one to another.

Thence I went to Strawberry-bank, otherwise called Portsmouth, but it proved
an unsuitable Time, because all the Country was come together, the Military
Part especially, with all their Arms and Accoutrements of War, to proclaim King
GEORGE the Second, (News being come three Weeks before, that his Father died on
his Way to Hanover) and also on Account of the Peace that was concluded with
the Indians: However, notwithstanding the vast Crowd and Hurry, we had a very
quiet, though but small Meeting; and Notice being whispered, that there was to
be a Marriage at Dover on a Day appointed, many in Curiosity came to it, and
the People seemed much pleased with our Way of Marrying, few of them having
been at any before. All ended quiet, without any Dispute. Then we had another
Meeting at the new Meeting House, after which I found a Concern to desire an
Opportunity with the Ministers and Elders, which was very readily granted; and
I was much concerned to request and advise both the Ministers and Elders, to
endeavor to keep in the Unity of the Spirit amongst themselves, that they
might be good Examples to the Flock, over which they were to watch, and to be
ready and willing to administer good Counsel, which the Apostle calls feeding
of the Flock; and this he recommends to the Elders as their Business: And that
the Ministers look well to their Gifts, carefully avoiding either to abridge or
enlarge in their Ministry beyond the true Opening of Life in themselves,
laboring with Diligence and Humility to evince the Truth of their Words by
their own Conduct, that no Blemish or Spot might appear amongst them, nor any
just Ground to reproach them with teaching others what they did not practice
themselves, being careful in Conduct, that their Words and Actions might be
agreeable; this would give Authority to their Ministry, and attract Honor and
Respect from their Hearers.

From thence I went to visit the Widow Hanson, who had been taken into
Captivity by the Indians, an Account of which I took from her own Mouth, being
in Substance as follows: Eleven naked Indians came with Violence upon the
Family, and killed two of the Children just as they entered the House; two
little Boys more being at Play behind the House, when they heard the Noise,
came running in great Surprise, the younger of whom could not be prevailed with
to moderate his Grief, whereupon one of the Indians with a Tomhawk (a little
Hatchet) struck him on the Head and killed the poor Child, to rid themselves of
the Noise, and to prevent their being discovered, and to strike the greater
Terror upon those in the House. Then they rifled the House of what they thought
proper to carry away. They took the poor Woman, who had lain in but two Weeks,
along with them by Force and Violence, with her little Infant, and two
Daughters, one Son, and a Servant Maid; it being in the Afternoon, the Indians
were in a great Hurry to force them away as far as they could that Night, for
fear of being pursued, and the Prisoners retaken. Thus they traveled for
twenty Days, passing through many Lakes and Rivers; notwithstanding which they
took no Cold, but their Health was preserved. The incredible and severe Trials
the poor Woman and her Children went through, during their Captivity, I cannot
here discribe to the full, in all which they were remarkably favored by
Providence, enduring hard Labor, though they were drove to very great Straits
for want of Provisions, being necessiated to ^at old Bear and Beaver-skin
Match-coats, first singeing the Hair off. After my Return to Europe, I saw at
Dublin a Relation of this extraordinary Affair in a printed Narrative, which
was brought over by a Friend from America.

Now being easy to leave these Parts for the present, I returned toward
Hampton, but in the Way had a comfortable Meeting at a Town called Stratham,
and so to Hamton, A^msbury, Haverill and Newbury, the Place where the Priest
before had given so much Disturbance; but although he had Notice of the
Meeting, he came not, and but a very few of his People; it was but a small
Meeting, yet peaceable.

Then I returned to Lynn, where was a Yearly Meeting, which was very large, and
I had good Service in it. Then to Salem, it being their Yearly Meeting for
Worship, and Quarterly Meeting for Discipline, which was exceeding large; they
had a Meeting of Ministers and Elders, in which I was much enlarged in Advice
to both: Then came on the Quarterly Meeting, in which for want of better
Writers and Method, they were somewhat deficient in their Business, whereby it
became tedious to themselves; I endeavored to put them in a better Method,
which they took very kindly and well: And after this was ended, a
Parting-meeting of Worship came on, which was very large, and was attended by
abundance of Presbyterians and other People: I was very much drawn forth into
various Branches of Doctrine, and the Meeting ended well; no Cavil or Dispute
arising, which they are but too liable to. I was informed, that what I had
delivered was taken down in Writing, but I never saw it though a Friend
afterward had a Sight of it, and the Writer said, he did it with a View to
have it printed by Subscription, and get something by it.

Not finding myself clear, I returned back with Friends to Haverill, and next
Day had a comfortable little Meeting: Thence to Hampton and Dover, it was
Yearly Meeting there: They having in almost every Place once a Year a
General-meeting, which they call a Yearly Meeting, and by this popular Title
abundance more People come together, in Expectation of something extraordinary
there to be met with; it held two Days, and was to very good Content. Next Day,
I had a Meeting on Kitteryside, in an old Meeting House that the Presbyterians
had erected, but not being in so convenient a Place for them, they had lest it.
Many, both Friends and others came, and before it was quite gathered, the
Priest with a large Company came in, and immediately began to pray, continuing
a long Time: But as soon as he had done, I spoke to the People with, some
Authority, which seemed to daunt the Priest, who it was thought intended to
have taken up all the Time himself, and to have put us by; if he had succeeded,
they would have gloried and triumphed much, but therein they were disappointed.
In the Course of my Ministry, I insisted on the Danger of neglecting the Work
of our Salvation, speaking cautiously, that such an Omission might be
irreparable. The Priest replying, said, that should be expressed, will be
irreparable. I desired him not to disturb us, for we did not him; and repeating
my Words over again, with this Addition, I dare not speak conclusively of the
Mercy of God, who is able by Christ to save us at the Hour of Death. After this
he was silent, only writing when he thought he had any Room to cavil, but he
was soon weary, for I was very strong both in Power and Doctrine, and great
Tenderness was among the People, which was strange to him, and Scripture came
very apt to confirm my Doctrine; the Priest growing weary would stay no longer,
but walked off, inviting the People to go with him, but very few went. We had a
very good serviceable Opportunity, the Meeting ended very quiet and well.

Next Day I went to Portsmouth, having been there before at an improper Time,
but now we had an excellent Meeting; then I was at the new Meeting House, about
which they had had some Uneasiness; we had a Meeting to very good Satisfaction,
and Friends appeared well reconciled. Then I went once more to visit the Widow
Hanson at Knox march, that had, as before, been taken Captive. From thence to
Stratham, having had a Meeting there two or three Weeks before, and the People
were then very much affected: But the Priest hearing of it, was very uneasy,
and went amongst his Hearers, begging and praying them not to converse with the
Quakers, if they could avoid it, so that we had but few that came, amongst whom
was a Man in Drink, that did cavil, and would pretend to a Disputation, but he
was so much in Liquor that he rambled in his Discourse, and know not what he
said; he went away in a Rage, cursing as he went along. Thence I came to
Hampton, and Aimsbury, and had Meetings at both Places. Thence to Newbury and
had a Meeting, to which the Priest was again invited, but he did not come near
us. Next Day I was at their Monthly Meeting, which was but dull. Next Day I was
up in the Woods, at a new Place, where there were many People, and we had a
good Meeting. Next Day I was at a Marriage, which was held in a Presbyterian
Meeting Place, a very commodious handsome House, and would contain near two
Thousand People, as some said; however, it was as full as it could well contain
and the Meeting was very easy and quiet: Sundry Teachers from the neighboring
Towns were there, and I was doub^^^ of some J^ngling and Dispute, but all went
off very quiet and we (...) I was largely opened to set forth the Service of
our Monthly-meetings, with respect to taking Care of the P^or, deciding of
Differences, and taking Cognizance of Marriages: At which the People seemed
pleased, wondering that they had no such Order among them: This was a very high
Day, and ended well. Next Day I went to Lynn, had sundry Meetings at fresh
Places about Lynn, Marblehead, Salem, and in several little Villages toward
Boston: Taking my leave of Friends in that Part of the Country, I came to
Boston, and had two Meetings there. Then I went to Mendam, Providence and
Swans^y, alias Wickapinsett, and had Meetings; and then to ^e^^uate
Yearly Meeting, which held two Days, but nothing happened uncommon, save that
the Parting-meeting at Pembrook was very large, very open and to good
Satisfaction: I had a small Meeting at Hanover and Free-town, and so back to
Wickapinsett again, and then for Rhode Island Quarterly Meeting: The first Day
I had something to say to the Ministers and Elders about the Discipline of the
Church, warning them to look diligently to the Flock; and setting them know,
that the Apostasy was partly occasioned through the Ministers and Elders
neglecting their Duty, etc. Next Day was the Meeting of Ministers and Elders,
and I was very much drawn forth to both. Then I had a Meeting at Providence
middle Meeting House, which was small, but pretty well. then by Mendam I went
to Leicester, and had a sweet good Time with a few seeking People, and in the
Evening I had a long Conference with a young Woman about the Sabbath, the
Sacraments, (so called) and some other Points; in all which she seemed very
tender, and in a good Frame. I told her, I would not treat her as a Disputant,
in an adverse Temper, but as a Sister and Friend in the same Faith in Degree:
But she complained much of the Bondage of her Education, and lamented her Case.

From thence I went to Oxford, where was no Meeting settled, nor any Friend in
that Place; the Priests did all that in them lay to hinder the People from
coming to hear Friends, when any came amongst them, if they knew it; however,
we had a good Opportunity. Thence to the Meeting in that great House, not far
from Seth Aldrich's, which was a fine full and comfortable Meeting. Then to the
Upper Meeting House, and so to Moshantatuck, and to Warwick, and had Meetings
in those Places. I was desired to stay to attend a Dispute. One Hugh Adams, a
Priest, had challenged Friends, he having undertaken to prove Infant-sprinkling
from Scripture, to be an Ordinance of Christ. But in the Proof he came off very
lamely, Samuel Aldrich, an excellent and ingenious Disputant, was by
appointment to manage the Argument on Friends Side, and none else: But such
Arguments the Priest brought for their Sprinkling as were entirely new to the
Audience; one was, the Spray of the Red Sea, when the Children of Israel went
through it, by the strength of the Wind sprinkling the Children, viz. Infants,
as well as old People; and as the Apostle said, They were all baptized in the
Cloud, and in the Sea. This was full Proof of me Point for Infant-sprinkling,
he said. But Samuel made an excellent short Discourse on the Text, very much to
the Purpose, and he had so much the Ascendant in the Argument on every Branch,
that the Priest lost Ground, and several of his Brethren being there were much
ashamed of him.

Then I returned back to Rhode Island, and so to Coakset Yearly Meeting, which
was very large; and then to Dartmouth Yearly Meeting, which was likewise very
large, and that Evening was a Meeting of Ministers, wherein I had much to say
on sundry Heads proper to them: And next Day being the Yearly Meeting, it was
very large, as before, there being a great Resort of People many Miles round.
It held three Days, and ended to the Satisfaction of most. This Evening, as I
was going to Bed, about ten at Night, there was an exceeding great Earthquake,
that made a Noise like the driving of Carts or Wagons on an uneven Causeway;
it continued about two Minutes, to the great Surprise of the People. It was
felt about fifteen hundred Miles, as was after computed, and as was thought by
Calculation, was not quite three Hours in going that Space.

From thence I went into the Island; and took my last Farewell of my Friends in
that Part of the Country, having made a thorough Visit amongst them. The
Weather by this Time grew very cold, it being the Beginning of the Ninth Month;
however, I proceeded to Connecticut, James-town, Kings-town, and to Greenwich
Monthly Meeting. From thence Seth Aldrich, John Casey, John Earl, and Peleg
Spencer, accompanied me, and we traveled into the Presbyterian Country; and
first, at a Town called Preston, we had a small Meeting, and hearing of a
Funeral about three Miles off, we went thither; the People (who, as we
apprehended were Baptists) seemed much surprised, and our not joining a young
Man who prayed amongst them, made them look more shyly on us; the poor Man
seemed in Confusion: But when he had done, we had a fine Opportunity to good
Satisfaction. Then we took our Journey toward New London, and on the Way had a
small Opportunity amongst some Presbyterians; such of them who were bigoted
that Way, were hard to speak to about the inward Work, they could not receive
it. Thence to New London on Groton Side, to one James Smith's who was one of
Rogers's Kind of Baptists, but his Wife was convinced, and they were under
great Persecution by the Presbyterians, both in Body and Goods. I had a Meeting
at John Rogers's on New London Side, and he objected against the Universality
of the Light that saves, and about Baptism; he had much to say for the
Continuance of Water Baptism, but at the same Time would allow, that there was
no real spiritual Benefit in it at all; and he asserted, that that Light which
condemns for Evil, was but the Tree of Knowledge and not saving; but Christ's
Light which saves, was another Thing; endeavoring hereby to divide between the
Light that condemns, and that which saves, making them two different Principles
from each other. I took the Bible, and turning to the first of John the
Evangelist, showed him, that the Light there spoken of, as the Divinity of
Christ the Savior of the World, was the same Principle that condemned the
Disobedient, and justified the Righteous; the Principle was not divided in
itself, nor was it two Principles, but one and the same in all: And though the
Operation of this one Light differed, that Difference, it was plain, was not in
the Light itself, but in the different Object on which it did operate; as for
Example, the same Heat of the Sun that softens Wax, will harden Clay; but this
argues not two different Qualities in the Heat of the Sun, though the Effect of
its Heat is different on Wax and Clay: By which (although this, or but few
Allegories will hold throughout) the People saw, that his Notion of two
different Lights, one saving, the other condemning, had no Foundation in the
Text. Then as to Baptism, he divided the Institution into three Parts; first,
from John; secondly, from the Apostles practicing it; and thirdly, from Mat.
xxviii. 19. But I told him, as he had already allowed that there was no real
spiritual Advantage in outward Water Baptism, his imaginary Division of the
Institution fell of course; for 'twas against Reason to suppose any Thing
ordained or instituted by Christ, to be used in his Church by Believers, could
be of no real Service; but thou allowest that Baptism with Water is of no real
Service therefore it is no Institution of Christ: But to conclude this Head, we
may comparatively with the Apostle say, That it is not the outward Part of
Christianity, or Baptism, will do any good to Believers, but in reality he is a
Christian, that is one inwardly: And Baptism is that of the Heart, and not that
of the Letter, that is really serviceable and saving. Thus we ended this
Conference; but he was full of Words, and confused in his Notions.

I had then another Meeting at Groton, though but small; after that we had an
Evening-meeting at one John Wood's, which was the best we had amongst that
People, where some Objections were made against public Prayer but their
Objections were soon removed. And afterward at Colchester and Hebron we had
some good Meetings amongst the People, though it was very difficult to get a
Place to meet in at the former: But a Man of Resolution offered a Place, and
there being a Town-meeting that Day, we had a large Company, who were very
sober, no Cavilling or Disputes in the least. Then we came to Sea-brook and
Killingsworth, and had Meetings amongst a People who had separated themselves
from the Presbyterians, and inclined to the Baptists, and were getting into a
lifeless Form of singing, and expounding in their own Way and carnal Manner,
which was likely to be a Snare to their Hurt: We appointed another Meeting
amongst them, which was but small, all my Friends save John Casey and John
Earl having left me. We now set out for New York, but had no Meeting till we
came to Rye, which was about 81 Miles. I was glad and comforted to be amongst
our Friends again, having been so long from them, they being much more
agreeable to me than other People. From thence I went to Marrineck, and over
the Ferry to Flushing, and it being their Quarterly Meeting, which held three
Days, the Meeting of Ministers and Elders was of good Service, among them were
some young Ministers; at this Quarterly Meeting we had a solid Time, a large
Appearance of young Friends of both Sexes being there. After this Meeting I
went with Joshua Fielding a little on his Way to the Eastward; and on
returning, I went to visit ^ Friend that was much afflicted with Lowness of
Spirits, and in a despairing Way, although he had from his Youth been a very
sober and orderly Man, but Providence having favored him with considerable
Substance, he imagined he transgressed in having every Thing too fashionable
and too rich, and did not serve his Maker with his Substance as he ought to
have done; this was a great Loa^ upon him.

From thence I visited Westbury on the Plain: Thence to Sequatogue, Huntington,
and Oyster-bay, and had good and very full Meetings. Thence to Mantinicock, and
to Hempstead, where I had but middling Times, though very large Meetings: I was
rather more shut up than I had been for some Time before, and being desired to
go and give the poor despairing (...) another Visit, I went, and found him much
out of Order, which made it unpleasant to be with him. From thence to Hempstead
and Jamaica, the Place where I had been so long a Prisoner twenty Years before,
and had Meetings at both Places, but the latter was very small for ^ant of due
Notice. Then to Flushing Monthly Meeting, which was much to my Comfort, not
having had so good a Meeting for some Weeks before. I here received some
Letters from Friends at the Eastward, which gave me some agreeable Accounts of
the Effect my Labors had had, by inclining some to ^ome to our Meetings who
did not before, in several Places where I had Meetings, there being a Prospect
of some coming nearer to the Truth and joining the Society; withal informing me
of the great Earthquake before noted, how that at New-bury, Haverill, Aimsbury,
and Places adjacent, it continued for fourteen Days, and was felt a long Way on
the Banks of Maremack-River; the Account was confirmed by many who felt it, who
declared themselves afraid to remain in their Houses during the several Shocks,
which returned every twenty-four Hours, continuing about the Space of three
Minutes. The Inhabitants did much blame themselves for their Pride and Luxury,
taking this to be a Judgment upon them for those Things.

(...) then went back to visit Westbury, Hempstead, R^ckway, and had Meetings
in all those Places, and to Jamaica again, where we had a large open Meeting,
and those my old Neighbors, among whom I had been Prisoner in my first
Journey, came generally, and were glad to see me, as I was to see them, and we
had a comfortable Opportunity together. After which I visited New-Town,
Flushing and the Kilns by New-Town, having a large Meeting; and so to New York,
where I had an Evening-meeting, not very large. From thence to the Narrows over
Staten-Island, and to Woodbridge, where I had a Meeting, and about three Miles
distant an Evening-meeting. Then to Shrewsbury to their Weekday Meeting, which
was small, but very agreeable. Then to Man^squan, and back to Shrewsbury on
First Day, where was a very large Meeting, and very serviceable. Thence to
Middle-Town, where the Baptists sent us their Meetinghouse to meet in, although
they had given the Priest Leave to preach there that same Day, so that the
Priest and his Hearers came some Time before our Meeting was ended, and
enlarged it very much; no Cavil nor Dispute happened, but all ended quiet and
well. Thence to Freehold, and had a Meeting in the Courthouse to good Purpose;
although the People were of an ignorant Sort, who made no Profession at all of
any Religion, yet some of them were very well pleased with that Opportunity.
Thence to Allen's-Town and Croswicks, and was at their Meetings: then went to
visit a Friend who sometimes appeared in public, and there was a Difference in
Sentiments about his Appearance, some approved and others disapproved his
Ministry; but although the young Man had taken Offense at those who did not like
him, we got some of the most Disaffected together, and gave him a Visit, and by
confering together, the young Man and those who were dissatisfied came to a
better Understanding, which was to all our liking. Thence to Stony-brook, and
Allen's- Town, and Croswicks again, to the new Meeting House, and to
Mount-Holly, and had Meetings at them all to Content. Thence to one Meeting
more, and to Haddonfield Meeting, Woodbury-Creek, Pilesgrove, Alloway's-Creek,
and to Cohan^ey; but the Weather being so excessive sharp with the Extremity of
Frost, the Meetings were exceeding small. From thence to Salem, and had a very
large open Meeting there, and thence to Haddonfield, and Philadelphia,
traveling over Delaware-River upon the Ice above a Mile, and came to their
Weekday Meeting, which was very small, by reason of the exceeding Sharpness of
the Weather: It is almost incredible to think the Hardness of the Frost in
those Parts; a Man could scarcely bear any Part of his Skin uncover^d, for fear
of being froze. I staid in Town over First Day, and from thence went to
Frankfort, German-Town, A^ington, and Horsham, and so back to Philadelphia, and
staid their Meeting of Ministers, and was at three Meetings on First Day, which
were very large and good, especially the first and last. Then I visited
Hertford, Radnor, New-Town, Goshen, and the Quarterly Meeting for the County of
Chester, held at Providence, which was very large, especially the Meeting of
the Ministers and Elders, (for there were there the greatest Part of the
Ministers in the Province, and several from Jersey Side) it was the biggest
Meeting of Ministers I ever was at in those Parts, the Time of the Year
considered, and I was very much enlarged in Counsel and Advice to them, being
never so opened on sundry Heads before; and in the Meeting of Business I was
drawn forth to show the Qualifications of a right and true Elder, and the
Excellency of right Government in the Church, which must first be known in our
own Minds; for such who have not the Government of their own Spirits, are not
fit to undertake the Government of others. And after this I had a Meeting at
Middle-Town, and so to Providence General Meeting, but I had very little to say
in either of these last Meetings. Thence to Darby, and had a small Meeting, and
so to Philadelphia, and had a brave Meeting, insomuch that I was filled with
Admiration at so uncommon a Supply of new Doctrine every Day, which gave me
great Cause to be more and more humble; and when some Friends would speak in
Favor of such an Opportunity, or Branch of Doctrine, it would give me a Shock,
lest by any of these unwary Commendations, I should take to myself that Honor
which was due to the Father of Spirits, and so fall into a Robbery unawares.

From thence I went to Plymouth, North Wales, Buckingham, Wright's-Town, the
Falls, Neshaminy, and Bristol, and had satisfactory Opportunities though some
more agreeable than others at each Place, and very full Meetings, the Sea on
considered. From Bristol I went to Darlington, and was at their Meeting of
Ministers, but had nothing to say; I stand the First Day Meeting, which was
very large and serviceable; it was the Quarterly Meeting Time, and the Meeting
of Ministers and Elders, and I having had such remarkable Times among the
Ministers occasioned these Meetings to be very large: At this Meeting I was
divinely opened with fresh Matter, setting forth the Service of a divine,
spiritual Ministry, which was free from all Contrivance and Forecast of the
Creature, in preparing itself, either with former Openings, or beautiful
Collections of Texts, or Sayings from Books or Writings, all which Gatherings
would bring Death, and could be no other in the best and most favorable
Construction, though well looked on by some, than the Ministry of the Letter,
under Pretense of the Ministry of the Spirit, which is a Deception of the
highest Nature.

Then I came into Pennsylvania to Wright's-Town, was at their Meeting of
Ministers, and had a very agreeable Time with them, wherein was shown the
Danger of Murmuring at the seeming Weakness of our Gifts to a Degree of
Dejection, and Neglect to exercise ourselves in them, showing that every Gift
of the Ministry was of great Service, though but small in comparison of others,
and had a great Beauty in it, and that we ought by no means to flight and
neglect it, but to think well, and be thankful that the Father of Spirits has
given us a Gift, though but small. And on the other hand, to exhort such as had
a more elegant Ministry, not to overvalue themselves upon their Gifts, but in
Humility and with thankful Hearts render the Honor and Praise where due, not
looking with an Eye of Contempt on their supposed inferior Brethren and
Sisters, but in Love preferring each other to themselves, more especially
considering, that mean and plain Diet, handled by Persons who have clean Hands,
and clean Garments, though but mean to look at, yet the Cleanness of their
Hands and Garments, as also the Diet, though plain, put in decent Order renders
what they have to offer very agreeable and acceptable to the Hungry, and for
others we need not be so careful. A Friend pleasantly said after Meeting, at
his Table, I might freely eat, his Wife was a cleanly House-wife, being willing
to improve the Simile, to her Advantage, she having something to say, though but
little, as a Minister, and her Husband thought she did not give way to her Gift
as she ought. The next Day was Quarterly Meeting in the same Place, which was
pretty large, and I was drawn forth to set the Degrees of Elders, as well as
their different Services, in a proper Light, under the Similitude of the
various Instruments made Use of in the erecting of a Building, and that every
Instrument or Tool had its Service, when used as Occasion required, and every
Builder to use them at a proper Time, and not otherwise. Thence I went over the
River to the Jersey Side, to one Meeting, that was large. Thence back to
Neshaminy again, and to Bylury, Abington, Horsham, North Wales, and the great
Swamp, and had a Degree of Service and Satisfaction in all these Places. Thence
I went to North Wales to a Funeral. Thence to Perk^^ming, had a small Meeting,
and in coming from thence had an Evening-meeting at a Friend's House, his Name
was John Jacobs. Thence to a Funeral at Plymouth, where was a very great
Company, and a very good Meeting. Thence to Philadelphia, and was at their
Half-yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders: Sundry Friends came from
Long Island, and I was largely opened in it to recommend a steadfast Conduct
with Justice and a single Eye to Truth, and its Cause at all Times, and to set
forth the Service of Elders and Pillars in the Church, showing how a Pillar
standing upright would bear a great Weight, but if it leaned to either Side, it
would bend, and perhaps break before it could be set upright again; warning
both Ministers and Elders against Party-taking and Party-making, advising them
as careful Watchmen to guard the Flock, as such who must be accountable for
their Trust, and in particular, not to dip into Differences, the Ministers
especially, either in the Church or private Families, but to stand clear, that
they might have a Place with both Parties, to advise and counsel, and so they
might be of Service in reconciling those who were at Variance: And I had a
Concern to caution the Ministers, in their Travels, not to meddle with
Differences, so as to rashly say, this is right, or that is wrong, but to mind
their own Service, guarding against receiving any Complaints of Friends
Unfaithfulness before a Meeting, which I had ^ound very hurtful to me; for such
Information, without a careful Watch, may influence the Mind to follow it
rather than the true Gift. I had it also to caution the Ministers, in their
Travels not to be hard to please with their Entertainment, but to show
themselves easy and contented with such as poor Friends could let them have,
and to guard against carrying Stories and Tales from one Place to another; and
as soon as their Service was done, to retire Home again; for some, be staying
too long after their Service was ended, had much hurt themselves, and been an
Uneasiness to the Church. I had likewise to caution against appearing too often
or too long in our own Meetings, but that Ministers should wait in their Gifts
for the Spirit to put them forth; that they carefully mind their Openings, and
not go beyond Bounds, for if we do, we shall lose our Interest in the Minds of
Friends, and our Service will be lost; always guarding against seeking after
Praise, or saying any Thing in Commendation of our own Doings, neither to be
uneasy when we have Nothing to say; as likewise to take Care at such la^g^
Meetings, not to be forward nor too long, because a Mistake committed in such a
Meeting did much more Hurt than it might do in small Country Meetings. I
likewise touched upon the great Duty of Prayer, requesting all to guard against
running into too many Words without Understanding, but carefully, to mind the
Spirit, that they might pray with it, with Understanding also.

Next Day was the Half-yearly-meeting, being tho first Day of the Week; I was
largely opened to show the Difference between the true and false Church,
setting them Side by Side, that they might judge for themselves. I staid all
that Week in Town, the Meeting not ending till Forth-day. I was at the First
and Third-day's Meetings following, and so took my Leave.

From thence I came to Darby, Springfield, Merion, Chester, Chichestar,
Christeen, and Newcastle, and had tolerable good Meetings: Friends being
acquainted that I was now taking my Leave of the Country-Meetings were very
large, and several of them to good Satisfaction, much Openness and Brokenness
appearing amongst Friends. Thence to George's-Creek, Duck-Creek, Motherkill,
Hoarkills, Cold-Spring, and so back to Motherkill and Duck-Creek; had pretty
good Satisfaction in these Meetings: The Friends in these Parts were but seldom
visited, and but very few public amongst them. The Priests, both Church and
Presbyterians, attempted to do something, but the People being poor, and
Pension small, they gave out for want of Pay.

From thence to Chester in Maryland, it was a Half-yearly-meeting, but the
Weather being very unseasonable, made it but small; it continued two Days, and
the last Meeting was both largest and best. Thence to Caecil and back to
Gilbert Faulkner's, and John Tibbet's, and Duck-Creek, had good Opportunities,
and took my Leave after having one small Meeting about nine Miles distant, and
so went for the Quarterly Meeting in Maryland at Treaahaven-Creek, it was held
in the great House; a good Meeting, but I found some Difficulties and
Misunderstandings among them, which did them much Hurt. Next was at a
Monthly Meeting in the same Place, where the Uneasiness appeared more plain,
but Endeavors were used to reconcile Matters, and put a stop to the
Uneasiness. Thence to the Bayside, Tuckahoe, Mars^y-Cre^k, Ch^ptank, and had
Meetings in all these Places. Thence to France-quaking, Chickonan^om^co,
Nanticoke, and over Viana-Ferry to Muiberry-Grove, and had small, but
comfortable Meetings in all these Places. Thence to the Widow Gale's at Monay,
and had a small Meeting here in her House. Thence to Annuamessicks, and had a
small Meeting in the Widow Waters's House. Thence to John Curtis's, and had a
small Meeting at his House; so to Thomas Crippin's, and had a Meeting in his
House, there being no Meeting Houses in these Places: Then one Captain Drummond
desired a Meeting in his House, which I assented to, and it was to good
Content. This Drummond was a Judge of the Court, and a very sensible Man.
Thence to Neswad^^ks, where was a pretty good Meeting House, and we had a very
large and good open Meeting in it. Thence to Magotty-Bay, and had a very good
Meeting at Edward Mifl^n's, a fine zealous Elder he was; he carried me over the
Bay in his Boat (about twenty Leagues they called it) to Nansemund, we landed
at old Robert Jordan's, and was at their Weekday Meeting. From thence went
toward Carolina, Joseph Jordan accompanying me on my Way to Nathan Newby's,
and his Son went with me to his Uncle Gabriel's. Next Day I went to Pascotank,
and had a fine open Meeting, which was very large, for the Inhabitants mostly
came to Meetings there when they expected a Preacher, and at other Times pretty
much. I visited a young Man in the Neighborhood, a pretty Minister, but in a
declining Way; we had a comfortable Time with him, he being in a good Frame of
Mind, fit to die. Thence to Little River, and to Perquiman's Booth, to the
upper and lower Meeting House, and had very large Meetings. Thence Gabriel
Newby accompanied me toward Virginia back again; the first Meetings we had
were at the Western-Branch, Pagan-Creek, and at Samuel Savory's; we had a
pretty comfortable Time at the last Place. Then to Swan's-Point, and over
James's River to Williamsburgh, and had a small Meeting at each of these last
Places: Joseph Jordan being with me, we paid the Governor a Visit, and
interceded for his Favor, on the Behalf of some Friends put in Prison on
account of refusing to Train; he was very kind, promising to do what lay in his
Power for them, and our People in general, and in a little Time the Friends
were set at Liberty.

We then went ( Joseph being with me) to Skeminho to the Widow Bate's, it was a
Yearly Meeting at the Widow's House, which was pretty large and open. Thence to
Black-Creek and to Curl's, and had tolerable good Meetings. Then we had a
Meeting of Ministers and Elders; there were but a few Ministers in those Parts,
but we had a suitable Opportunity to good Satisfaction; and indeed it not often
fell out that in such Meetings I was in want of Matter suitable to their
States. Next Day was the Publick-meeting, which was large and well. Next Day I
was at Wain-Oak (these were all called Yearly-meetings) which was large and
well, and Joseph Jordan had excellent Service in it, but I had very little to
say. Thence to the Swamp, Gras^y Swamp. Cedar-Creek, and Dover, and had fine
Meetings, People being very ready to attend them; these Meetings were above the
Fal^s of James's-River Thence back over the River to Robert H^nyoote's, Lemuel
Hargrove's, Somerton, and to Nathan Newby's; in all these Places I had
Meetings, and some of them very large and open. From thence into Carolina to
their Quarterly Meeting, and had a Meeting at James Griffet's House. Thence to
Little-River on the Seventh-day of the Week, and first of the
Quarterly Meeting: Next Day the Meeting was very large, and I took my Leave of
Friends therein, and we had a baptizing Time together. Then I returned back to
Virginia, and was at Nansemund Meeting, and had a large Meeting at a Friend's
House, whole Name was Levin Buffkin, it was a fine edifying Meeting indeed.
Then I came to the Branch, and Chuckatuck, at their Monthly Meeting, but Robert
Jordan had all the Time, that being his last Meeting, he being to come to
England, to visit Friends, in the same Ship with me. Another Meeting was
appointed at Arnold Wilkinson's which was small. After Meeting I went to Robert
Jordan's, having been made exceeding welcome, and also had several good
Opportunities in the Family. I went to but two or three Meetings more, getting
myself ready to return Home, and accordingly we took Leave, and came down the
(...) to Kickatan, but we ^ forced, in sailing there, (...) missing the
Channel, to be aground by (...)-Nose near twenty-four Hours before we could
(...) to Hampton, and when there, staid about a (...) and four Days, George
Walker was very kind, invited us to lodge at his House, which we did (...) four
Nights, and had a Meeting or two in his House, his Wife being more loving than
I expected: (...) was George Keith's Daughter, and in her young (...) Days
showed great Dissatisfaction with Friends, (...) after her Father's Death the
Edge of that Bitter^^^, abated, and her Husband was very loving and h^^ty to
Friends, frequently having Meetings at his House.

Having laid Wind-bound a Week and four Day^, the Wind sprung up fair for us,
and weighed Anchor the 29th of the Fifth Month 1728, (...) a fresh and fine
Gale; Robert Jordan seemed much pleased that we were on our Way, and a seeing
Joy filled my Heart, being thankful that I had been preserved so well in
Health, and assisted with Strength both of Body and Mind to acc^^plish this
long and tedious Journey, through (...) very severe Extremes of both Heat and
Cold (...) about eighteen Months, and missed but even M^^^ings, which were far
back in the Woods. viz. one in the Government of New York, two in (...)
Jerseys, and (...) in Pennsylvania: I was not (...) to miss them, but my
Friends thought the Weather and Season of the Year, together with the great
Scarcity of the Provision both for Man and Horse, and the great and thick Snow,
with the Extremity of the Frost, rendered that Journey hazzardous, if not
impracticable, and to stay till the Winter broke up, I could not see it my
Place; besides which, by staying so long I should have lost my Passage by the
homeward-bound Ships, otherways I should have been willing to have taken those
Meetings, if I could have saved my Passage, and accomplished it so as I might
waste no Time, but go on diligently as I had done before, for there were but
very few of their Meetings but that I visited two, three, and sundry of them
four, five, or six Times, several of them being ^^^ated in my Way in passing to
and fro. I was not by any Disorder or Sickness, or any Accident hindered (I
think I may safely say) one Hour all this Time. Indeed Friends had sent Word to
appoint a Meeting for me about thirty Miles on my Way, but the Weather was so
extremely tempestuous, that when we came there, no Meeting was appointed, so,
it was concluded I could not possibly come, so I was under a Necessity to stay
one Day longer in that Place, which was the greatest Hindrance I met with in
all the Journey that I remember.

Now to return: In our Voyage, about 250 Leagues from Land as we thought, the
Water seemed like a River after a hasty Storm of Thunder; on seeing it thus,
our People were under Surprise, and in that Surprise tried with the Lead for
Ground, but could find none; it was so uncommon a Thing, that the Sailors could
not tell what to think of it: This was about the 15th of the Sixth-Month; we
had fine pleasant Weather, and great Plenty of Dolphins and other Fish, for
which Providence I was very thankful; but on the 22d of the same Month, about
three in the Afternoon, an exceeding Gust of Wind, such an Hurricane as our
Sailors said they never knew, came from the North, which bore so unexpectedly
without any Warning upon us, that to all Appearance our Ship would be in a
Moment swallowed up in the Sea, the Waves running over us, and the Water coming
into the great Cabin Windows and the Forecastle, so that from five or six
Inches of Water in the Hold, it so increased, that we had more than so many
Feet in a few Minutes; the Decks seemed as though they would break down; being so
very heavy with the Waves breaking in upon them, they also staved us above a
Ton and a Half of Water in Casks fastened upon Deck, washed some Hogs overboard
and drowned us several Dozen of Turkeys, Geese, and other Fowls, which
afterward, with the Water and Swine, were much missed by us; besides all this,
the Wind tore our Sails like Paper, broke ou^ (...) ^etopmast, and several of
the Yards, like rotten Sticks, and the round Foretop; the Ship by the Violence
of the Tempest lying so much on one Side, as though she would not right up
again, so that they were for cutting away her Masts and Rigging, but I begged
the Master not to do it, but to trust to Providence, for I was satisfied she
would rise again as soon as the Wind abated: And the Wind began to abate in a
little Time, and the ^hip righted up, but the Tiller of the Rudder being broke,
it was very dangerous, until they had ^ot the Rudder fastened, which in a
little Time before it was dark, was effected with great Difficulty and Danger;
but the Sea running so very high, ^ost the Ship very much, and the Sea came in
with that Violence, that there was no Appearance of any Thing but soundering
and sinking immediately, for some Time, especially till the Rudder was put to
rights; but when they had the Command of the Rudder there were some Hopes of
Relief, but while the Rudder was at Liberty there was no commanding of the
Vessel, but she lay at the Mercy of the Sea, and it seemed as though that would
alone carry away the ^tern of the Vessel, by being forced through the Violence
of the Waves from one Side to the other: But when we had got up the dead
Lights, and secured ourselves in the best Manner we could, then all Hands to
pump, for we found between seven and eight Feet of Water in the Hold, but as
the tossing of the Ship made that very difficult to guess right, it might be
more or less; however, having a good Ship, new and firm, we found Hope
increased, but we were all very wet, and very much fatigued, and a dark and
troublesome Night it was, and we much longed for Day, but the Wind was very
much abated, not lasting above two Hours (...) very strong: And when Daylight
came we were glad, but that was soon turned into Mourning, by discovering the
mean State of our Ship, especially the Rigging and Sails, and finding so great
a Loss of Water and fresh Provision, Things of Value, next to Life itself: All
these Losses put together were Cause of Trouble, but by grieving we could not
help ourselves, therefore we could with the Psalmist, in something of the like
Nature, say, such Trials put People to their Wits End; Psalm cvii. 27.
howbeit, in turning the Mind to that divine Power and Providence which is
present every where, ruling both by Sea and Land, and whom the Winds obey, I
found Comfort in meditating on his Promises to care for those who put their
Trust in him.

Now our Men, who were all preserved from any other Damage, saving the taking
of Cold, which we all felt the Effect of to a great Degree, went about putting
the Rigging to rights again, which took up a full Week before we could make
Sail, the Wind blowing strong and variable; and when they had got Things in a
good Condition the Wind was against us for several Days, which made us
thoughtful to take Care of what Water and Provision we had, that we might not
be surprised with Want, when we had no Power to arm against it. The Men were
all called up to hear a Proposal, which was thus; Three Pints of Water a Man
for twenty-four Hours, and five Pounds of Bread for a Man a Week, having other
Provisions, both fresh and salt, a good handsome Stock, to the full Allowance.
At this there was Uneasiness; but this Allowance would hold by our Calculation
but for about four Weeks, so that if we saw not some Hopes of getting in, in
two Weeks, we must come to less Allowance again.

The Wind continued still against us till the 7th of the Seventh-Month, and
then veered a little to the Southward, and we apprehending ourselves to be too
much to the North, were not willing if we could avoid it, to put into Ireland:
But in about three Days after this we had a brave Wind, which lasted for some
Days, and it gave us Hopes of seeing Land, which we much longed for, being
threatened with Want of Provision, of both Bread and Water, but not Flesh, if
Providence did not interpose: Our Hearts were cheerful, and Gladness appeared
in every Countenance, but alas! it was but a short-lived Joy, for in the
Forenoon on the 13th the Wind scanted upon us again, and about five in the
Afternoon we sounded, trying for Ground, but found none; this made us all look
pale, and Sadness of Heart appeared in every Countenance; besides, our Ship
being a dull Sailer, added somewhat to our Trouble, fearing that we were
farther from Land than we thought by our Reckoning, and the greatest Comfort we
had, was a good Ship under us, though a heavy Sailer, therefore we cheered each
other with the Hope of gaining our Port in due Time with Safety and Comfort:
And this I moralized to myself, by considering the Resemblance of a Christian's
Progress through this Life, sometimes in a Degree of Prosperity, being under
Encouragement to press forward with a fair Wind, and anon under as great
Adversity and Discouragement by Temptations, Persecutions and Afflictions.

In two Days more we sounded; and found Ground at eighty-two Fathom, judging
ourselves from the Lizard sixty Leagues; but alas! the Wind veered and blew
seven Days strong against us, so that we were driven from Land, as we thought,
a Hundred Leagues. This made us talk of shortening our Allowance again, but
that Night about twelve o'Clock the Wind veered in our Favor, and the Sailors
cried, A large Wind, a large Allowance; Nothing being more disagreeable in its
kind than a large Wind and short Allowance. And the Wind being fair, we went on
with Cheerfulness, and upon the Credit of this fair Wind some of the Men had
not a Morsel of Bread left by Night, nor a Spoonful of Water, and had near
thirty-six Hours of their Week to come: However, we went along so agreeably,
that every Body looked pleasant, and it was comely to behold; but alas! this
lasted but about sixteen Hours before it came right in our Teeth again, and
blew very strong. Such Ups and Downs we had, that the Sailors grew very uneasy,
and did curse and swear, nay did not stick to blaspheme in such a Way, as made
it very uneasy, and unpleasant to hear; but this did not last long before it
was calm, and the Wind came up fair again, and we speaking with a Ship outward
bound, they gave us new Heart, by advising us that Scilly bore from us
North-East about twenty-two Leagues Distance. Also' this Day we spoke with the
King's Ship called the Dragon, come from Jamaica, and in the Evening saw sundry
Ships coming in; this made it look very pleasant, besides a fine Gale in our
Favor, so that on the 27th we saw the Land about five in the Evening, and a
Ship to Windward bore down to us, and told us it was the Lizard, and we judged
that it bore E. N. E. from us about six Leagues Distance. Next Day the Wind was
against us, turning in the Night E. N. E. so that we lost Sight of the Land
again, but tacking and standing the other Way we soon saw it, and having the
Tide under Foot, through but a ^eant Wind, we shot in a considerable Way, yet
after the Tide was spent we thought we lost G^ound, but the Wind wearing to our
Advantage, and a better Gale, did help us much, so was on the 28th we thou
pretty near in, thinking to have put into Fai^^ou^h, but the Wind being still
more favorable, we stood for the A Point of Land so called.
Ramhead; then it grew almost calm, so that what we got by the Flood we lost by
the Ebb, and we could but just discern the Edd^^^^^e like the Mast of a Ship
through a Glass, and scarcely at all with the naked Eye; but on the 29th, is
being the First Day of the Week, having a fine Tide and good Wind all in our
Favor, gave us some Hopes get into Plymouth by Meeting Time, the very Thought
of which was agreeable: But alas! by eight in the Morning we found, to our
Sorrow, the Tide against us, and the Wind dying away, we lost Ground, but
shortly after the Wind blew pretty strong and fair; then we found we stem'd the
Tide and got a little forward, and when the Ebb was spent, the Flood with the
Wind came in very strong, though a Neap-tide, so that we raised the Land very
fast, and about two in the Afternoon came abreast the Eddistone, about a
Musket Shot from it, and had a full View thereof, going along with Pleasure. In
about a Quarter of an Hour after this, Pilots came off, several Ships wanting
safe Conduct, and about nine we got safe to an Anchor, just by the Passage
against Edgcombe House, and on the 30th I landed at Plymouth, and staid in Town
that Day, and was very thankful I was safe on Shore again, having been just
nine Weeks on our Passage, and the last five of it was a very trying and
afflicting Time, but the four first were very pleasant and comfortable.

Being now on Shore amongst my Friends, I took Horse the 1st of the
Eighth-Month, and came to Exeter that Night. Next Morning, being the 2d of the
Month and fourth Day of the Week, I came Home, and as I entered my own House,
oh! the inward Comfort and Pleasure which I felt, ravished my Heart, that I
could scarce forbear to cry out, God! that God who judges Men, is just in all
his Ways, and rewards Peace into the Bosoms of those who fear and obey him.
And being by all my Family and Friends kindly received, made my Return
exceedingly delightful.

In about twenty-two Months and odd Days I finished this Journey, from the 22d
of the Tenth-Month 1726, to the 2d of the Eighth-Month 1728, and in that Time I
traveled by Land and over Rivers about five Thousand three Hundred and
twenty-two Miles, besides passing and repassing the great Ocean; and as I had
been out of that Country somewhat more than twenty-one Years, and found so
great an Increase of the Professors of Truth, I had a Curiosity to examine a
little into it, finding most of the old Meeting Houses very much enlarged, some
to hold double, and some treble, and some four Times the People that the old
ones would in my first going thither, and even now some wanted to be either
enlarged, or new ones built at proper Distances; besides the Account of new
Houses built in that Time, in Places where were none, nor Meetings but what
were kept in private Houses, which grew so numerous, that Necessity put them
upon erecting Houses to accommodate themselves. In New England and Rhode Island
are twelve: In the Government of New York are six: In both End and West-Jersey
are nine: In Pennsylvania: thirteen: In Maryland four: In Virginia nine; and in
North Carolina three. In all, there have been fifty-six new Meeting Houses
built within these two or three-and-twenty Years past, and in these Provinces
there are about ten Places more that want where they have none, and many old
ones want to be enlarged, not having Room for Half the People. Now the
extraordinary Increase of Professors is much to be attributed to the Youth
retaining the Profession of their Parents, and marrying such: For chief part of
the People in Pennsylvania are of this Profession, as well as in the Jerseys,
and Rhode Island, so that young People are not under the Temptation to many
such as are of different Judgments in Religion, as in some Parts.

Now being safe returned Home, I was diligent in my (...), minding my (...),
and attended public Meetings, Funerals, etc. until the Year 1740, at which Time
I found a concern to visit some Parts of the North, and Ireland, which comes
next in course with respect to both Time and Place, viz.

An ACCOUNT of my TRAVELS into the North of England, and Ireland, the second
Time, in the Year 1740.
AFTER having acquainted my Friends with what I had in View, requesting, as is
usual in the like Cases, a Certificate from the Monthly Meeting, which was
readily granted, I left my House the 1st of the Third-Month 1740, and went to
the Funeral of an intimate Friend, viz. Thomas Carey of Long-Sutton, the
Meeting was very large and well. Thence I went to Street, and so for Bristol to
the Yearly Meeting, which was attended by many Friends, and was very much to
Satisfaction; I was largely opened both in the public and select Meetings of
Ministers and Elders. Leaving that Place I went to Bath, Bradford, Milksham,
Chippenham, and C^ln in (...), and had in all these Places Meetings to good
Satisfaction, in some more than others. Thence to Newbury, Reading, Wickham,
and Unbridge, and had Meetings it all these Places, which were pretty well.
Thence to London to the Yearly Meeting, where I was more particularly enlarged
amongst the Ministers than ever I had been before in England, which gave me
some Apprehension it was to be my last, and when I was taken sick, of which in
its Place, it seemed to confirm it. I had likewise a very good Time in the
Parting-meeting, which confirmed me that I was in my Place. From thence I went
to H^rtford, it was their Monthly Meeting, and I staid three Meetings in that
Town. Thence to Ware and Roy^i^n, and had considerable Meetings in both Places.
Then into P^^^ex, to Saffron-Walden, Thack^^^^d and Coggeshall, and had
tolerable good Times; so to C^^^^l^r Yearly Meeting, which was very large, and
I had the Company of John Gurney, and Jos^^a T^^^, who both had very eminent
Service in that Meeting.

I was taken ill with a Cold, but had so good a Time amongst the Ministers,
that I thought myself almost cured; but after Meeting riding to Bury, it
brought such a F^ver upon me, that I thought I could not survive (...), and
this seemed to confirm my former Apprehension, from that uncommon Enlargement I
had amongst the Ministers in London, that I should never have another, and this
Notion grew upon me, adding much to my Lowness of Spirts however, I was obliged
to tarry a We^k with my Friend John Drewett, at Bury, and his Kindness and
Tenderness over me in that low, weak Condition, was very great and comfortable;
he conveyed me to Mildenhall in his Chair, but I was very weak, and obliged to
stay at Joseph Ellington's one Week longer, who was likewise very kind and
tender over me.

From thence I went to Brand, and through some Part of N^^^^k into Line^^^^^,
and had very large Meetings at L^^^y, and at (...) a great Number at a Funeral,
and Meetings at save at then Places, which were large. I met my dear Friend
Jos^ To^t at Ly^n, and he was with me at Gedney, and other Meetings between
that and Gains^rough, and then we parted, and I went into York^^^re, and had
sundry large Meetings, considering the Places, as at Leeds, Rawdon, Bradford,
(...), S^^le and Sedbergh; (at which last Place my Mouth was first opened in
the Ministry) and on First Day to Kendal, and had two large Meetings, and then
went directly for Whitehaven by Cockermouth, but had no Meeting till I came to
Dublin, staying in Whitehaven but about two Hours.

I took Shipping the 1st of the Sixth-Month 1740, and landed safe at Dublin the
4th. I staid there two First-days, being under some Disorder, and from thence I
went to Drogheda and Monallen, where I was very particular about the Call and
Qualifications of true Gospel Ministers, showing, that wicked Men could not be
such; and thence to L^^^an, and had satisfactory Opportunities, Michael
Light^eet being there at the same Time. From thence to one Meeting between that
and (...), and so I went to the North as far as ^^^^^arrey, and then returned
back to Toberhead, Old Castle, C^^thill, visiting Meetings on that Side to
(...) and so to C^^^ell, Youghall, and to Cork, to the Province Meeting, and
back by Waterford to a Province Quarterly Meeting at Mountmellick, visiting
Meetings round as I went to Montrath, Edenderry, and so to Dublin to a
Marriage, where for some Time I had very hard Work, but it ended very well:
From thence I went into the County of Wicklow, and round by Carlow, visiting
the Meetings round to the national Half-yearly-meeting at Dublin, about the
11th of the Ninth-Month.

I found in that Nation a brave, zealous and living People in the Root of true
Religion and Discipline, or Church Government, well qualified with Experience
in divine Wisdom; but there were also some who seemed very perfect in the Form,
and appeared to the outward very exact and zealous against Pride and worldly
Customs, but for all that, the Inside was not right, so that I found often very
close Exercise amongst them, in warning them against the Leaven of the
Pharisees, which was equally, if not more hurtful to Religion than that of the
Publicans: And in some Places showing, that it was needful to be good Examples
in Plainness of Speech, as well as Apparel, which many had deviated from; but
nevertheless such there were, who though plain, and otherwise strict, were too
much taken up with the World, and the Riches of it, making Haste to increase
their Substance, which was a very great Hindrance to their Growth in the Life
of Religion, and made them dwarfish therein; setting forth, that a Form,
without Life, whether by Education or otherwise, would not avail; also warning
the Ministers in the Exercise of their Gifts, to keep to the Spirit, and mind
carefully their Openings, and not to preach the Letter, under a Pretense of
Preaching the Spirit, and so instead of ministering Life, minister Death to the
People. In the main, I had great Comfort, and many very good Opportunities.

I left that Nation full of Peace in my own Mind, being glad that I went
thither: I was at eighty-two or eighty-three Meetings in it, and took the ^^ing
the 19th of the Ninth-M^^^h 1740, in Company with my dear Friend Michael
L^gh^^^, for W^^^ington, and was but twenty-four Hours on the Water; it was a
rough though very quick Passage: M^ Friend was very sick, and so was I also,
but not to that Degree as he was. We hired Horses to go to Whitehaven, it being
about six or seven Miles, and staid there till next Day, it being First Day,
and had two Meetings, the last being very large. I visited all the Meetings in
and about Cockermouth, and Pardsay, many of which were very large, and then by
Keswick to Hawkshead, where I was much comforted, being at Friend Lancaster's
House at Colthouse, and had two Meetings there, which were very full.

Thence I went to Kendal, had no Meeting, but next Morning went to Seabergh to
the General-meeting, which was small by reason of a deep Snow and very hard
Weather. Thence to Preston-Patrick, and back to Kendal, but had no Meeting.
Thence to Crook, and had a small Meeting, then back to Kendal to their Weekday
Meeting, where was a Funeral. Thence I went to Shap, but it was very bad
traveling by reason of the Snow and Frost. Thence to Cumberland
Quarterly Meeting, by Carlisle and Moorhouse to Wigton, where it was held; and
considering the Season, it was very large, holding two Days: At a Meeting of
Ministers and Elders held in the Evening, I was pretty much enlarged, as well
as at the other Meetings. I returned back to Penri^h, being accompanied by my
Friend Rowland Wilson this Journey, who was of great Service to me, and my
Friend John Wilson and his intended Son-in-Law met me at Penri^h, where we had
a very large Evening-meeting, to very good Satisfaction; the Dissenting
Teacher, with many of his Hearers were there, and it was very well. Thence to
Teril, and to the Monthly Meeting, at Great-Strickland, and so by Slap to
Kendal, where I was at three Meetings besides the Quarterly Meeting, and the
Meeting of Ministers, all very large and Satisfactory; and the Weather was much
warmer. I took my Friend John Wilson's House for Home at Kendal, and James
Wilson's at Sedbergh, staid their First Day Meeting, and had an exceeding large
Meeting in the Evening. That Meeting, with Cockermouth and Whitehaven, were
three of the largest Meetings I had in the North that Journey. Thence to my old
Friend Robert Chambers, and to Preston General-meeting, and dear James Wilson
and his Wife met me there, it was a pretty large Meeting, but I was much shut
up in it; and after Meeting James and John Wilson, with Robert Chambers, and
sundry others accompanied me to the Quarterly Meeting at Lancaster, which began
next Day, and was very large. These Quarterly-meetings of C^mberland,
Westmoreland and Lancashire, were three of the largest that I remember to have
been at, one after the other, in so short a Time, and they had an excellent
Economy in the Management of their Affairs; but there was no Meeting of
Ministers at Lancaster, at this Time. It may be said, I think very justly, that
these three Counties are in a thriving Way in the very Life of Religion and
true Godliness.

Having received a Line from my dear Wife, that she was weakly, and wanted me
to return, prevented my visiting the North as I had in View, so that from
Lancaster I had no Meeting till I came to Manchester where I had two good
Meetings. Thence to Stockport, Macelesfield and Leck, and had small Meetings at
each Place. Thence to Birmingham and had two Meetings, the last a Funeral,
pretty large, but not so edifying as I could have desired it. Thence to
Worcester, Gloucester, and Bristol, and had Meetings at them all to very good
Satisfaction, especially at Worcester, and Bristol.

In this Journey I traveled in Ireland (exclusive of the Sea) six Hundred and
seventy-eight Miles, and in England, before and after my Return from Ireland,
nine Hundred and Thirty, which in all is sixteen Hundred and eight Miles, and
save my Illness at Bury, had my Health as well as I could expect, being humbly
thankful, that I was so strengthened both inwardly and outwardly to accomplish
my Journey so well, not having, that I remember, left any Thing undone in that
Nation, save something I had to say in the Men's Meeting at Dublin, but their
hasty breaking up prevented it, which gave me Uneasiness for some Weeks after,
and I remark it here for a Caution to others; for I mist such an Opportunity as
I could never more expect to have, and this added to my uneasiness. Thus I saw
that my Fear of breaking in upon the Meeting, and hindering their Business,
made me lose my Time, so that I came off with a Burden upon my Mind.

An ACCOUNT of my TRAVELS since the Decease of my Wife, who after a (...)
Illness departed this Life the 6th of the Third-Mo^th 1746.
I Set out from my House the 27th of the Fourth-Month 1740, toward the
Quarterly Meeting at L^^^ard in Cornwad, which in that County and Devonshire,
are usually called Yearly-meetings, and had two small Meetings in the Way, viz.
at Collumpton and Oak-hampton; thence to Launceston, where we had a very large
Meeting, the Place considered, the People being very sober and attentive, and
the Doctrine of the Gospel flowed freely to them; I was much comforted with
that Meeting: Thence to Liskard to the Quarterly Meeting, which by reason of
the unseasonableness of the Weather, was smaller than u^ual, there being few
besides Friends, but Things were tolerably well, and from thence to Plymouth:
Friends of both Counties attend these two Meetings. After which I had a Meeting
in the Evening at a Parish, where I think but one Family of Friends dwelt, we
had a tolerable good Meeting, many People came to it; thence to Kings^ridge,
and so for Exeter and was at their Weekday Meeting, but had Nothing to say; so
by Collumpton to Chard, and then Home, where I staid until it was Time to set
out for the Yearly Meeting in Glou^^^ershire, held at Hampton-Read, which being
well supplied by sundry able Ministers attending, it was thought to be of good
Service.

I returned by Bath, Froome and Shipton-Mallet, had three Meetings at Bath, one
at Froome, and one at Shipton, all to very good Satisfaction, and then Home,
where I staid some Time; but finding the Constraint of Love to visit London, I
waited to be clearly satisfied in the Undertaking, and was not easy to go till
the 20th of the Eleventh-Month.

I went by Bristol, and the Meetings were very large, I staid two First-days,
and had very good Satisfaction in being there; then I went for London through
Wiltshire, and had a tolerable satisfactory Opportunity in the Evening at
Chippenham, where sundry Strangers came in; next to Caln, and had a Meeting
there also, but not quite so satisfactory; thence to Marlborough, and had a
very open Time, many Neighbors came who were very sober and attentive; thence
to Newbury, and had a small Meeting; thence to Reading, and was there on
First Day both Morning and Afternoon, and had good Satisfaction; thence to
Maidenhead, where sundry Friends from London met me; from thence I went to a
Meeting at Uxbridge appointed for Hannah Harris; from thence to London, and was
in Town four Weeks. In five First-days I visited all the Meetings, and some of
them sundry Times over, and had sometimes great Satisfaction and Comfort, but
at other Times I was very low and under great Poverty of Spirit; the First-days
were hard Service: The Evening Meetings at ^r^^e-church-street were very open,
and the Gospel flowed to them very plentifully, at which Meetings vast Variety
of Hearers frequented, of different States and Professions, but the Fountain
being opened, there was a Supply suitable to their Conditions.

After I was clear of the City, sundry Friends accompanied me to Esher, where
we had a small but pretty open Meeting; thence to G^^^^ford, where we had a
very small and poor Meeting. I queried, why they did not give their Neighbors
Notice? To which they answered, they did not use to do it. There is a very
great Remisness amongst our People in this Respect, for if they were diligent,
and d^sirous to have the Company of their Neighbors, where the Minister is so
concerned, it might be of great Service to them. I went from thence to
G^^almin, where we had a very large open Meeting; thence to Alton, and had two
very agreeable Meetings; so to Winchester, where were but a few Friends; then
to Rumsey, and had a small Meeting; so to Ringwood Weekday Meeting, which was
small but pretty well; thence to Pool, and had a Meeting or two there, and then
Home: being very glad that I succeeded so well, both as to Health and Ability
of mind, getting Home about the middle of the Second-Month, 1747.

I now visited the Meetings in the Neighborhood, until the 9th of the
Third-Month 1747, and on that Day took my Journey toward Bristol
Yearly Meeting, and I had but one Meeting between Home and Bristol; the Meeting
there was very large and well. From thence to the Quarterly Meeting for
Gloucestershire, it was held at Thornbury, and I had a very satisfactory Time
there: Thence I went to Nailsworth, was taken much out of Order in the Night,
but went to Meeting, although not very fit for it; my dear Friend Richard
Champion came there, and I went with him to his House, which made me think, by
the Re^^^^ and Kindness he showed, that he was an excellent sympathizing Friend
in Affliction, for he (...), for my Encouragement said, he would go to
Wo^cester with me, for the Meetings were appointed so far; and my worthy Friend
went with me thither.

I was bravely recovered by the Time I got to Worcester, having only Cheltenham
and Tewksbury Meetings between that and Nailsworth. I was at Worcester on
First Day at three Meetings, and had good Satisfaction and Peace in them. I
went thence to Bromsgrove, and had a small Meeting comfortable and well; thence
to Birmingham, where I staid the Seventh-day, and went to Coventry on
First Day, and was at two Meetings there, which were both open and well, but
the latter more so than the first: From thence to Hinkley, Leicester,
Castle-^^^nington, and to Nottingham on First Day, where I was at their two
Meetings, but few besides our own Professors were there; the Meetings were
tolerable well: I had not very agreeable Service, to my own Apprehension, in
some of the above Meetings, though some Friends thought my Doctrine suitable to
their States, and that is the chief End which we ought to aim at. From thence I
went to Mansfield, and had a very full Meeting at a Funeral, with which I had
great Comfort and Peace: Thence to Chesterfield, Sheffield, and Warnsworth, and
had tolerable good Opportunities; thence to Raw^liff, and to York
Quarterly Meeting, where I had good Service.

From York I went into Holderness, by Thorn, Iththey, Malton, Crans^^ick, and
Beverl^^, where was a Monthly Meeting, which was, I have, serviceable, being a
large Gathering of both Friends and other People of different Persuasions;
thence to H^^l, Welick, Oustwick, H^rnsey, and Darlington: O^^^wick was a very
large Meeting, the others but small, but not to complain of; thence to
Scarborough, where I staid a full Week, and was at two First Day Meetings,
which were both large and comfortable; I had seven Meetings in that Place to
good Satisfaction; then I had a small Meeting at Stanton-dale, and so to
Whithy, and had three Meetings there, but they were laborious, being pretty
hard to get through; thence to Moorsam, and at Castleton had a small Meeting;
it being Harvest-time many Friends could not attend. From thence to
Kirby-Moorside, and lodged with my dear and worthy Friend John Richardson at
Hutton in the Hole, and was at a very large Meeting at Pickering, called a
Yearly Meeting, but it did not answer Expectation, many of the People, who were
not Friends, coming to it as to a Revel, and would afterward get drunk before
they went Home, which gave Friends much Uneasiness, and Room to consider,
whether best to continue it or not.

I returned to my old worthy Friend John Richardson, whose Conversation and
Company was very agreeable and profitable; thence to Kirby, and had a very
comfortable Meeting; so to Bilsdale, Yeaton, Stockton and Yarm, had small
Meetings, but pretty open and edifying. At Yarm, my Friend Thomas Couldwell of
Darlington, and my worthy Friend James W^^^^n and his dear Wife, met me; Thomas
C^^^dw^ll was their Son-in-Law, and had a few Words in Meeting to good
Satisfaction; he was an innocent reputable Man, both in Ministry and Conduct.

James were with me through the County of Durham, where we visited most of the
Meetings to Newcastle; from thence we went into Allendale, and had a pretty
large Gathering of Friends, the Monthly Meeting being there, and their Business
was well conducted, and the Affairs carried on to Edification on and Comfort.
From thence to Alstone-Moore, had a pretty large Meeting, and a comfortable
Opportunity, it being Monthly Meeting also: From thence to Cornwood, which was
pretty full, and I had an agreeable Time. There being here some Convincement, I
was opened to show the Difference between a true and false Ministry,
demonstrating the Qualifications of each, that they might judge, whether a
spiritual Qualification, which sanctifie^ and purifies the Conscience, fitting
it for the receiveing the Knowledge of the divine Will, by Inspiration of the
holy Spirit; or a human Qualification by Literature and Books, with what they
call Ordinati^^, too often without the Sanctification of the Heart by the Word
of Truth, was most likely to advance the Work of true Religion.

From this Place we went into Cumberland; but after the first Meeting James
Wilson went Home to look after his Affairs, it being Harvest-time; but I
visited Cumberland pretty thoroughly, and was at Moorhouse Meeting, and so to
Coldbeck, but was taken so ill there, that I could not attend that Meeting;
from hence I went to Ithil and Cokermouth, Parasay and Whitehaven, but I was
very weak and low in my Spirit, when rendered me very unfit for Service. I was
at Workington on First Day, and had a very large and open Meeting, so that I
was finely recruited, and gathered Strength both inwardly and outwardly: From
thence I went to ^roug^ton, Allonby, and to Holm, where was a troublesome
Woman, in whom the Spirit which influenced the Pearsons was very strong, she
gave some Disturbance, especially to John U^win, but no Body said any Thing to
her; and after I had spoke some Time, and concluded, she stood up and expressed
something to this Effect, Here is a great many fine Words put well together,
but where is the Life? And in Meetings she would often cast forth Reproaches
and Reflections on Ministers, both of the same County and also Strangers. From
(...) we went round to W^gton, and I staid there over First Day, but John Urwin
left me, I had two very edifying Meetings; and from thence I went to Moor^^^,
and had a tolerable good Meeting, and so to the Quarterly Meeting at Carlisle,
which was very large, and I had good Satisfaction both in the Meetings of
Business, and the Meetings of Ministers, to my great Comfort; and these
Meetings very much restored me, for I had been very low and weak with the
Disorder I took at Coldbeck, but my Friend John Urwin was of singular good
Service to me.

In the Visit from Carlisle to Penrith, I went with my Friend John Wilson and
his Brother Crewdson, who were so kind as to meet me at Carlisle, and we had a
very large, good, open Meeting, and I doubt not, the Power of Truth was
eminently felt that Day by some. From thence I went to Great-Strickland
Monthly Meeting for Discipline, and to Shap, and had some Service, although I
was defected and low; and always when I was in that Condition, I endeavored in
secret to be still, waiting in Patience, with fervent Prayer that I might be
preserved in the Simplicity of the Gospel, to appear just as the Truth
assisted, carefully guarding against forming any Image or Likeness from a wrong
Root, left I should offend my Master, as Israel did in Moses's Absence, by
forming to themselves that dumb lifeless Idol the (...), to worship after the
manner of the Egyptians.

From Shap I went to Kendal, the Quarterly Meeting for (...) being there, it
was very large, and I was much opened in it, having very satisfactory Service
both to myself and sundry Friends: From thence I went to La^^^^er to the
Quarterly Meeting for that County, and had there very agreeable Service. These
three Quarterly-meetings succeeded one another, viz. Cumberland, Westmoreland,
and Lancashire, and are the largest of any I know of in this Nation, and
falling so in a Line, gave me the better Opportunity to attend them; I staid at
Lancaster over First Day; and had some Service there, where were two Meetings,
and both pretty large. From Lancaster I went to Yelland, and had a small hard
Meeting, my Friend Robert Chambers and Wife met me here, and I went Home with
them, and so to Prestaign Meeting next Day; it was but small and heavy my
Friend Sarah Wilson, James's Wife, and some other Friends from that Side, met
me there, with whom I went to Brigflats Meeting, it was a fine Gathering, and a
comfortable Time. Thence to Dent's Town, where was a General-meeting, which was
pretty large and well: Thence to Garsdale, and Ravenstonedale, and had two
small Meetings which were edifying, although not without some Mixture of
Uneasiness and Trouble, chiefly occasioned by Unfaithfulness and Indolence
prevailing on sundry Professors, from whom one might expect much better by
their Appearances, and the Places they aimed to fill in the Church: Thence to
Brigflats Meeting on First Day; and their Monthly Meeting for Discipline being
on the fourth Day following, I staid there, and all was conducted to
Edification and Comfort; thence to Grayrig, a small Meeting; so to Crook, where
some Friends from Windermoore met me; it was but a small Meeting, and we had
but a low, poor Time. I came back to Kendal, and was at the First Day Meetings,
that in the Afternoon was large, and I opened pretty clearly the Difference
betwixt a natural, and a spiritual State, showing the Necessity of the last, in
order to qualify for the Knowledge of divine Things, as that Knowledge is not
to be attained to by the natural Man; we had an edifying and good Time. James
Wilson's was my Home while at Brigflats, and John Wilson's at Kendal, during my
Stay there.

I went from Kendal to Bentham, and had a considerable large Meeting to
Satisfaction; thence to Settle, and was at their Monthly Meeting for
Discipline; thence to Skipton, and had a small Meeting there; and so to
Eradford, where I was on First Day, and had pretty good Satisfaction; this Week
gave me a good Degree of Ease and Cheerfulness of Mind: Thence to Rawdon,
Leeds, Gildersham, and to Bradford Monthly Meeting, which was very small,
chiefly occasioned by the Inclemency of the Weather, it being very heavy Rains
and a great Flood; and I returned to Leeds, and so back to Rawdon, and to the
Monthly Meeting at Asquith, where I met with dear Benjamin Kidd; the Meeting
was pretty large, and I think to good Purpose. I returned to Leeds on
First Day, it being my last and farewell Meeting; the Widow Hornor's House was
my Home, and in it I had great Peace of Mind and Consolation, though she was at
that Time under a very trying Exercise, which gave her some uneasy Thoughts;
but considering the great and close Trials she had undergone, she bore it with
great Decency and Patience, plainly demonstrating, that she was highly favored
of Truth, and always dwelling near it, to the Comfort of her Family, and all
sensible Friends who had the Opportunity of her desirable and edifying
Conversation.

I left Leeds, and went to Wakefield to a Funeral, on which Account the Meeting
was somewhat larger, though it was a very stormy Day, and much Snow fell at that
Time; John Scott was with me, and we had a tolerable good Opportunity: Thence I
went to Pontefract, and had a small Meeting; it was a deep Snow, and very hard
Frost, which made it very bad Traveling; thence to Warnsworth to their
Monthly Meeting, where Roger Shackelton met me, and staid with me till after
First Day, John Scott being still with me, but (...) then (...) we went from
thence to (...) to the Funeral of a worthy (...) had a very large Company, who
were (...) and sober in their Behavior; thence to (...) house, and had a small
Meeting; thence to (...) and had two large Meetings there to pretty good
Satisfaction: I stopped one Night at my Friend Peter Adam's, at Cutt^^^^, and
then I went to (...) and had a small Meeting there, and so to (...), and had
another small one, thence to Nottingham Weekday Meeting, and so to (...) on
First Day, here John Scott left me. The Morning-meeting was but small, but that
in the Afternoon was much large, and both were to pretty good Satisfaction. I
was at two or three small Meetings in the County; and then I came back to the
Quarterly Meeting at Leicester where I had a satisfactory Time before the
Business came on, which was conducted with Prudence and Love.

From Leicester I went to a general Monthly Meeting, in a Parish called
W^g^on^^u^-(...) on First Day, where the Meeting was pretty large, and to good
Satisfaction; and that Evening came back to a Meeting at Leicester, Benjamin
Halme being there also, and the Meeting was well and comfortable: Thence to
(...), and had a comfortable Time, and so to Nu^^^^n, and had a very large
Meeting, which I hope was to good Purpose; then to C^try Weekday Meeting, and
to (...); these Meetings were of some Service, but not large: Thence to Warwick
on First Day, and had an Evening-meeting the third Day following, which were
all comfortable Opportunities: Thence to Ha^^y and had a small Evening-Meeting;
but Friends were too negligent in acquainting their Neighbors, for which I had
Cause to blame them in several Places. From thence I went to Bi^^ti^g^^^m, and
was at their Sixth-day Meeting, which was small; I staid over First Day, and
had two Meetings to pretty good Satisfaction, and I was comforted; the fourth
Day following I was at their Monthly Meeting, which was well conducted, and I
had an edifying Time in it to the Elders, to keep their Places as Watchmen over
the Youth* and to be good Examples, and to take Care the Poor were not
neglected, but assisted in due Season. From thence I went to Scourbridge and
Bewdley; at Scourbridge we had fine large Meeting, sundry People came in,
besides Friends, and it was of good Service: From Bewdley I went to Worcester
on First Day, the Morning-meeting was small and heavy, but that in the
Afternoon was large and more open; from thence to T^^^s^ury, and had a very
open, good, edifying Opportunity, though but a small Meeting; thence to (...),
where although I requested Notice might be given, it was neglected, and the
Meeting was very small; from thence to Painswick, where I much pressed Notice
might be given to their Neighbors; I El^ewi^e gave several Notice of the
Meeting myself, de^ing them to acquaint others of it, and by this Means we had
a large and open Meeting; I hope it was of good Service to some, they being
very sober and attentive: From thence to Nail^worth, and although it is a very
considerable Meeting, if not the largest in the County, it was very small, yet
we had a comfortable Time together. Thence I went to Thornbury on First Day to
a Funeral, which was very large and open; from thence to Bristol and was at the
Third and Sixth-day Meetings, and on First Day at two Meetings, which were all
well and comfortable, thence back to Thornbury to the Funeral of a worthy
Elder, Thomas Ally, he was much respected, which his Neighbors manifested by
giving their Attendance at the Meeting, which made it very large; and many
divine Truths were opened, which appeared to Satisfaction, there being Teachers
of sundry Professions, who were very attentive: Thence to Frencbay, a small
Meeting, and so to Bristol; I was at the Sixth-day Meeting, and at a Funeral in
Temple-street, where many of the People called Methodists came; I said over
First Day, and had two Meetings, being edified in both, but the last in
Temple-street rather exceeded: From thence I came to Dassil near
Shipton-Mallet, and had a very satisfactory Meeting at Roscombe, about a Mile
off Dassil, where sundry Baptists, M^ts, and other Diffenters came, being all
very sober and attentive; and indeed what much contributed to enlarge the
Number was, that the Baptist Teacher gave Notice both to his own People and the
Inhabitants of the Place, and gave his Attendance himself; and after Meeting he
came to the Friend's House where we dined, and desired a little Conversation,
which was readily complied with; this gave some reason to think he intended to
object, but it proved to the contrary, for he was rather two much abounding in
his Praise, commending what he had heard more than I approved of, wanting to
know, whether I had not studied that Sermon (as he called it) before I came
there: My Answer to it was, I knew not when I came there, whether I should have
any I being to say or not, so far I was from having any Thing provided
beforehand: He said it was a very good Sermon, and very suitable for them who
heard it. He was very loving, and so we parted.

From Roscombe I came to Long-Sutton, and had a small Meeting; thence to
Sherborne Meeting, the smallest I ever was at, or had in that Place, and to but
little Satisfaction; the Smallness of the Number was much owing to the want of
Notice to the Town's People; from thence to a Funeral at Yeovill, of an ancient
Woman of ninety-five and upwards; a large Company of Neighbors attended the
Corpse, and we had a good Time, the People being very serious, and seemed
edified with what was spoken; from thence I came Home, it being the 16th of the
Twelfth-Month 1747.

I staid at Home, and visited the neighboring Meetings until the 2d of the
Third-Month 1748, and then went toward Bristol Yearly Meeting, but had no
Meeting till I came there, except the Monthly Meeting for the North Division of
the County of Somerset, and though it was very small, the Affairs thereof were
conducted with Prudence and Judgment; thence to Bristol Yearly Meeting, which
was to general Satisfaction.

From Bristol I went to Bath, and had a small Meeting, and so to Pickwick; I
had a small Meeting at Corsham, and then went to Bradford on First Day; the
Morning-meeting was small, but pretty open, that in the Afternoon was very
large, and I was concerned to distinguish between the Theory and the practical
Part of true Religion, and many of the People called Methodists being there,
were very attentive; all was quiet, and ended well; thence I went back to
Pickwick to the Men's Monthly Meeting, and the adjourned Quarterly Meeting for
the County, it was very small, which manifested too much Neglect amongst the
Elders of the Society there for the Service of these Meetings. From thence I
came to the Devizes, M^^ksham, and Market-Lavington, and had a Meeting at each
Place, which were pretty comfortable; so to Salisbury on First Day, and had two
large Meetings there: A great many Methodists came to both Meetings, and were
in their Appearance and Behavior very agreeable; several were partly
convinced, and constantly attended Meetings; I had very suitable Doctrine to
their unsettled States, and seeking Conditions, for they seemed to be enquiring
the Way to the Kingdom, with their Faces thither-wards; and I hope there will
be an Increase in that Place to our Society.

From Salisbury I went to A^ton, and had but one small Meeting there, and so
for London to the Yearly Meeting, which was very large; and many hopeful young
People of both Sexes attended it, who seemed very likely to come up in the
Places of the Faithful already gone, and a going to their long Homes, and my
Heart rejoiced to see and find in them a right Concern for the Cause of the
Gospel, and Zeal to keep up the Testimony their Parents joyfully suffered for:
We had several acceptable and edifying Times, and the Affairs of the Meeting
were conducted in great Love and Condescension, and ended well; the last or
concluding Meeting was very large, and the only one I had a particular Concern
for before I left Home, but I was almost shut out, being so narrowed up for
Time by those who appeared before me, that it seemed quite unseasonable and
dangerous to hold the Meeting longer, and not like to comport with the Health
of the People: but yet my Age and Infirmity considered, and it appearing
doubtful whether I might have the like Opportunity, and being pressed in Spirit
thereto, I stood up under great Fear and Weakness; but I was immediately
strengthened by the good Word of Life, through which I was helped, and came off
beyond my Expectations, being afterward filled with divine Peace and
Consolation, which confirmed me that I was in my Place and Duty.

I staid in London over First Day, but had no Service in public Ministry,
except at the Morning-meeting of Ministers on Second-day, where I was very much
drawn forth to the Ministers, the Meeting being very large with Country
Friends, and I was much comforted in that Meeting. Next Morning I went, with my
worthy Friend Samuel Waring, by Esher to Alton, and staid their First Day
Meeting, and had a Meeting at Great-Fraile, and staid the Monthly Meeting at
Alton, which was comfortable and well, though not much Appearance of Service:
From thence I went to Rumsey, but was taken very ill on the Road, and was very
much fatigued, but next Day was bravely recovered, and had a small Meeting with
the two Families, which was very comfortable; thence to Ringwood on First Day,
and had two open Meetings; the next Day was their Quarterly Meeting, where
their Affairs were well conducted: The Day following was the Yearly Meeting of
the two Counties of Southampton and Dorset, pretty large both in the Forenoon
and Afternoon, and were of good Service to Appearance. Thence to Pool to the
Quarterly Meeting of Dorsetshire, and I staid there over First Day, and had two
pretty full Meetings, especially the last, which was very large and open; many
divine Truths were clearly and plainly declared to the People, who by their
Stillness and Attention manifested a good Disposition to hear and be informed;
I staid the Fourth-day, and then came Home the last Day of the Fifth-Month 1748.

An ACCOUNT of my JOURNEY to Bristol Yearly Meeting, and to London, Norwich,
etc.
I Left Home the 17th of the Second-Month 1749, and had one Meeting at
Croscoume, or Coscoome, near Shipton-Mallet, to good Satisfaction; thence to
Bristol, and staid the Yearly Meeting, where I had some very agreeable
Opportunities, both in the select and public Meetings. Being clear of that
Place, I proceeded by Chippenham, Caln, and Marlborough, and had a Meeting in
each Place; thence to Newbury, being First Day, and had two Meetings, the last
pretty large and agreeable; thence to Reading, Henley, Wickham, and Uxbridge,
had but small Meetings, though satisfactory Opportunities at each Place: From
Uxbridge I went to London, and had sundry very acceptable Times in the select
Meetings of Ministers, and was largely opened in the public Meetings, and I
found my Concern to grow upon me; but when I was clear I left London, in
Company with John Wilson of Kendal, who went to visit his Wife, who had
received some Hurt by a Fall from her Horse near Billerica; she lodged at a
Friend's House in a Parish called Stock, and I lodged at my Friend Samuel
Arnold's Country House. We found John's Wife finely recovered, and we rode
together next Day to Colchester, being the 27th of the Third-Month, the
Yearly Meeting beginning next Day, and the Quarterly Meeting for the County the
Day following, and the select Meeting of Ministers on the Morning of the third
Day of the Week, which appeared to me but of little Advantage; but the public
Meetings were both very large and edifying, and ended well, and to good
Satisfaction. Thence to Maningtree, and had a small Meeting, and so to Ipswich,
and was at their Weekly-meeting in Company with Jane Hoskins (formerly Fenn)
and Elizabeth Hudson, both from Pennsylvania, who had agreeable Service amongst
Friends: I staid in Ipswich over the First Day, and the last Meeting was very
large, being appointed about the fourth Hour in the Afternoon, and many of
sundry Professions were there, and were very attentive and sober; and some very
much affected and broken into Tears, so that I hope that Meeting was of Service
to many: I was largely opened on the Subject of working out our own Salvation,
and the Means whereby it is attainable.

From Ipswich I went to Woodbridge, it being the Quarterly Meeting for the
County of Suffolk, and there being some Uneasiness amongst them, Friends were
concerned to advise them to a Reconciliation, lest by continuing in their
Uneasiness, they should be wounded by a Breach of Union and Affection. The
Meeting, by Adjournment, held all Day, and Friends seemed in a tolerable
Sweetness and Condescension one to another, though a party contentious Spirit
had too much got in among them. Next Morning was a Meeting of Ministers, to
good Satisfaction; and then the Yearly-meetings of Worship followed, which were
exceeding large, and the Parting-meeting the Day following; they were all very
much to Satisfaction: In the Parting-meeting I was much enlarged on the
progressive Advancement in a living and saving Faith, which is the very Life of
true Religion; and we had a small Meeting the Day following, being their
Weekly-meeting. Then I went to Brandon, Edmund Peckover being with me, and he
had very good Service, and the Meeting ended well; then I went back to
Woodbridge, and staid over First Day, but there were very few besides Friends,
though it was expected the last Meeting would have been large, but for want of
Notice it was not. Thence to Layston and Peason-hall, and Beckles, and had a
small Meeting at each Place, but to tolerable Satisfaction; thence to Mutford
and Paikfield, and had as large Meetings as the Accommodation would permit;
what was chiefly wanting, was Room for the People in both Places; thence to
Yarmouth, and had a pretty large Meeting to Edification; thence to
North-Walsham, and had a small Meeting to little Purpose; thence to Norwich
Yearly Meeting, which was very large: I was enlarged on the Qualifications of
true Ministers, showing, that without the divine Aid of the Spirit of Truth,
that Work could not be rightly performed to the Edification of the Hearers.

From Norwich I went to Lamas General-meeting, which was very large, too much
for the House to contain, but the People were very quiet; thence back to
Norwich, staid there the Weekday and First Day Meetings following, where I had
ten Meetings, though in two of them I had Nothing to say, and the Meetings were
mostly very large and to good Purpose, being full enough for my natural
Strength to go through with; but thankful and glad I was, finding inward Strength
and Assistance every Day to help me through so well, to my own Comfort and his
Praise, who is God blessed for ever; and he has given me Faith to believe, that
so long as he engages my Mind in the Work of the Ministry, he will give a fresh
Supply of Strength, both inward and outward, adequate to his Requirings. From
Norwich I came to Muttishal, Windham, and Teasborough, and had a Meeting at
each Place, the last was enlarged considerably with Friends from Norwich;
Things were middling, no Cause of Complaint; but I was under great Poverty of
Spirit in these small Meetings: Thence to Diss to a general Meeting; Friends
from Norwich and other distant Places came in and attended us, that it laid me
very low indeed; but I saw in the Opening of divine Virtue, that as the
Blessing of Christ my Master, upon a small Quantity of but plain and low Food,
gave Satisfaction to a Multitude, more than we were like to be, so I found it
best to retire to my Gift, and be still: The Meeting was very large, quiet, and
well, and I was concerned to set forth the Fully and Emptiness of all Forms of
Religion, without the Virtue and Power of the Spirit of Christ, and was opened
on this Subject very largely, much to my own Satisfaction, all being quiet and
well. Thence to Bardwell, and had a small Meeting, which was pretty well;
thence to Bury, and so to Ratlesdon; I had three Meetings at Bury, and one at
the other Place, all to pretty good Satisfaction.

From Ratlesdon I went to Walden, Royston, and Baldo^k, and so to Hitching, but
had but low Times in all these last Meetings; thence to Hartford and Ware, and
had tolerable good Satisfaction in both Places; thence to Bishop-Stortford, and
Dunmow, and had a small Meeting at each Place; and so to Chelmsford on
First Day; Things were well and comfortable: Thence to Billerica, and had a
small Meeting, and then went with my Friend Samuel Arnold to his House, in a
Parish called Stock, and staid some Days, and then came with him to London,
being the 20th of the Sixth-Month 1749.

I staid Town several Weeks, and my Concern grew upon me, and being filled with
Gospel Virtue, I had some very agreeable Service, visiting all the Meetings in
the City, some three or four Times over, and the First Day Meetings were very
full, but Weekday Meetings were small.

Finding myself easy and clear of the Town, I left it in great Peace on the ^^d
of the Eighth-Month 1749, and came to Either to a small Meetings so to
Guild-ford, Godalmin, and Alton, Basingstoke, Bagburst, and Andover, and had
some very agreeable Times, and in the main was pretty well satisfied. Thence to
Salisbury, and had a very full Meeting, sundry Methodists being there; so to
Fording-bridge, and was at a Funeral, where many People attended; I had good
Satisfaction in being there, and left the Place in much Comfort and inward
Peace; thence to Ringwood, and had a pretty large Evening-meeting to good
Satisfaction, thence to Pool, and so to Weymouth, and had Opportunities in both
Places; and from thence I came Home, being the 2d of the Ninth-Month 1749. --

From this Time it does not appear that our dear Friend kept any Account of the
Meetings he attended, but upon Application to his Monthly Meeting, they sent us
the following brief Testimony of his Service, from the Time he finished his
Journal to his Decease, viz.

From our Monthly Meeting held at Bridport, the 21st of the Ninth-Month 1755,
to Friends at their Second-day's Morning-meeting in London.

Dear Friends and Brethren,
THE Journal of our dear and worthy Friend Samuel Bownas, seems to break off
somewhat abruptly, ending the 2d of the Ninth-Month 1749, and we cannot find
that he kept any Account of his Travels, Labors and Services in the Ministry,
from that Time to the Time of his Decease, which was on the second Day of the
Fourth-Month 1753, during which Time he took no long Journeys, for being
advanced in Years, his Hands shook and Eyesight failed him much, but he was
very diligent in attending Meetings both at Home and in the Neighborhood, for
twenty or thirty Miles round, as long as his Health and Strength continued; and
his Ministry was lively and powerful to the last, to the Edification and
Comfort of those that were favored with it, and his Removal was a great Loss
to Friends in these Parts, but we have Reason to believe it was his great Gain,
for in his last Illness, which was very short, he seemed quite sensible of his
approaching Change, saying, that he could not stay long with us, and hoped that
kind Providence would be pleased to take him to himself.

Signed in and on Behalf of the said Meeting, by JOSEPH CURTIS, ROBERT CURTIS,
THOMAS WESTCOMBE, WILLIAM KENWAY, JOSEPH HUTCHINS.


FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF THAT Ancient Servant of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN
RICHARDSN, Giving a RELATION of many of his Trials and Exercises in his Youth,
and his SERVICES in the Work of the Ministry, in ENGLAND, IRELAND, AMERICA, etc.

He that hears you, hears me: And he that despises you, despises me: And
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Luke x. 16. LONDON PRINTED:
PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted and Sold by WILLIAM DUNLAP, at the NEWEST
PRINTING-OFFICE, in Market-Street, 1759

THE TESTIMONY OF FRIENDS belonging to Gisbrough Monthly Meeting, concerning
our Worthy Friend JOHN RICHARDSON, who departed this Life, near Hutton in the
Hole, the 2d of the Fourth Month 1753, in the Eighty seventh Year of his Age,
and was buried in Friends Burying Ground at Kirby-moorside.
AS many of our Elders are removed, and but few left who had personal Knowledge
of this our Friend in his younger Years, and early Part of his Service, we
cannot give so full an Account thereof as otherwise might have been done.

Nevertheless, by Accounts transmitted to us, we have Cause to believe he was
much devoted and cheerfully given up to walk in the Way of his Duty, and
therein was of great Service to the Churches where his Lot was cast; as also an
Instrument in the Divine Hand, in turning many to Righteousness.

As to the latter Part of his Life, we have this Testimony to give of him, That
he was a Lover of Discipline and good Order in the Church, diligent in
attending Meetings for Worship and Truth's Service, whilst of Ability; a good
Example therein, by sitting in a still, quiet, and unaffected manner in
Silence, and when raised up to bear a public Testimony, was comfortable and
acceptable to Friends.

And when his natural Faculties were somewhat impaired, and he confined at home
through old Age and Infirmities, he appeared more and more heavenly minded, and
seemed to grow in the Life of Religion, that we hope he is now at Rest in the
Fruition of that Happiness prepared for such as hold out to the End in well
doing.

Signed on Behalf of the said Meeting, held at Castleton the 22d of the Third
Month, 1754, by JOHN SNOWDON WILLIAM PEIRSON JOHN FLINTOFT JOHN WILSON THOMAS
WARD ONESIPHORUS HOOPUS ISAAC STOCKTON JOHN BAKER THOMAS WOOD JOHN STEPHENSON
ISAAC TAILOR THOMAS ELLERBY CALEB FLETCHER JOHN MARTIN GEORGE COATS GEORGE
MASON JOSEPH FLINTOFT RICHARD WILSON WILLIAM HARTAS JOSEPH HESLETON.


TESTIMONY OF FRIENDS, from the Quarterly Meeting held at YORK.
ON reading the Testimony given from the Monthly Meeting of Gisbrough,
concerning our late ancient and worthy Friend John Richardson, deceased, of
which we approve, and do find ourselves under an Engagement to add this short
Testimony; that from certain Experience of the Service he has had amongst us in
a fresh and lively Ministry, and in the exercising of the Discipline of the
Church in a Gospel Spirit, whereby many received Comfort and Edification; and
some of us having Knowledge of him from his early Appearance in the Ministry,
remember that he was acceptable to Friends, being sound in Doctrine, reaching
to the Witness of God in those to whom he ministered: He was a diligent and
faithful Labourer, traveling several Times through most Parts of this Nation,
and visited Friends Meetings in Scotland and Ireland, as also twice the English
Plantations in America, leaving many Seals of his Ministry having had the
Approbation and Unity of his Friends with his Service both at home and abroad.
He was a tender nursing Father in the Church, over the Youth whom God had
visited, to ^ncourage and strengthen those newly convinced, to whom also he was
a good Example; and though of a sweet and courteous Disposition, yet careful in
the Spirit of Wisdom, to caution and guard such against the deceitful Workings
and false Representations of the Spirit of Error; and to diverse of us who
visited him toward the Close of his Time, he appeared in a heavenly Frame of
Mind, to our great Comfort, evidencing a Preparation for that eternal Bliss
whereinto (we doubt not) he is entered, and reaps the Fruits of his Labors.

Signed in and on Behalf of our Quarterly Meeting, held at York, the 27th and
28th of the Third Month 1754, by BOSSELL MIDDLETON JOHN SCOTT ROBERT HENDERSON
EDWARD STABLER ROGER SHACKLETON LAYTON FIRBANK WILLIAM HIRD JOHN FLINTOFT
WILLIAM COWELL JOHN BIRKBECK JOHN KILDEN THOMAS ROWLAND SAMUEL GRIMSHAW WILLIAM
CONNING THOMAS ALDAM, jun. WILLIAM PAIN JOHN GREENWOOD JOHN HUSTLER CALEB
FLETCHER WILLIAM BROWN ABRAHAM SUTCLIFF JOHN SUTCLIFF JONATHAN CRAVEN.


AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF JOHN RICHARDSON, Introduced With a brief Relation
concerning his Father WILLIAM RICHARDSON.
IT has been repeatedly revived in my Mind, to leave the following Account
concerning my dear Father WILLIAM RICHARDSON, having also seen something of his
own in Manuscript, concerning his Convincement, with Remarks on some other
Things; but I being young when he died, did not their much heed it, and when I
would gladly have seen it for my own Satisfaction, I could not, nor as yet can
meet with it; therefore,

Inasmuch as my Father was early convinced of the Truth, a Sufferer ^or it, and
bore a public Testimony to it, I found it my Duty, as near as I could remember
the Contents thereof, to leave this short Account concerning him, viz.

He was born at North-Cave, in the East Part of Yorkshire, in the Year 1624, of
honest Parents, and of good Repute, and was educated in the Ep^s^^pal Way being
soberly inclined from his Childhood and upward, a Lover and Seeker after Purity
and Virtue: And I have heard him say, gave his Mind much to Retirement, reading
the holy Scriptures, breathing and seeking after the Lord, especially in the
Fields, being by Calling a Shepherd; and it pleased the Lord to open his
Understanding so clearly, that he saw and longed for a more excellent
Dispensation to come; and also saw that the Priests were wrong, and generally
proud and covetous, so that he was weary with following them, and much weaned
from them and all Company, except two or three Men who did meet with him, and
spoke one unto are her concerning their inward Conditions, and what they had
experienced of the Lord's Dealings with them. This was before they had heard of
the Name Quaker, os it was in a short Time after given to the People which the
Lord raised up to give Testimony of the notable and ancient, yet newly revived
and blessed Dispensation of Christ's Coming, and Manifestation by the holy
Spirit, inwardly in the Hearts and Minds of the Children of Men, in order to
enlighten, quicken, sanctify, and save them from Darkness, Death, Ignorance and
Sin, that they might be made capable of obeying, worshipping and glorifying the
great God and Sanctifier of them.

And as my Father was thus waiting and looking for a more general breaking
soath of this glorious, powerful and Gospel-day, which had in a good degree
sprung up in his Heart, he had not, as yet, see^ that worthy and good Man
GEORGE FOX, although he passed through those Parts about that Time; but soon
after came WILLIAM DEWSBERRY, and at the Sound of his Voice, I have heard my
Father say, he was exceeding glad, in hearing him declare the Way to find the
lost Piece of Silver, the Pearl of great Price with in, a Savior near, that
had been held forth by Men to he at a distance. But having left the dare
Watchmen, of whom they used to enquire, they now met with their Beloved at
home, in their own Bosoms; renowned be the great Name of the Lord, now and for
ever.

Thus the hearing and receiving the ever blessed Truth, was as the Seed, or
Word of the Kingdom, sown in the gold Ground, or honest Hearts of Men, which
took Root downward and sprang upward, and brought forth Fruit in some thirty,
in some sixty, and in (...) an hundred Fold, to the Praise of the great and
good Husbandman.

My said Father was early raised up to bear a public Testimony, which was
living and acceptable to Friends, but was so much attended with Weakness of
Body for many Years, that he went little abroad in the Work of the Ministry. He
suffered patiently the Spoiling of his Goods, and Imprisonment of his weakly
Body, in the great and more general Imprisonment; he not only believed in Jesus
Christ, but suffered for him; he was a good Neighbor, a loving Husband, and a
tender Father over all that was good, but severe to all that which was wrong,
and was for Judgment, without Respect of Persons, and spared it not even to his
own Children; and especially he was much concerned for me, for, as he said, I
was the wildest of them; and as he lived well, and believed in Jesus Christ, I
doubt not but he has finished his Course in the Love and Favor of God, is
entered into Mansion of Glory, and is at Rest with all the Faithful who loved
not their Lives unto Death, but rather hated them in Comparison of that
endeared and unfeigned Love the bore to God the Father, and to Jesus Christ his
dear and well-beloved Son; who died for them, and also for the whole World.

He departed this Life in 1679, aged about fifty-five Years, and was decently
b^a^ed in Friends burying Place in Hatham, near Cave, where he was born.

NOW having given this short Account concerning my Father, it remains with me
to leave to Posterity some Remarks on my Convincement, with an Account of
sundry Transactions, Travels, Healings, and Deliverances I met with, in and
from my Youth to this Day, with some Advice and openings in the Spirit of Truth.

I was young when my Father died, not above thirteen Years of Age, yet the Lord
was at work by his Light, Grace and holy Spirit in my Heart, but I knew not
then what it was which inwardly disquieted my Mind, when any Thing which was
evil did prevail over the Good in me, which it oftentimes did, for want of
taking heed to that of God in my Heart; I desired Ease and Peace some other
Way; without taking up the Cross of Christ to my own corrupt Will, and strove
for some Time (as no doubt many do) to make merry over the just Witness until
for a Season the converting and true Witness of God seemed to be slain, or
disappeared, and then I took Liberty, but not in grooss Evils which many ran
into, being preserved religiously inclined, seeking after Professors, and
enquiring of them, for my Information and Satisfaction, to find (if I could)
any Thing that was safe to rest in, or any true and solid Comfort to my poor
disconsolate and bewildered Soul, but I was afraid I should be deceived, or
take up a false Rest in any Thing that was wrong or unsafe^; which Was the
great Love and Mercy of God to me. But after many Searchings and Enquirings
among those who were but in the Letter without, and in the outward Court, where
the Veil is over the Understanding, and the Eye of the Mind is not truly opened
to see into Things that are invisible, and hid from all carnal-minded Men; even
so was my State and Afflictions hid from them, and all the deceitful Workings
of Satan, and the strong Temptations which I met with, these Mind Guides could
not see, nor their veiled Understandings know how to direct me (...) the true
Shepherd of Israel, the Lawgiver coming out of Sion, that turns away
Ungodliness from Jacob, and Transgression from Israel; not having truly
experienced Deliverance wrought in them out of this cloudy, bewildered and
tempted State which I was in. Oh! that People would come to him that has the
Eye Salve, with which if the Eye be truly anointed, it will see clearly Things
as they are, and not darkly, mistaking Trees for Men, and Things terrestial for
Things celestial; and that they would buy Gold, tried by the Fire of him that
is called the tried Stone, clect and precious, laid in Sion for a Foundation:
This is Christ whom the true Church believes in, and builds upon, and they are
enriched with his Love, Power and Virtue, which is better than Cold outwardly;
this is the Anointing, and the Un^tion, which the true Church has, and does
receive from Christ the hold One; and such as do truly put on his
Righteousness, Purity, and Holiness, their Clothing is better than that of
fine Linen outwardly. Oh! that all the Inhabitants of the Earth might be thus
anointed, enriched and truly clothed, that no more inward Blindness or Poverty
may he found in the Children of Men, nor the Shame of their Nakedness be any
more seen, now or hereafter.

Receive and learn these Things, you that can, of him that is the faithful and
true Witness, that always witnesses against the Evil in Man, but always gives
Witness to the Father, for the good in Men which they do say and think. This is
the Spirit of him that was dead, and is alive, no more to be known after the
Flesh, as the Apostle gave Testimony, and is to be known inwardly and
spiritualld by the Children of Men, to open the blind Eye, and unstop the deaf
Ear, and pierces into the Soul that has been clouded and captivated,
imprisoned and misguided, and even in a Wilderness, and sees not a Way of
Deliverance; like Israel in the Land of Egypt, when the Lord JEHOVAH sent
Moses, a lively Type of Christ, and employed him in that great Work of pleading
with, and plaguing Pharath and the Egyptians; yet for a Time their Burdens and
Afflictions were increased, and their Exercises more imbittered unto them,
until that great and mavelous Work was in a good degree accomplished, which
was their Deliverance out of Egypt, the great and mighty Work for which Moses
was chiefly sent; which Deliverance was not wrought until the Firstborn of
Man, and of Beast, was ^^am throughout all the Land of Egypt.

Now the clear Opening I had in the Light, of what is to be understood, and
gathered from hence, is not the slaying of the outward Man, but a putting off,
or slaying the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, crucifying, or putting off the
old Man with his Deeds; and as to the Beast, all Cruelty, Lust, Pushing,
Tearing, Devouring, and Savageness, is to be slain or put away; and the corrupt
or strong Will of Man, as well as what is beastial, must be slain before Man
can come from under the Power of him who is called the Prince of the Power of
the Air, who rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience. These Things
must be experienced, before the Children of Men can go forth rightly qualified
to glorify God, and follow his dear Son, whom he has appointed to be a Leader,
and a Commander of his People: This is he, as Moses declares, who is to be
heard in all Things, under the Penalty of being cut off from the People; or of
having their Names blotted out of the Book of Life; or being deprived of the
Comforts of the Lords holy Presence. Read this, you who have heard and
understood what the Spirit says unto the Churches. -- These Thig^ I saw, after
the true Witness arose or revived; and the Light did shine which had
disappeared, or had been clouded. I have been led into these Openings, which
have caused a little Digression from my Wilderness State I mentioned before,
which I now return to.

After much Searching without, amongst those who proved to me Physicians of no
Value, and miserable Comforters, I betook myself to a lonesome and retired
Life, breathing after, and seeking the Lord in the Fields, and private Places,
beseeching him, that he would bring me to the saving Knowledge, of his Truth;
and blessed be the Name of the Lord now and for ever, I had not sought him long
with all my Heart, before I met with his inward Appearance to me, in and by his
holy Spirit, Light and Grace; but when the true Light did begin so shine more
clearly, and the living Witness did arise in my inward Man, Oh then my undone,
bewildered and miserable Condition began to appear, and then great and
unutterable were my Conflicts, and the Distress I was in; I thought no Man's
Condition upon the Face of the whole Earth was like mine; I thought I was not
fit to die, neither did I know how to live; I thought in the Evening, Oh! that
it was Morning; and in the Morning, that it was Evening. I had many solitary
Walks in the Fields, and other Places (...) which I many Times poured out my
Complaints and Cries before the Lord, with fervent Supplications to him, that
he would look open my Afflictions, and the strong Temptations I was then under,
and that he would rebuke the Adversary of my Soul, and deliver it, for I even
thought it was as in the Jaws of a devouring Lion, and amongst the fiery
Spirits, and, as it were, under the Weight of the Mountains. Read and
understand the Afflictions of thy Brother, thou that have come through great
Tribulations, and have washed and made thy Garments white in the Blood of the
Lamb; this is the Beginning of that Baptism which does save, and of that
Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which the Lord sheds
upon the Believers in abundance; this is the Blood which sprinkleth the Heart
from an evil Conscience, that the Children of Men, thus changed, may serve the
living and true God; this is the Life which converts the World, even as many as
are converted; this is the Virtue, Life and Blood, which makes clean the
Saints Garments, and inwardly washes them from all Filthiness, both of Flesh
and Spirit. I found this was and is he of whom it is said, by him were all
Things made, and he is Lord of all; a Man ought to be subservient to him, and
all Things in Man subservient to him, who commands and comprehends all Things,
in whom all the Types and Shadows also do end, or are fulfilled. Head this thou
Virgin Daughter, or clean Church of Christ, the Rock of thy Strength, whose
Name to thee is as precious Ointment poured forth, and because of the Savor
thereof, the Virgins love him, and are under great Obligations to obey and
follow him the Lamb of God, wheresoever he leads.

Although I had seen many Things, and had diverse Openings, yet great were my
Trials, and many were the Temptations I met with in those Days, for I lived at
a Distance from Friends, and Meetings which made my Exercise the harder, as
will more (...) hereafter (...), in the Course of my Travels and Pilgrimage in
this Vale of Tears and Troubles, and some of them not very common; but the Lord
helped me through them all, blessed be his Name for ever.

I now came to witness that Scripture to be fulfilled, which says, that when
the Lord's Judgments are in the Earth, or earthly Hearts of Men, the (...)
learn Righteousness. And notwithstanding there was an Aversion in my with
Nature to the People in (...) called Quakers, as also to the Name itself, yet
when the afflicting Hand of the Lord was upon me for my Disobedience, and when
like Ephraim and J^dah, I saw in the Light my Hurt and my Wound, I bem^ed
myself, and mourned ever that just Principle of Light and Grace in me, which I
had p^^^ced with my Sins and Disobedience; and although that Ministration of
Condemnation was glorious in its Time, yet great were my Troubles, which
humbled my Mind, and made me willing to deny myself of every Thing which the
Light made known in me to be evil, I being in great Distress, and wanting Peace
and Assurance of the Love of God to my Soul; the Weight of which so humbled my
Mind, that I knew not of any Calling, People, Practice, or Principle, that was
lawful and right, which I could not embrace, or fall in with. This was surely
like the Day of (...) Troubles, and David's Fears; I saw that the Fifth of Sion
was to be purged away by the Spirit of Judgment and of Burning; this is the Way
of the Deliverance and Recovery of poor Men out of the ^all, and the Time of
the Restoration of the Kingdom to God's true Israel. Read ye that can, and
understand. This was the Day of my Baptism* into the Love of God, and true
Faith in (...) Son, as also into a Feeling of, or Sympathy with him in his
Sufferings, which were un^^^e able, and I found that Ministration changed; that
which had (...) Death, was now unto Line; and the Ministration which was of
Condemnation unto the first Birth, when that was slain, and in a good degree
na^^ed or fastened to the Cross of Christ the Power of God, then the Good
prevailed over the Evil, and working out the Evil in the Mind, and also in the
Members, made all good or holy. The Lords living Power, and consuming burning
Word, when it works and prevails, it brings into Subjection, and makes the
very Heart or Ground holy in Men.

Whereas there had been an Aversion in me to the People called in s^^rn
Quakers, and also to their strict living, and Demean^ur, Plainness of Habit,
and Language, none of which I learned from them; for when the Lord changed my
Heart, he also changed ray, Thoughts, Words and Ways, and there became an
Aversion in me to Vice, Sin and Vanity, as there had been to the Ways of
Virtue; but having tasted of the Terrors and Judgments of God because of Sin. I
was warned to flee from such Things as occasioned Christ's Coming, not to bring
(...), but a Sword; a Sword indeed, yea, his Heart penetrating, searching Word,
which is (...) than any two-edged Swordd that pierces to the cutting, or
dividing a^^nd^r between First and Spirit, J^ints and Marrow. And as thus I
came to see and abhor the Evil in myself, when such who had been my Companions
in Vanity reviled me, or came in my Way, I was often moved to warn and reprove
them, having, as before hinted, tasted of the Terrors of the Lord for Son, I
could not well forbear to warn others to flee such Things as I had been judged
for. Now I came clearly to be convinced about the Hat-honour, bowing the Knee,
the corrupt Language, as well as finery in Habit; all which for
Conscience Sake, and the Peace thereof, I came to deny, and take up the Cross
to, and had great Pence in so doing.

Although the blessed Truth thus prevailed in me, yet notwithstanding, I was
not without great Conflicts of Spirit, Temptations and Trials of diverse kinds;
nevertheless, my Mind was resigned to the Lord, and my fervent Prayers were to
him, and he kept me, and opened my Understanding, for I was afraid of being
m^sled in any Thing, especially relating to my Salvation: I came to be weaned
from all my Companions and Lovers which I had taken Delight and Pleasure in,
and all Things in this Would were little to me, my Mind being much redeemed out
of the World, and not only the corrupt and evil Part thereof, but even from the
lawful Part; so that my Heart and Mind became much inclined and given up to
seek the Lord, waiting upon him to feel his Presence, and Peace, and to know
his Will, and receive Power to do the same.

As thus my Mind came to he brought into a depending and waiting Frame upon the
Lord, and to be stayed in the Light, and experimentally and feelingly (...)
partake of his Love and Grace, which help^ me against my Infirmities, (blessed
be his Name) (...) ^ound it sufficient for me, as I kept to it, in all (...)
and Temptations: Then I came to see, that (...) the outward Performances in
Matters of Religion (...) not avail nor render Man acceptable to God, but a^
the Heart came to be truly given up to him, that (...) ^ht not only purge it
from Defilement, but (...) clean through the Indwelling of his holy Spir^ And,
as ne^ as I remember, I saw clearly (...) these Things before the sixteenth
Year of my (...) although, between the Death of my Father and this Time, I took
Liberty to go among what People I would, my Mother giving us great Liberty,
although she was a Woman west accounted of among all People who knew her, and
not undeservedly, for her Industry and fair Dealing concerning the Things of
this World.

After this Time I attended the Meetings of the Lord's People called Quakers,
as diligently as my Circumstances would well admit. My Mother being le^t with
five Children, I had only one Sister who was elder than myself, and three
Brothers younger, the youngest about three Years old when my Father died, he
leaving but little of this World to bring us up with; yet my Parents always had
as much as kept them above Contempt, and no Body lost by them; but I found
myself under a Necessity to work hard for my own Support, the Help of my
Mother, and Education of my Brothers, more especially as my Sister died soon
after.

We being last in a Farm of Grazing, and part Husbandry or Tillage, did well as
to the Things of this World, yet I cannot well omit mentioning one Thing which
became a great Exercise to me, which was thus; my Mother married one that was
zealous for the Pres^^tery, and I being much against it, showed my Dislike to
the Marriage, and told my Mother, I was afraid that she had too much an Eye to
what he had, for he was counted rich as to this World; but if she thought to
(...) our Portions in so marrying, the Hand of the Lord would be against her,
and a Blasting or Mildew would come upon even that which we had got through
Industry and hard Labor, and what the Lord had (...) have blessed to us, if we
kept faithful to the Truth, and contented our^^^^^^ with our present Condition.
Then my Mother confessed, that as to the worldly Enjoyments, it had not been
(...) with ^^r than now. I must write with great Caution; she was my Mother,
and a tender Mother over me, and was ^oth to offend me, and had promised, as
far as she well durst, not to marry with any one with whom I was not satisfied.
But as to their Proceedure in Courtship, and Marriage, from this Time I was
entirely ignorant, until it was accomplished. But when my poor Mother was
married, her Cry was, My Son, how shall. I ever be able to look him in the Face
any more, it will be such a Trouble to him; be that ^ath not at any Time
dis^^^ged me, but if I bid him go, ^e ran; and if I bid him do any Thing, he
did it with all his Might; or to that Effect, as several told me who heard her.
But she being married, what we had was mixed with my Father-in-Law's Goods, and
my Mother died first, and our Father married again, made his Will, and dying,
left me Five Shillings for all my Part, which was of Right to descend from my
own Parents upon me; I gave his Executors a Receipt in full, and there was an
End of all, except some small Matter given to my youngest Brother, for the rest
of my Brothers and Sisters were dead. As near as I remember, this Marriage was
in the eighteenth Year of my Age, so that what I foresaw about the Blast and
Mildew, came to pass.

Now to return to my further Account concerning the Troubles and Trials that
attended me in the Time while I was in my Father-in-Law and Mother's House,
after Marriage; we, and what we had, being removed to his House, except Part of
the Stock which was left in the ground. Now I foresaw that I was like to come
to a great Trial, and I was brought very low, what with the Trouble about the
Marriage, and the Exercise of my Mind concerning my own Condition, having had
many great Conflicts of Spirit, so that I was almost in Despair, had not the
Lord, in whom I believed, risen in his Power, and rebuked the Adversary of my
Soul, I had been overthrown, and swallowed up in the Floods of the Temptations
that were cast out of the Mouth of the red fiery-like Dragon after me, in this
the Day of my great and strong Trouble and Travail; but the God of Love and
Pity saw me, and helped me in my Distress, and in a Day and Time acceptable; he
that heard poor (...) when he cried from under the Shrub, and sent or gave
Relief to him and his Mother, who with him was gone from Abraham's House, saw
me in this great Straight. Also, when I came to my Father's House, he being a
Man much given to Family Duties, of saying Grace, etc. before and a^e. Meat,
none of which I could comply with, except felt evidently the Spirit of Truth to
attend (...), and open the Heart and Mouth into such D^es. The first Day I came
to the House, being (...) the Table with all or most of our Family, I the (...)
Is it now come to this? I must either displease my heavenly or earthly Father:
But oh! the Awfuln^^s, or deep Exercise which was upon my Spirit, and strong
Cries that ascended unto the Lord for my Help and Preservation that I might not
offend him. My Father-in-Law sat with his Hat partly on, and partly off with
his Eyes fixed on me, as likewise mine were on him in much Fear; so we
continued as long or longer than he used to be in saying Grace, as they call
it, but said Nothing that we heard; so at length he put on his Hat again, to
the Wonder or the Family: Neither did he then, or ever after, ask me why I did
not put off my Hat; neither did he perform that Ceremony all the Time I stayed
with him, which was above one Year: Thus the Lord helped me, renowned be his
great Name now and for ever. My Father might seem for Age, Spirit and
Understanding, so have been much more than a Match for me a poor Shrub, but the
Lord (who caused the Pillar of the Cloud to be bright and give Light to Israel,
and brought Darkness upon the Egypt^ (...), and fought against them, and for
Israel) I (...) touched and smote my poor Father, that he could (...) rise up
against that Power the Lord helped me (...) For it was not mine but the Lord's
doing, to him be given the Attributes of Praise, Salvation and Strength, now
and for ever. I saw clearly, that there could not be any true and acceptable
Worship performed to God, but what was in the Spirit, and in the Truth, neither
could any pray aright, but as the Spirit helped them, which teaches how to
pray, and what to pray for, and rightly prepares the Mind, and guides it in the
Performance of every Service which the Lord calls for from his Children.

I found my Father-in-Law was much displeased with my going to Meeting, yet I
could not see what Way to appease his Displeasure, except in being very di^gent
(which I was) in his Business, rather beyond my Ability, working very hard; it
is almost incredible what my poor little week Body went through in those Days,
but all would not gain his (...) the longer I stayed with him, the more he Love
declined from me; although I told him, (...) about my Wages, for I would leave
(...): I could not see what he could have against me, except my going to
Meetings, however that was all he alleged. N^w when his former Stratagems
would not do, he offered me a Horse to ride on, if I would go with him to his
Place of Worship, I met with many a Sn^b and sour Countenance from him, in my
return on Foot from Meetings, although as seasonably as my Body was capable of
performing; for my Father commonly sent me on the First Day Mornings into the
Fields a Mile or two, and as far upon a Common to look at Beasts, Horses, and
Sheep (all this on Foot) I thought with a Design to weary and make me incapable
of going to Meetings; all which I bore patiently, neit^ (...) at I remember,
ever said, this is hard Usage; (...) this, to the great Grief of my poor
Mother, I ha^ to go two, three, four, five, and sometimes six Miles, to Friends
Meetings. After I had walked fast, and ran sometimes with my Shoes under my
A^^s for want of Time, I have seen many Friends weep, and could not forbear
when they (...) come into the Meeting very hot and in a great (...), they being
in part sensible of the hard Ta^^^ I had to u^d^^go.

There is one Thing ^m what remarkable, which was thus; one First Day Morning
when I was about going to the Meeting, my Father said, if I would ride upon
such a (...) M^re, as he mentioned, I might; which was one of the greatest of
ten or twelve Horses which he kept, about four Years old, and not before rid at
all: I thought his Design was more to hinder me of the Meeting than any Good to
me, or any Expectation of getting his Mare rightly broke, but I accepted his
Offer, only asking how I might catch her? Having got Help to answer that, she
being abroad, I put on the Bridle and mounted the topping Beast, and upon her
first Resistance, down she came; for that was my Way: And it the first or
second Fall did not, the third mostly cured them from striving to ^^ow the
Rider; I commonly sell upon my Feet, and endeavored so to free my Legs that
she might not fall upon them, and then sprang up on her Back while down, and
made her rise with me; so away we went, and came in due Time to the Meeting.
This was partly the beginning of this Way of managing Horses by me; so I rid to
the Meetings two or three Times, and then my Father asked me, if the Mare did
not carry me soberly? I replied, she did; then I must have her no more, he
would make her his Saddle-Mare; so I betook myself to my Feet again, except
some other such like Turn came. The Lord's mighty Power bore me up, and he gave
me as it were Hind's Feet, and enabled me to go through these Exercises, and to
bear the Burden in the Heat of the Day of my Trials, inwardly and outwardly,
which were many and various.

Now the last Stratagem my Father used to hinder my going to Meetings was thus;
he took me in his Arms in great show of Kindness, saying, if I would be as a
Son to him, I should find he would be a Father to me, expressing something
about his having no near Kindred, (and much more to the same Effect he said to
my Brother Daniel, who was an innocent, wise, and clean-spirited Lad) I replied
to him, if in thus making me thy Son, thou intends to hinder me from going to
Meetings, or to oblige me to go with thee to the Presbyterian Meetings, or any
Thing that is against my Conscience, I cannot upon this Bottom be thy Son; and,
for the same Reasons, I refused to be his hired Servant, although he offered to
hire me, and give me Wages. Now when he saw that neither Frowns, Threatenings,
Hardships, nor great Promises of Kindness could prevail with me, he told me
bluntly and roughly, I should stay no longer in his House: I innocently
answered, I could not help it if it must be so, as all I could do would not
give him Content, without hurting my Conscience, and the Peace of my Mind,
which I valued above all mutable Things of this World. My poor Mother heard my
pleading with him, and how I offered to do the best for him I was capable of by
Night or Day, (as I always had done) if he would be easy, and let me have his
Countenance; but this was the Sentence, No, I should not stay in the House: And
indeed that troubled my poor Mother so, that I was forced to leave my Father,
and go to endeavor to mitigate her great Trouble (...) her, that if I was but
faithful, the Lord, I believed, would take Care of me that I should not want;
and the more fully to discharge myself, I remanded her, that as she had entered
into Marriage Covenants with her Husband, she should endeavor to perform them,
and in every Thing faithfully to discharge herself as a Wife ought to do to a
Husband, and leave me and all, and cleave to him, and to make her Life as easy
as she could: I also told her, never to send me any Thing that my Father know
not of, for I was not free to receive it; although what we had was in his Hand,
and all sunk there, as I mentioned before.

I write this partly, that all who do marry, may take special heed that it be
done with great Caution, and under due Consideration, and the Lord sought to in
it, that it may be done in his Counsel, and not only nominally, but truly in
his Fear, and then no doubt but it will be well with both Husband and Wise; and
being equally yoked, such will not only he mert and true Helpers in all Things
belonging to this Life, but more especially in Things appertaining to the World
that is to come, and the Good of the immortal Soul, which to the faithful
People of the Lord is of great Value. Oh, how happily and peaceably do such
live together in the Lord, as they keep to that which thus joined them! There
is more in it, both as to the Parents and their Posterity, than it is to be
feared many consider or think of, as is but too apparent in the many forward
and unequal Marriages which I have made Observation of.

One remarkable Passage occur^ to my Thoughts, which happened thus; my Father
having been at the Presbyterian Meeting and come home, he, as his manner was,
put me or my Brother upon reading the Priest's Text, which had been that Day in
Daniel, concerning his being (...) into the Den of Lions for his not regarding
the King's Decree, but on the contrary prayed to the God of Heaven with his
Windows open toward Jerusalem, after his wonted Manner. My Father made his
Observations as my Brother read, and very much magnified Daniel, and said, the
Spirit of God was in him, but that there were none such as him in these our
Days. I owned that he was indeed an extraordinary Man, but that there were none
endowed with a Measure of the same Spirit in any Degree, in that I dissented
from him, and gave my Father a brief Account of the many Sufferings of our
Friends, some of which were past, and some then under Sufferings for the Word
of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, which they bore for him, and especially the
great Sufferings of our dear Friends in New England, viz. hard Imprisonments,
cruel Whippings, cutting off Ears, Banishment if they returned into New England
any more; and I showed him likewise, how they put to death Marmaduke
Stephenson, William Robinson, William Le^^ra, and Mary Dyer, for no other Cause
but ^ing to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to
the living Power of God, to his Light, Grace and holy Spirit in their Hearts,
and laboring to bring the People from Persecution, Pride, and every evil Work
and Way, to live a Self-denying, humble Life, a Life agreeable to the
Christianity they professed; this was the Purport or Substance of the Service
they were called to, and so deeply suffered for: From whence I inferred, there
was somewhat of the Spirit of God in Man in these Days as there was in Daniel,
and many more formerly, which helped and bore them up in their great
Sufferings. New my Father confessed, it was true some suffered for Good, and
some for Evil; and withal said, he had now lived to the Age of about sixty-five
Years, and although he heard us telling of a Principle, or Light within, yet he
know not what it was. I replied very meekly, If he would hear me, I would tell
him what it was; which I did in the Words following: When at any Time thou ^^st
been under a Temptation to put forth thy Hand to steal, or to lie for
advantage, (...) by Provocation to swear, or any evil Work or Work, have not
thou found something in thee, that has showed thee thou ought not to have
said or done so, which it thou had taken heed to, and not said or done wrong,
have thou not found great Peace and inward Comfort in thy Mind? But if thou
have said or done wrong, have not thou found great Disquietness and Trouble of
Mind? This is the inward Principle, Light, or Grace, that God has placed in
Man to help and direct him, which we the People of God called Quakers, do hold
agreeable to the holy Scriotures. My Father smote his Hands together, and
confessed it was true.

But that I was not willing to break in upon this Story, but keep it entire,
th^^e was one Thing worthy of Notice, which I now come to, wishing it may be
duly considered by all who read or hear it: When I mentioned Marmaduke
Stephenson, (...) it good Man and great Su^^erer in the Cause of Christ, as
before, my Mother said, it was true; for she lived a Servant with Edward
W^^^^^ss, an honest Quaker in Skipton, where Marmaduke Stephenson was a
Day-labourer, about the Time he had his Call to go to New England. See the
Account of NEW ENGLAND ^^dged not by Man as Man* but by the Spirit of the
living GOD, written by GEORGE BISHOP.
If I remember right, the said, He was such a Man as she never knew for his
very Countenance was a Terror to them, and he had a great Che^k upon all the
Family; if at any Time any of the Servants had been wild, or a^ way out of the
Truth, if they did but see him, or hear him coming, they were struck with Fear,
and were all quiet and still: And if but one of the Children came into the
House where he labored, and he would not have it to (...) these were his
Words, Go thy way, or go (...), lest I whip thee; and they were subject and
quiet. This ample and excellent Account, I thought had some Reach upon my
Father, however, it much affected my Mind. Oh! that we the Professors of the
same holy Truth, may so live in it, as to reign ^ver every wrong Thing in
ourselves, and also in others, but especially in our Children.

Some little Time before the Marriage of my Mother, I was brought into the
public Work of the Ministry, concerning which I had many (...) being (...)
scarce eighteen Years (...) of a summering Tongue, which (...) come, a though I
had used what (...) in my Power as a Man, considering my Years and Ed^ion, all
would noted until the True helped me: But after many Conflicts, great Troubles
and Temptations, the worst I ever met with, and the most piercing Sorrow I ever
had yet been in since I came to the Knowledge of the blessed Truth was, when
through Reasonings, Disobedience, and Unwillingness to comply with, and answer
the Lord's Requirings, he in Displeasure took away from me the Comfort of his
holy Pretense for several Months together. Oh! the Tribulations and penetrating
Troubles I met withal in this Condition, no Tongue is able to express, no not
the Heart of any finite Creature is able to conceive the Depth of the Anxiety
of the Heart-piercing and wounding Sorrows I was in; I thought my State was as
^ad as Jonah's, for surely if there be a Hell upon Earth, I was in it: What
greater Hell can be here to a quickened Soul, and an enlightened Understanding,
who has tasted of the Goodness of God, and of the Powers, in a degree, of the
World to come, than to be deprived thereof, and think they are fallen away from
this State? I could scarcely believe I should ever have Repentance granted to
me, or he restored again into the Love and Favor of God, when I found that
(...) Life (...) up, as to me, which did before, (...), but even all the whole
City of God, (...): But being left under an Apprehension of the (...)
Displeasure, and in part a Partaker of the (...) of his Wrath; Oh! I thought,
surely the (...) Mountains, and even the H^ls, were not sufficient (i^ they
could have been put into the Scales or Balance) to have weighed against my
Troubles and Afflictions they were so great; but as the Lord had by his
Judgments brought me in a good degree from the Vice and Vanity of this World,
now by his Judgments he made me willing to give up to answer his Requirings in
part, and in my Obedience to him I began to feel some Comfort of Love and
Fellowship of the Spirit of the Lord in myself, and in his People, who were
brought to be Partakers of the like Fellowship.

Now I return to the Matter about my being turned out of my Father's House,
which I mentioned before, but was willing to keep this solemn Account entire,
with Desires it may be a Caution to all, in whom the Lord is at work in the
same manner, not to reason or gainsay so much as I did, but to give up freely
and cheerfully to the Will of God. When I saw I must turn out, I thought it
expedient to acquaint some worthy Friends with it, lest any undue Reflections
should be cast upon the Truth, or Friends, or myself, that if so, these Friends
might be able to contradict them; so I acquainted Sebastian Ellethorp, and that
worthy Man and Minister of the Gospel Benjamin Padley, two of the chief Friends
in Ellington Monthly Meeting, and they came to my Father's House, and when they
came, they began to enquire about the Reasons why I went away? and if my Father
had any Thing against me concerning the Business he employed me in? and,
whether I was not faithful and diligent in all his Affairs he sent me about? He
confessed, I was; and thought none could exceed me. They said, Well then, what
is the Reason of that Misunderstanding which is betwixt thee and thy
Son-in-Law? Is it about going to Meetings? When they understood his Reasons,
which were not hard to do, they expressed a Pity toward me that I could have
no more Liberty; and they thought, as I was so diligent in his Business, if he
would give me a little more Liberty to go to Meetings, it would be more
Encouragement to me. At which he took Offense, and gave the good Men rough
Language, and asked, What they had to do with him and his Son? and bid them go
Home and Mind their own Business; which they were much troubled at, especially
for my Sake, and much pitied me, and wondered how I had lived with him so long;
for he said in short, that there was no Abiding for me there. But Sebastian
Ellethorp told me, which was mightily to my Comfort, that my Father had nothing
against me, save that concerning the Law of my God. This is the Sense, if not
the Words, of these wise and good Men, which passed betwixt them and my Father,
as they expressed them to me; for I was not there when they were together.

Notwithstanding I pleaded with my Father to let me stay until I could hear of
a Place, he would not, though I was scarce fit for Service, being almost like
an Anatomy (as the saying is) so that most who knew me, said, I would pine away
in a Consumption; but turn out I must, and did, though I was weak, poor and low
in Body, Mind, Pocket and Clothes; for I think I had but Twelve-pence in my
Pocket, and very ordinary Clothes upon my Back. Thus I took my solemn Leave of
the Family, with my Heart full, but I kept inward to the Lord, and under
Truth's Government; many Tears were shed in the Family, especially by my poor
Mother, when I left them; my Father said little, but appeared like one struck
with Wonder, to see so much Love manifested toward me by the Family, and so
much wishing that I might not go away: But out I came upon the great Common
aforementioned, where I had had many solitary Walks, but none like this, for
this Reason, that I knew not where to go. I then thought of Abraham who was
called out of Ur in the Land of the Chaldeans, as it is briefly mentioned by
Stephen; but this was the Difference betwixt us, he was called, I was forced
out. But as I was walking upon the Common, the Sense of my weak Condition, not
knowing whither to go, nor where to lay my Head, although I had many Friends,
yet I could not be free to go to them, unless I had known they had Business for
me, being not of a forward, but rather backward and shy Disposition. I say, the
Sense and Weight of my Condition came over me to that degree, that it appeared
to me as though my Way was hedged up on every Side, inwardly and outwardly; I
even thought myself like a Pelican in the Wilderness, or as an Owl in the
Desert, there appearing to me scarce a Man in all the Earth in my Condition,
every way considered* and in the Sense and deep Consideration of my present
Wilderness State, I felt myself under a great Oppression of Spirit, and my
Heart seemed (...), like a Bottle that wanted Vent: I so (...) and about me to
see that none were near to seems Tears nor hear my Cries, and in the very
A^g^^^h and Bitterness of my Soul I poured form my Comp^a^nts, Cries and Tears
to the Judge of all the Earth, who spoke to me and comforted me in this my
deplorable State, which was worse than Jacob's when he lay upon the Ground, and
had a Stone for his Pillow; he had his near Kindred to go to, whom he might
expect would receive him gladly, but I had none to go to but such as rather
reviled me, and gave me hard Language; but the Lord said unto me, as it a Man
had spoke, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness thereof, and
all these Things that thou stand in Need of shall he given unto th^e. I then
desired he would please to show me the Place I should go to; and the Lord
opened my Way, and showed me the House I should go to, and abide in for a Time.
I said, Good is the Word of the Lord: I believed, and it was a great Means to
stay my Mind, and settle it in the Truth, with full purpose of Heart to follow
the Lord, and obey his Requirings, according to the Knowledge and Ability given
me; yet Reasonings attended me; two Things especially stood much in my Way,
yea, three Things were a Let to me, for soon after I came to the Friend's
House in South-Cliff, viz. William A^^^n by Name, I bound myself to him to
learn his Trade of a Weaver, and after I was bound, I found this good Man loved
me, and I loved him to the Day of his Death; and he often said, he was blessed
for my Sake, and all that appertained unto him; for when I went to him he was
very poor, but he increased very considerably after I went to live with him.

I come now to the Particulars which stood in my Way of answering the Lord's
Commands so fully as sometimes I should have done; First, a violent Humor fell
into one of my Legs soon after I was bound Apprentice, which I with others
thought was much occasioned by hard Usage, Heats and Colds, and many Surfeits,
even from my Infancy; which Lameness held me about two Years, and I suffered
much by the said Leg, and it much discouraged and disabled me. The second
Hinderance was, my low Circumstances in the Worlds, which very few knew of,
because the common Fame was (and not without some Truth) That I had rich
Parents. I have given an Account already how they were circumstanced, and so I
leave them at present and proceed; but few knew the Straits I met withal; yet
my truly religious Master, if he understood any Thing was upon my Mind to go to
visit any Meeting, or Meetings, he would say, take my Mare and go thy way, and
be not uneasy, neither about the Mare nor Business, nor do not hasten thyself.
These Kindnesses made me often thoughtful how I might return suitable
Acknowledgments, and be duly grateful for the same: I was diligent in my
Master's Business, not serving him with Eye-service, but faithfully; believing
it good and acceptable in the Sight of God, and I had great Peace in it; my
Master never found Fault with me for doing too little, but often for doing too
much, and would sometimes say, I think thou will cleave to the Beam; come off
and let us walk into the Fields and see how Things are there. Now as to the
third Hinderance, the Account of which I was not willing to have interwoven
with Matters of less Moment, although the healing of my very sore Leg I
attribute to the great and good Providence of God; for in a short Time after I
gave up freely and cheerfully to answer the Lord's Requirings, the Lord healed
me of my Lameness; and when I cried unto him, that he would also heal my Tongue
of its Stammering, believing that the Lord was as able to take away the
Impediment of my Tongue, as he was to stop the Violence of that Humor which
had attended my Body, and had a Recourse to my Leg, and made it sore from above
the Ancle to the Knee: And notwithstanding several Men had given their Advice,
and had showed their Skill, it all proved ineffectual, until I came to believe
in Jesus Christ, and to press through all to him, and to touch the Skirt, or
lowest Appearance of his blessed Truth and Power, in which I found true healing
Virtue to my Soul, and also to my Body, and to my Tongue, even to my
Admiration; so that I did not only speak plain in the Testimony the Lord gave
me to bear, but also spoke plain in my common Intercourse with Men.

I was likewise in these Days under the Dispensations of Openings and Visions,
and thought myself as it were upon Mount-Pisgah, and saw into the holy Land,
and into Things relating to God and his heavenly Kingdom, and into his Work and
Way of bringing Man out of the Fail and Alienation to himself again, and into a
heavenly State in Christ, as Man yields true Obedience unto the Leadings and
Operation of his blessed Grace and holy Spirit in the Heart. But under such
Dispensations it is requisite, yea, of absolute Necessity, that Man be brought
into true Self-denial, as also into a depending Frame of Mind, and true
Resignation of Will to the Will of God, and a daily sitting as in the Dust, as
to the Motions and Workings of the Creature as such; for all that is of Man's
working, or Work, does but let or hinder the spiritual Work of God in the
Heart; and we must come truly to know all fleshly Motions, and the Workings in
Man's own Will and Spirit, to be silenced, to hear the Voice of God, which is a
still small Voice, and not to be heard in the Noise and Hurries of the World;
neither when the Mind is busied with Things agreeable to our own corrupt Wills
and depraved Nature.

But although at times I had clear Sights into many heavenly Things, and also
had at times comfortable Enjoyments of the living Presence of God, yet I wanted
to be more established in the unchangeable Truth, which I had at times some
comfortable feeling of; and in crying to the Lord, I found he inclined unto me,
and, as David said, he heard my Cries, and plucked my Feet out of the Mire and
Clay and set them upon a Rock, that was higher than I, and in part established
my Goings, and put a new Song into my Mouth, even high Praises unto the Lord
for all his tender Mercies to me in these trying Times; and now being more
crucified to the World, and the Spirit of it, I witnessed a more constant
Indwelling of the heavenly Power and living Presence, Light and Grace, I came
to be brought into (...), and it became most agreeable to my Condition to keep
much in Silence, and wait upon the Lord for the Renewing of Strength, that
thereby I might ^u^mount all Temptations and Trials that might fall in my way,
or which I might be tried with, which were not a few.

Now these Things, before recited, are worthy of Commemoration, and proved
great Confirmations to me in the Truth, in these Days of my Tribulations and
great Trials: Read and believe thou that can, for they are faithful and true
Sayings. After the Lord had healed me, he sent me forth in the Work of the
Ministry, and the first Journey I took Southward was into Lincolnshire,
Nottingshamshire, and through Coventry, and so to Warwick to see William
Dewsberry. One Thing is remarkable upon William's Enquiry, what Way I came? In
my Account of the particular Towns and Places I had passed through, I mentioned
Coventry, which was the last and the worst; for some of the rude People flung
Stones at me, as I was speaking in the Meeting, with great Violence, so that
had the Lord suffered them to have hit me, they must have spoiled me; but my
Faith in the Lord, and the Strength of the Truth, bore up my Mind above Fear of
the outward Man, or what wicked Men could do to me. After William had heard my
Account, he fixed his Eyes on me and said, Thou must go back again to Coventry.
I appeared unwilling, for two Reasons; First, because I thought I had cleared
myself of that People. Secondly, I thought it not safe to run myself into
Danger of Suffering, unless I was satisfied the Lord required it of me. But
William was positive, and said I must go, for there was a Service for me to do
there. Upon a deliberate Consideration of the Matter, and a seeking to the Lord
to know his Will in it, I found my Way clear to go, and I had some Service and
good Satisfaction, and left Friends nearer to one another than when I first met
with them; for there had been a Misunderstanding amongst some Friends in that
City: So I came from thence to Tamworth, where there was a Difference,
especially betwixt two Friends; both of them had been such as had made some
considerable Figure among Friends: I felt it upon me to go to, the Man, to warn
him of the Spirit of Prejudice and Envy, for it he gave Way to it, it would eat
out his Love to Friends and Truth, and he would decline Meetings and come to
naught, and turn his Back on the Truth; which came to be fulfilled, as I
afterward heard; for he became a loose Man, and listed himself to be a
Soldier. I was zealous for the Name of the Lord, and had a great Concern upon
my Mind for the Promulgation of the Truth, and where I met with loose
Professors of the Truth, it was a great Exercise to me.

When I returned home from this, and indeed from all my Journeys, I took Care
what I well could, so far as my weak Body was capable, to fall into Business,
and not to loiter away my Time, neithe abroad nor at home. My weak Constitution
would not well bear the Weaving-trade, therefore I left it much against my
Will; but I wrought upon Clock and Watch-work, and many other Things, which
supplied my Necessities, the Lord allowing me as much Time at home as put me in
a Condition reasonably fit for Travel, and then I was inclined to go to visit
Friends. Many Things I omit, because I am not willing to swell my Account too
much. I traveled through most Parts of England four Times, and twice through
most Parts of W^ks, between the twentieth and twenty eighth Year of my Age.

After the Lord had opened my Heart, and I came in part to understand the holy
Scriptures, and to have a Feeling of that holy Spirit in which the holy Penmen
wrote them, and a Sympathy with the Spirits and Excercises of the Righteous
therein mentioned, I took great Delight in reading them, and having a good
Memory, could thereby the better deal with Priests and with Professors. I had
many Disputes and Reasonings with Priests and Professors, of several
Denominations, both in Yorkshire and other Parts in my Travels, so that through
these Disputes, and much Reading, my Mind was rather too much in the Letter,
and not altogether so much in Spirit, and in Power, as it should have been; for
which I met with a gentle Caution from the Lord, which was thus: I heard a
Voice (from the Lord) as plain as if one had spoke to my outward Ear, The Fowls
of the Air lodge in the Branches. This being repeated to me, I besought the
Lord to show me what was the Meaning of that Voice which I heard; and the Lord,
the mighty God, showed me in his condescending Love, that the Scriptures, even
all of them which were written as the holy Men were moved of the holy Ghost,
sprung from the living Root; yet those who rested only in the Letter, and came
not to be acquainted with, and live in, and minister from the same holy Spirit,
are outward; dead, dry, airy and foolish. This gentle Check was of great
Service to me; not so as to make me decline reading the Scriptures, but that I
should not have over much Dependency on them; and to caution me against the
Neglect of waiting for the Help of the holy Spirit, the Root and pure Spring of
the right and living Ministry which reaches the Heart, and carries the true
Evidence with it to the Believers, that it is of God; which that of the Letter
cannot do of itself. I tenderly desire that all concerned in this great Work of
the Ministry, may not be Ministers of the Letter only, but of the Spirit also,
and may speak in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. And let him that
speaks, speak as the Oracle of God, and he that ministers, do it as of the
Ability that God gives. This is the last and lasting Ministry, which is after
the Order of Melchisedeck, and not after the Order of Aaron, but in Jesus
Christ the High Priest, the one Offering, which makes perfect for ever all who
come to him through the Drawings of the Father; he is the one Lord, and there
is but one true Faith in him, and but one true and saving Baptism into him, or
into the Likeness of his Death; so as Christ died for Sin, we may truly die to
Sin; and as he was raised by the Glory of the Father, so we may walk in Newness
of Life; the heavenly High Priest, holy, harmless, separate from Sinners; and
such a High Priest who was tempted, and knows how to succor such as are
tempted; he is the Advocate with the Father, the Propitiation for the Sins of
all, the true Guide and Comforter, the Leader of them into all Truth, who obey
and follow him; although to the World a Reprover and a swift Witness against
all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men.

My writing thus, from this gentle Check, concerning the Fowls and the
Branches, etc. is not with the least Intention either to lessen the holy
Scriptures, or discourage any from reading them; for I would have all true
Christians encouraged to be more conversant in them; yet with this Advice, kind
Reader, from thy Well-wisher and true Friend, to breath to, and truly seek
after the Lord for a Measure of his holy and blessed Spirit, the only Key and
best Expositor to open and truly expound them to thee, as by the same holy
Spirit thy Mind and Understanding comes to be fitted and enlightened; and
indeed the whole Vessel must be brought into a Preparation to hold the heavenly
Treasure, and not to mix the pure with the corrupt and impure: For without this
enlightening, preparing, opening, and sanctifying Gift of God's holy Grace and
Spirit, Man can neither know the heavenly Power of God, nor yet the holy
Scriptures aright, as he ought to know them; and for this Reason it has seemed
good to God to hide these Things from the Learned, Wife and Prudent of this
World, that they should not pry into, nor find out the Mysteries contained
therein, unless they are sanctified, and called of God thereto; and as no Man
knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man that is in him; likewise
the Things of God are not perceivable by Man, without the Help of the holy
Spirit of God in Man.

Thus the Lord opened to me the true Meaning of the Parable of the
Mustard Seed, in this the Time of my Infancy as to the Ministry, with which he
sent me forth into the World, that my Faith might stand in the Lord alone, the
Author and Finisher, as well as Giver of the true and saving Faith, even that
Faith which works by Love, and gives Victory over the World; it was by and
through the Power, Virtue and Efficacy of true Faith, which is the Gift of God,
that the Elders in former Ages obtained, and now do obtain a good Report; it
was in and through this Gift, that worthy Abel with his Offering was accepted
of God, although he was envied of his earthly and evil minded Brother Cain, and
also by him slain. The ever memorable Eno^h, through the Virtue of this holy
Gift, walked with God, as himself gave witness that Eno^h pleased him; he
walked so in Faith and Obedience even to the End, that he died not as Men in
common do, but was translated, or changed in a peculiar Manner. Come, read thou
that can, and understand thou that art redeemed out of (and have overcome)
the Flesh, and the Powers of the first Nature, the World and the Devil, in a
great measure, for thou know that it is by the Operation of this Gift that
the Dead in old Adam are raised to a new Life, and way of living in the new
Man; and through this heavenly Adam, that is known to these to be a quickening
Spirit, agreeable to holy Writ. Through Faith the Violence of Fire was
quenched, the Mouths of Lions have been stopped, the Sword turned backward, the
Armies put to flight, even such as were Aliens or Strangers who outwardly
fought against the Lord's People; which sets before us, as in a Glass, how and
what we are to overcome in this Gospel-day, in which we are not to fight with
Men, but with our Lusts, and overcome Sin and Satan; which is as great a
Victory as he obtained that overcame the rampant Lions Daniel vi, v, 24.
, who had Dominion over the Wicked, as Sin and Satan have Power and Dominion
over the Wicked and Ungodly to this Day. Consider now in Time, thou that
read these Lines, whether Christ or Antichrist does most predominate in
thee? Whether Grace or Sin most abound in thy mortal Body? Whether the Spirit
of Truth, that leads into all Truth, or the Spirit of Error, that leads into
all Error and Untruth, is the most prevalent, and has the greatest Place in
thy Heart? For to him whom thou art the most subject, and yields thy Members
Servants to, his Servant thou art, and to him thou give way and subjects
thyself, and his Servant thou will altogether come to be in time, and the Wages
due to his Servants thou shall have given to thee at the End of thy Work:
Therefore consider in due Time, while the Day of thy Visitation is continued
unto thee, and the Lord is following and calling by his secret and inward
Checks and Reproof, by which he disquiets thy Mind, that although thou may
take some Pleasure in Vanity and wrong Ways, when thou can get over the just
Witness of God in thy own Soul, yet while it strives with thee to convert and
gather thee up out of earthly and fading Pleasures, to have thy Mind set upon
heavenly Things, and take Pleasure in them, thou will have no solid Comfort in
all thy lower Enjoyments, but Condemnation and Anguish of Soul will attend
thee, until thou either gets over the Witness, or leaves the Evil, is the
Experience of the Lord's People, who have been acquainted with the true and
inward Warfare, and also with the Saints Victory. Read and learn to follow
Christ by the Footsteps of the Flocks of his Companions; although it be through
great Tribulations, yet it is the Way to have thy Garments washed and made
white in the mystical Blood of the immaculate Lamb of God: This is he, as John
the Baptist said, that takes away the Sins of the World. Happy is every one
that truly puts on his Lamb-like Nature, his Humility, Righteousness and
Purity, and is covered with his holy Spirit, and lives and walks in and under
the Influence and Conduct thereof to the End of Time here, until we enter into
Immutability.

Now to return from this Digression to the historical Part. When I had
traveled much of the Time between my going forth, which was from about the
nineteenth Year of my Age unto about the twenty seventh, then finding some
little Respite from the Weight of that Service, I inclined to settle a little
closer to Business but had little to begin any Calling with, being necessiated
to leave my Trade of Weaving through Lameness, as before mentioned; and I had
been a Sojourner some time at Whitby, Scarborough, and Bridlington; but upon
seeking unto the Lord to know what Place I might now settle in, though my great
Inclination was for Whitby, yet it sounded as in my Ear, Brialington,
Bridlington is the Place to settle in; and in the Cross I repaired thither, and
settled for some time, keeping a little Shop, and mended Clocks and Watches, as
I had done for several Years past at times; it was of good Service my settling
there, for the Lord began to work mightily, especially amongst the young
Friends, so that in a few Years many had their Mouths opened in Testimony for
the Lord, and a fine Spring of heavenly Ministry was in that Monthly Meeting,
the like I have not known in the like Bounds, (for it is but a small
Monthly Meeting and has been so ever since I knew it.) For Truth did so
mightily prosper, and Friends grew so in the Ministry, that it became a
Proverb, that BRIDLINGTON was become a School of Prophets. This mighty Work of
the Lord, in these Days, is worthy to be chronicled and remembered among his
many worthy and noble Acts; we had many heavenly and good Meetings, praised and
^^^^wned be the worthy Name of the Lord, now and forever.

We had but little Discipline when I first settled in that Place, but
afterward many Friends Hearts were stirred up in a holy Zeal for the Lord, not
only to promote Meetings for Worship, but also for good Discipline in the
Church, and they began to see a Necessity of coming up more in the Practice of
this very needful Work; although there were some that said, they could see no
Need of such close Order and Discipline: Yet I found it to be my Way in the
Truth to bear with such, if they were not irregular in their Conversations; but
if they were disorderly, we dealt with them as the Lord opened our Way in the
Wisdom of Truth; and thus bearing with the Easiness of some on the one hand,
and encouraging the faithful and zealous on the other, until way was made,
beyond my Expectation, for the spreading of the Truth, its Testimony, and the
Discipline thereof in those Parts.

I had now traveled and labored much in the Lord's Work at home and abroad
for about ten Years, but had not in all that Time found my way clear to marry,
although not without some likely Opportunities, and with such as were a great
deal richer than she was whom I did marry; but I was afraid in this weighty
Affair to miss my Way, knowing the great Difference there is between them who
only profess, and they who possess the Truth, and them that are only in the
first Nature and unregenerated State, (and strictly speaking, but the Sons and
Daughters of Men) and such who are born again, not of Flesh and Blood, nor
indeed of any thing that is corruptible, but of that incorruptible Seed and
living Word of God which leads into a lively Hope, and brings forth a new and
heavenly Birth in Man, that takes delight to please and obey the Lord in all
Things, and so become Sons, or Children of God, in a more spiritual and nearer
Relation than that of Creation only; it is in and through this great, Work of
Renovation, and being born again, that such live up to that holy Seed and
regenerating Principle: And as the same does predominate and rule in Man, in
this State Man cannot sin, as the Apostle said, with this Reason annexed,
because his Seed (to wit, the Seed of God) remains in him; Thus walking in
the light, and living in the Seed, Grace and holy Spirit, although the Terms of
it differ, the Virtue and Nature of it are undividable; such who come to be
gathered to walk with, and truly love Christ the Bridegroom of the Soul, are
brought into a greater Nearness, truer Sympathy and Unity of Spirit than the
World knows of. Read this, you that are born again, and duly consider it in its
proper Time and Place. I believe, and therefore truly speak it, the Lord gave
me such a Wife as really feared him, loved Truth and Righteousness, and all
such as she thought loved, and especially such as lived in the Truth; her Name
was Priscilla Cannaby, Daughter of James Cannaby; she was descended of an
honest Family in the East Part of Yorkshire, the only Child her Parents left,
they were Bakers by Trade, and gave her a commendable Education, though they
did not leave her any great Portion; she was under the Care of her Uncle
Charles Cannaby of Bridlington, an honest Friend, who left something behind him
in Manuscript concerning his Convincement of the Truth, and Sufferings for the
same; he was convinced early, lived to a great Age, and was a Man of great
Service in those Parts where he lived.

I was in the twenty eighth Year of my Age when I married my Wife, who was a
Woman of an excellent Temper, very affectionate, sober and prudent, loved
Retirement much, and waiting upon the Lord, and the Enjoyment of his internal
and living Presence, and especially with the Lord's People, that they might
also be made Partakers with her of the like special Favors; this was as her
Crown and Kingdom while in this World, even from her Childhood; and to see
Friends prosper in the Truth was Matter of great Rejoicing to her. When we had
been married scarce three Years, the Lord raised her up to bea^ a public
Testimony amongst Friends in their Meetings, which was very comfortable and
acceptable to them; and also she had the Spirit of Grace and Supplication,
measurably poured upon her, so that many with me did believe she had Access to
the Throne of God, and to that River which makes truly glad the City of God:
She always freely gave me up to answer the Service I believed the Lord called
for of me. She was taken from me when we had been married but about five Years,
in the twenty eighth Year of her Age, and died in a sweet Frame of Mind, and
was sensible to the last, and her (...) Words were, He is come, he is come,
whom my Soul loves, and my Soul rejoices in God my Savior, and my Spirit
magnifies him; and so passed away like a Lamb, I believe into a Mansion of
Glory, where her innocent Soul will for ever sing Hallelujah to the Lord God
and the Lamb, who is worthy of Glory, Honor, Salvation and Strength, now and
for ever.

I might enlarge much upon the Virtue and Worthiness of faithful Priscilla, but
in this, as in other Matters, it is my Desire to avoid Prolixity, yet would
take Notice of the most remarkable Occurrences that have happened to me in the
Course of this my earthly Pilgrimage; also, I have been much pressed by some,
and not of the least of my faithful Brethren; likewise, I believed it to be my
Duty, to leave some Remains to Posterity for their Encouragement and Comfort in
the Way and Work of the Lord. One Thing is worthy here to be inserted, which
had a strange and astonishing Effect upon my Mind, which was thus:

As I was walking in a plain Field in the fore Part of the Day, not far from
the Sea, betwixt Bridlington and Broynton, my Soul was in a deep Concern, and
at that Time exercised in Meditation on the Things of God, and also in fervent
Prayers to him for Preservation from every hurtful Thing; and a heavenly Frame
my Mind was then brought into, for then I neither saw Cloud over my Mind, nor
yet any in the Firmament, for it appeared to me a Morning without Clouds; though
I had passed under many Clouds. Soon after my Mind was brought into this
heavenly Frame, and as it were swallowed up in the heavenly and internal
Presence of the Lord, I thought a bright Cloud came down and covered me, or
caught me up into it; so whether I was standing, walking, or set upon the
Ground, or carried up into the Cloud in the Body, or out of the Body, I know
not to this Day; yet Fear and Reverence, with bowing of Soul, did possess me
before the great Majesty; at the Glory of whose Countenance, as I had it in a
preceding Vision, Men and Angels fled and gave way, and could not steadfastly
behold the Brightness and Glory of the Countenance of the Son of the Highest,
with the mighty God and Father, which are one in Power, Greatness, Goodness,
and Glory, who was before all Things, made all Things, and upholds and fills
all Things that are good, with that which is truly good, or at least is for a
good End. Read this Mystery thou that can, and learn to fear him that has
Power over both Soul and Body, to kill and to cast into Hell, for one Time or
another he will make thee fear him, when he brings thy Sins to Judgment,
whether it be now or hereafter: The Time has been, is, or will be, in which
the Lord, the Judge of both Quick and Dead, has, does, or will plead with
thee, and all Flesh, as in the Valley of Jehosaphat; therefore beware left thou
make him wroth, as he was upon Mount Perizim, but be thou subject to the Lord,
as faithful Moses was upon Mount Horeb, or the Mount of God, when he obeyed his
Voice, and put off his Shoes; do thou obey, if it be to the putting away of the
Glory and Wisdom of Egypt, or Learning, or what else is required of thee: Oh
then thou art in the way to further Service, and wilt be enabled, as thou
continues faithful, to go through all to God's Glory, and thy unspeakable Peace
in the End.

Now as to the last Part of the Rapture or Vision, when I was swallowed up in
the luminous Presence to him that is first and last, the Alpha and Omega, I
heard a Voice, very intelligible to that Sensation I had then given me, saying,
Do thou see how Pride and Wickedness abound in the Nation? I answered in much
Fear, Lord, I do see it: The next Words which I heard in the Voice and in the
Cloud were, The People are too many, I will thin them, I will thin them, I will
thin them. I desired of the Lord to show me, whether it was his Mind I should
publish this in any Part of the Nation? The South was set before me, with this
Caution, Where this is opened to thee in my Power, there speak of it, and not
otherwise. I gave up to answer the heavenly Vision, and visited most Parts of
the southern Counties, as also the northern Parts, and Scotland; and where the
Lord opened my Mouth to speak of what I had heard, as before, by way of
Prophecy, I gave up, but did not so much insist upon that Matter, as to suffer
it to be a Means to mislead me from that Work of the Ministry I was chiefly
concerned in. I would that all, who are concerned in the like manner may be
cautious in this great Affair, and look well to the Rise and Original from
whence they receive this Gift, and how; and also what Frame of Mind they are
in, and that nothing of the Warmth of their own Spirits be set to Work or
stirred up, either by Sight of the Eye, or hearing, or reading outwardly, but
that the Mind may be redeemed from all Workings, from those and the like
Grounds, and purely purged, and truly adapted or fitted to receive this Gift or
Spirit of Prophecy; and also be sure to be very careful to be guidable in the
Gift, or otherwise thou may miss, as to Time and Place, etc. I intend not to
dwell long upon it, as there are other Services included in this of Prophecy,
as Edification and Comfort, etc. but what I have been upon, relates to
foretelling something that is to come; and, as once a worthy Elder said to me
when I was young in the Ministry, It is a great Thing to know what, where and
when; and I have ever found it true to this Day. Learn of him that is (as he
always was) meek and low of Heart, and be not discouraged, but persevere in
Faith and Sincerity, and look not overmuch at the Difficulty, but look over all
to him who has called thee, and in some measure revealed his Son through the
Spirit in thee: Although I know from some Experience, what it is to be
exercised in the matter of Prophecy, for in the Journey touched of before, I
was concerned to tell Friends at Kilmouck in Scotland especially, that the Lord
would take many of them away; which in a short time came to pass, for many died
before that time Twelvemonth, it being a time of Scarcity of Corn; and it was
thought many died for want of Bread, the Year ensuing my being there: I had
good Service for the Lord, and great Satisfaction in these my long Travels, as
I had in the like before, in diverse of which there were some convinced of Truth.

At Cromer in Norfolk, one Elizabeth Horry, when my Mouth was opened, despised
my Youth, as she confessed afterward; but what I had to say so reached her
Condition, that she shed many Tears upon her fine Silks, and confessed, before
the Meeting broke up, that all might hear, in these Words, All that ever I have
done has been told me this Day, and this is the everlasting Truth. And as I
passed along from that Meeting, not far from Cromer, with some other Friends,
it rose in my Heart to say aloud, that a Man who was watering his Horse might
hear, looking, and pointing my Hand toward him, That Man will be a Friend
before he die; and, as he owned after, he was so struck with it, that he had no
Rest till he came among Friends, though he was then afar off, but he came to be
a serviceable Man among us, and his Wife was also convinced of the Truth, and
was a serviceable Woman. Samuel Hunt of Nottingham, was first reached at
Leicester by the Testimony I had given me to bear in that Meeting at that Time,
as he acknowledged afterward; but I always gave God the Glory, and laid the
Creature as in the Dust, that Man, as Man, might not be too much accounted of.

After my being caught up, and hearing the Voice (as before mentioned) I had
many deep and heavenly Openings, some of which it may not (...) amiss to
mention here, inasmuch as I had now a more clear ^ight into a translated State
than ever I had before; I came through a divine Sense and Participation, to have
great Sympathy and dear Unity, not only with the ever memorable Enoch, whose
walking was such as the Lord gave Testimony or Witness to, that he pleased him;
the Ground of which Witness was from hence, he lived near and loved God, and
walked in the Ways of Virtue, and abhorred Vice: But also with the Apostle,
having this Seal, that God knows who are his; and with some other of the
Servants of Christ in former Ages who could say, as some now can say, (from
true Experience) that the Spirit of the Lord hears Witness with our Spirits,
that we are his, to wit, the Lord's Children, so long as we do well which last
Words are of large Extent, to do well, think well, speak well, and believe
well; for he that has no Faith, or that believes ill, cannot do well; he that
eats, drinks, or wears that which he knows he ought not, does not well; but
what is done well, is done in a pure Mind and clean Conscience, for so is true
Faith held, and all acceptable Work to God performed. I had great Openings into
the Removal of Moses, and taking up of Elijah, that great and worthy Prophet,
from the Earth into Heaven, and I have seen Things not fit to be uttered,
neither can the World yet believe them; and I saw far into the Mystery of the
Transfiguration of Christ, and Appearance of Moses and Elias with him upon the
Mount; and the Voice which was heard from the excellent Glory, This is my
beloved Son, hear him; not Moses, nor Elias in Comparison of him, for the Law
pointed to him, and was as a Schoolmaster to bring to him. The holy Prophets
foresaw, and prophesied of his Coming, and John the Baptist saw Christ, and
baptized him, and bore Witness of him as the Light, and said, Behold the Lamb
of God, that takes away the Sins of the World; he also said, He is the
Bridegroom that has the Bride (the Church;) he spoke of his own Decrease, and
Unworthiness in comparison of Christ, though called by Christ himself, as great
a Prophet as was ever born of a Woman, and he was also called Elias, which must
first come, and is already come in respect of Power, Knowledge, Boldness and
Faithfulness; he was as Elias, yet the least in the Kingdom of Christ was
greater than he, because the Power and glorious Kingdom and Gospel Dispensation
was not fully brought in (and restored to Israel, or those who should believe
in him) until his Ascension; but now these great Agents in these foregoing
Dispensations all passed away, with their figurative, prophetical and
elementary Dispensations, and gave place to the Son and Heir of all Things, the
M^ssiah, the great Prophet, Bishop, Shepherd, King and Lawgiver.

Now read these Things, and learn truly to understand how Moses past away, and
Elias past away, and Christ is left, who is able alone to perfect the Work of
Man's Redemption, who trod the Wine Press alone, and amongst all the Sons of
Men, none were with him or helped him; he came who was the Antitype of all
Types gone before: He, Christ, is come to remove the Covenant made before,
because of the Weakness and Imperfection thereof, which Covenant made not the
Comers thereto perfect, but the better Hope brought in by Christ, did; so this
Covenant is abundantly more excellent which was brought in by Christ, and
settled and established upon better Promises than that was or could be, by the
Blood of Bulls, Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer, which reached the outside
only; but in the second or new Covenant is the Blood which sprinkleth the Heart
from an evil Conscience, so that such may be fitted and qualified to serve the
living God, not in the Works of the old Covenant, but in the Newness of the
holy Spirit: This is he that, as to his Divinity and Eternity, was before the
Hills were settled, and the Seas and Fountains were made, that took delight to
dwell with the Sons of Men, or in the habitable Parts of the Earth: as he was a
Spirit or Word uncreated, he dwelt measurably in Abel, Seth, Enoch, and Noah
before the Flood; for by his Spirit God strove with the old World to reclaim
them from their Wickedness, when it was great; it was by this Spirit Noah was
made a Preacher of Righteousness, and instructed how to build the Ark; this is
he who was with Shem and Japheth, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, and all
the faithful Fathers after the Flood, the Foundation of all the Righteous,
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, such as loved and believed in him, and
suffered for his Name's sake, and the Testimony which they held: This is he
that despised the Glory of this World, and is lifted up a Standard to the
People, and an Ensign to the Nations; unto him shall the Gentiles seek, and his
Rest shall be glorious; he has lifted up a greater Rod than that of Moses,
sometimes called the Rod of Iron, by which he has, and I believe will break to
pieces many People as a Potter's Vessel, when the Sin and Iniquity of the
People is come to the height; it was he that turned the Waters of Egypt into
Blood; it was he that slew the Firstborn throughout all the Land of Egypt, he
overthrew the Egyptians, and brought forth Israel by a strong Hand, and an Arm
outstretched, after he had marked the Dwellings of his People, and spared them
in the Time of this great Slaughter, which was executed both upon Man and
Beast, to wit, the Firstborn in Egypt, then he became Israel's Passover. Read
these Things (that were typically done, and in an outward way) inwardly, and in
thine own Experience, that thou may say, and that truly, Christ is my
Passover, after he has mitigated thy sore Bondage, and in degree has given
thee Faith in his great Name, and has caused thee to love him, and made thee
willing to follow him, although it be through the Sea of Troubles, and
sometimes as through the Wilderness. Here is an eating of the heavenly
Passover, or Paschal Lamb, under the Influence of the pure Love of God, that is
spread or displayed over the Soul like a Canopy, or Banner: Here is the
heavenly Manna, the true Body to feed on, that yields true Nourishment and
solid Comfort to thy Soul, in this thy Travel toward the heavenly Country:
Here is the Substance of the Sc^pe Goat known, that hears away the Sins of
the People; for he bore our Iniquities, and through his Stripes were we healed;
on his Part there wants Nothing, but on Man's Faith in, and Obedience to
Christ: He is the Substance o^ Antitype of the brazen Serpent, which was lifted
up in the Wilderness to cure the Peoples Ailments, occasioned by the Serpents;
he is the Advocate with the Father, as John said, to encourage little Children
in that time, which I think may very well he applied to all in that State until
Time here shall be no more. Happy is every one that hears, obeys, and
reverenceth the Son and Heir of all Things in his spiritual Appearance in the
Heart; where he speaks to the Conditions of the Children of Men, as never Man
spoke, and to much better Purpose than ever Man could do: This is he that spoke
to the Fathers by the Prophets who, in these Times does speak to us in or by
his Son; so take heed to his spiritual Appearance in the Heart, for there must
the Work of our Salvation be perfected, after Sin is purged out, and the Guilt
thereof taken away; to such Death is easy, where Sin, the Sting of Death, is
taken away, having a part in Christ, the Firstborn of many Brethren, and
Resurrection from the Dead; I say, having a Part in him that is the
Resurrection indeed, and the Life; over such the second Death (which is a
perpetual Separation from the heavenly Presence of God, and Company of holy
Angels) shall have no Power. I now leave, I think, this not unprofitable
Digression, and return to the more historical Part, where one Thing, I think,
is worthy of inserting here, viz.

In my young Years I was very much afflicted in my Travels, upon taking Cold,
with assure Throat, that I could scarce speak so as to be heard, and had much
Trouble at Times to swallow any thing which Nature did require; and in one
Journey northward, in Truth's Service, coming to Hawkshead, and sitting in the
Meeting under no small Exercise with the Trouble aforesaid, not without some
Reasonings and Conflicts of Spirit, having left all, as I believed, to do what
the Lord required of me, and yet I apprehended myself, by means of this
Affliction, not likely to be of any Service; and after some Reasonings, and a
fervent seeking to the Lord to know the Cause of this great Trouble, and withal
to bring my Mind to a true Resignation to the Will of God in this, and in all
the Trials the Lord might see good in his Wisdom to exercise me in; I had not
been long brought into this devoted and resigned State to be and do what the
Lord would have me do, but oh! I felt of the Virtue of Christ as a sweet and
living Spring, by which I was healed: I was, and am to this Day (when I
remember the Lord's kind Dealings with me) very thankful to him.

It has been frequently observable, that the Lord leads his Servants through
many States, that they, having the Experience thereof, may be the more capable
of helping others in the like Straits; it is an excellent Thing to love and
truly believe in Jesus Christ, and keep Self down as in the Dust for ever.

An ACCOUNT of my first Visit to FRIENDS in America.
NOW the Time came on for my going into America, having had a sight of it about
ten Years before; I also acquainted my Wife therewith about a Year before she
died, and I found it was likely to be a very near trial to her; she was a
virtuous, good Woman, but was taken away, and left me three small Children, the
eldest not above four Years old, the youngest not much above one Month old, and
I having but little of this World, reasoned much about going, thinking my
Circumstances at present might excuse me; my Intentions were good, in that I
might not leave Things any way to the Dishonor of the Truth: My innocent young
Child was taken away when about a Year old; and soon after, where ever I went,
while I was awake, it sounded in my Ears several Days and Nights, Now is the
Time, New is the Time. My other two Children, Providence so ordered it, that
they were placed to mine and Friends Satisfaction: I went through many Provings
that no Man knew of, but I believe, when I am gathered to my Place, I shall
leave many Brethren behind me yet in mutability, that will read my Lines in
their own Experience. I would not have any to misunderstand me, for as to my
outward Circumstances, I left no Debt, neither was I in a way of going backward
in the World; for ever after I received the Knowledge of the Truth, I could not
see what Pretense I could have to Religion, if any should lose by me: I have
often said, and been hearty in my Intentions, that rather than Truth should
suffer on that Score, I would live upon Bread and Water, and wear very mean
Clothes, and work very hard if I were able, and upon any mean, if but lawful
Calling. It has been Matter of Wonder to me, how any that appear to carry any
Pretensions to Religion, dare run such great Ventures, sometime beyond their
own Bottoms or Abilities; which to me has always appeared an unwarrantable
Risque; and, as I apprehend, Pride and Ostentation is much the Occasion of it,
which are much against Truth, and Men are no better for their greatness, for
the more plain, and (...) more humble we are, the more we resemble humble
Jesus, and his Religion, which he labored to inculcate. If any are lifted up,
or aspire above their Place, let them consider well the foregoing Paragraph.

Now I must leave my little Children, and my very near Friends, and my native
Country, and all for Christ and the Gospel's sake, without any sinister End or
View; and then I appealed to the Lord, in the simplicity of my Heart, that he
knew I was willing to be at his Disposal, and what he had favored me with, I
could leave to him; yet whether what I had was sufficient to defray mine and my
two little ones necessary Charges, was somewhat in my way; and to satisfy me in
this Doubt, the Lord's Voice sounded exceeding clear to that Sensation I was
then endued with, saying, Go and be faithful, and I will bless thee every way.
Oh my Heart seemed to me to melt, and my Spirit to dissolve within me, and I
said, Good is the Word of the Lord, thou have not failed me in any of my great
Straits and Trials to this Day; I have great Cause to trust in thee: Renowned
be thy most excellent Name, new and for ever.

I parted with my Friends with much brokenness of Heart, and set forwards on my
Journey toward London, in order to take shipping there, the 11th of the Eighth
Month 1700; and when I, with my Companions Thomas Thompson, Jos^^h Langdale,
and John Estaugh, with some other Friends, went on board a Ship in the River
Thames, we had not been long there, and having considered our freedom about
going in the Ship, it opened clearly in my Mind, in the Light, that I must not
go in that Vessel; and I said to the Friends, I could not go in her, for I saw
nothing but Death and Darkness there. The Account of what afterward happened
to the Ship I had from two particular Friends, in two several Letters from
London into America, wherein they expressed a Thankfulness for our Deliverance,
and magnified that Hand which wrought it, and preserved us from going in that
Ship, which was lost near the Islands of either Jersey or Guernsey, and, as it
was said about seventy People were drowned.

Peradventure I may mention some Things that may appear to be of but little
Moment, but I have seen the Divine Providence attend terrene Affairs, although
they may appear of little consequence to some; such as do not duly consider
these Things, may make a wrong Application, and as the Course of my Travels
has afforded variety of Trials and Transactions, which are in some Things very
particular, from whence arises variety of Accounts, so there has been a
Willingness in my Mind to favor some who have been desirous of having me to
leave a Journal of my Life, which I have complied with, as far as I can see my
way clear in the Truth.

Then we went on board of another Ship called the ARUNDEL, Splenden Rand
Master, in which we embarked the 17th of the Ninth Month 1700, and after many
Storms, and much Sea-sickness, not without some Conflicts of Spirit, more than
I am free to express, and a long Passage, being near, sixteen Weeks upon the
Sea, we arrived in the River Patuxent in Maryland, as near as I remember, the
5th or 6th of the First Month 1701, and my Heart was glad, and filled with
Acknowledgments and Praises to the Lord, for bringing us safe over the mighty
Waters.

Now we left the Ship and Master, who was but a churlish, ill-natured Man. I
was very weak and low when I landed, both in Body and Mind, but the Lord helped
me, and made my Journey and Labors comfortable to many, as well as to my own
Soul. After the first or second Meeting we were at, John Eslaugh being now my
Companion, as we came near a great House in Maryland, I espied a little white
Horse, the Sight of which put me in mind of a Dream I had on board the Ship
before I landed, in which I thought I had got a little white Horse which
carried me well, and many Miles; I said to the Friends with me, let us call
here at this House, which we did, and upon Enquiry about a Horse, the Man said,
he had none but a little white young Galloway, as he called it, which he was
willing to sell, and withal told us, it carried him one Day forty Miles, and
asked 8 l. Sterling for it, and I had him 5 l. Sterling; the Man's Wife coming
up the Passage, heard what I had offered, and she said to her Husband, it is
enough; so I had him, and a good Horse he proved, and carried me, by a moderate
Computation, 4000 Miles. I took this, according to the nature of it, to be a
singular Favor from that great Hand which led me forth, and hitherto has
preserved me in the Land of the Living, to praise his ever worthy Name.

Now we set forward toward Virginia and North Carolina, and found great
Openness in these two Provinces amongst the People, and a tenderhearted
Remnant of Friends scattered abroad in these Wilderness Countries. Although, as
I said before, I was brought very low, yet the Lord, in whom I did, and yet do
believe and put my Trust, raised me, and filled many times my Heart with his
Word and Testimony, so that sometimes it went forth as (...) Flame of Fire
amongst the loose Libertines, who were proud and unfaithful, yet Professors of
the Truth, and we had many large and good Meetings. One Thing is worthy of
Notice; as I was speaking in a Meeting in Virginia, a sudden stop came upon me,
and occasioned me to say, I cannot go forward, whatsoever the Matter may be, I
know not: But giving over immediately, a Friend whose Name was Edward Thomas,
began to preach, who was but young in the Ministry, although an elderly Man,
and apt to be attended with Reasonings; but, as he said after the Meeting, he
had sought to the Lord with Prayers, that he would condescend so far to his
Request, as to give me a Sense of him, and in so doing he would take that as a
great Strength, and Confirmation to his Ministry, in this the Day of his many
Exercises and great Fears, or much to the same effect; thus we see the Lord in
his great Mercy condescends to the low, weak, and as it were, infant States of
his Children, like a tender Father, and being our heavenly High Priest, is
touched with the Feeling of the Infirmities of his People; Thanksgiving and
Honor be given to his most excellent Name, now and for ever.

During our Stay in Virginia, one remarkable Passage occurred, which it may not
be amiss to insert here, and the Case was thus; I being at a Friend's House, an
ancient Widow, in order to go to the Meeting, observed as I sat in the House,
several Persons of note come into the Yard (a Storehouse being near) to make,
as appeared afterward, a Seizure for Rates for the Government and Priest, they
not being distinctly charged, but a mixed Rate, occasions Friends in those
Parts to be straightened about the Payment of them: I observing the Priest to be
there, and appear very busy, asked, What he was ^^me about? The Friend replied,
They were come to make Distress for the 40 lb. per Poll, as they phrase it,
which is 40 Pounds of Tobacco, payable for every taxable Head, ( i. e. all
above sixteen Years old) There were along with the Priest the Sheriff and
Constable for the Government, and diverse Merchants of note as Spectators: I
understanding the reason of their coming, stepped out to the Priest, who seemed a
topping brisk Man, his Temper in this Case not unsuitable to his Name, which
was Sharp; and being come to him, I desired him to be careful how he devoured
Widows Houses; he briskly replied, he did not; to which I as closely returned,
that I found he did. He denied my Assertion, and said, The Government gave him
what he demanded and took; to which I gave the following Answer; Inasmuch as he
did not any thing for the Widow, for which he reasonably might require a
Reward, I believed the Government would not insist upon it for him, if he would
be willing to drop it, which in common Equity I thought he should: The Priest,
displeased with this modest Reply, tartly answered, You are no Christians. I
told him, The Charge was high and false, and he might more easily affirm than
prove it; wherefore I put the Question, and asked him, Why we were so charged
by him? To which he returned this insignificant Answer, That we denied part of
the Divinity of Christ. I told him, he was a Novice, and receded in his Opinion
from most of his Brethren, seeing it was a general Reflection cast on us by
most of his Fraternity. That we owned the Divinity of Christ, but denied his
Manhood, which was false also; therefore I demanded of him, to prove what Part
of the Divinity of Christ we denied; in which if he failed, I should look upon
him as a false Accuser, and those present would, I hoped, be my Witnesses: But
he shuffled, and declined answering, though I urged him as much as possible;
and to cut the Matter off, he asked, Whence I came? The Sheriff bid him give me
a Verse in Greek; I told them, I mattered not meddling in that, for us the
English Tongue was best understood by those present, therefore I thought it
would be best to keep to it. I told him, I was of Old England, but still
reminded him of his proving his Assertion, which I looked for from him; but
instead of that, he asked what Part of Old England I came from? I told him
Yorkshire; and bid him produce his Proofs, as before urged, but he still
evading the Matter, desired to know from what Place? I told him I was born at
North Cave; and, said he, I was born at South Cave, and my Father was Minister
there many Years, his Name was Sharp, and there is but a Mile difference
betwixt those Places: I said, it was a long one. No sooner was this over, but
the Priest, transported with my being his Countryman, began hugging me to such
a Degree, that I was quite ashamed of him: When I had, not without some
Difficulty, got clear of his Embraces, I asked him, if he esteemed himself a
Minister of Christ? He answered, Yea, and lawfully called thereto; I told him,
if he was a Gospel-Minister, as the Gospel was free, so should his Ministry be
free; and turning to the People there present, I told them, I would not have
them deceived, for they might understand he only possessed his Place by virtue
of a Law in that Case provided, and his Call and Ordination was only such as
had been transferred upon him for a Fee, which made him require Pay for what he
did, and indeed where he did nothing, which was highly unfair; wherefore they
might upon Consideration find he was but a Minister of the Letter, which was
dead, and not a Minister of the Spirit and divine Power: From which he offered
not to clear himself, though I urged him thereto. Then I asked him, which of
those odious Characteristics the false Ministers were branded with, and
deciphered by in the New Testament, he could clear himself of? which I then
enumerated to him. The Sheriff said, it was so; and withal said, Mr. Sharp,
answer the Man, for the Question is very rational, and you ought to answer him,
and for Honor sake clear yourself of those Odiums if you can: But he would not
offer to meddle with it; wherefore I told him, to mind for the future, not to
charge any Man or People with more than he could be sure to prove; for it was
highly scandalous. It being now Meeting-time, I asked him to go thither; but he
refusing, said, he durst not; so we parted.

Having visited Friends here, we returned back for Maryland, and Pennsylvania,
and a great many we found who loved to hear the Testimony and Doctrines of
Truth, but too few there were, who took up the Cross daily, and followed Christ
in the way of Self-denial, and knew the thorough Work of Regeneration, so as to
have their Garments washed and made white in the mystical Blood of the Lamb:
These are not polluted with the Sins and Iniquities of the World, who have
experienced this Blood to sprinkle the Heart from an evil Conscience. These are
capable of serving the living God; and coming from the Laver or Pool that truly
washes, there is none unfruitful, but every one bearing twain, and they are
inwardly clean and fruitful to God, and walk with him, whose bright and shining
Lives are also fruitful to the World that will receive them. Read this thou
that have known something of the Work of Conversion, and consider the great
Difference there is between the bright Lives of the Virtu^us, and the dull and
cloudy Lives of the Vicious, and before thou look well, which of these thou
most resemblest in thine.

Now when we came into Pennsylvania, my Companion before mentioned, whom I
loved well, told me he must go back to Virginia; it became an Exercise to us
both, for I could not see my Way clear to go back, having been twice through
that Province. When no other Way appeared, but we must part, (for my Way
appeared clear for the Jerseys, Long Island, Rhode Island, and New England) I
held it needful that we should, as we did, call the Friends and Elders of
Philadelphia and thereabouts together, to let them know how we parted, for we
parted in much Love and Tender-heartedness; yet notwithstanding, lest any undue
Reflections should be cast upon the friends there concerning us, because of our
parting, I thought these Friends would be capable of setting those Things in
their proper Light, being Witnesses thereto; so taking our Leave of our dear
Friends in these Parts, I traveled without any Companion outwardly, or
constantly; but I sometimes fell into company with Elizabeth Webb and Sarah
Clement, who were virtuous Women, and lived near the Kingdom, and were of good
Service in their Travels, and grew in Truth, which while with them I was
sensible of: We traveled under great Care and Circumspection, both for our own
good, and avoiding Offense, as became our Places, and holy Profession, that in
all Things we might adorn the Gospel of the Kingdom, a Dispensation of which
was committed to us to preach unto others. Good Service I had for the Lord, and
great Satisfaction in my own Mind in these Parts, the Lord helping me by his
mighty Power through all my Trials, as my Heart and Mind was devoted and
resigned to answer his Requirings.

I had great Openings in several Places in New England, and it appeared clear
to me, and sometimes I spoke openly of it, that the Lord would gather a great
People to the saving Knowledge of the Truth in his Time, notwithstanding what
many of our Friends had suffered for the Name of the Lord, and Testimony which
they held in their Parts, from the Predecessors of the present Inhabitants: The
View of the State of these Things, especially the great Sufferings of many of
our faithful Friends, put me in Mind of that saying, that The Blood of the
Martyrs is the Seed of the Church; and in this Case, I believe it will be
fulfilled in its Season.

One Passage happened, which I think not fit to pass over in silence: There
came into one Meeting, eastward in New England, a Man, who was Brother to a
Presbyterian Priest, to oppose Friends, (who, as Friends said, had been often
very troublesome in that Meeting) in the Beginning of the Meeting he desired to
have Liberty to ask some Questions. I being a Stranger, and not having so much
as heard of the Man, nor any making Reply to him, I felt Liberty in the Truth
to return the following Answer in behalf of the Meeting, That I did apprehend
it was the Desire of Friends, inasmuch as the Meeting was appointed for the
Worship of God, and not for asking of Questions, or controversies, that the
chief Part should first be answered; and I also thought the Meeting would be
willing, in the Conclusion, to give him Liberty to ask the Questions, if his
Intent therein was for Information or Satisfaction, and not for Contention.
Friends were silent, and the Man submitted to what was proposed, and a good
Meeting we had, the Lord's heavenly Power and living Presence being with us,
and the Substance was felt among us, and exalted over all the Shadows and
Types; and Christ the true Bread and living Water, Light and Life of the World,
was exalted that Day; and the mighty God and Father, with his beloved Son,
through the Help of the holy Spirit, was glorified, who is worthy for ever.
Near the Conclusion of the Meeting, the Man began to speak well of what he had
heard, particularly touching that of Water Baptism, which, he said, he had
nothing to object against; but as to the Sacrament, as he called it, because
little or nothing had been said about it, therefore he concluded, we either
denied or disused it; or Words to the same Purport. Then I stood up and said, I
did not remember that the Word Sacrament was in all the Bible; but, I said, I
supposed he meant the Bread and Wine; he answered, he did; I asked him, whether
he was of the same Mind, the Episcopal Church was of? If not of the same Mind
he might say so; for they say, the Bread and Wine is an outward and visible
Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace, etc. what said he to it? He was some
Time silent; then I asked him, How long he thought that Sign was to continue?
He replied, To the End of the World. I answered, He did not read in all the
Bible, that the Lord had appointed any Figure or Sign but what was to end in
the Substance, which is to be witnessed and enjoyed in this World, and not put
off only to the End or Conclusion thereof, as his Argument seemed to declare,
by his urging, that the Sign of that divine Substance must remain till the End
of this World. I asked him, What he could answer to that? He turned off with
only saying, I was too great a Sholar for him, and so he would not meddle with
me. He then was silent, and there being many People, I had a fine Opportunity
to open to the tenderhearted, and Friends present, how that was at best but a
Sign, which the People eat and drank outwardly, in Remembrance of Christ's
Death until he came, but that I could now prove plenteously from the New
Testament, that the Substance, the Grace was come, and urged many Proofs out of
the Scriptures to the same Purpose: And when I had done, what I had said so
reached a good-like old Man, a Presbyterian, that he confessed with Tears, he
had heard much said upon that Subject, but had never heard it so opened before;
and said, he believed I was in the right. The Meeting broke up in a good Frame,
and Friends much rejoiced that that Truth came over all, and the contentious
Man was silenced: And when the Meeting was over, the goodly goodly old Man took
me to the Door, and asked file; what a Man should do in case of a solemn League
and Covenant, he being entered into it? I told him, I needed not to direct him,
for he had that in himself which would show him what he would do; for if one
should make an Agreement or Covenant with Hell and Death, in the Time of
Ignorance and Darkness, and now the true Light discovered it to be so; the same
Light which discovered and manifested it to be wrong, as he was faithful to the
same, would show him how and when to break it, and every other wrong Thing; to
which Light I recommended him, and bid him take heed to it; which he said, he
hoped he should; and so I left him with Tears on his Cheeks, and passed on.

I omitted one Thing which happened in that Part of New England near New York
and Long-Islan^^ although I was twice backward and forward, yet to be brief in
my Travels through those Countries, intended to make one Account serve, viz. As
I was speaking in a Meeting, there came a great Damp over my Spirit, and in
that Time came into the Meeting several Men, occasioned by a topping and great
Man in the World, who had given them all Expectation that they should hea^ how
he would oppose the Quakers; but in a short time Truth rose, and Friends
generally heard a Man say to this Disputant, why do you not speak? he hushed
him with saying, the Man is upon the Subject which I intend to oppose them
with. After some Time the Man was put upon again to speak to me, with a why do
not you speak? we heard him say, the Man has opened the Thing so as I never
heard it before; and I have Nothing to say: And to his own, and the Wonder of
his Neighbors, he sat down upon a Seat near the Door and wept tenderly; so it
was a good time to him, and many more, for the Lord's mighty Power was amongst
us. And in my Return from my Journey in the East Parts of New England, the same
great Man desired me to condescend to have a Meeting at his House; and after
due Consideration and Approbation of Friends, who desired it might be so, when
they knew it was his Request, a Meeting was appointed, and I heard there were
likely to be at it a great many of the higher Sort of Presbyterians of his
Neighborhood.

I went to the Meeting under no small Concern of Mind, but when I was come into
the great House, I was very much affected with the wise Conduct of the Man, to
see in what excellent Order he had placed every Thing, so that I could not find
wherein any Thing could be amended; and a heavenly Meeting it was, without any
Opposition; and at the breaking up of the Meeting, this tender Man, whose Heart
was broken and opened by the Power of Truth, said audibly, His Heart and House
were open to receive me, and such as me, let all say what they would to the
contrary. But what the subject matter was at the first Meeting when he came in,
I forgot; it was enough that we remembered we had a good and heavenly Meeting,
and were truly thankful for the same to him who was the Author thereof.

I and some other Friends being in our Passage by Water in a Vessel bound for
Rhode Island, and meeting with high and contrary Winds, we put into a Creek
some Miles distant from Rhode Island, and desired the People to procure us some
Horses to ride on, and we would pay them any Thing that was reasonable but
hoped they would not make a Prey of us, for we were Strangers, and they ought
to do to us as they would be done by, if they were in a strange Land, as we
were; and there came up to us a goodly old Man, and asked us, what People we
were? if we were not Quakers? I told him, we were in Scorn so called, but we
did not much mind Names, for there was but little in them. He was a brisk
talking Man, and said, there was a Man here lately that said he was a Quaker,
and borrowed a Horse, and when he was gone some Miles from this Place, he
offered to sell the Horse: I know not, said the Man, but you are such. I
returned this Answer to the Reflection; That was a great Proof that we were an
honest and reputable People where we were known, he might assure himself of
that; for when a Man is so wicked, as to become a notorious Cheat, he will
cover himself under the best Name he can think of, otherwise he might have said
he was a Baptist, or a Presbyterian, or an Episcopalian, and desired you to
lend him an Horse; but you mind not these Names, neither does the wicked Man
think he can pass so well under any of these last, but under the first; and the
Reason of it I leave thee to judge. The old Man asked no more Questions, but
used his Endeavors to get us Horses, and a Man and Horse to go with us, to
have the Horses back again, and we were well mounted; but before we set
forward, the old Man took me to his House and was very courteous to me, for
though we had spoke for some Victuals in as short a Time as well might be, he
invited me to drink, and brought of his Apples and Beer, which he would have my
Friends to partake of, for, he said, (and we found it true) it was but a poor
Inn; I think there was no Liquor at it, but Brandy or Rum, and Water. The old
Man and I parted very lovingly, and I gave him a Piece of Money to show my
Gratitude for his Civility and good Service to us. The People looked upon us as
same great Wonder, for I heard one say, (...) these Quakers? well, said he,
they look like other People. How we had been represented, and by whom, its not
hard to gather, for it is very apparent, the same Spirit and the same Enmity
yet does, continue in some of the Inhabitants of that Country, which some of
our Friends formerly felt the severe Effects of; but they are since somewhat
moderated by the Government there, which is of a more mild and Christian
Disposition; although I am well assured, that many of the more conscientious
and thinking People in those Parts of the World begin to see, and many will see
and understand in Time, that hanging and taking away Lives, for the sake of
Religion, is opposite to Christ, and the Nature of the true Religion which is
wrought in May by the Operation, Quickenings, and Indwelling of the holy
Spirit, which, as it is regarded and followed, leavens and brings, the Soul of
Man in some degree to put on the Purity, heavenly Image, and Nature of Christ,
which is Love, praying for Enemies, and is not for destroying, but saving
Lives; but how far the Reverse will agree with that Religion taught by Christ,
and practiced by him and the Apostles, I would have all seriously consider of
in Time.

While we were in Boston, when one of the aforementioned worthy Women was
declaring excellently, with both good Utterance and Voice, as also good Matter,
as the Manner of the Inhabitants of Boston had been for many Years to
encourage, or at least suffer a rude Mob to bawl and make a Noise, so they did
now, that it was hard to hear so as to understand distinctly what the Friend
said, although she spoke plain and intelligibly: I did very much grieve me to
see the Ignorance and Darkness of those high Professors of Religion, so that
when the Friend had done, observing there appeared Men of some Note in the
World, I requested them to hush the Rabble, for I had something to say, which I
desired them to make known to the Governor and chief Men of the Town; so they
soon quelled the Noise. Then I told them, That in case we were as erroneous as
some might insinuate we were, that was not the Way to convince us of our
Errors, neither to bring us out of them, but rather to establish us in them;
and that was not the Way for them to gain Proselytes, but the Way to lose many
from them, and increase Dissenters; for what Convincement could there be by
Noise and Clamor, and Hooting, as if they would split their own Lungs? I had
come a great Way to see them, and what Character could I give of them? I never
thought to have seen so much Folly amongst a wise and religious People as now I
saw: Tell the Governor and chief of the Town, what the old Englishman says;
for I am ashamed of such Doings. It had a good Effect, for when I came after,
we had quiet Meetings; and I understood by a Letter from Daniel Zachary, of
Boston, to Old England, that the Governor said I was in the right, and ordered
that Peace should be kept in Friends Meetings there; and I never heard to the
contrary but it is well yet as so that. We have great reason to be truly
thankful to the Lord for these, and all other his Mercies, that He the Fountain
of all Good is pleased to favor us with: And as an Instance of the Lord's
Mercy to many poor Sufferers, and to show the implacable Envy of these People
to Friends, the Case of Thomas Maulham of Salem may suffice, in some measure,
to set forth both, who was a great Sufferer in the Time of hot Persecution,
when the Persecutors had stripped him of almost all he had; their insatiable
Minds not content with that, they came with Axes and how'd down all the
Apple Trees in his Orchard, it being a large one, and left the Stumps about the
height of a Man's Knee, and, as Thomas Maulham said, they took the Way as they
thought to ruin him; but the Lord turned it into a Blessing, for the Trees grew
to Admiration, and came to bear Fruit abundantly, and a finer Orchard I have
not seen in all my Travels, for the Bigness of it; let the Lord be sanctified
by all his People, and admired by all them that believe.

I with several other Friends went from Salem Yearly Meeting (which was a large
and good Meeting) toward Dover, and coming to a River, I staying a little
behind, a Friend took my Horse with two more into the Boat, and by that Time I
came to the Riverside the Boat was sinking, and the Ferryman made a lamentable
Cry, saying, The Boat is sunk, and we shall be all drowned; although it was so
ordered, that there (...) as but one Friend in the Boat with the Boatman, and I
do not remember that ever before now my Horse was in any Boat, and I not there;
which I looked on as the Mercy of a kind Providence to me, and to several other
Friends in Company. I hearing the Noise, as before, (and also the flowndering
of the Horses when tumbling into the Water) called to the Men, to be sure to
take care to free themselves of all the Tackling of the Horses, (as Bridles,
Stirrups, etc.) and catch hold on my Horse's Tail, and he would bring them both
ashore; but if they trusted to the other (as before mentioned) when the Horses
swam they would fail them, unless very strong; and to have them hold by the
Bridle was the way to drown both Horse and Man: This Advice was given while
they had the Horses in their Hands; the Boatman being a lively Youth, took my
Advice, caught hold of my Horse's Tail, it being long, (which I ever approved
of among Rivers) and I calling to my Horse, he came quickly with the Man
ashore, but left the honest old Friend Ezekiel Waring (to whose House we
intended to go that Night) in the River floating to the Neck, a hundred Yards
from the Shore by Computation, yet watchful Providence did so attend, that his
Life was preserved to a Wonder; for it was so ordered, although he missed taking
my Advice, and caught hold of his Stirrup, and the Girth broke, as they are apt
to do if they be tight when the Horse begins to swim, which brought off the
Saddle and Pillion, and the Oar of the Beat, and his Hat, which with the
Pillion-seat being in his Arms, just bore up his Head above Water for some
Time; his poor Wife seeing the Danger to which her Husband was exposed, fell
into a fainting Fit; (there being neither House, Man, or Boat, to be seen on
this Side of the River, but ourselves, the Boatman, and the Stem and Stern of
the sunk Boat full of Water.) A House there was on the other Side of the River,
which was half a Mile over. The Ferryman did his best to get a Boat or Cannoe,
and although it began to be dark, yet he found a Cannoe, (which is made of a fine
Piece of Timber hollowed in the Form of a Boat, and generally will carry but
two or three or four Men;) he coming near, asked if Ezekiel was alive? I told
him he was, but very weak, for I had often heard him blubber in the Water; I
encouraged him, that he might not faint in his Mind, for I told him, I yet
believed his Life would be preserved; he would very faintly say, Unless Help
came, be could not hold it long. I went on by the Waterside, and laid me down
often on the Land, not much regarding Wet or Dirt, sometimes tumbling over Logs
of Wood and Limbs of Trees, for so it is in these uncultivated Places: I
directed the Man with his Cannoe where the poor Friend was, as near as I could
tell by my last Observation, and withal desired he would turn the Stern of his
Cannoe to him, as he could not list him into the Cannoe; neither to let him lay
his Hand upon the broad Side of it, but upon the Stern, lest he should overset
it, and so both be drowned: So he did, and brought him gently ashore, to the
great Joy of his loving Wife and us all. The Boatman, as he owned, had found my
Counsel good, and therefore would have me tell him what he might do now; I bid
him fetch the Boat to shore by the Fowler or Rope, and then go and carry
Ezekiel in the Cannoe to the Inn on the other Side of the Water, that he might
dry, warm, and refresh himself until we came; in the mean Time we cleared the
Boat of Water, which when done, we put two Horses into it, and I towed my Horse
at the Boat's Stern to make Room for several, especially the good Woman before
mentioned, who were at this Time in my Company, not without their Exercise any
more than myself: We got well over, and then the Ferryman and Friend on the
other Side brought the Horses that were left, being three, which were enough
for the Boat, and proved too many the first Time. We found the good old Friend
finely and well recruited, and got to his House about Midnight, where we were
glad, and our Hearts were full of Praises to the Lord for this great and
eminent Deliverance and Preservation.

In this first Visit while in Rhode Island, I met with something worthy of thy
Notice, if thou art such a Reader as I wish thou may, which was thus: Being
in Rhode Island, several Friends came to me in some of the Intervals of the
Yearly Meeting, (for it held several Days, both for Worship and Discipline) to
enquire whether it was usual to let the Young, and such as had but appeared
little in Testimony in our Parts of the World, come into Meetings of public
Friends? I said, Yes, if they were of clean Lives, and what they had to say,
approved; and it was very like such might want Advice as much as those who were
come to more Experience in the Work of tie Ministry, if not more: This was some
means of enlarging the said Meetings of Ministers now coming on. When I came
into the Meeting, several of the Elders desired me to go into the Gallery,
which I refused, the Concern upon my Mind being so great, I thought it was
enough that I could but get into the House, and sit down among the lowest Rank.

This Meeting was one not to be forgotten, because of the eminent Visitation
from the Lord that was upon us in it; I have not often seen the like; I
question if there were any dry Cheeks for sometime in it; and the Manner of the
working of the heavenly Power was remarkable, in order to the sanctifying and
preparing Vessels for the Lord's Use; and he broke us down by his Judgments
from following flattering Flesh, and the pleasing Vanities of the World, and
the subtle Baits of Satan, by the Tenders of his Love, and engaged us to follow
the heavenly and inward Calls, Knocks, and Reproofs of his holy Spirit, and to
obey the Dictates of the same. When the Lord prepares in a good Degree for this
Work of the Ministry, many have been unwilling to give up and obey, until they
have tasted of the Lord's Displeasure, and in part of his Judgments, which have
brought them into a Submission; after which they went out with their Lives
sometimes in their Hands, and became a Wonder to Men, bearing their Reproach,
and sometimes appeared in great Congregations, sometimes in Noises and Tumults,
and sometimes were in Watchings and Fastings, in Weariness, Hunger and in Cold,
with much more, for the Name of the Lord and his Testimony, and for the
Enjoyment of Peace, and the internal Presence of him that has separated us to
this Work by the holy Ghost; and it is in and by our abiding faithful to the
same, that we are preserved in a Capacity of Perseverance through all to the
End, to the mutual Help and Comfort one of another, and Renown of the Name of
the Lord, who is worthy now and for ever.

We also had a very large Meeting on this Island in an Orchard, where I had
good Service for the Lord; and I remember I was much concerned about the two
Ministrations, viz, John's Baptism with Water, and CHRIST'S with the holy
Ghost, it being clear from John's Words, that he saw to the End of his own
Dispensation when he declared, he must decrease, but CHRIST must increase;
which is generally understood to respect their differing Dispensations; for the
first Baptism was to baptize unto Repentance, the other to the purging of the
Floor, and burning up of that which was combustible, viz. the Chaff and
Stubble, which the Lord's Baptism burns up inwardly, and which no elementary
Thing can do; for if all the Eatings, Washings, Observations and Ceremonies
under the Law, although to Israel commanded and enjoined by the Lord, could not
make the Comers thereunto perfect, how should these or any of them now, when
not commanded, as they never were to us, perfect the Gentile World? So what I
had upon my Mind, as I received, I went through with, and showed the Beginning,
Use and End of the watery Dispensation, and the Use and Continuance of CHRIST'S
spiritual Baptism to the End of the World. The Meeting broke up, and Friends
went into an upper Room in an Inn; but I felt such an Exercise upon my Spirit
that I could not eat, but desired Friends to be easy, and I would eat as soon
as I could; and while I was walking over the large Chamber alone, there came up
three Men whom I knew not, nor what they were, but it sprang livingly in my
Heart to set my Eyes on them in the Lord's Dread, and so I did; they passed
away, and I was told afterward, that they were three Baptist Preachers who had
been at the Meeting and came once more to see me, with a Design to have a
Dispute with me; but, they said, I looked so sharply they durst not middle with
me: Thus the Lord in a good Degree wrought for me, blessed be his worthy Name
for ever.

Now I leave the Account of my Travels in those Parts, and enter upon my
second, with my honest Companion James Bates, who was born in Virginia, and
traveled much with me through many Provinces, and some Islands; we had good
Service together, and it was much with me, when on Rhode Island, to visit
Nantucket, where there were but very few Friends; Peleg Slocum, an honest
public Friend near Rhode Island, intending to carry us in his Sloop to the
said Island that Night; and Peleg thought we had been close in with our desired
landing Place, but we fell short, and Night coming on, and having but one small
Cannoe to help us ashore, which would carry but three People at once, we went
ashore at twice, and left the Sloop at an Anchor; and it being grown dark, we
thought we were going up into the Island among the Inhabitants, but soon found
that we were upon a Beach of Sand and Rubbish, where was neither Grass nor
Tree, neither could we find the Sloop that Night, though we sought it
carefully, and halloo'd one to another till we were weary, so that we were
forced to settle upon our little Island, from the Center of which, one might
cast a Stone into the Sea on every Side; here we staid that Night, not knowing
but the Sea, when at the Height, would have swept us all away, but it did not;
there I walked, and sometimes sat, until Morning, but slept none; at last the
Morning came, and the Mist went away, and we got on board again, and reached
the Island about the ninth or tenth Hour.

The Master was willing, at our Request, to land three of us, (i.e.) me, my
Companion, and Susannah Freeborn, a public Friend, who had a Concern upon her
Mind for some Time, (as she signified to Friends in Rhode Island where she
lived) to visit the few Friends in Nantucket, and Friends thought this a proper
Season to pay that Visit. She was a Woman well beloved, and in good Unity with
Friends.

We landed safe, and as we went up an Ascent, we saw a great many People
looking toward the Sea, for great Fear had possessed them, that our Sloop was
a French Sloop loaded with Men and Arms, who were coming to invade the Island:
I held out my Arms and told them, I knew not of any worse Arms than these on
board. They said, they were glad it was no worse, for they had intended to have
alarmed the Island, it being a time of War: I told the good like People, for so
they appeared to me, that Peleg Slocum, near Rhode Island, was Master of the
Sloop, and that we came to visit them in the Love of God, if they would be
willing to let us have some Meetings amongst them. They behaved themselves very
courteously toward us, and said, they thought we might.

We then enquired for Nathaniel Starbuck, who we understood was in some degree
convinced of the Truth, and having Directions to his House, we went thither,
and I told him, We made bold to come to his House and if he was free to receive
us, we would stay a little with him, but if not, we would go elsewhere; for we
heard he was a seeking religious Man, and such chiefly we were come to visit:
He said, we were very welcome. And by this Time came in his Mother Mary
Starbuck, who the Islanders esteemed as a Judge among them, for little of
Moment was done there without her, as I understood.

At the first Sight of her it sprang in my Heart, To this Woman is the
everlasting Love of God. I looked upon her as a Woman that bore some Sway in
the Island, and so I said, and that truly, we are come in the Love of God to
visit you, if you are willing to let us have some Meetings among you: She said,
she thought we might; and withal said, there was a Nonconformist Minister who
was to have a Meeting, and they were going to it, and she thought it would be
the best way for us to go with them to the Meeting. I showed my Dislike to that
for these Reasons; first, we did not want to hear what that Minister had to
say, because some of us had tried them before we came there, (meaning the
Non-conformists of several Sorts) and if we should go, and could not he clear
without speaking something in the Meeting, he might take it ill; but as we
understand there is another Meeting appointed at the second Hour for the same
Man, therefore, as the present Constitution of Things are we lock upon
ourselves to stand upon an equal Ground in a religious Capacity with other
Dissenters; and if we should appoint our Meeting at the same Hour, then the
People will be left to their Choice to which Meeting they will go. The great
Woman approved of the Proposal, and said, indeed that was the best way. The
next Consideration was, where shall the Meeting be? She paused a while, and
then said, I think at our House. I from thence gathered she had an Husband, for
I thought the Word our, carried in it some Power besides her own, and I
presently found he was with us; I then made my Observation on him, and he
appeared not a Man of mean Parts, but me so far exceeded him in Soundness of
Judgment, Clearness of Understanding, and an elegant way of expressing herself,
and that not in an affected Strain, but very natural to her, that it tended to
lessen the Qualifications of her Husband.

The Meeting being agreed on, and Care taken as to the Appointment of it, we
parted, and I lay down to try if I could get any Sleep, for I have showed
before what fort of a Night the last was with us; but Sleep vanished away from
me, and I got up and walked to and fro in the Woods until this Meeting was
mostly gathered. I was under a very great Load in my Spirit, but the Occasion
of it was hid from me, but I saw it my place to go to Meeting, the Order of
which was such, in all the Parts thereof. I had not seen the like before; the
large and bright rubbed Room was set with suitable Seats or Chairs, the Glass
Windows token out of the Frames, and many Chairs placed without very
conveniently, so that I did not see any thing wanting, according to the Place,
but something to stand on, for I was not free to set my Feet upon the sine Cane
Chair, lest I should break it.

I am the more particular in this exact and exemplary Order than in some other
Things, for the Seats both within and without Doors were so placed, that the
Faces of the People were toward the Seats where the public Friends sat, and
when so set, they did not look or gaze in our Faces, as some I think are too
apt to do, which in my Thoughts bespeaks an unconcerned Mind: The Meeting being
thus gathered and set down in this orderly and ample Manner, (although there
were but very few bearing our Name in it) it was not long before the mighty
Power of the Lord began to work, and in it my Companion especially did appear
in Testimony in the fore Part thereof; and while he was speaking, a Priest (not
him before touched or, but another) flung out some Reflections upon him, and
the People for his Sake, which I did not see the least Occasion for; after
which he went away, (but more of this in the Sequel.)

I sat a considerable Time in the Meeting before I could see my Way clear to
say any thing, until the Lord's heavenly Power raised me, and set me upon my
Feet as if one had lifted me up, and what I had first in commission to speak,
was in the Words of Christ to Nicodemus, viz. Except a Man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God; with these Words, Nay, the natural and
unregenerate Man cannot so much as see the heavenly and spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, which stands not only in Power, but also in Righteousness, Joy and
Peace in the holy Spirit; and to be born again, was not to be done
unperceivable, no more then the natural Birth could be brought forth without
Trouble; and to pretend to be in Christ and not to be new Creatures, is
preposterous; and to pretend to be new Creatures, and yet not able to render
any Account how it was performed, was unreasonable; for it could not be, as I
urged before, without our Knowledge; for to be born again, signified to be
quickened and raised into a spiritual and new Life, by which the Body of the
Sins of the Flesh is mortified, and we come to live a self-denying Life: Those
who are crucified with Christ, they are crucified to their Sins, that as he
died for Sin, we might die to Sin: In this State we live not after the Flesh
although we live as the Apostle said) in the Flesh; but the Life which these
(live, is through Faith in the Son of God; And to have all this, and much more
wrought in us, and we know nothing of it, it unaccountable.

As I was thus opened, and delivering these Things, with much more than I can
remember, the great Woman I felt, for most of an Hour together, fought and
strove against the Testimony, sometimes looking up in my Face with a pale, and
then with a more ruddy Complexion; but the Strength of the Truth increased, and
the Lord's mighty Power began to shake the People within and without D^ors; but
she who was looked upon as a Deborah by these People, was loath to lose her
outside Religion, or the Appearance thereof: When she could no longer contain,
she submited to the Power of Truth, and the Doctrines thereof, and lifted up
her Voice and wept: Oh! then the universal Cry and Brokenness of Heart and
Tears was wonderful! From this Time I do not remember one Word that I spoke in
Testimony, it was enough that I could keep upon the true Bottom, and not be
carried away with the Stream above my Measure.

I might add much more concerning this Days Work, but I intend not to ^^y any
thing to the Praise of the Creature, but to the Renown of the mighty Name of
the Lord of Hoses, and let all Flesh he as in the Dust forever, for while I
continued speaking in this State, as before mentioned, and thus swallowed up in
the internal Presence of Christ, where there was no want of Power, Wisdom nor
Utterance, I spoke but a Sentence and stopped, and so on for some Time, I have
since thought of John's being in the Spirit on the Lords Day. If it had been a
State to have been continued in, I am of the mind, I should not have been
sensible of Weariness, neither of Hanger or Pain. This is a Mystery to many,
yet these are faithful and true Sayings, thou may read that can; but there
are none who can know the white Stone and new Name, but they who have it: there
are none who stand upon Mount Sion with Harps of God in their Hands, but only
such as have come through great Tribulations, and have washed their Garments
and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; to these are the Seals of the
Book of the Mysteries of the glorious Kingdom opened; these are called out of
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; these are redeemed out of the fallen and
earthly State of old Adam, into the living, heavenly and spiritual State in
Christ the second Adam; these cry holy; the other Part of the Children of Men
cry unholy, because they are not willing to cast down their Crows at the Feet
or Appearance of Christ in their own Souls; although such, with the four Beasts
may cry, come and see, yet are they not properly qualified to worship the Lord
God and the Lamb before his Throne, as the four and twenty Elders did, and as
all do, and will do, who worship God in his holy Temple in Spirit and in Truth,
according to his own Appointment; who are not tied up to the Canons; Creeds,
Systems and Dictates of Men, much of which is beaten out of the Wisdom, Parts,
and natural Comprehension of earthly fallen Man.

I return from this, which may seem a mysterious Digression to the other Part
of what did happen concerning the Meeting, and come now to the breaking up
thereof; and as extreme Heats often end in extreme Cold, and as great Heights
frequently center (as to Man in this Capacity) in great Depths, and great
Plenty in great Poverty, which I have often seen to be good in order to keep
the Creature low, in Fear, and in a Dependence upon the Lord, I soon fell into
such a Condition that I was like to die away; and when it was so, I with my
Companion made a Motion to break up the Meeting, but could not for some Time,
for they sat weeping universally; then I told the Meeting, especially such as
were near me, that if I should faint away, I would not have them to be
surprised at it, for I was much concerned lest that should hurt these tender
People; my Life was not dear to me in comparison of the Worth of the Souls of
the Children of Men; but all this did not break up the Meeting: But after some
Time Mary Starbuck stood up, and held out her Hand, and spoke tremblingly and
said, All that ever we have been building, and all that ever we have done, is
all pulled down this Day, and this is the everlasting Truth; or very near these
Words. Then she arose, and I observed that she and as many as could well be
seen, were wet with Tears from their Faces to the fore Skirts of their
Garments, and the Floor was as though there had been a Shower of Rain upon it;
but Mary, that worthy Woman, said to me, when a little come to consider the
poor State that I was in, Dear Child what shall I do for you? I said, a little
would do for me; if thou can get me something to drink that is not strong but
rather warm, it may do well: So she did, and I went unto her Son's, where my
Clothes were, that I might shift me, for I felt Sweat in my Shoes as I walked.

I mention this partly for the sakes of such of my Brethren, who may be at any
time in the like Case, to take Care to keep out of the Cold, and beware of
drinking that which is cold, neither is Brandy good, for for it feeds too much
upon the weakened Vitals; but in all Things endeavor to possess your Vessels in
Sanctification and Honor: And as it is not in Man's Power to make the Vessel
clean nor prepare it, therefore if the Lord does (with thy Obedience through
the Work of his Grace and holy Spirit) fit thy Vessel for his Work and Service,
take this Caution; see that thou neither destroy, defile, nor hurt the same.
But it may be, some or other have done all these, some one way and some another.

I remember Peleg Slocum (before mentioned) said after this Meeting, that the
like he was never at; for he thought the Inhabitants of the Island were shaken,
and most of the People convinced of the Truth: However, a great Convincement
there was that Day, Mary Starbuck was one of the Number, and in a short time
after received a public Testimony, as did also her Son Nathaniel.

After I was somewhat revived, my Companion having a Mind to speak to the
Priest, to know why he did so reflect on him, desired me to go with him, which
I did with several more, and coming to his Door where he was set upon a Bench,
James Bates asked him, why he did so reflect? He replied, he was in a Passion,
and had nothing against him; then James forgave him, and they fell into some
Debate concerning Faith my Friend urged the Apostle James's Words, which are
these, As the Body is dead without the Spirit, so is Faith without Works. The
Priest said, Dead Faith was nothing, and that it had no Being in the World. I
thought he appeared to be in the Craft; and after they had tugged at it a
while, I said, I found something in my Mind to interpose, if they would hear
me; they both showed a Willingness to hear what I had to say; and then I asked,
what Belief or Faith that was the Devils had? for I did not understand, but
that although they believed there was a God, they remained Devils still;
therefore the Word dead, is a proper Word, and properly adapted to that which
many may call Faith and is not operative, but a Notion that may be received by
Education, by hearing or reading, and not that Faith which works by Love, and
overcomes the World; and because of its not working, being inactive and
useless, is fitly called dead: What do thou say to that? He said, I was too
great a Scholar for him. I replied, there was no great Scholarship in that. He
then invited me to stay all Night, and said I should be as welcome as his own
Children, and he and I would dispute about that between ourselves. I declined
it and showed these Reasons for so doing; If he declined the Debate publicly,
I would not debate it privately; for then these Neighbors of his would want
the Benefit of it; and so we parted, with my saying, as it immediately sprang
up in my Heart, Thou have been a Man in thy young Years that the Lord has been
near, and favored with many Openings, and if thou had been faithful to the
Gift of God, thou might have been serviceable, but thou Last been
unfaithful, and a Cloud is come over thee, and thou art laid a side as useless.

I was altogether a Stranger to the State of the Priest, nor had I heard any
thing of him, nor indeed of the State of the Inhabitants of the Island, but
what I heard after mostly from Mary Starbuck; for as we walked from the
Priest's House toward our Quarters, she said, every Thing she now met with,
did confirm her in the Truth; for she knew this was the State of the Priest, as
I had said, she being acquainted with him in his best State, and then he had
fine Openings, and a living Ministry among them, but of late a Cloud was come
over him, and, as I said, he was laid by and useless. She also put me in mind
of something I had said in the Meeting about Election, which as near as I can
remember was thus: I had endeavored to make one in the Election, and one born
again, much the same; for I had laid waste all claim to Election without being
born again; for as Christ was the Chosen or Elect of God, who never fell, could
such who were in the Fall be the Branches of Christ, the pure heavenly Vine? Or
such who were found in the impure State, and in the Degeneracy, by Reason of
Sin and wicked Works? Or would Christ be married to a People, and become as
their Husband, who were in an unconverted State? Could this be the true Church
of Christ? Could this be the Lamb's Bride, who had departed from his Spirit,
and was in the Pollutions of the World through Lust, and running after the
Pleasures and Fineries of the World, depending upon Ceremonies, and outside
Things and Elements, which appear not to be essential to our Salvation, neither
do we find Life in them, nor Conversion through them? I was of the Apostle's
Mind, that neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any Thing, but a
new Creature: And what Man in the World can say, that Water (although he may
have been baptized or dipped into the same) has converted him, or changed his
State From a natural to a spiritual, or from a dead to a living State in
Christ? Or, who that have gone through the most celebrated Ceremonies (as some
may account them) had thereby got Dominion over Sin and Satan?

Having thus treated of Things, or to this purpose, among them, I said to Mary
that she warred and strove against the Testimony for a Time: And as near as I
remember, she said their Principle was, That such who believed once in Christ,
were always in him, without Possibility of falling away; and whom he had once
loved, he loved to the End: And it was a Distinction they had given to their
Church, to be called Electarians; and as I said, or near it, she had no mind to
be pulled out of her strong Hold. But when she saw the Glory of Christ, and the
true Church, as the Queen of the South saw Solomon's, and the Glory of his
House; and as she had her Questions and Doubts answered, she had no more Spirit
in her, or Doubts or Questions, but openly owned, This is the Truth, this is
the Glory I have heard so much of: That Spirit of doubting and questioning was
swallowed up now, by her hearing and beholding for herself this greater than
Solomon, his Wisdom and Glory, and the great House that he had built (the
Servants, the Attendance, and excellent Order, with the Ascent unto the House
of God, which were all wonderful in Solomon's House, carried in them a lively
Resemblance of Christ, his Power, Glory and Wisdom) as also that Order and Mean
which is seen among his faithful Servants, his Church and People even such as
our spiritual Solomon rules in and over by his Spirit and Power. Here is
Solomon, (...) Peace, elsewhere called the Prince of Peace; and as Solomon
ruled in Jerusalem, formerly called Salem. or City of Peace, and indeed over
all Judah, and ever all his Tribes, so does Christ in his Kingdom every where
upon the Face of the whole Earth. Learn this, see and know in and for thyself,
that thou art truly translated out of the Kingdom of Death and Da^^^ess into
the Kingdom of Christ, which is a Kingdom of Power, Life, Light, Peace and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. I was much bowed down in my Spirit, and in Weakness,
Fasting, and in much Fear; for the more that Truth appears, the more it brings
the Creature into Self-abasement.

A Passage is here revived to my Mind, which was thus: After a large
Yearly Meeting, where were many able Ministers, one of whom was worthy WILLIAM
PEN, who taking me aside after the Meeting, said The main Part of the Service
of this Day's Work went on thy Side, and we saw it, and were willing and easy
to give away to the Truth, though it was through thee, who appears but like a
Shrub; and it is but reasonable the Lord make use of whom be pleases: Now,
methinks, thou may be cheerful, From which I gathered, that he thought I was
too much inclinable to be cast down; therefore I gave him this true Answer, I
endeavor to keep in a medium, out of all Extremes, as believing it to be most
agreeable to my Station; with this Remark, the worst of my Times rather
imbitter the best to me: WILIAM shook his Head, and said with much Respect,
There are many who steer in this Course besides thee, and it is the safest Path
for us to walk in; with several other Expressions which bespoke Affection.

This worthy Man, and Minister of the Gospel, notwithstanding his great
Endowments and excellent Qualifications, yet thought it his place to stoop to
and give way to the Truth, and let the holy Testimony go through whom it might
please the Lord to empower and employ in his Work, although it might be through
contemptible Instruments. I sincerely desire this may prove profitable to those
whom it may concern, and into whose Hands it may come, that the Lord's Work may
be truly, minded, and given way unto, when it is opened; for seeing no Man can
open it, let not any drive on the Man's Part to shut the same. I have at times
seen something of this Nature, which has not been altogether to my
Satisfaction; a Word to the Wise may serve, I would hope and may be sufficient
for a Caution, for what I have written is in the Love of God, and under a
Concern that has been upon my Mind at Times, for some Years, to leave behind
me a gentle Caution to my tender Friends of both Sexes, to have an especial
Care in all things, to recommend not only their Gifts, but their Demeanor in
them, as a also their Conversations after them, to every Man's Conscience in
the Sight of God, so that you may build up the Lord's House (like the wise
Woman) and always have a great Care, that nothing you say or do may any way
tend to the Hindrance of the Lord's Work, or discourage the Weakest in the
Flock of Christ, but labor to fasten every Stake, and strengthen every Cord of
Sion, and as much as you are capable, build up the Tabernacle in Jerusalem, for
as God is a Spirit, and the Soul of Man is a spiritual Existence, and as the
Soul and Body of Man become sanctified and prepared, as a Temple for the Lord
by his holy Spirit to tabernacle in, the Lord is to such as a Sanctuary to fly
to, and rest in, from Heats and from Storms: Here is the true Church's Rock,
and Place of Defense ( to wit) the Name and Power of the mighty God. Oh! that
all the Inhabitants of the Earth were acquainted with this Name, and Rock of
Defense, they would not then be so much overcome, as they are, with the Power
of the Enemy of the Soul, but live above his Region, which is in the Earth, or
rather, in the earthly Hearts of Men. All you who have escaped the Pollutions
of the World, keep in your Tents, until the Lord moves and leads forward, and
opens the Way, sometimes as in a Wilderness.

Read and understand from whence these Things have their Rise and Original, for
there is the Church's Safety, and its Comeliness too, in abiding in the Truth;
this is your Place of Safety where the Enemy has no Power, where the Wiles of
Satan and Inventions of Man cannot reach, no Enchantment has Power over these,
renowned be the great Name of the Lord now and for ever.

How comfortable, how easy and pleasant are even all the Book, and Testimonies,
and Exhortations, that are given forth in the Spirit, Love and Life of Christ!
yea, the very Company and Conversation of such who are preserved in the Life,
becomes a sweet Savor of Divine Life to the Living; there is Edification,
Comfort and Consolation, a strengthening and building up one of another in the
most holy and precious Faith, so that I find the truly quickened Soul takes
great Delight to resort to, and as much as may be, converse with the awakened
and truly quickened Souls who take up the Cross of Christ daily, and follow him
in the Way of Self-denial, although it be a Way that is much spoken against, by
such who know not the Nature and Discipline of the holy Cross, and despise such
who are true Followers of Christ. To feel this essential Virtue, Seed or Leaven
of the Kingdom, or Salt of the Covenant (Christ) to work so effectually to the
restoring of the Powers and Faculties of the Soul, into the first Rectitude and
Purity, that all the Malignity may be thoroughly purged out, with all the Dross
or Tin, which defiles the Man; and makes him unfit for the Kingdom and for the
Service of God, is a great Work. Neither is the Vessel preserved clean, (when
it is in degree cleansed) but through great Care, Watchfulness and Diligence in
attending upon the Lord with great Devotedness, and Resignation to his Mind and
Will in all Things: Experience has taught us, as well as what we read in the
holy Scriptures, that there are many Combats to go through for such as are
engaged in this Warfare, before the abovesaid State, viz. Deliverance from Sin
and Satan, and a Sabbatical or peaceful Rest in Christ can be obtained to the
Soul.

Come thou that love the Light, and bring thy Deeds to the Light; and
believe in the Light, and least thy Body full of Light, by keeping thine Eye
single to God, and in and to all Things that may tend to his Glory and thy
Duty, thou will become a Child of the Light, and receive the whole Armor of
Light; this is that which will arm thee on the right Hand and on the left: Put
off thy own Righteousness, which it may be thy Breast has been too much
possessed with, and put on Christ's Righteousness as a Breast Plate, for it
much imboldens in imminent Dangers, and also at approaching Death; wait upon
him that has Power, that thy Feet may be shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace; so that as the Gospel-Power, and Gospel Ministry, all tend to
gather into the Ways of the Gospel and of Virtue, thou may not fail to be a
Preacher of Righteousness in thy Walking, and in thy whole Conversation; for
this is one of the good Ends for which the Gospel-Power has reached and
visited thy Soul, viz. to purge it and make it clean; and take care to have
upon thy Head the Helmet of Salvation, which will be a Strength and as a Crown
to thee, not only in thy many Encounters, but more especially in thy last
Encounter with Death; and that thou may have Faith as a Shield to put on,
that thou may overcome the World and have Victory; and above all things, take
to thyself the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, that through this
excellent Armor of Proof, thou may be able to quench all the fiery Darts and
Temptations of the Devil.

If thou art a Soldier of Christ, this is thy Armor; these are thy
Accoutrements which fit thee for thy Vocation, as a Follower of the Lamb
through many Encounters with thy Enemies, which Armor will give thee the
Victory, and bring thee through many Tribulations which is the Way to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Now leaving the Eastern Parts of New England, and these fine tender People on
Nantucket Island, with fervent Supplications and Prayers to the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, that he would prosper his blessed Work of Conversion which he had
begun amongst them, and in all such upon the Face of the whole Earth, in the
next Place I came to Lynn, to Samuel Collings, where I had not been long before
I met with an unusual Exercise, which I had expected for some Time would fall
upon me, viz.

Having heard of George Keith's Intention of being at Lynn Monthly Meeting the
next Day, (this Lynn, as near as I remember, lies between Salem in the East
Part and Boston) the Evening coming on, as I was writing to some Friends in old
England, one came in haste to desire me to come down, for George Keith was come
to the Door, and a great Number of People and a Priest with him, and was
railing against Friends exceedingly. I said, Inasmuch as I understand this
Lynn's Meeting is, although large, mostly a newly convinced People, I advise
you to be swift to hear, but slow to speak, for George Keith has a Life in
Argument; and let us as a People seek unto, and cry mightily to the Lord, to
look down upon us, and help us for his Name's sake, for our Preservation, that
none may be hurt.

The Country was much alarmed; for, as Friends said, George Keith had given
Notice two Weeks beforehand, that he intended to be at this Monthly Meeting,
and the People were in great Expectation to hear the Quakers run down, for
George Keith had boasted much of what he would prove against Friends. So after
some Pause, Retirment and fervent Seeking to the Lord for Direction and Counsel
in this important Affair, I went to the Rails, and leaned my Arms on them near
George Keith's Horse's Head, as he sat on his Back, and many People were with
him; but the few Friends who were come stood with me in the Yard. My fervent
Prayers were to the Lord, that it he gave me any thing to speak to George, it
might go forth in that Power and Wisdom which was able to wound that wicked
Spirit in which he appeared, and boasted over Friends after the following
Manner, crying, Is here a Man that is a Scholar? Is here a Man that understands
the Languages amongst you? If so I will dispute with him. I told him, It was
probable that the English Tongue was most understood and used amongst that
People, and therefore I thought it was the best to keep to it. He went on and
said, that he was come in the Queen's Name to gather the Quakers from
Quakerism, to the Mother Church, the good old Church of England, and that he
intended to exhibit in our Meeting on the Morrow these Charges following
against us, which, he said, he could prove we were guilty of, out of our
Friends Books, viz. Errors, Heresies, damnable Doctrines and Blasphemies: Look
said he, to answer for yourselves* for if you do not, the Auditory will
conclude, that what I exhibit against you is true.

I was roused up in my Spirit in a holy Zeal against his wicked Insults and
great Threatenings, and said to him, That it was the Fruit of Malice and Envy,
and that he was to us but as an heathen Man and Publican; (but more of this
anon.) Then he began to cast what Slurs and Odiums he could upon Friends, with
such bitter Invectives as his Malice could invent. I stood with an attentive
Ear and a watchful Mind; for as I stood leaning upon the Rails, with no small
Concern upon my Mind, I felt the Lord's Power arise, and by it my Strength was
renewed in the inner Man, and Faith, Wisdom and Courage with it, so that the
Fear of Man, with all his Parts and Learning, was taken from me; and in this
State George Keith appeared to me but as a little Child, or as nothing:
Renowned be the most excellent Name of the Lord, now and for ever. But this
great Champion ( Goliath like, at least in his Mind) I supposed feared not any
there; he overlooked us all, and in the Pride of his Heart disdained us; but
the Lord of Heaven and Earth looked down upon us in a very acceptable Time, and
helped us for his Name's sake, and covered our Heads in the Day of Battle:
Glorified be his great Name for ever.

I have sometimes thought to omit some Part of this Account concerning George
Keith, but I remember it opened very clearly in my Mind then, and I said to
him, That the Hand of the Lord was against him, and that he would pour forth
Contempt upon him, for his Disobedience and Wickedness.

But to return to his Reflections; he said, the Quakers pretend to be against
all Ceremonies, but he could prove that they used many Ceremonies, as taking
one another by the Hand, and Men saluting one another, and Women doing so to
one another, and, he said, that Women did salute Men; yea, they had done it to
him; as it was generally understood by those who heard him, which I thought not
worthy my Notice, (but more of this anon.) He went on and said, the Quakers
pretended, to be against all Persecution but they were not clear, for the
Quakers in Pennsylvania and the Jerseys had persecuted him, and would have
hanged him, but that there was some Alteration in the Government.

Then came out one of my Arrows which cut and wounded him deep: I said, George,
that is not true. Upon that the Priest drew near and appeared very brisk, and
said, I had as good as charged Mr. Keith (as he called him) with a Lie. I
replied, Give me Time, and I will prove that which George said, was not true,
and then thou and he may sake your Advantage to rescue him from that Epithet of
a Liar if you can. The Priest said, I knew not Mr. Keith: I replied, If he knew
him as well as I did, he would be ashamed to be there as an Abettor of him. The
Priest got away, and troubled me no more in all the Engagements that George and
I had afterward (although the said Priest was with him.) Then I demanded of
George, What Way our Friends proceeded against him, and what Measures they
took, as he would insinuate, to bring him to the Gallows? But I perceived Fear
began to surprise the Hyprocrite, and he thinking by my Boldness I was an
Inhabitant in those Parts, and knew his Abuse to Friends in these Provinces,
and their peaceable Behavior toward him, was willing to let the Matter drop,
and demanded my Name, which was told him. I then asked, How he could have a
Face to urge such a notorious Untruth in the View of that People who were much
Stranger's to, and ignorant of the Troubles and Differences, chiefly created by
him, among Friends in those Parts?

This Meeting (as before mentioned) being generally newly convinced of the
Truth, therefore I urged to have him come to the Particulars of Friends
Proceedings against him, that even for very Shame, among those Strangers he
would set forth as far as he could in Truth, the Steps Friends had taken in
persecuting him, as he pretended; but he would not meddle in the least with it.
Then I showed him, and the People, the Falsity of his Charge, and the
Wickedness of his Spirit, and the Peaceableness of Friends Behavior toward
him, and what great Affronts and Provocations they had put up with at his Hand,
as I had it from those who were Eye and Ear Witnesses of it: For, as I showed
George Keith, I had searched into the Bottom of these Matters, and heard that
when he stood before Governors and Assembly Men in their Courts of Judicature,
when they were met about the Affairs of the three Provinces, he has tore open
his Buttons and told them, His Back tickled for a Whipping, and could they not
cut him into Collops, and fry, and eat them with Salt: And that he scorned they
should wipe his Shoes: All which, with much more, I told him I could prove
against him. And when he saw he could not provoke Friends to give him some
condign Punishment, which I thought, as I said to him, none but Friends would
have spared, especially, when his, Back tickled so much for a Whipping; but
they like Men of Peace and Religion overlooked it all, and he like a Man full
of Malice, rather than want something to slur and blacken Friends with, writ a
Letter I know not where, but dated it from Bridlington Prison in West-Jersey.
It must have been dated on the outside of the Prison, the Doors being locked,
so that he could not get into it; yet this went current far off, that George
Keith was in Prison; consequently by Friends Procurement, they being chief at
the Helm of Government in those three Provinces.

I asked, What he had to say to all this, for it was all provable? He did not
object one Word against what I had said, but vainly hoping for better Success
relating to his Undertaking in old England, finding me (as he might suppose)
(so well versed in the American Affairs, hoped (no doubt) that I had been more
ignorant of the Affairs in Britain: But poor Man, he sped as ill there also;
for he boastingly said, Since it pleased God to open his Eyes to see into the
worst of the Quakers Errors; although, he said, Charity did oblige him to
construe every thing at the best whilst in Fellowship with them, but since they
were so opened, as he said, he had been instrumental to bring from Quakerism,
to the good old Mother Church in old England five hundred People. I replied,
that is not true: If he rightly considered what he had done in old England, he
had little cause to boast; for, I said, I thought about as many Persons as he
spoke of Hundreds, would make up the Number there; and if there was Occasion, I
could name all or most of them: And withal told him, that some of those few,
whilst among us, were grown to be neither honorable nor comfortable to us. I
urged George, if he could, to name or make appear more in Number than I had
mentioned, that he had so gathered, as he had falsely said. This was a very
great Stroke upon him, and put him to a Stand.

He then began to ask of my Country, and from whence I came? With the Account
of which I humoured him; yet withal put him in mind of his great Brag, and
importuned him to make something appear toward that great Matter he had done
in old England, even for very shame; for I was ashamed for him, that a Man of
his Learning, Parts and Pretensions, should so expose himself; but he went no
farther about it. Then I showed to the People what Sort of a Man he was, (as
they themselves could not but see, who were impartial) and that he was not
worthy of our Notice; for he cared not what he said, so that he could but
calumniate and abuse us.

By this Time he appeared somewhat glutted with the sharp Sword and keen Arrow
the Lord gave me, which cut and wounded deep, so that from this Time I did not
find in our after Encounters, he appeared at any time so bold and desperately
hardy, but rather expressed himself, although very wickedly, yet in a softer
Tone. He was now for being gone, threatening us with what he would do on the
Morrow; but I reminded him, that he was to us an heathen Man or a Publican, and
that what he exhibited against us, being but the Fruits of Wrath and Envy, as
such we slighted and trod it under our Feet as Dirt, and rather desired his
Absence than his Company: So away he went, only telling us, he would be with us
in the Morning. We understood by it, that he intended to be with us at the
Friend's House, the Meeting House being about a Quarter of a Mile from our
Lodgings.

The Evening coming on, the neighboring Presbyterian Women fell hard upon our
Women Friends about their saluting Men, which George Keith had charged upon
them, as was generally understood in the Plural, and this appeared as a
Con^^^^^ation, as they alleged, because what charged, I made no Reply to it,
as I had done to all or most other Charges, and had overthrown Mr. Keith, as
they said, so that he was not able to stand before me: They ought to have said
before the Lord the first Place: But how the Women might clear themselves of
that Reflection was the present Business: I said, I thought it would be the
best, at a suitable Time in the Morning when George Keith was come, that by
handsomely bringing the Matter over him, they might learn what Women they were
who saluted him, and so clear themselves from the Reflection cast upon them;
for, I said, perhaps he will limit it to some of his near Kindred (as Wife,
Mother, Sister, Daughter) which may serve for a Salvo in this present Case; for
I did not know of any such general Practice in any Place where I had been, and
I had visited most of the Meetings in England, Scotland, and Wales. So in the
Morning when George, with two Priests, and many People were come, with some
Friends, who filled the House, a Woman Friend stood up and brought the Matter
discreetly over George Keith. But when she put the Question in the Plural,
(Women) he shifted the Term and said, he did not say Women. I desired the
Friend to call to her Neighbors who heard what George Keith had said the last
Evening, and were now present, how they understood the Word? One like a wise
and just Man said. He would do Justice to every Man; and he understood that
George said Women; and many said to the same Purpose, but none to the Contrary.
The Friends asked me, How I understood the Wor^^ As being a North Countryman,
I might know better be North or Scotch Dialect then they. I replied They had a
broad way of expressing the Word Woman, rather sounding it like the plural, but
I understood it Women, as the above mentioned discreet Man had said.

The next Question she put to him was, What Woman? He answered, A good old
motherly Woman that was gone to Heaven many Years ago. Then she asked, What
Country Woman? He replied, A Scotch Woman. The Friend said, It was very well
that he had cleared all the World of that Fault (if it might be so termed) but
Scotland, and the Woman dead many Years ago. The Women Friends were greatly
satisfied, and glad they were so finely discharged of that which some counted a
soul Reflection, and especially before their zealous Neighbors the
Presbyterians, who (as the Friends said) probably might have twitted them with
it, whether the Matter was true or false, if it had not been cleared up; but,
as I said to George, it was a Reflection for Reflection's Sake: For I was
willing to set every thing that was wrong (as far as I was capable) in its
proper Light, that Friends and others, of all Persuasions and Qualities who
were present, might see Things as they really were, and not be deceived; and I
had much Satisfaction in so doing. And inasmuch as I was engaged in the Defense
of the Truth, it appeared the most clear to me, to load him with his own Lies,
Mistakes and Wickedness, and to do what we did, as much as in us lay, in the
Lord's mighty Power (...) for he appeared to me, like to the Angels who kept
not their first State.

Matters being thus far gone through, and the Meeting-time drawing on, I was in
some Concern of Mind, left any should be hurt by either hearing or answering
George Keith, he having a great Propensity to jangling; it therefore opened in
my Mind to ask him a Question, withal reminding him, that he was but to us as
an heathen Man or a Publican, yet he might, if he pleased answer me the
Question, which was, Whether he was always found in the fundamental Doctrines
of Christianity, yea or nay? Upon which he sat a considerable Time in Silence,
of which I was truly g^^^^ my Spirit being much bowed under the Apprehension I
had, of the weighty Exercise that was likely to attend the approaching Meeting.
But before we parted, George stood up, and taking his Staff in his Hand by the
Middle, said, While he was a Quaker, he thought, as Paul thought, that he had
the Spirit of God, and when he had the Spirit of God, then he wrote found
Things, but when he had it not, then he wrote unsound Things. I asked, Whether
these unsound Things he wrote were in Fundamentals, yea, or nay? If not in
Fundamentals, then my Question remained firm and untouched. He would have gone
from the Matter, but I reminded him of it again, as I supposed he foresaw that
he could not answer it, but by bringing a Stroke upon himself, for if he had
owned his being unsound, I had it under his own Hand, in a Book written after
he left Friends, that he was always sound etc. And if he had said, he was
always sound in the Fundamentals, as before, then I intended to have asked, why
he left us? For he advocated the same orthodox Principles which we believed and
taught; but we ended quietly, and prepared to go to the great Meeting, for by
this time many Friends and People were come, and coming from every Quarter, to
see and hear how Matters would go between the poor Quakers, and this great
Champion in his Heart George Keith, for I thought he most resembled the great
Goliath of Gath, who defied the Armies of the living God, of any I had ever yet
seen in all my Travels, in a religious respect.

Now to the Meeting we went; George Keith, with two Priests, and a great many
People gathered together of several Professions and Qualities into one Body,
and Friends and some friendly People into another Body; and as we came near to
the Meeting House, I stood still, and took a View of the People, and it
appeared to m^ as if two Armies were going to engage in Battle: There appeared
with George Keith Men of considerable Estates, Parts, and Learning, and we
appeared like poor Shrubs; and, under a Sense of our present State, I had like
to have been dismayed, and my Faith had even like to have failed me, but I
cried mightily to the God and Fountain of all our tender Mercies, that he would
look down upon us, and help us in this Time of great Exercise, which was not
hid from him, but his penetrating Eye saw, and his watchful Providence attended
us, blessed be his Name forever. I continued my fervent Prayers and
Intercessions to the Lord of Hosts, that he would arise for his great Name's
sake, and work for us that Day, that the Enemies of Truth might not triumph or
vaunt over us, and that none of these tender Plants, which he had brought to
the saving Knowledge of the Truth, might be hurt.

I had no sooner thus heartily sought to the Lord, but I felt renewed Strength
come upon me, and the Fear of Man was taken away from me, and I saw evidently
that Truth would have the Victory that Day, and my Faith and Confidence was
greatly strengthened in the Lord. These Breathings forth of my Spirit to the
Lord were in secret, without Words to be heard by Men, but the Lord hears and
knows the Distress and Language of the Spirit.

Being thus encouraged in myself, it arose in my Heart to speak to Friends
before we went into the Meeting House, and I advised them to be swift to hear
and slow to speak, and that what was spoken might be in the Lord's Power, for
that wounds George the most, and slays that wicked and ranting Spirit in him,
more than all the Wisdom of Words without it; and let us maintain our Testimony
of Denial against him, and endeavor to get together into one Body, that we may
be an Help and Strength one to another; and let every one who knows the Lord,
cry mightily unto him, that his living Power and Presence may be amongst us,
and I believed the Lord would not suffer any to be hurt. So the Meeting
gathered, and immediately after, George stood up to tell us (as before) that be
was come in the Queen's Name to gather Quakers from Quakerism, to the good old
Mother Church, the Church of England (as he called it) and that be could prove
out of our own Books, that we held Errors, Herefies, damnable Doctrines and
Blasphemies; with a Threat to look to ourselves to answer, or else the Auditory
would conclude, that what he exhibited against us was true. I expected some of
the elder Friends would say something to him, but none did; and I having a deep
Concern upon my Mind, lest Truth, or the Friends of Truth, should suffer through
our Mismanagement, and such as waited for Occasion, might have an Occasion
administered by us against ourselves; I say, under this Concern of Mind I stood
up, and signified to the People what manner of Man George Keith was;
notwithstanding he had walked many Years amongst us, yet toward the latter End
of his so walking with us, he grew very troublesome, by reason of a contentious
Spirit which did possess him: and after much Labor and excercising of
Patience, and extending of Love toward him, in order to recover and reclaim
him, all that Labor of Love and much Forbearance would not avail, but he still
persisted in the Work of Contention and Disturbance: Then he was publicly
disowned, and testified against by us, as a Person with whom we had no Unity or
Fellowship: And being thus cast out, he became to us (agreeable to the Sayings
of Jesus Christ) as an Heathen Man or a Publican; and being thus disjointed, to
expose us, what lay in his Power, to all Sorts of People, he chose printing
against us; wherein he has much abused us, in leaving out many times the
explanatary Parts of Sentences, and coining Words to make the Meaning appear
different from what was designed and indeed, from what was most fair and
genuine: Therefore, some of our Friends found themselves concerned to follow
him in Print, for the clearing us from what he, through Envy, would have
willingly fastened upon us, and to return his Self-contradictions,
Misinterpretations, and Misapplications of our Writings upon himself, and to
clear our own Innocence, and manifest the Perverseness and Wickedness of his
Spirit: Neither do we, as a People, hold ourselves to be under any Obligation
to follow him into foreign Parts of the World, to answer his Arraignments and
Charges, not being conscious to ourselves that we hold any thing contrary to
sound and orthodox Doctrine; and also knowing that what he exhibits against us,
is the Fruit of Envy and Malice, as such we reject it, and trample it under our
Feet; and were it not for your Sakes, who are Strangers to these Things, we
should take no further Notice of George Keith than to slight and reject him as
a Man that cares not what he says, nor is he worthy of our Notice.

Then pausing a little, George being quiet, a Friend stood up with a short, but
living Testimony, and then my Companion; all this in much Weight and with good
Demonstration. After them it pleased the Lord to open my Mouth, I think in as
much Strength, Clearness and Demonstration as ever, beginning with the
following Words, In that Way you call Heresy do we Worship the God of our
Fathers, believing all Things that are written concerning Jesus Christ, both as
to his Godhead and Manhood; giving a summary Account of his Birth, working of
Miracles, some of his Doctrine, Sufferings and Death, Ascension and
Glorification, the Coming of the Spirit of Truth, or Comforter, to lead all
those who receive, believe, and obey it, into all Truth: Having great Openings
concerning the Law and Prophets, and the Beginning, Service and End of the
Ministration of John the Baptist. The People appeared very much down and
attentive, for the Lord's heavenly baptizing Power was amongst us that Day: It
was thought, many were there who had not been at any of our Meetings of Worship
before, and the Presence of the Priests there, opened a Door for all the rest.

I being clear, lest them unto the Grace of God, and unto their free Teacher
Christ, whose heavenly Power in the Appearance of his Spirit, the last and
lasting Dispensation, was exalted that Day above all the shadowy and typical
Things that ever had been in the World; A good Meeting it was, and Friends were
mutually comforted and edified in the internal Presence of the Lord.

The Priest of this Place, whose Name was Sheppard, before my Mouth was opened
in Testimony, made Preparation to write, and when I began to speak, he had his
Hat upon his Knee, and his Paper upon its Crown, and Pen and Ink in his Hands,
and made many Motions to write, but writ nothing; as he began so he ended,
without writing at all. And as Friends entered the Meeting House in the Lord's
Power, even that Power which cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon, which had been
at work, kept down in a good degree the wrong Spirit in George, for he appeared
much down: But this busy Priest called to him several Times to make his Reply
to what I had spoke. After some Time I said to the Priest, in Behalf of the
Meeting, that he might have Liberty to make Reply. He proposed to have another
Day appointed for a Dispute to which I said, if he did make a voluntary
Challenge, which he should not say we put him upon, we, or some of us (meaning
Friends) if a Day and Place were agreed upon, should find it our Concern to
answer him as well as we could. He said, he would have Mr. Keith to be with
him: I told him, if he should, and med^led in the Dispute, if I was there, I
should reject him for Reasons before assigned. When the Priest had said this
and somewhat more, an Elder of the Presbyterian Congregation clapped him on the
Shoulder, and bid him sit down; so he was quiet, and then stood up George
Keith, and owned he had been refreshed amongst us that Day, and had heard a
great many sound Truths, with some Errors, but that it was not the common
Doctrine which the Quakers preached.

I then stood up and said, I had something to say to obviate what George Keith
would insinuate; for his Drift was to infuse an Opinion into them, that the
Quakers did not commonly preach up Faith in the Manhood of Christ, as I had
done that Day: I appealed to the Auditory, whether they thought there was a
Necessity frequently to press a Matter so universally received amongst
Christians, as Faith in the Manhood of Christ was? Yet we, as a People, had so
often and clearly demonstrated our Faith in the Manhood of Christ, both in our
Testimonies and Writings, as might satisfy any unbiased Person, or such who
were not prejudiced against us; and we know not of any People who believe more
scripturally in the Manhood of Christ than we do: But inasmuch as the Grace,
Light and holy Spirit, is highly concerned in the Work of Man's Salvation, as
well as what Christ did for us without us, and this being yet much a Mystery to
many called Christians, it pleases God to open, in the Course of our Ministry,
into the Meaning and Mystery thereof, and to press the latter more than the
former. To which George made no Reply, but began to exhibit his Charges against
us (as mentioned before) and said, he could prove them out of our Friends
Books, naming George Fox, and Edward Borough, etc. He had in a Paper a great
many Quotations out of Friends Books, and a young Man with him had many Books
in a Bag, out of which, he said, he would prove the Charges he was about to
exhibit against us.

He was now crowded up into the Gallery between me and the Rail, with a Paper
in his Hand; and I standing over him, and being taller, could see his
Quotations and his Paraphrases upon them, on which I told him loudly that all
the Meeting might hear, That he offered Violence to that Sense and
Understanding which God had given him, and he knew in his Conscience, we were
not that People, neither were our Friends Writings either damnable or
blasphemous, as be through Envy endeavored to make the World believe and that
be would not have Peace in so doing, but Trouble from the Lord in his
Conscience. I spoke in the Lord's dreadful Power, and George trembled so much
as I seldom ever saw any Man do: I pitied him in my Heart, yet, as Moses said
once concerning Israel, I felt the Wrath of the Lord go forth against him:
George said, Do not judge me; I replied the Lord judges, and all who are truly
one in Spirit with the Lord, cannot but judge thee. So he gave over, and it
appearing a suitable Time to break up the Meeting, Friends parted in great
Love, Tenderness, and Brokenness of Heart; for the Lord's mighty Power had been
in and over the Meeting from the Beginning to the End thereof, glorified and
renowned be his most excellent Name, now and for ever, for his Mercies are many
to those that love and fear him who is the Fullness of all Good.

This Meeting was not only for Worship, but also for Business, as I said to the
People at our parting; it was Friends Monthly Meeting, in which their Poor,
Fatherless, and Widows were taken Care of, and such other Things as concern
them as a People. Two Friends were desired to stay, to hear what George had to
say to them who remained, which said ^wo Friends gave an Account to us
afterward, that George said to the People after we were gone, that the Quakers
had lest none to dispute with him but on Ass and a Fool; when I heard it, I
said, could you not have replied, An Ass was once mode sufficient to reprove
the Madness of the Prophet?

George called to see me the next Day, and said You had the Advantage over me
Yesterday, for you persuaded me to be quiet until you had done, and then you
would not stay to hear me; neither indeed were we under any Obligation so to
do: I told him, I hoped that Truth would always have the Advantage over those
who opposed it; and so we parted, but met again upon Rhode Island, the Governor
of which Place, who was a friendly Man, having heard of my Intention of coming
thither, ordered the Deputy Governor, when I came, to have me to him, which he
did; and when he saw me at the Door, and after Enquiry heard my Name, he took
me by the Hand and led me like a Brother, or rather more like a tender Father,
into a Room, setting me down by him, and then began to say, I have heard much
of you, and I desired to see you long, and am glad you are here. I finding him
near me in Spirit, was very open in my Mind to him, and answered him with much
Clearness and Satisfaction. I remember he asked, Whether I thought the Sourness
in the Minds of the Presbyterians against us, was not rather abated? I told
him, I did believe it was; and if our Friends did but observe to walk wisely,
and live up to what they professed, they would overcome it all. He said, that
was the way, and there was not another comparable to it; and, as he said, and I
believe it was so, he bad no other view in sending for me, but to manifest his
Respects to me, and to do me any Service that lay in his Power: I told him, I
was sensible of his Love, and wished I could be capable of retaliating that
which in Gratitude his Kindness to me called for: He said, he desired no more
than when I came that way I would visit him, if be was living. I told him, I
intended so to do, if ever it was my Lot to come there again. I then desired he
would be at the Meeting next Day, George Keith proposing to be there, in all
likelihood it would be very large; which he promised he would, and accordingly
came.

George made little Disturbance in the beginning of the Meeting, but commanded
the Governor to quiet the Quakers: A priest said, Mr. Keith, you ought not to
command the Governor, but entreat his; well then, he entreated the Governor to
quiet the Quakers that he might be heard; whereupon the Governor, like a Man of
Justice and Wisdom, stood up and said, It was not in his Power to quiet the
Quakers; inasmuch as the House is theirs, and they have appointed the Meeting,
it is but reasonable they should have their Liberty, and if they be willing,
when they have done, you have your Liberty to say what you have to say to these
who will stay to hear you: So the Governor being next me, leaned his Hand, upon
me, and went away in a sober Manner. George was quiet, and we had a good
Meeting, and so parted.

After most of the Friends were gone, a Friend and I went to the Meeting House
Door, to hear what George said; he held his Bible in his Hand, and said it was
promised, that the Gospel should be preached unto every Creature under Heaven;
but if it was truly translated, it would be in every Creature, ( not in every
Creature as Horse, Cow, etc. but in every rational Creature of Mankind:) And
then their Meeting broke up in Confusion.

My next Remove was to Long Island, where I met with Thomas Story, and John
R^dman; John desired Thomas and me to be assistant to him in preparing a
Writing against George Keith, when he came to Flushing Meeting upon the
aforesaid Island, which Writing was to this Effect, viz.

Whereas Colonel West, an Inhabitant in these Parts, who died and made Males
Forster a Trustee, gave by Will a considerable Sum of Money to poor Friends of
London, which Money was ordered by the Testator to be put into the Hands of
some faithful Friends or the aforesaid City of London, to distribute as above.
A true Copy of which Will we obtained and at the Meeting made it fairly appear
to George Keith's Face, that he had wronged the Poor in receiving Fifty Pounds
of the aforesaid Money of Miles Forster, as appeared under Miles's own Hand;
which George did not deny when he was charged with it in the Meeting, as
knowingly to have robbed the Poor; it being made fairly appear, that George
Keith had no Right to meddle with the Money, neither as a faithful Friend, nor
yet as a poor Friend of London, because he was then in America; and what made
him more incapable of claiming any Part of it, was his being got into the
Spirit of Strife and Enmity against Friends, and therefore, before they could
hear his Charges, he ought to have first laid down the Money, or given such
Security as Friends approved of; neither of which he was capable of doing: So
he was slighted by all or most of the People, as well as by Friends, and this
blocked up his Way to much that we had little or no Trouble with him in that
Part of the World: But the Lord wrought for his Name's Sake, and the
Preservation of his tender People, Praises and Honor be given to his great
Name, now and for ever. Thus ended this Engagement betwixt a poor Servant or
Christ, and a grand Apostate, who appeared to fight against Reason, Sense and
Conscience. Think not, my Friends, the Account too long, for it has seemed to
me, for some time, a Debt due to my Brethren, and a piece of Justice to the
Memory of George Keith, for his Wickedness, Revolting, and sad Apostasy. Few
there are who can believe how great the Power of Darkness and Wickedness of
that Mind and Spirit was, which possessed and breathed through him; so great it
was, that even the considerate and sober People said, they did not think that
George Keith had been so wicked a Man as they now found he was upon Trial.
Courteous Friend and Reader, hold fast that which thou have received, that none
may take thy Crown, for it is said up in Store for the Righteous only, and such
who hold out to the End, in the same pure Righteousness which is of Christ
wrought and continued in Man, by the Operation and Indwelling of his holy
Spirit, as Man abides in Subjection and Obedience to the Leadings and Dictates
thereof.

I told George, that I was much ashamed of his complimenting Great People; for
I observed he sometimes said thee and thou, and sometimes you, and Sir;
sometimes put his Hat off, and sometimes kept it on: I told him, before I would
be so unhandy, if I intended to be ceremonious, I would have gone to School a
while, before I would shame myself as he had done. If I have not wrote the very
Words, in all my Accounts in the preceding Pages, I have the Substance: And
for a Conclusion I had to say to George Keith, The Hand of the Lord was against
him, and would follow him, unless be repented.

This Account carries in it an Admonition to us, und to Friends in future Ages,
into whose Hands it my come, to beware of letting in the Spirit of Envy,
Prejudice, and Pride of Heart, which I clearly saw was that which, with too
much leaning to his natural Abilities and Learning, was his Overthrow, he not
keeping to the Lord's holy Spirit, the Life and Strength of his faithful
People, and the Key of true Knowledge, the good Remembrancer, and Leader into
all Truth, which the Lord sees meet in his Wisdom to open and lead us into;
without the Help of which Anointing and holy Spirit, we are apt to be cold and
forgetful in our Duties toward God, and also in our Love and Duties one to
another; but as the Measure of this Spirit is faithfully kept to, and improved,
we grow more and more fruitful in every good Work and Word, to the Glory of God
and Comfort of our Souls, and, as the Salt of the Earth, help to season those
who are not seasoned.

When I was in the Yearly Meeting upon Rhode Island, there was a Query
concerning what Friends might do, in case there should be a Lay or Tax laid
upon the Inhabitants for building some Fortifications, and to provide Men and
Arms for the Security of the Island? Such a Thing being then in Agitation, he,
who was one of the chief Friends concerned in Church Affairs, would have me
give an Account what we did in the like Case in England; for, he said, they in
that Country looked upon themselves but as the Daughter, and Friends here in
Old England as their Mother and they were willing to act consistent with us as
far as they could, and would know how we did there in that Matter, whether we
could pay to that Tax which was for carrying on a vigorous War against France?
I was unwilling to meddle with it, as I said; but the Meeting waited a
considerable time for my Answer (as one told me) and was not willing to go
forward without it; at last, when I could not well do otherwise, I signified to
that large Meeting, That I had heard the Matter debated both in superior and
inferior Meetings and privately, and the most general Result was this; Friends
did not see an effectual Door opened to avoid the Thing, that Tax being mixed
with the other Taxes; although many Friends are not so easy as they could
desire: Neither have we any further Sway in the Government, than only giving
our Voices for such as are concerned therein; therefore, as Things appear to
me, there is a great Disparity between our Circumstances and yours here; for
you have a great Interest here, and a great Share in the Government, and
perhaps may put such a Thing by in voting, considering the Body of Friends, and
such as are friendly, whom you have an Interest in; therefore look not for Help
from the Mother, wherein she is not capable of helping herself, and thereby
neglect your own Business, but mind our own Way in the Truth, and look not out.
Friends appeared well satisfied with these Distinctions, and it gave me some
Ease, in that I had not hurt any.

During my Stay in one of the Jerseys, a great Weight, more than usual, seized
upon my Spirit, as I sat in a Meeting, under a Sense of the same, my Cries
ascended unto the Lord, the Fountain of all tender Mercies, that he would
please to show me what was the Cause of that great Power of Darkness which did
so oppress my Spirit; and it pleased the Lord to show me, that a Man there had
been guilty of some gross Wickedness; and when it appeared clear to me, to be
required of me to express it publicly, it became a very great Exercise to me,
and some Reasonings I had, before I gave up to make it public to that large
Meeting of Friends and other People; I labored under it till toward the
Conclusion of the Meeting, but finding my Peace concerned very nearly in the
Matter, I stood up in the Gallery and said, Under a Sense of some gross
Wickedness committed by some Person not far from me, has my Spirit been borne
down; which Wickedness will in a short Time break forth to the Dishonor of
Truth, and Grief of Friends. A great Man who sat in the Gallery by me, started
up and seated himself upon the Rail of the Gallery, with his Eyes fixed on me,
and I fastened, in the Lord's Dread, my Eyes on him, and said, We have a common
Maxim in old England, Touch a gail'd Horse's Back, and he will kick, and I am
of the Opinion, he that kicks is not clear. He got down as fast as he could out
of my way, for he not only prevented me from the View of the Meeting by setting
there, but his Uncleanness stood much in the way of my Service.

After the Meeting was over, several worthy Friends expressed to me the great
Concern they were under, lest he should either by Money, or by Subtilty,
conceal the Sin and Wickedness, if such was committed; for I found there was a
great Fear and Jealousy in the Minds of Friends, that something was wrong with
the Man, but I was 'till then altogether a Stranger to their Thoughts, and to
the State of the Man; yet I advised that Friends should have a watchful Eye
over him and his Family, for I told Friends, my Spirit was easy in what I had
delivered, and I believed the Evil would not be concealed. So in my Return, his
Housekeeper had brought forth a Child, and charged him with being the Father
of it, which he denied not: Friends then asked me, what they should do in the
Case? I said, Let the Judgment of Truth go forth against all manifest
Wickedness, without respect of Persons, that the ever blessed Truth, and such
as live in it, may be kept clear and in good Esteem before all Men as much as
may be.

Something of the like Exercise I met with in a Meeting in Pennsylvania,
repeating several times what Oppression my Spirit was under, because of some
yet hidden Wickedness, which in a short Time would be brought to light, to the
Blemish of the Truth, and great Trouble to Friends. That Very Evening, after
the Meeting, a Woman little thought on by Friends to be guilty of such a Crime,
went to a worthy Friend and told him, She was the Woman that had done that
great Wickedness I had so much complained of, and had borne such a great Load
because thereof; and, as the honest Friend said, she wept bitterly, even in the
very Anguish of her Soul. He came twelve Miles the next Day to Philadelphia to
acquaint me with the Matter, and ask my Advice, which I gave to this Effect; If
Friends find upon Enquiry, in the proper Season, that the Woman continues
heartily sorry, and truly penitent for what she has done, for Godly Sorrow
works Repentance, and if from such a hearty and penitent Sense (which is to
he felt beyond Words) she gave forth a Paper against her wicked Doings, not so
much to ingratiate herself into Favor, as for the clearing of Truth and
Friends, and for the Ease and Peace of her own Mind, and took the Blame and
Shame to herself, then Friends may pass it by; if not, Friends must set the
Judgment of Truth over manifest Wickedness, as before mentioned.

I went to visit a Meeting in that Part called North Wales, which had not been
long planted in that Place, where there was a fine tender People, but sew
understanding English, Rowland Ellis was my Interpreter; a good Meeting it was,
and Truth was over all: Some, by the Interpreter, expressed their great
Satisfaction in our Visit to that Meeting, which heretofore had not been
counted as Friends, but since that have been taken Notice of, and grown into
good Esteem with the Body of Friends.

I found it much my Work to be concerned in the Discipline of the Church which
was very low in many Places, yet I found there was a Willingness in many
Friends Minds to be helped in that needful Affair, for surely it is t good
Fence, or a Help to keep the Righteous in, and hurtful and wicked Things and
Doings out, if the same be rightly handled, and extended as it ought to be, in
the Love and Wisdom of God.

There was one Thing I had like to have omitted, which happened when I was in
Rhode Island, viz. one Rogers came thither to offer (as he said) his Gift in
the Yearly Meeting amongst Friends; but they appearing in a great Strait about
him, although he had writ in Behalf of Truth's Principles, and suffered
Imprisonment, and the taking away his Wise from him, and was not so much as
suffered to come to converse with his own Son, but under a Guard or Watch which
was set over him, to hear what passed betwixt them, as he told me and some
other Friends, which Friends said was true; yet, under the Consideration of the
Matter, and Clearness of the Man's Conversation, Friends remained in a Strait
what to do; and desired that I would take the Matter upon me, and reason the
Case with him, and try if I could persuade him to be easy, and not insist upon
any such Thing, as to promise to receive his Gift; for otherwise, he said, he
would go where it would be received. I showed him, that it was a Thing
impracticable amongst us, and in itself unreasonable, that we should be by any
Pre-engagement obliged to receive that which he might call a Gift, before we
heard it; if he believed he had a Gift, he might speak, and, as the Apostle
said, we might judge: For it was not impossible but he, who was a Scholar and a
wise Man, and had a strong Memory, might have gathered certain Passages out of
the Bible or other Books, with what other Interpretations he might have stored
up, and speak of, and call a Gift, which we could not receive as a real Gift of
the Ministry, which stands in the Spirit and in the Power, and if it be such,
it will make way for itself; if not, we cannot receive it. So he went away, and
troubled Friends no more that I heard of.

When I was at William Penn's Country House, called Pensbury, in Pennsylvania,
where I staid two or three Days, on one of which I was at a Meeting and a
Marriage, and much or the other Part of the Time I spent in seeing (to my
Satisfaction) William Penn and many of the Indians, (not the least of them) in
Council and Consultation concerning their former Covenants, now again revived
upon William Penn's going away for England, all which was done in much Calmness
of Temper and in an amicable way. To pass by several particulars, I may mention
the following; one was, they never first broke Covenant with any People; for,
as one of them said, and smote his Hand upon his Hand three times, that they
did not make them there in their Heads, but smiting his Hand three times on his
Breast, said they made them (i. e. their Covenants) there in their Hearts. And
again, when William Penn and they had ended the most weighty Parts for which
they held their Council, William Penn gave them Match Coats and some other
Things, with some Brandy or Rum, or both; which was advised by the Speaker for
the Indians, to be put into the Hand of one of their Cassacks or Kings, for he
knew the best how to order them; which being done, the said King used no
Compliments, neither did the People, nor the rest of their Kings; but as the
aforesaid King poured out his Drams, he only made a Motion with his Finger, or
sometimes with his Eye, to the Person which he intended to give the Dram to; so
they came quietly and in a solid manner, and took their Drams, and passed away
without either Nod or Bow, any further than (...) required them to stoop, who
were on their (...) him who sat on the Gro^^^ (...) or, as (...) Cl^^ce and
Manner is: And (...) served (and also heard the like by other^ that they did
not, nor I suppose never do speak, two at a time, not interfere in the least
one with another that way in all their Councils, as has been observed. Their
Eating and Drinking was in much Stillness and Quietness.

I much desire that all Christians (whether they may be such in Reality or
Profession only) may endeavor to imitate these People in those Things which
are so commendable, which may be a Means to prevent Loss of Time and expedite
Business; as much as may be endeavoring to prevent above one speaking at a
tune in Meetings of Conference and of Business.

When much of the Matters were gone through I put William Penn in mind to
enquire of the Interpreter, it he could find some Terms or Words that Wight be
intelligible to them, in a religious Sense by which he might reach the
Understandings of the Natives, and inculcate into their Minds a Sense of the
Principles of Truth, such is Christ's manifesting himself to the inward Senses
of the Soul, by his Light, Grace or holy Spirit, with the Manner of the
Operations and working therreof in the Hearts of the Children of Men, and how
it did reprove for Evil, and minister Peace and Comfort to the Soul in its
Obedience and Well-doing; or, as near as he could, come to the Substance of
this in their own Language. William Penn much pressed the Matter upon the
Interpreter to do his best, in any Terms, that might reach their Capacities,
and Answer the End intended: But the Interpreter would not, either by reason,
as he alleged, of Want of Terms, or his Unwillingness to meddle in religious
Matters, which I know not, but I rather think the latter was the main Reason
which obstructed him; therefore we found nothing was like to be done according
to our Desires in this Matter, as the Interpreter was but a dark Man, and, as
William Penn said, a wrong Man for our present Purpose.

William Penn said, he understood they owned a superior Power, and asked the
Interpreter, What their Notion was of God in their own Way? The Interpreter
showed, by making several Circles on the Ground with his Staff, till he reduced
the last into a small Circumference, and placed, as he said, by way of
Representation, the great Man (as they termed him) in the middle Circle, so
that he could see over all the other Circles, which included all the Earth. And
we querying, What they owned as to Eternity, or a future State? The Interpreter
said, they believed when such died as were guilty of Theft, These, Swearing,
Lying, Whoring, Murder, etc. they went into a very cold Country, where they had
neither good ^at Venison, nor Match Coats, which is what they use instead of
Clothes to cover them withal, being of one piece in the form of a Blanket or
Bed-covering: But those who died clear of the aforesaid Sins, go into a fine
warm Country, where they had go^d ^at Venison and good Match Coats, Things much
valued by these Natives. I thought, inasmuch as these poor Creatures had not
the Knowledge of God by the Scriptures, as we have who are called Christians,
but what Knowledge they had of the supreme Being must be by an inward
Sensation, or by contemplating upon the Works of God in the Creation, or
probably from some Tradition handed down from Father to Son, by which it
appears, they acknowledge a future State of Rewards and Punishments; the former
of which they express by Warmth, good Clothing and Food, and the latter by
Nakedness, giving Hunger and piercing Cold. I have often thought and said, when
I was amongst them, that generally my Spirit was very easy, and I did not feel
that Power of Darkness to oppress me, as I had done in many Places among the
People called Christians.

After William Penn and they had expressed their Satisfaction, both for
themselves and their People, in keeping all their former Articles unviolated,
and agreed that if any particular Differences did happen amongst any of their
People, they should not be an Occasion of fomenting or creating any War between
William Penn's People and the Indians, but Justice should be done in all such
Cases, that all Animosities: might be prevented on all Sides for ever; they
went out of the House into an open Place, not far from it, to perform their
Contico or Worship, which was done thus, First, they made a small Fire, and the
Men without the Women sat down about it in a Ring, and whatsoever Object they
severally fixed their Eyes on, I did not see them move them in all that Part of
their Worship, while they sang a very melodious Hymn, which affected and
tendered the Hearts of many who were Spectators: When they had thus done, they
began (as I suppose is their usual manner) to beat upon the Ground with little
Sticks, or make some Motion with something in their Hands, and pause a little,
till one of the elder Sort sets forth his Hymn, and that being followed by the
Company for a few Minutes, and then a Pause and then, the like was done by
another, and so by a third, and followed by the Company, as at the first, which
seemed exceedingly to affect them and others. Having done, they rose up and
danced a little about the Fire, and parted with some Shouting like a Triumph or
Rejoicing.

I leave Pensbury, but intend, before I leave the Indians, to say something
more concerning that People, which I met with near Caleb Pusy's House in
Pennsylvania, viz. I being walking in the Wood, espied several Wigwams or
Houses of the Indians, and drew toward them, but could not converse with them;
but looking over them in the Love of God. I found it to be my Wav^ as I
apprehended, to look for an Interpreter and go to them again Which I did; and
when I came to them, and signified that I was come from a far Country, with a
Message from the great Man above (as they call God) and my Message was to
endeavor to persuade them, that they should not be Drunkards, nor steal, nor
kill one another, nor fight, nor commit Adultery, nor put away their Wives,
especially for small Faults, which (as I understood) is usual with them to do
for if they did those Things, the great and good Man above would be angry with
them, and would not Prosper them, but bring Trouble on them, but if they more
careful to refrain these Evils (before mentioned) then would God love them, and
prosper them, and speak Peace to them, or very near these Words. And when the
Interpreter expressed these Things to them in their own Language, they wept,
and Tears ran down their naked Bodies, and they smote their Hands upon their
Breasts, and I perceived said something to the Interpreter; I asked what they
said? He told me they said, all that I had delivered to them was good, and
except the great Man had sent me, I could not have told them those Things. I
desired the Interpreter to ask them, how they knew what I had said to them was
good? they replied, and smote their Hands on their Breasts, the good Man here
(meaning in their Hearts) told them what I had said was all good. They
manifested much Love to me in their Way, and I believe the Love of God is to
them, and all People, in the Day of their Visitation.

Having left them, I came to a Friend's House in the lower Part of
Pennsylvania, who was in the Office at a Justice of Peace, and had been
convinced not long before by Thomas Story: When I came into the House, the
Man's Wife was very uneasy and called me a Deceiver, and wrung her Hands and
said, Woe is me, I am undone, my Husband is deceived; and what more Deceivers
come? Oh how she lamented. I was somewhat struck with the Passion the poor
Woman was in, however, I said little but sat down, and after some time it rose
in my Mind to ask her, In what her Husband was deceived, was he, since be came
amongst us, any worse Husband to her? if he was, it was a bad Sign; or was he a
worse Father to his Children? or, any worse Neighbor? or in any particular
Thing which she could name, changed from better to worse, since he was
convinced of the Truth? if not, she had no great Reason to complain: If he had
turned Drunkard, Whoremonger, Railer, Fighter, or Become a vicious Man, she
would have had Reason to complain; but she honestly owned, she had nothing to
charge him with. He sat by me and heard all our Discourse, but said nothing. I
told her, she had made a lamentable Outcry about her Husband's being deceived,
but had not convinced me of any Cause that she had received from her Husband
for her ^ore Complaint.

Being weary, having rid a great way that Day, I with my Companion Richard Orm
took leave of her Husband and went to our Rest, and saw him no more till the
next Day in the Evening, and when he came, I asked him, For what Reason he left
us so long, as he knew how uneasy his Wife was about us, and that we had a
great want of him? He said, he had been giving Notice of the Meeting twenty
Miles one way, and two Men given Notice as far, each Man his way; that was
Six-score Miles in and out.

Our Landlady, against we rose in the Morning, had got another Woman, a
Justice's Wife, to help her to dispute with us, and overthrow us, as she hoped,
but in vain, for Truth proved too hard for them; although the other Woman
charged high in the Morning, and said, we were no Christians. I said, it was
easier to charge than to prove; how do you prove it? Because, said they, you
deny the precious Ordinance of Jesus Christ. I asked. if they could prove it to
be such? They said, they did not question but they could. I said, they should
do it from plain Texts of Scripture, verbatim as it lies, without any
Infere^^^s Consequences, or Comments upon the Places the (...) upon; and they
agreed to it. But, in Ca^ (...) them, they should fail and not prove (as (...))
that Ordinance to be so appoint^d by Christ, (...) then they would allow us to
be Christians, notwithstanding what they had charged to the contrary; and they
said, they would.

I then repeated all the Preliminaries, and asked them, if they would agree to
each particular? they said, they would. I desired Richard Orm to mind them, and
imprint them as much as might be in his Memory, for it was like enough we
should have O^^^sion to call them in Question before we had done, which came to
pass not long after we began; they urged the 28th of Matthew in defense of
Water Baptism, where Christ said to his Disciples, Go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of
the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded
you: And so I am with you always, even with the End of the World. Water not
being mentioned the Disputants were at a stand, and said it must be implied: I
showed them, that by their Agreement to the Preliminaries, there were to be no
Inferences, but plain Scripture. I told them, it was an unreasonable Thing to
undertake to unchristian a great Body of religious People by a few Inferences,
which might be true, or not true. Now when we had tagg'd at it, and searched
the New Testament a great while, they could not find what they desired,
although they urged what Peter said in a certain Case, Who can forbid Water,
that these should not be baptized, who have received the holy Ghost as well as
we? I showed them, that there was a great Disparity between a Servant's
Question, and a Master's Command. When they were even weary with searching, and
could not find a positive Ordination by Christ for Water Baptism, they gave it
over, and I asked them, If they had not fallen short of the Proof of what they
had so boldly charged upon us in the Morning? My Landlady confessed, they had
fallen short of their Expectation; but the other was in the Mind, as she said,
that it might be proved: I told her, she would not prove it from any plain Text
of Scripture.

My passionate Landlady became more meek and friendly, and received the Truth
in the Love of it: We had a good Meeting the next Day, and she said, If I would
stay that Night, I should be as welcome as her own Children; but if not, she
blessed the Lord for my. Company, and the Good she had already received by me,
and parted with me in much Brokenness of Heart; and I heard she lived and died
in good Unity with Friends. But oh, how glad was her Husband to see that great
and sudden Change wrought in her! it was the Lord's Doings; to him be the
Praise now and for ever, for he alone is worthy.

I had many comfortable Meetings in my Travels through these Provinces, and
good Service. We were at a Yearly Meeting at Tredhaven in Mary^and upon the
Eastern Shore, to which Meeting for Worship came with William Penn, Lord
Baltimore and his Lady, with their Retinue, but it was late when they came, and
the Strength and Glory of the heavenly Power of the Lord was going off from the
Meeting; so the Lady was much disappointed, as Understood by William Penn, for
she told him, She did not want to hear him, and such as he, for he was a
Scholar and a wife Man, and she did not question but he could preach; but she
wanted to bear some of our Mechanics preach, as Husbandmen, Shoe-makers, and
such like Rusticks; for she thought they could not preach to any Purpose.
William Penn told her, some of bese were rather the best Preachers we had
amongst us or near these Words. I was a little in their Company, and I thought
the Lady to be a notable, wit, and withal a courteously carriaged Woman. I was
also in Company with the Governor of Virginia at our Friend Richard John's
House, upon the Wast Cliffs, in Maryland, for we both lodged there one Night,
and I heard that he had been studious in a Book against Friends, called the
Snake, and Friends greatly desired he might have the Answer called the Switch,
but knew not how to be so free with him as to offer it to him I told Friends. I
would endeavor to make way for it. Although he had seemed to be a Man of few
Words, yet at a suitable Interval I said to him, I had heard that he had seen a
Back called the Snake in the Grass; he confessed he had, I desired he would
accept of the Answer, and he as studious in it as he had been in the Snake,
which he promised he would, and took the Book.

There happened a Passage worthy of Note, either in this or the preceding
Governor's Time in Virginia, as I was credibly informed which was thus; The
Governor wanted a Cooper to mend his Wirt, Syder and Ale Casks, and some told
him there was a Workman near, but he was a Quaker; he said, if he was a
Workman, he made no Matter what to profese'd: so the Quaker, such as he was,
was (...) for, and came with his Hat under his Arm: The Governor was somewhat
at a stand to see the Man come in after that Manner, and asked, If he was the
Cooper he had sent for? He said, Yes. Well, said the Governor, are not you a
Quaker? Yes, repied the Man, I am so called, but I have not been faithful, He
then asked, How long have you been called a Quaker? The poor Man said, About
twenty Years. ^as for you, poor Man, said the Governor, I am pray for you.

By this we may clearly see, that such who walk most up to what they profess,
are in most Esteem among the more thinking and religious People; and the
unfaithful and loose libertine Professors of the Truth are slighted, and I
believe will be more and more cast out as the unsavory Salt, which is good for
naught in Religion, and is indeed trodden under the Feet of Men; for a great
Part of the Men in the World have such an Understanding as to know what we
profess, and also what we should do and be in many Things; let us therefore
walk wisely before all, and not be an Occasion of stumbling, nor give Offense
either to Jew or Gentile, nor to the Church of God, that so we may indeed be as
a City set upon an Hill, which cannot be bid; nay, that may not desire to be
hid, but rather that the Inhabitants of the Earth might see our good Works, and
have an Occasion from thence administered, to glorify the Father which is in
Heaven.

I having it on my Mind to visit a Meeting up the River called Perquimus, on
the West Side of the great River Choptank, and I being on the East Side, Henry
Hosier and some more Friends set forward with me in a small Boat, not in good
Condition but crazy, with only one small Sail: We set out, as we thought, in
good time to reach our desired Port, but when we were upon the great River (as
I remember it is ten Miles over the shortest way, but the manner of our crossing
it made it more) the Wind veered much against us, being then within about four
Points of our Course, and it rained hard, and was very dark, so that we could
scarce see one another, and the Water broke so into the Boat; that it was most
of one Man's Work to heave it out, and all our Company were discouraged, and
most of them Very Sea-sick; Henry Hosier, of whom I had the most Hopes for
Help, said, that he could not steer the Boat any longer. What by the extreme
Darkness, the Roughness of the Waves, Boisterousness of the Wind, and hard
Rain, I, unwell as I was, was obliged to undertake the steering of the Boat,
and not without some Conflicts of Mind, not having any Certainty, from any
outward Rule, what Way we went; having no Fire, and the Boat being open, we
could not have any Light to see our Compass, but my Faith was in the Lord, that
he would bring us to shore; and I kept the Boat as near the Wind as she would
fail, and told my poor sick and helpless Company, I believed that we should not
perish, although we might he miss of our Port: But the like imminent Danger, I
think, I was never in before upon any Water; but renowned over all be the great
Name of the Lord for ever, we put into the Mouth of our desired River
Perquimus, as though we had seen it in the Day, or steered by a Compass, neither
of which we had the Benefit of for several Hours.

Here we went ashore and made a great Fire under the River's Cliff, and about
Midnight the Moon rose, and it cleared up and froze, and was very cold* My
Companions falling asleep, I turned them over, and pulled them from the Fire as
it increased, and put them nearer as it failed, but could not keep them awake;
I sought Logs of Wood, and carried them to and minded the Fire, which was Work
enough for the remaining Part of the Night; but Morning being come, we got into
our cold icy Boat and sailed away toward the Meeting. When we were come among
Friends, Notice was given of a Stranger being there, and heavenly and sweet
Meeting it was, so that we though we had a good Reward for all our Trouble,
blessed be the Name of the Lord now and for ever, for he is worthy: Although he
may see good to try us, sometimes one way and sometimes another, how should we
know that we have any Faith, if it be not tried? How shall we know that we have
any true Love to God, if it never be proved? The Trial of the true Believers
Faith is more precious than Gold. The excellent Sayings of Job, came into my
Mind, Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot
perceive him; on the left Hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: He
hides himself on the right Hand, that I cannot see him, Job xxiii. 8, 9. And
then in Verse the 10th, he, like a Man in the true Faith, says, The Lord
knows the Way that I take; and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as
Gold: And the more vehement that the Fire is, the more it destroys the Dross,
and the more pure and weighty the Gold is, which has past through the most
severe Fires. Read thou, and understand this that can.

I had a Meeting when in Virginia, at a Friend's House whose Name was Matthew
Jordan, and something which I said in the Meeting, somewhat offended a young
Woman a Presbyterian, and not having, as she said, a suitable Opportunity while
I was there, to discourse with me, being busy in her Master's Affairs, (for she
was the Friend's Housekeeper) she desired Liberty of her Master to go to the
next Meeting, that there she might ease her Mind to me about the Offense I had
given her in the first Meeting: (it was something about Election and they told
me what it was, but not Writing it down, it went from me) and accordingly she
came to the Meeting, where the Lord's mighty Power broke in upon us, to the
tendering of many Hearts, to Friends mutual Satisfaction, and it proved a good
Day to the aforesaid young Woman; her Heart was as if it had melted within her,
and she shed many Tears, and I am Satisfied went from the Meeting in Fear and
in great Joy; in Fear, how to walk as not to offend Christ the Elect, which
before she could talk of, but now she had met with, and he had opened her State
to her: And Joy, that she had met with the Messiah, the Elect of the Father,
his choice and beloved Son; so that she could now say, Where are the Wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? All her brisk
talkative Qualities were swallowed up in the feeling of the internal,
enlightening Presence of Christ.

When she returned to her Master's (before mentioned) he asked her, If she had
got Satisfaction? meaning, Had she had any Discourse with me and was satisfied?
She replied, She satisfied. Some Time after I met with her in Philadelphia,
plain and Truth-like, but knew not who she was at the first. The Manner of the
Working of the Truth is to humble the Creature, and bring it into Contrition.
Tenderness, and Fear, with true Self-denial.

I come now to mention something that happened in my going over James's River,
toward a Yearly Meeting in Virginia: Alighting at an (...) by the Riverside,
where we refreshed ourselves there was a poor little Child cried so
exceedingly, that I was uneasy to hear it, and asked the Mother, what was the
matter? She said, it had cried most of the Time since it was born, and they
were almost off their Feet with it, or to that effect. I told her, I believed I
could give the Child something which would do good, and she readily agreed to
it, and I gave it a little of something then, and ordered her to give it twice
more in four or five Days time: But when I returned, the Child was better, and
oh! how glad the poor Woman was to see me, and spoke more in my Commendations
than was to my Satisfaction, and was kind to Friends afterward for my Sake.

Now we came to ferry over the River, being, as I remember, five Horses and
nine People; there was Jane Pleasant a public Friend, and her Manservant who
rid before her upon a great Horse, and high in Flesh, and about the Midst of
the River, it being two Miles over, he rose upon his hind Feet, and slung
himself upon the Edge or Gunnel of the Boat, half into the River; the Fall of
the Horse, and the Motion of the other Horses thereupon, caused the Boat to
make such Sallies that it took in Water, and was very likely to sink: But
before he could have Time to rise again, or to make any more Springs, I took
several young Men by the Shoulders, and flung them upon his Neck to keep him
down, and told them as fast as I could, why I did so. Now I had to deal with
the Ferry-man, who was about to strip for swimming, and said we should all he
drowned; but for his Part he could swim; and was about to leap into the River,
for, he said, the Boat would either break or sink. I told him. It will soon
enough for him to swim, when he saw the Boat either break or sink, and it he
would not row, then I would; With much Entreaty he took the Oar again and rowed
us to the Shore. But in our imminent Danger I looked over my tender Friends,
(for so they appeared to me) and thought in my Heart what a Pity it would be,
it all these were drowned! yet the Thought of my own drowning never entered my
Mind, until I was got over the River, which was a Mercy to me, and a great
Means to keep out Disorder and Confusion, which commonly attend sudden
Surprises and Frights, or else they make People dead-hearted and almost
senseless.

As I had now an Occasion to observe, as well as in some imminent Dangers I had
seen before, where I happened to be, I find it an excellent Thing to be as much
as we can, always ready, and by being frequently thinking upon Death, it is not
so surprising when it does come: This is a great Point of true Wisdom, to
number our Days so, as to remember our latter End. The want of thus
contemplating and truly thinking on what Preparation we are in to look Death in
the Face, and to appear before the great Judge of both Quick and Dead, was the
Cause of the Complaint, Oh! that my People were wise that they understood this,
that they would consider their latter End. The great Remisness of such
Considerations among People, bespeaks Folly and great Insensibility, and that
the Heart is hardened through an Habit of sinning; oh! that I might prevail
with the Children of Men to awake. Arise, you that sleep in Sin, and are at
ease therein, that you may come to hear inwardly the Call of the Son of God,
that your Souls may not only live here to serve God, but also may live
eternally in Bliss with him is the Desire of my Soul for the whole Bulk of
Mankind; for my Life has often appeared not dear to me, in Comparison of the
saving of the Souls of the Children of Men.

I have often thought of Moses, how far he went for saving of Israel, and how
far Paul went for the saving of his Kinsfolk after the Flesh; it was a great
Demonstration, that these great and good Men had great Faith and Interest in
the Lord, and also a very great Love to his People; and such whose Eyes are
truly opened, cannot but see it is the Love of God, and Love to the Souls of
Men, that constrains us thus to take our Lives as in our Hands, and labor
under many weary Steps, and many Perils by Sea and by Land, and in the
Wilderness, Cold, and sometimes in Tumults and Noises, sometimes in Watchings
and Fastings, that we have been sometimes Spectacles to Men; but the Lord has
given us Faith and Patience to bear and overcome all, as we have singly stood
in his heavenly Counsel, and been truly devoted to his Will in all Things.

It may not be amiss to mention a particular thing which happened to me before
I left Long Island, viz. Knowing that my Landlady, Samuel Bowne's Wife, had a
very sore Breast, by which she had much Trouble, and had no less than five
Tents in it, and she being a sensible and a serviceable Woman, something came
with a Concern upon my Mind to administer unto her Breast, with a Belief it
would heal her: I reasoned about it until I had got one Foot into the Stirrup
for mounting my Horse, but I grew uneasy for being dilatory in doing that which
came into my Mind; so I went in again and said, Mary, I am come back to advise
thee what thou should do, by which, I believe thou will be healed, although I
cannot stay to see it done. I believe, said she, and intend to follow thy
Advice; but asked, what would become of all those Tents? I told her, the
Poultice would draw them all out, and give her Ease; and accordingly I heard it
did, for she slept twelve Hours immediately after the Time of the Application,
and when she awoke the Tents were all drawn out, and she had little further
Trouble with it: So it is good to mind Truth and the Workings of it in all
Things. I met with the great Doctor (as he was esteemed) who had it under hand,
and he said I was a bold Fellow: I said, it proved well. He Answered, it was
well for me it did.

Something more which I have before omitted occurs to my Memory: When I was in
that Part of Virginia toward North Carolina, to visit Friends, a very great
Mist arose, and we went wrong, until the Guides were so far lost, that they
confessed, they knew not East from West nor on which Hand we had left the Road,
although it was in the fore Part of the Day, but neither Wind or Sun to be felt
or seen; then I told them, I would try what I could do, if they did but know
what Quarter we should go to: They said, we should go toward the South; then I
brought out my little Compass which I had made before I left England, and took
it in my Hand and steered by it, till we all came into the Road; for that
inward Sense I had, did persuade me, that we were to the Westward of the Road,
so leaning a little to the Eastward of the South Point, we came right as
before, and when so, the Guides much rejoiced, and said, I was fitter to be
Guide in a Wilderness Country than they. My Compass was not so big as a
Tailor's Thimble, which had often been of Use to me, and others with me.

Now the Time came on for my leaving all my near and dear Friends in th^se
Parts, and I embarked for the Islands the Sixth of the Ninth Month 1702, with
my Companion James Bates, on board of a Sloop, Samuel Salter Master, for
Barbados, and we put into Bermudas in our way: Soon after we landed, being on
the 21st of the same Month, we were sent for by Governor Bennett to come before
him, and being near his Door, a Man came and clapped me on the Shoulder, as we
were walking on our way, and said roughly to us, You must go before the
Governor, and seemed to hasten us: I replied meekly, I am willing to go as fast
as I can, but I have been very Sea-sick, and can go but weakly: The man fell
from his Roughness, and bid us take Time, and carried himself very civily to
us, and put us by a Man who was keeping Centry at the Governor's Door with his
Musket on his Arm, and when we were come into a large Room the Man left us, and
we staying a while, I began to reason in myself, What if the Governor should be
a rigid Man and be severe to us, and either confine or punish us? But I said in
my Heart, Lord, thou that know all Things, know that I have not only
offered up my Liberty, but Life also, for thy Name and Gospel's sake; and
immediately the Fear and Reasonings about human Power was taken away from me.

I being not well, and weary with walking from the Ship, sat down to rest
myself unbidden, when there came a friendly well carriaged young Woman, who I
supposed to be a Servant, and spoke kindly to us; I desired her to do as much
for us as to give us something that was small to drink, for we were very
thirsty and had been much out of Health, and were not well recovered since we
came from the Sea, having had rough Weather: She brought us Wine and Water, and
a Thing to mix them in; so taking most of a Glass of Water, and a very little
Wine poured into it, I drank and was very well refreshed. By this Time she
Governor called us into an upper Room, and as I came near to the Top of the
Stairs, going but faintly, for Reasons before given, the Governor put forth his
Hand and reached to take hold of mine, and like a tender Father drew me up, and
led me along toward a great Window, and stood and looked on me and said, He
believed he knew what I was, and my Business too, I replied, it might be so,
and asked, if he was the Governor of that Place? He said he was, and bowed his
Head. I then spoke to him in the Love of God and said. Thy Countenance bespeaks
Moderation, and the Apostle said, Let your Moderation appear to all Men, for
the Lord is at hand; and it was with me to say to him, The Lord of Heaven and
Earth bless thee and all thine? He bade us sit down, and gave us each a Glass
of Wine, and enquired from whence we came? I told him my Home was in Old
England, but it was long since I was there; my Companion's was in Virginia, He
wanting to know the Affairs in Europe, I told him, There was a Merchant
belonging to the same Ship that we did, who was lately come from Europe, and I
thought was a Man of Parts and Memory, and well versed in the Affairs of those
Parts of the World, and when we came into this Place he was with us: The
Governor then sent for him, and when he came, he answered his Expectation in
resolving all or most of his Questions, for the Knowledge of the News appeared
to me to be the young Man's Talent. Having done with and dismissed him, he
said, he must now have some Discourse with us: Then rose up all the great Men
who were with the Governor, to make way that I might come near him. I said, If
it was the Governor's Mind, I had rather sit where I was, for I sat well in the
Air, and that suited well with my present Weakness: So he bade them all sit
down, and they did so.

Now, said he, I want to know the Reasons why you, as a People, where you live,
do not assist the King and Country with Men and Arms, for their and your own
Defense and Safety, against all that may attempt or endeavor your Hurt? I
replied, The most convincing Reasons I have to offer to the Governor are, We
have neither Precept nor Example from Christ, or his Apostles, to use the Sword
to hurt one another withal. No, said he, what then means tha^ Saying of our
Saviors, when he bade him that had not a Sword, sell his Cloak or Coat and buy
one? I replied, One of his Disciples answered and said, Lord, here are two:
Christ said, It is enough. Now how two Swords can be enough is answer for a
general Precept, I have the Governor and all these Men to judge. So after a
little Pause he said, In case you was assaulted by Robbers that would break
your House, and take what they could get from you; or upon the Highway, and
would take your Purse or Horse, what would you do in that Case? I replied, I
could not directly answer what I should do in such a Case, because through the
Lords Mercy I was never yet so assaulted; but it appears most likely, that I
should endeavor to keep my House from being broken up, and yet withal be
tender of Men's Lives: And as to the other Assault, inasmuch as it is well
known I do not provide any outward Weapon for my Defense, neither Sword, Pistol
nor any other such like Weapon, therefore I must rely upon the Lord (...)
Protection and Help, who is able to rescue me out of the Hands of all such
ungodly Men; or if he does not, I must endeavor to bear what the Lord suffers
such to do with me. The Governor said, You say well, for inasmuch as you have
not provided any thing for your Defense, you have nothing to fly to but the
Lord; you say very well; and said, he hoped what he had offered had not given
any Offense. I replied, It was so far from that, we were glad he was so free
with us, yet if he pleased to dismiss us, we should be willing to be going, for
Night come on. He said, There were some of our Friends would be glad to see us:
I replied, I understood there were some further on the Island that did own us,
but how much they were of us I could not tell, for I had not seen any of them.
He asked, whether we had a mind to go by Water or by Land, for he had a Boat,
and a couple of Hands should carry us where we would; or if we had a Desire to
ride, he had two Horses, we might take them and keep them as long as we staid
upon the Island. I endeavored to persuade him to let us go without troubling
himself any further, for I was sensible of his good Will and Love to us, and
having his Countenance, was more than we expected, and as much as we desired.
He still urging to I know after what Manner we would choose to go? I told him,
I was very sensible of his Generosity to us who were Strangers, and if he would
be easy and let us pass, we had wherewithal to defray our necessary Charges
either by Water or Land, as would answer best with our Convenience. He pressed
upon us to accept of his Offer, for he said, he did not do it in Complement to
us: Then seeing no way but to accept of his generous Offer, I said, Riding at
present would be much more acceptable to me, considering how I had been lately
fatigued at Sea, of which I was not yet well. He immediately gave Orders for
the Horses to be brought to the Door, which being done, and we having Notice
thereof, I rose up and made an Offer to go, and the Governor likewise rose up
and came and took me by the Hand, and so we went down the large Stairs into the
great Room where we first entered in the Lord's Dread and holy Fear. Read this
thou that can, and withal learn to understand, here I had resigned my Life
and all to the Lord who gave it, and my Life at that time, as at many other
times, was not dear to me for Christ's sake; and being thus resigned, I felt
the Love of God, and a Measure of that Life was manifest, in which I had
Dominion over Men, Bonds, and over Death and the Powers of Darkness, blessed be
the Lord for ever.

Now coming to take Horse, I looked out at the Door and saw two Horses, and a
Man holding them beyond the Pavement, and the Centry as before in the Street,
and the Horse next the Door, which I supposed I was to ride on, had a Saddle on
the Back of it set about with three Rows of shining Silver Lace, I thought
about two Inches broad each: The Governor holding me by the Hand and looking in
my Face, its not unlikely but he might think, is I used to say, I looked very
sheepishly at it. He said to me, I am apt to think you are not used to ride
upon such a Saddle as this; I told him, if he could let me have one more like
myself (plain) without much Trouble, I should like it the better, but if not, I
could ride on it, I thought without much Straitness, in case of Necessity. He
answered, he could not, for Horses and Saddles too were scarce on that Island,
for the one was that which he rode on, and the other was for his Man; but he
said, he would tell me how to prevent all this: If, said he, you get over the
Inlet of Water, though he questioned it, because the Wind blew very strong in
the Mouth or Inlet of the River; but, he said, he spoke not this to hinder our
taking his Horses; but if we get over, he said we should come to Richard
Stafford's an old Judge of Life and Death, and might ask there for the Cover
for his Saddle, which ties on with little Straps at each Corner, and hides all
this, and then it will be like yourself; but if the Ferry-man, says he, cannot
carry the Horses over, what Man soever you meet, white or black, if capable,
tell him he must bring me my Horses, he dares do no other but bring them; and
be sure you take no further Thought for them: And if we met with any thing in
his Liberty that might trouble us, let him but know and he would help it, if it
lay in his Power; and so with his Blessing on us, we took leave of him and came
to the Water side, but could not get the Horses over, therefore sent them back
again, and intended to have staid at the Ferry-house all Night, but the Boat
was about going over as we lighted; and Notice being got some way or other to
the Judge's Ear, that there were two Strangers on the other Side of the Water,
he had sent a Boat and a couple of Men for us, who said we must go, for the
Judge said, he could not sleep until we came; whatsoever the Matter is, we know
not, said they: So we went, after asking if they at the Ferry-house had been at
any Cost or Trouble on our Account in providing Supper, for as yet we had not
eaten any thing since we landed; the People said no, they had not done any
thing which we should pay for: It grew dark and very stormy, and the Sea broke
over the Boat, so that some of us were forced to hold our Coat Laps one to
touch another on the Weather Side, to keep out the Breakers of the Waves, that
they might not fill the Boat, and we came safe over to the Judge's House, and
no sooner got into the Passage but his friendly Wife met us, and asked us, If
we were the Strangers her Husband had sent for? I said, We are Strangers. She
bid us follow her to the Judge, and we did so, When we came to him he rose up,
and took the Candle in his Hand and said, Are you the Strangers that I have
sent for? I said, Who (...) may expect I know not, but we are Strangers. When
he had looked well in my Face, he set down the Candle and said, What a Mercy is
this, that the Lord should send Men from I know not where, in his Love to visit
me! and took me in his Arms and kissed me; and I said to him, The Lord of
Heaven and Earth bless thee; and we shed many Tears and wept together.

As I entered the House, I felt, the Love of God, and his Glory, I thought,
shore in and filled every Room as I passed through them, and I said, Peace be
to this Place, and I felt it was so. He required of our Travels, and from
whence we came, of which we gave him a brief Account; he also asked if I knew
any thing of the Family of Staffords at Laborn, near Haverford west, in South
Wales? I told him all I knew about them, both of the Dead and of the Living;
with which he was pleased, and said, He had not heard of them many Years, and
that Family were his near Kindred.

Now as the Judge was somewhat troubled with the (...), I found his usual
Bedtime drew near, and I made an Offer to go away l^ft I should discommode
him, yet he appeared unwilling to part with us, but considering his own
Ailments and our early Rising in the Morning, he at length consented: But
before we parted, his Wife asked leave of him to go with us on the Morrow to
the Meeting, to which he readily assented, if he was not worse of his
Distemper, and then ordered how we should ride, and which Negro should go, not
only to help his Wife but us also, and take our Horses when there was Occasion,
and do any thing he could for us; and indeed so he did, and appeared to me to
run on his Feet without much Trouble, being a lively young Man.

I omitted before, that the Judge asked, If we had seen the Governor, and if he
was kind to us? I told him he was very friendly to us, and said, If we met with
any Trouble in his Liberty that he could help us in, only let him know and he
would right us. The Judge said, It was very well, and he was glad of it. I
perceived the Judge was rather a Moderator of the Governor, he being an ancient
wise Man, and had lived long as a Judge upon the Island, and understood (it is
like) more fully the State of Things there than the Governor could be capable
of, he being but a young Man, although he appeared to be a wise Man, and, as
William Penn said, came of an ancient and honorable Family in England. which
he knew very well, whose Name was Bennett. Afterward I told William Penn how
it had fared with us on that Island, and especially the Kindness of the two
chief Men in Power there, and William Penn wept, and said, He had not heard any
Account of this Nature, that he had been so much affected with, as he remembered
these many Years.

Now we left the Judge until the Morning, and got some small Refreshment, it
being late, and I had been faint for several Hours for want of eating, but the
Lord's heavenly Power bore me up over all, so that at Times I felt no want of
any thing; Oh! Renowned over all be the Name of the mighty God, now and for
ever. We went to Bed, and when Morning came, I with my Companion were stirring
early, having eight Miles to the Meeting, and it being in the latter End of the
Ninth Month, we were willing to be in such Time, that we might give some Notice
to the People. I was walking in our Lodging Room early, and the Judge's Wife
came to the Door and asked, if she might speak with us? I said she might; then
she came in and said, She had a Message from her Husband to us; I queried, what
it was? She said, He desired we would come and pray for him before we went
away. I desired she would favor us so much as to lay before her Husband
something which I had to say, and she promised she would: Well then, tell the
Judge, that if he will suffer us to come into his Room, and sit down and wait
upon the Lord, as our Manner is in such a Case as this, if it please the Lord
to move us by his holy Spirit to pray we may; but if not, let not the Judge
take it amiss, for we are willing to be at the Lord's disposing in all Things.
She went, and I believe, as she said, laid the Matter before him as I had
delivered it to her; for she was a Woman of a good Understanding, and came back
again to us in a very little Time: I asked, what the Judge said? She replied,
he said, Let the Men take their own Way, and whether they pray for me or not, I
believe they are Men of God: So after some little respite, we being brought to
the Judge's Bedside, sat down and waited upon the Lord, who was pleased in his
Love and by his mighty Power to break in upon us, and also opened my Mouth in
his Gift of Grace and of Supplication, in which Gift, ardent and fervent. Cries
went up to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that he would send Health and
Salvation to the Judge, and also to all his Family, and to all People far and
near, that all every where might repent, and come to the Knowledge of he Truth
and be saved. The Judge wept aloud, and a mighty Visitation it was to his
Family, and especially to himself and his tender Wife. We left the Judge in a
fine Frame of Spirit, and no doubt near the Kingdom, having his Blessing and
earnest Request, that when we could reach his House we would not fail to come
to it, for we were very welcome; and I found and felt it so, and it was mostly
our Lodgings: His Wife and Foot-page went with us to all the Meetings, except
one, while we were on the Island, which was about two Weeks, in which Time we
had many good Opportunities among a sober behaved and well carriaged People,
amongst whom we met with, no Opposition, but had large quiet Meetings.

When we were clear, as we thought, of the Island, we went to take our solid
Leaves of the Governor, acknowledging his Civility and Generosity to us
Strangers, and I told him and the Judge. That they would not leant their Reward
for what they had done to us, and such who should take their Lives as in their
Hands, and come in the Love of God to visit these remote Parts of the World,
which we durst not have undertaken if we had not believed it required of us by
Almighty, and our Peace concerned in it, as also the Glory of God, and the Good
of the Children of Men; these are the M^^ves to those our great Undertakings:
or Words to that Purpose. So we parted in much Love with these great Men,
especially the Judge, with Tears on his Face, as also his tender and friendly
Wife, who had been very serviceable to us in ordering Meetings and making way
for us, and none like her in all the Island, that we met withal, she being
given up to that Service, for the encouraging Truth and Friends in what she was
capable of.

Being invited to a Friend's House to dine one Day, when we were sat down at
the Table, the Woman of the House desired that one of us would say Grace; from
which I took an Occasion to show her, and several more in the Company, who
appeared not much more grown in the Truth than she, that since we had been a
People, we had both believed (and accordingly practiced) that true Prayer was
not performed without the Help of the holy Spirit of God, and no Man could pray
aright and acceptably without it; nor was it in Man's Power to have it when he
pleased; therefore it is Man's Place to wait upon the Lord for the pouring
forth of this Gift upon him, and also to know whether it be required of him to
pray, so as to be heard by Man, or only to pray secretly, so as to be heard of
God, as did Hannah, and many more have done; which, as they do aright, no doubt
but as Christ said to his Disciples, their Father will hear them in secret, and
reward them openly; or to this Effect: With which they all appeared satisfied.

We then went on board our Vessel, and set Sail with a fair Wind for the east
End of the Island, in order to B^rb^^^s but soon after we got out to the Mouth
of that Inlet where we arrived first the Wind came full against us, and we put
in there again: and the Master, althou' not (...) one of us, said in a friendly
manner, What is the matter (...)? this is al^^g of you, Mr. Richard on (...) he
was pleased to call me, although I o^^ showed my Dislike to it you have something
to do (...) the Island. I said, I kn^w not if any thing; but he seemed positive
and withal said, if the Wind came fair at (...) he would call if I was willing;
if not, he would (...) as long as I pleased. I said, I knew not of any thing to
hinder, but he might call as soon as the Wind came fair. So we parted, only
giving him an Account, that we intended to go for the Judge's House. It was
late in the Evening when we got there, and the Judge was gone to Bed; but his
Wife up, who lifted up her Hands with more than ordinary Surprise and much lay,
and said, She was always glad to see me, but never (...) than now: I said, Why
so? She than began to tell, how that since I went away, there had been a Man
with the Jud^ who had in ^ensed him against me all that ever. (...) ^old, and
said. He knew me in England, and that I was broke, and come into these Parts to
preach for a Living. I asked, what her Husband said to all that? She said, his
Answer was to the Man, that he believed I was no such Person, but an honest
Man; yet the Accuser seemed very positive. I said, It would be well if this Man
could be brought with me to the Judge's Face, that he might be convinced, not
only of the Man's Ignorance of us as a People, but of me in particular, and his
Envy against me be made known; upon which I opened to her the Case of such
Journeys and Services, how we proceeded, and how the Meetings were constituted
in which we did so proceed, and from whence we had Certificates, from Monthly,
Quarterly, or Meetings of Ministers to which we belonged, and from Friends in
the several Provinces and Islands where we traveled, if we desired them, many
of which I could show the Judge if Time would admit; but she said, left we
should be called away in have, she craved to see some of those Certificates: I
showed her them, beginning at the first, wherein Friends of Kelk, now
Bridlington Monthly Meeting in Yorkshire, to Friends in America, showed not
only their full Unity with this my present Journey, but also with my Service
for the Truth, and Conversation in the same, where I had lived and traveled;
and that I had settled my outward Affairs to Friends Satisfaction, under many
Hands variously writ.

When this great and wise Woman saw this, she said, I was enough; but I showed
her other Certificates from diverse Places, wherein Friends had signified
sufficiently their Unity and Satisfaction with me. I likewise informed her,
that in case any Man, not approved by us as a Minister, did take upon him to
impose his Preaching upon any who were Strangers to him, such as knew him took
Care to acquaint the Churches therewith, if his Intentions could be known, that
no Impostor might do any Hurt: All which she admired, and said she had never
heard so much before, neither did she think there had been such excellent
Orders in the World amongst any People.

Having thus acquainted her with our Order and Discipline, and afterward
informed her of the Cause of our unexpected Return, I renewed my Proposal of
having my Accuser before the Judge; she told me, she had good Place with her
Husband, and would endeavor to obtain it: And accordingly, after talking with
him, she let me know, that the Judge expressed his Readiness to do me any
Service which lay in his Power, and was of Opinion, my Accuser durst not face
either him or me in that Affair, but that if the Wind continued against us, he
would try to find him out and bring him, which might be of Service; but if the
Wind favored, she thought I might be easy to go; as indeed I was, and the more
so, considering that our Captain Salter, who lived near the Judge on the same
Island, had showed a great deal of Patience and good Disposition to usward for
about two Weeks, yet would gladly be gone; so about Midnight we were called to
go on board the Ship, for the Wind was fair, if we were ready; I replied, we
come quickly, and so we did, and took leave of all we saw of the Family, and
remembered our dear Love, with grateful Acknowledgments to the Judge, for all
his Civility and Kindnesses he had done to us, with Reasons why we could not
see him, for he had been afflicted for some time with the Gout, and was now
fallen into some Rest, and we going very early away, were not at our own
Disposal.

I admired the Lord's good Providence in all this, and there was something of a
Reach from the same watchful Providence, to order that to be put into my
Certificate which did, so fully remove that Slur this Enemy would have fastened
upon me, (i. e.) that I had broke in England, and could not pay my Debts, and
therefore was come into these remote Parts of the World, where I was unknown,
to preach for a Livelihood; but the contrary fully appeared, that I was known
and well beloved too, and had Effects to discharge any just Demand upon me,
blessed be the worthy Name of the Lord, now and for ever.

Now I may lay something of our Affairs upon the Sea in this Voyage: When
Captain Salter had taken us in Passengers at Philadelphia for Barbados, it
being a time of War, and People somewhat afraid of shipping Goods, he said, he
was to have two honest Quakers Passengers, and he did not fear being taken by
Privateers nor Pirates. I was troubled at his Confidence in us, and told him
so, and that it was much if the Lord did not suffer us to be taken, that he
might see Men were not to be depended upon, but that we ought to depend upon
the Lord alone for Protection and Deliverance: However, in much less time than
was expected, Goods came, and we were loaded and gone. We had rough Weather
before we came to Barbados, (I have given an Account of Bermudas) especially
about the Tropic of Cancer we had very high Winds, and I was extremely
Sea-sick, and so was my Companion, and I could eat little, but was treated with
remarkable Civilities by the Captain; for in and about that Latitude there are
Fish not unlike Herrings, which fly from Wave to Wave, and by dipping their
Fins or Wings in the Water, they will fly a great Way, especially when they are
chased by Fishes of Prey, and almost every Morning there were of those Fishes
found on the Ship's Deck; and the Captain often said, as his Manner was, Mr.
Richardson these are sent for you, or for your Breakfast, and seeing it is so,
I will dress them myself, for I know, said he, my Cook is so greasy you can
hardly eat of his Cookery, which was very true; and therefore he would wash his
Hands, and lay a clean Napkin on his Arm, and tell me he would dress me my
Breakfast in the best Fashion he could. I asked him why he would put himself to
so much Trouble? He said, he never waited on a Man in all his Life with so much
Pleasure, and if I were going, into any Country where he was going, I should
not pay any thing for my Passage; so much Respect he showed to me.

Now it happened in the Course of this Voyage, when we were within a few
Leagues of Barbados, one Morning early as soon as Day appeared, he that was
aloft (upon the Watch to look out, as the Manner of Mariners is, especially in
the Time of Wars and Danger) espied a Ship which he and the rest of our most
knowing Men supposed to be a Turkish Frigate, of considerable Strength;
however, it was a great Vessel, and appeared to have a great, many Guns: When
we first saw her, she appeared to be within Gunshot. But oh, what a Surprise
and Fright our Ship's Crew were in! I had not often seen the like. Our Vessel
being deep loaded, although a good Sailer, was less than that which chased us,
and to run for it appeared the only way for us to escape, hauling as close to
the Wind as we could to keep the Sails full; and the Vessel being stiff with
its great Burden, endured Sail well, and indeed they crowded so much Sail,
that I told them I tear'd they would bring the Rigging by the board, so thus we
labored until Noon, and then our Captain had lost all his Confidence in the
Quakers, and said we shall be taken, for the Ship has gained upon us for
several Hours, and we have done what we can, and are all spent: I walked upon
the Main-deck under no small Concern of Mind, and Truth fore, and I found it
open in the Truth, that we should not be taken: The Captain said, binding it
with some Asservations, we shall certainly be taken. I said, No, we shall not,
unless by our Mismanagement. Alas! said he, you are such a Man as I never met
withal; do you not see the Frigate, or Sallec-man, for that he called her, is
just going to fire a Broadside at us, opening the Gun Ports, and laying the
Ship broad Side upon us, and levelling at her as well as they can? And indeed
our Captain, although he was a stout Man, yet appeared very ghastly and
dead-hearted, and said (in a Tone which bespoke both Affliction and Trouble) to
me, Go into my Cabin, or some where under the Deck, for they will fire
immediately; and that where I walked I could hardly escape either the Shot or
the Rigging falling upon me. I said, they will not fire; and desired him to be
easy, for we should come to no Damage by that Ship. Well then, he asked what
they should do, for the Enemy was just upon us? I said, I would peach them a
Beatle or two, or more of my best Brandy, and they should take as much as might
do them good; but have a Care of more, and ply away a while and you will see
they will fall back, and we shall leave them. The Captain said, although there
was no human Probability of escaping, yet for my Sake they would try, and to
work they went. I think I never saw Men on board of any Ship work like them for
some Hours, and we soon perceived we outsailed them, and by the time it began
to be dark we had lest them considerably.

Now all Fire and Light was forbidden, except what could not be avoided, and
all Noise, and a Council was held, to consult what Way to steer, whether the
nearest or most common way for the Island, or about; for it was reasonable to
conclude the Adversary would way-lay us, if he could, before we came to the
Island; and the Captain said, what I said in the Case should be done: After
some Deliberation I told him, I was most easy in steering the nearest Course,
which we did, and saw our adversary no more.

We came to the Island next Day in much Joy, that we had escaped so imminent a
Danger, but I was very ill in a Fever when I landed, which had been growing
upon me for several Days, (this being the Sixth-day of the Week, and 18th of
the Tenth Month) I was so poorly, that several thought I must die; but I stood
resigned in the Will of God, whether to die or live. The First Day being come,
I went to the Meeting, though with great Difficulty, being very weak, where^ I
sat under more than usual Exercise, Reasonings, and Conflicts of Spirit for
some time, about my present Condition, which was weak and low, and in my own
Apprehension, unlikely to be of any (...), notwithstanding all the Troubles and
Hazards of the Sea and Robbers, and Other Jeopardies in coming here, I was now
thus disabled and said by as useless. These Things were an Occasion to me to
consider, whether I had not missed my Way in something or other Many
particulars were brought to my Maid, whether I had discharged myself faithfully
where I had been and when I looked back and took a View of my past Travels and
Services in the Work of the Ministry, and Discipline of the Church, my Conduct
and whole Conversation, I saw nothing but I was clear of the Blood of all (...)
and well satisfied both as to the Time of my c^ming, as well as to the Coming
(...) the Island. There appeared yet two Things in my way; First, if this Place
should be my (have (...) might not watch over me with the best (...) If he had
gone at the Lord's Comman, no doubt but he would have brought him back again;
and Security, as I had two little Children in England, if I finished Course
here, they would be left Fatherless and Motherless, And I said before the Lord,
Let not my End bring Dishnour to thy great Name, nor any Blemish to the Truth
which I have loved, and ^a^cured for the Promotion of from my Childhood.

When I had thus, or to this Purpose appeased to the Lord, I felt great
Quietness and Resignation of Mind; and as I thus sat, a Friend, well thought on
by several, began to speak in the Meeting, and it opened in my Mind, that he
was not wholly redeemed from having some Thoughts, that elementary Water had
not yet ended its Service; I mean in Point of Dipping: I would have shut it
out, for the Man appeared a wise, zealous Man, and I being also either a
Stranger, could not remember I had heard or his Name, yet the Matter continued,
and I thought, for my own Satisfaction I might ask him the Question: If he was
a right spirited Friend, he would not be hurt; if he was not, he stood in Need
of Help, or at least it was high time for Friends to have a more perfect
Knowledge of him. So I leave this a while, and return to the other Part of the
Meeting which was very remarkable.

During my sitting, as before, under much Weakness or Body, yet quiet in Mind,
the living Virtue or heavenly Power of Christ sprang up in my inward Man, like
healing and suppling Oil, which so effectually helped me every way, that I
could say feelingly and experimentally, Miracles are not ceased, for I was
raised beyond my own Expectation, and all others who knew my weak State, to
give Testimony to the glorious Coming and Manifestation of Christ in Power,
Spirit, Life, Light, and Grace, for the Help, Health, and Salvation of all the
Children of Men who receive, believe in, and obey his Spiritual Knocks,
Reproofs, and heavenly Calls in the Soul, without any Lessening to his
Humanity: Great Cause have I, with all the Living, to love, value, honor and
reverence the great and mighty Name of him who has helped and healed, by
sending his eternal Word of living Power into our Hearts.

Returning with other Friends to my Quarters from this good Meeting (not to be
forgotten by me) came the beforementioned Friend to see me; and I having, as I
told him, a Desire to speak privately with him, he replied, there were (...)
there but his good Friends, and I might speck my Mind. I told him, what I had
to say related ch^sly to himself, and in such a matte as he might not be
willing to have it expected; but he would not hear, and said, I might speak it
there I desired he would not take in Offense at what I had to say, for I did
^pp^le it to be a Secret to all there but himself; and then I said, the matter
is, When thou wast speaking in the Meeting, it founded in the Ear of my Soul as
if one had said, This Man (meaning thee) is not wholly redeemed out of a Bell^
in John's Ministration of Water, as not having done its Work. Now the matter is
before thee, thou know whether what I received be true or false: In the
first place I enquire for my own Satisfaction. His Answer, if it may be called
one, was as follows; he said, The Disciples of Christ, when they baptized
with Water, knew that it was the Mind of their great Master that they should so
baptize: I said, I know not that any of the Apostles did ever say so much as
thou would insinuate; for both by what Peter and Paul say, it appears very
natural to be the Mind of Christ, only to condescend to so much as was done by
the Apostles in that of Water, because of the Peoples Weakness; and no Question
but the Jews were very much ser^ed in the Be^ef of John the Baptist's
Dispensation of Water to Repentance, and a so of the Circumcision, and
Purifying, and many other Things used amongst that People: Now Peter, when the
Contents were grown stronger in the Faith and in the Grace of God told them, It
in me the putting away the First of the F^, but the Answer of a good Conscience
(...) is God, by the R^ction of Jesus Christ; and Paul, Although he did once in
Conde^ention circumcise Tim^hy, yet told the People at another Time, that
Neither C^ (...) cry thing, but a new (...) (...) them nothing; and he a so
thanks God (...) and Ga^us, and the Hous^ld of Stephanus; befour those, Be knew
not that be had (...) saw him not is (...), but to prea^ the Gospel: And I am,
as I said to the Friend of the Prophet's Mind when he said, The Elements should
melt as with fevent Heat: It the Gospel Power be not this fervent Heat, I knew
not what is, not what is able to melt away the Elements. But I further said, it
he was a Baptist, he should deal plainly and honestly with Friends, and tell
them what he was, and not preach one thing and keep such Reserves to himself,
Friends admired, and said, they had not the least Thought of any such Thing by
him; so he said, he would not fall out with me. I told him, I was as much for
Peace as he was, but at the same Time I would have us to mind that we sound in
the Faith, and Preachers of the Gospel, and not go back again into the (...) is
all in compare^ of the (...), I had good Service and great Satisfaction upon
This Island, although I found Truth so low that it Might them be truly said as
(...) (...) or the true Seed, (...) which is in our Apprehensions but small,
and much pressed down with the many Things that are hurt^, especially by the
Love of Money, Pride, and Forgetfulness of God?

I was invited on beard a great tra^p at Ship, whereof one Read was Master, who
remembered me when I was but young, and was traveling to or near Scarborough, he
was loving to me, and several Friends who were with me, and I had and Service
on board. There was also on beard a French Protestant, now a Captain of the
(...) transport Solders bound for Jamaina; he lodged at John Groves's, and was
a very civil Man, and (...) it I would go with Captain Read, who offered, it I
was going, to carry me to (...) free he would wait on me if I was sick of asked
any thing; and would gladly Have had my Company: I acknowledged both their
Generosity and Civility to me, and so I took leave of them, and of the noble
Captain Salter, who I have had occasion both to mention and to love, who took
his solid leave of me, and wept like a Child, and said openly in the hearing of
many, that he never (...) Man so well before, and though he did not want B^ss,
yet for my sake be would serve my Friends What say in his Power; or near those
Words.

I find as we live and walk in the Truth, there is an inward Witness which God
has placed in the Hearts of Men that is reachable, except in such who are
arrived to a great Degree of Hardness and Insensibility, and so have ^le Sense
or Perceivance of Good, either in themselves or in others which is a deplorable
State and much to be lamented. Oh what Grief of Heart and Spirit it has been
to me, to hear and see the Wickedness of some! if such Wickedness was as great
a Trouble to them who acted it, as it was to me, I have thought they would soon
grow weary of it.

Now I lest the Island, and embarked on board a Ship, John Griffith Matter,
bound for Bristol in old England, and went to Sea with some East India Ships
that had put in at Barbados, having a Ship of War or two for their Convoy.
After we were got to Sea, they had so much drinking and carousing that we grew
weary or staying with them, and after some Consideration, the Captain, who was
a Friend, lest them and came sale to England.

In our Passage we had some rough Weather near the Tropic when I mentioned
before, and the Men and Captain being much disordered with watching and hard
Labor, as I remember, for eight and forty Hours Night and Day, a Calm ensuing,
the Captain desired me to take his Place for his Watch, and mind the Helmsman,
and see that he made straight Steerage; bat alas! he was so sleepy, it was next
to impossible to keep him awake, I walked on the Deck, and had overmuch Work to
mind the Compass, and the Helmsman too, for a fine Breeze of Wind came on, and
all of a sudden a very unusual Fear fell on me, and I looked into the Sea, and
beheld it appeared to turn blue, and as far as I could discern to Windward, I
saw white Caps or the Water-freckle; on seeing which, through Fear, more than
any great Skill, I stamped with my Foot as though I would have broke the Deck.
Out came the Captain, but what with Fear and Sleep he could scarce hit the Door
out of the Cabin; but when he was got upon the Deck, he stamped, and called out
all his Hands, and bid them lower and furl the Sails with Speed, or else we
were all dead Men, for here is a Hurricane just upon us: And no sooner was all
made snug as well as could be (as the Seamen phrase it) but the Wind blew so,
that we thought it would have turned the Bottom of the Ship upward: The like I
never saw; and, as the Captain said, we had not one Minute to spare of being
cast away, according to all human Probability; and, as the Seamen term it, it
was such Hurry durry thick Weather, that we could scarce see any thing a
hundred Yards, which violent Weather held for about an Hour, in which time we
drove by a Vessel, and were so near her, that I thought I could have slung a
Stone aboard: Our Ship's Crew were fore afraid, and looked upon her to be a
Robber; her Rudder was lashed or tied up, and the Men were all gone off the
Deck, but our Mariners were so affrighted, that they thought they would set
some sail and follow us; for no sooner were we past this Ship but the Weather
grew better, and away we ran in hazard of bringing toe Masts by the board, but
through the Divine Providence of him that is Lord over all, both Sea and Land,
we escaped and camp safe into Cork in Ireland, where the Matter lived, and rode
there for some time, and then weighed for Bristol, as I intended for the
Yearly Meeting there.

We had rough Weather in crossing the Channel, before we came into the Severn,
where our Sailors, being afraid of being pressed, launched the Boat, and ran away
into Cornwall, leaving out ^^ur on board to bring the Ship up the River. We saw
a Pinn^^^, having in it a Lieutenant with a Crew of pressed Men, to press more
if they could find them, and our Master called on me, and desired I would put
on my best Clothes and come to him, and so I did, and he sat me on his right
Hand: By this time up comes the Lieutenant and asked for my Men, taking me for
the Master; I told him, they had launched the Longboat and were gone, and we
could not hinder them, they being the strongest Party; at which he appeared
very much enraged, and seemed as though he would have struck at me. I told him
calmly, he had more need pity than he angry with us, for if there should be a
Gale of Wind, we were in great Danger of all perishing for want of Hands, for I
showed him what Force we had, viz. James Bates, whom I did not then call my
Companion, nor John Griffith Captain, the Cabin Boy and myself were all the
Men on board. But he asked, what for a Man that was who sat beside me? I told
him, he was a Man sufficiently secured against the Press: Then the rough Man
fell, and said, I looked like an honest Man, and he would take my Word and not
search (...) Men: So I ordered a Bott^ of the best Liquor on (...) be br^ght,
and then the Lieutenant and I parted very ^^endly.

I write not this as Thing I approved, but disliked; but being taken at un^,
had not time to shun at as before mentioned unless I had exposed my Friend the
Master or the (...); although I neither said not did, that I know of, any thing
worse than what thou ^st here written; I told the Captain I thought he was a
great Coward, and had exposed me to D^ to save him (...).

Wind and Weather favoring us, we came in due time to Br^ Yearly Meeting,
where I met with William F^n and was truly glad to see him with many more at
that place; but my Companion falling sick. I was made willing to leave him, and
traveled (...) of Ireland, and a sweet (...) to (...) myself of what I had
upon my Mind and came away in Peace, and in one feeling or the Love of God.

John Haydeck and I came from London together, and had Meeting (...)
Yearly Meeting, where I was glad to see my Home-Friends, and to enjoy the Love
of God once more with them; for this is our principal Crown and Kingdom in this
World, to enjoy the favorable Countenance of the Lord, and one another in his
living and internal Presence; and when I looked back upon all the Mercies and
Deliverances I had received from the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, Seas, and
Rivers of Water, whose Hand made all, and whose Eye and watchful Providence
attends all, and is over all, my Soul was filled with Thanks and Praises to the
great and most excellent Name of him who lives for ever, and has helped my
Soul to overcome many strong Temptation, and has borne up my Head under many
deep Afflictions and Tribulations, renowned for ever be his holy Name.

I came home the 18th of the Fourth Month 1703, and found my Children well; and
now I was under a Thoughtfulness how to walk and demean myself so, as that I
might be preserved near the Lord, and in due Reverence and true Fear before
him; that inasmuch as I found there was something of Holiness unto the Lord
imprinted or engraven upon the fleshly Table of my Heart, that now in this
Time, when I was not so particularly and immediately concerned in the like
daily Travel on Truth's Account, I might not lose the Savor, Relish and
Sensation of heavenly Things. Some will read me here, in this short Survey I
have been taking of my present State and Thoughtfulness, that it I could not
make it better, I might not make it worse, either in doing, or not doing any
thing that might prove a hurt to me; for a Vessel had much better be laid by,
if it can be spared, than used to its hurt. Now in this careful and watchful
Frame of Mind, I have found Preservation from time to time to this Day, by
retaining the Salt of the Kingdom in the Soul or the inward Man, which is of a
preserving Quality, with which the Vessel is, and can only be kept tit for the
Master's Use: If we lose this, the Creature soon grows out of Order and unfit
for the Master's Use. Read and consider there Things in Time, whose thou have
the P^ze in thy Hard, and Time to do and receive God at the Hand of him be the
Offerings of Pr^e and Renown, new and for ever.

Whilst I remained at Home as my usual Manner was, I attended First day, and
Week^, and Monthly-meetings, as also Quarterly and other Meetings for the
Service of Truth and visited many Meeting up and down in the Country, and had
up to the Service of Truth; but did not see it convenient (as my Children were
well placed to settle or keep a Family, until my Way appeared clear to marry,
which did now draw on, and after I had been near seven Years a Widower I
married Anne Robinson, who descended of a substantial Family at far from
Kirby-^side, in Yorkshire.

We had not been marrid much above two Years, before my Wise began to appear in
the public Work of the Ministry, and indeed very comfortably and acceptably to
Friends, and she grew in Understanding both of the Discipline of the Church of
Christ, and also in further Knowledge in the Work of the living Ministry, etc.
And about that time it came upon me to visit Friends in most of the Northern
Counties in England; and some small time after my Return, I had a Concern to
visit Friends in several Parts of the Southern Counties, Thomas Beedal being my
Companion, who grew in the Truth and (...). We had many g^ Meeting (...) and
Service and great (...) Home in Peace.

New I (...) Heart the Time (...) Who and I must put (...) Meet he p^ to one
^other, which we (...) and never had either evil Word (...) against each other.
I am fully sati^fied (...) Peace and true Love one with an they, and were glad
when we could either one or both serve Truth and Friends: Therefore I find it
on my Mind in this P^ce, to Insert the following Relation concerning her, viz.

A short ACCOUNT of the Life, Convincement, Qualifications, and dying Sayings
of that (...) the Lord. ANNE RICHARDSON, who (...) this Life the 18th of the
Twelveth Month, 17^^, aged about Thirty three Years.
SHE was descended of an honest and considerable Family or the Rooinsons, at
Hutton in the Hole in Yorkshire, and was convinced in her young Years, and
received the Truth in the Love of it, and it became valuable and precious to
her above all Things in this World; and through the blessed Work and Operation
of the Grace and holy Spirit of Truth, she was weaned from the World's
Pleasures, Vanities and Recreations, from taking any Delight (...) and (...)
w^t to (...) ence (...) the (...) a (...) and Fesh^ (...) Lan^ (...) of (...)
in being (...) Meeting, a (...) up a the Lord. We (...) dese^ (...) gave her a
large (...) of his living Power and (...) a K^ (...) Thing that appea (...).
And affect Truth (...) every Thought (...) ^jected (...) is a great Week, yet
(...) without which there is (...) and without (...) again, there is no
ent^^ing into the Kingdom of Heaven.

After this great (...) in her, It was (...) Part of her Time, that the was
much (...) the Power (...) the peaceable, meek and quiet Spir^ of (...) and
grew daily more and more in the (...) and Love of God, and was much believed of
God's People, and indeed of her Relations, Neighbors and Acquaintances, who
were (...) Persuasion, and (...) all her Ways, (...) and Interest, but (...)
Peace (...) in all her (...) who ought (...) the Professors (...) against her,
not even (...) Day of her Death, for the was (...) spoken well of by (...) both
Friend's and (...) often been seen in to (...) me Cause, for the was a (...)
and exemplary (...) and gave no Offense to (...) to the Church of Christ; (...)
with such as were in (...), whether in Body (...) in her (...) and by other
Means clearly (...) She was a Woman endued with great Patience, and with a
quiet and serene Mind, we I qualified and fitted to her Husband's
Circumstances, whose Lot it was often to be abroad in the Service of the Truth
an honorable and a faithful Wife, wi^ing to give up her all for Christ and the
Gospel's take, counting nothing in this World too near or dear to part with,
for the Gory of God, and Advancement of the ever Soul, and the Good of others.

One Thing is remarkable and worthy of Comm^m^ration, which I insert as
follows, that others in the like Case may not barely and outwardly imitate
her, but feelingly come up in her heavenly Practice and Experience, under the
Influence, Light and Help of God's holy and blessed Spirit, viz. When that
worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, John Bowstead, returned from London
Yearly Meeting through several Counties to York, and so Home with me, not long
before my Wise was taken away; and having some Discourse with her, he asked
about several Things of Moment, especially about her Husband being so much from
Home, she gave him this Answer; That inasmuch as she gave up her Husband
cheerfully and freely to serve the Lord, and to be serviceable to the Church of
Christ, she did not only sympathize and feel with him in his most adverse and
low State, but partook with him in his best Enjoyments, when the Power of Truth
prevailed over all its Enemies; although I am then far from him, yet I partake of
the Spoil, or the shedding abroad of the good Things of God among his People,
as my Heart goes along with the Work of the Lord, and such as are engaged in
it; and in all my Husband's Afflictions I am afflicted with him: And one of my
Main Concerns is, that neither I, nor any Thing in this World, may detain my
Husband from doing what the Lord calls for at his Hand; for if any Thing hurt
him as to the Truth, what Good can I expect of him? This John much admired,
with the deep and weighty Reasons she gave about the Christian Discipline of
the Church, and concerning the Ministry, the like, he said, he had not met with
in all his Travels before; yet she was a Woman of few Words, and express much
in a little Compass: And when she was taken away, oh! the Loss and Sorrow he
expressed to me in a Letter concerning her Death.

She was very clear in her Understanding, had a penetrating and discerning Eye,
a great and inward Sense of the State of a Meeting, as also of their several
particular States. I cannot at present describe to the full all the hidden
Virtues of this Handmaid of the Lord, but there were many visible Fruits of her
virtuous Mind, that did appear to the Children of Men, some of which were
these, viz. She was an affectionate and tender Mother to her Children, yet did
correct them when Occasion required, without Passion, or the least Appearance
of Disorder of Mind, and still had them in great Subjection; at which I often
admired, and thought, surely she is come, by Workings of the holy Spirit, to a
greater Dominion over her own Spirit than many who appeared to be her Equals.
She was a true Christian, a loving and dutiful Child to her Parents, a good
Neighbor, a faithful Wise, a loving and tenderhearted Dame over her Servants,
and overcame them with Love, and was much beloved by them, and also feared;
they loved her, and were very unwilling to disoblige or offend her.

She appeared and behaved herself as became a sanctified Vessel, that was in a
good Degree fitted and prepared for the great Master's Use, and often appeared
as one than had been secretly in some Intercourse with Jesus Christ in Spirit,
where his Glory had more particularly shone in and over her Soul, not only
because of the Gravity and Solidity of her Countenance, but also the
Tenderness, Humility and Sweetness of her Mind and Spirit, Weightiness of her
Conversation, Edification of her Advice, Soundness of her Judgment, and
Clearness of her Understanding, all which made her Company very acceptable
while among the Living Her Heart was often filled with the Love of God, and
early raised and enabled to speak a Word in Season unto many States and
Conditions, Whether of home or abroad, in her own Family, amongst her
Neighbors, or in the Church of Christ, in Testimony to Matters relating to the
Worship of God, or in Matters relating to Discipline, especially in the
Meetings of her own Sex, where she had a great Service, and will be greatly
wanted. She had great Care upon her for the good Education of our Youth in
Plainness of Habit and Language, that they might be preserved out of the
Corruptions of the World in all the Parts thereof; in all which Services she
will be much missed: Yet we being sensible, that her Removal is her great Gain,
it helps to alleviate our Sorrow and Loss, which is great, and will not soon be
forgotten by many who had the Benefit and Comfort of her good Services. Also
her watchful and solid sitting in our Meetings for Worship was remarkable, with
very little Motion that was perceivable; yet when the least Stirrings of Life
in her Mind were perceived, in order to bring her forth in Testimony, the
Meeting was truly glad, and the Living amongst us rejoiced at it, for her
Appearance was with the Wise, and in the Language of the holy Spirit; which was
a clear Demonstration that the Work was the Lord's, and by and through his
Spirit and Power; all which gave her a great Place in the Minds of faithful
Friends and Brethren. But she is gone in the Prime and Flower of her Age! which
sets before end is a Memento unto us to show us the Uncertainty of our Time
here, and to prepare for one Certain to come, that Death may not overtake us as
unawares before we are prepared for it.

I come now to the Time of her long Weakness, in which she was preserved in
great Patience, Steadiness and Resignation of Mind to the Will of God, even
unto the End; and she enjoyed much heavenly Comfort and Consolation in the
living Presence of the Lord to her immortal Soul, so that when she was asked,
Whether she thought she might recover or not? She mildly replied, She was
afraid to desire to live; because, said she, I believe if it please the Lord to
take me away now, it will be well with me, for I find nothing that lies as a
Burden upon my spirit. At another Time she said, As to that little Testimony I
have been concerned in, this is my Comfort and Satisfaction, that I can truly
say I did not kindly any strange Fire, and there are could not was in myself at
the Sparks thereof, but what I did in that Matter was in the (...) and (...) my
(...) among the (...).

Many (...) the ^oke that were (...) to could not be rem^n be^ed; we having
some Hopes of her Recover, (...) as to such a (...) what the (...) as otherwise
it (...) she was heard to my (...) She (...) (...) World. I never (...) come
(...) thereto be what it would (...) the (...) ^me of her Health; and in her
(...) much swallowed up in the (...) her Lord and Savior (...) Christ, and
(...) song P^ (...) his (...) Name, and (...) as one wholly redeemed (...) this
(...) whose Heart was (...) earnestly engaged in the (...) and heavenly Things.
(...) be the Lord, (...) had (...) a Part in the (...) and ever such (...)
(...) but she live^ and (...) in Jesus Christ, even unto the end of her (...)
here, and (...) away with (...) any Appearance (...), I believe (...) of (...),
where her Soul (...) song (...) to the Lord God and the Lamb for ever, with all
these who have overcome the World, the Beat, and false Prophet, and every Thing
the Lord's Controversy is with, and who have not loved their Lives unto Death,
but given up that Life they had in any wrong Thing whatsoever.

When I had drawn up the foregoing Account, and showed it to some discreet
Friends, they said, it was not (...) her Work; yet when I looked it over again,
with an Intent to insert it here, I thought it looked too large; but upon more
mature De^ration I could not find what part to omit, but it would hurt the
whose Matter, therefore as I found in contained Encouragement to all tender and
well-minded People, to persevere in Faithfulness to the End; Caution against
Pride. Passion and indulging or sparing any wrong Thing in Church or Family;
and something of Advice to several Conditions and Growths in the Church of
Christ; it appeared most easy to me, not to lose any of those good Fragments
which had any thing of a heavenly Savor in them, and it I have not missed it,
there is something that has a living Relish, for without that I should soon be
weary of either writing or speaking.

Not long after the Departure of my Wife, it came upon me to visit the ^thern
Parts of England, and some Part of Works, and I had good Service and great
Satisfaction; I was also London, John Adam being my Companion, who was an
innocent, clean spirited Man.

Again, I found it required of me to visit the South-west Parts of England, in
the Year 1717, and I traveled through the West Part of Y(...) into
Westmoreland, Lo^shire, Ch^, and so on to Bristol and as far as Cornwell, and
had many good Meeting; although I traveled alone, yet the Lord, in whom I put
my Trust and depended upon helped me, and bore up my Head through and over all,
renowned be his most honorable Name, now and for ever.

An ACCOUNT of my Visit to FRIENDS in IRELAND.
IN the Year 1722 it was renewed upon me to go into Ireland; the Thoughts of it
had been long upon my Mind, but now the Time seemed to be fully come, to pay
that long thought of Visit; and Joseph Bunting of Ca^land, being my Companion,
we went from K^dal Yearly Meeting which was a large and good Meeting, and
passed along to Whitehaven, and took shipping for D^blin, and staid their
Half-years Meeting, which was large, and in which the living Power and Presence
of the Lord was felt amongst us; exalted over all be the mighty Name of the
Lord, for those and all his Mercies.

I had there many good Meetings, and also met with some hard ones (as is the
Let of such who are called to this Vocation) and the best way I have found,
when I met with such, is first to regard (...) Call, then to mind our dally
Steps we take in that Vocation into which we are called, and take special Care
to have along with us the Company and Counsel of him that has so called us;
this is the way fully and truly to discharge ourselves of that Trust the Lord
has reposed in us, to the mutual Comfort and Edification of the Churches of
Christ, and also to the Peace and Consolation of our own Souls.

It is now with me to write the following Remarks on Ireland, which will not be
remote to the State of Friends in many other Places, where there is a right,
found, living Ministry preserved, and good Discipline exercised, which mostly
go together: There Truth and Friends arc kept generally in good Esteem, and
also thriving; but where these fail, especially the Discipline, oh! how undue
Liberty, and the Fashions of the World, with many corrupting Things, creep in
amongst the Professors of Truth, even unto the Reproach thereof, and Scandal of
these who are so prevailed upon; and hearty Sorrow of such as know and feel the
Hurt of these Things: Oh! what a Hinderance this is to the Progress of the ever
blessed Truth in the Earth; and indeed it has been in my Mind, that the main
Work in this our Day is to search into the Churches, and endeavor to bring
them into such a Condition, that it may once more be said, Fellow Christ as you
have us for Examples; not only here and there one, but the Believers in
general; so it will be, when we as a People all speak the same Thing, or that
which is agreeable, as well in our Practice (so often recommended) as in Faith
and Doctrine; for I have ever understand Examples to be more prevalent than
Precept: But if any amongst Friends be grown so hardy, and so unsensible, as to
prefer some foolish Fashions, which to me appear to be shameful and undecent,
it is an evident Demonstration they are departed too much from the Principles
and Practices of our worthy Elders in the Truth; which I fear is the Case or
too many, both in that Nation and in England.

Let not any say, that I smile in the Dark, and do not tell what I mean; for
some few particulars I intend to mention for the Ease of my Mind: I have seen
several Changes of Fashions in forty Years time; our first Friends and
Promoters of Truth came out in the Lord's Work and heavenly Power, plain, and
generally continued so for their Time; but alas! how soon there appeared an
Alteration, in some Men especially, when the Weight of Sufferings was over; it
then began to appear, and has from time to time continued to increase ever
since, among some professing Truth with us, not only in extravagant Wigs, with
much Powder in them, but also in Cross-P^ts, needless Capes, and diverse Cuts
and Shapes in their Clea^bing, in Conformity to the prevailing Fashions of the
Times, as well as in setting up heir Hats; all which appear to me more likely
to lead those who follow them, into Egypt, or the World again, than into the
heavenly Country or Canaan, which we profess to be pressing after, and hope to
obtain in the End.

Now, not to let the F^ales pass without my Observation on them: I well
remember in my younger Years, especially in great Towns and Cities, I have met
with those that professed Truth with us, who have had but very little Coverings
on their Heads, and others that have had more set up at a considerable Distance
above their Foreheads, and both these Sorts perhaps bart-necked. When I have
met with such I have said, What a fair or beautiful Daughter of Sion would
thou be, if thou would put on Truth and Christ's Righteousness, and put away
all these foolish Fashions? And in Families, when I have asked some
Particulars, what they could say for these Dresses, and being so naked, both
Neck and Shoulders, I received this Answer, or something like it, That it was
good for their Health, to keep their Temples cool and to learn to be hardy, by
exposing themselves thus to the Air in their Youth: But if that was the true
Reason, I added this Caution to them; to consider duly, if Religion did not,
yet the Modesty of their Sex should, reclaim them from it. Sometimes, with the
Dislike I showed to these Things, I advised them, that they would cover their
naked Skin, and no more expose themselves to the Lust and vain Speculation of
the worst, and great Trouble of their best Friends; and worst of all, to the
great Hurt of themselves, and in a Manner destroying all reasonable Claim to
Christ: For how can our Love to, and Faith in him be true and found, when our
Practice is so remote from the Practice and Example of Christ and his Apostles,
which they gave and endeavored to inculcate? Be not conformed to this World,
but he transformed by the renewing of your Mind, that (...) was pr^ what is
that good and acceptable, and perfect Will of God, Romans xii. 2. Whose adorning,
let it not he that outward Adorning of plaiting the Hair and of wearing Gold,
or of putting on of Apparel: But let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that
which is not corrup^^ble, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which
is in the Sight of God of great Price: For after this manner in the old Time,
the holy Women also who trusted in God adorned themselves, being in Subjection
unto their own Husbands, I Pet. iii. 3, 4, 5. Alas! woe is me, for the Hurt of
the Daughter of Sion, when I consider with Regret from whence such are fallen,
if ever restored out of the Fall.

If we as a People should follow such Examples as I have touched upon,
certainly we shall become an Hissing and a Bye-word to all Nations round about,
who may have heard of us, and what great Things the Lord of Hosts has done for
us since we became a People, as may, and has been seen and heard in Examples,
Words and Writings from our faithful Friends and Brethren (the chief
Promulgators of Truth and Righteousness) in their unwearied Labors, Faith and
Sufferings for the Cause and Testimony or Jess Christ; and what also was not
less remarkable, by their exemplary Lives of Plainness, Humility, Sincerity,
and Self-denial, with Works of Charity.

Now, thou that read this, beware that thou do not let in any wrong Mind,
and in that begin to judge me instead of judging thyself; for as far as I know,
I have but done my Duty: See first, that thou do thine before thou begins to
judge me. Bear this Caution from thy Friend, thou that God has endued with his
Spirit, and wait till this holy Spirit of Truth is upon thee a Spirit of
Judgment; as then a^^dest under these Qualifications, thou art fit to fit in
Judgment, and judge wrong Things in thy^ first next in thy Family, and then in
the Church of Christ; and he unwearied in thy Labors to preserve, as well as
to store, what thou art capable of doing in the Church of Christ, from all
wrong Ways and Things; for it Corruption and Slackness come in, and prevail
over the Leader, as well as over those whom God has raised thee up to be a
Help unto, then will the Lord deal with both thee and them some other Way; for
I am satisfied the Lord will turn his Hand upon his People in these Days, as he
did upon Israel formerly, saying, by his prophet, He would purge away her
Dress, and take away all her Tin; not only all gross Evils, but also that which
in Appearance may be like Truth, but is not Truth: This was and will be the Way
to restore Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the Beginning: Oh!
then shall the Gentiles see the Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory, said
the Prophet.

Although there is great Occasion for an Amendment in many yet there is a
bright and heavenly-minded Remnant in England, Ireland, and many other Parts in
the World, against whom I find not any thing to press upon my Mind to complain
plain of; but a Word of Encouragement springs in the Life, in the Love and good
Will of God, to press and persuade you to a steady Perseverance in the true
Faith, and in an exemplary and pious Life (I never saw more need of this than
now, according to my View of the State of Things) that when the Lord the
righteous Judge, who will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret
Thing, these, as beforementioned, may be found clear of the Blood of all Men,
seeing that they have warned them, and given Notice when they have seen any
Danger, or an Enemy approach nigh to them.

Here is Work for such as God has set up as Watchmen over his People, to see
that those do not go on in Bye-ways, who profess Truth, and leave the Way of
Truth unoccupied by them; here is Work for the true Judges, who have the Spirit
of Judgment upon them: And not with standing some, here and there, who may be
found in the faithful Discharge of that Truth the Lord has reposed in them,
may meet with some Opposition from such as are unfaithful, and not willing to
be bounded and girded by the Truth, no not so much as to an outward Conformity
to the Plainness and Decency, so much and frequently recommended by the
Writings, by public Testimonies, and also in our Meetings for Discipline; for
it is a considerable. Branch of our Meetings for Discipline to inspect into,
and take care to see that Friends walk orderly as becomes our holy Profession;
and where wrong Steps are made, and wrong Ways are gone into, and Liberty taken
by any who do profess Truth with us, that such may be dealt with, and the Evil,
as also the bad Consequence thereof, laid before them, and they be labored
with, and not left; for although it may be but a small Appearance or Beginning
of a Leprosy, which is naturally apt to spread, unless proper Applications, and
in due Time too, be made in the Wisdom and Love of God; yet if any there be who
prefer (...) own Wills and so far love that Life they have in those Things,
that are not only evil in themselves, but also of evil Consequence by their
(...) Example more than they love Truth and the Unity of the Brethren, such had
better for Truth's sake and for the Reputation of the Testimony thereof, he
dealt with, for Epic of the Minds of the Faithful, who suffer under the Sense
they frequently labor of a Cloud of Darkness and Oppression, wrong Ways and
wrong Things.

It may not be amiss to give a Hint here, at what Door many have gone out into
diverse Evils; first, by being brought by Custom to be in love with
Strong-drink, and keeping loose Company; for even such have been so far a Means
to corrupt, and in time to draw away the Mind from that Simplicity and purity
the Lord's People ought to live in, until a Cloud has some over the
Understanding, and the Sense of the Virtue and heavenly Savor of the precious
Truth is lost; and then the old Inhabitants of the Land (comparatively
speaking) cloud in again, as Pride, Passion, Lust, Envy, loose Conversation,
open Drunks one's; nay some worse Spirit's than their Minds with the former,
that was once measurably overcome and cast out; it is therefore certain, that
the land at these will be miserable, except the Land grants them a Place of
Repentance while here.

Now my tender and well beloved Friends, watch against and strive to keep out
the Enemy that he enter not; for what way soever he enters and gets Footing, he
defiles God's Temple, and before thou witnessed if the Lord to Destroy him and
call him out again, thou must have many a sore Combat, and some Warfare
(perhaps more than thou art aware of) before thou gainest all the Ground thou
have lest, by giving way to the Adversary of thy Soul; therefore keep upon thy
Watchtower, watch unto the End, watch and pray continually, that he enter not
into Temptation, said our great Lord unto his Followers: for I have found by
Experience, that it is harder to gain what we have lost, than to keep it while
we had it; and to improve our Talents, is not only the way to have them
continued, but also to have them more abundantly added unto us; but such as do
not improve what is given unto them, even that which they have been entrusted
with shall be taken from them: Oh! how desolate and miserable such will be in
the Day of Account, when Christ like a great Shepherd, divides the Sheep from
the Coats, and between the Slothful and the Faithful Servants, between the wife
and the foolish Virgins, and between all those who adhered to, obeyed, and
followed him according to the Measure of Light and Knowledge received, and
those who have rejected and disobeyed the Strivings and Convictions of God's
holy Light, and blessed Spirit, placed in the Hearts of the Children of Men to
enlighten, instruct, reprove, comfort, and guide, according to the State of
every individual Mind, as it is conformable or disobedient to inward
Convictions. So is this holy Gift a Witness for, or against, to accuse, or
excuse in thy Conscience, according as thy good or evil Doings are and do
prevail in thy Heart and Soul. But this is somewhat a Digression from the
historical Part of my Travels; for as I have mentioned before my going into
Ireland, I shall now say something more particularly thereof.

We journeyed from Dublin toward Cork, and had several Meetings in our Way, as
at Ballicane, Culladine, Wexford, Lamb^^own, Waterford, Clonmel, Cashel
Youghail, Cork, and staid their Province Meeting for Munster, which was a good
and large Meeting. I was much out of Order here, by reason of a Fever-and-Ague
which held me several Days, and I was much obliged to my Friends John Dodds,
Joseph Hear and his Family for the great Care they took of me in this my weak
State; I was not without some Reasonings for a Time, as to my being out of my
native Country, but the Lord who is mighty in Power, helped me and raised me
again, and gave me Ability to discharge myself of that Service I was called to,
honored forever be the great Name of the Lord for this and all his Mercies.

Next we came to Charleville, Lim^^ick, Ross, and from thence to John Ashton's,
Birr, James Hutchinson's, Montrath, Mountmelick, Henry Ridgway's, and from
Balinakil to Montrath again, and was at their Six-weeks Meeting, which was a
heavenly and good Meeting, there being a living Remnant there: then we came to
Kilconner, Carlow, Ballitore, John Stephenjon's, Timahoe, Edenderry, and went
to see my good Friend Thomas Wilson, who was sore troubled with the Gravel; I
was much afflicted, and truly sympathized with him in my Spirit, and John
Barcrost, that true Man, and I did what we could for our afflicted Brother, and
so left him and his Family in the Love of God; and went to Lismoiny, the Moat,
Waterstown, Ballimury, Athlone, and had another Meeting at the Moat; O'deastle,
Ballibays, Coothill, Castleshean Ballihegan, Ch^lemount, Dumclaudy, Colrain,
James Moor's, the Grange, Antrim, Lusburn, Hilisborough, and was at their
Province Meeting, which was held at Ballendery, and was also at some Meetings
twice; Monallen, Trumery, Lurgan, Raffer-Island, Newry, and from thence to
Droghedn, and so to Dublin, being the 29th of the Fifth-Month, 1722, and stayed
there some Meetings; and a living Remnant there is in that City, but it is a
rich Place; the mighty God of Heaven and Earth keep his People low, and truly
humble in that great City and every where else, is the earnest Desire of my
Soul to the Lord; for I know there is a considerable Remnant, whose Labor and
daily Travail is to have the Church kept clean from all manner of Defilements
both of Flesh and Spirit, so that she may be presented unto God the Father
without Spot or Wrinkle or any such Thing, in the Day when the must appear
before the great Judge of all the Earth, who will do Right unto every one,
according as their Works are found to be Good or Evil.

Being clear of Dublin and the whole Nation, I took shipping for Whitehaven,
and had a short Passage sage but a very rough one, and had some Meetings in my
way Home, to which I got on the 21st of the Six Month, 1722, and found in
Children recovered from the Fever and Ague in which I left then when I took my
Journey, which Distemper ha^ so far prevailed over them, that they were
sometimes ^ly sensible; it had been upon them for a Considerable able Time, and
it proved a Trial to me to leave seen in that very weak State, but one Day a^ I
sought the Lord in the Fervency of my Heart, to know whether I should leave
these my two poor weak Children or not, as also my Housekeeper much in the
same Case (who were all my constant Family) it sprang in my Heart livingly as
though it had been spoke with a Man's Voice, Leave them, and I will take Care
of them; I said, Thou the Lord have never fal^ed me, I will leave them to thee
do what see much good in thy Eye with them. I looked then no more behind me,
neither at them nor any thing else I had left, but became as if I had not any
thing in the World. For thus it behaveth all the Servants of Christ to do, even
the Married as if they were not married; and those that buy any Thing, as if
they did not possess it: This is a Liberty which many are Strangers unto, it is
wrought by the Finger of God; it is the Work of Go ^'s heavenly Power to loosen
Man thus from the Things of this World, and at the same Time we are most bound
unto Christ, yet enjoy a comfortable and heavenly Freedom in our Spirits in
Christ, by our Faith and Obedience unto him, in and through all Trials,
Provings and Adversities: And dear Friends, the greater the Cross, the greater
is the Crown and Reward, which all these possess, who do all Things they do
with a single Mind, and an upright Heart unto the Lord in all Things, and at
all Times.

Thus the Children of the Bridegroom are or ought to be espoused or married to
Christ, and truly devoted to him, that so they may stand, as much as may be,
disentangled from all mutable Things, and cleave to and follow him when and
wheresoever he calls and leads, and be in Subjection to him, as a virtuous Wife
is not only bound, but willingly is subject, to her virtuous and preferable
Husband; Thus we may knew and experience Christ to become our holy Head, and
that we may hold unto him, and that we may so walk and live, that he may take
Delight in his Church, (the Body) to rule in and over it, is we have the State
of the true Church and Christ represented in the most excellent and sacred
Writings of the holy Scriptures. Oh! that we may like wife know the Marriage of
the Lamb to be come, and that as of old, we may make ourselves ready, put off
the Sins and Corruptions of the Word that are through Lust, and put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his pure Righteousness: This is the fine Linen, the
Righteousness of the Saints; this is the Wedding Garment; without which
Preparation, and true Bride's Attire, I cannot see how any can expect an
Admittance into the Bridegroom's Chamber: Therefore I entreat all such as do
not find themselves in Preparation, and have not their Peace assured to them,
and want the Seal or Evidence of the Spirit of the Lord that they are his, not
to slumber away their precious Time until the Midnight, least unexpectedly the
Cry he heard to found with Terror in thy Ears, Arise, trim thy Lamp, for behold
the Bridegroom comes, who has in Times past exercised Mercy and
Loving Kindness toward thee, and has sought diverse Ways to win thee to love
him; he has at times reproved thee for thy evil Ways, and at other Times he
has set before thee the Comforts and Happiness thou should possess, if thou
would obey and follow him; nay, he has wooed thee as a young Man does a
Virgin, and if thou had devoted thy self to him, he would have gathered and
saved thee, and rejoiced over thee as a Bridegroom does over his Bride, But if
thou turnest thy back upon all his Reproofs, Entreaties, and Endearments (as in
the Parable of the five foolish Virgins) in the Time when he (the Bridegroom)
calls to an account, he will not know thee otherwise than to shut thee out of
his Presence and Favor, notwithstanding whatever thou may have heard,
received or done, if thou continuest to work Wickedness, and art not reclaimed
there from.

These Things sprang in my Mind as a Warning for all, to flee from every
destructive Thing, before the Lord overtakes them, when they cannot escape his
Hand of Justice; and also, that the Faithful may be encouraged in well-doing,
and to a faithful Perseverance to the End, Amen.

Some Things which have been omitted, I think proper to insert here, as worthy
of Observation. As I was traveling toward Lincoln, and passing through. Brig,
Friends gave me Notice then there were two great Disputants, a N^mist Minister,
and a Doctor of Physic, who were like to go all or most of the Way with me, as
the Assizes were coming on, and would be at me with Arguments about Religion,
which I soon, found true; for we were no sooner got into a suitable Way but
they began with me, which I endeavored to prevent by telling them, I did not
look upon myself to be qualified for Disputes; and withal I observed, that
sometimes Disputants ended in a worse Understanding one of another than when
they began, except they minded well to keep good Government; and now as we
appeared free and friendly, how we might be when we had ended our Dispute, was
a Question, therefore I had rather they would forbear: But they turned the deaf
Ear to all that I said, and nothing would do with them, but a Dispute we must
have, I then asked them what they would say? They queried, Whether all Men were
placed in a Station capable of Salvation, yea or nay? I replied, if I should
give my positive Thoughts to your Question, we shall have Occasion to go back
to treat of the Nature, not only of the upright State Man was in before he
fell, but also how he fell; and also in the Fall, how he stands as in Relation
to his Restoration, which brings us to the Question. Although this be not the
usual Way of Disputants, yet if you will submit to it, it will either Answer
your Question, or set it in a clearer Light for an Answer. They asked, How
could that be? I replied, if it did not, they might say so. They then so far
condescended as to hear me, and I said, first, we all agree in this that Man
was made upright; secondly, that he fell from, that Uprightness; the Question
then is, How? Answ. By the Offense or Disobedience of the first Man Adam, Sin
entered and Condemnation came upon all who had sinned. I then queried of the
Disputants, whether they believed that Adam's Fall did affect all those who did
not hear of it, as well as those who did? For, I said, there were some of
Opinion, that those who had not the explicit or outward Knowledge of the
promised Seed or coming of Christ, had not the Benefit of his Coming; and
except they would first allow, that all were affected or hurt by Adam's Fall,
then such as were not, remained in Paradise to this Day, except they would make
the Remedy less than the Disease, the Plaisto^ less than the Sore, and Christ's
Coming less extensive than Adam's Fall. I argued, that upon the foot of Reason,
as well as what we had in plain Scripture, Christ's Coming was as extensive as
the Fall of Adam; for, by the Obedience of Christ, the Gift of God Came upon
all unto Justification.

Now I think, said I, your Question is set in a clear Light for an Answer, or
else Answered; so take it at what End you will (laying aside all Quibbling) I
intend to join Issue with you, and prove that all Men are placed in a Station
capable of Salvation; or otherwise you must leave a great Part of the World in
Paraoise, or make the Coming of Christ less extensive than the Fall of Adam. I
then queried, what they said to all this? They answered, they never heard the
like before, and they would not meddle with me, I was too great a Scholar for
them. I said, there was little of Scholarship in it; I offered, I thought,
nothing but plain Scripture and sound Reason; and I told them, I had now as
good as answered their Question, and had given several Reasons to back my
Answer, and as they appeared wise, well read Men, and as far as I had gathered,
had been principled against universal Salvation, and universal Grace, for them
now to drop the Matter so slenderly, before me who appeared but like a Child to
them, was very surprising: But they replied, they would not meddle with me.

I then commended them for their good Temper, and the Civility they showed to
me, for they were civil to me beyond what I could expect; and they invited me
to the Burial of one of their deceased Friends, but I could not go, for I was
in haste to get to Lincoln, having some Business there that hastened me. Now at
parting with them, my Soul magnified the Lord, under a Sense of his Goodness to
me, in that he had opened my Way, and helped me through this Difficulty, with
many other Trials and Afflictions I had met with.

I had at another Time some Reasonings with a Papist who was my Neighbor,
about the Visibility of their Church, and Transubstantiation, with several
other Things. As to the first, I showed him, that the true Church, fled into
the Wilderness, where she was for Times, Times, and half a Time; in this State
we do not read she had any outward Character as a visible Church; and that if
they derived their Descent, it was from some false Church, and not through the
true one. And as to the other, they took too much upon them, more than they
could justify from Scripture, or clearly demonstrate from Christ or his
Apostles; for Christ never gave any of them such a Commission, as to convert
Bread and Wine into real Flesh and Blood, and then to call it Christ. You, said
I, by these Notions, deceive yourselves and your Adherents; for Christ spoke
unto such as you by Parables, because they were carnal, and did not understand
the Meaning of his Sayings in this Case, no more than the Jews understood what
Christ meant, when he spoke of destroying this Temple (meaning his Body) which
they understood was of that Temple at Jerusalem, which they made a great Wonder
at, and said, How can this be, that he can destroy this Temple, and raise it up
again in three Days, when it was Forty eight Years in building? Thus they
reasoned carnally, as Nicodemus (though a Ruler of the Jews) did concerning
Regeneration or the new Birth; and as the Woman of Samaria did, from whence
Christ should have that living Water, which he spoke of, that should be in Man
as a Well of living Water, springing up unto everlasting Life; and as the Jews
did, when Christ said, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no Life in you; they said, How can this be, that he can give us
his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink? But this is a spiritual Eating and
Drinking; even as Christ said, Out of the Belly of him that believes, shall
flow Rivers of living Waters; which he spoke of the Spirit: In like manner it
is said in the Revelations, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if any hear
my Voice, and often unto me, I will come in, and (...) with him, and be with
me. Here is an Union of Spirits between Christ and his faithful Children, and
here is an inward Eating and Drinking of the (...) spiritual and mystical Flesh
and Blood of Christ; which carnal Men cannot eat of neither can the carnal Eye
discern Christ's spiritual Body, which he seeds his living and spiritual Church
withal. When I had reasoned with the Man to this Effect, he went away seemingly
not pleased, but would not from that Time ever meddle with me any more.

I need not say much here about Christ's being come; having showed, in a
Conference in New England, how he is come to answer his Eating and Drinking the
Passover and last Supper with his Disciples, saying, he would drink no more of
the Fruit of the Vine, Until he drank it new with them in his I Father's
Kingdom. Now he that has experienced what this Eating and Drinking is, is come
beyond the outward Eating and Drinking, into the Kingdom which is within, which
comes not with outward Observations, Eatings, Drinkings, nor carnal Ordinances,
but the Kingdom of Heaven consists in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy
Ghost.

Now, read this thou that can, and learn to understand between the Thing that
Points, and the Thing which is pointed at, and between the Thing signifying,
and the Thing signified, and mistake not the Shadow for the Substance any
longer; for it is possible a Man may do all the outward Parts, and yet be
ignorant of the Cross of Christ, and of the heavenly Substance: But if he is
come to the End of these outside Things, to the Holy of Holles, such will know
what it is to minister before the Lord in his Temple, and to serve and wait at
the holy Altar, and live, and have that pure spiritual Life preserved: For we
read not of any Tithes that appertain to this spiritual Priesthood, or Gospel
Ministry; and what their outward Maintenance was to be, is showed by Christ,
beyond Contradiction, who sent them forth. Where they were received (mark that
well) they might eat such Things as were set before them, but were not to take
any Thing from them by Force, for that is out of the Doctrine and Practice of
Christ and his Apostles.

Why do People call the Scripture their Rule of Faith and Manners, when at the
same Time they believe and act contrary thereto? For when I had some Years
before a Debate with the Priest of our Parish, we meeting it Sp^^ton, I being
there upon some Occasion, and several People met together, the Priest demanded
my Reasons, why I did not pay him his Tithe? I used some persuasive Arguments
to put him off, not being willing at that Time to enter into any Debate with
him; but the more I showed my Unwillingness to it, the more urgent he was upon
me: So when I could not see how to avoid entering into some close Debate with
him, I desired he would not be angry, and he said he would not, I then showed
in several Particulars, why I could not pay him any Tithe, because I believed,
if he was a Minister of Jesus Christ, he ought nor to claim any, for, as there
was a Change of the Priest^d, there also must be of Necessity a Change of the
Law, as we see in Heb. vii. 12. and to pretend to draw any Command or Example
from Christ or his Apostles, out of the new Testament, for that Purpose,
appears to me weak and inconsistent.

We had some farther Discourse upon the Ground of his Right and Title to
Tithes, whether Jure divino, as they used to be formerly claimed, or Jure
bumano, that is, by human Laws, as most of the modern Priests seem to choose to
fix their Title; I bid him fix his Right for Tithes on which Claim he pleased,
and I would endeavor to answer him as well as I could, but he seemed not to
fix upon either; whereupon I told him, That there was no scriptural Settlement
of Tithes upon Gospel Ministers, and also offered to prove, that he was neither
in the Practice of the Levites, to whom Tithes were directed to be paid, nor
yet in the Practice of those Ministers whom Christ qualified, ordained and sent
forth; First, not in the Practice of the Levites; because the Tithes due to
them, were for their Service and punctual Performance of their Part of the
ceremonial Law, Numb. xviii. 21. which if any now claimed, it seemed to me,
that he subjected himself to the Practice of burnt Offerings and Sacrifices,
Circumcision, Jewish Habits, Washings, etc. (besides which, the Law which
appointed the Tithe to the Levites, expressly forbids them to have any Share or
Inheritance in the Land, as appears from Numb. xviii. 20, 23, 24, and Deuteronomy.
xviii. 1, 2.) which the modern Claimers of Tithe would be loath to be compelled
to the Practice of; not to insist on the Law of the third Year's Tithe, of
which the Widow, the Fatherless and the Stranger within their Gates, were to
receive a considerable Part as their alloted Portion, Deuteronomy. xiv. 28, 29.
Secondly, not in the Practice of those Ministers Christ qualified and sent
forth; for these went out by an especial Command from him, without Gold, Silver
or Brass in their Purses, without two Coats; and so intent were they to be in
the Execution of their great Duty of preaching the Gospel, that they were to
salute no Man by the way, but to go forward on the great Errand they had
received in Commission: And when they returned to their Lord he asked them, If
they lacked any Thing? And they said, Nothing; yet not because they had forced
a Maintenance from any, but that the Effect of their Ministry among their
Hearers had been so prevalent, that those who had been convinced by their
Doctrine, and turned to the effectual Power of Christ in themselves, had from
thence known their Hearts so opened, as to administer to all their immediate
Necessities; and these, thus sent, had only eat such Things as were set before
them, as they were appointed; and where they had sown Spirituals, had only
reaped of the Temporals of their Converts for their immediate Subsistence: But
though thou sowest not to me of thy Spirituals, nor do I believe thee to be one
who have any thing spiritual, which can be of any Benefit to my spiritual Part;
and though thou esteemest me as on Heathen Man and a Publican, and I am
excommunicated and cut off from any Church Fellowship with thee, (not for any
Evil, but as far as I can understand, for not coming to what thou call the
Church) yet thou expectest to reap of my Temporals, because the Law of the Land
has given thee that Power; which Disposition to reap (...) thou has not sown
and to gather where thou have not (...), is far from manifesting a (...) Spirit.

The Priest farther urged some Passages out of the New Testament, in
Vindication of the Payment of Tithes, alluding to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
ix. 7. about sowing of spiritual Things unto us; that it was but a small Thing
if (...) received of our (...) Things; and that of feeding a Flock, and
partaking of the Milk of the Flock, and of planting (...), and eating the Fruit
thereof: All which I endeavored to obviate, by showing, that he did not sow
his Spirituals to us, so as that he might be entitled to our carnal Things;
neither were we of that Flock which he should partake of the Milk of; neither
were a Vineyard which he had planted, that he might eat of the Fruit thereof.
Furthermore I said, as I am a Stranger, and an excommunicated Person, and not
of thy Children, the Apostles, if they wanted or were in any Straits for
Necessaries, did not apply to Strangers for Help, but to such of their Children
as they had been instrumental in the Hand of God to plant the true Faith, and
sow the Seed of the Kingdom in: Now these who were thus convinced, and by the
Work of God's Power converted, these were such who knew Spiritual Things sown
in them, who I believed were very free to distribute (where true Need was) of
their temporal Things, especially to such who had been instrumental in the
Lord's Hand to their coming to the saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ. But I
showed the Priest, that all this carried no Analogy to what was between him and
me, for I, being excommunicated, was but to him as an Heathen Man and a
Publican, and as we never came to hear him, we could not owe him any
Acknowledgment, nor could he expect any Thing as a freewill-offering on that
Account.

This Priest Wykes, (for that was his Name) was a strong spirited Man, of
considerable Parts and Learning; and a neighboring justice of the Peace told
me, he was fearful would be very severe with me; yet to his Commendation be it
spoken, he was ever after this Conference very loving, and never gave me any
Trouble for those he called his Dues.

I may add one Observation or two not mentioned in our Debate, which were, that
If the Maintenance of the Priests was to be wholly withdrawn, or left to thy
Freedom and Generosity of the People, many of them would want and come to
Poverty, and he forced to labor with their Hands, which would distract or at
least impede their Studies. I answered, that with such Ministers as they were,
this might be the Case: But if all Would come truly and rightly to wait on the
great Teacher, the Anointing in themselves, it would greatly tend to the
Advantage of Christendom; for the Almighty, who by his good Spirit is alone
able to raise up and quality Gospel Ministers, as he knows the Wants of his
People, and their Faith and Trust in him, would no doubt raise up from among
them faithful Ministers; such, who being humble, meek and low in Heart, like
him of whom they had learned, would be content to live in Moderation on a
little, and to labor in their respective Callings, like the Apostle Paul, that
great Minister of the Gentiles, working with their Hands that their Ministry
might not be chargeable, such as Fishermen, Collectors of Customs, etc. whose
Ministry being not their own, but received immediately from the great Shepherd
of the Sheep, would not require much Time and Study to pen down, but coming
from the Spirit of Truth immediately moving upon the Minister's Heart, would be
more effectual to reach the Witness of Truth in the Hearts of their Hearers
than all the labored Discourses of the most subtle Priest, though the Produce
of much Pains and Study. Neither have I found in all my Travels, from any
Observation I have made, that ever the faithful Ministers of Christ became any
great Burden or Charge to the Churches; for I have seen the divine Providence
attend the Lord's faithful Servants, who thereby have been enabled to order
their Affairs with Discretion, so as to want little.

An ACCOUNT of my second Visit to FRIENDS in AMERICA.
I Having had Drawings in my Mind, for some considerable Time, once more to
visit Friends in several Parts of America, and inasmuch as I believed it was my
Duty, and what the Lord required of me to give up to, I was resigned, after
some Reasonings about my Age, and Declension as to Ability of outward Strength,
concerning which I met with some inward Conflicts and Combatings which brought
me very low for a Time; but the Lord helped me through these Difficulties, and
caused his Truth to spring comfortably in my Heart, and his heavenly Presence I
witnessed at Times to refresh my Soul in these Exercises unknown to many; and
the Time being come for my preparing for the Journey, on the 15th of the Third
Month 1731, I set forward from Hutton in the Hole to Scarborough, where I took
shipping with George Widget for London, and came thither the first Day of the
Yearly Meeting, with which I was very well satisfied, and on the 25th Day of
the Fourth Month went on board of a Vessel bound for Philadelphia in America,
John Wilcox Master, who was very civil and kind to me.

On the 27th of the said Month we set sail, and had a good Passage in the main,
excepting that we had one very great Storm, in which we were in Danger of being
lost; our Bolt-sprit was broke, and the Masts were in Danger of coming down,
yet we were preserved and in about eleven Weeks, being the 12th of the Seventh
Month, I landed near Philadelphia, to the great Satisfaction of Friends as well
as myself, renowned be the great Name of the Lord for ever.

I have many Times considered, that although it was my Place to leave my very
near and dear Friends, Children and Relations, who in a tender Frame of Spirit
were much concerned for me, and I for them, yet I met with many tenderhearted
Friends in my Travels, who were very near me in the ever blessed Truth; which
fails not those who trust in the Lord, and are faithful, according to the
Ability and Understanding which the Lord has given to the Children of Men, and
are devoted to answer the Leadings and Guidance of his holy Spirit, and willing
to bear the Cross, Burden, or Yoke, which he sees good to lay upon his
Servants and Handmaids: And I entreat all such who are called unto the Lord's
great Work, to give up cheerfully and not grudgingly, and not to look back at
what is behind, so as to hasten or hinder themselves in that Work they arc
called to, lest they fall short of that Penny, or Crown, which the Faithful
will receive in the End of all their Labor.

The Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia was nigh when we landed, which was large,
and a good Meeting, many Friends from several Parts being at it. Here I met
with Henry Frankland, and we were truly glad to see each other, and went in
Company together southward toward Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, and
returned to Pennsylvania; and in a short time after we parted: He came for
England, and I traveled fur New England through the Jerseys, Long Island,
Rhode Island and Nantucket, having Richard Waln of Pennsylvania for my
Companion, an innocent kind Man; we passed through all, or most part of the
aforesaid Provinces and Islands, and had very large Meetings, and great
Attention there was in many to hear the Testimony of Truth, and an open Door
both of Utterance and in many Places of Entrance, for what was delivered; yet
not without Opposition in some Places.

I had some Discourse with a Baptist, a Justice of Peace, in one of the
Jerseys, (a Man whom I truly loved) and he told me that some of his Children
went to our Meetings, and he did not hinder them; he appeared a tender spirited
Man, and was of good Repute in these Parts where he lived, and very serviceable
in his Post; What we had most in debate, was touching Water Baptism; I
endeavored to show him the Use and End of all the shadowy Things, all which
were ended in Christ the Substance, or Antitype; and that such outward
Materials or Elements appertained not unto his Kingdom, or inward and spiritual
Administration; nor could they take away the Root or Cause of Sin, which is
only effected by the holy Ghost and Fire, or the holy Ghost that works as
does Fire, to the cleansing and purifying the Hearts of the Children of Men, as
is the Nature of material Fire to cleanse what it is properly applied unto.

I met with the same Justice afterward at Burlington in West Jersey, he was
glad to see me, and so was I to see him, for he was very loving and friendly. I
likewise met with a Man who was a Schoolmaster upon Long Island, that appeared
somewhat offended at something I had said in a Meeting where he had been, and
he followed me to a Friend's House, and appeared so full of Scriptures in
Vindication (as he thought) of Water Baptism, that what with his reading many
Passages in the Scriptures, and paraphrasing upon them, he would not hear me
for some Time; but when he was quiet I said to him, Thou have not treated me
like a fair Disputant, to run on so long, and not to give me Time to make my
Objections; it thou had pitched upon any particular Scripture, and given me
Liberty to have answered, it would have been civil and reasonable. He owned, he
had not done fairly by me; but I desired to know, what Church he pretended to
belong to? He answered, To the Episcopal Church. I then requested he would
answer me one Question before we entered into any farther Debate, and he
promised he would if he understood it. I told him, I heard he was a Scholar,
and no doubt but understood how to answer it, if he did but consider the
Matter; the Query was this, Whether the sprinkling a little Water in a Child's
Face, would bear the Name Baptism, yea or nay? He said, it would not. I
answered, Thou have made a great Pother and Noise about little or nothing; for
by thy own Confession thy Church has no Baptism at all, for I know not of any
other Way they use but Sprinkling. He would not enter into any farther
Discourse about it, but made use of the Words of Gamaliel, in favor of the
Work the Apostles were concerned in, saying, If this Work be of God it could
not be overthrown, but if it was of Man it would come to naught. I told him, I
was of his Mind; and the Lord has supported me in this and the like Work, now
between forty and fifty Years, and if I continued faithful, I had no Doubt at
all in my Mind, but he would support and stand by me to the End. And when we
parted he said, The Lord of Heaven and Earth bless you, for I believe you are
an honest Man.

By this we may see, that Truth sometimes comes over Men, and the Witness which
God has placed in Men is reached, and Truth prevails many times beyond our
Expectation, or what is by us foreseen; therefore it is good to keep to the
Guidance or Leading of the Spirit of Truth, for it is a blessed Remembrances,
Instructor, and true Comforter to all such as truly depend upon him, who sent
the Spirit of Truth into the Hearts of the Children of Men, to guide them into
all the necessary Truths which we are to know and practice, and consequently
out of ail Untruth.

When we had gone through this Island, and visited Friends there, and in
Rhode Island, and had some Meetings in our Way, we went to Nantucket, where we
met with many innocent plain Friends; also on Rhode Island, and in many Places
in these Parts of the Country, we found great Openness; in Boston beyond
Expectation, and there was some Convincement in that Town. We traveled up to
Dover, and visited Friends thereabout (which are the most remote Parts where
Friends inhabit in that Quarter of New England) where I met with a Presbyterian
Priest: What his Design chiefly was in coming to the Friend's House I know not,
but thought it was to see, or rather speak with me, for he soon began to ask me
some Questions; first, Whether I was not brought up a Scholar, and had been in
some of the Colleges where I had my Education? And also, Whether I had not put
on the canonical Gown, and preached according to the Manner of the Church of
England? I replied, I had not received my Education in any College, neither
ever put on the canonical Gown, nor preached after the Manner of the Church of
England. He told me, I had been so represented to him; and said, be supposed I
had been at some Schools: I told him, I had been at several to learn when I was
young; and said, I did not know that I had given Occasion at any Time, by what
I had said, whereby any Man might judge me to be a Scholar. He understood I
came from old England, and began to ask several Questions, as Whether our
Friends increased or decreased? I answered, I could not positively tell; I
thought there was no great Alteration in my Time as to Number, for their
Decrease in one Fart of the Nation, I thought might be made up by their
Increase in another Part. He also asked me, How the episcopal Ministers dealt
with us about their Tithes? My Answer was thus; As to that Part called the
Praedial Tithes, they commonly either gather them themselves or Family, or set
them to Tenants who take care to ferch them away before us, knowing that we
cannot be free to leave them on the Ground, as Hay and Corn, etc. and as to
small Tithes, there is an The 7th and 8th oh William the third, Chap. 6. is the
Act for Recovery of small Tithes or Offering. etc. not amounting to above the
Yearly Value of forty Shillings, which is common for all People, the Cost not
exceeding ten Shillings, before two or more Justices of the Peace, not to go
back above two Years.

The 7th and 8th of William the third, Chap. 34, which is our Affirmation Act,
is the Act for the Recovery of Tithes and Church-rates for any Sum not
exceeding ten Pounds from Quakers only, before two Justices of the Peace,
without any Limitation of Time. And by the Statute of the 1st of George the
first, Chap. 6. Sect. z. limited to ^er. Shillings Cost. See the Statutes at
large.


Act of Parliament, called An Act for the more easy Recovery of small Tithes,
for any Sum not exceeding forty Shillings, and ten Shillings Cost; which is by
Justice's Warrants. This is mostly thought to be intended to prevent their
Procedure by Exchequer Process, through which great Havoc and Spoil has been
made of Friends Goods, and sometimes their Bodies cast into Prison, where some
have lain a long Time. He asked, How our Friends did in Scotland, if they
increased there? I told him, I heard that they did not increase, but some of
the Presbyterians in Scotland were kind to our Friends, and would come to our
Meetings, especially if Strangers were at them: And I also told him, that
Persecution in our Part of the World was become hateful amongst most sober
People. He said, It was very well; and likewise mentioned, that we were
refined, and not the People we had been. I asked him, wherein he thought we
were refined? He answered, in our Principles. I desired him to name one, and he
said, George Fox denied the Resurrection of the Dead. I told him, George Fox
did own a Resurrection according to Scripture, as we do; but because he and our
Friends thought it not safe to recede from plain Scripture, nor to comply with
the Way many People have of expressing it, which we think to be too gross and
carnal, viz. that the same Body shall rise, therefore they have asserted we
deny the Resurrection: The Apostle says, that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that Body that shall be, for it is sown in Corruption, raised in
Incorruption, sown a natural, raised a spiritual Body; with much more that
might be added: And how much such a Change makes a Difference between the
present and the suture in the Resurrection, between natural and spiritual,
Corruption and Incorruption, I knew not of any finite Creature that is able
truly to determine; and therefore I think it is not consistent with Charity,
nor true Wisdom, to differ about such Things which exceed our Comprehension. He
allowed it to be better to let them alone.

We parted very friendly, and Friends were glad of the Opportunity, he having
the Character of being a great Scholar and a wise Man; but from all that
passed, they believed he gained no Advantage: However he behaved well; and
before we parted, I told him, I thought the greatest Reason why some think us
refined was this, That formerly People were to prejudiced, that whatever was
printed or said against us, our Principles, Practice and Doctrine, was
generally received and believed, though never so much disgusted or covered with
such Dresses as might render us most odious, and were by many taken for the
Standard of our Belief and Practice; but of late the Light has mere appeared,
and many are grown better disposed toward us, and likewise Men, not willing to
be imposed upon any longer, have searched for themselves into the State of the
Controversy between us and our opposers; and our Writings upon perusal,
appearing so clear and different from what the Books of those who opposed us
charged upon us, caused many who read them with a good Design, and were willing
to be set right, to say we were reformed, and not the People that we had been.
The Priest said, he thought there might be much owing to that: I told him it
was undeniable, that there must be a great Difference between our Principles,
Doctrines and Conversations, truly stated and set forth in their proper Light,
and when they were misrepresented, sometimes with all the Art and implacable
Malice that Men were capable of: And this has been the Way our Adversaries have
treated us, almost in every Thing we have believed, said of writ, although it
was very agreeable to the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

We returned back to Salem, Lynn and Boston, and visited Friends in our Way,
and at Rhode Island, Long Island and New York; and we had many good Meetings
and some large in the Jerseys, where I had some Discourse with a Justice of the
Peace about Water Baptism, but he did not hold it long before he gave up; and I
had another at Allens-Town with a Presbyterian, which held for some Hours,
about Water Baptism, and concerning Election and Reprobation, and he also soon
give up as to the first; but when he began about Election and Reprobation, I
said, I thought it was the most pernicious Doctrine that ever was broached in
the World, it did so oppose the very Nature of God, and his Design of creating
of Man, which, with all his other Works, he pronounced good and blessed; and
that Man, as the Crown and Glory of all his Works which he had created, should
be designed for the most miserable End, was unaccountable; I urged many
Scriptures against that Doctrine, as also the Confusion their were in about it,
as that of their Westminster Confession of Faith, wherein they say, That the
Decree is so certain and definite, that one cannot be added to the Number of
the Elect, or diminished from the Number of the Reprobate; and yet you tell us,
that God bath ordained the Means to effect his Ends: I then said, this
Supposition of a Decree for the Means, as well as the End, seems intended to
make the Priests and their Service necessary; but yet if they cannot alter the
Decree, what Benefit or Advantage can there be to Men by their Services or
Performance? I hope none will think that a Service to Mankind, to strengthen or
confirm that Decree if it were in their Power to do it, which I am satisfied it
is not; because no such Decree was made or is in being; the opposite appearing
by plain Scripture (which he owned when I urged it) to wit, that the Fall of
Adam did affect all; and upon the Parity of Reason, the Coming of Christ did
reach as far; because, as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; he tasted Death for every Man, was a Propitiation for the Sins of all;
and where then will thou find a People that is not included? But if thou can
find in, and prove by plain Scripture, that there is such a People not included
in these general Assertions, that Christ came to save, show me who they are.
These and much more I urged against that Doctrine, and he with many others
appeared much satisfied, and we parted friendly. He came next Day several Miles
to a Meeting which I had appointed; the Man was counted a wise and sober Man,
and was under some Convincement, and behaved well.

From thence we went to Pensylvania, and had many good Meetings in that Part,
and being clear and willing to return, I took leave of Friends in a loving and
tender Frame of Spirit, and embarked on board a Ship, whereof Samuel Flower was
Master, the 1st of the Third Month 1733 at Philadelphia, and arrived at Bristol
the 18th of the Fourth Month following, and was glad we got safe to England
having been seven Weeks in our Passage; I got, Home on the 6th of the Sixth
Month, and was truly thankful to the Lord, who had preserved me in these long
Travels and Labors of Love, through many Difficulties; but the Lord's Power is
sufficient to bear up and carry through all, Renowned be his worthy Name over
all, now and for ever, Amen.

A remarkable DELIVERANCE which happened to me, being omitted in its proper
Place, I think sit to insert here, which was as follows.

In the Year 1718 and the Twelfth Month, when John Dodgson was visiting Friends
in our Parts, he lodged with me, and I went with him and his Brother-in-Law
Peter Buck, to be their Guide to Whithy, and staid their First-day's Meeting;
and Second-day's Preparative Meeting; and on the Third-day I went on with
Friends toward Scarborough, to have the better Road home, there having fallen
a great deal of Snow while we were at Whithy, so that it was looked upon
impracticable for me to return the same Way home that I came, it being a
moorish, bad Way: But in our Way back, within a Mile or little more from
Scarborough, we came to a Brook, which by reason of the excessive Rain and Snow
was higher than ever I had seen it, so that we came to ride through it, Henry
Levin, our Guide, first adventured in, being mounted upon a very strong large
Horse, and got over with some Difficulty, and I followed him; but when I came
about the middle of the fording Place, it took my Mare off her Feet, and
something being in the was, it turned her upon her Broadside, so that I was
dismounted and carried away by the Rapidity of the Stream; but there being a
Foot-bridge a little below, about Knee deep under Water, and no Rail either to
be a Guide, or to lay a Hand on, and the Water being reduced to a narrow
Compass, hurried me violently along, and drove me with my Breast against the
Bridge with such Force, that it very near knocked the Breath out of me; but
before I touched the Bridge I happened to hold up my Hand, and John Dodgson
seeing the Danger I was in, jumped off his Horse, and ran at a venture (seeing
the Water ripple) to hit the Bridge, and just caught hold of my Fingers, and
held my Head above Water, until Henry Levins, who was got over, came to his
Assistance.

But by the Strength of the Water in my Boot-tops, they being large, and by a
Nail in the Timber under the Bridge) catching hold of my great Coat, which held
me fast, it was impossible for one Man to free me, and not without some
Difficulty for them both to get me out, the Nail holding so fast that it tore
out a great Piece of my Coat, Lining and all; but upon Henry's dismounting, his
Horse ran away to Scarborough, (and mine swam back to the Company) and when
they had got me out, Henry an on Foot to get his Horse, and found him at the
Stable Door where he used to stand, and in the mean Time John Dodgson kept me
in Motion by dragging me along, having very little or sometimes no Hopes of my
Recovery. When the Horse returned, they got me back to Scarborough, but I was
not sensible how, and they had me to Dorothy Jaques's House, and when there,
they could perceive my Lips move, but could not hear what I said, until one
laid an Ear close to my Mouth, and so understood that I said, If they gave me
any Thing that was strong, it would carry me off; which made them very
cautious: However, they stripped me and changed my Shirt, and put me into a
warmed Bad, and applied warm Flannel to my Feet for three Hours together, which
I knew nothing of, being then altogether Senseless.

Isaac Skeleton, who had been a Companion of mine in the Service of the Truth,
through several Counties, hearing of this Accident, came immediately and got
into Bed to me and kept me close in his Bosom, which many thought was a great
Means to preserve my Life. John Dodgson, though he intended for the
Monthly-meetings expressed so great a Concern for me, that he said, He would
either see me in a Way of Recovery, or die, before be lest me; yet it pleased
the Lord, of his infinite Mercy so wonderfully to raise me up again, as to
enable me to be at the Meeting next Day, and also to bear some Testimony, which
was very acceptable and comfortable to Friends, as it was also to see me there
beyond their Expectation; but yet I was much troubled with Pain, the fleshy
Part of my Shoulder being rent by the violent hauling me out of the Water.

In Gratitude, my Soul can do no less than praise and magnify the Lord for this
great Deliverance, and all his other Mercies, who alone is worthy. And I cannot
but take Notice of Friends Kindness and Goodwill to me, in doing whatsoever
they could for me, but more especially my worthy Friend John Dodgson, who
hazarded his Life to save mine.

FINIS.

