Mr. ADAMS's Artillery-Election SERMON

THE Expediency and Utility of WAR, in the present State of Things, considered:
A DISCOURSE Before, and at the Desire OF THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE
ARTILLERY-COMPANY, AT BOSTON, June 4. 1759; Being the Anniversary of their
Election of Officers: AND, In the Audience of His Excellency the GOVERNOR, HIS
HONOR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE His Majesty's Council Of the
Province of the MASSACHUSETT'S-BAY.

By AMOS ADAMS A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Roxbury.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Z. FOUL and S. DRAPER, at their Printing-Office
opposite the Lion and Bell, in Marlboborough-street, M,DCC,LIX.

MATT. X. 34. Think not that I am come to send Peace on Earth: I came not to
send Peace, but a Sword.
JUDGING only by our natural partial Ideas of the divine Wisdom and Goodness,
and from our inadequate Views of the Designs of Providence, we should be ready
to conclude, that when the Father of Mercies, the God of Peace, sent his only
begotten Son into the World, on a Message of Love to Mankind, one principal
Design of his Mission had been, to compose the Nations, and establish Peace in
this lower World; that he had crushed all the Sons of Violence, and set up a
Kingdom against which no Nation had dared to exalt itself; that all his
Disciples, by their Profession of Christianity, had been secured from the Wrath
and Violence of a wicked and restless World; that he had said to the World,
Touch not mine Anointed, nor do my Prophets Harm; that every Attempt to disturb
their Tranquillity, had been punished with immediate Vengeance, Fire from Heaven
to devour them. And when, in Contradiction to all such Expectations, we find
that the Church of Christ has, in every Age, shared in the Calamities common to
Mankind: and more than this, when we find it has been the peculiar Object of
the implacable Malice of the World; that the Kings of the Earth have set
themselves, and the Princes taken Counsel together against the Lord, and
against his Christ; such a Conduct in divine Providence, leads us to wonder at
the Designs of Providence, so contrary to what Reason seemed to suggest: we are
tempted to say, there is one Event to the Righteous and to the Wicked; were
there an infinitely wise and good Being, that presided over the Affairs of
Mortals, surely we should not see real Christianity depressed, and Sin reign
and triumph; we should not find the Church of God a Field of Blood, under the
long-expected Reign of the glorious Prince of Peace.

To teach us therefore, how apt we are to form wrong and inadequate Notions of
the Methods of God's Government; to give Relief to our Minds under those
Discouragements, that the Events of Providence are apt to produce; and that no
one might mistake the Nature, the Design and Privileges of his Kingdom, our
Savior has plainly told us what we are to expect; he has pointed out what is
like to be the Condition of his People, and taught us not to wonder, when we
see all these Things come to pass: think not that I am come to send Peace on
Earth; I came not to send Peace, but a Sword.

THIS Verse, to any one, who will consider the Tenor of our Savior's
Discourse, is sufficiently plain, and void of Difficulty; and leads us, on this
Occasion, to consider the following Things; viz.

First, THE Christian Church, as sharing in the Calamities common to a
degenerate World, particularly that of War.

Secondly, THE Agency of God, in the Wars and Miseries common to this State of
the World.

Thirdly, THE Reasons of the divine Conduct in this Affair.

1st. WE are to consider the Christian-Church, as sharing in the Calamities
common to a degenerate World, especially that of War.

GOD was pleased of old, for wise Purposes, to take a particular People, the
Seed of Abraham, into a peculiar Covenant with Himself: He separated them from
all the Nations of the Earth, He dealt with them as he did not with any other
Nation, He gave them Laws different from all other Nations; and as it was
necessary in that Age, before Life and Immortality were brought to Light by
Jesus Christ, He invited them to the Worship and Obedience of the True God, by
the certain Promise of temporal Rewards, and detered them from Idolatry and
Disobedience, by the Threatenings of temporal Judgments. These Promises and
Threatenings were a considerable Part of God's Covenant with that People: if
they obeyed and served him, they were sure of Prosperity; that God would draw a
Line of Protection around them; that all their Enemies should flee before them:
-- But, if they forsook God, and went after the gods of the Nations, the Sword
was threatened, to cut them off from under Heaven, Isai. i. 19, 20. if ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the Good of the Land; but if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured of the Sword, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken
it. And according to the Tenor of this Covenant, God always dealt with that
People; when they feared and obeyed Him, He subdued their Enemies and gave them
Peace and Rest; but when they forsook God, the Heathen had Dominion over them.
To acquaint us how exactly God conformed his Dealings to their moral Conduct,
and to this Covenant, so to teach us the Regard God has to Virtue, seems to be
one principal Design of the large History we have of that People in the Bible.

SUCH Promises, and Threatenings, with a Conduct agreeable to them, were suitable
and necessary for that People. This was perhaps the only Method in which they
could be brought to Obedience: Their spiritual Capacities and Discoveries were
but small, not sufficient to govern them, without the immediate, and sensible
Effects of Virtue and Vice. This was a Government exactly agreeable to the
Genius and Capacity of that People, and in this Way God's moral Dominion was
long supported.

BUT even then the Promises belonged to them as a People, and not to
Individuals, as such. Hence we find even in that Day, Examples of suffering
Virtue, and triumphant Wickedness. The Prosperity of the Wicked, and Affliction
of the Righteous, was a Subject that engaged the Attention, and exercised the
Patience of good Men, in that Day. Among that People, the Apostle tells us of
some eminent Saints, that had Trial of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, -- they
were stoned, were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the Sword, etc.

THUS were the Jews taken into a peculiar Covenant with God, and as a People,
were the Subjects of temporal Promises and Threatenings.

BUT upon God's sending his Son into the World, the State of Things was much
changed. That particular Covenant with the Jews, to which these Promises
belonged, was abolished, the Jews were no longer considered as God's peculiar
People. The Promises and Threatenings that belonged to their political Being
ceased; nor was there any Nation appointed to succeed them. The Blessing of
Abraham, the spiritual Promises descended, from that Time, equally on Jews and
Gentiles. Our Lord appeared, to set up a Kingdom, that is not of this World, to
reveal a New, a better Covenant; which was established upon better Promises;
enforced not with temporary Sanctions, but with spiritual and eternal Motives;
exceeding greet and precious Promises, by which we are made Partakers of the
divine Nature. The Gospel is a Dispensation of superior Light; in it Life and
Immortality are set before us in the clearest Light; its Promises are of a
divine Nature, its Motives to Obedience are not temporal Peace, but spiritual
Happiness; Motives drawn from the World to come. The Obedience of the Gospel
Covenant, is that of Faith; it flows from an unshaken Faith in the Rewards and
Punishments of another Life; We walk by Faith, and not by Sight. Evangelic
Religion, does not take its Rise from the Hope of Silver or Gold; but from the
Love of God, the Love of our Redeemer; and a blessed Faith and Hope in the
Promises of future Glory. Christians are not, under the Gospel, considered in a
political View, as the Nation of the Jews was; nor have we any Exemption from
the Calamities that are common to Mankind: So far from this, that our blessed
Lord has expressly taught us, to expect the peculiar Resentment of the World, to
be subject to the Sword, and fiery Persecutions, till that happy Day come when
the Nations shall learn War no more. I came not ^o send Peace on Earth but a
Sword; hence he goes on to arm and fortify his Disciples, and show them what a
zealous Love to himself, will be necessary to support them, in their Obedience
to him. He that (...) Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me; He
that finds his Life shall lose it; and he that loses his Life for my sake,
shall find it. Argeably he tells them, Matt. v. 11, 12. blessed are ye when Men
shall hate you, and persecute you and say all manner of Evil falsely against you
for my sake; Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven.
In the World ye shall have Tribulation. So far is Christianity from securing
temporal Prosperity to its Professors, that Sufferings are every where in the
New Testament supposed to be the peculiar Lot of Christians; they are taught to
expect th^^; and one grand Design of the Gospel is, by its noble Promises, to
support the Faith, encourage the Hope, and secure the Steadfastness of its
Professors, under those shocking Trials they are taught to expect: And that
this is not a State peculiar to the primitive Ages of Christianity, but is like
to last many Ages we learn from the Revelation of St. John, who tells us; and
when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends out of
the bottomless Pit, shall make War against them and kill them, -- and the
Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went to make War with the Remnant of her
Seed, which kept the Commandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ. In
a Word, the Events of many Ages, serve to demonstrate that no such Promises of
temporal Prosperity belong to the Church, as a political Body, as did (...) to
the Nation of the Jews. A great Change (...) made in God's Dealings with his
Church, when the Gospel Kingdom was set up, He now deals with us in another
Manner; we are arrived to a more perfect Age, and put on Trial upon more
refined Principles and Motives; we have reason to expect, that Religion it
self, will expose its Professors to the Malice (...) wicked World: Hence the
Church is said to come out of great Tribulation and to wash their Robes, and
make them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

HENCE, it plainly follows that the earthly Promises and Threatenings, proposed
to God's ancient People, are ill (...) to Christians, considered in a political
View-^nder the Gospel. What Right have any to apply the Promises of worldly
Felicity, made to a particular People; under a peculiar Covenant, long since
confessedly abolished, to Christians, who are evidently under another Covenant,
a more spiritual Dispensation; who are considered in the Gospel, not as
political Societies, who (...) this proposed as one essential Condition of
their salvation, that they deny themselves, and be ready to sacrifice all, even
Life itself, in the Ca^se of Christianity.

I KNOW the great Apostle of the Gentiles tells us, that Godliness is
profitable unto all Things, ^^ing Promise of the Life that now is: -- That our
blessed Master promises to them, that seek (...) the Kingdom of God, that all
these Things (...) added unto them; He once said, Blessed are the Meek, for
they shall inherit the Earth; -- not that they shall always have much of the
Earth. (...)
But it is observable, that the Promises in the New Testament, that look this
Way, respect Christians not in a political Form, (for no such political
Constitutions were then founded among them,) but as Individuals; and it is
necessary to understand them in a limited Sense, as intimating to us the
natural Connection of Holiness and Happiness, how much true Religion
contributes to our comfortable Enjoyment of this World, and that Believers may
safely trust in the Providence of their heavenly Father, who sends his Rain
upon the Just and upon the Unjust. It is undeniable evident, that no such
Promises are absolutely in Force; for we find in Fact, they are not literally
fulfilled, either to particular Christians, or Societies of Christians.
Experience convinces us, that many eminent Men are as remarkable for their
Poverty, and Affliction, as for their Piety: that the most eminent Christians
have died Martyrs to the Malice of the World, and the Faith of Jesus Christ.

IT is readily granted that Sin and Misery, Virtue and Happiness are nearly
connected; that public Virtue is the natural Parent of public Happiness. The
Gospel is excellently adapted to advance temporal Prosperity; -- Peace, Harmony
and good Order, are naturally grafted on the Christian System. Nothing can more
powerfully tend to advance human Happiness, even in this Life, than the refined
Morality of the Gospel. But how often do we see the Order of things inverted,
the Tendency of Virtue obstructed, in this World of moral Disorder! Christians
don't feel that Felicity, for which the christian Precepts are divinely
adapted. Indeed God may interpose, and cause Religion to have its genuine
Effects; -- I don't say, his Providence does not in this State sometimes give
us a visible Token of his Approbation of Religion, (though I make no doubt, this
was (...) Ages of the World, than in our Days THERE were good Reasons why God
should make more visible Distinctions between Good and Evil; such Distinctions
were, undoubtedly, more common among Individuals, and the Nations not in
Covenant with God, in the early Ages of the World. The commoness and
observableness of this Distinction, was what led the Friends of (...) to speak
so positively, of the Prosperity of the Godly, and Destruction of the Wicked;
and to censure Job as a secret (...), because the Hand of God had (...) him,
Job iv. (...) Fear, thy Confidence, thy Hope, and the Uprightness of thy Ways?
Doubtless that interrogatory Assertion, was founded on common Observation of
Facts, v. -- Remember, I pray (...), to (...) perished being innocent, or where
were the Righteous out off? -- But we find their Reasoning testified against,
as built on a mistaken Principle, tho full of useful Observations. Job (...).
7. And it was so that after the Lord (...) sp^kes (...) Words unto (...), the
Lord said (...) E^^phaz the Tema^ite, (...) Wrath i^ kindled against (...) and
thy (...) Friend, (...) have (...) of (...) is right, as my (...) H^^ Opinion
of the Prom^seuousness and (...) of God's Di^^ensations, was more just and
honorable to (...) we find between Good and Bad, both in (...) and (...),
further th^n the (...) and Vice? (...) we see -- (...); that there is (...) the
Righteous and to the (...) -- (...) not the Declarations of present good and
Evil, ^in the sacred Writings, as the Attendants of Virtue and vice, (...) are
not ^p^ken of particular Persons, or (...) Declarations of the (...) of Cause,
(...) general Regard (...)?
) but in what Cases, and in what Manner, he will do this, either on behalf of
Individuals, or of Nations and Kingdoms professing Christianity, is absolutely
in his own Breast: He has confined himself by no Promise: He is sovereign and
arbitrary in all his Dispensations toward his Church: He sometimes suffers the
R^d of the Wicked to rest on the Lot of the Righteous: -- He does not always
appear to crown the best Cause with Prosperity -- Though Reason would seem to
teach us, that God will ordinarily appear in the Cause of Virtue, yet
Revelation shows us, we are not to expect it in many Instances; though we are
assured, Religion will be finally Victorious.

SOME may be ready to say, this is lessening the Motives to public Virtue: --
If real Christianity will not secure to a People the divine Protection; if this
will not ensure to them Success against all their Enemies, what becomes of the
Props and Supports of national Religion? But, if it evidently appears, that no
such Promises are to be found in the christian Constitution, why should we
labor to enforce public Virtue by a Motive that God has not given? He must
think diminitively of the blessed Gospel, who does not see the noblest, the
most suitable and sufficient Motives, to all Piety, Righteousness and Sobriety,
even without such Promises of outward Prosperity, sufficient to raise true
Believers to a Contempt of the World; yea, to a glorious Contempt of Life
itself: -- And what is that Religion, which is merely the Product of worldly
Motives? how far beneath the noble Religion of the Gospel! I beg Leave humbly
to (...) Repentance and (...) or (...) by the Hope of Success against our
Enemies be not (...) the New Testament institutions, and (...) to ca^tivate a
(...) Religion, founded on the (...) of the World; (...) worldly Principles,
Motives and View^?
--

II. WE come to consider the Agency of God, in the Wars and Calamities among
Mankind, -- I came -- to send -- a Sword. --

WE find God often speaking of his Agency in the Wars and Destructions of
Mankind. Isai. xlv. 7. I form the Light, and create Darkness, I make Peace and
create Evil; I, the Lord, do all these Things. -- Isai. live. 16. I have created
the Waster to destroy. We find him expressly calling for the Sword, Isai. xxv.
29. -- for I will call for a Sword upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth, says
the Lord of Hosts. Amos ix. 4. -- thence will I command the Sword, and it shall
slay them. So we find the Almighty calling and raising up Enemies to chastize
Nations.

THESE strong Expressions of Scripture seem to intimate some powerful Influence
of God, raising up, and spriting Men to be the Executioners of one another: But
they must be taken in a limited Sense; nor may we imagine God to have any other
Agency in these Things, but what is perfectly consistent with the Goodness of
his Nature. It would be a most dishonorable Thought of God, to imagine, that
he excited the Lust and Ambition of Mankind; that he made them cruel, or
inspired them with that unnatural Desire to butcher, and devour one another:
No; these are Thoughts unworthy that Being, whose most endearing Character is
Love.

IT must however be acknowledged, that God does in some Sense send the Sword,
and suffer his own Church ^^^eel the scorching Flames of War; these Things are
all under his Eye, subject to his Control, and serve the Purposes of his Will;
and His Influence may extend thus far:

1st HE may be said to send the Sword, as He affords that Strength and Power by
which Wars are carried on: He gives to his Creatures that Wisdom, Power and
Courage, by which they destroy one another: He affords that Affluence of
Riches, that Superiority of Power, which are the Cause and Occasion of civil
Contentions: But herein, He is no more the blameable Cause of that Destruction,
which is made in the World, by the Abuse of that Strength and Power, than He is
the Author of all the Sin which is committed in the World, because He has
created and upholds all, and gives to every one those Abilities they have; yea,
He supports them in their Rebellions, by giving them Food and Raiment; sending
his Rain upon the Just and upon the Unjust. Even the Gospel, one of the richest
of all Blessings, is the Occasion of Sin in this Life, and of an aggravated
Damnation, to such as receive the Grace of God in vain, in the next. The Means,
Occasions and Instruments of War, are the Effects of divine Bounty; but in all
these, God by no Means unsuitably influences his Creatures, nor is He the
blameable Cause of Evil. That Power which God gives to Nations and Princes, by
which they destroy one another, is but the accidental Cause of Evil, and might
as well be employed to save and defend.

2dly. GOD in Wisdom permits the Sword to devour. Although Wars and Fightings
have their Original in the Lusts of Men; yet God has a sovereign Power to
restain and subdue that Pride, that Malice and Ambition, which make such
Destruction in the World. He can turn the Hearts of Kings, He can send the
Spoilers away spoiled; He makes Wars to cease to the Ends of the Earth, He
breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in (...). He (...) the Chariot in the
Fire: He has often manifested his irresistible controuling Power, on behalf of
his suffering Creatures. But He is pleased to permit the Lusts of Men to have
their natural Effects: He does not lay that Restraint on his Creatures, that he
is able to do: He suffers the proud Oppressors of Mankind to make sad
Destruction; and sometimes to spread Desolation among his own People He;
beholds Nations and Empires rushing on certain Ruin. In this Sense God is often
said to do, what he does not hinder, or permits to be done. Thus when he raises
up the Scourges of Mankind, and suffers them to go on and prosper; He is said
to call and send them to execute his Judgments; -- It is in this Sense He is
said to harden Men's Hearts, and blind their Eyes; thus He bid Shimei curse
David; though in all these Instances, He only permitted them to be done: the
Purpose, Desire and Action was not of God. So God not only gives Permission to
the Sword, but equally permits those numerous Rebellions, that are daily
committed against Himself; yea, by one Man he permitted Sin at first to enter
into the World, from whence spring all the Evils of his Creatures, whether of a
moral or penal Nature. This Permission of Sin and Disorder, is agreeable to the
Oracles of Truth, but is one of the deep Mysteries of Heaven: His Judgments are
a great Deep.

3dly. GOD makes use of the Jars and Tumults among Nations, and the
Destructions which He permits in the World, to bring to pass the wise Designs
of his Providence; All these Things are in the Hand of God: He overrules them
to the best Ends: He makes the Wrath of Man to praise Him. Thus He raised up
and permitted; yea, in the Scripture Style, He sent Nebuchadnezzar, to destroy
Nations and Kingdoms not a few, and among the Rest his own People, that He
might accomplish the Designs of his Government, which that cruel ambitious
Prince never thought of. So while the Enemies of the Church, and of Mankind,
are enslaving and destroying them in subserviency to their boundless Ambition,
they are all this Time serving the Ends of his Government, executing the good
Purposes of God; -- Purposes laid in the eternal Counsels of the divine Mind --
Ends, wise in themselves, holy, just and good. The bloody tragical Scenes acted
on the Stage of this World, though dreadful in themselves, are finally overruled
for good; in the End they will appear Parts of that Government, in which divine
Wisdom, Holiness and Goodness, will shine forevermore. God is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in Working; He does great Things and unsearchable,
mavelous Things without Number.

4thly. GOD sometimes secretly influences and spirits his People to stand up in
Defense of Liberty and Religion. So He gave Charge to the Israelites to be the
Executioners of his Vengeance upon the Canaanitish Nations; to make no Peace
with them, 'til they were utterly destroyed from off the Earth; and in a
wonderful Manner assisted them to execute the awful Commission: a Judgment
which those Nations deserved for their Idolatry. We likewise find military
Skill and Power ascribed to God; He teaches, says David, my Hands to war, and
my Fingers to fight: This special Influence, this powerful Assistance, has been
often experienced in a just Cause, in the Defense of his People, in executing
the particular Commands of Heaven. He who has the Hearts of Kings in his Hand,
often raises up Instruments to assert his Cause, to vindicate the Safety and
Liberties of Mankind, when threatened by the unbridled Rage and Ambition of
Princes. -- Of old He raised up Deliverers for his People: He made them valiant
and victorious.

BUT after all, Wars and Fightings come from the Lusts of Men: they have their
Origin in that Lust of Riches and Dominion so common to a degenerate World. It
is Ambition and Coveteousness that have, through all Ages, depopulated Kingdoms,
subverted Empires, and deluged this World in Blood and Ruin. Wars are visible
sad Instances, awakening dreadful Demonstrations, of the deep Corruption of
human Nature; such unnatural Events, as proclaim Mankind awfully deviated from
the Rule and Order of their Being; awfully lost to the noble Principles of
Humanity; filled with that malignant Hatred, that is not to be found in the
brutal World. How many of the Wars and Persecutions that have distressed the
World, have proceeded from that Malice there is in the Hearts of Men to Jesus
Christ, and that best of Religions, He has taught and supported in the World!

BUT when you read and hear of the Calamities God has permitted upon the World
by the Sword: when you think how many Thousands, I had almost said Millions,
have been sacrificed to the Pride of Princes; how often the World has been
drowned in Blood, and wide Destruction spread among suffering Mortals; you are
ready to ask, What are the Reasons of God's Judgments; what Ends, agreeable to
the divine Wisdom, are answered? can such Things consist with the divine
Goodness? are they not Evidences of God's want of Regard to His Creatures? --
Can you vindicate the Ways of Heaven, and ascribe Righteousness to our Maker?

III. I ANSWER, as was proposed in the last Place, the Ways of God are past
finding out; -- it is hard for us to investigate the particular Reasons of many
Parts of the divine Conduct: -- But even in these dreadful Things, there are
wise Designs of Providence pursued. Upon the most serious Consideration of
Things, we shall see much of the wise and good Government of God; that these
are a necessary Discipline, a State of Things exactly adapted to the moral
Temper and State of the World, and not without their salutary Effects in God's
Creation.

As to the Church of Christ, the Sword may be sent to refine and purify it.
This is a Discipline by which God tries the Fidelity of Christians, brightens
their Virtues, and prepares them for a Crown of Life: and if God is pleased to
exercise his Children with severe Discipline; if they suffer with Christ here,
and reign with Him hereafter, who can say that God is unrighteous; seeing this
is but a Probation-Life, that perfect Rewards and Punishments are reserved for
the next Life, when every one shall receive according as his Works shall be?

MOREOVER, the Sword often serves to chastize the Church for their Apostasy.
Christians often fall into great Apostasy and lose the Power, and in a Measure,
the Form of Godliness; they often need the Rod to scourge, awaken and reclaim
them: this is frequently the Case, when Christians have enjoyed long Peace and
Prosperity; they need some severe Discipline to recover them.

IN ^ine, God may send the Sword upon his People, to display his Power in the
Preservation of his Church from all her Enemies. Not that this is a primary and
immediate End, but a final Cause, an (...) of that glorious Being who looks
(...) View. We have lately seen the (...) the Occasion of amazing Displays of
divine Love and Power in the Deliverance of His Cause. The Preservation and
Government of the Church, not suffering the Gates of Earth and Hell to prevail
against her; giving a final Triumph, will redound to the Glory of God and the
Redeemer. As the Promise is now the grand Support of our Faith, so the complete
accomplishment of it will wonderfully display the Wisdom, Power and Providence
of God, and give Occasion for that Song of the Blessed; Amen, Blessing, and
Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto
our God for ever and ever.

AND then as to the World in general: Wars and Desolations are suffered, to
curb the Lusts and punish the Wickedness of Mankind. That Mankind have revolted
from God, and are liable to his just Vengeance, is too manifest to be denied.
Mankind have more or less, in every Age, disowned the divine Authority, and
been sunk in Atheism, Sensuality and Profaneness; hating God, and running upon
his Neck, ^ven upon the thick Bosses of his Buckler: It Is therefore necessary
that God use a severe Discipline. -- Indeed I dare not say that Misery, or
natural Evil, is essential to a State of Trial and Improvement. Where
reasonable Creatures are innocent and incorrupt, milder Means are sufficient;
but where Children are obstinate, God, as the tender Father of his Creatures,
must take the Rod in Hand: -- From this Necessity He destroyed a World of
Ungodly by a Flood; he sends Plagues, Famines and the Sword, to correct the
exorbitant Growth of Wickedness, to lessen the Number of Sinners, to lay
Restraints upon Survivors. As Sin and Misery are closely connected, in the
Nature of Things, what Wisdom is it in God to suffer Men to feel the Folly of
their own Ways, in the Vengeance they execute upon one another: thus Sin is its
own Punishment: The alwise RULER teaches the Evil of Sin, sets Bounds to human
Wickedness, prevents the dreadful Effects of Prosperity, and keeps the World in
Awe: for, O! Lord, when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn Righteousness. Examples of divine Resentment are needful: So
God drowned the OldWorld; He rained Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, to make
Examples of Judgment for all succeeding Generations. These Severities in
Government are not to be looked upon as the Effects of Passion, or arbitrary
Will, or a needless Rigor; but as righteous Dispensations; -- it is in Mercy to
Mankind that He inflicts them: He suffers no more Examples of Vengeance in the
World, than are necessary to the good Government of it: -- In the End, all
these bitter Things will be found to be the most proper Discipline for this
degenerate Race: the Ends of Government will be wisely answered; we shall be
able in the Review of all, to say, great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints. -- We shall see
Order, Harmony and the best Good of the Creation, resulting from this Confusion.

THUS necessary, thus profitable is the Sword in the present State of Things.
But should any go farther, and ask, Wherefore has the supreme RULER formed such
a Plan of Government, and permitted such a lapsed State of Being as to make
these Confusions necessary? -- Let such know, that they do not enquire wisely
of this Matter. Who can by searching find out God? who can find out the
Almighty unto Perfection? His Ways are above our Ways. -- Shall the Thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? -- It Is not for
us, short-sighted Mortals, to pry into the secret Reasons of the divine
Conduct, nor to say whether this was the only possible Plan of divine
Government: The indisputable Marks of Wisdom and Love, which we see in all his
Works, lead us to believe, that his Way is perfect; that he is a God of
Judgment, without Iniquity, Just and Right is He.

From what has been offered: --

1st. LET us learn to think well of God, and his Dispensations. When we think
on the Miseries, the Nations have in all Ages suffered by the Sword: when we
reflect on the Pride of Monarchs, and the Horrors of War; and consider that
these are permitted by God, in the Wisdom of his Administration, we are ready
to think hard of Heaven, and foolishly charge God with a want of Regard to our
Happiness: Are these the Dispensations of that Being, whose Nature is Love? is
this the Language of paternal Goodness? -- But we ought to remember that Sin,
which by one Man entered into the World, has reigned triumphant in all Periods
of Time, notwithstanding the more gentle Methods of Grace to reform it; so that
it was necessary to uphold God's moral Dominion, that Men should feel some of
the natural penal Effects of Vice. The natural State of the World has never
been worse; the Father of Mercies has never been more severe, than was
necessary to the Purposes of his moral Government. Wars, though the greatest of
natural Evils, have been salutary in their moral Effects; hereby the Lusts of
Men are restrained, the Number of obstinate Sinners is diminished. God is known
by the Judgments which he executes. God has been, as Holy and just, so Wise and
Good, in all. Though we are not able to assign the particular Reasons of the
divine Conduct in particular Cases, nor the eternal Reasons of such a Plan of
Government; yet we have Reason to believe, we shall know hereafter. -- The full
Display of the Beauty and mavelous Wisdom of God's Government, in the
wonderful Contrivance and Execution of it from the Beginning to its final
Accomplishment, must be reserved for a Fund of everlasting Entertainment, in
the Regions of perfect Knowledge: -- O! what a noble Satisfaction will it g^ve
us, to behold these mysterious Dispensations unfold! to see infini^^ Order and
Harmony, Justice and Mercy running through all! how astonishing to see the best
Good, rising from the greatest Evil! to see God, in all, invariably pursuing
the universal Good of his vast Creation! -- Here we see through a Glass darkly;
we see but Part of the extensive Plan; we know not the eternal Connections in
the divine Mind: But hereafter, all his Works will appear to have been of a
Piece; exact Order and Propriety will shine in all: God himself will shine
through all, immensely Great, divinely Good. -- O what a happy Review will this
be! O happy Employment of the reasonable and pious Mind! O noble Happiness! to
rest in God; to be swallowed up in Him; to gaze forever on that glorious Sun,
and feel itself divinely, inexpressibly Happy in the Friendship of that Being,
who is incomprehensibly wise, and supreamly good!

2dly. FROM a serious Consideration of the present State of the World, we learn
that a military is a necessary and respectable Character. God, from Motives of
superior Wisdom, and extensive Benevolence, has been pleased to make this World
hitherto a State of Goodness, tempered with a needful Severity: The Sword is
his Rod to chastize Nations, from which not his own Church is exempt. -- This
State of Things makes Self-Defence a necessary Duty, and reconciles a military
to a christian Character. -- It is true, the Use of carnal Weapons is no Part
of our christian Constitution. The Founder of our holy Religion once said, my
Kingdom is not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight. Christianity is not to be propagated by Fire and Sword; it
gives no Claim to the Rights and Possessions of others. But our Christian
Profession by no means dismembers us from civil Society, nor deprives us of the
Privilege of Self-Defence and Self-Preservation; a Principle so natural and
powerful, in all Ranks of Beings: it does not strip us of our Rights as Men,
nor destroy in our Breasts; but rather improves, upon the best Principles, an
ardent Love of Mankind, the Love of our Country, and a noble public Spirit: It
forms the Valor of Alexander and Caesar, stripped of that brutal Rage and
destructive Ambition, which ^ully the Characters of those cruel Tyrants over
Mankind. -- ALREADY Caesar
Has ravaged more than half the Globe, and sees
Mankind grown thin by his destructive Sword:
Should he go further, Numbers would be wanting
To form new Battles, and support his Crimes. --
Ye gods, what Havoc does Ambition make
Among your Works!
See Addison's CATO.
A noble Zeal in the Defense of Religion, an ardent Love of our Country, a
calm, and dispassionate Valor in the Protection of Mankind from Violence are
Virtues, if not immediately inculcated in the New Testament, yet naturally
growing upon christian Principles. Though we meet with Precepts of this Tenor in
the Gospel, -- resist not Evil, be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with
Good, they must be received in a qualified Sense, and rather respect private
Injury than public Violence. Although Christianity is an Enemy to those savage
Passions, which prompt Men to destroy, yet it cultivates that Love of public
Good, and lays the Foundation of that unshaken Fortitude, that arms with
resistless Energy, in Defense of the Rights of Mankind. -- What remains then
but that we look with Respect upon the military Order; that every lawful
Attempt to revive, improve, and propagate military Skill and Discipline, be
regarded as a public Good; that Men of this Character be respected as, under
God, the Guardians of our Lives, Liberties, Property and Religion? --

IT was judged most agreeable to the Rules of Decency, and the Custom of the
Nation, to offer what was designed for particular Addresses, in the Form in
which it now (...). --
HIS Excellency the Governor, (...) Excellency THOMAS POWNALI, Esquire
Captain General of this Province, and the Source of military Power, under God
and the King, needs not what has been said to acquaint Him with the Origin,
Reasons, Necessity, and Utility of War in the present State of the World. He is
well acquainted with the present Situation of our military Affairs. It is with
Pleasure and Gratitude we see Him, concerned for the public Good, compassing
Sea and Land, to put us in a proper State of Defense; to give full Security to
our most distant Frontiers. -- His Excellency easily distinguishes the Merit
and Capacities of Men; He knows every good Man has not a military Genius: He
will therefore, in all his Appointments to command, select Men of Genius and
Merit, without which all Attempts to revive military Skill will prove
ineffectual. -- He will go on to encourage military Skill, and spare no Pains
to render our Militia, (our Defense under God) respectable. -- He knows, that
in nothing can he more effectually serve this Country, than in His encouraging
martial Discipline; in rendering us formidable to an invading Enemy; in making
a thoro' Reformation in military Affairs. Should God ever permit the Necessity,
we are persuaded he will put his Person at the Head of His Troops, and teach
them Bravery by his own Example: He will venture his Life in the Defense of the
Country that looks to Him, as its principal Guardian and Protector. --

HIS Majesty has put the Reins into his Hands at a Time when the Cares and
Fatigues of Government are doubled upon Him; but He needs no Motives to support
him under the Weight of the Administration, but the Pleasure of doing Good, the
Happiness of being extensively useful, the Approbation of his own Conscience,
and of our FINAL JUDGE; by a Conduct uniformly conformed to such noble
Principles, He is sure to endear himself to every true Lover of his Country,
and to secure the Approbation of HIM who searches the Heart: -- We wish Him the
divine Assistance in all his Administrations, the Love and Honor of a grateful
Country, the Favor of our gracious Sovereign, and above all that Approbation
of the KING OF KINGS, in that Day when we must all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ; Well done, thou good and faithful Servant; thou
have been faithful over a few Things, I will make thee Ruler over many Things,
enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

WE behold, with universal Satisfaction, His Honor the Lieutenant Governor,
THE Honorable THOMAS HUTCHINSON, Esquire
great among his People, advanced to the Second Seat of Government, accepted of
the Multitude of his Brethren, affectionately seeking the Wealth of his People,
the Welfare of Church and State, and speaking Peace to all his Seed.

THE Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, cannot possibly impute it to
want of Respect to them (but rather the contrary) that, in Conformity to the
Method I have pursued in the preceding Paragraphs, I say before them what
might have been particularly addressed to them, although I, in so doing, have
varied from a Custom, on such public Occasions, perhaps peculiar to Us. --
OUR Lot is cast in difficult and perilous Times; while we are deeply
interested in the Events of War, it becomes Gentlemen of the military Order to
improve in every Art of Self-Defence. Could I, by a most importunate Address,
be instrumental of a general Improvement in the Art of War, though I might act
beside my sacred Character; yet I could excuse my self, with the Thought of
having done Good to my Country. We are indeed to look on this Necessity as the
Judgment of God. We are to cultivate the Arts of War, as beside the genuine
Tendency of our holy Religion; nevertheless necessary in this State of
Disorder. The skilful Defenders of our Lives and Liberties are great Blessings
to Mankind. Does it not create Anxiety in every considerate Mind, to find, that
after so many Years Exercise in War, military Skill and Discipline have
received no greater Improvements? Every one knows the Posture of our military
Affairs is greatly changed since the Beginning of the War; that the Discipline
which was before, is now by no Means suitable and adequate to the present State
of America. Should God suffer us to be invaded, we should not have to deal only
with raw undisciplined Savages, but with regular Battalions, expert in all the
Arts of War, provided with a numerous Train of Artillery, no Way to be broken
but by Troops equally provided, of equal Skill and Fortitude. What an unequal
Match are twice their Number of half-armed, undisciplined Militia, suddenly
assembled; the greater Part of whom never faced an Enemy, or were marshaled in
regimental Order? What Impression could they make upon the firm Battalions of
veteran Troops? What Perplexity, what Amazement, what Confusion would a
powerful Invasion throw us into? How highly necessary is it that our Troops
know how to approach, and retreat from an Enemy in unbroken Order, and to
withstand the furious Shock of a regular Army? Providence therefore calls us to
make great Improvements in this necessary Science. This good Land, which God
gave to our Fathers, with the noble Privileges transmitted to us, is worth
defending. Our pleasant Seats, our Wives and Children, our Liberties; these
sacred Temples, our holy Religion call for Improvement in the Art of defending
them. We become more and more the Object of public Attention. We may expect
this New World will henceforth be the Seat of War; we may expect in our Turn to
be invaded: Some of us may yet see our Plains flow with human Blood. This
Matter therefore deserves a serious Attention, especially by those of the
military Order, particularly by the Gentlemen of that ancient and honorable
Constitution, originally designed for, and who profess to be the School of true
Discipline.

A LOVE to my dear native Country leads me, my patient Hearers, to congratulate
you, on the Smiles of Heaven upon the Protestant Arms, the signal Successes,
the repeated Conquests of the last Year have given a favorable Turn to the War
in America, and now enable us to meditate a final Blow, as the last Means of
Peace: May Heaven crown that Enterprise, so hopefully begun, with desired
Success! -- We still enjoy the precious Life of our Royal Sovereign to give
Life to our Hopes: the British Arms, under a wise Administration, are grown
respectable: our Navy is become the Envy and Terror of the World. Add to this,
the noble Stand our German Ally has made against the united Powers of France,
the Emperor and several powerful States of Germany; the Swedes and Russians,
all unitedly bent upon his Ruin; and that Train of Victories, which has
surprised the whole World. These Events give us Hopes of Peace highly
advantageous to the Protestant Nations. But let us rejoice with Fear; the
Events of War are most precarious and surprising. He, who guides the circling
Worlds, can dash our Hopes with a Word. There wants but his Permission, and
raging Pestilence shall cut off our Armies; Storms shall scatter our Ships of
War; He can insensibly blind the ablest Generals, dart Life into our despised
Foes; or by a secret Influence intimidate Legions in a Day of Battle; He can
soon make the Prospect dark, as it is now bright and clear. He wants neither
Means nor Skill to humble our Pride, and baffle our sanguine Expectations. O!
let us suitably acknowledge his Agency; let us hope in the God of Armies: Thine
O Lord is the Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the
Majesty -- now therefore, our God, we thank Thee, and praise thy glorious Name.

3dly. LET us be deeply affected with the depraved, deplorable State of
Mankind. We do not live in a Garden of Pleasure, but in a World of Woe. It Is
affecting to think of the Havoc and Desolation sinful Mortals have suffered in
all Ages. We, that only hear the Sound of War, know but little of its Horrors.
What affecting Scenes are these! Countries depopulated, the Glory of Kingdoms
slain in a Day. To walk the Fields of Battle; to feel our Hearts pierced with
the Groans of expiring Men; to see Garments rolled in Blood; to trample on
broken Limbs, and mangled Bodies, gnawing their Tongues, biting the Ground for
Anquish; the dying mingled with the dead, Fields streaming with crimson Gore; O
Spectacle of Horror! -- But to bring these Things home: to see our Wives and
Daughters ravished, our young Men slain in Battle, our Infant-Offspring dashed
in Pieces, our Houses laid in Ashes; this would give us the most feeling Sense
of human Misery: nor let any say, this is but an imaginary Vision, this, hard
as it is, has been the Lot of Thousands, perhaps Millions of our own Race.
Shall we not feel for others; shall not the Love of Mankind teach us Compassion
to our very Enemies. Let us mourn the Unhappiness of Mankind: Let us cry to the
Father of Ages to pity his degenerate Offspring, and hasten that glorious Day,
when the Nations shall learn War no more.

4thly. LET us be thankful for the Hopes we entertain of Deliverance from this
State of Woe. Though the World has hitherto been a Field of Blood, we hope for
better Days. It is hardly possible to believe, that the noble Prophecies of the
Peace and Glory of the Church, have ever yet had their most illustrious
Accomplishment. No past State of the Church seems to have answered to the lofty
Metaphors, of the Old Testament Prophets, and more elevated Descriptions of the
New Testament Revelation. The whole Tenor of prophetic Revelation evidently
points us forward to a more glorious Day upon Earth: when JESUS CHRIST the
Prince of Peace, shall be King over all the Earth; in that Day shall there be
one Lord and his Name one -- when He shall judge among the Nations and they
shall beat their Swords into Plow-Shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks,
Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, and they shall learn War no
more. Such a happy Period of the World seems to be pointed forth by the Prophet
Hosea when he speaks of the Recovery of the Jews in the latter Days, (Chapter iii.
4, 5.) and by the Apostle of the Gentiles (Romans xi. 26) likewise by the Prophet
Daniel, (ch^ vii. 27.) The Kingdom and Dominion, and the Greatness of the
Kingdom under the Whole Heaven, (...) given to the -- Saints of the MOST HIGH
(...) Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all (...) shall serve and obey
Him; when, as the Apostle John expresses it, The Kingdoms of this World shall
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and He shall reign for ever
and ever. As all the great Lines of Providence, through the Course of
preceding Ages, were directed to, and brought about, that great Accomplishment
of the eternal Counsels of God, in the coming of the Messiah; so we have little
Reason to doubt, the Scheme of Providence is carrying on in a continual
Progress, though we are unable to trace its Steps, to bring on that most
perfect State of the World, in which the noblest Designs of God's Love in this
World will be fully accomplished. All Things have been, in all Ages conducted
for the final Advancement, of Purity, Perfection, and Happiness through Jesus
Christ. As the preceding Dispensations prepared the World for the
Gospel-Kingdom, that grand Dispensation of Grace; so it is highly probable,
that the Dispensations of Heaven since, are all preparatory to, and
introductive of, that Golden Age, that most perfect and glorious State, that is
not yet for Ages to commence. As all the Ages before the Manifestation of God
in Flesh, were but a preparatory Scene to (...) which is the perfect State of
the World; so perhaps all the Ages that are passed and to come before that Day,
(...) but the (...) Light, the Dawn of Day, to (...) long meridian (...) that
compleatest Dispensation of God's Love to the World; a glorious Emblem of the
uninterrupted Felicity of Heaven. Now when we consider the more rigorous
Dealings of Providence, as the necessary Steps to prepare the ascending World
for its meridian and lasting Glory, what an enlarged View does it give us of
the benevolent Designs of the Father of Mercies! Further, as that future Day
seems to be spoken of by the Prophets, as the most excellent State of the
World, the Perfection of the Gospel-Administration, may we not conjecture, that
(analogous to the known Order of divine Operations) all preceding Ages will
bear no more Proportion to that Day, than the Dawn of Light to the long
Summer's-Day; or than one or two Days to a Thousand Years. Well may such
Prospects alleviate our Minds under the Pressure of human Woe. -- With what
cheerful Hope should we extend our Views to that long Age of Peace, when all
these Things shall be forgotten! And though we, long ever that Day, shall sleep
in our Graves, I HERE say nothing new or particular of the future State of the
Church; only a general Thought, that will occur to every one who rea^^ his
Bible with Attention: nor have I (...) to (...) what may be the Import of (...)
yet when we see the Good of God's chosen, we should rejoice with the Gladness
of his Nation, and glory with his Inheritance. Blessed be God for the rising
Light of Prophecy, -- for that Light and Happiness, to which this unhappy World
will in distant Ages rise, through JESUS CHRIST; of the Increase of whose
Government and Peace there will be no End.

LASTLY, let us all prepare and long for an eternal World of Peace. Here our
Hopes and Fears take their Turns: our Hearts ach for a miserable World. Justly
may we adopt the Complaint of the Psalmist; Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech
-- I am for Peace; but, when I speak, they are for War.

BUT, blessed be God, our Faith leads us to consider these Things, not as the
final State of human Nature, but only as the Means of a glorious Hereafter.
These Troubles are in the Hand of the Mediator, through whom they serve to
prepare a chosen Race for a Stat^ of refined Happiness. We are Strangers and
Pilgrims here, but we look for a City which has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. There we shall find no contending Nations; Pride and Envy are
never felt: there are no aspiring Princes, no grasping Monarchs, to disturb the
heavenly Society. O! let us be quickened by the uncertain State of human
Affairs, to lay up our Treasure there. Let us fight the good Fight of Faith,
under JESUS CHRIST the Captain of our Salvation, that we may lay hold on
eternal Life. Consider, my Hearers, the Dignity, the noble Powers, the
Immortality and substantial Felicity of your intellectual Spirits, and labor
to rise up in spiritual Perfection. O! let us all secure a Union and Conformity
to the Father of Spirits; the Peace of God, that passes al^ Understanding, and
a glorious Inheritance in the Regions of Light and Love: let us see to it that
we dwell in God, and He in us; then may we, in all the future Convulsions of
Nature, look down with Serenity on tempestuous Worlds; -- behold the Elements
melt with fervent Heat, the Earth and the Works that are therein burnt up. --
We were made to outlive the Ruins of Time. We need not fear them who can only
kill the Body; but, Him who can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. We shall
one Day behold the Desolation of this material System; unshaken, -- triumphing
in our natural Immortality. And when the Sun shall become black as Sackcloth of
Hair, when Time shall "tread out Empire, and "quench the Stars," We, undying
Spirits, if wise and holy, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and
as the Stars for ever and ever.

Now to Him who governs the World in Wisdom, of whom and to whom, and through
whom are all Things; to Him be Glory, by JESUS CHRIST, World without End.

AMEN.

