GOD will trouble the Troublers of his People. A SERMON PREACHED AT
POUGHKEEPSIE, in Dutchess-County, IN THE PROVINCE OF NEW YORK. JULY 14th, 1758.
Being the Day of the EXECUTION of HUGH GILLASPIE, FOR FELONY.

By the Rev. CHAUNCY GRAHAM, M. A. Minister of the Gospel in RUMBOUT.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

Eccles. Be not wicked over much; why should thou die before thy Time.
Psalm. Bloody and deceitful Men shall not live out half their Days. Now
consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in Pieces, and there be none
to deliver. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by H. GAIN, at the Bible and Crown, in
Hanover-Square, 1759.

DEDICATION. To the Honorable JAMES DE LANCEY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of NEW YORK, etc.
May it please your Honor,
I Sincerely congratulate you upon your being, by divine Goodness, called to
bear such a Place in Government among your fellow Men, as gives you peculiar
Advantages of being a public Blessing to this Province; and at the same Time
enriched your Mind with such Endowments as qualify you for the Duties of your
exalted Station, as well as dispose you to such a steady, vigorous and faithful
Discharge of them, as proves an Encouragement to Virtue and a Terror to Evil
Doers; an Instance whereof occasioned the following Discourse, which, though
unworthy of your Honor's Notice, yet as a Token of the Author's Gratitude, is
now humbly laid at your Feet. And that your Honor may long be continued a rich
public Blessing to your Country and to Mankind, by exploring and cutting off
such as in Contempt of the Laws, would destroy our Peace and prevent our
Prosperity; and at last enjoy the glorious and eternal Reward of Well-doing, is
the constant Prayer of him who accounts it his Honor to subscribe himself, in
all Duty and Obedience,

Your Honor's Most obsequious, and Very humble Servant, CHAUNCY GRAHAM,

A SERMON, etc.
JOSHUA vii. 25. And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled us? the Lord shall
trouble thee this Day.
THOUGH we, of the present Generation, are fallen into the very Dregs of Time,
wherein, if the Stewards in God's House are faithful to their divine Master,
they must lift up their Voices as Trumpets, to testify against the
God-provoking Impieties of a professing People, and warn a sinful Generation to
flee from the Wrath to come: However all their solemn Declarations may be
reproached with the fashionable Epithet of Cant and Whine, and their most plain
and scriptural Representations of the dreadful Consequences of Rebellion
against Heaven, be esteemed harsh, ungenteel and unmannerly, by the Gay and
polite Sinners of the Age; Yet if Men would but seriously consider this Matter,
without any Resentment of the Preacher's honest Plainness, only as it is
represented in the sacred Cannon, it will appear that the dreadful Confusion,
the amazing Horror and eternal Torments, which will be the inevitable
Consequence of a Life of Impiety, inconceivably exceeds the utmost Reach of
their most extended Imagination; enough to make the stoutest hearted Rebel,
against the most high God, fall down and cry out, What must I do to be saved,
from the impending Wrath of a just God, that is ready to be poured out on my
guilty naked Soul, in one eternal Storm! yea, to lay his Hand upon his Mouth,
and his Face in the Dust, if so be, there may be Hope.

BUT should we, for once, put even Eternity out of the Account, and only view
the various Mischiefs done to human Society, by the daring Crimes of bold
Transgressors, as well as the Miseries such bring upon themselves, even in this
World; one would think that a due Consideration, even of this, might be a
sufficient Restraint from gross Iniquities, to every one that has the least
Degree of Benevolence, or Spark of Self-Love dwelling in his Heart. Yet, alas!
such is that Tyranny which the unbridled Lusts of abandoned Sinners, exercise
over their rational Powers, that they thoughtlessly, hurry on in the full
Career of sensual Gratifications; not considering that Destruction and Misery
is in their Way, nor once regarding the Mischief they are doing to the whole
Community, whereof they are Members; whilst by their Contempt of all Laws, both
Divine and Human, they are really the Troublers of God's People, bringing
crimson Guilt on the Land, and pulling down complicated Judgments upon the
Inhabitants thereof; and when God's People are not vigilently careful to bring
such to suitable Punishment, their criminal Connivance, or indolent Negligence,
inhances common Guilt, and brings down aggravated Wrath: Whereas, on the
Contrary, when the Powers, which are ordained of God, exert themselves to their
utmost to detect and punish Evildoers, they hereby become Ministers of God for
Good to his People, remove Guilt, and prevent Judgments. Thus it was in the
Case of Achan, whose Crime, Trial, Confession and Execution, we have the Record
of in this Chapter.

As I have already, both for the Benefit of the condemned Criminal, now before
me, and also of the Public, from Joshua's Advice to Achan, Ver. 19, took
Occasion to point out, and enforce this Criminal's Duty, to make a full, free
and unreserved public Confession of his Crimes, by which he has forfeited his
Life, and a faithful Discovery of all his Associates in Iniquity: So as we are
now assembled to see the Execution of a just Sentence pronounced upon him, and
witness his suffering the Penalty of the Law, which he has broken, and behold
him violently cut off from the Land of the Living; as being so mischevious to
Community, that he deserves not to be continued a Member of human Society:
Allow me to suggest to you a few Things on this melancholy Occasion, from the
Words of Joshua to Achan, just before his Execution. You doubtless remember
Theft was the Crime for which Achan was both indicted and executed. The sad
Affair stood thus: Upon the miraculous Reduction of Jericho, Achan, contrary to
an Express divine Prohibition, Chap. vi. Ver. 18, feloniously takes away sundry
Goods, with a Wedge of Gold, which he hid under the Earth in his Tent: Soon
after Joshua sends three Thousand Men on an Expedition against Ai, but on their
first Attack they fled before the Men of that Place, and returned with the Loss
of Thirty-six Men. Joshua, sensible of the Cause by the Effect, that a jealous
God was some way provoked, rent his Clothes, fell upon his Face to the Earth,
with the Elders of Israel, in which Posture he and they continued till
Even-Tide; when Joshua prays to God to discover the Reason of so shameful a
Defeat. God answers his Prayers, shows him the Reason, gives Direction to find
out the Felon, and orders what Death he shall die. Thereupon Joshua arises
early in the Morning, and by attending the divine Direction given him, Achan is
taken, whom Joshua exhorts to make a public and full Confession of his Crime;
with this he readily complies; and his Confession appears true, by the stolen
Goods being found in the Spot where he said he had hid them; then the Children
of Israel take and bring him to the Place of Execution, where Joshua previously
addresses him in the Words of my Text, both by Way of Query and awful
Threatening, Why have thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this Day; q.
d. Can you possibly offer any Reason to justify your Conduct, in abusing and
thus troubling the whole Camp of Israel, by provoking God to anger with them?
Know assuredly, it will be repaid this Day; we are ordered to take thee from
the Land of the Living, and send thee to God's dread Tribunal, to answer for
all thy Crimes, nor can one Day's Reprieve be allowed thee from the Execution
of that Sentence of Death thou art now under.

WHAT I design, further from the Words, is to show:

I. How it is, that notorious Sinners trouble God's People.

II. WHAT Troubles such undergo, when God brings them to condign Punishment.

III. MAKE some suitable Improvement.

1 st. I am to show, how it is that notorious Sinners Trouble God's People. And
in general: They trouble them in their whole common Course of Life. All their
Schemes are concerted and prosecuted, some Way or other, to the Damage and
Injury of the Public. They set up their own private and personal Interest,
above that of the Community; nay, frequently in Opposition to it, and pursue it
in such a Way, as that if they succeed, the public Interest must necessarily
sink. It is one of the first Maxims with this Sort of Vermin, that it is no
Matter what Injury is done to any particular Person, or what Damage accrues to
Communities, if it is but subservient to their own private Advantage, nor do
they regard how shameful, sordid and vile the Methods are, in which they pursue
it, if they are but successful.

BUT particularly, such trouble God's People, by ruining the Interest of the
Public. Every Body Politic, whether Kingdom, Province, Colony or Corporation,
has an Interest of its own, in which all its Members are included, and hence it
becomes both the Duty and Interest of every Member, in their Conduct, to pursue
the Good of the Whole; and where these come in Competition, to prefer the
public Weal to their own private Interest; nor can they honestly prosecute
their own Profit, but in this beautiful and becoming Subordination. Such
therefore, as set up their own personal Advantage, as the chief Prize they keep
in their Eye, regard not what becomes of Public, even though their own private
Advantage should finally terminate in its utter Destruction. Their own Gain is
the Deity they worship, let the Consequences be what they will unto others.
Thus Achan, to gratify his own covetous Thirst after Gain, fell a pilfering
among the Stuff, not regarding in the least, what malign Influence his Theft
might have on the whole Congregation of Israel. Auri Sacra Fames, quid non
Mortali Pectora coges!

THIS Principle acts variously in different Persons; yet the Consequences are,
in a greater or less Degree, the same in all, viz. destructive to the Interests
of Society; for it is only the same Principle acting in various Forms, or the
Improvement of different Methods, for the Seize of the self same End,
to-wit, the building up personal, on the Ruin of public Interest. Some it
inclines to the Practice of picking, pilfering and stealing from their
Neighbors; while others choose to act more covertly, under some Show of
Honesty, yet carrying on a Trade of overreaching, cozening, cheating,
extortion and defrauding in their Dealings. Some not so well suited with the
former base Methods of hurting the Public, by ruining its Members, as it were,
singly, one after another; take a more expeditious Method, as they conceive, to
become rich, by ruining whole Provinces and Colonies; aiming, by one fatal
Stab, to let out the very Heart's Blood of Communities. These Miscreants are
very sensible that no civil State can subsist or flourish without Trade and
Commerce, and that this can never be maintained without some fixed and proper
Medium; being too lazy by lawful Industry, to procure a Sufficiency of such
Medium, to provide Things honest in the Sight of all Men, and ashamed to beg,
they lay themselves out in the most shameful Practice of counterfeiting the
public Currency, of their own and neighboring Governments. Of this Kind are
our Money-Makers, a Brood of Vipers, that are eating out the Bowels of
Provinces and Colonies, and by their Practice rendering themselves a common
Neusance, to be detested and purged out by every one, who has any Relish for
the Comforts of a social Life: These care not how much they distress the State,
by ruining its Trade, and cheating it out of its proper Medium, whilst they
endeavor to impose upon it, their own spurious Stuff, as if it were current
Money with the Merchants; who sees not when this Cheat is artfully managed, and
successfully carried on, that it increases the Medium, in Proportion to the
Number of Counterfeits; and that this, with other Things, has had a direct
Tendency to depreciate the public Bills of some Colonies to so great a Degree,
as rendered them almost useless: Besides such Bills must finally perish in the
Hands of some or other, who must inevitably sustain the Loss of it, and the
Loss of every Member is the Loss of the Whole. Others infest the Traveller on
the public Road, rob him of his Property, and sometimes of his Life. Others
leave the Land, and commence Pirates by Sea, to the great Detriment of foreign
Trade, and Ruin of particular Undertakers. Thus, in their several Turns, and
various Methods of Iniquity, such Enemies of Mankind, as far as lies in their
Power, ruin the public Interest, and thereby render themselves Troublers of
God's People.

2 d. By bringing Distress on the Public; and this they do in sundry Respects;
as,

BY bringing divine Judgments on God's People. God declares, that because of
swearing, the Land mourns. In Hos. iv. 1, 2, 3, God declares, He had a
Controversy with the Land, because there was no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge
of God in the Land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches Blood; therefore shall
the Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein, shall languish, etc.

BUT why need I multiply Quotations of this Kind from the Scriptures, the
Instance in our Text may be sufficient. Here in our Context, we have the Army
of Israel fleeing before the Men of Ai, on the Account of Achan's Villainy, as
the God of Armies himself testifies, Ver. 11, 12, of our Context; Israel has
sinned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant, which I commanded them;
for they have even taken of the accursed Thing, and have also stolen and
dissembled, and they have put it among their Stuff. Therefore the Children of
Israel could not stand before their Enemies, because they were accursed,
neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among
you. God, the Judge of all the Earth, expressly charges the whole Camp with
Guilt, and pronounces it accursed for the Sin of one Man: Well might Solomon
say, One Sinner destroys much Good, when the Sin of one Man becomes so
distressing to all Israel.

A LIKE Case we have, Numb. xxv. Chapter, where the Plague was sent into the
Camp, for the Sin of Zimri and Cozbi, and by their Death it was stayed. Again,

THEY often troubled God's People to find them out, and bring them to deserved
Punishment. The Body of a People may feel the distressing Effects of Wickedness
committed amongst them, and yet for some Time not be able to discover the
Actors; they feel themselves smitten, and greviously wounded in their
Interests, but cannot discern the Hand that strikes them; and so, sometimes in
order to prevent their own Ruin, they are obliged to take a great deal of
Pains, use various Methods, and be at much Cost, to find out those Troublers of
their Peace, and Destroyers of their Prosperity. How much Pains did Joshua
take, to explore the true Cause of the Mischief that befell the Army? None knew
the Cause of the sad Defeat, therefore the whole Congregation of all the Tribes
of Israel must be assembled, a Lot must he cast for every Tribe, then through
every Family of the taken Tribe, and lastly through every Person of the
discovered Family, Man by Man, till at last Achan is taken. Such Evildoers
exert all their devilish Craft and Cunning, to secret themselves and Crimes,
that they may keep out of the Hand of Justice, and multiply Transgression with
Impunity, and so often create much Trouble and Expense to the Public, as well
as to the Persons particularly injured by them, to find them out, and cut them
off.

THEY occasion also great Trouble and Distress to the Minds of God's People:
Though Sinners make light of the blackest Crimes, yet they appear awfully
aggravated to such as love and fear God. It is a distressing Thing to every
such Soul, to think that God is publicly dishonored by the bold
Transgressions of his Law amongst them, and that heavy Guilt lies upon the Land
of their Habitation; hence their Hearts tremble for Fear of God, and they are
afraid of his Judgments. The Man after God's own Heart, to see others violate
the Precepts, and trample on the Authority of the great God, was most deeply
affected, when he cries out, Psalm cxix. cxxxvi, Rivers of Water run down mine
Eyes, because they kept not thy Law. So Psalm cxxxix. 21, Am I not grieved with
those that rise up against thee? Grieved for the Contempt cast on thine
Authority, and the eternal Destruction brought upon themselves by their
Rebellions against thee. I come to say,

2 d. WHAT Trouble such undergo, when divine Justice seizes them, and brings
them to that Punishment which is the proper Demerit of their Crimes.

HERE I must own myself non-plussed, to paint to you, my Hearers, the Shocks,
the Racks, the Horrors of a condemned Malefactor (if he has any Sense at all of
his Guilt) just ready to feel the full Weight of his deserved Punishment, from
the Hand of that God who will render to every one according to their Works.
When he comes to the Day of his Execution, sees the Instruments of Death
prepared, to send him to an unknown World of Spirits, and waft him to the
dreadful flaming Tribunal of the great JEHOVAH: My very Soul is ready to sink
under the Burden of the Thoughts, to consider how deep Remorse for all his
former Crimes, settles on his awakened Conscience, and the never dying Worm
begins to prey upon his very Heart Strings. O what Horror must he feel, if in
an impenitent State, at the Approach of Death! What dismal Clouds must hang
over his Mind! What Perplexity and Anguish fill his shuddering Soul! when the
fatal Period comes, and not one Hour nor Moment's Reprieve can be granted, but
die he must! Die as a Malefactor, unpitied by Heaven and Earth, if impenitent.
Yet all this is nothing to the Pre-apprehensions of an eternal Existence, if
unpardoned, where nothing but Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish,
awaits them in a Dungeon, infinitely darker than that from whence he was bro't
forth to Execution; even Blackness of Darkness for ever. Could we hear the
Soliloquy of a condemned Malefactor, might we not reasonably expect it would be
groaned out in such mournful Language as this, accented with the most
Heart-rending Sighs! Alas! my trembling Soul, what a Shudder seized thee when
the awful Sentence of Death, the accursed Death to hang on a Tree, made both my
Ears to tingle! Now I know the certain determined Hour of my Death, and every
Moment hastens it on: O! the awful Hour, when I must be hung up, a Spectacle to
Angels and Men, between Heaven and Earth, because unworthy of both. How
scandalously shameful the Death! and yet how just, when I reflect on a Life
spent in such open Hostility against the God that made me, and the Villainies I
have perpetrated, so injuririous to the public Weal of my fellow Men; by which
I have forfeited my Life into the Hand of civil Justice, and now must die
unpitied, unlamented! But O! my Soul, all this would be nothing, yea less than
nothing, did not Death plunge thee into a new World, set thee in a new State,
where thou must meet with a new, and perhaps dreadful Reward for thy Crimes.
And now behold the awful Day is come, look my Soul, my Coffin stands before me,
view the Crowds assembled to see the just Sentence executed upon me, and now
but one Hour or two to make my Peace with Heaven, and do the Business of my
whole Life in, which has hitherto been neglected, and in a few Minutes more O!
my guilty trembling Soul, thou art to make thine Appearance before the
Judgment Seat of the dread Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and all thy Crimes will
meet thee before that Bar, and thou must give an Account of all the Deeds done
in the Body, and receive according to that which thou have done; and therefore
have Reason to fear a Sentence infinitely more tremendous than that which
condemned me to Death here, even, Depart thou cursed into Everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

WHEN a condemned Malefactor, on the very Verge of Eternity, thus views
himself, and speaks to his own Soul, who can stretch a Thought comprehensive of
his Trouble and Distress! He looks back, and sees nothing but an ill-spent
Life; forward, and sees Destruction and Misery just before him; upwards, and
sees an angry God, ready to frown him away for ever; inwards, and feels nothing
but an accusing Conscience loaded with the Guilt of blackest Crimes; around
him, and sees nothing but Shame and Confusion, and for ought he knows, the
Devils ready to drag his departing Soul, when driven out of his Body, down to
the Nethermost Sides of the Pit, where his Worm shall never die, and his Fire
never be quenched; but the Smoke of his Burning must ascend for ever and ever.
O! the inexpressible Trouble! the inconceiveable Distress that presses the
Malefactor, when God brings him to Punishment! -- I now proceed,

3 d. To endeavor a proper Improvement of this awful Subject, and sorrowful
Occasion.

ARE egregious Sinners by their atrocious Crimes, Troublers of God's People?
then,

1 st INFER. Such as vigorously exert themselves to bring such Villains to
Punishment, must be esteemed by the Public, cordial Friends to its truest
Interest: We all feel the good Effects of Vigilency and Zeal in the civil
Magistrate, to execute the penal Laws against the Disturbers of our Peace, and
Hinderers of our public Prosperity. It is well known, that for a Number of
Years past, a Banditti of thieving moneymaking Vermin, from almost all Parts,
have taken Shelter amongst us; and had not effectual Measures been vigorously
pursued, they might, by this Time, almost ruined the trading Interests of this
and the neighboring Governments; but, by the Vigilence and Care, the Pains and
Industry of his Honor our Lieutenant Governor, who has with Zeal, improved
both his Authority and Influence, to bring such Wretches under the Execution of
the Penal-Laws, the Designs of those Enemies to the State, have been
frustrated, and his Honor merits that most endearing Character of a Patriot to
his Country, and stands justly entitled to our most grateful Acknowledgments.
May he long enjoy the Honor, and feel the Pleasure of doing good, and never
put up the Sword of civil Justice until he has hewed to Pieces that whole Knot
of Rebels; brought their black and horrid Schemes to light, and the Authors and
Abetters to the deserved Reward of their Villainies. The Honorable Judges of
our Supreme Court of Judicature, in this Province, as well as the Worshipful
Judges of the Sessions, in this County, together with the other Officers of our
Court; have very distinguishingly exerted themselves, to break up that hellish
Club, and prevent further Mischief to the Public, from that Quarter; and merit
our sincerest Thanks for their singular Service herein, done to the Public, and
wherein every Man of us may feel our Share. Here I would just beg Leave to wish
them Success in this Affair, for the future, not doubting from their past
Conduct, but that they will still exert themselves so as to prove a Terror to
such evil Doers, and root such a Sink of Villians out of the Province; which
will be an unspeakable Service done to the Public, transmit their Names with
Honor to Posterity, and gain them highest Esteem from all honest Men, who have
a true Regard to the public Interest, and rejoice in its flourishing Prosperity.

2 d INFER. When wicked Men by their Crimes, become insupportable to the State,
it is a Piece of public Service done to Mankind, for the civil Authority, to
cut them off; hereby they become Ministers of God for the People's Good, nor
can they become otherwise a Terror to Evildoers; to acquit the Guilty is as
much an Abomination in the Sight of God, as to condemn the Innocent. The
cutting of a Wart or a Wen from the Body, does not only free it from that
troublesome and deforming Excrescence, which to the Loss of the whole, drew off
so much Nutrition to maintain its useless and troublesome Bulk; but it may
prevent the Growth of many more, that would in Proportion, rob the Body of
proper Nourishment. The public Punishment of a Malefactor, is not merely to
restrain him, but that it may terrify other Workers of Iniquity, that they may
hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly. All suitable Care and Pains should
be taken by the civil Magistracy to reform Offenders, and to spare all that are
like to be reformed, and become wholesome Members of Society; but such as
render themselves unsufferable, must be treated as a gangreened Limb, which
must be amputated, rather than the whole Body perish. If we have a proper
Temper of Mind, we cannot but feel Pity and Compassion moving in our Hearts, to
the very worst of the human Species, when we see them suffering for their own
criminal Follies: Yet a Regard to distributive Justice and the public Good,
should dispose us to approve the Sentence, and bear a solemn Testimony to its
Execution. Achan, by his Wickedness, had become a sinking Burden, such as all
Israel could not stand under; his Theft was too weighty for the whole Army, and
therefore, as soon as his Crime was discocovered, they readily gave him up to
Death, the happy Consequence of which was, that God turned away the Fiercness
of his Anger from Israel, and then they could not only stand in Battle, but put
their Enemies to Flight. And this, my Hearers, would no doubt be our happy
Case, were there no Achans to be Trublers of our Israel. Therefore,

3 d INFER. The great Reason of the sore and distressing Judgments we are
under, is the open and aggravated Breaches of the divine Laws, that are found
in the midst of us. It must be confessed, that for Years past we have been
under the Frowns of Heaven, manifested in a long Series of divine Judgments,
one after another, some in a lighter, and others in a heavier Degree, on this
Land. Now as God delights in Mercy, and Judgment is his strange Work, so he
declares that he does not grieve or afflict the Children of Men willingly;
therefore we must determine the procuring Cause is in ourselves, and that our
Ways have not pleased the Lord; and when we search and try our Ways, will not
gross, open and scandalous Sins appear to have the greatest Influence, in
pulling down divine Judgments upon us; do we not find God threatening his
ancient People, in a most emphatical Manner, for such bold and daring Crimes,
the Cry of which reached the very Heavens, Jer. v. 7, 8, etc. Where God points
out their Sins, and more than once concludes with this awful Inquiry, Shall I
not visit for these Things, says the Lord; and shall not my Soul be avenged of
such a Nation as this. Here he lays open and charges upon them, their Idolatry
and Uncleanness, their Hypocrisy and Injustice, their Incorrigibleness and
Obstinacy, their Departures from God, and Defiance of him, their Violence and
Oppression, their Sabbath-breaking and Profaneness, and an horrid and
unnatural Combination of some to ruin the whole Nation: Therefore the Judgments
they are threatened with, are extremely distressing, and very terrible. A
foreign Enemy shall be let loose against them, who should set Guards upon them,
so that if they staid in the City they must die by the Famine; and if they came
forth they must die by the Sword; and thus they should have no where left to
look for Safety, no Place to run for Shelter, nor any Power to trust in for
Deliverance: And the Reason of all this fore Distress was, because their
Transgressions were many, and their Backslidings increased. Nay, their Enemies
were to ascend their Walls, destroy their Fortifications, remove their
Battlements, carry them into Captivity, and withold Good Things from them. --
May not this teach us, that it is our Land-defiling Sins, our Uncleanness,
Intemperance, Profaneness, our Violations of God's Sabbaths, our Polution of
God's Sactuary, our Contempt of his Word, Ordinances and Ministry; our Theft,
Forgery and Perjury, that have brought divine Judgments upon us, while we have
had on the one Side, a barbarous and Blood-thirsty People, of a strange
Language, let loose against our Frontiers, who show no Pity, and scarcely give
any Quarters; and on the other Hand, we have had a Nation not more powerful
than treacherous; as innured to Fatigues, as they are expert in the Arts of
War, permitted to enter our Limits, take our Fortresses, demolish our strong
Holds, and lead many of our Inhabitants away captive, into a Land of graven
Images, where they die unpitied, or live friendless or forlorn, till some kind
Providence open a Door for their Deliverance. O! It is our Sins, my Hearers,
that cause all these Troubles. We have procured these Things to ourselves; our
own Wickedness corrects us; our Backslidings reprove us. These our Distresses
clearly point out to us, present Duty, even to repent and reform; let us then,
search and try our Ways, and turn to God, with our whole Hearts. Let every one
of us in our respective Places and Capacities improve all our Power, Influence,
and Advantages, to promote an universal Reformation; especially, let the Civil
Authority bestir themselves, to suppress Wickedness and Villainy, by a strict
Execution of the penal Laws, so as to put all Iniquity out of Countenance, and
bear down the most fashionable Sins of the Times, with Resolution, Fortitude
and Steadiness. And, for your Excitement, here the blessed Encouragement God
gives to faithful Magistrates, in Jeremiah v. 1. Run ye too and fro through the
Streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad Places
thereof, if ye can find a Man, if there be any that executes Judgment, that
seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it. A very noble Motive indeed, to every
civil Officer, to make it his great Care and Business to execute the Laws upon
Transgressors; search out and punish Iniquity: And surely happy the People who
are in such a Case, who are blessed with such, to bear Rule over them, as by
Faithfulness in their Places, terrify and chase away evil Doers, and so avert
divine Judgments from the Land.

4th INFER. How little soever great Sinners think of it, while they are
troubling God's People by their horrid Crimes, they are all the while pulling
down complicated Sorrows and Troubles on themselves; and they shall, by their
own sad Experience feel, that all these Things shall be Bitterness in the End.
Whilst Sinners are in their full Career of Rebellion against Heaven, living in
Wantonness and Luxury, Idleness and Theft, Profaneness and Perjury, rolling
Sin as a sweet Morsel under their Tongue; they think nothing of a reckoning Day
approaching, or what Sin must cost them in the End. But, alas! alas! when
divine Justice seizes them, and gives them up Prisoners to the Hands of the
Civil Magistrate, to cut them off from the Face of the Earth, then Sin appears
with another Prospect; before, they saw nothing but its painted Face, but now
they see and feel its Scorpion's Tail, stinging them to Death! Now all the
Honey turns into the Gall of Asps. The Distress that will then unavoidably
seize them, from a View of the Vileness of their Lives, the scandalous
Shamefulness of their Deaths, the Change of their State, and if they are in any
suitable Measure convinced of the Greatness and Aggravations of their Guilt,
and the Dreadfulness of that Wrath which they have been treasuring up to
themselves, by their Sins; then, what Racks of Conscience! what Shudders of
Soul! what Sinkings of Heart! what bitter Remorse! whilst they review their
Lives, and then look forward into a boundless Eternity, where they expect to
feel themselves in the Hands of a living, and an angry God, whose Wrath burns
to the lowest Hell; from whose Presence, and the Glory of whose Power, they
expect to perish with everlasting Destruction, and be plunged into the
bottomless Gulf of perfect Horror, and eternal Despair!

5th INFER. When Sinners, by their heinous and daring Crimes, have forseited
their Lives into the Hand of civil Justice, they have none to blame for it, but
themselves. They cannot reasonably plead Ignorance of the Law; but know, that
he who does such and such Things, is worthy of Death; yet they venture on the
Crime, and commit the Fact in the Face both of the Law, and of Conscience,
knowing that it is for their Lives. Who can they blame? Not the Law; for it is
just and good: Not their own Ignorance, but their horrid Presumption; for they
know, that the Murderer, the Thief, the House-breaker, the Robber, the
Counterfeiter, if convicted, must die. Not the Jury that finds them guilty, for
they are under solemn Oath to do so, upon sufficient Evidence, and may not do
otherwise. Not the Judge who condemns them, for he is obliged in general to
give Sentence according to the Jury's Verdict. Not the Governor, because he
does not reprieve them, for he is under no Obligations to give them back that
Life, which they have already forfeited to the Public; and it might in its
Consequences, be very injurious to the Public, to spare that Life, which has
already been justly forfeited; so that the Blame lies wholly at the
Malefactor's own Door, and his Blood will be found upon his own Head. But I
shall now conclude with a few brief Addresses on this solemn Occasion. And,

1st, I would address the Criminal ready to be executed. -- Poor Malefactor! my
Compassions are moved, and my Bowels yern toward you. -- I am now to make my
last Address to you, in the Name of my divine Master, in Behalf of your
precious Soul, just before you step into the World of Spirits, to make your
most solemn Appearance before the great and dreadful God. You are to go from
hence to the Place of Execution, and if you are yet an Impenitent and out of
Christ, how shocking must the gloomy Prospect be! It is a great thing to die,
and enter into Eternity; but to die in such a Manner, and under such
Circumstances, must have something in it peculiarly dreadful. Let me then urge
and press it upon you, with the tenderest Compassion, and yet with utmost
Earnestness, as you love your own never-dying Soul, to think closely of the
dreadful Scene now opening upon you. Think how you will appear before a God of
inflexible Justice, that will by no Means clear the Guilty. What, O! what have
you, poor Criminal, to recommend you to his Love and Favor?

Since your Condemnation, I have shown you what Confession you ought to make
for your abuse to the Public; also how you ought to repent, and cry to God with
all your Might, if perhaps the Wickedness of your Heart and Life may be
forgiven you, and Mercy extended to your immortal Soul, through Jesus the only
Savior; that he would renew you by the powerful Influence of his holy Spirit,
justify you by the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and yet meeten and
prepare you for eternal Felicity* I also told you that the Gospel condition of
Life, is Faith in the Son of God; which I endeavored also, in the clearest
Manner I could, to explain to you. Now poor Man, your Conscience knows what
Improvement you have made of my Advice and Instructions. Whether you have
incessantly sent up your earnest Cries to Heaven for renewing Grace; and
whether God has enabled you, from a deep and affecting Conviction of your own
Vileness and Wretchedness, Guilt and Misery, and an effectual Discovery of the
Sufficiency, and Willingness of Jesus Christ; and the Beauty, Excellency, and
Safety of the Gospel Way of Salvation by him, as has prevailed with you to
comply with the Terms, and venture your eternal Interest into his Hands, as
knowing he is able to keep that which is committed unto him. If you have not
accepted the free and gracious Offer, you are yet in the Gall of Bitterness,
and under the Bonds of Iniquity, exposed to the Wrath and Vengeance of that
God, who, out of Christ, will be a consuming Fire to Workers of Iniquity.
Nothing* poor Heart! will save you, but an Interest in Jesus Christ. You must
be justified, cleansed, and sanctified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and by the Spirit of God. O! then, fly, fly to the Arms of divine Mercy, and
lay hold on the Scepter of Grace. Repent of all your Sins, for except you
repent, you shall surely perish; pursue a Disposition to forgive your Enemies,
and heartily ask Forgiveness of those you have injured and wronged. But remember
this, you can never do this acceptable to God, without Faith in Jesus Christ;
nor is Faith a mere speculative View of Truth, or a rational Conviction that
gains only a general Assent. Human Nature has entirely warped off from God, and
Sinners must turn to him sincerely and unreservedly, or they cannot be happy.
Hence God bids us look to him, come to him, trust in him, etc. all which
Scripture Phrases intimate, that the Mind must upon a Discovery of his Power
and Ability, Love and Grace in Jesus Christ, turn to him, center in him, rely
upon him, and make choice of him, as its only Portion, and delight in its
Choice, and so love him supremely, with all its Heart; from hence will
naturally flow Grief for Sin, Hatred to Sin, Aversion from all Sin, as being
what it is, and a steady vigorous Endeavor after new Obedience, with a free
Desire frankly to forgive Mankind, as the Penitent desires to be forgiven of
God. This is the Substance of what every Child of Adam must feel, in Order to
partake in the great Salvation by Jesus Christ. Consider then, whether you have
really complied with the Terms of the Gospel, and thus accepted the Grace of
God, as one poor and wretched, miserable, blind and naked; morally incapable of
saving or relieving yourself, and in this View, have you cast yourself at the
Foot of divine Sovreignty, owning the Sentence of God's holy Law to be just,
and resolved all your Hopes of Help and Salvation, into the mere self-moving
Mercy of God in Jesus Christ. Assure yourself, that you must be clothed with
the perfect Righteousness of the Lord Jesus, or you can never make a
comfortable Appearance before a righteous God; for though God declares he can be
just, and yet the Justifier of such as believe in Jesus, Romans iii. 26; yet he
cannot, consistent with his governing Perfections, save one Soul out of Christ.
It is a vain Thing therefore, for any to fling themselves on divine Mercy,
without a Regard unto Justice, or a Reliance on the complete Satisfaction that
Christ has made; for though God be infinitely merciful, yet he is equally just,
and all his glorious Attributes are equally dear to him, and must therefore
perfectly harmonize in the Sinner's Salvation: He will never raise the Honors
of one, on the Ruins of another, but here whilst Mercy is abundantly magnified,
Justice is gloriously displayed. O! therefore, accept of the Gospel-Offer of a
Savior, come to him as one weary and heavy laden with Sin, under a pressing
Sense of your Guilt, and your perishing need of Help, and surrender yourself
into his Hands, for here is the only Door of Hope, out of which there is no
Salvation.

Spread all your Sins, of every Kind, before God; those Sins that are against
God only, confess to God alone; those against Man, must be acknowledged to Man.
And it will be your Interest, poor Man, who are just entering into a fixed
Estate for a whole Eternity, whose precious Soul my Heart pities; your Interest
it is, I say, as well as Duty, to repent of every Sin: Repentance with any
Reserve, will be fatal, one Sin unrepented of, will bring certain Damnation,
banish from God's Life-giving Presence, and sink you into that Lake that burns
for ever and ever, which is the second Death. Now should this be your dreadful
Portion (which may infinite Mercy prevent) consider seriously, before it be too
late, you cannot charge God with Severity, nor complain of him as unkind; then
you will be convinced, sadly convinced, that he gave you Means, but you would
not use them; he gave you Laws, but you would not obey them; Calls, but you
would not hearken to them; Threatenings, but you contemned them; Mercies, but
you abused them; Judgments, but you defied them. O poor Creature! Remember, if
you perish, the Fault is your own. God will be just when he speaks, and clear
when he judges. O! what a glorious Reward have you often rejected? What rich
Mercy have you all along despised? What Patience and Long-suffering have you
abused? Must not all your Destruction then be of your own procuring, yourself
being Judge? God has not failed on his Part, he has allowed you a State of
Probation, provided a Savior for the chief of Sinners, given you his Gospel,
sent you his Ministers, repeated his Calls, lengthened out his Patience to this
Hour, and done all that could be done in these Regards; but you have held fast
Wickedness and Deceit, and refused to turn. Now it is come to the eleventh Hour
with you, and even Part of that is spent; if you are yet out of Christ, the
glorious and only Ark of Safety, your Case is most extremely dangerous, as your
Time is just spent; having but an Hour or Two more to live, and perhaps the
great Work of a whole Life, for which you were sent into the World, all to do,
in these few remaining Moments, or you undone for ever.

O! bethink yourself, poor Man! for God's Sake, bethink yourself, where you are
going, and to whom you must betake yourself in this Hour of Darkness and
Distress. Remember Christ is ready to save the chief of Sinners, even at the
eleventh Hour: He saved a Malefactor when just expiring; follow the Example of
that poor Thief on the Cross, and apply to Jesus Christ as he did, and who
knows but you may find the like Acceptance. Christ is still the same, his Love
and Pity, his Willingness and Readiness, his Grace and Sufficiency, still the
same as ever; and he is near to you, for he possesses your Reins, and is
perfectly acquainted with all your Wants, Miseries and Distresses; and he alone
is able to save you from the Wrath to come.

Time urges me to finish, yet I know not how to leave you, and at the same Time
at a Loss what farther Motives to use with you. My very Heart aches for your
precious Soul, and I would gladly be the Instrument of saving it from eternal
Destruction. Your only Safety I must again tell you, is in Jesus Christ; but
with what Arguments shall I prevail with you to accept of his Grace, and be
happy for ever! you are at Varience with the World, as a Criminal, and perhaps
with Heaven also as a Sinner. O distressing State! Fly, O fly, from the Wrath
to come, and lay hold on offered Mercy in Jesus Christ; cry to him, pour out
your Soul before him; plead the Riches and Freedom of his Grace: Tell him he
has encouraged you to plead by former displays of his Mercy; he has pitied
other Sinners, great Sinners, when in utmost Distress, and bro't to the last
Extremity; and beg that he would extend the same divine Compassion to your
precious and immortal Soul, and not leave you now to perish in your Iniquities,
after you have lived so long in a Land of Light, under the greatest Advantages;
and venture your naked, guilty and polluted Soul into his Hand, trusting to his
Merits, relying on his Grace, and prostrate at his Foot; if you perish, resolve
to perish there. Now, to conclude, what shall I, what can I say more to you*
poor wretched Man? I can only beg and beseech you, for Christ's Sake, to be
reconciled to God. Spend the very few remaining Moments of Life, in reallizing
that certain Death, that is just before you; and that Eternity you must this
Day enter into; and cry to God with every Breath you have yet to draw, to have
Mercy upon your immortal Soul; wash it in the Blood of Christ, which cleanses
from all Sin; give Faith unfeigned, and Repentence never to be repented of. And
I pray sovereign rich Mercy may yet pluck you as a Brand, out of the Burning;
give you a just and affecting Sense of your Guilt and Vileness; convince you
thoroughly of your undone State, and lead you to Jesus Christ; accept you through
his Righteousness, cleanse you in his Blood, renew and sanctify you by his
Grace; and that though now you are to die as a Criminal on Earth, by the Hand of
civil Justice, yet he would compassionately receive you to Glory, and make you
a singular Monument of his free and sovereign Grace, to all Eternity. Amen.

2. I would beg leave to address the civil Authority, here present, on this
awful Occasion.

Gentlemen, though I have in some Measure anticipated what I designed for the
Matter of this Address; Yet,

Allow me to remind you, that your Work, is not in itself, greater or more
arduous, than it is necessary and important to the Public. You are to be
Ministers of God, for the Good of his People; in the pursuit of which noble
End, you must be a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to such as do Well. The
executive Power of penal Laws is put into your Hands; you wear the Sword of
civil Justice, which is the Sword of the Lord; let it not rust in the Scabbard,
or be worn in vain, but ever keep it drawn in the Cause of God, and the Public.

Suffer me therefore, with that Authority, Freedom, and Faithfulness, that
becomes a Minister of Christ; with that Pathos and Solemnity that the
Importance of the Matter calls for, and yet with all that dutiful Respect to
you, as Fathers in the State, to whom Honor is justly due, even upon the Foot
of divine Institution and Precept, to exhort and beseech you, to put our
wholesome Laws in the strictest Execution, against the open Contemners and
Violaters of them. Let the profane Swearer, Sabbath Breaker, the beastly
Drunkard, and the covetous Thief, feel the Weight of the Law, whilst they Smart
under your Rod. These, my Honored Fathers, these are Crimes not only most
flagicious in themselves, but pregnant of many others; fill Heaven with
Indignation, and pull down the awful and desolating Judgments of God upon the
Land: Against these, and such like Transgressions, therefore enter into a
sacred Combination* among yourselves, and employ all your Power, Influence and
Authority to bear them down as with a strong Hand; and whilst, on the one Hand,
you with a becoming Vigilence, and due Severity, search out and punish
Immorality, Wickedness, Debauchery and Profaneness; be sure you neglect not to
encourage Regularity, Virtue and Piety, on the other. In this Way you may
expect a divine Blessing on your civil Administrations, be honored as
Instruments of a general Reformation, in a loose and degenerate Age, and merit
the Character of being the Chariots of our Israel, and the Horsemen thereof;
and to your abundant Satisfaction, see Peace and good Order flourish in your
Day.

3. To conclude, I would address myself to this numerous and crowded Auditory,
convened on this mournful Occasion. O Sirs! what more awful than the Errand we
are come upon this Day, to see one of our poor fellow Men, and fellow Sinners,
receive the just Recompense of his Crimes. Now, what can be thought of more
dreadful than Sin, that furnishes us with the rueful Spectacle we are assembled
to view! Behold then in the poor contemned Criminal, as in a Glass, the vile,
shameful and debasing Nature of Sin, to how low a State it may bring you, and
then leave you exposed to public Shame and Disgrace, helpless and forlorn: And
let this sad Warning excite every one of you, my Hearers, to flee from all Sin;
without Delay to reform, repent and turn to God, through Jesus the only
Mediator, that so Iniquity may not be your Ruin. Here I would particularly urge
you to beware of committing any known Sin, do not sin against the Light and
Dictates of your own Consciences; this is to sin wilfully, and so to sin
presumptuously, and we find no Sacrifices were appointed, under the Law, for
the presumptuous Sinner. Sinners do not usually begin with the most flagrant
Crimes, but they proceed from less to greater, and so their Progression, is
from bad to worse. Persons at first perhaps learn to lie, then to swear
profanely, then to disobey their Parents, then to break God's Sabbaths, and
despise his Messengers; from thence they proceed to pilfer and steal, then to
Burglary, and it may be, Murder. Beware then of the least Sin, as that which,
by swift Degrees will draw you on to blacker Crimes, till it bring full
Destruction upon you. Every Sin, how little soever it may appear in your Eye,
is an Evil of infinite Demerit, and exposes to the Curse of the Law, and the
Wrath of the Lawgiver, both in this Life and that which is to come; and if
unrepented of, will assuredly bring eternal Ruin. Labor therefore every one of
you more and more, to get a just Sense of the Soul-damning Nature of Sin. And,
O! strive Day and Night, after an Interest in Christ, whose Blood can cleanse
you from all Sin; whose Righteousness can cover your Nakedness, whose Grace can
renew, sanctify, and meeten you for his Kingdom above. Then you will be safe in
him, and though you Sin, you will have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus
the Righteous; and he that has begun a good Work in you, will carry it on to
the Day of complete Redemption; then his Grace will be your Sufficiency against
every Temptation, and his Spirit your Guide into all Truth, and Conducter in
the pleasant Ways of Wisdom, and peaceful Paths of Virtue, afford you the
Testimony of a good Conscience for your Rejoicing in the Hour of Death, when
you resign up your Breath, and under the Conduct of Guardian Angels take wing,
and soar above all created Rounds, to the blessed Regions of immortal Peace and
Felicity, and place you in the happyfying Presence of the glorious God, where
is Fullness of Joy, and give you an honorable Seat at his Right Hand, where
are Pleasures for ever more; where you shall ascribe Glory and Honor, and
Blessing and Praise to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, who
loved you and washed you from your Sins in his own Blood, and made you Kings
and Priests unto God for ever and ever. To whom belongs the Kingdom, the Power
and the Glory, World without End. AMEN.

FINIS.

