The CURSE of COWARDICE. A SERMON PREACHED To the MILITIA of HANOVER COUNTY, IN
VIRGINIA, AT A General MUSTER, MAY 8, 1758. With a View to raise a Company for
Captain SAMUEL MEREDITH.

By SAMUEL DAVIES, A. M.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by Z. Foul and S. Draper,
opposite the Lion and Bell, in Marlborough-Street. M,DCC,LIX.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE the EARL of HALIFAX, First LORD COMMISSIONER of TRADE
and PLANTATIONS, And one of the LORDS of HIS MAJESTY's Most HONORABLE PRIVY
COUNCIL, etc. etc.
MY LORD,
AS the following Pages contain the Genuine Sentiments of a Heart full of Zeal
for the Honor of his Majesty King GEORGE, and a just Indignation against a
base, cowardly Neglect to defend the Civil and Religious Liberties of British
AMERICA, they cannot be unacceptable to Your Lordship.

This Discourse having a direct Tendency to raise a Noble Spirit among the
Inhabitants of the Western World, whose Territories have been first insidiously
curtailed, and then openly attacked by the perfidious, and restless Disturber
of the Peace both of Europe and America, the Circulating thereof must
necessarily be a Matter of no small Importance.

Here Courage is set upon its proper Basis, which will produce more solid,
steady, and persevering Vigor, than any Methods that are or can be taken,
merely to inflame the Passions, for that is only to intoxicate Men with Rage,
and temporary Phrensy.

The Author's Friendship sent the Manuscript cross the Atlantic to my Hands;
and having read it, I thought it would be criminal to conceal such generous
Principles, and powerful Motives to His Majesty's Service, from the Public,
either in England or America.

And should You, my Lord, think fit to introduce this American Composition to
His Majesty's View, must it not give Him a real Satisfaction, to see the
grateful Apprehension the Inhabitants of that Country have of His paternal
Care, and that there is among them a Spirit of undissembled Loyalty to His
Person, and most ardent Zeal in His Service, not altogether unworthy of His
Royal Regard?

Your Lordship's just Sense of the Utility and Importance of the British
Colonies in America, and constant Watchfulness over them, as myself and all
others that have Connections there know; have gained You, SIR, the universal
Esteem of the Inhabitants of that extensive and now populous Continent.

Permit me then with the most profound Respect to dedicate to your Lordship,
what I apprehend is so well calculated to promote His Majesty's Service, and
the vigorous Defense of His Dominions in general: And if spreading these
Sentiments in the Country which gave them Birth, should have that happy Effect,
I shall esteem it an additional Honor to that of being permitted to subscribe
myself,

Your LORDSHIP's Most devoted, and Obedient Humble Servant, DENNYS DE BERDT.

JER. XLVIII. 10. Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord deceitfully; and
cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from Blood.


NOTHING can be more agreeable to the God of Peace, than to see universal
Harmony and Benevolence prevail among his Creatures: and He has laid them under
the strongest Obligations to cultivate a pacific Temper toward one another,
both as Individuals, and as Nations. "Follow Peace with all Men," is one of the
principal Precepts of our holy Religion. And the great Prince of Peace has
solemnly pronounced, "Blessed are the Peacemakers."

But when, in this corrupt disordered State of Things, where the Lusts of Men
are perpetually embroiling the World with Wars and Fightings, and throwing all
into Confusion; when Ambition and Avarice would rob us of our Property, for
which we have toiled, and on which we subsist; when they would enslave the
freeborn Mind, and compel us meanly to cringe to Usurpation and Arbitrary
Power; when they would tear from our eager Grasp the most valuable Blessing of
Heaven, I mean our RELIGION: when they invade our Country, formerly the Region
of Tranquillity, ravage our Frontiers, butcher our Fellow Subjects, or confine
them in a barbarous Captivity in the Dens of Savages; when our earthly All is
ready to be seized by rapacious Hands, and even our Eternal All is in Danger by
the Loss of our Religion: when this is the Case, what is then the Will of God?
Must Peace then be maintained? maintained with our perfidious and cruel
Invaders? maintained at the Expense of Property, Liberty, Life, and every Thing
dear and valuable? maintained, when it is in our Power to vindicate our Right,
and do ourselves Justice? Is the Work of Peace then our only Business? No; in
such a Time even the God of Peace proclaims by his Providence, "To ARMS!" Then
the Sword is, as it were, consecrated to God; and the Art of WAR becomes a Part
of our Religion. Then happy is he that shall reward our Enemies, as they have
served us Ps. cxxxxii 8.
. Blessed is the brave Soldier: blessed is the Defender of his Country, and the
Destroyer of its Enemies. Blessed are they who offer themselves willingly in
this Service, and who faithfully discharge it. But on the other Hand, Cursed is
he that does the Work of the Lord deceitfully; and cursed is he that keeps
back his Sword from Blood.

As to the original Reference and Meaning of these Words, it is sufficient to
my Purpose to observe, That the Moabites, against whom this Prophecy was
immediately denounced, were a troublesome and restless Nation in the
Neighborhood of the Jews, who, though often subdued by them, as France has
been by England, yet upon every Occasion struggled to recover their Power, and
renewed their Hostilities. By this, and various other Steps, they were arrived
to the highest Pitch of national Guilt, and ripe for Execution. The Babylonians
were commissioned for this Work of Vengeance: and they were bound to execute
the Commission fatihfully, under Penalty of a Curse. To them this Denunciation
was immediately directed, Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord
deceitfully [or negligently]; and cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from
Blood. This is expressed in the Form of an Imprecation, or an authoritative
Denunciation of a Curse: And in this Form, it might be used, consistently with
Benevolence, by a Prophet speaking as the Mouth of God. But this is not a
Pattern for our Imitation, who are peculiarly obliged under the Gospel to
"Bless, and curse not," and to "pray for all Men." However, it may be
pronounced even by our Lips as a Declaration of the righteous Curse of God
against a dastardly Refusal to engage in War, when it is our Duty; or a
deceitful negligent Discharge of that Duty, after we have engaged in it. These
are the Crimes that seem intended in my Text: and against each of these the
tremendous Curse of JEHOVAH is still in full Force in all Ages, even under the
mild and gentle Dispensation of the Gospel. Cowardice and Treachery are now as
execrable as ever.

Cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from Blood. -- This Denunciation,
like the Artillery of Heaven, is leveled against the mean, sneaking Coward,
who, when God, in the Course of his Providence, calls him to Arms, refuses to
obey, and consults his own Ease and Safety, more than his Duty to God and his
Country.

Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord deceitfully. -- This seems to be
levelled against another Species of Cowards; fly, hypocritical Cowards, who
undertake the Work of the Lord, that is, take up Arms; but they do the Work of
the Lord deceitfully, that is, they do not faithfully use their Arms for the
Purposes they were taken up. They commence Soldiers, not that they may serve
their Country, and do their Duty to God, but that they may live in Ease,
Idleness and Pleasure, and enrich themselves at the public Expense. Cursed is
be that does the Work of the Lord deceitfully, and serves himself under
Pretense of serving his Country.

You Gentlemen and others, whom I this Day behold with peculiar Pleasure
engaged in the Cause of your neglected Country, and who have done me the Honor
of inviting me to this Service; a Service, which I am sure I should perform to
your Satisfaction, if my Preparations and Abilities were proportioned to my
Benevolence for you, and my Concern for your Success: You are peculiarly
interested in the Remarks I have made upon the Text. And that I may contribute
all in my Power both to increase your Number, and direct you to a proper
Conduct in the honorable Character you sustain, I shall lay before you a brief
View of the present Circumstances of our Country, from which it will appear,
that the War in which we are engaged is a Duty, or THE WORK OF THE LORD; and
consequently, that we are all obliged, according to our respective Characters,
to carry it on with Vigor, under Penalty of falling under the Curse of God.
And then I I shall show you what is the deceitful Performance of the Lord's
Work, or unseasonably keeping back of the Sword from Blood, which exposes to
the Curse.

I. I am to lay before you a brief View of the present Circumstances of our
Country, which render the War in which we are engaged the Work of the Lord,
which consecrate Swords as Instruments of Righteousness, and call us to the
dreadful, but important Duty of shedding human Blood, upon Penalty of falling
under the tremendous Curse of God.

Need I inform you what Barbarities and Depredations a mongrel Race of Indian
Savages and French Papists have perpetrated upon our Frontiers? How many
deserted or demolished Houses and Plantations! How wide an Extent of Country
abandoned! How many poor Families obliged to fly in Consternation, and leave
their All behind them! What Breaches and Separations between the nearest
Relations! What painful Ruptures of Heart from Heart! What shocking Dispersions
of those once united by the strongest and most endearing Ties! Some lie dead,
mangled with savage Wounds, consumed to Ashes with outrageous Flames, or torn
and devoured by the Beasts of the Wilderness, while their Bones lie whitening
in the Sun, and serve as tragical Memorials of the fatal Spot where they fell.
Others have been dragged away Captives, and made the Slaves of imperious and
cruel Savages. Others have made their Escape, and live to lament their
butchered or captivated Friends and Relations. In short, our Frontiers have
been drenched with the Blood of our Fellow Subjects, through the Length of a
thousand Miles: and new Wounds are still opening. We, in these inland Parts of
the Country, are as yet unmolested, through the immerited Mercy of Heaven. But
let us glance a Thought to the Western Extremities of our Body Politic; and
what melancholy Scenes open to our View! Now, perhaps, while I am speaking; now
while you are secure and unmolested, our Fellow Subjects there may be feeling
the Calamities I am describing. Now, perhaps the savage Shouts and Whoops of
Indians, and the Screams and Groans of some butchered Family, may be mingling
their Horrors, and circulating their horrendous Echoes through the Wilderness of
Rocks and Mountains. Now, perhaps some tender delicate Creature may be
suffering and involuntary Prostitution to savage Lust; and perhaps debauched
and murdered by the same Hand. Now, perhaps, some miserable Briton or Virginian
may be passing through a tedious Process of Experiments in the infernal Art of
Torture. Now some helpless Children may be torn from the Arms of their murdered
Parents, and dragged away weeping and wringing their Hands, to receive their
Education among Barbarians, and to be formed upon the Model of a ferocius
Indian Soul.

And will these Violences cease without a vigorous and timely Resistance from
us? Can Indian Revenge and Thirst for Blood be gluted? or can French Ambition
and Avarice be satisfied? No, we have no Method left, but to repel Force with
Force, and to give them Blood to drink in their Turn, who have drunk ours. If
we sit still and do nothing, or content ourselves, as alas we have hitherto,
with feeble, dilatory Efforts, we may expect these Barbarities will not only
continue, but that the Indians, headed by the French, those eternal Enemies of
Peace, Liberty and Britons, will carry their Inroads still farther into the
Country, and reach even to us. By the Desertion of our remote Settlements, the
Frontiers are approaching every Day nearer and nearer to us: and if we cannot
stand our Ground now, when we have above an hundred Miles of a thick-settled
Country between us and the Enemy, much less shall we be able, when our Strength
is weakened by so vast a Loss of Men, Arms and Riches, and we lie exposed to
their immediate Incursions. Some cry, Let the Enemy come down to us, and then
we will fight them. But this is the trifling Excuse of Cowardice or Security,
and not the Language of Prudence and Fortitude. Those who make this Plea, if
the Enemy should take them at their Word, and make them so near a Visit, would
be as forward in Flight, as they are now backward to take up Arms.

Such, my Brethren, such, alas! is the present State of our Country: it bleeds
in a thousand Veins; and without a timely Remedy, the Wound will prove mortal.
And in such Circumstances, is it not our Duty in the Sight of God, is it not a
Work to which the Lord loudly calls us, to take up Arms for the Defense of our
Country? Certainly it is: and "cursed is he," who having no Ties sufficiently
strong to confine him at Home, "keeps his Sword from Blood." The mean,
sneaking Wretch, that can desert the Cause of his Country in such an Exigency;
his Country, in the Blessings of which he shared, while in Peace and
Prosperity; and which is therefore entitled to his Sympathy and Assistance in
the Day of its Distress; that cowardly ungrateful Wretch sins against God and
his Country, and deserves the Curse of both. Such a Conduct in such a
Conjuncture, is a moral Evil, a gross Wickedness; and exposes the Wretch to the
heavy Curse of God both in this and the eternal World.

And here I cannot but observe, that among the various and numberless Sins
under which our Country groans, and which must be looked upon as the Causes of
our public Calamities, by every one that believes a divine Providence; (a
Doctrine so comfortable, and so essential both in Natural and Revealed
Religion! an Article in the Creed of Heathens and Mahometans, as well as Jews
and Christians;) I say among these various Sins, Cowardice and Security are
none of the least. He that has determined the Bounds of our Habitation, has
planted us in a Land of Liberty and Plenty; a Land, till lately, unalarmed with
the Terrors of War, and unstained with human Blood: Indeed, all Things
considered, there are but few such happy Spots upon our Globe. And must it not
highly provoke our divine Benefactor, to see a People thus distinguished with
Blessings, so insensible of their Worth, so ungrateful for them, and so
unacquainted with their own Unworthiness to receive them? What can be more
evidential of their undue Apprehensions of the Worth of these Blessings, than
their being so little concerned to secure and recover them? The Generality
among us have acted, as if their Interests at Stake were so trifling, that it
would not be worth while to take Pains, or encounter Dangers, to preserve them.
What greater Evidence can be given of Ingratitude, than a supine Neglect of
these Blessings, and such a stupidly tame and irresisting Resignation of them
into bloody and rapacious Hands? And what can be more evidential of a proud
Insensibility of our Unworthiness of such Blessings, than our being so
inapprehensive of losing them, even in the most threatening and dangerous
Circumstances? Our Countrymen in general have acted, as if Beings of their
Importance and Merit might certainly rest in the quiet unmolested Possession of
their Liberty and Property, without any one daring to disturb them, and without
their doing any Thing for their own Defense: or as if neither God nor Man could
strip them of their Enjoyments. What vain self-confident Presumption, what
intolerable Insolence is this, in a sinful Nation, a People laden with
Iniquity, who have forfeited every Blessing, even the Ground they tread upon,
and the Air they breathe in; and who live merely by the immerited Grace, and
Bounty of God? Is not Cowardice and Security, or an Unwillingness to engage
with all our Might in the Defense of our Country, in such a Situation, an
enormous Wickedness in the Sight of God, and worthy of his Curse, as well as a
scandalous dastardly Meanness in the Sight of Men, and worthy of public Shame
and Indignation? Is it not fit, that those who so contemptuously depreciate the
rich and undeserved Bounties of Heaven, and who swell so insolently with a vain
Conceit of their own Importance and Worth, should be punished with the Loss of
these Blessings? What Discipline can be more seasonable or congruous? May we
not suppose that divine Providence has permitted our Body Politic to suffer
Wound after Wound, and baffled all our languid Efforts, in order to give it
Sensibility, and rouse us to exert our Strength in more vigorous Efforts? Has
not the Curse of God lain heavy upon our Country, because we have done the Work
of the Lord deceitfully, and kept back our Swords from Blood?

And shall this Guilt increase from Year to Year, 'til we are entirely crushed
with the enormous Load? Shall neither the Fear of Jehovah's Curse, nor the Love
of our Country, nor even the Love of ourselves, and our own personal Interest,
constrain us at Length to relieve our ravaged Country, and defend the Blessings
which God has entrusted to our Custody, as well as lent us to enjoy? -- Blessed
be God, and Thanks to you, brave Soldiers, for what I now see. I see you
engaged in this good Cause: and may the effectual Blessing of Heaven be upon
you, instead of the Curse entailed upon Cowardice and Treachery! But are there
no more to join with you? what! none more in this Crowd? None more in Hanover?
which I think should show itself worthy of Precedence, and exhibit a brave
Example to other Counties: this Is what may be reasonably expected, from the
Number of our Militia, the high Price of our Staple Commodity, the Frequency
and Variety of our religious Instructions; and I may add, from our own former
good Conduct in such an Emergency. Hanover had the Honor of sending out the
first Company of Volunteers, that were raised in the Colony. Under Captain
Averton, immediately after General Braddock's Defeat.
And are we degenerated so soon? Or is our Danger less now, than immediately
after Braddock's Defeat? Or are we now inured and hardened to bad News, so that
the Calamities of our Frontiers, which have been growing every Year, have now
ceased to be Objects of our Compassion?

I am sorry to tell you, that the Company now forming, is not yet completed,
though under Officers from among yourselves, from whom you may expect good
Usage; and the Encouragement is so unusually great, and the Time of Service so
short. Only 'til the first of December next.
May I not reasonably insist upon it, that the Company be made up this very Day
before we leave this Place? Methinks your King, your Country, nay, your own
Interests command me: and therefore I must insist upon it. -- Oh! for the
all-prevailing Force of Demosthenes's Oratory -- but I recall my Wish, that I
may correct it -- Oh! for the Influence of the Lord of Armies, the God of
Battles, the Author of true Courage, and every heroic Virtue, to fire you into
Patriots and Soldiers this Moment! -- Ye young and hardy Men, whose very Faces
seem to speak that God and Nature formed you for Soldiers, who are free from
the Encumbrance of Families depending upon you for Subsistence, and who are
perhaps but of little Service to Society, while at Home, may I not speak for
you, and declare as your Mouth, Here we are, all ready to abandon our Ease, and
rush into the glorious Dangers of the Field, in Defense of our Country? Ye that
love your Country, enlist: for Honor will follow you in Life or Death in such
a Cause. You that love your Religion enlist: for your Religion is in Danger.
Can Protestant Christianity expect Quarters from Heathen Savages and French
Papists? Sure in such an Alliance, the Powers of Hell make a third Party. Ye
that love your Friends and Relations, enlist; lest ye see them enslaved or
butchered before your Eyes. Ye that would catch at Money, here is a proper Bait
for you; ten Pounds for a few Months Service, besides the usual Pay of
Soldiers. I seriously make the Proposal to you, not only as a Subject of the
best of Kings, and a Friend to your Country, but as a Servant of the most High
God: for I am fully persuaded what I am recommending, is his Will; and
Disobedience to it may expose you to his Curse.

This Proposal is not liable to the Objection that have been urged against
former Measures for raising Men. You can no longer object, that you are dragged
away like Slaves against your Wills, while others are without Reason exempted:
for now it is left to your own Honor, and you may act as free Men. Nor can you
object, that you are arbitrarily thrust under the Command of foreign, unknown,
or disagreeable Officers: for the Gentleman that has the immediate Command of
this Company, and his subordinate Officers, are of yourselves, your Neighbors
Children, and perhaps your old Companions. And I hope I may add, you need not
object, that you shall be badly used: for, GENTLEMEN-OFFICERS, may I not
promise for you, that not one Man in your Company shall be treated with Cruelty
or Injustice, as far as your Authority or Influence can prevent? May I not be
your Security, that none but the Guilty shall be punished, and they only
according to the Nature of the Offense? Perhaps some may object, that should
they enter the Army, their Morals would be in Danger of Infection, and their
Virtue would be perpetually shocked with horrid Scenes of Vice. This may also
be a Discouragement to Parents to consent to their Childrens engaging in so
good a Cause. I am glad to hear this Objection, when it is sincere, and not an
empty Excuse: and I wish I could remove it, by giving you a universal
Assurance, that the Army is a School of Religion; and that Soldiers, as they
are more exposed to Death than other Men, are proportionably better prepared
for it than others. But alas! the Reverse of this is too true; and the
Contagion of Vice and Irreligion is perhaps no where stronger than in the Army;
where, one would think, the supreme Tribunal should be always in View, and it
should be their chief Care to prepare for Eternity, on the slippery Brink of
which they stand every Moment. But, GENTLEMEN-OFFICERS, I must again appeal to
you, that as for this Company, you will not willingly allow any Form of Vice to
be practiced in it with Impunity; but will always endeavor to recommend and
enforce Religion and good Morals by your Example and Authority, and to suppress
the contrary? May I not give the Public the Satisfaction of such an Assurance
concerning you, that whatever others do, as for you and your Company you will
serve the Lord? Do you not own yourselves bound to this in Honor and Duty?
Such a Conduct I can assure you, will render you popular among the Wise and
Good; though perhaps it may expose you to the senseless Contempt of Fools, who
make a Mock of Sin, and who esteem it Bravery to insult that God in whose Hand
their Breath is, and whose are all their ways. Such a Conduct will afford you
Pleasure in the Review, when the Terrors of the bloody Field are spread round
you, and Death starts up before you in a thousand shocking Forms. Such a
Conduct will be a Source of true Courage, and render you nobly indifferent
about Life or Death in a good Cause. And let me honestly warn you, that if you
do not maintain such a Conduct, you will bitterly repent it either in Time, or
Eternity.

But I return to invite others to join with you in this important Expedition.
-- What a Crowd of important Arguments press you on every Hand? What can our
Legislature do more, than they have done to engage you? If such unusual
Encouragement does not prevail upon you to enlist as Volunteers, what remains
but that you must be forced to it by Authority? For our Country must be
defended: and if nothing but Force can constrain you to take up Arms in its
Defense, then Force must be used: Persons of such a sordid unmanly Spirit, are
not to expect the Usage of Freemen. -- Think what the paternal Care of our
Sovereign has done for us: and how many Millions of Money, and Thousands of Men
our Mother Country has furnished for our Defense. And shall we do nothing for
ourselves? Great Britain, I own is interested in our Protection: but can she be
as much interested as ourselves? -- Consider what the brave New England Men
have done, after so many Mortifications and Disappointments, and their Treasury
so much exhausted. By the best Accounts I have had, the little Colony of
Massachusetts Bay has raised no less than 7000 Men, though not larger perhaps
than 15 or 20 of those 53 Counties contained in Virginia. And since we have the
same Interests at Stake, shall not we cheerfully furnish our Quota for the
public Service? -- We all admire the Bravery and Success of the King of
Prussia: but his Success must be greatly owing to the Bravery of his Subjects,
as well as his own. He has almost as many Soldiers as Subjects. And while he
has almost miraculously stood his Ground against such superior Numbers, shall
we, with the Advantage of Numbers on our Side, be perpetually flying before a
pitiful Enemy, and tamely give up our Country to their Ravages? Let us
strenuously exert that superior Force, which a gracious Providence has put in
our Hands: and we may soon expect, through the Concurrence of Heaven, that we
shall again enjoy the Blessings of Peace. Whatever Intelligence our artful
Enemies may send, or the Cowardly among ourselves may believe It is generally
believed, that all the expensive preparations of last Year were rendered
fruitless, by false Accounts of the superior Number of the Enemy at (...), etc.
, there is no Reason to conclude, that the French Regulars upon this Continent
are half so many as ours: and as to the Coloni, or Country Militia, we are
certainly 20, perhaps 40, to one. Let us then, in the Name of the Lord of
Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel, let us collect our whole Strength, and
give one decisive Blow; and we may humbly hope Victory will be ours.

Every one can complain of the bad Management of our public Undertakings, and
lament the general Security and Inactivity that prevails. Every one can wish
that Something were effectually done, and that this and that Person would
enlist. Every one can tell what great Achievements he would perform, were it
not for this and that, and a hundred Obstructions in his Way. But this idle
Complaining, Wishing and Lamenting, and Boasting, will answer no End. SOMETHING
MUST BE DONE! must be done BY YOU! Therefore, instead of assuming the State of
Patriots and Heroes at home TO ARMS! and away to the Field, and prove your
Pretensions sincere. Let the Thunder of this Imprecation rouse you out of your
Ease, and Security, Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord deceitfully;
and cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from Blood. God sent an Angel from
Heaven to curse the dastardly Inhabitants of Meroz, who refused to take up Arms
for the Defense of their Country. (Judges v. 23.) Curse ye Meroz, said the
Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof: because they came
not to the Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty. And
shall this Curse fall upon Virginia? no, fly from it by venturing your Lives
for your Country: for this Curse is far more terrible than any Thing that can
befall you in the Field of Battle. -- But it is not enough for you to undertake
this Work: you are also obliged faithfully to perform it, as the Work of the
Lord. And this leads me,

II. To show you, what is that deceitful Performance of the Lord's Work, or
unseasonable keeping back the Sword from Blood, which exposes to his Curse.

If Soldiers, instead of abandoning their Ease and Pleasure, and risquing their
Lives in Defense of their Country, should unman themselves with sensual
Pleasures and Debauchery; if, instead of searching out the Enemy, they keep out
of their Way, lest they should search out and find them; if they lie sleeping
or rioting in Forts and Places of Safety, while their Country is ravaged,
perhaps in their very Neighborhood: when they waste their Courage in Broils
and Duels among themselves, or in tyrannizing over those that are under their
Command: when they lay themselves open to false Alarms, by being credulous to
every Account that magnifies the Force of the Enemy: when they are tedious or
divided in their Consultations, and slow and faint in the Execution: when they
consult rather what may be most safe for themselves, than most beneficial to
their Country: when they keep skirmishing at a Distance, instead of making a
bold Push, and bringing the War to a speedy Issue by a decisive Stroke: when
they are fond of prolonging the War, that they may live and riot the longer at
the public Expense: when they sell themselves and their Country to the Enemy
for a Bribe: in short, when they do not conscientiously exert all their Power
to repel the Enemy, and protect the State that employs them, but only seek to
serve themselves, then they do the Work of the Lord deceitfully; and his Curse
lights upon them as their heavy Doom. I leave others to judge, whether the
Original of this ugly Picture is to be found any where in the Universe, But as
for you of this Company, may I not presume that you will behave in a noble
Manner? Shall not Sobriety, public Spirit, Courage, Fidelity, and good
Discipline be maintained among you? This I humbly recommend to you; and may God
enable you to act accordingly!

Thus far have I addressed you as Soldiers, or at least as Persons concerned in
your Stations to do all in your Power to save your Country. But we must not
part thus. It is possible we may never meet more, 'til we mingle with the
assembled Universe before the supreme Tribunal: Therefore, before I dismiss
you, I must address myself to you as Sinners and as Candidates for Eternity.
You are concerned to save your Souls, as well as your Country; and should you
save or gain a Kingdom, or even the whole World, and lose your Souls, your Loss
will be irreparable.

None of you I hope will reply, I am now a Soldier, and have nothing more to do
with Religion? What! has a Soldier Nothing to do with Religion? Is a Soldier
under no Obligations to the God that made him, and that furnishes him with
every Blessing? Is not a Soldier as much exposed to Death as other Men? May not
a Soldier be damned for Sin, as well as other Sinners? And will he be able to
dwell with devouring Fire and everlasting Burnings? Are these Things so? Can
any of you be so stupid as to think them so? If not, you must own, that even a
Soldier has as much Concern with Religion, as another. Therefore hear me
seriously upon this Head.

You are about entering into the School of Vice: for such the Army has
generally been. And are any of you already initiated into any of the Mysteries
of Iniquity there practiced? Must I so much as suppose, that some of you, who
have bravely espoused the Cause of your Country, are addicted to Drunkenness,
Swearing, Whoredom, or any gross Vice? I cannot now take Time to reason with
you for your Conviction: it may suffice to appeal to your own Reason and
Conscience, Do you do well in indulging these Vices? Will you approve of it in
the honest Hour of Death? Will this Conduct prove a Source of Courage to you,
when the Arrows of Death are flying thick around you, and Scores are falling on
every Side? No, you are self-condemned; and may I not reasonably hope, you will
endeavor to reform, what you cannot but condemn? Soldiers indeed, are too
commonly addicted to such Immoralities: but are they the better Soldiers on
that Account? Can an Oath or a Debauch inspire them with a rational Fortitude
against the Fears of Death? Would not Prayer and a Life of Holiness better
answer this Purpose? Their Courage, if they have any, must be the Effect, not
of Thought, but of the Want of Thought; it must be a brutal Stupidity, or
Ferocity; but not the rational Courage of a Man or a Christian.

Some of you, I doubt not, are happily free from these gross Vices: and long
may you continue so! but I must tell you, this negative Goodness is not enough
to prepare you for Death, or to constitute you true Christians. The Temper of
your Minds must be changed by the Power of divine Grace; and you must be turned
from the Love and Practice of all Sin, to the Love and Practice of universal
Holiness. You must become humble, brokenhearted Penitents, and true Believers
in Jesus Christ. You must be enabled to live righteously, soberly, and godly,
in this present evil World. This is Religion: this is Religion that will keep
you incorrupted in the midst of Vice and Debauchery: this is Religion, that
will befriend you, when Cannons roar, and Swords gleam around you, and you are
every Moment expecting the deadly Wound: this is Religion, that will support
you in the Agonies of Death, and assure you of a happy Immortality.

But are not some of you conscious, that you are destitude of such a Religion
as this? Then it is high Time for you to think on your Condition in sober
Sadness. Pray to that powerful and gracious Being, who can form your Hearts and
Lives after this sacred Model. Oh! pray earnestly, pray frequently, for this
Blessing: and use all the Means of Grace in that Manner which your
Circumstances will permit. -- Remember also, that if you try to prolong your
Life by a dastardly Conduct, your Life will lie under the Curse of Heaven; and
you have little Reason to hope, you will ever improve it as a Space for
Repentance. -- Remember also to put your Confidence in God; who keeps the
Thread of your Life, and the Event of War, in his own Hand. Devoutly
acknowledge his Providence in all your Ways, and be sensible of your Dependence
upon it.

And now, to conclude my Address to you, as the Mouth of this Multitude, and of
your Countrymen in general, I heartily bid you farewell. Farewell, my dear
Friends, my brave Fellow Subjects, the Guardians of your poor ravaged Country.
God grant you may return in Safety and Honor, and that we may yet welcome you
Home, crowned with Laurels of Victory! Or if any of you should lose your Lives
in so good a Cause, may you enjoy a glorious and blessed Immortality in the
Region of everlasting Peace and Tranquillity! Methinks I may take upon me to
promise you the Prayers and good Wishes of Thousands. Thousands, whom you leave
behind, will think of you with affectionate Anxiety, will wish you Success, and
congratulate your Return, or lament your Death. Once more I pour out all my
Heart in another affectionate Farewell. May the Lord preserve your Going out,
and your Coming in, from this Time forth and even for evermore. Amen.

Here I thought to have concluded. But I must take up a few Minutes more to ask
this Crowd, Is there Nothing to be done by us who stay at Home, toward the
Defense of our Country, and to promote the Success of the Expedition now in
Hand? Shall we sin on still impenitent and incorrigible? Shall we live as if we
and our Country were self-dependent and had nothing to do with the Supreme
Ruler of the Universe? Can an Army of Saints or of Heroes defend an obnoxious
People, ripe for Destruction, from the righteous Judgment of God? The Cause in
which these brave Men, and our Army in general, are engaged, is not so much
their own as ours: Divine Providence considers them not so much in their
private personal Character, as in their public Character, as the
Representatives, and Guardians of their Country: and therefore they will stand
or fall, not so much according to their own personal Character, as according to
the public Character of the People, whose Cause they have undertaken. Be it
known to you, then, their Success depends upon us, even more than upon
themselves. Therefore let us all turn every one from his evil Ways. Let the
Wicked forsake his Way, etc. Let us humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of
God, which is lifted up over our guilty Heads, that we may be exalted in due
Time. I could venture the Reputation of my Judgment and Veracity, that it will
never be well with our Country, 'til there be more of the Fear and Love of God
in it, and 'til the Name of Jesus be of more Importance among us. I could
prescribe a Method for our Deliverance, which is at once infallible, and also
cheap, and safe, and so far from endangering the Life of any, that it would
secure the everlasting Life of all that comply with it. Ye that complain of the
Burden of our public Taxes; ye that love Ease and shrink from the Dangers of
War; ye that wish to see Peace restored once more; ye that would be happy
beyond the Grave, and live for ever, attend to my Proposal: It is this, A
THOROUGH NATIONAL REFORMATION. This will do, what Millions of Money and
Thousands of Men, with Guns and Swords and all the dreadful Artillery of Death,
could not do; it will procure us Peace again; a lasting well-established Peace.
We have tried other Expedients without this long enough: Let us now try this
new Expedient, the Success of which I dare to warrant. -- And do not object,
that such a general Reformation is beyond your Power; for a general Reformation
must begin with Individuals: therefore do you, through the Grace of God, do
your Part; Begin at Home, and endeavor to reform yourselves, and those under
your Influence.

It is a natural Inference from what has been said, that if the Defense of our
Country, in which we can stay but a few Years at most, and from which we must
'ere long take our Flight, be so important a Duty, then how much more are we
obliged to seek a better Country, i. e. an heavenly; and to carry on a vigorous
War against our spiritual Enemies, that would rob us of our heavenly
Inheritance? Therefore in the Name of JESUS, the Captain of your Salvation, I
invite you all to enlist in the spiritual Warfare. Now proclaim eternal War
against all Sin. Now take to you the whole Armor of God: quit you like Men, be
strong. And for your Encouragement, remember, He that overcomes, shall inherit
all Things: He shall enter into a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. -- cannot be
shaken with those Storms of public Calamities which toss and agitate this
restless Ocean of a World. In that blessed Harbor may we all rest at last!

FINIS.

