The RELIGIOUS SOLDIER: OR, THE MILITARY CHARACTER OF KING DAVID, Displayed and
Enforced, IN A SERMON, PREACHED MARCH 8, 1759, To the REGULAR OFFICERS and
Soldiers IN ELIZABETH-TOWN.

By the Revd. Mr. ABRAHAM KETELTAS, A. M.

Dulce et Decorum est pro Patria Mori, HOR. Hereby perceive we the Love of GOD,
because he laid down his Life for us, and we ought to lay down our Lives for
the Brethren, 1 John iii. 16. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right Hand
forget her Cunning, Psalm cxxxvii. 5. NEW YORK: Printed and sold by H. Gain,
at the Bible and Crown, in Hanover-Square, 1759.

To His Excellency General AMHERST, Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Forces
in NORTH AMERICA.
SIR,
AS the Subject of the following Discourse, is the military Character of the
greatest General in sacred History, I imagined there would be a peculiar
Propriety in the Inscription of it to Your Excellency.

The Sphere in which divine Providence, and the Wisdom of the Nation, have
placed You, is very honorable and important; of this the unbounded Expense of
the present Operations, committed to your Management; the large Army under your
Command, and the vigorous Efforts of these Colonies to strengthen Your Hands,
are the most incontestible Demonstrations. The Eyes of anxious Multitudes are
fixed upon your Excellency; as under God, the Guardian of their Lives,
Privileges and Estates. By Your Wisdom, Valor and military Skill, together
with the Assistance of the brave Troops under your Command, they hope to see
the Encroachments of the Enemy entirely removed, and the Peace, Liberty and
Happiness of these Colonies, established on a glorious and permanent Foundation.

The Welfare of the Church of Christ, which he has redeemed by his Blood, and
the Welfare of a populous, fertile and extensive Country, very much depend on
the Success of those Measures, of which your Excellency is the CHIEF PROJECTOR
and PRIME MOVER: Nay, let me add, the Glory of the British Name, the Felicity
of Nations yet unborn, and all that is valuable in Life, to an English
American, are deeply concerned in the Prosperity of GENERAL AMHERST.

If ever Wisdom, Magnanimity, and great Abilities (and what ever else is good
and valuable in human Nature) were required in any Office, it must doubtless be
such an one, as that which Your Excellency sustains.

You will not then (I trust) be offended with me, for recommending to Your
Excellency, an Imitation of that celebrated Monarch, whose Character I have
briefly hinted at, in the following Pages; and especially with Regard to his
undertaking and executing all his Schemes in a humble Dependence on the
Blessing of God, and his earnest Application to the Throne of Grace, for
Courage, Direction and Assistance.

It is recorded of Alexander the Great, that he held the Iliads of Homer in
great Admiration; laid them under his Pillow when he slept, and read in them on
all leisure Opportunities; and that, finding Achilles to be the great Hero of
that Poem, he endeavored to emulate his Actions, and follow his Steps, as the
best Way to Glory and to Fame: But I dare venture to affirm, that your
Excellency would act a much wiser Part than Alexander, should you give that
Preference to the Bible, which he gave to the Iliad, and instead of taking an
Achilles, propose the Jewish Monarch for the Model of your Conduct.

The Example of David, as a religious General, has this to recommend itself
above all others, that he was a Person under the immediate and unerring
Direction of Heaven; he was a glorious King, an eminent Prophet, of singular
Endowments and exalted Piety; he is distinguished in the Scriptures of eternal
Truth, by that most honorable of all Titles, the Man after God's own Heart:
Your Excellency therefore cannot copy after a more finished Pattern.

In perusing the History and Writings of King David, Your Excellency will find,
that though few Heroes have been more successful and accomplished than this
illustrious Monarch, he constantly acted with the utmost Diffidence of himself,
and the most cordial Reliance upon Heaven.

All Events are under the Control of the supreme Ruler of the Universe; he can
turn the best concerted Schemes into Foolishness, and baffle the Attempts of
the strongest earthly or angelic Power; it is therefore exceeding just and
proper, that in all our Enterprises (especially those in which Thousands are
concerned we should with David, strive to secure the Favor and Assistance of
this All-wise, this Omnipotent, this tremenduous Being.

YOUR EXCELLENCY very justly receives the universal Applause of a grateful
People, for the signal Service you have done your Country: Yet we hope this
will not divert you, from seeking the Blessing of that Providence, to the
Smiles of which the Success of all Events, are primarily to be ascribed.

The Inhabitants of the British Colonies, (I doubt not) rejoice in the
Appointment of a Gentleman of your Excellency's Merit and Abilities, to the
Chief Command of His Majesty's Forces in America. They reflect on the
successful Expedition against CAPE-BRETON, in which your Excellency had the
Chief Command, with Sentiments of Gratitude too big to be uttered: And they
ardently wish, that all Your future Operations may be thus attended with
Victory and Joy, with Honor and Safety to yourself, and Glory to his Majesty's
Arms.

May the LORD OF HOSTS, inspire your Excellency, with Valor, Prudence and
Intrepidity, and animate your Breast with the Love of your Country, and a
disinterested Zeal to promote her Happiness! May he give you Health of Body,
and Vigor of Mind; be your Guide and Support under all the weighty and
important Concerns of your Station; prosper all your Measures for the public
Welfare; protect your Person in the Day of Battle; direct your Counsels, and
deliver the Enemy into your Hands; may your Name be glorious in the British
Annals, and your Memory precious to the latest Generations: These, may it
please your Excellency, are the unfeigned Desires,

Of your most obedient humble Servant, ABRAHAM KETELTAS.

The RELIGIOUS SOLDIER: OR, THE MILITARY CHARACTER OF KING DAVID, DISPLAYED.
2 Samuel xvii. 8. For said Hushai, Thou know thy Father and his Men, that
they be mighty Men, and they be chassed in their Minds, as a Bear robbed of her
Whelps in the Field; and thy Father is a Man of War, and will not lodge with
the People. Especially these Words, THY FATHER IS A MAN OF WAR.


IN order to discover the occasion upon which these words were spoken, and thus
enter more fully into their meaning and energy; It may not, perhaps, be
improper, briefly to relate the preceding part of the history, to which they
belong. Absalom, the beautiful and ambitious son of King David, aspiring (...)
his father's throne, endeavored, by an artful address, and the most graceful,
courteous, and condescending behavior, to insinuate himself into the
affections of the Jewish people; which point, he in a great measure
accomplished: For the sacred historian informs us, that Absalom stole the
hearts of the men of Israel, and even enticed Ahitophel, one of his father's
most eminent statesmen and bosom friends, to join with him in the conspiracy.
-- The rebellion was kept a profound secret from David, till it was ready to
burst on his head, and then he was informed of it by a messenger, who let him
know that the rebels were very strong and numerous, and probably would soon put
themselves in motion: Whereupon, the hoary monarch, in order to prevent his
being surpised, immediately marched from Jerusalem with his trusty servants,
and retired with the utmost speed into the country; where he hoped to gain
time, collect an army to withstand the rebels, and defeat their ambitious
designs. Whilst the King was retreating from his capital, many who entertained
an unshaken regard for him, pitied his misfortunes, and followed after him;
amongst these was a very celebrated counselor, and cordial friend to King
David, whose name was Hushai: His interview with his royal master, was very
tender and affectionate; for when he overtook him on the way, and beheld the
mournful and distressed condition, to which he was reduced, by the unnatural
rebellion of his son, he could not contain his inward grief, but rent his
clothes, and put earth on his head; professing at the same time, his design to
continue with him in his adversity, and spend the last drop of blood in his
cause. -- David thanked him for his loyalty, but withal told him, that the best
service he could do for him, in his present circumstances, was to go over to
his son Absalom, and pretend a desire to join with him in the conspiracy, that
so the prince receiving him into his council, as a man of prime parts, he i. e.
Hushai might defeat the schemes of the famous Ahitophel; whose wisdom David
seemed to dread more, than the united power of all the other rebels. --
Accordingly Hushai, willing to do his utmost for his royal master, went over to
Absalom, with a determination to counteract the advice of the sage Ahitophel,
and to inform David privately of all the measures taken by the enemy. When he
was come into the presence of Absalom and had professed his desires of serving
him, he was readily received by the unsuspecting prince, and because of his
superior knowledge in state affairs, presently admitted to be one of his privy
council. Now it must be observed, that David had no sooner fled from his
Metropolis, than Absalom and his men, immediately took possession of it, and
the prince having so far obtained his end, without delay, summoned his council,
to know what should be done next: The opinion of Ahitophel was first required,
which he gave in the following manner. Let me now choose out 12,000 men, and I
will arise, and pursue after David this night, and I will come upon him, while
he is weary and weak handed, and will make him afraid: And all the people that
are with him shall flee, and I will smite the King only. This advice of a
sudden attack, and pursuit after David and his men, whilst they were yet in
confusion, weary and weak handed, seemed, as it really was, exceeding
reasonable, and therefore was approved of without hesitation, by Absalom and
his party; yet before he would put it into practice, according to David's
conjecture, he demanded the opinion of Hushai: This faithful minister, well
knowing how much the life of his sovereign, would be endangered by the
execution of Ahitophel's project, endeavored to discourage it as much as
possible, and with this view he told Absalom, That the counsel which Ahitophel
had given, was not good at that time, and as an argument to overturn it, he
urged the extroardinary skill of David in military affairs, and his undaunted
courage and bravery. -- This was the purport of his address; Ahitophel has
advised an immediate attack upon your father's forces and a direct pursuit
after him; but consider how desperate the king and his men will fight, at this
critical juncture, even like a bear robbed of her whelps; which may occasion a
total defeat of your army. Besides it will be in vain to attempt to find him
now, for he is so well versed in the stratagems of war, that he will elude your
strictest search; this you must know from what you have heard of his repeatedly
escaping the hand of Saul. He is so well acquainted with caves and hiding
places, that he will conceal himself in some retirement, where he cannot be
found, and he will not expose his person to the first onset; but when his
brave, trusty and experienced veterans, whose martial prowess is so universally
celebrated, shall make a breach upon your advanced guards, as surely they will
do, from their advantageous situation, and uncommon vigilance; then they will
make a warlike shout and say, There is a slaughter amongst the people that
follow Absalom: And when this report is heard by our men, he who is valiant
among us, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt with fear;
the bravest soldier in our army will be struck with a panic, and all our
troops, even all Israel, will be affrighted at the remembrance of his undaunted
valor, and that of his brave soldiers, and flee before them: For all Israel
knows that thy father is valiant; they have had the most undoubted proofs of
it, and they know that, those which are with him are valiant men. Since then
this is the case, and we should run a dreadful risque, to attack such a brave
body of desperate and warlike men, with an army only of 12,000, and in the
night, I therefore counsel that all Israel be generally gathered together, from
Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea, for multitude, and that
thou go to battle in thine own person; and by having such numbers on our side,
we shall make sure of victory. -- This counsel pleased Absalom and his men, and
was preferred to that of Ahitophel. The argument which moved them to it, was the
extraordinary valor of David and his soldiers, set forth in the most striking
colors; they were particularly intimidated by the representation, which Hushai
made of the warlike and intrepid disposition of David, and his skill and
experience in military affairs. -- This point Hushai particularly pressed upon
Absalom, when he told him in the words of my text, Thy father is a man of war;
that is, a brave, watchful, experienced, good and hardy soldier, and therefore
it will be no easy matter to subdue him, or take him by surprise.

These words naturally lead me,

1st. To enquire into the military character of King David, and then to urge
the soldiers to the imitation of it.

First, Then I am to enquire into the military character of King David. This
will be equivalent to showing what is necessary to constitute a good soldier.

In the first place then, David was endued with natural courage and valor. His
heart was as the heart of a lion, bold, intrepid and dauntless; he was an
enterprising and fearless man from his youth; this is evident from many
particulars recorded by the sacred historian; before he was introduced to Saul,
whilst he was yet a youth, he bore the character of a mighty valiant man, and a
man of war. When he tended his father's sheep, a lion rushed among the flock
and seized a lamb; whereupon he boldly assaulted the furious beast, slew him,
and delivered the lamb out of his mouth; he slew a bear also upon a similar
occasion, 1 Samuel 17. When Goliath of Gath, the Philistine champion, a person of
a gigantic stature, and formidable appearance, had defied the whole army of
Israel, and none of them dared contend with him in single combat, but fled from
before his face; David, though a youth, was concerned at the reproach of his
countrymen, and said; who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy
the armies of the living God? He thus addressed King Saul, when he beheld him
dejected at the cowardice of his troops, Let no man's heart fail, because of
him, thy servant, will go and fight with this Philistine. After this he went
out, slew Goliath, bestrode his dead body, and cut of his head with the giant's
own sword. This was a signal proof of a brave and undaunted spirit, thus to
face and contend with a man, the terror of whose voice and aspect had made all
Israel afraid: After David had thus slain and beheaded the champion of the
Philistines, he was promoted by King Saul, to be general of his forces, or (as
the scriptures express it) he was set over the men of war. In that station he
behaved very gallantly, and grew so fast into reputation, that he was esteemed
and extolled above his royal master; he distinguished himself by repeated
victories over the Philistines, and performed such glorious exploits, that the
women publicly sang his praises, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, but
David his ten thousands. When Saul became envious of David's increasing
popularity, and sought to kill him; he devised this expedient to execute his
purpose. -- He proposed to give his daughter in marriage to David, upon this
condition, that he should procure him the foreskins of an hundred Philistines;
hoping he would fall by their hands: David was well pleased with and readily
assented to the proposal: He went out, and instead of an hundred, he obtained
the foreskins of two hundred Philistines. When the Amalakites, with a
considerable army, had burnt Ziklag, and carried away the women and children
captives, he with a band consisting only of 400 men, pursued after them, gave
them a total defeat, and recovered the prisoners and the spoil out of their
hands. From all these, and sundry other passages of sacred writ, it appears,
that David was naturally a man of undaunted courage; he was not afraid of
plunging into the thickest fight; he was not intimidated by the most warlike
appearance, or the haughtiest speeches, but cheerfully and eagerly assaulted
the bravest adversary: He never discovered a timorous disposition, but remained
unruffled and unawed, amidst the most dreadful scenes of slaughter. Now every
good soldier ought to resemble David in this, for it is a shame for a soldier to
be a coward. Those who are distitute of courage, do great injury in the day of
battle, to the army, to which they belong, disheartning others by their
scandalous example. -- They dare not fight themselves; but by their timorous
conduct, they terrify others; such persons had better be removed from an army,
than continued in it; For many battles have been lost by means of the panic and
confusion introduced by a number of fearful men; which, the braver part of the
army would have gained, had the cowards been absent. A soldier's breast should
glow with martial fire; his soul should be daring and fearless. David's heart
(as before observed) was like the heart of a lion; and when he rushed to attack
the foe, it was filled with inexpressible ardor. This ardor of the heart can
only be well understood by men of courage, who know it by experience. There is
a certain enthusiasm which animates brave minds, when they are in battle, which
it is impossible by words minutely to discribe; without something of this in his
disposition, I think a man should not devote himself to a military life; yet if
he has, he should endeavor to acquire it by prayer to God, and meditation on
the bold and glorious exploits of others.

Secondly, David was entirely acquainted with every branch of knowledge that
related to his duty as a soldier. Saul informed the Ziphites, It had been told
him, that David dealt very subtly. David was the most celebrated general of
his age, for his skill in military affairs; he knew full well how to exercise
the bow and the shield, and to handle the sword and the spear; he knew when to
advance, attack and pursue, and when to avoid a battle or make a retreat; he
knew how to maintain his ground, and post his troops to the best advantage. The
Scriptures relate, that when David went out, whithersoever Saul sent him, he
behaved so wisely, that the King, on the account of his skill, set him over the
men of war, and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the
sight of Readiness servants, 1 Samuel xviii. 5. The sacred historian informs us,
that he was prudent in matters, i. e. a skilful officer; he was advanced for
the Sake of his Dexterity in the art of war, to be captain over a thousand, 1 Samuel xviii. 13. And when he was a general, he discovered his skill in military
affairs and characters, by choosing the best men to serve under him, who
observed the strictest discipline, and were most expert in war. We read
concerning the men that came to David, that they were among the mighty men,
helpers of the war; they were armed with bows, and could use both the right
hand, and the left, in hurling stones, and shooting arrows out of a bow, 1 Chronicles. 11th and 12th Chapters.

DAVID was well versed in the stratagems of war; knew how to thwart and
disconcert the schemes of the enemy, and kept his spies to inspect their
conduct, and give him intelligence of their proceedings. Thus he sent Hushai to
watch the motions of the rebels, and battle the measures urged by Ahitophel;
which he accordingly did, and privately sent messengers to acquaint his royal
master of it. David secretly came on the back of the Philistines, and by the
suddenness of his attack, gave them a total defeat, pursued after them, and
took all their baggage and spoil, 2 Samuel v. 25. He was wary, and upon his
guard, against the contrivances of his foes, and always eluded, or frustrated
their designs, 2 Samuel xvii. 9. etc. He was well acquainted with caves, lurking
places, and inaccessible retreats, where he frequently concealed himself, and
from which he often attacked the enemy to great advantage, and surprised them
on a sudden, 1 Samuel xxvi. He was acquainted with the art of fortification; for
he took the city of Jebus, repaired the fortress Millo, and built round about,
from Millo and inward: He understood the method of defending a Place, scalling
a high wall, or taking a strong hold by assault, 2 Samuel v. 7, 8. Thus, then,
David was not only a brave, but a skillful hero; he was well acquainted with
military affairs; and so should every good soldier be. I don't pretend to
delineate precisely, the particulars of knowledge in the art of war; which
ought to be studied and attained, by one who would make a figure in that
profession; this is out of my province: I only assert, that these particulars,
be they what they will, should be familiar to a good officer or soldier; for
without the knowledge of them, their characters would be very incomplete. This
is very evident from the Difference betwixt a veteran, or regular, and a raw
provincial; he who would become an accomplished soldier, should learn to be
dexterous and active, in the use of the sword and firelock; be acquainted with
every branch of his duty, serve under an experienced general, and learn the art
of war from him: He should read such books as treat on the subject of his
occupation, the descriptions of sieges and fortification, the histories of all
preceding battles, stratagems, victories; and the ways whereby they were
obtained, or lost, should be carefully perused by him; none should be preferred
in an army, who are ignorant of military affairs: The placing of raw and
unexperienced men, in any important post, has often proved fatal to a warlike
enterprise. David chose skillful men for his commanders; he studied the art of
war himself, and had his officers teach the children of Judah the use of the
bow, 2 Samuel i. 18. Modern officers should be emulous to imitate the royal
monarch in this; instructing the men committed to their care, and their men
should readily submit to their instructions.

Thirdly, David was a regular and obedient soldier; he obeyed command, and
followed the direction of his superiors, without the least hesitation; and to
the great peril of his life, the sacred historian informs us, That David went
out whithersoever Saul sent him; and when the King signified his desire to have
him go on a scouting party, and procure him an hundred foreskins of an hundred
Philistines: The thing pleased David, he immediately went out, and instead of
an hundred foreskins, he obtained double that number. Thus every soldier
should, with the utmost readiness, obey the will and direction of his
superiors. If soldiers desert their post, fly from their colors, or refuse to
obey command, defeat and loss of victory must needs ensue: It Is their
indispensible duty to submit to their leaders, without murmuring or mutiny:
Stubbornness in soldiers, wears a dark and threatening aspect, with regard to
the success of any warlike enterprise. I would therefore strongly urge it upon
them, to propose the obedience of the jewish king for a model of their conduct.

Fourthly. David's breast was animated with a fervent love to his country; he
was deeply concerned for its honor; and more especially as the true church of
God, as pure and undefiled religion, existed in it. When Goliath of Gath, had
challenged his countrymen, and they were afraid to engage with him; David was
concerned at the reproach of Israel, indignation was enkindled in his bosom,
against his cowardly brethren; his heart burnt to fight the Philistine, and
roll away the reproach from Israel. When he beheld the giant, striding with
haughty steps, before the jewish armies, and heard him defying the bravest of
them, and challenging them to single combat, his soul was all on fire to meet
him. He cried out with the utmost ardour, Who is this uncircumcised Philistine,
that he should defy the armies of the living God? And he ran to meet the
Philistine, and quickly put an end to his proud and confident boasting. When
the Israelites were routed by the Philistines, and Saul and Jonathan were slain
on mount Gilboa, David lamented over them, saying, The beauty of Israel is
slain upon the high places; how are the mighty fallen! tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Askalon, least the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. This
admirable elegy discovers what a tender sense he had of the honor of his
country, and how ardently he wished its welfare and prosperity: That he loved
his countrymen, is also evident from the following pathetic speech, which
created him a strong interest in their hearts, Ye are my brethren, ye are my
bones and my flesh, 2 Samuel xix. 12. When he lived amongst the Philistines he
could not forget his dear Country, but fought valiantly against her enemies.
Israel always lay near his heart, and he was ready to plunge himself in the
greatest dangers for her defense: Though his Country sometimes treated him with
base ingratitude, yet they could not destroy his natural affection, or abate
the ardour of his public spirit: He was a distinguished patriot, and preferred
the welfare of his nation, to his own life; of this you may behold a most
striking demonstration, 1 Chronicles. xxi. Chap. 17th Verse, when the destroying
angel brandished the sword of divine vengeance over Jerusalem, and slew
multitudes of her inhabitants; David fell on his face before God, and said, I
have sinned, and done evil in thy sight; but as for these sheep, what have they
done? Let thine hand, I pray thee, O lord my God, be on me and my father's
house; but not on thy people that they should be plagued. David loved the
church, as well as the state; he prayed earnestly, and fought bravely in her
behalf. The consideration that true religion might suffer, if the Israelites
were defeated, made him exert himself with redoubled vigor, against the
enemies of both. Now, you, my brethren, to whom this Discourse is directed,
should strive to have your hearts influenced by the same generous motives,
which so intensely warmed the breast of this Hebrew champion: You should
consider that in the present war with France, the true protestant religion, the
lives and properties of your countrymen, and all that is near and dear to them,
lies at stake: If the enemy should prevail, then farewell to liberty of
conscience, the free enjoyment of our civil and sacred Privileges, and every
thing else that is valuable in human life: If the enemy should prevail, then
your friends, brethren and fellow subjects, must die, or suffer the greatest
extremities; therefore, if you have any regard for these endearing objects, the
protestant interest, and a bleeding country; let these tender considerations
excite you to exert yourselves with the utmost vigor in the day of battle;
like David, reflect upon the reproach brought upon the british arms, by the
cowardice, neglect, or treachery of some of its unworthy sons; and let your
hearts be sensibly touched by the reflection: Endeavor to wipe away the shame
and disgrace which they have so plentifully heaped on the nation, and let your
bosoms beat in your country's cause. A Heathen could say, Dulce et decorum est
pro patria mori; it is pleasant and honorable to die for our country; but how
much greater reason has a christian to say so: Our children are dear to us, our
wives are dear to us, so are our Parents, our kinsmen, our friends and
Acquaintance: But especially the church of Christ, and the privileges of our
most holy religion; but our country contains within it all these objects of
endearment, therefore every good soldier, every real christian, should be ready
to lay down his life for his COUNTRY.

5thly. DAVID was a loyal soldier, and true to his king. Though Saul treated him
with the blackest ingratitude, defrauded him of his promised reward, and
several times made attempts upon his life; yet he could not be induced by this
ungenerous treatment, to rebel against his king: Nay, whilst Saul was pursuing
after him, and thirsting for his blood, and an opportunity offered of slaying
him, in the Cave of Engeddi, he could not be prevailed upon to do any thing
more than barely to cut off the skirt of his garment. In the wilderness of
Ziph, where Saul had designs upon his life, he came to his tent whilst he was
asleep, and took away his spear only, when he might as easily have taken away
his life. This, as well as his expressions to Abishai, and his other officers,
showed how much he reverenced the Lord's anointed. When Abishai said unto him,
in the wilderness of Ziph, God has delivered thine enemy into thine hand: Now,
therefore, let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear: He replied, Destroy
him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's anointed, and be
guiltless? Immediately after, when Saul awoke out of his Sleep, he called him,
his Lord and his King, and acknowledged himself his subject and servant,
saying, Wherefore does my Lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I
done, or what evil is in me? In the Cave of Engeddi, when David's men advised
him to slay Saul, he said unto them, the Lord forbid that I should do this
thing unto my master, the Lord's anointed; peruse also his address to Saul, 1 Samuel xxiv. from 8 to the 15th Verse. After Saul was slain on mount Gilboa,
David discovered his loyalty to him, by commanding the messenger to be
executed, who declared he had put him to death; and by composing that pathetic
elegy, wherein he bewails the fall of his royal master, in the most plaintiff
and melancholy strains. Now a good soldier like David, should be loyal to his
King, and ready to spend the last drop of blood in his cause. If the jewish
Hero was so strongly attached to a cruel and oppressive monarch, who thirsted
for his blood, and treated him with the basest ingratitude; surely you, my
brethren, who have the honor of serving the best of Kings, are under superior
obligations, to promote the glory of his arms, with all your abilities, and
fight for his dominions, which have been most unjustly invaded: So gracious a
sovereign as his present Majesty, has the strongest claim to the love and
affections of every true Briton: And all who enjoy the benefits of his royal
favor, should be ready to support his measures with their lives and estates.
KING GEORGE THE SECOND, is the FATHER of his people; the present grand and
expensive praparations to protect his American subjects, from the bloody
Designs of cruel and perfidious enemies, and remove their unjust encroachments,
and all the former blessing of his majesty's benign government, are the most
convincing evidences of his paternal regard; he therefore would not deserve the
name of a briton, who would not fight and die, for such a GRACIOUS KING.

But, Sixthly. David, though a brave soldier, was not of a violent disposition;
he was not inclined to take away the property of his countrymen by force of
arms, without asking their consent, and contrary to reason and law: Of this his
conduct in sending his young men, civilly to ask provision of the surly Nabal,
is a plain proof; the history of the affair is to this purpose: David and his
troops abode for some Time in the neighborhood of Mount Carmel, in which Nabal
lived; during this time they defended the flocks and servants of Nabal, both by
night and day: They used the latter with the utmost civility, and took not a
single lamb from the former; and therefore one of Nabal's young men gave this
character of David's, to Abigail; the Men were very good to us, and we were not
hurt, neither missed we any thing as long as we were conversant with them. Thus
did David train up his men to the greatest order, and he set them a very good
example himself; as I hinted at before; for when his army was in great want of
Provision, instead of detaching an armed body to seize Nabal's flocks, he sent
him the kindest Message, desiring a little refreshment for himself and his
small band: David sent out ten men (says the sacred historian) and he said unto
the young men, get ye up to Carmel and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name,
and thus shall ye say to him that lives in prosperity, peace be both to thee
and thine house, and peace unto all that thou have, and now I have heard that
thou have shearers; now thy shepherds that were with us, we hurt them not,
neither was there aught missing unto them, all the while they were in Carmel:
Ask thy young men, and they will show thee; wherefore let the young men find
favor in thine eyes; give I pray thee, whatsoever comes to thy hand, unto thy
servant and thy son David. Thus gently did David and his men deal with the
people amongst whom they resided; and every good soldier should imitate their
example. To seize violently upon the property of others, without leave or
consent; to insult, strike and abuse the innocent; to rush into an house, with
an armed mob, and take away the substance of the poor and helpless; to trample
upon the laws and liberties of the Nation, and defraud the honest man of his
due: All this is contrary, extremely contrary, to the genius of the gospel, and
the dictates of reason and humanity, and is the very reverse of that prudent
conduct of the jewish monarch, which I have just now described.

Seventhly. David was an hardy, watchful and active soldier. The schemes which
he had concerted, he immediately put into execution; witness his pursuit of the
Amalikites, who had taken, burnt and plundered Ziklag, and carried away its
inhabitants prisoners; amongst whom were David's wives: He came upon them by
forced marches, overtook them before they were aware of it, put them totally to
the rout, and recovered his wives, the rest of the captives, and the spoil, out
of their hands. The activity of David, his expedition, and dispatch in the
execution of his designs, should excite gentlemen of the military character, to
vigorous measures; the advantages that will redound from them, will be
unspeakably great. Vigor and dispatch in the execution, are sometimes
essentially necessary to render a project successful. The conduct of that
ILLUSTRIOUS HERO, of the present age, the KING OF PRUSSIA, and his uncommon
successes, are the plainest proofs of the truth of these remarks: David (I
observed was an hardy soldier) he frequently underwent the greatest toils and
fatigues, he very often slept in caves, rocks and dens of the earth; as any one
may see who will peruse his history; he suffered hunger and thirst, and the
greatest extremities in the high places of the field. At a certain time when he
was in the cave of Aduilam, and was ready to faint for water, three of his
worthies, at the peril of their lives, broke through the host of the Philistines
and fetched him water; but notwithstanding David's extremity, he would not drink
it, but poured it out to the Lord, and said, My God, forbid it me, that I
should do this thing: Shall I drink the blood of these men, that have put their
lives in jeopardy? For with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. What a
standing reproach is this conduct of the King of Israel, to those Persons who
sacrifice the INTERESTS OF A NATION to their luxury, effeminacy and ease: He
that devotes himself to a military life, should learn to endure hardness, to
mortify his appetites, and deny himself, when the interests of his country call
him, to it; otherwise he will prove but a very indifferent soldier. A handful
of hardy Macedonians, under the command of Alexander the Great, could subdue a
united kingdom of effeminate Persians: And this will always be the case;
tender, delicate and pampered constitutions, unused to labor and fatigue, can
never stand before the hardy and robust. David was also watchful, he observed
all the motions of the enemy, he maintained a constant guard, and thought it a
crime worthy of death, for a soldier to sleep when he was set to keep watch.
Thus, when Abner and all the guards of king Saul slept about him, David said
unto Abner, wherefore have thou not kept thy Lord the king; ye are worthy to
die, because ye have not kept your master, the Lord's anointed. He manifested
an extraordinary spirit of vigilance, in repeatedly escaping the hands of Saul,
and avoiding the designs of his son Absalom; compare 1 Samuel xxii.xxiii. and
xxiv. chapters. Now every good soldier must tread in David's steps; be
watchful, and always upon his guard against the enemy; he should be exceeding
cautious not to be surprised and taken unawares.

Eighthly. David was a compassionate and humane soldier; he was averse to
cruelty and revenge; as such, he treated his enemies with a great deal of
generosity and a forgiving temper: This we have partly seen from his conduct to
Saul; he forgave Shimel, though he cursed him most bitterly, and cast stones and
dirt at him, in the day of his trouble; he kindly received and entertained
Abner, his rival's general; and after Joab had basely murdered him, he with
tears, lamented his death, and attended upon his Funeral. David's conduct to
the rebels, who had joined with his son Absalom against him, manifested a
gracious and merciful disposition: And herein, so far as he acted consistent
with Christianity, I would propose him, my brethren, as a pattern for your
imitation. I would not have you be of a cruel and revengful disposition; but if
you have an opportunity, I hope you will treat your enemies with tenderness and
compassion. I have observed in reading history, that the bravest men have
generally been remarkable for their humanity, and generous disposition toward
their enemies; and you are in particular bound to exercise such a temper, as
you are Christians and enjoy the glorious light of the gospel, which is a
system of the most sublime, disinterested and extensive benevolence.

Lastly. And to finish the military character of king David; he was a virtuous
and religious soldier; he loved and feared God, and cheerfully obeyed his
commandments; he was eminent for the purity of his heart, the warmth of his
devotion, and the holiness of his life; he undertook and executed all his
warlike operations, in a humble dependence on the divine power and Assistance;
he put no trust in an arm of flesh, abstract from his creator's blessing. When
GOLIATH beheld David, he disdained and cursed him, and said, come to me, and I
will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field.
David was not at all intimidated by these haughty words, but boldly answered
the Giant, Thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield;
but I come to thee in the name of the LORD OF HOSTS, the God of the armies of
Israel, whom thou have defied: This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine
hand, and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee, and I will give the
carcasses of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air,
and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know there is a God
in Israel; and all this assembly shall know, that the Lord saves not with
sword and spear; for the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our
hands: Some trusted in chariots, and some in horses, but David remembered the
name of the Lord his God, Psalm xx. 7. He ascribed all his courage, success and
skill, in military affairs, to God: By thee (says he) I have run through a troop,
and by my God, have I leaped over a wall; it is God that girdeth me with
strength, and makes my way perfect, he makes my feet like Hinds feet, and
sets me upon my high places, he teaches my hands to war, so that a bow of
steel is broken by my arm, Psa. xviii. He disclaims all dependence on human
power, in the xxxiii. Psalm, 16 and 17 Verses; there is no king saved by the
multitude of an host, an horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he
deliver any by his great strength. Sensible of his dependence upon God, he
always prayed for the divine blessing before he engaged: This was his
supplication, Thou art my king, O God! command deliverance for Jacob. Through
thee will we push down our enemies, through thy name will we tread them under,
that rise up against us. For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword
save me; give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man. Through God we
shall do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down our enemies, Psalm xlvi.
and lx. When Ahitophel, that eminent statesman, had gone over to Absalom, he
cried out, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahitophel into foolishness.
When he was ready to be destroyed by the hands of Saul, he prayed unto the Lord
for deliverance, compare lvii. and lix. Psalms. When David had obtained a
victory, he acknowledged the agency of God in it, and gave thanks to his great
and glorious name; as may be seen in the xviii. and xxi. Psalms: Where he
expresses himself in the following manner, I have pursued mine enemies and
overtaken them; neither did I turn again 'till they were consumed. I have
wounded them that they were not able to rise: For thou have girded me with
strength unto battle; thou have subdued under me, those that rose up against
me, thou have also given me the necks of mine enemies. David was very constant
in prayer to God; morning, evening, and at noon, he made his supplication to
the most high; he loved the house of God, and the place where his honor dwelt:
He affirms, he would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, than
dwell in the tents of wickedness; and cries out, how amiable are thy
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and enquire in his temple. David
took a sacred delight in the contemplation of the law of God, and the reading
of his word: His delight was in the law of the Lord, and in his law did he
meditate both day and night. The practice of piety was so far from being his
burden, that it was his greatest pleasure; accordingly, he sings in the xix.
Psalm, The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: More are they
to be desired than gold; yea, than much fine gold: Sweeter also than honey, or
the honey comb. He heartily approved of the duties of religion, and habitually
hated all kinds of sin; he esteemed God's precepts, concerning all things, to
be right, and he hated every false way. His piety was not only external; but
his heart delighted in it. O! how I love thy law, (is his language) it is my
meditation all the day long: He ardently desired to make progress in holiness,
and be more conformable to the divine image, he aspired after perfection, and
panted after immortality. As the heart pants (says he) after the water brooks,
so pants my soul, after thee, O God! My soul thirsts for God, the living
God; when shall I come and appear before God. His breast was enflamed with the
most lively and cordial gratitude to his heavenly father; of this his numerous
affectionate thanksgivings, in the psalms, are an ample testimony. David was
anxious about the renovation and sanctification of his nature, and endeavored
to cultivate inward purity and holiness; he truly repented of all his Sins, and
offered to God the sacrifices of a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart:
He trusted in the righteousness and merits of a future Messiah, for pardon and
justification: He confessed his original and actual sins, with the lowest
humility, and sought salvation in a way of free and unmerited grace, accounting
that man happy whose transgression was forgiven, and to whom the Lord imputed
not iniquity; he renounced all dependence upon his own goodness, in the sight
of God, saying, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name, be the honor and
glory: He hated the congregation of evil doers, and abstained from the company
of the wicked. He walked not in the counsel of the ungodly; nor stood in the
way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the scornful: He kept his tongue as with
a bridle, whilst the wicked were before him. He rejoiced, and delighted in God,
and entertained a solemn and affecting sense of his omnipresence, power, glory,
majesty, wisdom, holiness, goodness, mercy and truth; he was a person of the
greatest integrity, abhorred falsehood, and maintained a sacred regard for the
truth; he thus addressed the heart searching God, O Lord! if there be iniquity
in my hands, if I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; yea,
have delivered him who without cause is mine enemy; let the enemy persecute my
soul and take it. He presents us with the following description of the good
man, whilst he gave an example of it in his own life and conversation. Lord,
who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Who shall abide in thy holy hill? He that
walks uprightly and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his
heart. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor,
nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor, in whose eyes a vile person is
contemptible: But he honors them that fear the Lord; he that has clean
hands and a pure Heart, who has not lift up his soul to vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully. David was convinced of the necessity of this character, in order
to obtain future happiness: He knew that the wicked would be turned into hell,
and all the nations that forget God; he knew that Jehovah hated all the workers
of iniquity, and would finally rain upon them snares, fire and brimstone, and
an horrible tempest: Therefore he walked in the ways of holiness, and kept the
commandments of his God; knowing it was the only way to secure his blessing
here, and eternal felicity hereafter: He endeavored to live in a state of
reconciliation with God, that in case he was slain in battle, he might be
translated to those HAPPY ABODES, where there is fullness, an everlasting
fullness of joy. A sense of his integrity, and the favor of God, made him bold
and intrepid in the day of battle; he could look beyond the scenes of
slaughter, and behold the heavenly Canaan as his infallible reward; he knew how
infinitely dangerous it would be, to risk his life in the high places of the
field, if God was his enemy, and he remained in a unpardoned and unsatisfied
condition; he knew that in such a case, the mortal blow that deprived him of
his life, would dispatch him to the regions of never-ending misery and despair;
he therefore lived in the practice of universal virtue, and in a constant
preparation for his great and last change: He chose God for the portion of his
soul, and maintained a life of communion with him in providence and ordinances;
in short he denied all ungodliness and every worldly lust, and lived soberly,
righteously and godly in this present evil world.

Thus, my brethren, I have described THE MILITARY CHARACTER OF KING DAVID; I
now proceed to urge you to an imitation of it.

And, in the first place, I beg leave to address THE GENTLEMEN OFFICERS, under
a view of the preceding particulars.

GENTLEMEN,

Let me exhort you to copy after that GREAT and EMINENT scripture HERO, whose
piety, martial exploits, and endowments, I have just now briefly set before
you; let the same zeal to vindicate the rights and liberties of your fellow
subjects; let the same loyalty to your KING, and love to your COUNTRY, warm
your breasts, which animated his; exercise the same benevolence and regard to
the men placed under your command; be watchful over their morals and behavior,
and remember you are accountable to God for all those miss-steps in their
conduct, which by your influence, authority and example you, may prevent;
suffer them not to curse, swear, get drunk, pillage, beat one another, and
insult the innocent with impunity; yet remember, that in their punishment, you
treat them as fellow creatures, who partake of the same common nature with
yourselves, and are entitled to your pity and tenderness. Discipline,
considering the universal corruption of mankind, is necessary in an army; yet
it should be conducted with humanity, and according to the genius and spirit of
the gospel.

GENTLEMEN, You have observed in the preceding discourse, that king David
always went to battle in a humble dependence on the blessing of God, and with
earnest prayers of success from his almighty arm. I hope therefore, you will
not be ashamed to imitate the JEWISH MONARCH, in this important part of his
conduct; and to implore the assistance of the Lord of Hosts, in every branch of
your duty. Think not GENTLEMEN, that the great God is inattentive to the
concerns of this lower world; for he rules the UNIVERSE by his PROVIDENCE, and
makes the scale of victory incline to whatever side he pleases. We have
positive assurances, in the sacred scripture, that he interposed in favor of
particular armies, who sought his assistance by prayer, and destroyed others
who despised it; and is he not the same God now, that he was then? Is he not as
much concerned in the management of events in the present conjuncture of
affairs, as he was in former ages? Has not the present war furnished us with
the most striking proofs of his SUPERINTENDENCY, and does it not seem,
GENTLEMEN, that considering the superior number of british troops at
MONONGAHELA and TICONDEROGA; their defeat was owing to the frowns of that
PROVIDENCE, which we did not sufficiently acknowledge.

Gentlemen, don't suffer the successes with which his majesty's arms have been
lately crowned, to beget in you, a high opinion of yourselves, or a disregard
to that GOD, to the smiles of whose favor we are principally indebted, for all
the eminent advantages which our troops have obtained.

GOD himself has declared in his word, those that honor me, will I honor; but
he that despises me shall be lightly esteemed. Oh! therefore look unto him for
VICTORY, and expect it from no other quarter.

GOD is a being of infinite power and wisdom; he created and sustains the
UNIVERSE, and whenever he pleases, he makes a WRECK OF MATTER? AND A CRUSH OF
WORLDS: Be then persuaded to seek the assistance of his OMNIPOTENT ARM; least,
if you despise it, it fall upon you, and grind you to powder; least it scatter
his majesty's troops, and strike terror through the stoutest british heart.

Finally, GENTLEMEN, we take this public opportunity, gratefully to acknowledge
the signal services done, in part by yourselves and the brave troops under your
command, in the reduction of the important fortress of LOUISBOURG, and the
islands of CAPE-BRETON and ST. JOHN'S: We confess ourselves much obliged to
you, for the dangers and fatigues to which you have exposed yourselves, for the
british nation in general, and this part of his majesty's dominions in
particular. Gentlemen, we ardently wish and pray, that your former success may
be the happy prelude of more IMPORTANT VICTORIES; and may GOD improve you as
instruments in his hand, to chastise our cruel and perfidious enemies, and
restore an honorable peace to your country. May the Lord of hosts prosper your
arms, protect your persons, and make you great and distinguished blessings:
These are the sincere wishes of my heart, and I am persuaded not only of mine,
but every person in this assembly.

I now pass on to make an application of my discourse to the SOLDIERS who are
here present. Brethren, I have proposed, for your imitation, the example of a
very religious and accomplished soldier, a man of distinguished piety, and
under the infallible direction of God's holy spirit: Therefore let there be an
emulation amongst you, who shall resemble it most; let there be a generous
strife, who shall make the nearest approaches to (...) MILITARY CHARACTER OF
KING DAVID. Be of good courage, and play the men for your people, and the
cities of your God; and the Lord do that which seems him good. Let the
WELFARE of so many of your fellow subjects, the welfare of the PROTESTANT
INTEREST, the welfare of the CHURCH OF CHRIST, animate your hearts, and inspire
you with martial ardour and intrepidity. Let the blood of innocent babes and
helpless women, which has been shed by barbarous hands; let the captivity and
death of so many brave soldiers, the loss of important garrisons, the groans of
distressed multitudes, the eminent danger which threatens the lives and
properties of your countrymen, and their invaluable liberties, both civil and
sacred; let these united and affecting considerations, stir you up to great and
glorious deeds. Behold the bones of slaughtered britons, bleaching on the banks
of MONONGAHELA; review TICONDEROGA'S BLOODY FIELD, covered with the bodies of
your poor brethren: There the dastard French shrunk into the ground from
BRITISH VALOR; and hardly secure in their deep, inaccessible intrenchments,
with trembling hearts, slew the heroes whom they durst not face. Oh BRITAIN! O
my COUNTRY! how did thy VALIANT SONS fall in battle; how were thy MIGHTY slain
by hostile hands: There HOW, the HERO, and the PATRIOT fell, there fell a list
of WORTHIES, exposed to an unequal chance, and cut off by an untimely stroke.
O! let these tender reflections, my brethren, arouse up all the man and the
briton, and exert you to attack the enemy with redoubled ardour and fury. Let a
sense of BRITTANNIA'S WRONGS, and the dishonor which her arms have suffered;
let the glorious victories of your renowned ancestors, and all that is great
and noble, warm you breasts, and make you dauntless like lions. Endeavor, by
the most gallant exploits, to wipe of the disgrace which has been cast on the
british arms, and retrieve the glory of the English name. Consider how David
was concerned to take away the reproach from Israel, and what indignation
glowed in his breast against the Philistine; and let the same passion be in
you, let your arms, let your swords, be like the bow of Jonathan, which turned
not back; and the sword of Saul, which turned not empty from the blood of the
slain, from the fat of the mighty: Desert not your post, fly not from your duty
in the day of battle, but bravely face the adversary, and rush on to the bold
attack; fight manfully, plunge into the midst of the enemy, and turn not again
'till they are fallen under your feet, 'till you have beat them small as the
dust before the wind. But here let me caution you, not to venture in your own
strength, not to trust in an arm of flesh; but, like David, go forth in the
name of the Lord; exert yourselves in a humble dependence on his blessing and
assistance; pray earnestly to him for direction, courage, and success; apply to
God to strengthen your hands, and cover you heads, in the day of battle.
Without the divine assistance you can do nothing; thus we read, 2 Chronicles. xxvi.
5. That when king Uzziah sought the Lord, God made him to prosper; but the
contrary happened when he neglected it: And when the children of Judah, in
Abijah's reign, relied upon the Lord God of their fathers, they prevailed
against the children of Israel. Therefore trust in the LORD, and make the MOST
HIGH your habitation: And rest persuaded, that numbers, courage and military
skill, will avail you nothing, if God should frown upon you; this we all know
by melancholy experience, the battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the
swift; For God destroys the proud and mighty, in the imagination of their
hearts; and exalts the humble and the weak: He does according to his sovereign
will and pleasure, in the armies of heaven above, and amongst the inhabitants
of the earth below; and there is none that can control him, stay his hand, or
dare say unto him, what do thou?

In the next place, my brethren, let me tell you, if you desire success to
attend your arms; it is necessary, absolutely necessary, that you, as well as
we, should abstain from sinful practices; for GOD hates, and is angry with the
wicked every day, and will baffle the designs of those that despise his
authority, and trample his laws under foot; he will frown upon their measures,
and cause them to fall by the hands of their enemies. We are told, Deuteronomy. xxii.
9. That when the host goes against the enemy, then the people should keep
themselves from every wicked thing. We are also informed in the 7th of Joshua,
that the Israelites could not prevail against the children of Ai, 'till they
had put away the evil and accursed thing, from among them. Now let me ask you,
brethren, do you make any attempts to eradicate vicious habits, and lay aside
the practice of iniquity? Are there not on the contrary, many amongst you who
commit the grossest abominations? who delight in drunkenness, fornication,
violence, riotous living, profane swearing, and other detestable vices? Now,
how can you reasonably expect the blessing of God, as long as you are guilty of
such base actions? Blessing of God; no, his wrath will come upon such
transgressors to the uttermost. Let me tell you, if you fall in battle, you
will, without doubt, be cast into HELL, where the smoke of your torments will
ascend for ever and ever. Let me therefore urge you to forsake your sins, and
turn to God with all your hearts; be chaste and temperate; wrong no man; do
violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages;
obey your officers; behave in a sober, regular and discreet manner: In short,
imitate the character of KING DAVID, and thus you will obtain the love of your
fellow creatures, and there will be a much greater probability of your success
in the day of battle.

Let me advise all the soldiers indiscriminately, to search into their
spiritual state: See to it, my brethren, whether you are prepared to meet
death, the king of terrors; examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith,
prove your own selves; do you live as probationers for eternity? And are you
qualified for the kingdom of Christ and of God? Have you, with holy David,
heartily renounced, and sincerely repented of all your Sins? do you live a life
of faith in a savior's merits, and of obedience to his divine commandments? Do
you, with the royal Psalmist, delight in prayer, in praise, in going to the
house of god, and reading, and meditating upon his word? Do you, with him,
avoid the company of the wicked, hate sin with perfect hatred, and delight in
the law of the Lord, after the inner man? Are the corruptions of your heart and
the follies of your life, your greatest burden? and do you, with the King of
Israel, pray earnestly for the pardon of your sins, and the sanctification of
your natures? Are you anxious to cultivate inward purity, maintain communion
with God, and make advances in the divine life? Have you been convinced of your
lost and ruined condition by nature, and your exposedness, whilst in that
condition, to divine wrath and justice? And have you, in consequence of this
conviction, by faith, fled to Jesus, the only city of refuge? If you have not,
you are in a very unsafe and dismal situation; for God out of Christ is a
consuming fire; and sinners out of Christ, are exposed, not only to temporal,
but ETERNAL DEATH: Let me therefore exhort you, before you go to the field of
battle, to make God your trust, your buckler, your shield and your high tower;
lean not upon yourselves, your own valor, your own strength, or your own
righteousness; trust not in horses or chariots, but trust in the name of the
Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel; flee to Christ immediately,
without any delay, secure an interest in his favor, and then neither death nor
life, neither France nor hell, can separate you from his love. But like good
Josiah, if slain in battle, you will be carried by angels from blood and
carnage, from tumult and slaughter, to the regions of everlasting and
undisturbed repose. I exhort you all to attend to these serious considerations;
I warn you all as a friend, who is anxious for your present and future welfare,
to avoid those sins and abominations, which are, alas! too common in an army:
Avoid every kind of profaneness and immorality; shun, as much as possible, the
company of the wicked, and in the time of leisure, meditate on religious
subjects, and let it be a matter of the highest concern to your souls, to
prepare for death, judgment and eternity. Now is the only accepted time, now is
the day of salvation; therefore in God's name, for Christ's sake, and as you
would not be forever miserable; let me beseech and entreat you, with the utmost
importunity, to consider these things which belong to your peace, before they
are everlastingly hid from your eyes.

Believe me, my brethren, when I reflect that there are so many poor souls
among you, going very soon to the field of battle, ftom whence it is probable
that some of you will never return; and when I consider that they are not yet
reconciled to god, through the blood of his son, and therefore must perish
forever, if slain by the enemy. -- I say, when I consider these things, my
heart bleeds for you: Unhappy creatures, whom the sword of the adversary may
send to the shades of hell: Repent of all your sins betimes; in the day of
action you will have no opportunity for this important purpose, therefore now
embrace the GOLDEN MOMENTS, and seek the pardon of your sins, and an interest
in the MERITS of CHRIST, before you go hence to be here no more.

Brethren, you have resided for some time amongst us, and I hope and believe
you have been, in the main, well treated by the inhabitants of this town; we
have always wished you well, and therefore are unwilling you should part from
us, without expressing that our hearts are toward you. We wish you a blessing
from the house of the Lord. GOD ALMIGHTY bless you, protect and prosper you!
Teach your hands to war and your finegers to fight; give you courage and
conduct, make you the terror of your enemies, and the defense of your country!
God be your refuge and strength, a very present help in time of trouble: The
LORD OF HOSTS be with you; the God of Jacob be your refuge! may he render you
successful, make bare his EVERLASTING ARM in your behalf, give you the necks of
your enemies, render your expedition safe, honorable and victorious; make you
good and faithful soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, and at last confer upon
you, a CROWN of unfading glory, a CROWN of EVER BLOOMING AND TRIUMPHANT
LAURELS: That this may be the happy portion of every soul in this assembly, may
God of his infinite mercy grant, for the sake of our dear redeemer, to whom,
with the father and the holy spirit, be, rendered and ascribed, the kingdom,
power and glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

