Mr. Lookwood's ELECTION SERMON. May 10th, 1759.

The Worth and Excellence of Civil Freedom and Liberty illustrated, and a
Public Spirit and the Love of our Country recommended.

A SERMON DELIVERED BEFORE THE General Assembly OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT,
AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE Anniversary ELECTION. May 10 th. 1759.

By James Lockwood, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Wethersfield.

ACTS xxii.27. -- Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, yea. PSALMS cxxxvii.5. If
I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her Cunning. Manus (...)
inimi^a Tyran^is, Ense peti^ Placidam sub Liberate Quierum. Algernon Sidney.
New London: Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and
COMPANY, 1759.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the GOVERNOR and COMPANY of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford on the second Thursday of May, Anno Dom. 1759.
ORDERED, That JOHN CHESTER, Esquire and Mr. ELISHA WILLIAMS, return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Rev. Mr. JAMES LOCKWOOD, for his SERMON delivered before
this Assembly, on the Tenth Instant, and desire a Copy thereof, that it may be
Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

An Election Sermon.
ACTS xxii.28. AND the chief Captain answered, with a great Sum obtained I this
Freedom. And Paul said, but I was freeborn.
SAINT Paul by Nation was a Jew, by civil Dignity and Privilege he was a Roman
Citizen, by Profession he was a Christian, and by Office a Minister and an
Apostle of Christ, and this was his highest Dignity and Honor. He had been
bred a Pharisee, and was an eager and violent Persecutor of the Christian
Cause, but after his Conversion, he was an ardent and zealous Promoter and
Preacher of that Faith which once he destroyed; which laid him open and exposed
him, to the furious Resentment and Rage of his Countrymen the Jews, who now
rose upon him, in a riotous and tumultuous Manner, in the Temple, whilst he was
peaceably employed there -- apprehended him, beat and abused him, in a very
injurious and shameful Manner, 'till he was (...) by the Chief Captain with a
Band of Soldiers, and ordered to be carried into the Castle; and being come
upon the Sta^^s, he there stood, and having obtained Leave, he made admirable
Defense of himself, by a particular Recital of the Manner of his past Life, and
the wonderful Circumstances of his Conversion to Christianity: where upon the
Jews were filled with accumulated Fury and Rage; they lift up their Voices --
away with this Fellow from the Earth -- they cried out, and cast Dust into the
Air. In the midst of this riotous uproar, when some cried one thing, and some
another, among the Multitude, the chief Captain commanded him to be brought
into the Castle, and ordered that he should be examined by Scourging, that if
possible he might find out what the Business was, and wherefore they they thus
cried out against him, presuming that by this Method, he might extort a true
Confession: accordingly they bound him with Thongs. At this critical Juncture,
Saint Paul's Freedom and civil Immunities, as a Citizen of Rome, were of great
Advantage to him: He says to the Centurion that stood by v. 25. is it lawful
for You to Scourge a Man that is a Roman, and uncondemened? This Question
imports a strong and clear Negation. The same Truth likewise is suggested, and
weight laid upon it in the Sixteenth Chapter of Acts, where we are told, that
after Paul and Silas had been beaten, and cast into Prison, the Magistrates
sent Word to let them go, in Answer to whom, Saint Paul say v.37. They have
beaten us openly uncondemn'd being Romans, and have cast us into Prison; and
now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily, but let them come Themselves,
and fetch us out -- let them come themselves, make up the Matter, and dismiss
us honorably.

THE Freedom of Rome and a Right to the Privileges and Immunities of that State
was accounted an high, distinguishing Honor. I shall not undertake to give a
particular Detail of those Privileges: some of them are mentioned here, which I
shall take some Notice of. Saint Paul here complains, that he was Punished
uncondemned and without a Trial: now, it was contrary to the Laws of the
Romans, and so it is to the Laws of all well regulated States and Kingdoms, to
condemn or punish a Man without a fair, impartial Trial, and the Accusers and
Accused had Face to Face, and the accused have Liberty to answer for and defend
himself: but in the present Case, Saint Paul had had no Trial at all, but they
fell upon and abused him, in a riotous, tumultuary Manner, which was a direct
Violation, not only of the Laws of common Justice and Equity, but of his civil
Freedom and Immunity as a Citizen of Rome: nor was this all, but they had bound
and scourged or beaten him, from both of which he was exempted by the Roman
Law. To bind or beat a Roman, or one who was free of that City, and entitled to
the Privileges of it was by no means lawful: hence Cicero, in one of his
Orations says, Facinus est vinciri Civem Romanum, Scelus verberari, that is,
it is a great and heinous Crime, either to bind or beat a Roman Citizen: if they
were guilty and deserved it, they had other Ways of punishing their Citizens,
but Thongs and Whips they accounted too dishonorable and shameful Methods of
Punishment, and unbecoming the Dignity of Roman Citizens.

No Wonder then the Centurion, when he understood that Saint Paul was a Roman,
was alarmed at what had been done: he goes straightway to the Chief Captain,
and informs him how the Matter stood, and desires him to take heed what he did:
whereupon the Chief Captain went directly to Paul and said, tell me now
seriously and honesty, are you a Roman Citizen, Saint Paul answered frankly and
truly, yes I am; the chief Captain replys to this Purpose, in the Text, why
that seems hardly probable, from the indifferent Figure and Appearance you now
make, unless there has been some remarkable Change in your Circumstances; for
I, who hold a considerable Post in the Roman Army, obtained that Freedom at an
expensive Rate, and for a greatSum of Money: Paul rejoins, I had no Need of
making any such Purchase, for I was freeborn, born to the Freedom of the City
of Rome, and all the Privileges and Immunities of it; it descended to me from
my Father, who was a Roman Citizen before me.

THERE were several Ways of becoming free of the City of Rome, and being
entitled to the Priviliges of it* one was by Purchase, so the chief Captain was
made free: another was by Birth, so Paul came by his Freedom: and some were
vested and dignified with these Privileges, in Consequence and Reward of some
signal Services they had done the Roman Government; in this Way, it is probable
eno' St. Paul's Father become free of Rome: for many of the Jews, by serving in
the Roman Army, and signanzing themselves, were endowed with the Freedom and
Immunities of Citizens of Rome.

THESE Words, I apprehend, may well eno' give Rise to a brief Discourse on
civil Liberty, and the Privileges, Rights and Immunities that belong to a free
State or Government, with a particular Application of it to this Government.

THE Source and Original of civil Government, in General, is Divine and from
GOD. The most high has sufficiently informed us in his Word, and from the
Nature, Reason and Necessity of the Thing, that it is his Pleasure, civil
Government should obtain among the Nation's of the Earth: but he has not seen
fit to interpose, and expressly to fix and determine in his Word, that this or
that particular Model or Scheme of civil Rule and Government, should obtain and
be observed, in this or the other Nation, or in any Nation; but has left that
Matter, very much, to the Election and Choice of the several Communities; or,
that Matter is overruled by a Train of providential Events, whence the several
Nations and civil States of the Earth, are led to fix and settle in some one
particular Form of Government rather than another.

As we in this Colony are dependant upon, and hold the Charter of all our civil
Privileges, from the Crown of Great Britain, it may not he improper, to take a
very brief View of that Kingdom, with it is inestimable Privileges.

GREAT Britain is a limited Monarchy, and is sometimes called, by political
Writers, a Republic or Commonwealth, with a Prince at the Head of it: it is
governed by Laws of their own making, and both King and People are bound and
obliged to act and conduct themselves according to the Laws of the Realm. The
British Legislature consists of three Branches, the King and two Houses of
Parliament, without the Concurrence of each of which, no Laws can be made, and
which mutually temper, assist and check each other.

HISTORIANS tell us, that this Form of Government, for substance, has obtained
in England from the earliest Times, and the same Kind of Government was settled
by the Northern Nations, in several Parts of Europe, which they overrun in the
Decline of the Roman Empire, and founded new States upon its Ruins: but those
Governments on the Continent, as to the free Form of them, gradually
degenerated into despotick and arbitrary; but in, England, it has been
preserved, secured and improved. In the Time of the Saxon Heptarchy, when
England was divided into seven Kingdoms, the Government was free, and so it was
after those Kingdoms were united into one: King William the first, a Norman,
having conquered England, near Seven Hundred Years ago indeed established an
absolute Government there; but his Son William the second, to secure his Crown,
solemnly promised to restore the ancient Government and Laws: and the same
Promises were made by some of his Successors, but not well performed; which
bro't on the War of the Barons, in which the Nobility and People struggled hard
to recover their Liberties, which at length were solemnly confirmed to them, by
a Charter, which was called Magna Charta, or the Charter of Liberties, by King
John.

SOME Attempts were made, by some succeeding Princes, to strip the People of
their Privileges, or to curtall and lessen them; but they ever brought
Misfortunes and Vexatlons upon Themselves, and sometimes the Loss of
theirCrowns, or their Lives. When King Charles the first attempted to introduce
arbitrary Government, it blew up a Civil War, which ended in the Loss of his
Head: and when his Son King James the Second, took large strides toward
arbitrary Rule, the Nation jealous of their Liberties, invited over the Prince
of Orange; upon which King James thought fit to abdicate the Throne and
Kingdom; and the Crown was Settled on the Prince and Princess of Orange, by the
Names of King Williams and Queen Mary; by whose Means and Instrumentality it
was, that the Crown was Settled on the present Royal Family, which GOD long
preserve.

UPON the Accession of King William and Queen Mary the Nation assembled in
Parliament, took special Care, expressly to set down, and solemnly to declare
and assert, the ancient, legal Rights, Liberties and Privileges belonging to
the Nation, which have been enjoyed to this Day, and we hope will long be
enjoyed. For the Historical Facts here related, see Rapin's History of England.


THERE is no Nation now in Europe, nor on the Earth, whose Civil Government is
like that of Great Britain -- none that exceeds, perhaps none, that, in all
Respects, equals it in Excellency. Now, as the Colony of Connecticut is
dependant upon, and derives it is Being and all it is Privileges from the British
Crown; and free and excellent Form of our Government, pretty nearly resembles
that of our Mother Country. The CHARTER of all our Civil Privileges was granted
by King Charles the Second: by which Charter, this Colony was made and
constituted a Body Corporate or Politic, with all the Rights and Immunities of
a free People. The Legislature of the Colony is established, and a Method
Settled for it is Subsistence and Perpetuity. The Whole of this Legislative Body,
consisting of two Houses, are elected and chosen annually by the free Men of
the Corporation; who are under the Solemnity of an Oath, to give their
Suffrages, according to their best Knowledge, in such a Manner as may conduce to
the best Good of the Government. In the Hands of this Assembly is lodged, the
Transaction and Management of the great Affairs of the Government, relating to
the Peace, Security and Prosperity of the whole Body: To them it belongs, to
erect and establish Executive Courts, of whatever Denomination, for the Trial
of such Causes as may properly fall under their Cognizance; to settle and fix
their Powers, and regulate the Form and Manner of their Proceedings: to them
likewise it belongs, to make and enact Such Laws and Statutes, -- to levy and
raise such Taxes upon the Community, and impose such Customs and Duties, as may
be needful for the Security of the People in their Lives, Property and Rights,
for the Support of Government, and the Peace and Welfare of the State.

Our Governors and Civil Rulers are not obtruded upon us from abroad, nor
forced upon us by a Superior Authority: they are all elected and chosen by
Ourselves, and from among Ourselves. The Laws we are under, and which obtain
among us, are not the Sovereign Injunctions of an arbitrary Ruler; but they are
all Laws of our own making -- all enacted and made by Ourselves, or by those,
whom we have chosen to represent and act for us: Our Lives and Limbs, our
Property and Estates, our Rights and Liberties, our Characters and good Names
lie at no Man's Mercy; but they are all guarded and secured by Laws: as Strong
an Hedge is set around them for their Security and Defense, as we can desire;
for they are screen'd and defended by Laws of our own choosing and making. And
whatever is needful and proper to be done, from Time to Time, for the
Suppressing of Disorders and Immoralities, or Practices and Courses that are
detrimental to the Community; for the promoting of Virtue and good Manners,
Diligence and Industry, and the general Good, Security and Prosperity of the
State; still' this lies with us, and may be done by those whom we choose to
rule over us. In a Word, we Ourselves elect and choose those, to whom annually
the Conduct and Management of the great Affairs of Government is committed, and
whose Duty and Business it is, to watch for the Security, Peace and Prosperity
of the State.

Now, one would be ready to imagine, that the Subjects of such a Government, of
such rich and distinguishing Privileges and Immunities, should be all Gratitude
and Thankfulness to God, for his merciful Indulgence and discriminating Favors
-- all Cheerfulness and Alacrity in obeying and honoring the Laws, and
submitting to the Administrations of such a Government: but the most valuable
and Excellent Things in the World, are capable of being perverted and abused;
and so are the Civil Freedom and Privileges of this Colony.

PERVERSE and disingenuous Spirits, unreasonable and unthinking Men, by basking
long in the Sun shine of Liberty, and indulged to the full with the richest
Political Privileges, and unacquainted with the opposite state and situation,
are ready sometimes to flight and despite their Freedom, and turn their
Political Grace and Favor into Wantonness: and if all the Public Affairs are
not ordered and conducted, in a Manner that suits their Humors, how
unreasonable soever; or, if they feel a Burden heavier than common, at an
extraordinary Juncture -- a Burden absolutely necessary, to the Security and
Defense, not of their civil Liberties and Property only, but of their Religion
and Lives, are ready to imagine their Freedom and Liberties are worth Nothing
at all; to murmur and complain; to call for Chains and Shackles, to curse their
Benefactors, revile the Gods, and Speak Evil of Dignities, and with tremendous
Rashness, to censure and condemn the whole Legislative Body of the Colony, and
reproach and vilify their Administrations. I hope indeed there are few if any
Such Murmurers and Complainers in this numerous Assembly. We are called indeed
to Liberty, but not to Licentiousness; we have full Liberty to do all the Good
we can in our Places, and to serve GOD and our Generation, in the Secure,
unmolested Possession and Enjoyment of our Lives and Property, and all our just
Rights; but we have no Right or Liberty to do wrong. The Temper and Conduct now
hinted at, I am persuaded, is a great and heinous Sin, highly provoking to that
GOD, by whom Kings reign and Princes decree Justice; and who rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he pleases: besides, it is a very
great political Evil; it tends to weaken the Hands, and discourage the Hearts
of our Political Fathers, who are watching and laboring for our Good, -- to
cause the Public Affairs, to go on heavily, and under great Disadvantage and
Discouragements -- to enervate and weaken the Civil State, and to expose us to
the Insults of our Enemies,andthrow us at last an easier Prey into their Hands.
O let us all stand at a Distance from such a Temper and Conduct, hate and abhor
it, and endeavor in all proper and prudent Ways to discountenance and suppress
it, wherever it appears; Sensible that is not only a heinous Sin against GOD,
but of pernicious and fatal Tendency, as to the Community and Civil State.

IN stead of the above Spirit and Behavior, let us all be persuaded gratefully
to resent, and wisely to improve our civil Freedom and Liberty. As we are
signally favored and distinguished by GOD, in the excellent Temper and
Constitution of our Civil Government There is no more a perfect Civil
Constitution, than there is a perfect Man to be found upon the Earth; that is
the most perfect, which is attended with fewest Inconveniences, and best
answers the great Ends of Government. One of the Inconveniences that attend a
free Government, such as this, is, that the People sometimes, either through
Ignorance or Prejudice or Caprice, or being wrough upon by the artful
Applications of designing Men, drop from the Administration their ablest
Statesmen and warmest Benefactors. Gentlemen of approved Capacity and
Fidelity, and that at a Season, when they stand in greatest need of them: but
in such Case, I think, they are commonly wont to be soon sensible of their
Mistake, and to restore them to their Stations of Eminence and Trust, perhaps
with Advantage to their future Reputation and Honor.
and the Privileges and Immunities claimed under it; we ought, I think, in all
Reason, to take some Pains to bring Ourselves acquainted with the Liberties and
Privileges we enjoy; how they differ from, and exceed in Excellency those, of
almost all other Countries and Civil Communities on Earth: that, being sensible
of their Worth, Preciousness and inestimable Value, we may learn to esteem and
prize them very highly: and in Consequence thereof, our Hearts, deeply
impressed with a Sense of their vast Importance and unspeakable Value, may glow
with sincere Gratitude, and our Lips over flow with Thanksgiving and Praises to
the blessed GOD, the Fountain and Father of all Good; and we may be confirmed
and established in our unshaken Loyalty and Obedience to the Crown of great
Britain from which we hold and enjoy so great Privileges.

THE Light of this joyful Day, one would think, should serve to awaken these
grateful and becoming Sentiments in all our Minds. -- a Day, on which the
Suffrages of this Corporation are bro't into View, and the free, Election of
our Civil Rulers for the ensuing Year is determined -- Suffrages not given, I
hope, at Random and without Consideration; for they were given, all given under
Solemn Oath: yes, we are bound by Interest, Duty and the Solemn Oath of GOD
upon us, to give our Suffrages, from Year to Year, for those to rule over us,
who, according to our bes Knowledge and Understanding, are best qualified to
fill those Places of Honor and Trust to which they are to be preferred -- most
fit to Support their own Characters, and most likely, in Conformity to the
great End of Government, to employ their Power most effectually for the Good of
those, who are to live under the Shadow of it: they must be able Men -- Men of
Genius, Penetration and Wisdom -- Men of Steadiness, Courage and Resolution --
Men of Virtue, Religion and Piety and true Fearers of GOD, Friends to Zion, and
who prefer Jerusalem above their chief Joy; who will be a Terror to evil Doers,
and a Praise to those that do well; they must be Men of Truth and unshaken
Fidelity, Uprightness, Honor and Sincerity -- hating Coveteousness, of a public
and generous Spirit, Friends to the Constitution and Government, firmly
attached to it is true Interest, free and ready to exert and lay out Themselves
to promote and advance it: those Persons among us, in whom these Characters are
the most visible and conspicuous, ought to be elected and chosen to rule over
as from Year to Year: And being chosen and fixed in their Stations of Honor and
Trust, their Duty and Business is, to watch for the public Good, and exert all
their Abilities, to promote and advance it; to approve themselves Fathers and
Benefactors to their Country, and Ministers of GOD to us for Good.

AND answerably to their high Trust and Authority, and our Relation to them, we
stand bound by the Laws of Heaven, to the Discharge of various Duties to our
Civil Rulers, to those whom we freely choose to be set in Authority over us: and
those Duties we must discharge, faithfully discharge, or we cannot be said to
make a right Use and Improvement of our Civil Freedom, and political Rights and
Immunities, but to pervert and abuse them. We are bound then to treat the
Fathers of our Land with a disitinguish'd, deferential Respect and Honor --
with Esteem and Honor in Proportion to their Station, Dignity and Character.
Fear GOD, Honor the King. Honor and Fear must be given, to whom they are due.
We are to guard strictly and conscientiously against all ungrounded Jealousies
and Surmises, and rash Censures of their Administrations: always remembering,
that every private Person is not in a Situation or Capacity to discern the
Reasons and Foundation of public Counsels and Administrations, or to form a
right Judgment of them: in stead of this, we are bound to treat those, whom GOD
in his Providence has Set over us, with great Respect, Honor and Reverence:
nor is this all; we must cheerfully obey their Laws and Commands, and Submit to
their Orders and Administrations. They are clothed with Authority from GOD to
rule and govern, and it is our indispensable Duty to be loyal and obedient.
Hear the Language of Inspiration; Let every Soul be Subject to the higher
Powers; for there is no Power but of GOD; the Powers that he are ordained of
GOD. Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of GOD; and they
that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. Ye must needs be Subject,
not for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake. Read the New Testament, read it all,
where you will find, not only these Taxes, but many more to the present
Purpose: and such a Reading may possibly Subserve,and by the Blessing of God it
certainly will Subserve, a Purpose infinitely more important than this.
We are likewise bound to Support the Honor of Government, by the cheerful
Payment of such Taxes as are lawfully enacted. The honorable Support of
Magistracy is not an arbitrary Thing, which the Community may do or neglect at
their Pleasure, without Sin or Danger; it is a necessary Piece of Justice,
necessary by the Law of Nature and Revelation; both of which concur, in
requiring us to give unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, as well as unto
GOD the Things, that are GOD's. We are obliged likewise sincerely and servently
to Pray for those in Authority over us, and for the Blessing of Heaven on their
Persons and Administrations. Their Work is great and important, their
Difficulties, Discouragements and Temptations many; and the Welfare and
Prosperity of the People, yea of every Individual of the Community is
concerned, in the wise and faithful Discharge ot their Trust: and they need
Light and Direction from above: We are therefore from Time to Time to bear them
upon our Hearts before the Mercy Seat, and strive together in our Prayers to
GOD for them, that they may be Ministers of GOD to us for good. Look into the
Book of GOD, and you will find written, I exhort therefore that first of all,
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks, be made for all
Men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, for this is good and acceptable
in the sight of GOD our Savior: and in all proper and suitable Ways, we are to
encourage the Hearts and strengthen the Hands of our Rulers, and endeavor to
render their Administration and Government over us, easy, prosperous and
successful.

AND if we would improve our Civil Freedom and Liberty as we ought, it is
likewise highly incumbent upon us, to shun and avoid all such Courses and
Practices, as are hurtful and detrimental to the Civil State, tend to weaken
and enervate it, and expose and lay it open to the angry Resentments and
desolating Rebukes of the righteous Governor of the World; as certainly all
sinful and immoral Courses do: and to cultivate and practice all those sacred
Virtues and Duties, which give Strength, Firmness and Stability to the Body
Politic, and greatly conduce to our Security, Peace and lasting Tranquillity.

AND now, what shall I say, to induce and engage us all to a ready and cheerful
Compliance with these Serious and, I hope, seasonable Advices. Consider, it is
the Body, the Community to which we Ourselves belong, and of which we are
Members, whose Cause I am now pleading: and how unnatural, how monstrous would
it be, to wound this Body, to injure this Community, or to do any Thing to
dishonor and endanger it; or, not to do all in our Power to advance it is
Security, Peace and Prosperity? If our civil Privileges were trivial and of
little Value, or, if we lived under an arbitrary and tyrannical Government, the
Case would be widely different. Arbitrary Rule or Tyranny is one of the
greatest Engines of Misery and Desolation to Mankind -- the most dreadful Curse
that ever blasted and devoured the Earth: but we, of God's distinguishing
Goodness and Mercy, are called to Freedom and Liberty. Liberty! how charming,
how animating is the Sound? may we never know it is Worth and inestimable Value
by being stripped and deprived of it. It Is one of the richest Gifts of Heaven to
the Sons of Men -- the source and spring of almost every Thing, that is
excellent and valuable upon Earth -- the Nurse of Arts and Sciences, the Parent
of Diligence and Industry, the Procurer of Wealth and Riches, and needful to
the unmolested Profession and Practice of Christianity it self: it adds
Cheerfulness, Ease and Alacrity to the Mind -- Sweetens and endears the Social
Life, and heightens the Relish of all the common Enjoyments of Time. And shall
we not value Freedom? shall we not prize our civil Liberties? and heartily
thank GOD for them, and improve them well? Certainly, if we do not, we are of
all Men the most inexcusable.

WHAT can those unhappy Persons mean, who are Sick of our Liberties, chagrin'd
and out of Humor, and seem willing to part with them? This must proceed from
great Ignorance and Stupidity. Do they know what it is to be denied Civil
Liberty, and to lie at the Mercy of an Arbitrary Ruler? I shall say nothing of
the Asiatick Nations, where arbitrary Rule and Tyranny have their full swing,
and the Inhabitants by Millions are oppressed and crushed under it is Weight;
but I shall mention one Instance in Europe, to illustrate this Matter. In the
Pope's temporal Dominions in Italy, by a fixed and settled Rule or Order, which
may not be transgressed, all the People are obliged to deliver all the Grain
they raise to the Pope's Agents, at half Price, to be deposited in the
Ecclesiastic Chamber, as they call it, out of which it is bought by the
Bakers, at double the Price, and by them it is made into Broad, and Sold at
their advanced Price to the People; so that they who raised the Grain, are
obliged to buy their Bread, at more than Double the Price,, at which they Sold,
and were obliged to sell their Grain. See Burnet's Travels.


This is but one of the many Instances that might be adduced, of the Nature and
Misery of arbitrary Government: and how strikingly is this dark view contrasted
to the chearing Light of Freedom and Liberty! and it serves to show us the
invaluable Worth and Excellence of our Privileges: their Price is above Rubies.
We may well say with the chief Captain, with a great Sum obtained we this
Freedom. The British Nation struggled hard, and were at vast Expense of
Treasure and Blood, from Generation to Generation, to defend their Civil
Liberties against the Attempts that were made to deprire them of them: and our
Ancestors enterprized the Settlement of this free Colony, at the Peril of their
Lives: and yet we of this Generation may say too with St. Paul, that we were
free born, born to Liberty: our Fathers died and went off the stage, with a
cheerful Hope, of transmitting their Privileges to the latest Generation: and
shall we their Descendants be insensible of their Worth, wantonly and madly
throw them away, or misimprove and abuse them, or take such Courses, as may
incur the Forfeiture and Loss of them? by no Means: no, let those who are
unacquainted with the Sweets of Liberty and a free Government, reproah it,
despise Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities, and foam out their own shame:
but let us, who know better Things, whose Lines are fallen in pleasant Places,
and who have so goodly a Heritage, and who have vowed Obedience to Christ the
Prince of Peace -- let us hear his Words and obey them. Render to all their
Due, Fear to whon Fear, and Honor to whom Honor is due. Let us express an
unshaken Loyalty, to our gracious and rightful King and Sovereign, and a
cheerful and ready Subjection and Obedience to our own Government, Laws and
Administrations: and let us use our Endeavors to promote the Security, and
advance the Welfare and Tranquillity of the Government, by the serious Practice
of Religion and Piety and every social Virtue; and by cultivating Peace, Unity
and Harmony among ourselves: so may we humbly hope, that the GOD of our Fathers
will still be our GOD, will protect and bless and Save us, will be the shield
of our Help, and the sword of our Excellency, that he will ride upon the
Heavens for our Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. And happy is that
People that is in such a Case; yea, happy is that People whose GOD is the LORD.

BUT this being a critical and important Juncture, when our Liberties and
Privileges, dear and valuable as they are, yea, our Property, our Religion and
our Lives are struck at, by an insidious and powerful Enemy, with whom we have
long been involved in an expensive and bloody War; and who are pushing with all
their Might, and exerting all their Force and Policy, to strip us of all that
is dear to us upon Earth, and in the Room thereof, (if our Lives, are given us
as a Prey) to throw Chains and Shackles upon us, and to reduce us, to the most
abject and dismal Slavery; it is particularly incumbent upon all Orders and
Ranks of Men among us, at this Time, to endeavor to divest themselves of mean
and low and selfish views, and to imbibe and cultivate a catholic and public
Spirit, and a dear Love and Affection to their Country, in which they are
endowed and dignified with such rich and precious Privileges, and to exert
themselves, in their proper Spheres, with uncommon Alacrity and Vigor for it is
Defense and Tranquillity: You will therefore bear with me, If I go on to rouse;
a public Spirit, and an ardent Love to our Country, and a due Regard to the
Privileges of it, and a correspondent Conduct and Behavior in all Orders of
Men.

A public Spirit, and the Love of one's Country, in all Ages and Nations, has
been acknowleged and celebrated as a most important and laudable Virtue. The
Savage and unlettered Nations cannot but acknowledge and extol' this, as a most
noble Virtue: and the ancient, polite Nations of Greece and Rome, Set this
Virtue in the strongest and most amiable Point of Light, and extol it as a most
eminent, noble and God-like Accomplishment. They imagined, a Person could
hardly recommend himself as a Friend to his Species, but by loving his Country,
and expressing that Love in suitable and Proper Ways: hence those, among the
Romans and Grecians, who were inspired with this noble Ardor, would cheerfully
hazard every thing that related to themselves, to Save their Country, and
advance it is Prosperity -- would throw themselves by Hundreds, by Thousands
upon the Edge of the Sword, when their Country was in Danger, for it is
Security: and those who signalized Themselves, by noble Exploits, in the
Defense of their Country, were loaded with Honor and Praises. And if this
generous Love of their Country, and laudable Spirit to defend it, was so
conspicuous among the Heathen, would it not be an inexcusable Reproach upon
Christians, if this noble Ardor and the proper Effects of it, should be found
wanting among them? Consider what does your Country include? This dear Circle
incloses all on Earth that is ours -- all in this World, that ought to be the
most dear to us. On this Spot of Earth, the great Father of the Universe has
Station'd us, to act our Parts for Eternity: here the Word and Gospel of Jesus
is put into our Hands: here the Churches and Schools of Christ are opened, his
Word preached, and his Ordinances administered, in Order to our being trained up
and fitted for Heaven: here our Civil Liberties and Privileges are enjoyed,
such as we can never prize too high, never improve too well: here our worldly
Interest and Estates lie -- our Families, and all that is dear to us in this
World. And shall not our Country be loved and valued by us? shall not this
delightful, animating Affection be found burning, with a Flame not to be
extinguished, in every Breast? I^ our Country flourishes and improves in
Strength, Security and Prosperity, our own Interests, civil and religious are
the more Safe, and better Secured; but if our Country Suffers, we, as Members
of this Body Suffer too; if it be destroyed, what a Ruin and Desolation will it
bring with it, upon all that is valuable and dear to us upon Earth? What a
Blessing is a public Spirit, an enlarged, generous Disposition! It Is an
amiable, excellent Disposition in it self, and it speaks the Person, who is
graced with it, to be one of the excellent of the Earth. The Good and Welfare
of our Country is our greatest earthly Good, for our private Interests are
involved in it, and must stand or fall with it: and therefore in all Reason,
our petty, personal Interests, ought to be subordinated to the Good of the
Public. We ought not to desire to thrive at the Expense and Danger of the
Public, and to erect our private Fortunes and Interest on the Ruins of our
Country. A narrow, contracted Spirit, a Selfish, grovling Temper, is one of the
basest, vilest and most despicable Properties, that can possess and rule the
Heart of Man: it would attract and draw every Thing to it self, and there it
stagnates and dies, or is absorpt and lost. Many an excellent and noble Design,
for the Advancement of Religion, and the Kingdom of Christ, of Peace and
Righteousness, and for the Security and Flourishing of civil Communities and
Kingdoms, is clogged, suppressed and rendered abortive, by such a Selfish,
sordid Spirit. This Spirit is the Bane of Communities on Earth, but then, for
our Comfort, it is confined to the Earth, for it is certain, it will find no
Place in Heaven. But a public Spirit, a temper and Disposition to consider and
pursue our private Interest, in a just Subordination to the public Good, is a
most excellent and recommending Property, and merits the highest Praises and
Commendations: Such a Spirit animating and ruling a Person, renders him a
public Blessing and Benefactor to his Country: It Is an heroic Spirit, a Patriot
Virtue, and an Imitation of GOD, the great and good Governor of the Universe,
who Showers his Benedictions on all the Nations of the Earth.

I know well, it is not every Member of a Community, that has either Abilities,
or a Call in Providence to Signalize himself, in great Exeploits or
Achievements for the Benefit of his Country: but this Spirit, this Temper, in
some Degree, is what every one, I hope, is capable of; and so, in Proportion to
their Opportunities and Abilities, they may approve themselves Blessings and
Benefactors to their Country. This Spirit and Temper is a very laudable and
Praiseworthy Thing at all Times, but it never was more necessary, there never
was a louder Call for it, in this Land, than in these dark and dangerous Times.
Let us then shake off a contracted Selfish Disposition, open our Eyes, enlarge
our Views, extend our Good will, and believe it, that our Country calls for our
most cordial and benevolent Regards: let every Heart be fired with a Love to
our Country -- a public and generous Spirit inspire and rule in every Breast. I
am now inviting You, to shake off and abhor the meanest and basest Temper, that
ever vexed and plagued the World, and which is the spring and source of
innumerable Evils and Calamities to Mankind, and to imbibe that Spirit, and
cherish and cultivate that Temper, which is the Beauty, the Ornament, the
Nobility of the human Mind -- is the spring of almost all worthy and noble
Designs in Church and State, renders a Man justly dear and honorable to the
World, and a Benefactor to human Kind. And can we, my Candid Hearers, can any
of us fail, at this Juncture, to manifest our Love to our Counrty, and the high
Estimate we put upon our precious Privileges, in all proper and requisite Ways,
and all suitable Measures for it is Defense and Security. But perhaps you may be
ready to say, the Scale is now turned, and a more hopeful and chearing
Prospect, with Regard to the Event of the War, opens before us, than in Time
past; thank GOD for it most heartily; but be not high minded, but fear, let not
him that girdeth on his Harness boost himself, as he that puts it off. The
Race is not always to the Swift, not the Battle to the Strong. A vainglorious
Confidence in an Arm of Flesh, and military Preparations (whilst the GOD of
Armies is ovelook'd and dishonored) is the ready Way to Frustration and Ruin.
The Event of the War will be as GOD pleases, He rules among the Kingdoms of
Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. I am sure, we have still Reason,
great Reason to fear and be humble, to call our Sins to Remembrance, and repent
in Dust and Ashes, to turn to GOD and seek his Face and Favor, and his
merciful Interposition and Help, that he would go forth with our Armies and
fight our Battles for us: let this be the grand Care of every one. And whilst
our Civil Fathers and Patriots are studying for the public Weal, and with a
steady Hand, and an intrepid Heart, and all the Forethought and Sagacity of
governing Wisdom, are conducting the great Affairs of State, and consulting the
Welfare of the Government and of the Army, in every View: whilst the Ministers
of JESUS are pouring out Prayers for their Country, and the Success o^ the
present, important Enterprise, and leading up the People of their Charge to the
Mercy-Seat, and animating and assisting their Devotions their -- whilst these
Things obtain at home, as we hope they will; may I not add, in the Name of my
Dear Country, our Eyes under GOD, are very much upon the Heroes of our Land,
upon you, Gentlemen, raised up by Providence, to head our Armies, and lead
forth our trained Legions to the War. Can you recollect the tragic Scenes ot
Years past, your Forts demolished or burnt to Ashes, your Armies cut to Pieces,
your Countrymen, in Multitudes, butchered and mangled -- Can you look round
from Monongabela to Nova Scotia, and see the scattered Bones of your
Slaughtered Countrymen, whitening in the Sun to this Day, whilst their Blood,
which the Earth has Swallowed up, still cries to Vengeance -- while these
dismal Scenes rise to your View, can You, Gentlement, with all your Heroic
Ardors about you, Sleep quietly in your Beds? When Providence Divine, in
Accepts loud as Thunder calls you to Arms, can you but stand collected, stand
ready to strain every Nerve, and to exert your best Efforts of military Genius
Dexterity and Bravery in your Country's Cause? May a Supreme Love to the GOD of
your Fathers, an ardent Affection to your Country, and the true Spirit of
Heroism, inspire and fill your Hearts: and by your happy Influence and Address,
may the noble Ardor catch from Breast to Breast,'till the whole Army is warmed
and animated by the same excellent Spirit. When you consider what is at Stake,
what our Fears are, what our Hopes, can your Zeal Sleep? No, gird on your
military Harness, draw forth the devouring Sword, banish Vice from the Camp,
commit your Cause to GOD, in his Name set up your Banners, and in his Strength,
we hope, you will tread down our Foes. The Romans must be conquered in Italy,
was a Maxim with Hannibal: The Scorpean's Head must be crushed in Canada, or
his Tail will Sting a Thousand Leagues round: thither, we hope, GOD in his
Providence will conduct You in safely, and crown You with Success and Victory
there, to the Glory of his great Name, to the lasting Security of our dear
Country, and the inestimable Privileges of it, and to the Enlargement of
CHRIST's Kingdom, of Peace and Righteousness in these Ends of the Earth.

BUT I must draw to a Close: If thus we are possessed with a due Sense, of the
Worth and Value of our Privileges, inspired with a true Love to our Country,
and in our Several Places, suitably exert. Ourselves for it is Defense and
Tranquillity, and approved Ourselves faithful to the GOD of all our Privileges
and Enjoyments, we may well expect to reap the happy Fruits and Effects
thereof, in the Peace and Satisfaction of our own Minds, shall have a more
hopeful and reviving Prospect, as to the future Security and Prosperity of our
Country: and what is more, infinitely more, when we are called from the Society
of Mortals, here on Earth, and those Stations and Places, in which we may now
Serve our Country, and express our Love to it, we shall be taken up to that
illustrious Assembly on high, of heroic Saints and perfected Spirits, who
served their Generation here on Earth, by the Will of GOD; and together with
them, shall spend an Eternity, in the Service and Praises of GOD -- that GOD,
who is the common Father of Angels and Men, and who Showers his Goodness, his
Grace and Salvation on the whole Family of Heaven and Earth.

FINIS.

