A JOURNAL OF THE EXPEDITION UP THE River St. LAWRENCE: Containing A true and
most particular Account of the Transactions of the Fleet and Army under the
Command of Admiral Saunders and General Wolf, from the Time of their
Embarkation at Louisbourg 'til after the Surrender of QUEBECK.

By the SERJEANT-MAJOR of Genesis Hopson's Grenadiers.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by FOUL and DRAPER, at their Printing-Office in
Marlborough-street. 1759.

A JOURNAL, etc. Louisbourg, June 1. 1759.
WE embarked on board the Transport Harwood, bound on the Expedition to Canada.
-- The 4th Day we set Sail for the River St. Lawrence, which we made on the 9th
Day, and there we lay 'til the 16th, before we got into the River; which is
very wide and mountainous. For about forty Leagues up the River the Depth of
Water is 100 Fathoms. The 16th Day we came into seventeen-fathom Water; and on
the 23d we joined Admiral Durell, who had 7 Sail of the Line, with some
Frigates with him, which lay as a Guard to protect the River, at a Place called
the Island of Coudre. -- This Island is pleasantly situated, lies partly high,
and was very well peopled before we came up: -- And passing this Island about a
League up, we anchored, and two of our Boats went in Shore and was attacked by
a (...) Party of Canadians and Indians, and was obliged to retreat to their
Ships.

The 25th we made the out End of the Island of Orleans, and on the 27th we
landed on it without the loss of a Man. -- A small Party of Rangers were almost
surrounded by a large Party of Indians; but the Rangers rushed through them
with the Loss of only one Man; what Damage the Enemy sustained is uncertain.

On the 29th the French sent five Fireships down among our Fleet; but, thank
God, they did no Damage. The same Day we marched about 6 Miles, under the
Command of Col. Carlton, and encamped that same Night in Sight of the French
Army, and likewise in Sight of the Town. -- Genesis Monckton's Brigade and a Party
of Rangers landed on the South Side; we had a small Attack, by which we had 3
killed, 2 wounded and 4 taken Prisoners.

July 1st, the Enemy came against our Detachment on the South Side of the River
with floating Batteries; but our Shipping soon drove them off; -- the Damage
they suffered is not known. Same Day the Louisbourg Grenadiers went a Foraging;
we had two killed and scalp'd, belonging to the 22d Regiment. The same Day we
marched to the West End of the Island, in order to join the Louisbourg
Battalion: A Party of the Enemy fired out of the Woods, and wounded two Men.

July the 5th, a Barge came between the Island and the main Land, to sound the
Depth of Water: The French fired four Cannon-Shot at her, and came down on a
large Bar of Sand, from whence they fired small Arms; also five Canoes came
down the River, loaded with Indians, who took the Barge, made one Man Prisoner,
and wounded another belonging to the 22d Regiment. On the same Day their
floating Batteries attacked our Shipping; but was soon obliged to quit their
Firing. -- Genesis Monckton opened a small Battery upon the South Side: The first
Day they cannonaded and bombarded on both Sides; but lost never a Man.

The 8th we landed on Quebeck-Shore, without any Interception, and marched up
the River about two Miles; when the Louisbourg Grenadiers being ordered out to
get Fascines, they had scarce sat down to take a small Refreshment, and
detached a small Party of Rangers to guard the Skir^^ of the Wood, before a
large Party of Indians surrounded them, killed and scalp'd 13, wounded the
Captain-Lieutenant and 9 Privates; they likewise killed and wounded 14 of the
Royal Americans, wounded 2 of the 22d and one of the 40th Regiment: we got only
3 Prisoners, and killed 2 of the Savages. --

The third Day our Shipping was drove off by the Enemy's Shells. -- We got only
some few Prisoners, 'til the 12th Day, when the French built a Battery against
us, but had not Time to mount any Guns on it; for we soon demolished it with
our Fieldpieces and Hauitzers. The fourteenth Day their floating Batteries
came out after our Boats, but we soon drove them back again. -- The 16th, we
set the Town on Fire, about 12 o'Clock, which continued burning all that Day.

On the 17th we went out a Fascining, and to make Oars, with a small Party to
cover us; -- 5 were killed, of which 4 were scalp'd, and we was obliged to quit
the Wood directly; the Indians came up very close, and killed and scalp'd one
Man close by us; the Grenadiers of the 45th Regiment fired upon them, and I saw
one drop; but the Indians took him off in a Minute: We had 5 killed, belonging
to the 35th Regiment, and one dangerously wounded; the 15th Reg. had one
wounded; the 45th Reg. had one wounded very bad; but our People returning upon
them, made them fly so fast that they were obliged to leave their Blankets and
Match-coats, with several other Things, behind them; but we could not get one
of them Prisoners. A Deserter came to us, from whom we had in imperfect Account
of their Forces; which, however, gave us some Encouragement.

July 18th, the Deserter went out with our Light-Infantry, to show them a Place
where to cross the Falls; the Indians fired on them, but hurt none: Likewise
the same Night some of our Shipping passed the Town, and one run ashore on the
South Side of the River. The 19th Day the floating Batteries came out to attack
our Shipping round the Harbor; but our Batteries on the Land-Side drove them
off, so that the Shipping received but two Shot. -- On the 20th an Accident
happened in the Light-Infantry's Camp; a Man sitting in his Tent, with his
Firelock by him, taking hold of the Muzzle to pull it toward him, it went off
and wounded him in the Thigh, so that he died the same Night.

The 21st Day of July all the Grenadiers crossd over to the Island of Orleans;
the Indians attacked us very smartly, as we was marching to the Waterside. --
Same Day the Enemy opened two Batteries on us, which raked our Camps. Our
Troops, with Seamen, stormed a Battery on the S. Side, spiked the Cannon, broke
the Mortars, broke into their Magazine, took all their Powder, and threw all
the Shot and Shells into the Water.

July 22d we set the Town on Fire, which burnt all the next Day: Some of our
Shipping went to pass the Town; but they fired so hot, that they were obliged
to turn back.

The 23d 300 Provincials landed on the Island of Orleans, which was some
Reinforcement.

July 25th, the Louisbourg Battalion and three more Companies of Grenadiers,
with 3 Companies of Light-Infantry, went round the Island of Orleans. -- The
27th we arrived at our Camp; and we received News, That our Forces on
Montmorancy Side had been attacked the Day before, and likewise got the better
of the Enemy; we had an Account that we killed 300 of them, but the Number of
wounded none of us could tell: Our loss was 5 Officers and 32 Privates, 12 of
whom were killed, and the rest wounded. The same Day we went to get our
Plunder, which we discovered on our March round the Island, consisting of
Gowns, Shifts, Petticoats, Stockings, Coats and Waistcoats, Breeches, Shoes,
and many other Articles too tedious to mention, -- and some Cash; which, if the
Things had been sold to the Value, would have fetched upwards of 500 l. Sterling.
The same Night the French sent five Fire-Floats down, which made great
Confusion among our Fleet; but the Men of War sent their Boats and towed them
ashore, where they burnt out without further Damage.

July 29, Otway's and Hopson's Grenadiers went on board the Three-Sisters,
Witmore's and Warburton's on board the Russell, the rest in flat-bottom Boats
and other Vessels, with a full Intent to land on a Part of the French Shore; so
as by that Means we might come at the Town: The first Push we made was on the
31st of July, with 13 Companies of Grenadiers, supported by about 5 Thousand
Battalion-Men; -- as soon as we landed we fixed our Bayonets and beat our
Grenadier's-March, and so advanced on; during all this Time their Cannon played
very briskly on us; but their Small-Arms, in their Trenches, lay cool 'till
they were sure of their Mark; then they poured their Small-Shot like Showers of
Hail, which caused our brave Grenadiers to fall very fast: Brave Genesis Wolf saw
that our Attempts were in vain, so he retreated to his Boats again: The Number
of killed and wounded that Day was about 400 Men; -- in our Retreat we burnt
the two Ships, which we had ran ashore on that Side to cover our Landing.

The 3d Day of August a Party of Capt. Danks's Rangers went from the Island of
Orleans to Quebeck-Side, a little down the River; they were attacked by a Party
of French, and was smartly engaged for the Space of half an Hour; but the
Rangers put them to flight, killed several and took one Prisoner: The Rangers
lost one Lieutenant, who died of his Wounds soon after, and 2 or 3 others. They
got a great deal of Plunder.

Aug. 4th the French made an Attempt of crossing the Falls; but our Train fired
Hauits and Cohorns so fast, that they were obliged to retreat without
accomplishing any Thing; -- what Damage was done them I know not.

On the 6th a Victualing-Ship sailed from our Fleet, and went below the Falls,
the French hove Shot and Shells in great Number at them; but did them no Harm.

The 8th of Aug. two Sentinels being at the Falls, they took an Indian and
bro't him Prisoner to the General, who sent him on board the Admiral. At 12
o'Clock at Night we threw a Carcass and one Shell on the Enemy's Battery of 9
Guns, which blew up their Magazine, Platforms, and burnt with such Violence
that some of the Garrison were obliged to get into Boats to save themselves
from the Flames. The 9th Day we set the Town on Fire, being the 3d Time.

On the 10th the French floated a Thing down in the Form of a Floating-Battery;
one of our Ships sent out a Boat to see what it was, and just as the Seamen
were going to jump on board, it blew up and killed one Midshipman and wounded
four Sailors. -- The same Day about 30 Sailors went a Plundering on the
South Side of the River, and as they were about their Prey, they was surpised
by a Party of Indians and drove off; but they all got safe to their Boats, though
not without the Loss of their Plunder.

The 11th Instant there was an Engagement between our Scouting-Parties and the
Indians; our People drove them off; we had a great Number wounded, several very
badly, but the most slightly; there was but few killed: There was one of the
35th Reg. told me, he saw an Indian who fired at him, but missed him; that he
levelled his Piece and fired at the Indian, and missed him likewise; upon which
the Indian immediately threw his Tommahawk at him and missed him; whereupon the
Soldier, catching up the Tommahawk, threw it at the Indian and levelled him,
and then went to scalp him; but 2 other Indians came behind him, and one of
them stuck a Tommahawk in his Back; but did not wound him so much as to prevent
his Escape from them.

The 12th Day we had an Account of General Murray's going to land above the
Town -- He made an Attempt to land twice and was beat off; he made the third
Attempt, and landed on the South-Shore with the Loss of about 100 killed and
wounded. The same Day we had an Account from the Enemy, That Genesis Amherst's
(...)my was taken very badly, and that they were obliged to turn back again.

On the 13th we had an Account by one of the French Gunners, who deserted to us
that Night, That the Enemy had very little Provisions; he likewise gave an
Account what a Body of French and Indians came over the Falls, the same Side
that our Army was on, and that they had four Days Provisions with them, and
remained there still.

The 14th a Sailor belonging to the Dublin Man of War, endeavored to swim over
to the French, over the River; but the Current ran so strong, that he was
driven on Shore on the Island-Side, and was taken up by one of Hopson's
Grenadiers and carried to their Quarter-Guard, from whence he was carried on
board his own Ship again, stark naked.

The 15th of Aug. Captain Gorham returned from an Incursion, in which Service
were employed, under his Command, 150 Rangers, a Detachment from the different
Regiments, Highlanders, Marines, etc. amounting in the whole to about 300, an
armed Vessel, three Transports, with a Lieutenant and Seamen of the Navy to
attend him; of which Expedition they gave the following Account:

"That on the 4th of August they proceeded down to St. Paul's Bay, (which is
opposite to the North Side of this Island) where was a Parish containing about
200 Men, who had been very active in distressing our Boats and Shipping. -- At
3 of Clock in the Morning Capt. Gorham landed, and forced two of their Guards,
of 20 Men each, who fired smartly for some Time; but that in two Hours they
drove them all from their Covering in the Wood, and cleared the Village which
they burnt, consisting of about 50 fine Houses and Barns; destroyed most of
their Cattle, etc. -- That in this one Man was killed and 6 wounded; but that
the Enemy had two killed, and several wounded, who were carried off. -- That
from thence they proceeded to Mal Bay, 10 Leagues to the Eastward on the same
Side, where they destroyed a very pretty Parish, drove off the Inhabitants and
Stock without any Loss; after which, they made a Descent on the South Shore,
opposite the Island of Coudre, destroyed Part of the Parish of St. Ann's and
St. Roan, where were very handsome Houses with Farms, and loaded the Vessels
with Cattle; after which they returned from their Expedition."

The same Day 1 of our Schooners went from the Fleet below the Fall, and the
French fired 8 or 9 Shot at her; but missed her. This Day a Party of young
Highlanders came to the Island of Orleans from Genesis Monckton's Encampment, on
Purpose to destroy all the Canada-Side. -- The same Day our People set one of
the Enemy's Floating-Batteries on Fire; -- and in the Night General Monckton
set the Town on Fire, (being the 4th Time) and the Flames raged so violently,
that 'twas imagined the whole City would have been reduced to Ashes.

August 18th, a Sloop and Schooner went below the Falls; the French hove Shot
and Shells at them, but did 'em no Damage. The same Day the Enemy hove a Bomb
from the Town, which killed one Man and wounded 6 more, -- one Man had his Arm
cut off by a Piece of the same Shell.

On the 20th the Louisbourg Grenadiers began their March down the main Land of
Quebeck, in order to burn and destroy all the Houses on that Side. -- On the
24th they were attacked by a Party of French, who had a Priest for their
Commander; but our Party killed and scalp'd 31 of them, and likewise the
Priest, their Commander: They did our People no Damage. The three Companies of
Louisbourg Grenadiers halted about 4 Miles down the River, at a Church called
the Guardian-Angel, where we were ordered to fortify ourselves till further
Orders; we had several small Parties in Houses, and the Remainder continued in
the Church. -- The 25th, began to destroy the Country, burning Houses, cutting
down Corn, and the like: At Night the Indians fired several scattering Shot at
the Houses, which killed one of the Highlanders and wounded another; but they
were soon repulsed by the Heat of our Firing: -- It was said that the Number of
the Enemy consisted of 800 Canadians and Indians. Sept. 1st we set Fire to our
Houses and Fortifications, and marched to join the Grand Army at Montmorancy;
the 3 Companies of Grenadiers were ordered to hold themselves in Readiness to
march at a Minute's Warning.

The 26th a Sergeant of the 35th Regiment deserted across the Fall, and our
People fired several Grape-Shots after him; notwithstanding which he got clear
off to the Enemy.

The 27th of August some of our Shipping went past the Town, which fired so hot
at them with Shot and Bombs, that one would have thought it impossible for any
Vessel to pass; but they received little or no Damage. The 29th, 5 Sail went to
pass the Town, up the River; the Town fired very warm all the Time of their
passing, and I was very well informed, That only 15 of their Shot took Place
out of all their Firing: Likewise the 30th Instant four of our Ships passed the
Town, where they kept a continual Firing; but did us very little Damage.

Sept. 1. all the Sick and Women that was on Montmorancy-Side, came over to the
Island of Orleans; on the 2d Instant a large Body of Wolfe's Troops came over,
with the Louisbourg Grenadiers, and encamped that Night on the same Island.

The 3d Day all the Army left Montmorancy-Side, and we set all the Houses and
Fortifications on Fire, and then we embarked in flat-bottom Boats and came up
above the Fall; the French fired very brisk all the Time of our passing, but
did us no Damage, and we went over to Point Levee and encamped there.

Sept. 4th the Louisbourg Grenadiers and the Remainder of the Army, crossed
over to Point- Levee from the Island of Orleans, and encamped there. -- The
same Day 4 Men came from Genesis Amherst's Army; they was 26 Days on their
Journey, and informed us, That we had got Ticonderoga, and likewise Crown-Point.

Sept. 5th about 5 or 6000 Men marched up the River, on Point- Levee Side, to
go above the Town, and carried one Month's Provision up in Sloops. The same Day
one of the Royal-Americans, who was taken Prisoner by the French-Indians the
31st of July last, made his Escape and came to the Porcupine Sloop of War, that
lay a little below the Fall; he informs us, That there is no more than about
300 Indians that carries Arms; but that there was a great Number of Women and
Children, that they were very scant of Provivisions; likewise that he himself
had been 48 Hours without any Thing to eat: He further said, that the Enemy
were very numerous in their Intrenchments, consisting of at least 14,000 Men,
of which 11,000 were Canadians and the rest Regulars, the latter of whom were
heartily tired with the Siege.

Sept. 6th the Schooner Terror of France went above the Town, in the middle of
the Day, as she passed they kept up a constant Fire at her, and she received
five of their Shot; one in her Jib, two in her Mainsail and 2 in her Foresail;
but lost none of her Hands, nor did she sustain any further Damage.

The whole Army being on Point- Levee Side, the main Body were ordered to get
ready to march above the Town, on the South Side, and to take only one Shirt
and one Pair of Stockings, besides what we had on: We marched up the River
about 8 Miles, and then embarked on board the Men of War and Transports that
were up the River; the Number that embarked was 3349 Men, with a Party of the
Train of Artillery.

Sept. 10. the Weather being very wet, and the Troops very much crowded on
board the Men of War and Transports, the General thought proper to land us on
the South Side again; which was a great Decoy to the French: We marched to the
Church of St. Nicholas, under the Command of General Monckton, where we halted.
The next Day we received Intelligence of a small Number of French and Indians,
who were driving some Cattle; -- we dispatched a Party of 500 Men, who took the
Cattle, but the Enemy got off.

The 12th we received Orders to embark on board our Ships again.

The 13th we had Orders to land; so we fell down the River in the Ships and
Boats till we came a little above the Town, where the Enemy least suspected us
(for where the Enemy thought we should have landed, they had about 600 Horse;
but what Number of Foot we could not say; we could perceive that they was
entrenched and had 5 Floating-Batteries to intercept our Landing)

On the 14th we landed, at break of Day, and immediately attacked and routed
the Enemy, taking Possession of a Battery of 424-Pounders, and one thirteen
Inch Mortar, with but an inconsiderable Loss. We then took Post on the Plains
of Abraham, whither M. Montcalm (on hearing that we had landed, for he did not
expect us) hasted with his whole Army (consisting of Cavalry as well as
Infantry) to give us Battle; about 9 o'Clock we observed the Enemy marching
down toward us in three Columns, at 10 they formed their Line of Battle, which
was at least six deep, having their Flanks covered by a thick Wood on each
Side, into which they threw above 3000 Canadians and Indians, who gauled us
much; the Regulars then marched briskly up to us, and gave us their first Fire,
at about Fifty Yards Distance, which we did not return, as it was General
Wolfe's express Orders not to fire till they came within twenty Yards of us --
They continued firing by Platoons, advancing in a very regular Manner till they
came close up to us, and then the Action became general: In about a Quarter of
an Hour the Enemy gave way on all Sides, when a terrible Slaughter ensued from
the quick Fire of our Field Pieces and Musquetry, with which we pursued them to
the Walls of the Town, regardless of an excessive heavy Fire from all their
Batteries. The Enemy lost in the Engagement, Lieut. Genesis Montcalm, (who was
torn to Pieces by our Grape-Shot) 2 Brigadier-Generals; one Colonel; 2
Lieutenant-Colonels; and at least 1300 Officers and Men killed, and 200 taken
Prisoners at their very Sally-Ports, of which 58 were Officers: -- On our Side
was killed the brave and never to be forgotten General WOLF; with 9 Officers,
4 Sergeants and 44 Privates; wounded, Brigadier-General Monckton; Colonel
Carlton, Quarter-Master-General; Major Bar, Adjutant-General; and 50 other
Officers, with 26 Sergeants and 557 Privates. -- This Action was the more
glorious, as the Enemy were at least 12,000 strong, besides 500 Horse; whereas
we, at the utmost, did not consist of above 3500, some of whom did not engage;
-- for at the Time of the Engagement Colonel Scott was out burning the Country
with 1600 Men; Col. Burton was at Point- Levee with 2000 Men; and on the Island
of Orleans there were 1500; whereas our whole Army, at our first embarking at
Louisbourg, did not exceed 8240 Men.

At Ten o'Clock at Night we surpised their Guard and took Possession of their
Grand Hospital, wherein we found between 12 and 1500 Sick and Wounded.

We lay on our Arms all Night, and in the Morning we secured the Bridge of
Boats which the Enemy had over Charles River, and possessed ourselves of all
the Posts and Avenues that was or might be of any Consequence leading to the
Town* and broke Ground at 100 Yards Distance from the Walls; we likewise got up
12 heavy 24-Pounders; six heavy Twelve-Pounders, some large Mortars, and the 4
8-inch Hauitzers, to play upon the Town, and we had been employed three Days,
intending to make a Breach, and storm the City Sword in Hand, but we were
prevented by their beating a Parley, and sending out a Flag of Truce with
Articles of Capitulation, and the next Day, being the 17th of September, we
took Possession of the City, where we found 250 Pieces of Cannon, a Number of
Mortars, from 9 to fifteen Inches, Fieldpieces, Hauitzers, etc. with a large
Quantity of Artillery-Stores.

M. Vaudreuille, the Governor-General of New-France, stole out of the City
before the Capitulation; leaving only about 600 Men, under the Command of Mon.
Ramsay by whom the Capitulation was signed. The poor Re^^^ns of the French
Regulars, with about 10,000 Canadians, retired to Jaques Quartiees under the
Command of M. Levy; but the Canadians deserted him in great Numbers, and came
in and surrendered themselves.

Sept. 19th the French Garrison were embarked on board Transports. Such of the
Inhabitants as Would come in and take the Oaths of Allegiance, were permitted
to enjoy their Estates.

Brigadier General Murray is Governor of the Town, and the whole Army left to
Garrison it.

During the whole Siege from first to last, 535 Houses were burnt down, among
which is the whole eastern Part of the lower Town (save 6 or 8 Houses) which
make a very dismal Appearance. We also destroyed upwards of Fourteen Hundred
fi^e Farm-Houses in the Country, etc.

FINIS.

