A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN in LONDON, FROM VIRGINIA.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM HUNTER. MDCCLIX.

A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN in LONDON.
VIRGINIA, January --, 1759. SIR,
HAVING lately seen in the Journals of the Assembly of this Colony, held in
1758, a long Memorial, addressed to the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners
for Trade and Plantations, by the Merchants of London, in Behalf of themselves
and of their Correspondents, Merchants of Bristol, Liverpool and Glasgow,
trading and interested in the Colony of Virginia, I cannot help entertaining
you with some Observations upon it; and, that you may judge of the Justice with
which they are made, I have trascribed the whole Memorial, as it appears on the
Journals aforesaid.

The MEMORIAL.
That the General-Assembly of Virginia have lately passed an Act, whereby their
Provincial Treasurer is authothorized, for the Purposes therein mentioned, to
issue Paper Notes to the Amount of L. 80,000 which said Paper Notes so issued
and rated at Proclamation Money by the said Act of Assembly, are thereby
declared to be a lawful Tender in Payment of any Debt or Demand whatever,
excepting his Majesty's Quitrents.

That your Petitioners having very large Sums of Money now due to them in the
said Province, in the Way of Trade, upon Bargains and Contracts made with the
Inhabitants of Virginia; and for, and on their Account, do moreover stand bound
to the Tradesmen in Great Britain for large Sums: All which said Bargains and
Contracts, by general Agreement, are payable in Sterling, or at the Rate of
Sterling, lawful Money of this Kingdom; and were entered into, and concluded,
long before the Issuing of such Notes, and before any such Traffic, by Way of
Paper-Money, was known or heard of in the Virginia Trade.

Your Memorialists therefore beg Leave hereupon to remonstrate to your
Lordships the very great Injury that may arise to the trading Interest of these
Kingdoms, and more particularly to your Memorialists, from the Virginia Act, as
it now stands; not only by Reason that it does affect Debts, Bargains and
Contracts, due to the Merchants of these Kingdoms, expressly stipulated payable
to them, before the passing of the Act, in Sterling, or at the Rate of
Sterling, lawful Money of Great Britain, but does moreover invert the Nature of
Trade, from a certain to an uncertain Value of Profit and Loss: And, in so far,
your Memorialists do conceive the said Act to be arbitrary and unjust;
arbitrary, because it does, ex post facto, extend to Debts due on Bargains and
Contracts made before the passing of the Act; unjust, by Reason that it does
depreciate the Nature of such Debts, by making Debts (payable in Sterling
Money, of universal Value) to be received in Paper Notes of a local, uncertain,
and fluctuating Value, at the same Time that no Provision is made by the Act
for making Payment in such Notes ad valorem of Sterling, according to the
Difference of Exchange between such Paper-Money and Sterling, when Payment is
made; which Provision, on Principles of Law and common Equity, ought to have
been made: In so far, therefore, as that your Memorialists may be very great
Sufferers from the Defects in the said Act as it now stands, as well as from a
Clause in one other Act that passed in the said Province Anno 1748, entitled,
An Act delaring the Law concerning Executions, and for the Relief of insolvent
Debtors, whereby Executions for Sterling Debts shall be levied in current
Money, at the Rate of 25 per Cent. Advance on Sterling for the Difference of
Exchange, and not otherwise.

Your Memorialists do therefore humbly offer to your Lordships Consideration an
Expedient which your Memorialists apprehend may fully answer the End proposed
by your Memorialists by guarding against the Injury that may arise from the
said Acts, with respect to your Memorialists Properties and the Trade of this
Kingdom, and at the same Time no ways defeat the Operation of the Paper Money
Act, with regard to the military Services thereby intended; which Expedient is
viz. That the Governor of Virginia be instructed by his Majesty to urge to the
Assembly the passing another Act for explaining and amending the Act now in
Question, and thereby provide that all Debts, Bargains, or Contracts, that were
entered into before the passing of the said Act shall remain and stand payable
according to the Nature of such Debts, Bargains or Contracts. And that all
Bargains or Contracts that have been heretofore made, or that may hereafter be
made and entered into, in the Course of Trade or otherwise, between these
Kingdoms and Virginia, if the same shall be expressly stipulated and made
payable according to Sterling or lawful Money of Great Britain; that then and
in such Cases such Paper Notes so issued or that hereafter may be issued, or
any other Species of Current Money not being Sterling, shall not be deemed a
lawful Tender in Payment of any such Debt, Bargain, or Contract, so entered
into, payable in Sterling or lawful Money of Great Britain, unless the Person
or Persons to whom such Payment is tendered in Paper Notes or in any other
Species of Current Money shall think proper to accept thereof in such Paper
Notes or other Species of Current Money, if the same shall be offered to him or
them, according to the Difference of Exchange between such Paper Notes and
other Species of Current Money, at the Time when such Paper Notes or other
Species of Current Money shall be so offered in Payment of Sterling Debts, etc.
And that the Person or Persons so accepting of Payment in Paper Notes or in any
other Species of Current Money, according to the Difference of Exchange between
Sterling and Paper Curency, and such other Species of Current Money, shall be
deemed and held as fully paid and satisfied for his and their Debts to all
Intents and Purposes as if such Payment had been made in Sterling or lawful
Money of Great Britain, any thing in the aforesaid Act or in any other Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

To an Amendment of this Nature your Memorialists conceive the Assembly of
Virginia can make no Objection, in so far as that it is bona fide founded on
Principles of common Justice and the Laws of this Kingdom, and more
particularly agreeable to the Act of the Sixth Year of her late Majesty Queen
Anne, whereby foreign Silver is made Current in the Plantations, but in due
Proportion as the intrinsic Value thereof is to Sterling. And at the same Time
it is thereby provided that all such Species of Silver Coin so made Current
shall not affect Contracts or Bargains made prior to the Act. And it is thereby
further provided that nothing in the said Act shall be construed to compel any
Person or Persons whatsoever to receive in Payment any of the said Species of
such foreign Silver Coin as the same is rated in the Act. In so far therefore
as that the Amendment proposed by your Memorialists to the Act of Virginia,
coincides with Equity and the Laws of England, and with the Regard that is at
all Times due to the trading Interest of these Kingdoms, and with the Justice
due to your Memorialists in this particular Case.

From such Considerations your Memorialists humbly hope for your Lordships
Interposition with his Majesty for an Instruction to the Governor of Virginia,
for the Purposes aforesaid, and that your Lordships will be pleased to suspend
giving Judgment upon the Virginia Act as it now stands by way of Approbation
thereof, 'til such Time as the Sense of the Assembly of that Province is had
upon the Amendments proposed thereto.

AS to the Memorial, by Way of general Observation, I say, it appears from the
Complexion of it, to be a Performance wholely dictated by an uncommon Kind of
Partiality, and the grossest Species of Weakness imaginable: For from the
wording of it, it is evident, that it is but of very late Date that any Paper
Money was heard of in Virginia. It would therefore have been but Justice,
previou^ to any Complaint in an Instance so rare, and new, to have made some
Enquiry into the Cause of making such an Act; especially if it is attended with
such dreadful Consequences as it is represented to be. They would then have
found that not only extreme Poverty, but even extreme Danger, united to compel
the Colony to fall on some Expedient for raising Money to defray the Expenses
of an Army that they were under the greatest Necessity imaginable of collecting
together, to secure themselves against the rapid Incursions of a cruel and
barbarous Enemy. And that before they attempted to substitute Paper or any
Thing in Lieu of what I find is by Merchants only called, Money, they had used
every Method of borrowing Money at a greater Interest than common, and if I am
not much mistaken, Application was even made to some of these complaining
Gentlemen, but with very little Success. Such an Enquiry would not only have
explained the Cause of making such an Act, by showing the Dilemma that the
Country was in (for although many Gentlemen discovered on the Occasion a truly
Patriot Spirit, yet it was impossible for private Fortunes to go any
serviceable Length in such an Affair) but it might possibly have convinced Men,
calling so loudly for Equity, Law, Justice, and what not, that such an Act was
exceedingly proper, and indeed well precedented; for we find even limited
Monarchies and Commonwealths have done the same Thing in such distressed
Circumstances: Some have coined in the Field, and others have substituted baser
Metals in the Room of Gold and Silver which they had not, to answer their
pressing Occasions. Surely then they who shall apply the Words Arbitrary and
Unjust to a Transaction truly similar as to its Circumstances, to what has
before been deemed necessary and passed uncensured, must either be very bad
Haberdashers of Epithets, or Men of low and selfish Notions. Should it be said
that Virginia ought not to be considered with respect to its Power of making
Laws in the Light of a limited Monarchy or Commonwealth; I answer that whenever
any People are reduced to the before mentioned Necessity, it is an
incontestable Argument for the Exertion of every Degree of Power, since it is
certainly ultimately exercised for the absolute Benefit of that very State from
which a Power of the same Nature must necessarily have been granted, had it
been near enough to have extended it in a proper Time: Such a Power therefore
is always implied in the very Nature of Things, let the Degree of Subjection be
what it will; and the Consequence of its not being so, would in the Case of any
potent and sudden Invasion be the Loss of the Colony to that very State which
claims the Subjection, unless Matters shall be conducted hereafter with much
greater Precaution, than has hitherto been experienced. To prevent any Thing
that may be advanced against this Argument with Respect to the distressed
Situation of the Colony, on Account of the Assistance sent to it under General
Braddock, or the L. 20000 remitted to the Honorable Robert Dinwiddie, the then
Governor; I say in the former Instance, it was more distressed by the Defeat
suffered, than it was before the Assistance was sent; for the unexpected
Victory inspired the Enemy, with greater Boldness, and if possible lessened
their Humanity. In the Instance of the Money, the Person entrusted is perhaps
able to assign some Reason why not more than L. 800 was expended, or applied to
the Use of the Colony, or Maintenance of their Army.

AND here I think I ought to be a little explicit, and disclose a Matter
somewhat scandalous in the transacting. Mr. Dinwiddie, from a general Foresight
in turning the Penny (always distinguishable in him) having ordered certain
Necessaries for the Use of the Forces, under the Command of General Braddock,
refused absolutely to discharge the Accounts of the Persons employed to procure
the same to the Amount of L. 1236-11-2, pretending that he could not regularly
carry those Articles to Account with the Government in England, and by frequent
Solicitations to the Committee appointed for the Disposal of the Money raised
here for the Defense of the Colony, he engaged them to pay that Sum under a
most solemn Promise of subjecting to their Order L. 5000 that remained in his
Hands out of the above mentioned L. 20000, which he alleged might be regularly
done, as that Money was remitted to him for the Use of the Colony; but when the
Assembly addressed him to dispose of a Part of that L. 5000 for building a Fort
in the Cherokee Country; a Thing recommended to them as necessary to preserve
the Friendship of those People, he returned for Answer, that he had no more
remaining in his Hands of the above L. 20000 than the L. 800 before mentioned;
accordingly no more than that Sum was applied as is before expressed. So that
the Country instead of being benefitted by that Remittance from England, was
not a little injured in as much as it was properly speaking the Means of their
loosing L. 435-11-2 of their own Money in this instance alone. I might add
further, that at the Time the above Sum of L. 20000 was in that Gentleman's
Hands, or at his Disposal, he was graciously pleased to lend the Country the
Sum of L. 3000 at the exorbitant Interest of Six per Cent. which was punctually
paid him. These Facts are too true to be denied, and although the Sum perhaps
may be too trifling for the Enquiry of a British Parliament, yet certainly as
it was a very glaring Abuse of the good Intentions of the People of England, it
seems but just that the Public should be satisfied with an impartial
Examination into the Conduct of that Gentleman, in this Particular at least,
since from his own Mouth, we have been informed that the M -- y at Home had
complimented him with L. 2000 of that Money as a Recompense for his
extraordinary Care in the Disposal of it.

NOW as this was the Situation of the Country, could any Thing but mere
Partiality and Weakness dictate a Complaint against an Act so immediately
conducive to its Preservation. Thus far I observe of the Memorial in general, I
shall now treat it in a more particular Manner, and pursue it as
paragraphically as may be in order to show that the Partiality with which I
charge it, is of such a Nature as will not endure a Disguise even with the
false Show of Reasoning which seems to have been purposely adapted quite through
it.

I. WE are told that the Paper Notes emitted by the Act are by it declared to
be a lawful Tender in Payment of any Debt or Demand whatever (excepting his
Majesty's Quitrents.) I agree it is so declared in the Act, and of what Use
would such Notes have been, or to what Purpose should they have been issued at
all, if they were not to be Current in all Cases. Gentlemen may attempt to
gloss over their Endeavors by talking of Expedients for making the Act
serviceable for the military Purposes for which it was intended, and yet not
general as to the Currency of these Notes; but I beg Leave to say it is nothing
more than a Piece of artful Nonsense; for what are the military Services of
Money, but the paying of the Soldiers, and purchasing the Stores necessary for
War; and could any Man be hired to fight for a Cash that he could not pay his
Debts with, but at the Option of his Creditor? And who is there that would part
with any Kind of Stores for a Piece of Paper that should only be useful at the
Will of another that might think proper to deal with him? If then it is
necessary that such Notes should be a current Tender in such Cases; why not in
all Cases? Why is a Debt in England of greater Dignity? Kings indeed have a
just Right to such Exceptions, their privy Purses ought alawys to be kept
sacred from any Touch, but that of the last Instance: But Subjects have no
Pretense to Immunities, one more than another, they must all equally enjoy an
Advantage, or suffer a Calamity whenever it attends a Community. And I hope I
am not arguing with Persons who do not think Virginia a Part of the British
Community. Had this Law been calculated on the Footing of the Expedient,
proposed by the Memorialists to their Lordships, it would have carried its own
Insignificancy; that is, it would not have answered its Intention of raising
Men for the War, which was necessarily aimed at; but I shall treat the
Expedient in a more respectful Manner by taking full Notice of it, when it
comes in its Turn, and I believe show, however prettily it might read in a
Countinghouse, it would meet with a quite different Fate at a Bar of Equity.

II. WE are told in what Manner the Merchants are affected by the Act. The
Inhabitants of the Colony are indebted to them in large Sums of Money.
Furthermore the Merchants on Account of these Inhabitants are bound to the
Tradesmen of Great Britain in large Sums; both of which were by general
Agreement payable in Sterling, or at the Rate of Sterling, and this by
Contracts concluded long before the issuing of any Paper Money in Virginia.

I THINK we have here a Declaration of the whole Cause of their Complaint, that
is, 1st, The Planters we indebted to them; 2dly, They are furthermore indebted
to them; for I am persuaded however artfully they may have divided on this
Article of Debt, it is but one and the same Thing, that is, a Debt to the
Merchants from the Planters; but it seems to have been necessary here to
represent the whole City, nay the several Kingdoms of Great Britain, likely to
be endangered by this Act, in order to raise the greater Clamor against it. I
shall not do Justice to the Weakness of this Paragraph, if I do not here take
Notice of a Discovery made by it, that I am sure many Merchants of the City of
London, have denied to be the Case when charged with it in private Letters. We
have had many of us for some Time past, great Reason to own the Thing is
unhappily true in the first Instance, of our being indebted. Unhappily in as
much as the Generality of Creditors are a Kind of lording Tyrants over their
unfortunate Debtors, notwithstanding the undoubted Securities pledged, and the
annual Tribute paid in, of a very high though lawful Interest. And to this we do
attribute (and we presume with great Truth too) the Growth of many Innovations
and arbitrary Charges (to use the Gentlemen's own Language) that have been and
are every now and then brought to Account to keep the poor Dogs of Debtors deep
in their Books, and render the Redemption of their Freedom impossible, by thus
lowering the Produce of their Commodity, that they may continue under the
Obligation of sending it to them alone, through Fear of more apparent
Persecutions. I say this we knew, and we have had great Reason to believe (that
notwithstanding the Merchants always took Care to carry every Article of Goods
as soon as shipped to the Account of the Planter) they were nevertheless in
Arrears to the Tradesmen for them, from their being so observably rated above
the same Things purchased with ready Money; but it was never certainly known to
be so till this Declaration made, which I call a Discovery, and I am much
mistaken if they were aware of making it, the Time they were endeavoring to
interest others in their* Complaints Now though this artful Division of theirs is
but a weak ^ffort in them; yet it opens to us a prodigious Aggravation of the
Misfortunes of those that are indebted to them, in as much as they are not only
obliged to pay dearer, for the Necessaries they send for, from the advanced
Price of the Tradesmen, always added for long Credit given; but are loaded with
Interest in the Merchants Accounts on that advanced Price; which must needs be
a large annual Sum out of the Profits of the Colony, put into the Pocket of the
Merchant; a Practice not so well founded as to admit of a common Justification:
But I shall forbear to consider this any further here, as it is an Article that
may one Day make a very good Figure amongst many others, in a Complaint from
this Side of the Water, when the Leisure of a British Parliament shall admit of
an Enquiry into the real Causes of the distressed Situation of their Colonies;
and some truly noble Spirit shall glory in exerting itself for that Benefit,
which has so long been desired. -- Let the Attempt be thine, O FAUQUIER, to
complete thy Goodness, thine to explode and remove all unnatural and
destructive Jealousies, and by thy Happiness demonstrate to distant and
succeeding Delegations, that it is the Patriot GOVERNOR alone that can
represent the Patriot KING. Nor deem thou this as a Drop bubling from the
nauseous Fountain of Flattery: No it is the Dictate of a Mind that enjoys more
than Kings can confer, a contented Condition; a Mind that has no Demand against
thee but what must center in its Country's Good; a Mind that disdains all
Praise or Commendation to any dignified Character but such as is made truly
glorious by public Virtue. Now let me ask the Gentlemen how a Debt from the
Planters to the Merchants came to be made an Introduction to their Complaints.
It does indeed show a Connection they have with the Colony, but I beg Leave to
say, they are not in that Connection, in the least affected by any new Thing in
the Act. They acknowledge the Debts due from the Colony, were by general
Agreement dischargeable in Sterling or at the Rate of Sterling Money; and does
this Act say they shall not be so discharged? No, nor was it ever intended to
operate in such a Manner; it says indeed, that the Paper Notes so issued, shall
be a lawful Tender in Payment of any Debt or Demand whatever, and these Words
do expressly imply ad valorem, with Respect to Sterling Debts, and it is not in
the Power of the most quibbling Petyfogger to cavil long enough to draw any
other Meaning out of them. It Is a known Rule in the Construction of Statutes,
that two Acts equally subsisting shall only operate in the Manner in which they
are truly reconcilable, and this for a very good Reason, otherwise every new
Statute must be extended so as to take in all the Laws that are relative to the
Matter contained in such Statute, which would be perhaps constructing a Volume
every Session of Parliament too large for any one Man's Perusal, and might be
productive of great Confusion, which is too often the Case in frequent
Revisals. When therefore a subsisting Act has fully regulated any Matter or
Thing, a succeeding Statute not expressly or virtually repealing it, shall not
be extended to defeat the Purpose of the preceding Act. I will exemplify it in
the Case before us, to show the Justice of it, though there seems to be little
Need of any Exemplification, as there is scarcely a Book treating of Statutes
that does not confirm it. There was an Act made in 1748, which the Memorialists
have recited, declaring that Executions for Sterling Debts should be levied in
Current Money at the Rate of Twenty-five per Cent. Advance on Sterling, and not
otherwise. The Act in the Paper Emission in no Part either virtually or
expressly repeals or contradicts it; can the Clause then, allowing the Tender of
Paper Notes in Payment of any Debt whatever, mean with Respect to Sterling
Debts any Thing else, but that such Tender shall be made according to the Act
in Force, before the making the Act for Paper Emission, and was that Law in
1748 still in Force could such Tender made under the Paper Act be good, unless
it had been made at the Rate of Twenty-five per Cent. And as this was the then
ad valorem between Sterling and Currency, how can the Merchant be affected by
the Paper Act, as to his Sterling Debt, Bargain, or Contract. This may be a
Method out of the Way of Reasoning with these Gentlemen, but if they will wade
in Waters that they are Strangers to, they should apply to those who are
acquainted with them, before they rush into Fears and Apprehensions and expose
themselves by mere groundless Complaints. From hence it appears any other
Construction upon the Act complained of would be against the Rule of Law, and I
must say, against the Rule of common Sense too, for they might as well in my
Opinion, carry the Tender in the Act to a Payment of a Debt in Tobacco, which
would be an Absurdity, if there was no Limitation of the Words to be allowed.
The Gentlemen must now excuse me if I tell them, that although they have laid
their Complaint against the Act, in the Defect of it with Respect to a
Provision for Sterling Debts; I cannot think that they or their Draftsman were
really so ignorant as not to know, that this Act did not stand in Need of any
such Clause; but that by the amending Clause in the Expedient proposed to their
Lordships, they intended some Thing further, and that their sole Motive for
complaining was, that they should not be obliged to take these Notes at any
Rate at all, but as they pleased. Should this be the Case, they are not only
Men of very inhumane Principles, but notwithstanding their long Practice in the
Arts of Profit and Loss, very bad Politicians, as to their particular Interest.
Inhumane in that they would either compel a Man to do an Impossibility, (viz.)
Pay a Debt in a particular Coin, when it is not in his Power to acquire one
Penny of it to do it with, or else pay it in such a Manner, as would oblige him
to Part with all that he has: For if there was to be no Restriction set as to
the Value of Sterling Money, and the Difference wholly left to the Will of the
Creditor, it would be vesting such Creditor with the most arbitrary Rule in the
World, and from the very Nature of complaining in all such Cases, it would be
giving up the Debtor and his dependent Connections, as a Sacrifice to the
certain Cruelty of the Creditor; for he that growls at the wholesome
Restrictions Society shall think proper to establish between Man and Man, can
only do it from an incompassionate and devouring Temper; in vain is Charity to
be expected from him who contends against Laws that have Charity for their
Basis. In England indeed where all the Currency they have is a rated Sterling,
there can be no Occasion for a Law of this Kind to enable the Debtor to stop
the Persecutions of his Creditor; but in Countries where Sterling is a Coin
very little seen, such a Law is not only salutary for the Community, but highly
Equitable and Just, between Man and Man, that they should be permitted to
discharge their Money Debts, of what Kind or Nature soever, in the Currency of
the Country in which they live, and it is the true Business of the Legislature
to keep such Laws at all Times subsisting; for Man left to his own Will over
his Fellow Creatures, may sometimes fall into such Depravations of Mind, as to
become more cruel than the most Savage Beast of Prey. As to their Politics, I
need only put a Case founded on a real Fact, to show how bad they are with
Respect to their Debts. Suppose a People to be so circumstanced as to have no
Sterling at all amongst them, and very little of any other Coin, how can such a
People be ever able to pay their Debts; few Commodities besides their Tobacco
can be exported to any certain Market, but in the Way of Barter; their Tobacco
seldom yields much more in England in common Crops, than is sufficient to
purchase Necessaries and pay Interest; and should an accidental foreign Trade
send a little of its Gold into that Country, a Tender ad valorem of that Gold,
must necessarily be allowed, or that would be of little Service; if then it
must be allowed in the Case of one species of Currency, why should it not in
all Kinds; would it not then be much easier for such Merchants to get their
Debts paid by an established circulating Currency, than by none at all: A Debt
so paid might in the Round of Trade (which Adventurers are well acquainted
with) be carried Home to England, and there center in Sterling, with a very
fair and considerable Profit. I will now ask where is the material Difference
between one Kind of Currency and another with Respect to Trade or Debts; but I
bar the Man of miserly Habits from giving any Answer at all, he is first for
the most Part a Stranger either to Trade or Debts, because he can scarcely
trust himself, how then will he trust another. Again, the Wretch conceives such
an inexpressible Pleasure in the counting and poring over his Golden Guineas,
that I much question whether double the Sum in Bank-Bills would purchase them.
It Is to the rational Trader alone that I apply, and such Merchants ought to be
deemed; to them therefore I address myself, and I am persuaded I have their
true Answer in this Memorial.

THEY tell us, the Act for emitting Paper-Money is unjust, by Reason that it
depreciates the Nature of Sterling Debts, by making what was payable in a Coin
of universal Value, payable in Notes of a local, uncertain, and fluctuating
Value: If I understand these Terms right, we are to collect from them, that the
Value of Sterling is universally agreed upon; and that Paper Notes have no
Value at all, out in the Place they are made current; and that even the Value
there is uncertain, because of its Fluctuation with Respect to the Value of
Sterling: The material Difference between Paper and Sterling must then lie in
the Certainty of the one, and in the Uncertainty of the other. And is it not
evident, that all other Species of Coin, with Respect to Sterling, are of the
same uncertain Nature as Paper? Neither can Gold and Silver Coin be less so
than Paper, as it must be rated by Sterling, the Scarcity or Plenty of which
will certainly lower or advance the exchanging Difference; and to say that Gold
and Silver Coin is current in more Places than the Paper Currency is, and
therefore though local yet less confined, is but a Kind of begging the
Question, and when it is granted, it makes very little in the Point, for in
those Countries where Gold and Silver Coin are not current by Law, they are
only to be considered as a trading Commodity, which is more or less vendible in
Proportion to the Gain or Profit that is to be made by it, and there can be no
Instance in which a Paper Currency that can be remitted to the Country where it
is made current by Law, will not be as good a Commodity in Trade as Gold and
Silver, but one; that is, where the trafficking or exchanging Difference
between Gold and Silver and Sterling is greater than the intrinsic Difference;
and as this can only happen from the too great Scarcity of Sterling Trade,
should an Instance or two depending upon such an Accident be made such an
Argument of as to decry a Paper Currency, when in every other Case it is equal
to all other Coins, except Sterling: And as to Trade or Debts, I beg Leave to
say they cannot be affected by it, for the Trader has it always in his Power to
suit his Trade to his expected Payments; and the Sterling Debt, when paid in
Paper, will always be paid in the exchanging Difference that is then
circulating: To be injured, therefore, by the Paper Notes, the Trader or
Creditor must put a Case that can only center in his own Neglect or Avarice;
his Neglect, in not negociating it away in Time, before Exchange shall rise;
Avarice, in keeping it by him, in Expectation that the Exchange is still
falling, and from thence proposing a farther Gain to himself. Those who tell
us, that Paper Currency has a farther Difference from Gold and Silver Coins, in
that it is difficult to be realized; if they mean it is difficult to turn an
Estate in Paper Notes into a landed, or any other permanent Estate, I answer it
cannot be more so in that than it would be in other Coins, when the Act is
considered; for that does absolutely bar all Difference between them, and when
an Estate becomes vendible, it cannot by Law be of more Value in one than
another: A Man, indeed, of a miserly Disposition might be tempted to part with
a Tract of Land for Gold, when he would not for Paper; but that Gold he must
keep useless, or clandestinely exchange it; for if he does it openly, he can
get no more for it than if it was Paper. Should a Man want to realize it, as
they call it in England, he can as easily exchange it for Bills as Gold, if he
does not care to venture it in the Commodity of the Country; and in no Instance
does it differ with Respect to realizing from Gold and Silver Coins, but in the
beforementioned one, where the Plenty of such Coin shall so far exceed the
Sterling Trade, as to make the exchanging Difference greater than the
intrinsic: And thus, at last, does this Difficulty of realizing become greater
in the one than the other, by the same Accident which I have before mentioned,
and which must be so rare as scarcely to happen twice in a Man's Life. I am
pretty well satisfied, that these Arguments against the Virginia Paper Currency
have been adopted from the Practice of other Colonies, where they have both
Gold and Silver, and Paper Currencies, at a great Difference with Respect to
each other; but it should be considered, that it is there a profitable Trade to
the cunning Merchants, and that no Provision (as I am informed) was ever made
against it in the Acts that emitted the Paper: But in Virginia this is in a
great Measure prevented, and will be more so, as the Iniquities of such Trade
shall from Time to Time be discovered; but here I beg Pardon for a Digression;
I shall now consider the Arbitrariness, and Injustice charged on the Act by the
Memorialists.

THE Act they say not only inverts the Nature of Trade from a certain to an
uncertain Value of Profit and Loss; but it extends ex post facto to Debts due
on Bargains and Contracts made before the Passing of the Act, and therefore it
is arbitrary. I was something puzzled to fix a Meaning to the certain Value of
Profit and Loss in Trade, which this Act has overset, because from all the
Ideas I could collect of Trade, it can have very little Certainty in it; there
is always a Probability in it, and some Trades are more probable as to their
Success than others; but as I know it was a Complaint against the Act, I have
endeavored to extract a Meaning out of it: That is, that before the Making of
the Act, they used to Trade for Sterling only, which they call a Trade of
certain Value, and since the Act they are obliged to Trade for Paper Currency,
which is of uncertain Value. If this is the Accusation, I beg Leave to say, it
is a Mistake, for they did not, nor could they trade any more for Sterling
before the Making of the Act, than they do, or can since the Act; that is
before the Act there was always a subsisting Currency in the Country, which
they were obliged to take in Exchange for Sterling, trade how they would, and
this Act does no more than introduce a new Kind of Currency, which these
Gentlemen, as I have already shown, are only pleased to think meanly of, not
that it materially differs from the Currency that subsisted before the making
of the Act: Their Accusation therefore as to its inverting of Trade, etc. is
vague and idle, and their ex post facto is of the same Stamp; they are Words
that do not deserve my Notice, only to expose the Scheme couched in them, they
know they give a retrospective Cast to the Act, and such is the popular Cry
against a Retrospection in Statutes, that it is like bawling out a mad Dog in
the Streets, which has been the Cause of violent Deaths to many an harmless and
useful Cur. But I will first satisfy those who shall read me, that it is a
Complaint ill founded, and then show these Gentlemen, that whatever the common
and vulgar Opinion may be of retrospective Acts, they may be the most salutary
Acts imaginable to a Community in some Instances.

1st, IT IS said the Act does ex post facto extend to Debts, etc. due before the
Making of the Act. I say no Part of this is true, but that the Debts, etc. were
contracted before the Act: And how does this Act extend to such Debts? In no
other Manner than what they were always extended to, and must from the very
Nature of Things have been extended to as soon as ever a Debt, etc. could
possibly have been contracted: I say it must from the very Nature and Reason of
Things, have been a Rule that every Person trading from Great Britain in a
Country where the particular Currency of that Country was of less Value than
Sterling, that such Trader should be obliged to take his Debt or Contract in
such Country, at some certain Discount, between the Currency of such Country
and Sterling, or he must have traded solely by Barter; and if any one will give
himself the Trouble of enquiring Back into the History of Exchange and Trade in
this Colony, he will find that for a long Time, the Riches of the People, lying
more in Sterling than Currency, from that over Balance, the Difference of
Exchange was first on the Side of Currency. I can charge my Memory with having
read old Letters, wherein one per Cent. Sterling, was given for one Hundred
Pounds Currency. And this seems to be the Reason of those Acts now subsisting
amongst us (though very little regared) prohibiting the Exportation of Cash under
large Penalties, and of those other Acts (now so iniquitously extended) giving
Encouragement for the Importation of Cash: In Time as the Quantity of Cash
increased, Sterling claimed a superior Value, and as the Riches of the Country
declined in Sterling, the exchanging Value increased; during all which Time the
Trader must have suited himself to the Possibility of his Chapman, and the
Creditor to that of his Debtor; but when Men became so extravagant as to pay no
Regard to social Good, but governed their Demands wholly by Avarice, let it
undo where it would; then the Law in 1748, came in to Remedy the Evil where it
could, by taking Cognizance of the Claim of the Creditor, and so ultimately
confining the Trader; and if he could not be contented with a reasonable
Exchange, the Process brought against the Debtor, ended in a Regulation of the
Exchange between Sterling and Currency, as the Legislature then thought was
most reasonable: But this Limitation of Exchange to a certain Standard always,
was by these very Gentlemen exclaimed against (as I shall show them presently,
to give the World the true Complexion of this Memorial) and the Legislature
then fell on the best and most equitable Rule, than can be devised by Man, for
the dispensing of Justice to the Creditor and preserving the unfortunate Debtor
from his merciless Claws; by directing Courts to Rate the Value of their
Sterling Judgments given, in Current Money, according to the general and most
known exchanging Difference so that the Creditor, was justly dealt with, and
always had Cash in such a Proportion, as might enable him to replace his
Sterling Debt in England, if he pleased. Thus the Rule, which Reason and Nature
dictated should be subsisting, became the Rule established by Law, and did
subsist before the Act, for emitting Paper Currency. I hope it is now evident
the Act has done nothing ex post facto, it has enacted no new Thing with Regard
to any Sort of Debts, but only directed that for such a Time, such Notes should
have all the Value, that any other Species of Currency had: If it should be
said that although Sterling Judgments were before the Act, to be rated in
Currency, yet such Currency was no Tender in Law, at it is in this Act; I
answer, it is a mere Lawyer's Quibble, and if it was not expressly declared so
in former Acts, yet it was virtually, and consequentially so done, in that
every Creditor must know he could recover no more than the real Difference of
Exchange; and surely that Court where it should appear that the Debtor had made
the Creditor a Tender of the full Exchange on his Debt, must have treated such
Creditor on his Refusal, as a litigious Person.

AS to retrospective Statutes, I need do no more than mention a common
Proposition, to prove that notwithstanding popular Clamor, they are often very
expedient. Let a preceding Transaction be what it will, it may be productive
of very great Evil to a Community by its Effects, and shall a Community go on
to endure this Evil, because it was produced by an Action done before the Evil
was experienced: To say they ought is to fix the Infallibility of human
Understanding, as to Causes, Effects, and Consequences, which is an Absurdity.
A Retrospection therefore in such Cases, is not only salutary, but absolutely
necessary, to destroy such Effects even if it is obliged to reach the Cause:
Suppose for Instance there had been no Rule or Law subsisting to oblige a
Creditor to accept of an adequate Exchange for his Sterling Debt in Currency; I
say from the apparent Necessity there was of making this Act to raise Men and
Money, which has been shown beyond Contradiction, it was absolutely necessary
for the Good of the Community, that the Act should be so made, as to take in
the Creditor before the Act, or else such Creditor might have defeated the main
Purpose of the Act (that of providing an Army) in refusing to be satisfied for
his Debt by the Notes, and would not such a Proceeding in Creditors, have
struck at the very Vitals of the Community, by leaving the Land defenseless,
and in the Power of the Ravages of the Enemy.

THE Injustice wherewith this Act is charged, in depreciating Debts, etc. has
been fully answered, in the Arguments already used, which show that neither
Trade or Debt, are or can in the least, be affected by the Act; the very Defect
they hint at in the Act (that is the Want of a Proviso for paying Sterling
Debts ad valorem) is nothing more than a Defect in their own Brain; they either
have not read the Laws of the Country, or are disturbed that all the Laws are
not every Session brought into one Law, and what a mighty Law would that be! In
Fact, the Clause they want was long before this Act enacted, and in some
Measure at their own Instance, which I shall now show in their next Paragraph
of Complaint.

IN order to make their Complaint more formidable, they usher in the Act passed
in 1748, to show what Sufferers they are like to be by the Virginia Acts of
Assembly. In the short Sketch that I have just now given of the History of
Exchange in this Colony, I showed that it was always a Method in the Country,
of paying Currency for Sterling ad valorem, and that whilst Creditors were
governed by the real or exchanging Difference subsisting, it remained only an
equitable Rule, necessarilly subsisting in the Nature and Reason of Things; but
when Avarice admitted of no Bounds to their Demands, the Assembly in 1748, took
the Case under their Consideration, and to do Justice to both Creditor and
Debtor, made all Executions on Sterling Debts leviable at Twenty-five per Cent.
which was then thought the common and reasonable Exchange: But the Law was not
long known in England, before the Merchants of London, whom I suppose I may
safely call the Memorialists, endeavored to obtain a Repeal of it, by the
King's Proclamation; however they were given to understand it was
constitutionally late, for a Repeal by Proclamation, as his Majesty had given
his Assent to the Act. And an Instruction was accordingly sent to the Governor,
to urge the Assembly (as those Gentlemen term it) to do it by a subsequent Act.
The Assembly always endeavoring to avoid giving the least Color for a
Complaint against them, then readily embraced the Opportunity, and with great
Alacrity, passed a Law to Repeal that in 1748, and so enacted, that all Courts
on any Judgment given in Sterling, should at the Time of passing such Judgment,
settle at what Rate of Discount, the same should be leviable in Current Money.
Now let any candid Man say what these Memorialists would be at: A Clause is
wanted in the Paper Act to provide for the Payment of Sterling ad valorem, and
it is so done and practiced before and after the making of the Act. Again, the
Act in 1748, is likely to injure them, when in Fact there is no such Law in
Being: Surely these Things can hardly be called common Mistakes, no, they are
gross Blunders, begotten by a Genius for Clamoring. I now again hope this Act
is not only cleared of all Arbitrariness and Injustice, but that it justly
rides in Triumph over the Memorial, and all its devilish Machinations, for
certainly calumniating Insinuations, and false Accusations, are Satan's chief
Implements.

I WILL now consider the Expedient proposed by these Gentlemen, and that
minutely too, to show how little deserving of Regard this Body are in this
Instance, however formidably they may have united; and indeed to show how
necessary it is to preserve the Justice due to every Cause, by hearing both
Parties fully before a Determination should be given.

TO separate the Expedient from its great Bundle of Preamble, is simply to say,
it is an Amendment to the Paper Act. 1st, To secure all Contracts before the
passing the Act from any Effect at all by it. 2dly, That in all Cases of
Sterling Debts, etc. stipulated payable in Sterling either before or after the
Act, such Debts. etc. shall not be effected by a Tender of Paper, or any other
Species of Currency not being Sterling at any Rate, unless the Creditor, etc.
shall consent to it; and if he does consent to it and takes the Money, that
then he shall be deemed in Law, fully satisfied for his Debt, etc.

I CANNOT here pass over a Compliment due to the Gentlemen, on Account of their
Happiness in the Choice of a Draftsman, who has discovered in the Memorial, a
wonderful Dexterity in splitting Unities; that is, dividing one and the same
Thing into several Parts, for the Sake of multiplying Sentences: The wiser Part
of Mankind has indeed condemned the Practice as nonsensical, but a bad Cause
(or rather no Cause at all) for complaining, should be rolled up in an abundant
Disguise of Words. The first Part of the Amendment proposed is wholly to secure
Debts, etc. made before the Act from being affected by it. And what does the
second Part of the Amendment propose? Nothing more than to secure all Sterling
Debts, made both before and after the Act, from being affected by it; for I
conceive it wants no written Law to tell a Man if his Creditor is willing to
discharge his Debt, for Carrots or Turnips, he may pay them to him; and that
after he has paid them, and the Creditor has taken them as such, he is
certainly discharged from any further Claim on Account of that Debt or
Contract; and for this he has the Law of common Sense to direct him. But now
for the Reasonableness of such an Amendment, which not only strikes at the
Paper Act, but at all Rules and Acts relative to the exchanging of current
Money, and of Course at the Law of necessary Justice, before explained; when I
say the Reasonableness of such an Amendment, I mean not the Amendment as it is
worded, for verily that is mere formal Nonsense, but of any Amendment to secure
these Sterling Debts, etc. from being paid by Law in the Currency of the
Country ad valorem, for that is the certain Drift of the Memorialists; a Drift
they did not care to be plain in discovering, when they charged the Paper Act
as being defective with Respect to Sterling Debts: In this Kind, indeed, it is
defective; and had it been otherwise, it would have been the most fallacious
Act imaginable, by emitting a Currency that should be no where current, not so
current as a Cask of Nails, or any other Commodity, to be sold only to him that
might want to buy them, for any Man might hold what he had to sell at a
Sterling Demand, and then of what Wotrh would the Paper Notes have been? I need
say nothing more to such an Amendment, than to remind any Reader of the
Necessity that must have always subsisted of exchanging (not only in Virginia,
but in every Country where Sterling is not the sole Currency) Sterling for such
Currency, at an agreed Rate; and that it was from this Necessity alone that any
Law could ever have arisen to establish the Method of doing it, lest the Will
of the Creditor should grow too extravagant for the Capacity of the Debtor; all
which, I flatter myself, I have fully shown in my Observations already made on
this Memorial. I should now take Leave of the Expedient, but that there is a
seeming Arrogance in concluding that it was impossible for the Assembly of
Virginia to make any Objections to the Amendment, in so far as it is, bona
fide, founded on Principles of common Justice, and the Laws of England. What,
do the Principles of common Justice oblige a People, extending the Power of a
Mother Country, by improving her distant Territories, and in doing that,
confined (except in some trifling Commodities) solely to a Trade with that
Mother Country? I say, should such a People, in the Course of such Trade, fall
in Debt to such Mother Country, do the Principles of common Justice enjoin,
that Persons so circumstanced should not be allowed any Way of paying such
Debts, but in a Coin of which there is hardly an Hundred Pounds to be found
amongst them in a Year; or else to pay them according to the extravagant
Demands that their Creditors shall make in the Currency they have: Gentlemen
that talk so, must be Madmen; is this common Justice? It is, bona fide,
unnatural, and against all Justice. Again, the Amendment (they say) is founded
on the Laws of England; to this I answer, without entering into a critical
Enquiry as to the Fact, and with all possible Deference, that if there be such
a Law, as the Laws of no People on Earth should be unalterable, every Moment
that it has had any Effect in the Manner that these Memorialists propose, it
must have been grievously partial and burdensome; and therefore it ought now
to change its Face, and smile on those who have deserved all Attention, and
every reasonable Indulgence; who, in Spite of Poverty and every unnatural
Check, have certainly convinced the World, that they are faithful Subjects,
endued with that Nobleness of Spirit that has ever distinguished a true-born
Briton.

THE Conclusion is of a Piece with the whole Memorial, that runs on with a very
great Air of Importance, but complains of nothing real; and this, it is
evident, is as pompously inclined to the same Point, Nothing. There is a
Request made to their Lordships, that they would be pleased to suspend giving
Judgment on the Virginia Act as it now stands, by Way of Approbation thereof,
till such Time as the Sense of the Assembly of the Province is had upon the
Amendments proposed thereto; which, in Fact, is desiring that their Lordships
would let the Act keep its Force and Efficacy, which every Act must necessarily
do that is pssed by the Governor, unless his Majesty shall declare his Dissent
by Proclamation, which no Doubt he is in some Cases advised to: But, if the Act
lies for his Majesty's Pleasure, it is necessarily operating here as a Law,
unless provided against in the Body of it by a suspending Clause. Their
Lordships Approbation of an Act might indeed incline his Majesty to give his
Assent to it, and thereby give it a greater Degree of Firmness in the
Constitution; but this can hardly be very necessary, in many temporary Laws: Of
Course then these Gentlemen have really asked for nothing, with Respect to
their Complaint; not only nothing to their Purpose, but so long as their
Request is granted; that is, that their Lordships shall be silent as to their
Approbation of the Act. It is very materially against them; but I have all
along seen they have a latent Meaning in the Memorial, and I suspect here they
are praying that their Lordships will suspend their Approbation, in order to
offer up another Prayer hereafter, that they will be pleased to advise his
Majesty to repeal it; and this Construction is not out of the Way of their
partial Syste^ ^^refully kept up through the whole: But would not this be a
most extraordinary Prayer indeed, first to let an Act emit Money at such a
settled Currency and on such a settled Fund, and, when the Money is in
Circulation, repeal it, because London or British Merchants are put on the
necessary and just Footing with other People. If I mistake not, it would amount
to an entire Forfeiture of public Faith, with a very sacred Absolution for so
doing.

I WILL now recommend both the Memorial, and Observations on it, to the
impartial Reader; and let him say if in any Instance he ever met with less
Cause of Complaint, less Decency or Gratitude to that Country against whom they
complain, less Respect to that Board to whom they address themselves, or less
Regard for the Reputation of their own Body: I say less Cause of Complaint,
because the very Matter complained of (if ever it existed) was not only long
before their Complaints fully remedied, but even before the passing the Act; I
say less Decency and Gratitude to that Country against whom they complain; 1st,
in puffing out how largely they are indebted to them, 2dly, in accusing them
with arbitrarily and iniquitously endeavoring to destroy their Trade, and
cheat them of their Debts: For this would be the Conclusion, had the Facts been
true; and not in the least reflecting how many of them owe their very Being, as
Merchants, to the Civilities of the Country, and at Times perhaps when their
own Credit was not sufficient to have induced any Man but a bold-venturing
Virginian to have trusted them: I say less Respect to that Board to whom they
address themselves, in presuming to build on Mistakes, Blunders, scandalous
Accusations, and what not, in order (if possible) to deceive their Lordships,
and less regardful of their own Reputation in rendering it for ever after this
a just Matter of Suspicion, whether the Facts on which they shall ground any
future Complaint, are truly stated or not.

WAS it for such Uses as these, ye Merchantmen of London, that this Country has
submitted to a long and constant Tax on their Commodity, in order to raise a
Treasury for the mutual Benefit of the Trade Threepence per Hogshead now
comprehended under the Article of Petty-Charges in the Accounts of Sales for
our Tobacco sent to them, which has been always understood as a Tax intended
for the Support of any Solicitation that might be necessary for the Benefit of
the Trade. Never as yet, as we could learn, applied but to their own particular
Ends in Trade.
; that instead of assisting them in their greatest Poverty, in the Day of their
greatest Distress, wi^^ ^^e Overflowings of that Heap, if properly accounted
for ye do not only loudly oppose their Endeavors to preserve themselves, but
even abuse them, and aim by your Complaint (no Matter whether founded on Truth
or Falsehood) at particular Exemptions of yourselves, from all Possibility of
suffering in the common Calamity, and thereby show yourselves no otherwise
interested in the Country, than in the dirty Demands you have against it.

IF the Gentlemen shall think proper to show themselves offended at what I have
written, I can only say that I am sorry for the Cause of Writing, but not for
having done it; for it is certainly a Piece of Justice due to the Legislative
Body of my Country, to remove from them where it can be done with Truth, every
Kind of Reflection against their Honor, their Virtue; and I shall never be
affected with any Reply that can be made, having an excellent little Fortress
to protect me, one built on a Rock not liable to be shaken with Fears, that of
Independency, my Batteries are Facts and Truth, and my Engineer is a Fellow as
fit for his Post as any in the World, Reason; thus supported I will conclude
with the Words of Cicero, in the Cause he plead for Publius Quinctius.

Hic ego, si Crassi omnes cum Antoniis existant, fi tu L. Philippe, qui inter
illos florebas, hanc causam voles cum Hortensio dicere, tamen superior sim
necesse est; non enim quemadmodum putatis, omnia sunt in eloquentia, est
quaedam tamen ita perspicua veritas, ut eam infirmare nulla res possit. Of
which I shall give the following modest Translation, by Way of Address to the
Lords of Trade, etc.

My Lords, I AM so confident of the Justice of my Count^, (...) the Matter
complained of to your Lordship, by this Memorial, that I cannot avoid saying,
although all the Crassus's and Anthony's, that ever excelled in Oratory; nay though
Lucius Phillippus, who made so great a Figure at the Bar, even in their Days,
was now in being, and engaged with the Merchants of London against me, yet I am
satisfied that I must of Necessity prevail, and this not from any Boast of
extraordinary Eloquence in what I have written, but from that evident Truth
which governs through the Whole, a Truth that cannot be perverted by any Kind of
Artifice whatever. I am, SIR, Your most Obedient.


