Mr. Parsons's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 30th 1759.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience of HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR, HIS HONOR
THE LIEUT.-GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, AND House of
REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY
31st, 1759.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the said
Province.

BY JOSEPH PARSONS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Bradford.

Est enim gloria solida quaedam res, et expressa, non adumbrata. Ea est
consentiens laus bonorum, incorrupta vox been judicantium de excellent
virtute. -- Quae quia recte factorum plerumque comes est, non est BONIS VIRIS
repudianda. Cic. Tusc, quaes. lib. III. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed, by JOHN
DRAPER, Printer to His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR; and the HONORABLE His MAJESTY's
COUNCIL. 1759.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, In COUNCIL, May, 31. 1759.
VOTED,
THAT BENJAMIN LYNDE and WILLIAM BRATTLE, Esq'rs, be a Committee to wait on the
Rev'd Mr. JOSEPH PARSONS, and return him the Thanks of this Board for his
Sermon preached Yesterday before the General Court, being the Anniversary
Election of Counselors for this Province; and to desire a Copy thereof for the
Press.

Copy attest. A. OLIVER, Secr'y.

AN Election-Sermon.
ESTHER 10.3. FOR Mordecai the Jew was next unto King Ahasuerus, and great
among the Jews; and accepted among the multitude of his brethren, seeking the
wealth of all his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.


THE sacred scriptures, always intending the sanctification of sinful men,
exhibit characters of various kinds; that there may be found in them,
dissuasives from vice and motives to godliness, not only rational and
forceable, but of peculiar influence upon every turn of mind.

THE principal persons in this book are Ahasuerus, Haman, Esther and Mordecai.

Ahasuerus king of Persia, whose dominion extended even from India to
Ethiophia, over an hundred and twenty-seven provinces, was a monarch vested
with such unlimited power, as no wise man would be willing any one should be
possessed of, below the character of a confirmed angel; at lest any of the
sinful race of fallen man; a power by edict to murder thousands of innocents in
a day to gratify a favourite's passions; and a power able to perplex and
distress the affairs of peaceable states round about, contented with their own
possessions, and coveting no other.

AMBITION, pride and cruelty are the most conspicuous marks in the character of
Haman; who had crept into the monarch's favor above all others, and was likely
to make a distressing use of the absolute power which he could command.

Esther the queen, an orphan, without father or mother, but brought up by her
near kinsman Mordecai, by the gift of nature, and her kinsman's pious paternal
care, possessed every lovely quality of the sex, made more illustrious by grace,
which illustrates virtue it self; and had merit enough with the monarch to be
advanced to his bed upon the divorce of Vashti, the former queen.

Lastly, THE character of Mordecai the Jew was truly excellent and great: from
which, if I mistake not, something may be inferred suitable to that part, which,
through the ill health of my dearly beloved brother in Christ, is so suddenly and
unexpectedly fallen to my lot upon this retured anniversary.

AND his character seems to be that of a pious, just, wise man, and strictly
tenacious of his purpose; a character in some danger of moroseness: (should I
be much mistaken if I resembled him to the roman Cato?) but yet, when
sanctified by the divine spirit, and influenced by the fear of God, a temper
fitted for arduous undertakings, and to act sedately in shocking disasters.

HIS piety toward God is seen in his prayers, and in the prayers of his people
by his direction under the queen, and their devout humiliations before God; a
pious practice, always used in dangerous times, in the church of God; which it
becomes the religious rulers and leaders of his people to recommend and urge as
a becoming acknowledgement of his care and government of the world, due for his
glory, and the way to his mercy. It is also seen in his firm reliance upon God,
the protector of his church, expressed in that message to the queen: If thou
altogether hold thy peace at this time, from making supplication to the king,
then shall enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place --
and who knows whither thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this.

HIS justice is vindicated and declared, as the slaughter of a great number of
the enemies of the Jews was necessary self-defence, and standing for their own
lives; and in that when his enemies were in his power, and the law of
retaliation might seem to justify the taking not only their lives, but their
spoils, it is said more than once, on the prey they laid not their hands.

HIS wisdom appears in all his method to deliver his people from the massacre
intended by that wicked Haman: and his inflexibility in continuing in
sackcloth, which kept him from the queen's presence, though called, and which the
circumstances of things seemed greatly to require.

OUR text is the last verse in the book; and, for the encouragement of virtue
in the service of God and his people, describes the felicity of Mordecai's
condition after the difficulties and dangers he had passed through. He was next
to the king; and the ambition of a subject can look no higher, nor the
benevolent mind wish for a better prospect of extensive usefulness. He was
great among the Jews: in true greatness distinguished, and universally honored
among them. And accepted among the multitude of his brethren: his person
respected, and his services well received: and no wonder, considering what he
had done, and was still disposed and able to do for them: seeking the wealth of
all his people, and speaking peace to all his seed: the peace and welfare of
his people was his continued concern, which he promoted by his wise counsels
and powerful influence with the king.

IN discoursing upon this text, I propose to speak to the following
observations; which, I think, naturally arise from it in relation to the story.

I. WHEN God is pleased to advance men of integrity and ability into the
frequent presence and favor of their sovereign, they have an happy advantage
to serve with him the interests of their people.

II. TRUE greatness may commendably be sought; and when possessed should be
considered, and thankfully acknowledged as the gift of God.

III. THE acceptance of an obliged people is a just satisfaction to the minds
of men of great usefulness in exalted stations.

IV. Good Men advanced will hold themselves obliged to improve their power and
fame for the prosperity of their people.

I. WHEN God is pleased to advance men of ability and integrity into the
frequent presence and favor of their sovereign, they have an happy advantage
to serve with him the interests of their people.

THEIR great abilities and many faithful services rendered to the king, engage
his esteem and confidence. And hence he becomes persuaded, no petitions will be
preferred but such as righteousness shall demand, or mercy request; and such
only as shall promote, or at least be consistent with, the public good. The
king must see with eyes not his own: and able, faithful men about him can
hardly be too highly prized, as right action is universal good, errors
dangerous, and wickedness extensive destruction. Therefore said a great and
politic king, him that privily slandereth his neighbor will I cut off; him
that has an high look and a proud heart will I not suffer. Mine eyes shall be
upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in
a perfect way he shall serve me. He that works deceit shall not dwell within
my house; he that tells lies shall not stand in my sight.

IF Ahasuerus had not entertained an high opinion of Haman's ability and
faithfulness, hardly would he have been able, though with the persuasive argument
of ten thousand talents (which the king generously returned) to have prevailed
for the bloody murder of so great a multitude; who had hitherto been indulged
their peculiar customs without detriment to the king's affairs; and who while
they lived peaceably in the land, content with their liberty of conscience,
must be a great strengthening to the kingdom. Especially is fidelity, or
approved loyalty, a very great recommendation of a subject, strengthening his
interest with his sovereign to serve his people. Ahasuerus was concerned that
Mordecai's loyal services in detecting the conspiracy of Bigthan and Teresh had
never been rewarded. Greatness is often suspected, but fidelity creates
confidence.

THE story of Nehemiah, and the happy effects to the people of God of his
interest with the king and frequent opportunities of approaching into his
presence, will afford much useful instruction, and quickening spirit to a great
man who delights to form himself by the divine lessons of holy scripture: and
of such, I hope our number is very great.

II. TRUE greatness may commendably be sought; and when possessed should be
considered and thankfully acknowledged as the gift of God.

IN this light, I conceive, I may consider the advancement of the great man in
my text, and his happy condition as the reward of a national spirit.

TRUE greatness sometimes intends those excelling accomplishments which merit
honor; and sometimes the honor which is given for them: I here consider it
complexly, as comprehending both.

THE intrinsic greatness of Mordecai, his wisdom, justice and firmness of
spirit, directed by the fear of God to the public good of his own church and
people, was the solid foundation of his estimated greatness, or the universal
honor that was paid him, and will always be paid him, in the church of God:
and upon such a foundation only can true honor arise. Let us here a little
consider the difference between true and false greatness as a comparison
between Mordecai and Haman may show it. Both these great men were alike high in
the king's favor, both were feared for their power, and might alike be
supplicated by abject dependants, avaricious or ambitious aspirers after
employments they were unfit for. Their glare of glory upon they eye of the
world was much the same, or Haman's the brighter: Yet the greatness of the one
was true, of the other false: and the fear of God and a religious love of
virtue made the difference. Pride, a glittering appearance, a temper never to
forgive, but to revenge the slightest affronts of one man with the blood of a
nation, and a rapacious disposition to seize the prey; such was the foundation
of Haman's estimated greatness. But Mordecai's arose upon the solid foundation
of many conspicuous virtues peculiarly useful to the public, and a manifest
indifferency to the trappings of state which the childish pride of Haman
dictated for himself, as a fitting reward for the man whom the king should
delight to honor.

THIS true greatness is what may innocently and worthily be pursued: and the
desire of glory is not criminal but virtuous: Christ recommends it by his own
example in that prayer, Father glorify thy Son. Fame, or a good name is said to
be better than precious ointment. Everlasting inconceivable glory is the great
allurement of the gospel to the obedience of faith.

BUT this, like other virtuous propensities, is capable of being turned into
the worst of vices. Piety, may proceed to superstition, and terminate in
hypocrisy; a prudent care, to anxious solicitude, and to that love of the
world which is inconsistent with the love of God; and a just resentment of evil
may degenerate into revenge: and so may the love of glory into pride,
detestible in the sight of God, and never endured by men, how much soever each
one has of it in himself. Yet is there a thirst after true greatness, as it is
virtue improved into great abilities for public usefulness, which must
therefore be virtuous; and after the connected glory, and a joy in it with
moderation when acquired, which must be innocent, because made a motive in the
word of God to serve the interests of religion: they that honor God he will
honor, but they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed.

AND therefore it must be consistent with humility, a shade necessary to add
the true luster to every shining public virtue; a grace of the spirit of God,
essential to the character of a true christian; for he that comes to Christ
must take his yoke upon him, and learn of him who was meek and lowly in heart,
or he will not find rest to his soul.

AND so we see it was in Christ; for at the time he was fullest in his
expectations of heavenly glory, and doubtless contemplating upon it as a
support, under his approaching agony and bloody sweat, and all the cruelties of
the cross, he set his disciples the most lowly example of humility in all his
life. Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, that
he was come from God, and went to God, he arose from supper and took a towel,
and girded himself, to wash his disciple's feet.

I know, after all that can be said, proud ambitious men will be apt to flatter
themselves that their love of glory is the virtue: so natural is it for men to
put darkness for light when a favorite lust is in question. It is necessary
however that a preacher of the gospel should lend his assistance to enable men
to distinguish rightly, or at lest to revive and continue the well known
distinction in their minds; lest, as man was once for pride turned out of
paradise, for pride the gates of it should be shut against one that would
return thither.

I beg leave here to mention two things;

1. Earthly glory should be always sought in subordination to heavenly. This
will be, according to the directions of our gospel, to live by faith and not by
sense, to seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and
justly to prefer what is infinitely to be preferred. This will evidence our
sincerity, that we believe, what we profess, that there is a future everlasting
world, in which all, who persevere in ways of well-doing, shall be rewarded
with glory, honor and immortality. Therefore, when earthly glory is
inconsistent with heavenly, the pursuit of the former is entirely to be
remitted. For what madness would it be to forego, or even hazard, the loss of
heavenly glory for any thing that is earthly? for the whole world?

THIS is a consideration which ought always to be present to the mind of him,
who is in the pursuit of glory: for he is entered into temptation which nothing
will carry him safely through but the faith of the gospel, which is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

2. IN like manner earthly glory is to be sought with a view to future
usefulness. The author of our beings has joined sensible pleasure with our
food; yet it is to be under the control of the rational intention of
preserving our health, and strengthening the animal frame; and the religious
one, of presenting our bodies living sacrifices holy and acceptable to the
Lord, which is also, according to the apostle, a reasonable service. So the
delights of worldly glory should be but a subordinate end: and the superior
should be usefulness to the public.

THIS Christ has taught us by the before-cited prayer. Father glorify thy Son,
that thy Son may glorify thee. If this were duly considered, great men would
not by retirement desert the service of their country, because they had
attained to their summit of worldly glory, and their employments were become
troublesome and dangerous; by which means the commonwealth is sometimes
deprived of it is most useful members, when the greatest abilities, with all the
advantages of long experience, are most necessary. If the increase of worldly
honor be not sufficient to dissuade from what is really an ignominious
forfeiture of honor obtained, let it be considered what an increase of
heavenly glory will be made by so great self-denial for the public good, as the
continuing in a troublesome dangerous post is supposed to be.

BEFORE I conclude this general head, let me observe, what indulgence soever
may be given to men to value themselves upon their services according to their
true worth, and benefit to their fellow-men, and to expect merited honorable
acknowledgments for them, there is no place for such a temper in respect of the
infinite God. For, can a man be profitable to God? His we are, and from him we
received all our talents, and opportunities of improving them: and when we have
done all in our power, and with the greatest success in serving him, we must
confess ourselves unprofitable servants, and that we have done but our duty.
This confession becomes the mouth of the most exalted angel about the throne of
God; how much more man who is a worm, and who drinks in iniquity like water;
and in the most glorious of whose actions will be found, such ignoble, impure
mixtures as to be a just occasion of penitent reflections and deep humiliation.
If man has whereof to glory, it cannot be before God.

III. THE acceptance of an obliged people is a just satisfaction to men of
great usefulness in exalted stations.

IN the minds of generous men there is a natural passion for their people,
which is exceeded by no other, but is stronger than even the fear of death.
This gives the greatest concern when our country is in danger, pains our hearts
in all it is sufferings, produces into action the wisdom and resolution of the
great, and even creates courage in the effeminate where it never existed
before. When the people were smitten and the ark taken, Eli could live no
longer: And the psalmist thought it criminal not to prefer Jerusalem to his
chief joy. This same passion, which produces the powers of men into strenuous
action, prepares the mind to receive great satisfaction from the good
affections of their country.

AND they are what the endeavors of great men to serve their country justly
deserve; and the more for the greatness of their good actions which are felt in
their good effects throughout the community. By them not one man, not a few
men, but multitudes taste the sweets of their own plenty in security; and a
whole nation is sometimes saved from imminent ruin.

HOW ungrateful then will it be to disappoint the expectations of great and
useful men so justly founded? Ingratitude occasions a peculiar kind of painful
resentment from anger and love intermixed; perhaps harder to be endured than
anger by it self, as the softness of love produces dejection of spirit, to
which simple anger would not be liable. It was not an enemy that reproached me,
said the Psalmist, then I could have born it, but it was thou, a man, mine
equal, my guide, and my acquaintance: we took sweet counsel together, and
walked to the house of God in company.

To be sure, very painful resentments do an unthankful people give to those who
have loved them, and denied themselves greatly for them; enduring such
disquietudes and hardships as men at ease, and unused to imagine themselves in
the places of others, (according to our savior's direction for right
thinking,) have little apprehension of; and therefore are less likely to value
the benefits they have received by them.

Ancient Greece may, I presume, vie with any state for it is number of
public-spirited great men, and the glory of their actions performed in the
defense of their country. But how ungenerously, how inhumanely were those great
men treated! How many from Miltiades, the great commander of the famous battle
of Marathon, through Socrates down to Phocion and Demostthenes, were imprisoned
to death, or died by poison or the sword?

AND what an ungrateful return was made by Israel to Gideon, who fought for
them, and adventured his life far, and delivered them out of the hand of their
enemies, in slaying threescore and ten of his sons upon one rock, to put them
out of the way of Abimelech the usurper? The scripture takes great notice of
this ingratitude, coupling it with their ingratitude to heaven. The children of
Israel remembered not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hand
of their enemies on every side: neither showed they kindness to the house of
Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all the goodness he had showed unto
Israel. Judge. 8.34, 35.


THE acceptance of an obliged people is food that nourishes a public spirit,
which will hardly subsist long without it. True it is, the noble Athenians, I
mentioned before, notwithstanding the ungrateful treatment others had received,
and they had received themselves, surprizingly retained the love of their
country, and declared they esteemed Athens and it is privileges their chief
joy, by studying, and some times serving, it is interests and even in
banishment. But oftentimes, men have been made traitors by far less bad
treatment; so corrupt is the state of mankind, and so true it is that every
great man is not a hero.

BUT when the faithful endeavors of able men to serve their country are
considered with pleasure and gratefully received, it secures the benefit of
their abilities, and urges them forward with renewed vigor. The love of our
country is cherished by love.

IN such a state, how happy is the unity! how delightful the communion! similar
to that which is between the great God, after whose name rulers are in
scripture sometimes called, and his sanctified sons: for that divine communion
is very much in asking and receiving blessings, and in grateful
acknowledgements in return.

THIS acceptance of public services was, I say, one of the satisfactions of
Mordecai's happy condition; and what every good man will rejoice in. And the
consideration, that this acceptance of the people is for real good done, makes
the great man's satisfaction both innocent and solid; and not like the praises
which are given for no reason. How much more eligible is the sober acceptance
of a considerate people than the highest applause of a flattering multitude?

Besides, Such an acceptance is a great satisfaction as it is an happy presage
when public virtue is justly esteemed by a people; and when heroic actions,
such as a good man doing them can afterward reflect upon with inward
satisfaction, are to their acceptance, and the only ones they are content to
reward. In that state there must be much of that righteousness which exalts a
nation.

IV. GOOD men advanced will hold themselves obliged to improve their greatness
for the prosperity of their people.

Bishop Patrick paraphrases the last clauses of our text thus; advising and
promoting whatsoever was for their advantage; and speaking still to the king
for that which might tend to the happiness and prosperity of his nation, which
he advanced to the utmost of his power.

THEY by their interest in the king's favor, or with those who stand before
princes, if they love their country (as all good men do) will have frequent
opportunities, and gladly improve them, of pleading it is cause when it is
character is aspersed; when criminal matters, of which they are innocent, are
invidiously laid to their charge, or their faithful, industrious, expensive
services represented in a diminishing light. They will urge for the royal
favor, their country's loyalty and firm attachment to the sovereign, it is
usefulness as a valuable member of the grand body politic, notwithstanding any
peculiar customs, innocent to the state, which may have obtained among them,
and it is desire to the utmost of it is ability to promote the universal good of
the kingdom through all it is numerous provinces.

THEIR councils, when demanded and given, in virtue of the high and important
offices they sustain, will be the utmost efforts of their wisdom for the good
of their king and country, whose interests are inseparable. Especially may this
be expected from them in the capacity of legislators, as upon good laws the
welfare and peace of a people greatly depend. -- They will be concerned that
their laws, for their goodness and wisdom, may, be accepted and revered.

FOR there is a veneration due to the laws of a country as sacred and
inviolate, and, to which men ought to submit, not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake. And for this reason, it seems, the formalities of them are
made very solemn, to awe the minds of lawless men into a fear of transgressing
what their wickedness prompts them to transgress. And this is no more than is
necessary considering how great numbers in the community by liberty understand
the doing what is right in their own eyes, as when there was no king in Israel;
how full many are of compassion, and how ready to take the part of a villainous
transgressor, and studious to screen him when in danger of being detected, and
brought to a well merited punishment; and this not only of the meaner and more
sordid part, but of better men, who can have no reason to fear for themselves
the fate of a villain. These better men should consider, all men should
consider, the law is the hedge between property and property, the fence that
secures to us all that is dear, even our very lives; and that to side against
the law is to side against our own lives, and to give that fence a blow toward
bringing it tottering down to the ground.

TO mention no more, good men for the welfare of their country will be active
in the execution of every wise purpose within their sphere of action. Their
counsels are useless until put in execution; and particularly, the wisdom of
the legislature is expended in vain, if the laws be disregarded. Magistrates do
not appear to be good men, or to have the welfare of their people at heart, who
behold, but connive at, the transgression of the laws in the face of day;
instead of being guardians and conservators of the foundation of their security
and prosperity, according to the intention of their advancement. And if such an
evil prevailing be not observed, or being observed, is not speedily remedied,
well may the laws lose their just veneration and fall into disrepute, by the
frequent unnoticed transgressions of them.

THESE and such like things will a good man consider himself as obliged to by
advancement. For he is one that fears God and honors the king, one that is
concerned for the public good, and acted by that universal benevolence which is
the charity, the glory of the gospel.

HE will consider, as the doctrine of divine Providence is an article of his
faith, his advancement is from God, who sets up one and puts down
another; and that the righteous Lord, who loves righteousness and hates
iniquity, the infinitely good giver of every perfect gift, regards him as His
magistrate, ordained by himself to do justice and judgment, and to exercise
loving kindness in the community for the glory of God, the honor of the
redeemer, and the wealth and peace of his people. And often will the pious
magistrate bring himself before God's vicegerent in his own breast, his own
conscience; and strictly examine his life in relation to his own office, as
knowing that he must give an account another day; that judging himself now, he
may not be condemned with the wicked world.

AND because he is convinced of the vanity of every thing that is earthly in
the comparison, he esteems heavenly glory, the greatness of perfect virtue, and
the glory of the heavenly train about the throne of God as his supreme good;
after which he aspires by a conscientious endeavor to approve himself to him.

NEITHER is it an inconsiderable motive, but a very weighty one, with the good
and the great, uprightly to seek the welfare of their people, that their
constituents expect it from them, and distinguished them with that very
intention. Unfaithfulness is a very inconsistent character in a candidate for
honor, criminal, injurious and ungrateful; and therefore inconsistent with
goodness. What a disappointment will it be to those who distinguished and
honored the advanced, and had given them great testimonies of their respect,
if they should be negligent and unfaithful for the sake of private interest?
What should we call it among people of lower life, if a man, valuably
considered and entrusted, should serve his own ends by the confidence placed in
him? To deceive, to cheat, is ignominious among the vulgar, and greatly
scandalous to him that pretends to be good; and a very unthankful return for
acceptance among the multitude of our brethren.

FINALLY, A very influential motive every good man finds the consideration of
the infinite displeasure of God in the everlasting world, against unfaithful
men, who had been entrusted with many talents for important ends. By these they
had in their hands an advantage to be distinguished among the saints in heaven,
as themselves had been distinguished by their fellow men in this world; but
forfeited not only the distinction, but even heaven it self, by hiding their
talent in a napkin, or improving it to a bad purpose: so that what was intended
to have been their distinguishing glory will be the increase of their
everlasting misery and disgrace.

IT is not the knowledge of these things, my honored fathers and brethren, for
every one knows them, but a serious influential consideration of them which
produces the holy effect; and, dwelling in the minds of good men, continue
them fixed in the pursuit of glory by virtue.

IT remains now to conclude with the addresses which in decency are to be
expected upon this anniversary.

AND may I be permitted, in the first place, in the most humble manner, to
address your EXCELLENCY, sitting in the first chair of government, among the
rulers of this Province;

May it please your Excellency,

IF I am not mistaken, the divine author of our natures, in forming us with a
principle of self-love and preservation, has prepared us to take a peculiar
delight in what is our own; so that, by this circumstance, an additional
satisfaction is received from every thing that is excellent. This province,
SIR, by the disposition of divine providence, and the favor of the best of
king's, is yours; it will therefore have your kind distinction: it is griefs
will more sensibly touch, and it is prosperity rejoice your heart, than those of
others.

IN these days of perplexity and danger, when much darkness is scattered in our
paths, we need the assistance and conduct of the most discerning penetrating
powers: and may we not hope, that from affection to your people, as well as
duty to God and the king, your great abilities will be employed for our
welfare, peace and protection, especially when such mighty preparations are
made from home, to improve the successes, with which a good God was pleased to
favor our enterprises of last year, into a deliverance from the future fear of
an enemy, whose tender mercies have been cruelties.

AND as in this province you, SIR, are next unto the king, through your interest
in the great men who stand in the king's presence, and have the privelege of
the royal ear, and your sollicitous applications still continued for us, may we
not hope to be always justly and favorably represented.

OUR privileges, religious and civil, will always have your paternal care, not
only because your people's hearts are set on them, but as things of invaluable
worth, and great importance to their virtue, happiness and glory.

OUR College, SIR, is our glory; many of those you have been pleased to employ
in exalted stations, to your own satisfaction, and the acceptance of their
people, laid the foundation of their intrinsic greatness within it is walls: and
others divine providence will present you with to be employed as your
instruments in government, as occasion may call for them. This address for
patronage to a great proficient in learning, might be considered only as a
decent compliance with prevailing custom; but is more, if the number of those
who cannot, or will not, be sensible of any advantage in an academic education
for the service of church or state, is greatly increased.

AS it will be equally honorable and advantageous to your administration, as
happy for your people, it will be your Excellency's concern, that posts of
profit and honor, at your sole disposal, or by the advice of his majesty's
council, be filled with men who seek worldly glory and advantage in
subordination to that which is everlasting; who fear God and love their
country, and whose ablities are equal to the trust.

WE praise God and congratulate your Excellency upon your safe return from the
eastward, where your presence would be so useful to the erecting the projected
fortress to strengthen our frontier, and curb the cruel enemy. May your
Excellency's services for the public always find acceptance with the people and
favor with the king, and be approved of God almighty at last, and rewarded
with joy unspeakable and full of glory!

IN the next place, may I be permitted to address your HONOR our
Lieutenant Governor, in the next seat of gevernment, upon the first return of
this anniversary, since the publication of your Honor's commission.

IT is with great satisfaction we behold your abilities, by the good providence
of him who gave them, brought forth into the fullest light, and advantageously
situated to serve your king and country, for which they are peculiarly formed.

AS your greatness among your people, and acceptance among the multitude of
your brethren, took it is rise from your early and continued concern for their
prosperity, and seeking their peace by wise and upright counsels, the same
public spirit, we doubt not, will increase with your opportunities. For we
know, from what we have felt in our own breasts, and what great and virtuous
minds minds feel in a proportionable degree, what anxiety perplexed your
spirit, when our affairs were critical, what compassionate concern when the
enemy were mostly victors, and what joy dilated your heart, when God in mercy
to a guilty, but prayerful people, returned to us, and by repeated and very
important successes taught us, what he would delight to do for us, would we but
answer his just expectations in our repentance and reformation.

MAY you, SIR, long continue to deserve and receive the honors of your king and
country; every day adding weight to an heavenly crown, in the pursuit of which
there is no danger of a faulty ambition, and when possessed, shall never fade
away!

IN the next place, may I address my self to the honorable his Majesty's
Council, and the honorable House of Representatives, the electors by royal
Charter of one of the important branches of the legislature.

Honored Fathers,

IT is a very serious consideration, and will have great weight in the thoughts
of every godly man, the omniscient God observes with what spirit you are
proceeding to the important elections of this day. The glory of God, and the
good of this people are greatly interested in the exercise of that power with
which you are entrusted. If unworthy, unable, or unfaithful, men, are the
rulers of a people, that people is in a state truly deplorable, and to all
appearance hastening to ruin. The great God, who has provided, and for ages
continued the happy privileges of this people, because he loved their fathers,
and has a kindness for themselves, will be greatly displeased if you should
counteract his kind intention by suffering your selves to be influenced by any
thing in your election, but the good of this people; and do not take all
requisite pains to acquaint your selves with the qualifications of those whom
you elect.

OUR mouths are often open, and with a great deal of reason, in praise of our
privileges; and they are a frequent subject of our thankgivings to heaven: but
of what advantage will they be, and what can we be the better for them, if
through avarice, pride and the pursuit of false glory, or bribed by friendship,
or taken in, by being taken notice of, and a condescending, suppliant,
court-like address, or from the spirit of party -- a patriot should be
excluded, and an undeserving person advanced. The end of our privileges will
be entirely lost; for they intend, that our rulers should be our safety, and
our glory.

BUT if on the other hand, being duly affected with the consideration of the
account which must be given to God of your fidelity in the discharge of every
trust, you are prepared to choose from a desire to do the public the best good
you can, may not the subject, I have endeavored to entertain you with, stir up
your pure minds by way of remembrance of some important qualifications which,
the word of God suggests, are necessary to be found in a ruler to be a blessing
to his country.

HE who mistakes the tinsel of glory, for glory, and seeks to shine, rather
than to serve his country by the exertion of true greatness; he who seeks not
with a becoming concern and industry the defense of his people in dangerous
times, and their wealth and peace at all times, and in this way acceptance and
honor among them, is not the man: but he is, who fears God, and who, being
convinced there is no christian grace which is more pleasing to God, or is more
the spirit of his son and his charitable gospel, cultivates in himself a public
spirit, and rejoiceth in all occasions of doing public good; and though
dangerous and expensive, thankfully improves them that it may be remembered to
his future heavenly glory.

To the satisfied conscience of an elector, all the good done by the chosen
must increase satisfaction; and he may, and not wrongfully, assume to himself a
share in the merit of their good deeds: but painful must be the consideration
of the michiefs which our country suffers, through the incapacity or
unfaithfulness of the man whom we voted for.

BUT then will the joy of a good conscience be felt to the highest degree of
satisfaction, when an office is to be resigned; whither being temporary it is
expired, or through misapprehension, envy, disgust, or a party spirit to be taken
away with ingratitude, or voluntarily quitted to withdraw from a world by
degrees, soon to be forsaken for ever, to be wholly devoted to a preparation
for eternity, in a compliance with the admonitions of ill health, and the
infirmities of advancing age, or finally summoned by death to appear at the
grand tribunal. Nothing can then impart support, consolution, strength and joy,
equal to the necessity of the occasion, like a review of a long course of
conscientious care, in the fear of God, in all things, and especially in
important betrustments, to aquit ourselves to the acceptance of God, and the
benefit of his people.

TO conclude, let me bespeak the prayers of this assembly that God would bless
our land with patriots possessed of such excellent qualifications as our
subject has led us to consider and admire: and having received them let us
acknowledge it in our thanksgivings as a very great favor, and treat them as a
gift of heaven, highly esteemed.

LET us consider there is a tribute of acceptance and honor due to those who
rule well; that to withold it from them is wrong, and to disparage their
characters a great injury to themselves, and an hurt to our country, as it
weakens their benign influences: so on the other hand acceptance, honor,
applause lavished away upon those who deserve it not is to misplace one reward
of public virtue.

AND let us consider, if we would be happy in our rulers, if we would be happy
in any important respect, to our fervent prayers we must add sincere repentance
and and reformation; dreading all hypocritical pretenses to the special favor
of God when we have nothing better to found them upon than profession, form and
ceremonies; for, for this very reason God sent this threatening message to
Israel when their judgment lingered not, and nothing would prevent it but
repentance and reformation, Isa. 24.13, 14. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch,
as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
but have removed their heart far from me, the wisdom of their wise shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid.

FINIS.

