Dr. Mayhew's TWO Thanksgiving-Discourses, October 25th. 1759.

TWO DISCOURSES DELIVERED OCTOBER 25th. 1759. BEING the Day appointed by
Authority to be observed AS A Day of public THANKSGIVING, FOR THE Success of
His Majesty's Arms, More particularly in the Reduction of QUEBEC, THE Capital
of CANADA.

WITH AN APPENDIX, Containing a brief Account of two former Expeditions against
that City and Country, which proved unsuccessful.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the West Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by RICHARD DRAPER, in Newbury-Street;
EDES and GILL, in Queen Street; and THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, in Cornhill. 1759.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SOME things omitted in delivering the following discourses, on account of
their length, are inserted in this publication. Some considerable alterations,
besides, have since been made in the second of them, composed, both in haste,
and while the author was under bodily indisposition. For which alterations, if
they should happen to be amendments, as they were designed, he concludes, he
shall fall under no blame from any of those that heard them, and have signified
their desire to see them published.

DISCOURSE I. OF the great Things which GOD has done for us.
PSALM CXXVI. Verse 3d. THE LORD has done great Things for us, whereof we are
glad.


NO comment is necessary for the explanation of these words, which are very
plain of themselves: Neither is there need of any preface, or introduction, in
order to accommodate them to the present joyful occasion; since, it is
supposed, they must appear, even at first view, sufficiently adapted to it. We
may therefore immediately adopt them ourselves, and apply them to the business
of this day. For the Lord has, indeed, done great things for us, whereof we
are doubtless glad; having abundant reason to be so. And, in the language of
the context, well may "our mouth be now filled with laughter, and our tongue
with singing."

IT is proposed, by divine assistance, in the first place, to represent to you
those great things which God has lately done for us, for our land and nation;
and which are the occasion of our being assembled together in his house of
praise at this time.

IN the next place will be shown, the propriety of being glad and rejoicing on
such occasions, and what great reason we have for it at present; more
especially on account of that important event, which is the more particular and
immediate occasion of this solemnity.

SOME needful regulations of our joy on this occasion, will then be subjoined;
that it may be taught to flow in a proper channel, and be agreeable to our
character as christians, instead of degenerating into the mirth of fools.

AND the whole will be closed with such reflections and exhortations, as the
occasion itself naturally suggests; and which may, therefore, be particularly
seasonable at this time.

TO return then, it will be proper, in the first place,

I. TO represent to you those great things which God has lately done for us,
for our land and nation; and which are the occasion of our being now assembled
together in his house of praise. And although many of you may, perhaps, have a
more accurate knowledge, a juster conception, and a deeper sense, of these
favors of heaven, than I have myself; yet it will be good for us to talk of
them, to revolve them in our minds, and speak of the great goodness of our God
to us, with reference to them. If I do not inform you of any thing, which you
knew not before; yet I may possibly revive the remembrance of certain mercies,
which had slipped the memories of some; and contribute toward fixing both
them, and others, in your minds; which, it is conceived, will be answering a
valuable end. For the more thorough, or deeper sense, we have of these mercies,
the more permanent it will be; and the more permanent it is, the more lasting
will be our gratitude to God for them; and the more lasting our gratitude, the
more suitable returns shall we make to him; which will be, in effect, best to
answer the true ends of this solemnity.

IT is proposed, as was intimated before, to enlarge chiefly on that great and
happy event, which is the principal, and more immediate occasion, of our public
rejoicing and thanksgivings at this time. My discourse in the afternoon, will
be in a manner confined to this event; which will also employ more of our time
this morning, than any other particular one. However, it is humbly conceived,
there will be no impropriety in taking a little larger compass, and extending
our views, on this occasion, even beyond America. Accordingly, if you please,
we will introduce this interesting affair, the reduction or surrender of the
capital city of Canada, by taking a transient view of some other of our late
military successes, which preceeded it; looking back to the principal of those,
which have come to our knowledge since the time of our last general and public
thanksgiving; and connecting these later with former ones, which were taken
notice of on that occasion.

AS you may remember, we then saw the war in general going on prosperously on
the side of Great Britain and her allies. We then saw the enemy driven, with
great loss and slaughter, out of his Majesty's German dominions. We then also
saw some successful descents made on the coasts of France, from whence we had
been threatened, but just before, with an invasion, as at present. We then saw
several of the enemy's fortresses, and one of her valuable settlements, on the
coast of Africa, reduced; and subjected to the obedience of his Britannic
Majesty. We then saw his Majesty's illustrious Prussian Ally, not only standing
his ground against his numerous enemies, but victorious in diverse instances;
and, in particular, triumphant over the formidable Russian army. We then saw,
here in America, the French fortress, usually called Frontinac, surrended to
his Majesty's arms; and our troops returning from thence laden with the spoils
of our enemies. We then saw the enemy driven from the river St. John; and the
adjacent country secured to his Majesty; the whole Peninsula of Nova Scotia
having been before reduced, and well garrisoned by our troops. We then saw the
British colors on the walls of Louisbourg; and the islands of Cape-Breton and
St. John, in our possession. We then saw the trade of the enemy greatly
distressed; and her maritime power much lessened: We saw the ports of
Great Britain and her colonies, filled with the merchantmen of France, and her
private ships of war; while the ports of the enemy were mostly blocked up. We
then saw the armed vessels of France on lake Ontario, burnt; and no
inconsiderable part of her royal navy, taken, sunk, or otherwise destroyed. In
fine, we then saw the commerce of the enemy, to appearance, almost ruined; her
councils disconcerted, and her coffers low: the councils of Great Britain firm
and steady; her trade in a flourishing condition; and her fleets triumphant on
every sea, where the British flag made its appearance.

IT was judged not amiss just to hint at these former successes, with which
heaven had favored the British arms, before we came to those later ones, which
fall within the period mentioned above; and which are now to be spoken of. Only
it is to be observed, that as this discourse is not designed for an history,
much less for a journal, of sieges, voyages, and campaigns; so it must not be
expected, that I should be minutely circumstantial; but only speak of the great
things which God has done for us, in a summary, general way; which, it is
conceived, is the only one that is proper for this place and occasion.

AS things looked with a favorable and promising aspect, where we left off
above; so it must be acknowledged with all gratitude, that God has not
disappointed the hopes, which those smiles of his providence had raised in us.
The war has gone on with great and remarkable success, on the part of Great
Britain, ever since, as well as for some time before, our last general
thanksgiving; November 23. 1758.
which is now almost a year. God has done many considerable, and some great
things for us, in this time; while our losses and disadvantages have,
comparatively speaking, been few and small.

SINCE the period last referred to, we have had authentic advices from the
East Indies, of an advantage gained there over the enemy's fleet in an
engagement, the consequence of which was the utter loss of several of their
capital ships. And although, about the same time, the enemy obtained an advantage
by land, in those parts; yet there is great reason to hope, that by means of
the succors soon after received there, whatever loss we sustained is at least
retrieved, if not more than retrieved; whereas that of the enemy could not be
so.

BUT leaving those distant parts, the situation of our affairs in which, we
have less certainty of, let us come to Europe; and take a cursory view of it
there.

AT the opening of the present season for the destructive business of war, the
French King thought proper to send a prodigious army into Germany. This, in
conjunction with other troops in those parts, was destined to ravage his
Majesty's Hanoverian dominions; and, in short, to conquer, and take possession
thereof, for his Most Christian Majesty: Who, if he resemble his immediate
Predecessor, of such famous memory for disturbing and plundering his
neighbors, can no more be satisfied, either with conquered, or stolen
provinces and countries, than he that loves silver can be satisfied with
silver, or he that loves abundance, with increase. Whose Greatness, in its
nature and rise, was not very different from that of the great Chaldean
Monarch, thus characterized in sacred writ: He is a proud man, neither keeps
at home, who enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satisfied; but gathers unto him all nations, and heaping unto him all people.
-- Woe to him that increases that which is not his! How long? -- Because thou
have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee;
because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land -- Habak. II. 5, -- 8.


BUT not to digress: This design of his Most Christian Majesty upon Hanover,
had almost succeeded, and taken effect; so that all the friends to the
liberties of Europe, who are of course enemies to the ambitious views of
France, stood aghast, as it were; and trembled for the consequence of a general
battle, which was now unavoidable; the army on which, under God, the salvation
of that country depended, being inferior in number, at least by one half, to
the united forces of that, which stood ready to devour her to the very heart,
having before scarce half gorged itself with her exterior, and less essential
parts. In this critical and memorable juncture, it pleased God to inspire
Prince Ferdinand with such wisdom and magnanimity, and his comparatively small
army of British and Hanoverian troops, with such invincible bravery and ardor,
as not only to maintain their ground, but to gain a complete victory. This
prodigious army they entirely routed, not without great slaughter; took their
artillery, magazines, etc. pursued them to the Weser, and into it; where
thousands of them perished in the waters, as the proud Pharaoh and his host
perished in the Red Sea. And although there were nothing preter-natural in this
case, as in the other; yet it seems, upon the whole, to have been a remarkable
interposition of providence: So that Prince Ferdinand, who is as much renowned
for his piety, as for his great military virtues, might on this occasion have
adopted, with great propriety, the song of Moses, on that alluded to above, --
"I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his
rider has he thrown into the sea. -- Pharaoh's chariots and his host -- his
chosen captains also, are drowned in the Red Sea. The depths have covered them;
they sank into the bottom as a stone. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become
glorious in power; thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in pieces the enemy."
There is another sacred song, which all his Majesty's Hanoverian subjects
might, with peculiar propriety adopt, on occasion of this memorable deliverance
from impending ruin. -- "If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now
may Hanover say; if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose
up against us; then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was
kindled against us. Then the waters had overwhelmed us -- the proud waters had
gone over our soul. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their
teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare
is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made
heaven and earth"

BUT to proceed to some other matters, which more immediately concern Great
Britain and her dependencies, though not our gracious Sovereign; whose
hereditary German dominions may naturally and justly claim a great share in his
royal care and affections: The French have been meditating, or at least
pretending to meditate, a descent upon the island of Britain, with a formidable
army; and again to bring the Pretender on the stage. Yea, their presumption has
talked, and vaunted itself of a conquest of those kingdoms; so that they seem,
in their own vain imagination, to have anticipated so great a triumph. And if
they have not been in earnest, at least their preparations for an invasion,
have been so vast and expensive, as might naturally make one believe, they
were: For it is hardly to be supposed, they would be at such a prodigious
expense of labor and money, without any design to put their threats in
execution; and so, in the event, to make themselves the jest of Europe, which
they have sometimes done at a much cheaper rate; and might doubtless have done
so again. But whatever their real intentions might have been by these
formidable preparations, Great Britain, on her part, has been attentive to
guard against the worst. Proper dispositions have been made on her own coasts
for the reception of the enemy; and at the same time, the ports of France near
the British channel, have been so well watched and guarded by our superior
fleets, that the enemy, although they had had a sufficient force, and al! things
in readiness to make a descent, have not yet had it in their power to leave
their own coasts, without almost the certain loss of their whole army and
armament, with a great part of their navy. Yea, divine providence has so
favored us, that one of the British admirals has had it in his power to enter
one of the enemy's ports, where these grand preparations were making; and to
destroy a part thereof, with some of their stores and magazines, some of their
shipping, and even a considerable part of the city itself, near which they
were. Havre de Grace.


ANOTHER of our admirals, or at least part of his squadron, not long after,
approached so near their principal port, Breast.
where their chief maritime strength was collected, as to bring off some of the
ships carrying supplies to them, even from under the fruitless fire of their
castles and batteries.

BUT we have very lately had authentic advices of still greater importance,
respecting the good success of a third British admiral, the same who commanded
the fleet the last Year at the siege of Louisbourg, still fresh in all our
memories. For when one of the enemy's squadrons was about joining their
principal fleet, and in a fair way of effecting it, which might have proved of
bad consequence to us, this brave and successful admiral, you know, opportunely
discovered, attacked, and beat it; taking and destroying five or six capital
ships; the remainder, or at least the most of them, being obliged to betake
themselves to a neutral port; and there reduced, in their extremity, to implore
convoy of a neutral power, to see them safe back again into their own, Toulon.
from whence their evil genius had tempted them to depart. But in vain; being
still blocked up by a superior force; so that we need not wholly despair of
having further accounts of them, which may be agreeable to us.

I MUST not omit, now I am hinting at some very interesting occurrencies in
Europe, relative to the war, to mention the last advices, which we hope may be
depended on, respecting the victory of his Majesty's great Prussian ally over
the Russian army, then within a few leagues of his own capital, which seemed in
imminent danger of falling into the hands of those Barbarians. If this advice
be not premature, as we all hope it is not, this is a very important event, not
only to his Prussian Majesty, who has now stood as it were on the brink of a
mighty precipice, for several years together; but also to our King, and to
Great Britain, whose interests are at present so closely connected with those
of that truly great and illustrious Monarch. May angels still guard him! or
rather He, who "makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire:"
who gives salvation unto kings; and has hitherto delivered FREDERIC his
servant from the hurtful sword!

BUT if you please, we will now come from Europe to America; which is coming
still nearer to ourselves. But before I say any thing of the military
operations on the continent, we will cast an eye toward the American islands.
For it is there we are to look for, and there that we may find, one of the
great things which God has lately done for us. The reduction of Guadaloupe,
with some of the adjacent islands, is truly such; and, in some sense the
greater, because effected by so small a force, and under such seemingly
disadvantageous circumstances. This is almost, and perhaps may prove quite, an
irretrievable and irreparable loss, to that haughty, and all-grasping power
which has incurred it; a loss which she will much longer feel and mourn, than
we did that of the island of Minorca, at the beginning of the present war,
during a less watchful ministry than the present. And to Great Britain, this
acquisition alone, if maintained, will probably much more than make good all
the damage she sustained in the former respect; which, if I mistake not, time
and experience make still less and less considerable.

BUT while our thoughts are in that part of the world, where so valuable and
noble an acquisition has been made, by the blessing of God on the British arms;
while our thoughts are engaged in that part of the world, I say, and on so
worthy and joyful an occasion; what is it that still gives a kind of damp to my
spirits; or rather, raises my indignation? While a British fleet rides safely
and quietly in port, do I see an inferior French one sailing, in a kind of
triumph, from port to port, from island to island, from one month to another?
Do I see our merchantmen, by scores, or hundreds, taken within hearing of the
British cannon, if they were but discharged? Do I see them carried into port,
in vast numbers, even by the enemy's privateers, from within a few leagues of
our fleet, which looks patiently on? Do I hear our enemies saying, with scorn
and insult, Where is the boasted courage of these Britons, who vainly pretend
to be lords of the ocean? And do I hear even some of our friends whispering,
that all British commanders have not the spirit which becomes their character?
-- But perhaps all this is but a reverie: If so, I will trouble you no longer
with my dreams: But even dreams are not always false; and if there should
happen to be any thing of reality in this, such things will doubtless be taken
proper notice of by those, who want neither the authority, nor the public
spirit to do it.

AND having thus taken a short trip, if I may so express it, to the American
islands; and seen there, an important acquisition lately made by his Majesty's
troops, under the favor of divine providence; let us now cross over to the
continent, in the affairs of which we ourselves are most immediately concerned.
And being arrived here, we will not now needlessly ramble about, backwards and
forwards. But setting out from the southermost scene of action, (I mean, where
any thing of great importance has lately been done) which is indeed nearest the
parts from whence we last came, and proceeding thence to the northward, though
the distance is great, through a wilderness, and though there are several noble
prospects in the way to detain and delight us, even in a wilderness; yet it
will not be long before we arrive at the capital city of Canada. There our
chief business lies: There it will, therefore, be at least proper, if not
necessary, to make a longer stay. And though it be a cold climate, I flatter
myself, we shall find something to warm and enliven us; or at least to keep our
blood from chilling.

TO begin at the southward then: It was not long after our last general
thanksgiving, when we had the little expected, and therefore the more joyful
tidings, that the British troops, even without the trouble of a siege, were in
possession of the French fortress on the forks of the Ohio, usually called fort
du Quesne; but now Pittsburgh, in honor to that great patriot, that wise,
honest, and magnanimous British minister, during whose ministry, not only this,
but all our other successes, worth mentioning, since the present war commenced,
have been obtained. This fortress, it seems, was evacuated by the enemy on the
near approach of our army. The acquisition whereof is of great importance to
our southern colonies; not only with reference to the savages in those parts,
who are since, from enemies become friends; but also in respect of that most
valuable and very extensive country about it; which, in due time, may probably
be peopled with British subjects.

AND there are one or two circumstances besides, which may just be mentioned
with relation hereto; and which may, perhaps, heighten the joy of some on
account of this acquisition. One is, that the present war with France, had its
rise more immediately from some differences respecting this country on the
Ohio; here hostilities began; here it was, that the French had the assurance to
seize, captivate, and murder, our traders and others, in a time of peace; as
also to fortify on this river. But we have now the satisfaction to reflect,
that the law of arms at least, has decided in our favor one considerable point
controverted between the two crowns; and which was indeed a principal ground of
the present war, though by no means the only one.

ANOTHER circumstance alluded to above, is, that we had received several
repulses and defeats from the enemy, in endeavoring to regain the possession
of the country we are speaking of; from whence the enemy had, in a time of
peace, driven the subjects of Great Britain. The expense of one of the former
expeditions against Du Quesne had been very great, through almost impracticable
woods and mountains: And at last, when the British army had in a manner
surmounted these difficulties, and thought themselves almost sure of success,
it was in a sort surprised, and put to the rout, by a lurking enemy which it
hardly saw; as even the noble and generous Lion, in passing through a thicket,
may be stung and poisoned to death by a vile insidious serpent undiscovered,
which one of his paws, or only the flapping of his tail, might have destroyed
in an instant. Thus it was, that a brave English general General Braddock.
here received his mortal wound from a foe, contemptible every where but in his
own native woods and swamps; a general, whose valor, zeal, and indefatigable
industry in the service of his king and country, cannot be too much commended;
and whose untimely fall can hardly be too much lamented.

I MUST confess, though to some it may perhaps seem a weakness, that these
circumstances preceding this acquisition, give an heightening to my own joy on
account of it; though it be in itself so important in many respects, that it
could not, even without these, fail to rejoice every well-wisher to his
Majesty's American colonies.

BUT having stopped long enough here, considering the time allowed us for our
journey; let us now hasten to the northward, as was proposed. A very material
acquisition has been made this present campaign, of the fortress of Niagara.
This was in itself a strong fort, and defended by a numerous garrison: Which is
not to be wondered at, considering the importance of it to the enemy. For being
situated between the two Lakes, Erie and Ontario, it commanded the
communication between Canada and Louisiana, the Missisipi, etc. And besides, it
was so situated as to draw the commerce, and with it the affections, of
numerous tribes of savages about those lakes; as also to awe the six nations,
our old friends and allies; and even to stagger their friendship; which, as
might naturally be supposed, usually follows their interest, wherever it leads.
This important fortress is now in our hands; the very considerable army that
had been destined to its relief, and to raise the siege, being repulsed with
great slaughter, and the garrison made prisoners of war. By which acquisition,
the wavering nations of the Mohawks, as they are commonly called, are secured
in their fidelity and friendship; many other tribes of the savages have become
our useful allies, instead of perfidious enemies; the French forts and
settlements at Presque Isle and Venango are abandoned; and, in short, the whole
extent of country between Lake Ontario and Pittsburgh, is left without a person
who dares to own himself our enemy, unless we look far to the westward. It may
be added, that by this acquisition, if maintained, even though Canada had
remained entire in the possession of the enemy, would have been effectually cut
off, all intercourse of any consequence between Canada, Detroit, and all the
French forts and settlements to the southward of Lake Erie. So that the enemy
on that side, could have maintained their ground only on the Missisipi, and
some of its remote branches; where, by reason of the distance from us, and the
difficulty of the navigation, they could neither give us much disturbance, nor
gain much advantage to themselves. And this acquisition, so important in its
nature, it is to be remembered, was made with the loss of a very small number
of our troops; though not without the loss of a brave and excellent general;
Brigadier-General Prideaux.
not indeed, killed by the enemy; but in vulgar phrase, by an accident; yet
such an accident as is directed by the providence of God. For if a sparrow does
not fall to the ground without our Father, much less such a worthy commander;
of more value, not only than many sparrows, but than many general officers of
an higher rank.

FROM the last mentioned fortress to the capital whither we are bound, the
nearest and directest course is across Ontario to Frontinac, and so down the
river Cataraqui to La Galette, etc. However, as we have not heard of any thing
lately done there, to invite us that way, we will take another route; which
though longer, will be much more agreeable to us.

LET us therefore proceed from Niagara to Lake George; a considerable distance,
and mostly through a wilderness; but where we may now travel with safety, though
unarmed; there being no enemy here to do us any harm. We see the country all
our own, to the latter of these lakes: At the southern part of which, a year or
two since, the enemy under general Montcalm, made themselves masters of one of
our forts; and, after the capitulation, and surrender thereof, inhumanly
stripped, butchered and scalped the troops, to whom they had solemnly plighted
their faith. At which time the city of Albany itself trembled for fear; and
some there were, who hardly thought themselves secure, even in this metropolis.
How different, how much more pleasing a scene, is now presented to our view, if
we cast our eyes on that quarter? especially if we extend our view to the
northern part of the last mentioned lake?

WE there see the main body of the enemy who, it seems, the last year were so
powerful at Ticonderoga, as to repulse and rout a large army of 15 or 16,000
men, not without considerable slaughter; I say we there see the main body of
the enemy, now retiring precipitately before the conqueror of Louisbourg; even
without daring to wait the near approach of his army. Doubtless the name of
Amherst, though with a less numerous army than that which the enemy had so lately
defeated at the same place, taught them a sudden fear, and seasonably suggested
to them, that their only safety was in flight. This almost impregnable fortress
is now in our hands, and all the country round Lake George; so that between
that and us, no enemy presumes to set his foot. The value of this acquisition,
so important in itself, is in some measure inhanced by reflecting on the
expensive, though fruitless attempts, heretofore made to obtain it; by reflecting
on the loss of so many brave men at that place; and above all, by reflecting on
the untimely fall of one of our general officers there, the last year. The
memory of Lord How will long be respected and honored by every British
subject, who has any esteem for valor, military skill, public spirit,
activity, and unwearied application. His untimely fall, as it were in the first
bloom of manly age, would even now demand a tear, were not this a day of
rejoicing.

BUT let us follow our wise and excellent general at the westward, from Lake
George to Lake Champlain. We there also see the enemy flying before him; and
leaving him to take a quiet, and uninterrupted possession of fort Frederic,
usually called Crown Point. A fortress which, though not very strong in itself,
has long been a grievous eyesore to those northern British colonies, and to
our allies of the six nations, and that very justly; since, by (...) enabled
the enemy at any time suddenly to (...) frontier settlements, and afforded the
(...) quick and safe retreat; and where they could always supply their good
brethren, our savage enemies, with provisions, clothing, and warlike stores.
This fortress we now see in our hands; or rather, a far better and stronger
one, lately built there under the direction of general Amherst. In short, we
see the whole country thereabouts in our possession, and secured to us; a
communication opened between this lake and our western frontiers; and settlers
invited to come, and take up their habitation where, till very lately, it was
not safe for us to set our feet. This we owe to general Amherst, under
providence: Who, according to our latest advices, was proceeded still farther
northward; where we cannot at present follow him; but may safely rely on his
prudence and magnanimity, under that divine direction which has thus far
attended him; and humbly hope, he will take no step but what wisdom shall
dictate, and providence succeed.

SOME may possibly think it strange, that the last mentioned general has made
no quicker advances after a flying enemy; but given them time to fortify
themselves toward the northern end of the lake. But it may be taken for
granted, that he is a thorough master of his profession; that he wants not zeal
in his Majesty's service; and that he has sufficient reasons for this part of
his conduct. Can any of us presume to say, it was even practicable for him to
make more haste, without being in hazard of making the worse speed? Or do we
know that this delay was not chosen and preferred, upon the soundest maxims of
wisdom and good policy? I am very far from presuming to be a judge of these
matters; and much farther from pretending to penetrate the particular views and
designs of so secret and consummate a commander. But might not this delay,
supposing it not unavoidable, possibly have been chosen on the following
account, -- That had the general pressed the enemy in their retreat before him,
he would, in a sort, have compelled them to go to the capital city, to add
great numbers and strength to the great army already there; and hereby,
perhaps, have given an opportunity, and enabled them, to defeat and overthrow
the little British army besieging it; before it would have been possible for
him to join it, which would have frustrated the grand design. For it would, on
account of the narrows, or land-carriage in the way, have been seemingly
impossible for this western army to get to the capital, till some weeks after
the flying enemy. But all this is only conjecture.

AND I am now, almost before I was aware of it, though perhaps after too long a
delay, got to the chief scene of action; where our most signal success has
been; and where you will allow me to tarry a little longer than at either of
the former places. I am even still almost "as one that dreameth," when I think
of the surrender of the capital of Canada, which is in effect the reduction of
the whole country. For it is morally, if not naturally impossible, that the
enemy, having lost this city, which is now in our possession, should hold out
half another campaign, against a force much inferior to that, which his Majesty
has already in North America. Yea, it is almost certain, that after taking the
capital, laying waste the country, burning so many of the houses, taking or
destroying so great a part of the stock, stores and magazines; it is almost
certain, I say, after this, that a great part of the enemy, who pretend still
to stand out, must either come in, and submit to the generous terms offered
them, or else, before another spring, perish by hunger and cold, with their
unhappy wives and children; which God forbid! But not to anticipate those
observations and reflections, for which we shall find a fitter place hereafter;
let us now take a nearer, and more attentive view of this truly great and
memorable thing, which God has so lately done for us, in delivering the capital
city of Canada into our hands; with some of the most material circumstances
relative thereto.

GOD has remarkably smiled upon this great enterprise from the very first, till
we see it brought to this happy conclusion: From the very first, I say; unless
we should make an exception as to the enemy's getting up the river with a
considerable fleet of provision and store ships, under convoy, while a squadron
of British men of war, destined to prevent any such relief and sucours getting
in, lay in port; some say, from necessity. But however that might be, it is not
improbable, that if this fleet had actually been intercepted, the reduction of
Quebec might have been effected much easier and sooner than it was; and the
whole country, before this time, brought to a submission. But not to dwell upon
any circumstance which was less in our favor than we could have wished; let us
proceed to some others, which were more so than we could have reasonably
expected.

THE navigation of St. Lawrence's river has always, ever since Sir Hovenden
Walker's fruitless attempt, wherein several ships were lost, been represented
to us by friends and enemies, as being extremely difficult and hazardous.
However, through the favor of Him, whom winds and seas obey, our very great
fleet of men of war, of provision, transport and store-ships, arrived safe at
Orleans, a little below Quebec, meeting with little or no disaster in the whole
voyage. This is very remarkable; a thing almost unexampled in so long a voyage,
and with so large a fleet, even where the navigation is, on all hands, allowed
to be far less difficult and dangerous, than that of this river.

IT was another favorable circumstance, that in the very heart of the enemy's
country, our little army should land, with all their provisions, artillery and
stores, and take possession of the ground, almost without the loss of a man;
especially considering the lurking, insidious and guileful genius of the
enemies they had to deal with, and who were perfectly acquainted with all the
country, so that it might have been expected they would have made some
considerable advantages hereof.

A THIRD circumstance not unworthy of notice here, is, that after our fleet
then at anchor, had been put into some disorder by a storm, and, if my memory
does not fail me, before the storm was quite over, the enemy attentive to every
incident in their favor, chose this opportunity to send down with a rapid
tide, and full gale, a number of large fireships, and rafts on fire; hoping,
not without some probability, by this means to destroy a considerable part of
the British fleet. But under the favor of providence, by the wise precaution
of the British admiral, and the address, the singular alertness and dexterity
of the British seamen, this threatening mischief was entirely warded off; and
soon became only the subject of their merriment.

IT is further to be thankfully acknowledged, that our great fleet, and little
army, have all along been favored with remarkable health; but a very small
proportion of them having died by sickness, or even been sick at all. Whereas
had sickness prevailed among our troops, even in a degree not uncommon in
camps, it would have reduced that small army to such an handful of men, as must
in all probability have occasioned the breaking up of the siege.

AND here I cannot but mention another thing, which, though it may seem at first
view quite remote from the point in hand, has yet a close connection with it.
There was probably never known among us so fruitful a season as that last past.
God has caused the earth to yield her increase in very great abundance; whereby
our fleet and army have had a constant supply of fresh provisions, vegetables,
etc. To which it is in part doubtless owing, through the blessing of God, that
our fleet and army have enjoyed so much health.

BUT to proceed to some other things. Our parties that were sent out from time
to time to harrass the enemy, and lay waste the country, after the terms
offered by the general were rejected, had so much success therein; and the city
itself had been so far ruined by a long, constant and severe bombardment, that
neither of them could, in many years, have retrieved these damages and losses,
even though the siege had been raised before the actual reduction of the city.

I HAVE more than once called this a siege; though by the way, what was done
hardly amounted to so much as is usually understood by a blockade. But call it
what you please, it is a wonder that it was not broken up, without effecting
the main point: The enemy having encamped, and strongly entrenched themselves,
in thrice the number of our small army; and in so advantageous a place, that it
would probably have required even thrice their own great numbers to force their
lines. And after one unsuccessful attempt to this end; when so much of the
season was gone; the seeming impracticability of approaching the enemy where
they were, and the improbability that they would ever give up this advantage,
or be brought to hazard a general battle on equal ground, notwithstanding their
superior numbers; after all this, I say, it is probable there are but few
generals, who would not have utterly despaired of succeeding, given up the
point, and left the enemy to retrieve, as well as they could, the great damages
they had already sustained.

BUT it seems the British general was one of those rare military geniuses,
which, like the Phoenix, appear but once an age, except perhaps in
Great Britain. He was one of those, whose courage nothing could abate; whose
ardor, regulated by prudence, nothing could damp; whose resolution no
difficulties, however great, could shake or alter, so long as a possibility
remained of carrying his design into execution; and in fine, one of those,
whose wisdom and address at a critical juncture, were not inferior to his other
great military accomplishments. These great qualities, with which heaven had
endowed him, and to which heaven seldom fails of giving success, were now all
called forth, and displayed at once, in drawing the numerous enemy from their
inaccessible entrenchments, to a general battle, which he had long desired.

BEHOLD him there, with his little body of British troops, himself the head to
direct, and the soul to animate the whole, if such troops needed animation; the
force of Canada moving toward him with slow and solemn steps, under a tried,
experienced and approved commander! -- Unhappy Montcalm! courageous at least,
if not prudent at this time! What is it that, in an unpropitious hour, tempts
thee thus to forego those advantages, which could not, perhaps, have been
forced from thee? What is it that induces thee to put the capital of Canada,
and, with it, the whole country, upon so desperate a risque as the event of the
ensuing battle? Perhaps thou reliest on thy superior numbers. But do thou not
know both British troops and French ones better, than to think the latter can
stand before the former on even ground, though the disproportion of numbers be so
great? Is there not something else of more consequence than numbers, when
things are brought to such a crisis as the present? Do thou not know, that
God has given men different nerves, sinews, arms and hearts? Do thou not
know, that those who fight for a Tyrant, will not fight like freeborn Britons?
Perhaps thou thinks thyself again at Ticonderoga -- But do thou not see,
who it is at the head of that little veteran army, by his presence infusing
courage enough into each breast, to make every man a hero? Or, perhaps, thou
think thy relics, thy crosses, and thy saints, either St. Peter, or thy
great Lady, whom thou profanely stilest "The mother God," will now befriend,
and make thee victorious. But remember, that little host now in array against
thee, worship the God that made the heavens, earth, and seas, with all that
they contain; the Lord of hosts is his name! His is the glory and the victory;
and know, that the event of this battle shall be accordingly! Cross thyself
speedily, if thou think it will be of any advantage to thee! Mercy to thy
soul, notwithstanding violated faith at Lake George, once St. Sacrament! But
alas! be assured, that yonder gloomy wood on thy right, affords not laurels,
but cypress for thy brows!

BUT remonstrances prevail nothing. Behold! now the charge begins! Behold, now
the enemy fall, they fly! Behold the horrid rout, the pursuit, the field
covered with the slain! Behold, now the enemy regain their untimely-forsaken
trenches! See, now they are stormed, and turned into canals running with a
purple tide, till choked with the dead and dying, fallen promiscuously on one
another! Behold, there falls their valiant Leader! Behold now, the gates or
ports of the capital open to receive the vanquished and flying; but hastily
shut again, lest the victorious should enter with them, or before them! -- In
fine! behold this place, renowned for its strength, the power and pride of the
enemy, against which so many fruitless attempts had been made, now surrendered
to his Britannic Majesty, whose colors, yonder, wave over the devoted city!

This, my brethren, is the Lord's doing; a great thing which he has performed
for us, for our country and nation, whereof we are glad; and it may justly be
wonderful in our eyes! That so small a force should obtain so great, complete,
and important a conquest, as it were in a moment, with so little loss of
numbers on its own side, and so great a one on that of the enemy! Since the
surrender of Quebec, we may, without much presumption, look on Canada as a
conquered country. For, as was observed above, according to the ordinary course
of things, if we keep possession of this capital, to prevent which we know of
nothing at present, the inhabitants must soon be obliged to submit to terms, or
else do what will be far worse for themselves, though not for us perhaps, the
matter being considered only in a political light. Scarce any thing short of a
miracle, can prevent the alternative from taking place. But we shall have
occasion to say something more particularly upon this point in the afternoon,
when we come to consider the importance of this acquisition; and how much
reason we have to be glad and rejoice, on account of the great things which God
has done for us, especially in the signal victory we have been speaking of, and
the surrender of Quebec in consequence of it.

IT may be added here, that as things have turned out, through the good
providence of God, almost the only unfavourable circumstance, worthy of a
particular mention here, relative to this great and prosperous enterprise, and
which was taken notice of above, is productive of another, different one, which
in a great measure, if not entirely, counterbalances it. For that fleet, with
her convoy, which arrived at Quebec so opportunely for the enemy, is
indisputably and wholly lost to France; and, not improbably, before this time
in our own possession. Which is a thing of no trivial consideration in itself,
though it may seem such in companion of the reduction of this capital.

AND thus I have, as fully and particularly as was convenient, or at least, as
the time would allow, reminded you of the great things, which the Lord has
lately done for us. The other parts of my design, as expressed in the beginning
of this discourse, will, by divine permission and assistance, be prosecuted in
the afternoon.

IN the mean time, let us be glad in the Lord, and rejoice greatly in the God
of our salvation. Though he seemed, more than once, to have "cast us off, and did
not go out with our armies," when the reduction of this same capital and
country was meditated and attempted; he has now returned to us in mercy. He has
at length led us successfully into this American Edom, and "brought us into the
strong city." He has at length, in a great measure, given us help from trouble,
when the help of man was vain: Through him we have now done valiantly; for he it
is that has tread down our enemies. Psalm LX. 9. -- 12.
Some of you may possibly remember, it was on this passage of scripture that I
discoursed the last day of general prayer and fasting amongst us, June 1759.
which was to implore the guidance of heaven in, and a blessing upon, our
military designs and undertakings this present year, particularly against our
Canadian enemies. And I now most heartily congratulate you, my brethren, and
bless the great, the everlasting God, who "does his will in the armies of
heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth," before whom "all nations are
as the small dust of the balance," that he has not rejected the common, united
prayer of his people, nor frustrated the strong hopes which were expressed at
that time, that we should "see our desire on our enemies;" on these our
ancient, cruel and perfidious enemies, who have so long dealt most
treacherously and unrighteously with us, and who meditated still greater
mischief against us; even our utter extirpation and ruin! By which conduct in
times past, they must doubtless have highly provoked righteous heaven against
them. Many a time have they afflicted us from our youth: Many a time have they
afflicted us from our youth; yet they have not prevailed against us. For the
Lord is righteous. -- The Lord is in his holy temple; the Lord's throne is in
heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men. He who, from
heaven his dwelling place has seen our afflictions, and many sufferings, has
from thence also heard our prayers, and sent deliverance to his servants that
hoped in his mercy. Our cries, and the cry of so much blood, unrighteously and
inhumanly shed; the blood of helpless women, tender children, and infants at
the breast; -- these cries have doubtless been loud enough to be heard from the
depths of earth to the highest heaven, where they have entered into the ears of
the Lord of Sabbath; and have, through "the blood of the covenant," had their
effect: For "the Lord tries the righteous: BUT THE WICKED, AND HIM THAT LOVES
VIOLENCE HIS SOUL HATES!"

The End of the first Discourse.
THE apostrophe beginning page 27, where Genesis Montcalm is brought upon the
stage, was formed upon the conception which the author then had, of the
situation of the two armies, and what happened on that memorable day: But
whether that conception were strictly just or not, he cannot say, reports
having been so various. If any apology is needed on account of what relates to
General Montcalm at the close of this apostrophe, he observes, That though the
dead are not to be inhumanly insulted; yet as it is hardly supposeable that the
perfidious and horrid massacre of our troops at Fort William Henry, could have
happened without the connivance of the French General, or that he could not
have prevented it, (which is not the first instance of their cruel perfidy) it
was thought such an hint at that tragical affair, was no ways improper: At
least, that it could not be justly looked upon as proceeding from inhumanity,
as it is guarded; especially since that unhappy General is there considered,
not as being dead, but still living, and on the point of joining battle with
the British troops.

Discourse II. What great Cause we have for Gladness and Rejoicing.
PSALM CXXVI. Verse 3d. THE LORD has done great Things for us, whereof we are
glad.


IN the morning you were reminded of the great things which God has lately
done for us, for our land and nation; particularly in the reduction, or
surrender, of the Capital of Canada; which is the principal occasion of this
day's solemnity. However, it was thought not improper to come to a
consideration of this, by an induction of some other of our late military
successes which proceeded it. Accordingly we extended our views, on this great
and joyful occasion, to the principal successes with which God has favored us
on this continent, since the time of our last public and general thanksgiving;
to those at the lakes George and Champlain; at Niagara and Du Quesne, now
Pittsburgh. We also cast an eye toward the West India islands; the coasts of
Portugal and France; toward Hanover and the Prussian dominions; nor did even
the East Indies altogether escape our notice. In all these parts, it has
pleased God to give some success to the arms of our King, or those of his
allies; and in several of them, very great and remarkable success. But that, in
the reduction of Quebec, considered in itself, in its probable consequences,
and its vast importance to ourselves, is so great that it may, with respect to
us, naturally be supposed to diminish from the greatness, and eclipse the
luster of the rest. And besides* as this was the chief and more particular
occasion of our assembling together this day in the house of praise, it was, on
that account, proper to dwell longer upon it, than upon any of the others.

SOME remarks were of course dropped in the preceding discourse, on the
importance of these several successes, and the grounds we have for gladness and
rejoicing on account of them. But these were only transient hints; and as a
fuller representation of the importance of these successes may be useful to us,
and a means of increasing our gratitude to almighty God, who has done such
great things for us; I now proceed, as was proposed,

II. MORE particularly to show the propriety of our being glad and rejoicing at
this time, and what great reason we have for it; particularly in respect of
that important event, which is the more immediate occasion of this solemnity.
And indeed my discourse this afternoon, will be in a manner confined hereto,
and to such reflections as naturally arise from it; for I shall hardly, if at
all, mention any of our other late military successes, however considerable in
themselves. This, it is conceived, is an event, not only great in itself, but
big with many happy consequences; in short, an event of the most interesting
nature to us, to Great Britain, and all her dependencies; as will presently be
attempted to be shown.

THE reasonableness and propriety in general, of rejoicing on suchlike
occasions as the present; for victories over, or success against our enemies,
when God is pleased to grant it, are so obvious in themselves, so plainly
supposed in the holy scriptures, and, it may be added, this is so frequently
enjoined therein as a duty; yea, this is what we are so naturally disposed to
do, that there will not be the least need of laboring this point. However, it
may just be observed here, that it was on occasion of the Israelites being
delivered out of the Hands of their oppressors and enemies, that the Psalm of
which the text is a part, was composed. For it begins thus: "When the Lord
turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dreamed: then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing." This, and some of
the happy circumstances attending, or happy consequences flowing from it, were
plainly the "great things" to which the text refers; and on account of which,
the church of God that was of old is introduced, expressing her gratitude and
joy, saying, "The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad."
Nor, indeed, can we ever have any cause for gratitude, on these, or other
occasions, any further than we have cause for joy and gladness. For gratitude
or thanksgiving is due to almighty God, only for the favors and mercies which
he vouchsafes to bestow upon us; all which are, in their own nature, a proper
Ground of gladness and rejoicing to us. And our gratitude ought always to arise
in proportion to the greatness of these mercies and favors; or to the real
occasion which we have to rejoice and be glad.

TO represent to you, what great cause we have to rejoice on the present
occasion, is therefore in other words, or in effect, only to represent to you
what great reason we have to be thankful to almighty God, which is what I have
in view. It is further to be observed here, that as the favors we are
considering, are primarily and chiefly of a national, secular and political
nature, relating more immediately to our common temporal prosperity, though
remotely to our religious liberties, and spiritual good; so it will be proper,
and even necessary, if I speak particularly of them at all, to consider them,
at least primarily, in a national, secular and political light: For, how things
of this nature can possibly be considered with propriety in any other, I must
confess myself not able to see. And this must be my apology, it is hoped a
sufficient one, if on the present occasion I should verge a little nearer to
what is commonly called politics, than is ordinarily convenient or suitable for
the pulpit. Though in reality, I shall not discourse on politics, unless all kind
of discourse relating to secular affairs, and the temporal prosperity of
nations, may properly be called politics also. And although I do not think it my
province, were I capable of it, to enter deep into matters of this nature,
which is far from my design; yet it is humbly conceived, I shall not transgress
by offering some considerations in order to show, what great reason we have for
rejoicing at this time; especially on account of that acquisition, which is the
principal occasion of our rejoicing. In order whereto, it will be necessary to
illustrate the importance of that acquisition itself, to us, to these British
colonies and provinces in general, and to Great Britain. This is therefore what
will now be attempted, without any further apology.

AND to this end, the following things may be observed; viz.

THAT the enemy, having lost the capital of Canada, have it not in their power
to recover the possession of it:

THAT if it remains in our possession, all Canada must of course be subjected
in time, even though we should act only upon the defensive:

THAT as things are now circumstanced, we have it in our power to act
offensively in such a manner, that the whole country may and must, be reduced
in a very little while:

THAT the Reduction of this country, will be the bringing all our savage
enemies into a friendly alliance with us:

AND then, since it may possibly be demanded by some, What benefits will from
hence result to us, taking these things for granted, this demand will be
answered by a particular, though brief induction of some great advantages
accruing from hence, both to Great Britain and her American colonies, whose
interests are indeed inseparably connected, as both she and they are, of late,
more than ever convinced.

THESE are the things which are proposed under this head. Only it is here
premised once for all, to prevent frequent and needless repetitions, that when
it is said, such or such a thing may, will or must be done, or come to pass;
and that another will not, or cannot, both must be understood, as they are
intended, with all due submission to the overruling providence of God, and
with proper allowances for extraordinary occurrents. There is doubtless a
certain established order of things, or succession of events, which though it may
be, and sometimes is, broken in upon, is yet a good foundation for us to
proceed upon in our reasoning as to things of this nature. And otherwise,
indeed, all reasoning about them would be mere childish impertinence. But still
there is no absolute certainty in any of our conclusions respecting them, since
they have some contingencies for their bases; contingencies with respect to us,
but which are yet both foreknown and ordered by the supreme Governor of the
universe, to whom therefore we should always look, in an humble sense of both
their, and our, absolute dependence upon him. Having premised these things once
for all, and still keeping them in mind; I now return to the first of the
propositions laid down above; viz.

THAT having lost the capital of Canada, the enemy have it not in their power
to regain the possession of it. To be sure, they have no Force now in America
capable of doing this. Their principal and grand army has been beaten, routed,
and cut to pieces; their chief military officers killed and made prisoners; and
the poor remains of their regular troops, which were in that memorable battle,
sent to Great Britain. If their principal force united under so experienced and
capable a commander, with other good officers, was not able to defend their
capital, what can be expected, or what need be apprehended from them now,
broken and disconcerted, without a sufficient number of good officers, without
spirit, and perhaps without a sufficiency of provisions and military stores?

IF this capital is regained, it must therefore be by means of large succors
from old France; or rather by an army well supplied and appointed, sent from
thence into Canada, to join the forces already there. But this is, humanly
speaking, impossible. The missisipi is at too great a distance, and the
navigation of it such, that no considerable succors can come that way.
Besides, we are in possession of Niagara, the only way of communication; which
fortress might, were there occasion, be reinforced almost with what numbers we
please. Neither is it to be supposed that an army, or any considerable
succors, can come to Canada by the river St. Lawrence, of which we have now
the command. The British navy is so superior that the ports of France, where
any preparations should be made for this purpose, might be blocked up. Or if a
fleet should happen to steal out in the spring, a superior one might be
immediately dispatched after it, so as to prevent its effecting any thing; and
probably take or destroy it. Or a strong British squadron, were that judged
needful, or advisable, might be kept constantly in the river, during the
season for navigating it. All which things being considered, we need be under
no apprehensions, but that we shall be able to maintain that acquisition, which
has been lately made with so much honor to the British arms. And we will now
venture to advance one step farther. For, as was observed above,

IF this Capital remains in our possession, all Canada must of course be
subjected in time, even though we should here act only a defensive part. Some
may, perhaps, think this a pretty extraordinary and sanguine position. It
admits, however, of a very short and easy proof. For many European commodities
are, from use and habit, become necessary to the Canadians; so that they
neither will, nor can, live long without them. With these they cannot be
supplied from old France, as affairs are now circumstanced, either by the
Missisipi, or St. Lawrence, or any other way. Their communication with France
is now effectually cut off, unless perhaps it be for letters of condoleance,
which can neither do us any harm, nor themselves much good. So that if the war
should continue, they will be obliged to come to us for these necessaries; and
to take them of us, if at all, on our own terms: Which would, in effect be
subjecting themselves and their country to the British government. At least,
this is what they might be compelled to do, should those above us think it
proper. And these remarks, though made with particular reference to the Canadians
properly so called, are equally applicable to all the French inhabitants on
this continent about the lakes, and to the southward of them, till you come
near the Missisipi, or some of its branches that are very remote from us;
Quebec, and the river St Lawrence, now in our possession, being the way in
which they use, chiefly at least, to be supplied with those necessaries; for
which, if they continue in the country, they will be forced in time to come to
us; even though we should act only on the defensive with respect to them.
However, there is no need of going on this latter supposition: For, in the next
place, as was observed above,

AS things are now circumstanced, we have it in our power to act offensively
against them in such a manner, that the whole country may, and must be reduced
in a very little time. They can receive no considerable succors or supplies
from Old France, for the reasons mentioned above. They have no cities, forts or
places of defense, capable of making resistance, or holding out a siege, even a
short one. The country lies open to us; or rather, we have one army at least
already in the heart of it. His Majesty has a large number of brave and tried
troops now in America; so many, that all the forces the enemy can collect,
probably would not dare to meet one half of them in the field: That method they
have already tried to their cost! And though the country should not submit, or be
entirely subjected this fall, which is not indeed to be expected, considering
how far the season is already elapsed; yet what should prevent a total
conquest, even very early another season; when the enemy must be still in all
probability, more weakened, distressed and dispirited, than they are at
present? Excepting such things as are quite out of the ordinary course, nothing
can prevent this. Which being considered, the reduction of Quebec is, in
effect, the reduction of all Canada, from Hudson's Bay southward and westward
to the great lakes: and not only so, but of all the territory which the French
possess to the southward still of those lakes till, as was said before, you
come near the Missisipi, or some of those branches of it, which are at a very
great distance from us.

OUR next position was, that the reduction of this country, will be the
bringing all our Indian enemies into a friendly alliance with us. For Quebec
and Canada being in our possession, they cannot be supplied from thence as
heretofore, with arms, ammunition and other things, which long use has been
made necessary to them. They must therefore come to us for them; and be obliged
to court our friendship. And this reasoning will hold good with respect to all
the numerous savage nations, quite from the territories of Hudsons Bay, where
the Indians have long been our friends, down to the great lakes, and to the
southward of them, as far as Georgia; and Westward, till we approach near the
Missisipi. Wherever they can be supplied easiest, and upon the best terms,
especially if it be by those who are the most powerful on the continent, and
can give them the greatest protection and assistance in case of need; there
they will, sooner or later, come to be supplied. And this, probably, in a short
time, provided those prudent measures continue to be prosecuted with reference
to them, which have lately been used. For we see them now daily forsaking the
French interest, coming over to us, and seeking an alliance with us. So that
this reasoning is not grounded merely on hypothesis, but partly on certain
fact. And it may be added here, that on the foregoing principles, the
friendship of all these savages may be relied on as hearty and sincere, having
not only convenience, but even necessity for its basis. For they cannot live,
but by being and keeping on good terms with us. And so, in short, they will be
a barrier, if one is needed, between our southern colonies and the French on
the Missisipi; or, perhaps, with a little of our assistance, should the war
continue, make them glad to confine themselves wholly to the westward of that
river.

SAVING the right of the natives, all the territory about Hudson's bay,
northward, westward and southward as far as the bounds of Canada, already
belongs to Great Britain, where we have long had several forts and settlements,
of which we are still in possession. And upon the foregoing principles,
Great Britain must of course, in a little time, be possessed of a territory
here in North America, extending and continued from that Bay, and indeed from
some way to the Northward of it, as far as Florida to the southward, about two
thousand miles; and extending as far back to the westward, almost, as we should
desire; reserving always, as was intimated above, to the savage nations, their
just claims, or proper rights. This is what we may, without much presumption,
promise ourselves, making proper allowance for contingencies, or things out of
the ordinary course; on which, being unknown, we can ground none of our
reasonings in this, or any other case. But to say the least, this may probably
be the consequence of reducing Quebec: For all that has been said above, has a
close and manifest connection with that important event.

BUT allowing the above conclusions to be justly drawn; yet some may perhaps
demand still, "Cui bono?" Though things should turn out thus; yet what real and
considerable benefit would from hence result to Great Britain and her colonies?
(For we have all learnt, at length, to consider their interests, not as being
separate, but closely united) This is the demand, to which some answer was
promised above; though it is hardly to be supposed, indeed, that such a question
could be seriously asked by any intelligent person, the advantages accruing
from hence, being so many, great and manifest. To hint at some of the
principal, and most obvious of them th^n:

IN the first place, one great advantage we should gain hereby is this, that
all the British colonies and provinces would henceforward enjoy peace on their
extensive frontiers, or inland borders. We shall be delivered from the ravages
and barbarities of faithless savages, and more faithless Frenchmen; of all
which ravages and barbarities, the French being in possession of Quebec and St.
Lawrence river, has, from first to last, been the principal cause. For the
Indians would all have long since been our friends, had it not been for them in
our neighborhood, to set them upon us both in war and peace. How much blood
has been heretofore shed on the frontiers of the British colonies? What a vast
treasure has been annually expended in defending ourselves, though very
ineffectually, from our American enemies, different in complexion, yet much the
same in heart Even Mons. Vaudreuil, the Governor General of Canada, and himself
a Canadian by birth, it is confidently and credibly affirmed, had the
inhumanity, or may I not rather say? the brutality, to ornament a room with
English scalps hung round it; which he used to show to his unhappy prisoners;
to insult them; pointing out to them, which were the scalps of their near
relations friends and neighbors!
? How have our infant settlements, otherwise very flourishing, been distressed,
kept back, and, many of them quite broken up, by the enemy? Whereas we may now
rationally expect to have peace in all our borders; and that there will be no
more breaking in, or carrying out to a wretched captivity. The public expenses,
and consequently the public taxes, will be vastly lessened; and become very
small in comparrison of what they have hitherto been in time of war. And we
shall save, not only much money, but, what is far more precious in the sight of
God and wise men, much blood. Our colonies will of course increase and people
fast; and, under the common blessing of providence, flourish more than ever,
quickly filling up, and extending themselves far back into the country. Of
which, the mother country will reap the benefit in common with us. These are
such great and obvious advantages, that all must needs see them.

IN the next place, an extensive trade will of course be opened with all the
savage nations back of us; particularly the fur trade, of late years almost
engrossed by the French, who have had those savages in their interest. They
must now hunt for us in our turn, in order to pay us for the necessaries which
they must come to us for. Which is also in some measure applicable to the
Canadians themselves, that country being reduced, if any of them shall remain
therein. They must all be supplied by us, and pay us for it some way or other.
So that in short, all the commerce of this part of the world, from the
northward of Hudson's Bay to Florida, and back to the Missisipi, or near it,
will of course be in the hands of British subjects: A commerce which will
greatly increase the demand for British manufactures, and both well employ and
maintain many thousand more people in Great Britain, than do or can get a
livelihood there at present in any honest way. It will also much increase her
navigation, and that of her colonies.

MOREOVER: The reduction of Quebec, and supposed reduction of Canada in
consequence thereof, will be a benefit to us, as it will be, in some measure at
least, a cramping of the French sugar-islands, which have of late much more
than rivalled our own. The French West India islands, if I am not misinformed,
have heretofore had great dependence upon Canada for bread-corn, and other
provisions, for some kinds of naval stores, and diverse other articles, both
necessary for them, and which they cannot, elsewhere, be so commodiously
supplied with. The depriving them of which, especially if an effectual stop
should be put to the illicit trade carried on thither from some British parts
of the continent, must greatly distress and reduce them, and be a
proprotionable advantage to ours; lessen their commerce and navigation, and
increase our own.

Again: One would think that France would now, almost of course, be wholly cut
out of the American cod-fishery, of which she has heretofore made such vast
advantages. Her Louisbourg fishery was gone before. That up the gulf and river
St. Lawrence is now gone. All treaties, by virtue of which she claimed a right
to make fish on the coast of Newfoundland, have been violated by her; they are
broken through, and become mere nullities, as though they had never been. And if we
should hold the possession of Louisbourg, Canada and Newfoundland, with the
coast of Labrador, one would think it easy to prevent her making fish in any of
those parts, especially considering the great superiority of the British navy.
Nor does it seem improbable that this whole fishery may fall into the hands of
British subjects; unless we should perhaps hereafter have a ministry as
complaisant to his Most Christian Majesty, and the court of Versailles, as that
in the latter end of Queen Ann's reign, which complimented France with the best
places for carrying on the cod-fishery, in all North America; i. e. in the
world. But at present, to be sure, there is no reason for any apprehensions of
this sort. Now the destruction of the French fishery would be the destruction
of one most material and extensive branch of her commerce, in which she was
before our too successful rival: And this whole fishery, falling into the hands
of Britain, would prodigiously increase her trade and wealth; giving her the
advantage of supplying all those markets, which France supplied before? This
would also be the lessening of the latter's maritime power in general, and the
increasing, proportionably, that of Great Britain. For France, being deprived
of this fishery, could not employ and maintain so many seamen as heretofore, by
many thousands; whereas we might then employ and maintain many thousands more
than ever. This is a consideration of the last importance to the welfare and
safety of Great Britain, and of her colonies, if not of all Europe; her chief
dependence and security, under divine providence, being placed in the
superiority of her naval power, and keeping under that of France. For should
France, whose ambition is so exorbitant and boundless, and whose power is so
great on the continent, once become superior by sea, the liberties of
Great Britain, and perhaps of Europe, are no more.

THESE are not all, but only some of the chief of those secular and national
advantages which occur to my thoughts, as naturally resulting from, or having
an apparent connection with, the great things which God has lately done for
us; more especially in the reduction of Quebec, which, you will remember, I now
consider as being in effect the reduction of Canada, and bringing all the
Indian savages into a friendly alliance with us. Whether that chain of
reasoning, by which I came to view it in this light, will hold together, and be
strong enough to support so weighty and important a conclusion; or whether it
be only like a rope of sand, which cannot be even lightly touched without being
broken to pieces, must be submitted to the judgment of others: As also,
whether, allowing it to be good, and duly connected, the advantages
abovementioned, may naturally be supposed, to slow from such a conquest of the
French in America, and such an alliance with the Indians.

IF these inferences are not unjustly deduced, as it is humbly conceived they
are not, what great cause have we to be glad and rejoice at this day; and to
praise God for the great things which he has done for us? Our religious, as
well as civil privileges seemed, a few years since, to be in some danger from
the growing power and encroachments of the enemy here, supported by France. For
had they at length got the upper hand, we should doubtless have been deprived
of the free enjoyments of the protestant religion; harrassed, persecuted and
butchered, by such blind and furious zealots for the religion of Rome, under
the direction of a priesthood and hierarchy, whose Wisdom, to be sure, is not
from above, if the characteristic of that which is so, is to be either pure, or
peaceable, gentle, or easy to be entreated, full of mercy, or of good fruits,
without partiality, or without hypocrisy James III. 17.
! We have therefore reason to bless God for the successes he has given us, not
merely on temporal and worldly, but on religious and spiritual accounts also.

WE have often heard with our ears, and our fathers have told us, what great
things God did for them in their days; how he preserved, and provided for them
in the wilderness, when this was such, which now rejoiceth and blossometh as
the rose; and how he, in part, drove out the heathen from before them, who were
their enemies without a cause. But we now see, in our own days, greater things
than those! Our fathers, as they had abundant reason to do, earnestly desired
to see this day, but did not see it: if they had, how glad? how joyful would
they have been? And if those who are fallen asleep in the faith of Jesus
Christ, instead of being perished, have, perhaps, some knowledge of the affairs
of this lower world, I doubt not but that our pious forefathers, who suffered
so much from their enemies here, would receive some accession of joy even in
heaven, by looking down from thence, and beholding what God has done for us
their beloved posterity; how he has avenged us of our, and their enemies; and
by seeing the prospect which we now have, by the blessing of God, of living
peaceably and happily in this good land; so that though themselves never could,
yet we their descendents, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, and
them that hated us, "may serve God without fear, in holiness and
righteousness," the remainder of our lives.

THINK it not strange that you hear such a supposition made, as that above. For
although both tongues and prophecies shall cease, yet "charity never fails"; in
heaven it is perfected in those souls, which were endowed with a measure of it
on earth. And charity, you know, "rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in
the truth;" it delights in observing the felicity of others, and God's
righteous acts, whereby his people and church are secured against their
adversaries, and put in a prosperous condition. Nor will it be amiss just to
observe here, that in the Revelation of St. John, the blessed above are
introduced as praising God, I had almost said, keeping a Thanksgiving, for his
righteous judgments on earth, in delivering his servants from oppression and
persecution; particularly, from the persecutions and oppressions of the mother
of harlots, and abominations; that idolatrous and apostate church, which has
so long made herself drunk with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus -- I heard,
says he, a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia! Salvation,
and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God. For true and righteous
are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore, which did corrupt the
earth with her fornication [or idolatrous practices]; and has avenged the
blood of his servants at her hand. And again, they said, Alleluia Chap. XIX. 1.
2. 3.
!

GOD has revealed his purpose, his unalterable purpose, in due time, though
gradually, to consume and destroy the beast and the false prophet, with their
adherents; till in the end they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation; when
there is to be a most signal revolution in the civil and religious state of
things in this world; and all the kingdoms thereof are to "become the kingdoms
of our Lord, and of his Christ." And one might, perhaps, without any great
degree of superstition (...) enthusiasm, from some late occurrences in Europe
and elsewhere, not to say any thing of the order of these predictions
themselves, be inclined to think that this time of ruin to some, and
reformation and joy to others, from the presence of the Lord, when the "gospel
of the kingdom shall be preached for a witness among all nations," is at no
very great distance from the present.

BUT however that matter may be, from speaking positively of which, one would
think, every uninspired man, endowed with wisdom and modesty, would be very
far; yet I cannot but just observe here, as a proper ground for gladness and
rejoicing to all of us, who have any serious concern for the interests of
religion, and the salvation of men's souls, that, by the great things which God
has lately done, and is still doing for us, he seems, in his providence, to be
preparing the way for a much more general and extensive propagation of the
gospel among the savage nations of America; for enlarging the kingdom of
Christ; and reclaiming from the error of their way to the wisdom of the just,
not only those who are altogether heathen, but those also who have hitherto
been deluded and infatuated by the Romish missionaries, who "compass sea and
land to make proselytes -- " A field is opened to make some further attempts to
this end. And although I would be be very far, especially at this time of general
and common rejoicing among us, from saying what might justly be offensive to
any; yet I cannot but add here, that if the honorable and reverend "Society for
propagating the gospel in foreign parts", should see cause to employ some
considerable proportion of the charities entrusted to their prudent and pious
care, in so noble an enterprise, so good a work, as that of gospelizing the
savages in the extensive wildernesses of America, I believe all the world would
applaud them. With all the deference that is due to so respectable a body,
doubtless the great end of those charities would, in this way, be at least as
much regarded and prosecuted, and, perhaps, better answered, than by supporting
many missionaries at a great annual expense, in all the oldest, the principal,
and richest cities and towns in these Northern colonies; where christianity has
been the general, common and established religion for more than a century of
years past. -- But not to digress: Having thus attempted to show, what great
reason we have to rejoice and be glad at this time, by representing the
importance that acquisition which has been so often mentioned, considering the
great and happy consequences that may, very probably at least, flow from it; I
proceed now as was proposed,

III. TO subjoin some useful and necessary regulations of our joy on this great
and happy occasion, that it may be restrained within due bounds, and flow in a
proper channel.

And in the first place, we should take heed that our joy is not leavened with
pride and vainglory, as though our successes were wholly from ourselves. This is
what is very common with people on similar occasions. They are glad with a kind
of self-important, and self-sufficient joy, which swells them up, and is quite
the reverse of that rejoicing which becomes christians. For man has nothing
which he did not receive, whether strength, wisdom, courage or magnanimity: Why
then should he glory in it, or in the effects and consequences of it, "as though
he had not received it?"

THERE is another thing nearly allied to this, against which we ought also to
guard. Many people who, though they believe in the overruling providence of God,
and are far from wholly attributing to themselves, the glory of their victories
and successes, yet rejoice on such occasions under the notion of their having
as it were merited them, by their superior goodness and righteousness. This is
also a vain, proud joy, not becoming sinful creatures. It is indeed possible,
that we may not be altogether so guilty in the sight of God, as our enemies
whom he has thus far subdued under us; but we are yet far from being so
righteous ourselves, as to have merited thereby the successes which he has
given us against them. And there is a remarkable passage in the book of
Numbers, Chap. IX.
so much to the present purpose, that I cannot forbear quoting it. The children
of Israel were now about to pass over the river Jordan, where God had promised
to drive out the idolatrous nations from before them. But lest they should
ascribe this to their own great piety and goodness, he gives them the following
caution and admonition: Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God is
he that goes over before thee as a consuming fire: he shall destroy them, and
shall bring them down before thy face: so shall thou drive them out, and
destroy them quickly, as the Lord has said unto thee. Speak not thou in thine
heart, after that the Lord thy God has cast them out from before thee, saying,
for my righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this land: but for
the wickedness of these nations the Lord does drive them out from before thee.
Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, do thou go
to possess their Land: but for the wickedness of these nations, the Lord thy
God does drive them out from before thee.

WE should, moreover, be very far from indulging to any kind of excess, or
riotous joy, on this happy occasion. Some there are, who seem to think they
cannot be sufficiently glad and joyful on such occasions, without behaving more
like the ancient Bacchinalians, or madmen, than like Christians and reasonable
creatures; running into many foolish excesses quite inconsistent, not only with
christian sobriety, but with civil order. Let us be admonished to abstain from
every kind and degree of extravagant, riotous mirth. It is better, says
Solomon, to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the song of
fools. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of fools:
this also is vanity.

IN the next place: We should be at least equally far from taking pleasure in
reflecting on the miseries which our enemies suffer. We may, indeed, reasonably
rejoice that God has given us such success against them, as may probably put it
out of their power to harm us for the future. But their calamities and
distresses, considered in themselves, are no proper ground of gladness to us.
And if any part of our joy on this occasion arises from hence, so far it is
contrary to the spirit of the gospel. If we have good and benevolent hearts, we
cannot but be touched with pity for those unhappy people, however malicious
they have been toward us; especially for the poor women and children, who can
hardly be supposed to have been "in this transgression," with the rest. Yea, if
we could relieve them in their distresses, without hazard to ourselves and the
public, the great law of charity would oblige us to do it; whereby we should
fulfill that evangelical command, If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
give him drink: For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head.

AGAIN: We should by no means please ourselves with any such thought as this on
the present occasion, that being at rest from our enemies, we may hereafter
have it in our power to lead a soft and luxurious, an indolent or effeminate
life; consuming the bounties of divine providence on our lusts. To please and
delight ourselves with any such thought, with any such hopes as these, were to
rejoice, not as Christians, but as Epicures; and would be a certain indication
of a corrupt, sensual turn of mind.

BUT having dwelt long enough on the negative here, it may be proper to propose
some more direct and positive rules, to guide and assist us in pointing our joy
aright on this great occasion.

AND here, in the first place, we should rejoice in the Lord; in him who has
done these great things for us, whereof we are glad. We are to consider God as
the supreme author of our victories and successes. All that is in the heaven,
and in the earth is his; and in his hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all. However brave, prudent and magnanimous the persons are, or
were, to whom we immediately owe these successes, they are yet to be considered
only as the instruments and servants of God, by whom he has wrought such
salvation, such great things for us. Thine, O Lord! is the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty.

WE should also ascribe these successes to God, not merely as the supreme cause
and author, but as the gracious, merciful, and bountiful bestower of them; whom
we had laid under no obligation, in point of justice, thus to espouse our
cause, when men rose up against us* but who might, for our sins, have given "us
a prey to their teeth," however wicked and unrighteous our enemies themselves
may be supposed to be, or to have been. And indeed God, in his unsearchable
wisdom, sometimes permits the wicked grievously to afflict such as are more
righteous than themselves; wherein he is not unjust, since the whole world is
become guilty before him.

IT is moreover necessary, that our joy should be accompanied with unfeigned
gratitude, or truly thankful hearts. Gladness on such an occasion without
sincere thankfulness, which is very supposeable, and perhaps very common, would
have no degree of piety or virtue; it would be but a natural, human passion,
the offspring of self-love. It is only a grateful joy that becomes christians,
at least, that will entitle us to that honorable character. And it is in this,
that a religious Thanksgiving most essentially consists; I mean, in having our
hearts truly touched and warmed with a sense of God's undeserved goodness to
us: Though it is highly expedient that this should be outwardly expressed, by
talking of his loving kindness, by devoutly singing his praises, and ascribing
to him blessing and honor, glory and power.

OUR rejoicing in the goodness of our God to us, should also be attended with
unfeigned good will and charity toward men. Indeed a proper sense of God's
mercies has a natural tendency to soften and expand the heart of man; to fill
it with the warmest wishes for the good, the eternal good of others. And if we
feel no such benevolence, or charity, in our breasts, it is almost a certain
sign that there is in them no religious or virtuous joy; and that however full
we may be of gladness or mirth upon this occasion, it is only the mirth or
gladness of sensual men; of men under the influence of natural human passions
and affections only, at best; but possibly of such as are much worse, unnatural
ones.

MOREOVER; Our rejoicing in the goodness of God to us on this occasion, should
be accompanied with sincere resolutions to make the most proper and worthy
returns to him that we possibly can; i. e. to keep his commandments, and live
to his glory. Truly grateful and religious joy is never unattended with
suchlike pious and virtuous resolutions. And indeed, after all that has been
said in the former part of this discourse, concerning the greatness and
importance of those things which God has done for us, the chief, or rather the
sum-total of the advantage is, that we may, if we have hearts for it, hereafter
lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; to do which, is
the supreme good of man in this world, and the only way to obtain immortal joys
in the next.

FINALLY here; We should "rejoice with trembling". We should exercise an humble
dependence upon almighty God, in whose hand all future events are; whether
prosperous or adverse to us, we cannot certainly foresee; but we shall know
hereafter. We should be far from a vain confidence that God, who has done such
great things for us, will not in some other respects frown upon us, and sorely
chastize us. We may well tremble, or at least fear in some measure, lest he
should do thus: Especially if, instead of making proper returns of love and
obedience to him for these mercies, we should forget, or misimprove them. Even
the prosperity of fools often destroys them, when their enemies could not do
it. And when we consider our own numerous frailties, follies and corruptions,
we may well tremble amidst all our joys, lest we should prove as wicked and
ungrateful as many have been before us; who sung God's praises, but soon forgot
his works; sinking under the blessings they enjoyed, into indolence,
dissoluteness and impiety. How guilty should we be, if we should increase the
number of such, after God has thus manifested his great goodness to us, and
laid us under such obligations! However, what is here said is by no means
designed to damp, but only to regulate our common joy, and the hopes which
these late successes may naturally raise in us respecting our future
prosperity; especially if we should conduct ourselves, in consequence of them,
as becomes wise men and christians.

IT were, indeed, an argument both of our insensibility and our ingratitude,
not to rejoice on so noble an occasion. We, I mean New England, and all the
British American plantations, had never so much cause for general joy as we
have at present; while we see ourselves in so fair a way, under the blessing of
providence, to be wholly delivered from our enemies in these parts. Had the
French retained their power, and independency of us here in America, we might
be certain from more than an hundred years sad experience of them, that they
would still be, not only our enemies, but false, perfidious and barbarous ones;
and not only so, but that the greater part of the savages still instigated, as
they are already infatuated by them, would be our enemies also. Canada, even
though the French should relinquish all their encroachments, and retire within
their old proper bounds, is yet so near to us, that it is impossible for
Frenchmen, retaining their power, and their independency on Great Britain, to
inhabit that country without being pernicious enemies to us, in peace as well
as war. Of this we have had experience, much more than sufficient: We have
sadly felt the effects of their perfidy, and of long wars with the savages,
wholly owing to them.

WE have all along been more or less disquieted, often greatly distressed, by
these our American enemies: And there was a time, not long since, when we had
considerable reason to apprehend what the consequence might be; how far fatal
to ourselves, and the British interest in America. We had some reason for this,
whether we reflect how the enemy conducted, or we ourselves conducted, at that
time: When they had a strong chain of forts quite round us, and boasted that
they had us in a pound: When, not only all the perfidy, which is nothing new or
strange, but almost all the policy, the prudence, the military spirit, and I
may add, the success also, seemed to have fallen to their share! These things
then looked with a dark and threatening aspect on the British affairs in
America, and, consequently, in Europe also. But blessed be God, that the scene
is so much changed! "The snare is broken, and we are escaped." The power of the
French is now broken, at least here in America; and not likely to be recovered.
Our heathen enemies have no longer cause to "shoot out the lip," to deride and
insult us, saying, Where is their boasted strength? "Where is their God?" Even
they must now confess that the Lord has done great things for us, whereof they
also may in time probably be glad, how sorrowful soever they may be at present.
And having offered up our praises to heaven for these favors, we can now make
no prayer more seasonable, than that God would be pleased so deeply to impress
our hearts with a sense of his goodness, that it may never be effaced; but that
we may always remain humbly and obediently thankful for it.

IF we have but hearts to live answerably to these mercies, we may expect to
see far "greater things than thief." We have given many outward demonstrations
of our joy. To pass over some others, we have chim'd bells, and cannon have
roared; bonfires have blazed on every hill; colors have been displayed; our
houses have been gaily illuminated; and many a splendid rocket has been thrown
to illuminate and adorn the skies themselves. Such have been the civil
demonstrations of our joy on this great occasion. And we have now as soon
indeed, as could well be, manifested our joy in a religious manner, by
observing this day of public and general thanksgiving. The former I do not
censure; the latter is doubtless to be commended. What remains then, but that
we now give the highest and best evidence of all, that we have a just sense of
these favors, and are truly thankful for them; I mean, by "denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and living soberly, righteously and godly in
the world?" That we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and
honesty, is indeed the most, if not the only, rational and worthy end we can
have in view, in any of our military undertakings. And when once providence
has, or shall have, put it in our power to live thus, the great end of war
being answered, we are wholly inexcusable if we live otherwise; particularly if
we should "turn aside to vain jangling" amongst ourselves, "doting about
questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings,
evil-surmisings, and perverse disputings;" instead of "studying the things that
make for peace, and the things whereby we may edify one another."

IF we should henceforth live as becomes fellow subjects, and
fellow christians, in the fear of God, and brotherly-love, still "abhorring
that which is evil, and cleaving to that which is good," we might then
reasonable hope to see ourselves established without any rivals, much less
perfidious and cruel enemies, in this good land, of such a vast extent; and
that our posterity after us will also be glad of those great things which God
has done, and is still doing for us. Even they will abundantly utter the memory
of his great goodness, and talk of his righteousness, if we and they become,
and continue, a willing and obedient people. Yea, we may reasonably expect that
this country, which has in a short time, and under many disadvantages, become
so populous and flourishing, will, by the continued blessing of heaven, in
another century or two become a mighty empire (I do not mean an independent
one) in numbers little inferior perhaps to the greatest in Europe, and in
felicity to none.

WE ourselves shall, indeed, be all gone off the stage long before that time,
and "gathered to our fathers:" But our posterity will remain. And I must own,
if I may so express it, that I feel a strong affection working in me toward
those that are yet unborn, even to many generations. As I think with great
satisfaction and delight on the happy estate of good men long since dead;
especially of our pious forefathers who first peopled this country, and
underwent so many difficulties and hardships in this undertaking for the
testimony of a good conscience, and during their abode here; so I delight in
looking into furture ages, and seeing, at least in imagination, the prosperous
and happy condition of those that are to succeed us.

I CANNOT help, neither do I desire to help, such imaginations; because they
afford me at least an innocent pleasure; perhaps one that might claim even the
name of virtuous. For all those pleasures that have their foundation in
benevolence, and are the result thereof, are truly such. I cannot forbear
fancying that I see a great and flourishing kingdom in these parts of America,
peopled by our posterity. Methinks I see mighty cities rising on every hill,
and by the side of every commodious port; mighty fleets alternately sailing out
and returning, laden with the produce of this, and every other country under
heaven; happy fields and villages wherever I turn my eyes, through a vastly
extended territory; there the pastures clothed with flocks, and here the
valleys covered with corn, while the little hills rejoice on every side! And do
I not there behold the savage nations, no longer our enemies, bowing the knee
to Jesus Christ, and with joy confessing him to be "Lord, to the glory of God
the Father!" Methinks I see religion professed and practiced throughout this
spacious kingdom, in far greater purity and perfection, than since the times of
the apostles; the Lord being still as a wall of fire round about, and the glory
in the midst of her! O happy country! happy kingdom!

I can scarce forbear fancying, that I hear a venerable sire talking after this
manner to his child, of things that came to pass in old times, the days of his
forefathers: My son, these friends and brethren of our's, whom you see of a
darker complexion than ourselves, were once our heathen enemies, and vexed our
fathers in the wilderness; (for this was once such!) At the same time there was
a certain restless, ambitious people in our neighborhood, from a far distant
country, called France in those days, who with them, and without provocation,
endeavored to destroy our fathers out of the land. But several hundred years
ago, when GEORGE the II. an excellent King, sat upon the British throne, and a
certain wise and good man, named PIT, was his minister, a great General was
sent with a little army, to take the enemy's chief city. The name of this brave
general was WOLF; but the name of the enemy's general is forgotten. All we
know of the latter is, that some time before, the army under his command
perfidiously murdered a great number of our people, after they had surrendered
a certain fortress to him, and he had plighted them his faith! -- But the
strong city of the enemy I just now spoke of, was taken after a bloody battle,
and their whole country was soon subdued. From that time God, who loved our
fathers, gave them rest on every side. They then grew and flourished mightily,
and filled the whole land. Such great things, my dear child! did God perform
for our fathers in the days of old; for which we have cause to be glad and
rejoice to this time, and praise his glorious name -- But whither will
imagination transport me! into what times and regions, if I do not check it! --

EVEN these days, my brethren, wherein we live, I mean, since God has done so
great a thing for us, are far more joyful than any which our fathers saw; though
far less happy than those times which busy fancy, the love of my dear country,
and charity to unborn posterity, would paint out to me, and almost compel me to
believe are actually to follow.

WE can never be thankful enough to God for that interesting event, which has
been the main subject of my discourse, being the principal occasion of our
present rejoicing. But alas! there is never any great good "in this present
evil world," without some mixture of evil, at least of what seems to us to be
so. This is the case, even with respect to that event, which is both so great
in itself, and so happy in its probable consequences. -- O untimely, though
gloriously fallen! Mortal in thy body, but immortal all beside! immortal in thy
deeds, immortal in thy memory, immortal in thy fame! -- I can no longer forbear
to mention his fall, which I have hitherto forborne with difficulty, even though
it should cause a general gloom, and occasion the closing of this solemnity
with less joy than it began. Immortal WOLF! untimely, but gloriously fallen!
Untimely in respect of thy youth! without an heir to hear of thy great actions,
to enjoy thy renown, or to inherit thy name! Fallen far from thy native,
beloved country, and every near relative! Untimely for thy country, which needs
such as thou wast to conduct and inspire her armies, and lead them on to
victory! But still fallen gloriously for thy self, and for that country which
gave birth to such a commander! Fallen in the service of thy king, and of that
country, so dear to thee, and for which thou would readily have laid down
more lives than one! Fallen, though in youthful ardor, yet not without the
prudence and wisdom of age! Though without an heir; yet such as thou wast need
not children to bear up, and immortalize their name! And thou have here left at
least one whole grateful country, where all, old as well as young, will honor
thee as a father, and enjoy thy fame, as well as the fruit of thy toils! Though
far from the country which gave thee birth, yet near one which would glory
might it be said, that "this man was born here!" Though distant from every near
relative, yet near to those, whose childrens children will "rise up and call
thee blessed!" Fallen, though untimely for thy country still engaged in war; yet
not till thou had saved one country by conquering another! For though others
use to conquer only while they lived, thou wast a conqueror even in death!
Whose fall, no less than whose presenee while living, inspired the troops with
a courage not to be resisted; and even turned what was before only fortitude,
into fury, though not into madness!

WHEN I reflect upon these circumstances of his fall, I am obliged to retract
what I said before: He that fell so gloriously, did not fall untimely. No! He
falls not untimely, who falls in the service of his King and country with such
magnanimity, with the vigor of youth and the wisdom of age united; especially
if he falls a conqueror, as this brave general did. Whoever falls thus in the
discharge of his duty; thus greatly, thus victoriously, and with such glorious
circumstances attending his fall, being supposed to be an upright good man,
falls not immaturely, but "in a good old age." Whether he had lived many years
or few, is little to the point. Not he that draws and respires this vital air
the oftenest; not he that sleeps the most nights, or wakes the most days; not
he that passes through the most summers and winters; in fine, not he that sees
the most suns and seasons rolling over him in succession; this is not he that
lives the longest, or that dies the most maturely. There is another, a far
juster standard of age, of life and death: And he who lives the most usefully,
the most to the proper ends and purposes of life, lives, both the most
honorably, and the longest, and makes the most mature, as well as glorious
exit. -- Honorable age is not that which stands in length of time, or that
is measured by number of years: But wisdom is the GRAY HAIR unto men, and an
unspotted life is OLD AGE!

MY Brethren, though my heart relented when I began to speak of this British
hero's fall in the vigor of his life; yet by means of such reflections as
these, which are the suggestions, not of passion, that erroneous guide, but of
reason, which will not lead us astray; by means of such reflections, I say, I
find my spirits so far returned, that I could now almost congratulate you on
his noble exit, instead of condoling with you on it! However, not to carry this
matter beyond just bounds: Who would not die as this brave commander died, to
be both remembered and honored in future times, rather than live a while as some
others have lived, and then die to be forgotten; or if not entirely forgotten,
yet remembered only as having in their day given the most flagrant and
inglorious proofs, that they were not in places adapted to their talents, when
they were found at the head of armies!

BUT still you will say, that not only we, but the nation, has sustained a
great loss in the fall of this excellent commander. Far be it from me to deny
this! But blessed be God, the nation has other wise, brave, and magnanimous
commanders; One Genesis Amherst.
at least, perhaps several, now in America; and many more both at home and
abroad. And he, on whom the command devolved at so critical a juncture, Brig.
Genesis Townshend, on the fall of Genesis Wolf.
and under whom that great enterprise was brought to so happy a conclusion, is
doubtless another, to whom the like character justly belongs. Nor will
Great Britain ever be destitute of such commanders, till either her happy
government is subverted, and her liberties lost; or till those glorious times
shall come, when instead of "learning war any more," all the nations which have
hitherto by their mutual enmity and violence, been as it were scourges in the
hand of almighty God, to punish one another for their sins, shall at length
"beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks;"
being both too wise, and too virtuous, thus to "hurt and destroy" each other.
At least such commanders will never be wanting in Great Britain, during a reign
and administration like the present, wherein superior merit is so early
observed, and so gloriously distinguished!

LET us not therefore despond under this loss. We could not expect, according
to the established course of human affairs, even under the peculiar favor and
smiles of heaven, to do great things, or obtain great advantages against our
enemies, without some circumstances attending them, which cannot be thought of
but with regret. It becomes us, therefore, to submit with patience to what we
could all wish otherwise, and to be heartily thankful for what is so agreeable
to our desires, so great in itself, and so important in its consequences. For
shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

IF such reflections as some of those above, though I can hardly suppose it,
should seem to any not suitable to the present season, or to a day of general
joy and thanksgiving, I have only this apology to make: That they were in a
manner forced upon me by that great and happy event itself, which is the
special occasion of our rejoicing. For, to have taken no notice of the fall of
that excellent general, by means of whose almost unexampled bravery and good
conduct, this important acquisition was made, would have been both ungrateful
and inhuman. And if it were mentioned at all, not to have spoken of it in a
grave and serious, but light and indifferent manner, would have been still more
ungrateful and inhuman, with the additional bad circumstances of being grossly
absurd and unnatural, not to say impious. For, not only the fall of such
distinguished personages, but death itself, is a very grave and serious subject
to be thought or spoken of. Do any of you doubt it? You will soon be of the
same opinion: For, human life is short, and "after death the judgment!"

This further serious reflection would not have been added to the former, had
not the speaker chosen to see this assembly dissolve, each one with a grave and
solemn brow, much rather than with an air and countenance of thoughtless
levity, though the occasion of our coming together was so truly joyful. And
indeed, they must be wholly strangers to virtuous and religious joy, far the
noblest and greatest of any, who think sobriety and gravity inconsistent with
it, which, are in reality essential to it. Let us therefore, when we depart
from the house of God, depart in his love and fear, with hearts thoroughly
impressed by a sense of his goodness, and the obligations which he has laid us
under to keep his commandments. Doing thus, we shall still "walk in the light
of his countenance," and still praise him while we dwell on earth. And when we
depart this world, so full of discord, strife and war, and even the most
prosperous events whereof, have still some disagreeable alloy, we shall depart,
having our "hope full of immortality;" and our hearts, of that PEACE OF GOD
which passes all understanding. AMEN!

The end of the second Discourse.
APPENDIX.
Containing a brief Account of two former Expeditions against QUEBEC and
CANADA, which proved unsuccessful.
MANY people amongst us, both in the town and country, who have heard frequent
mention of former enterprises against Quebec and Canada, have probably, either
through want of books, or leisure to consult such as are of any considerable
length, no distinct knowledge of those unfortunate expeditions. This is a
season wherein there is of course much conversation about that city and
country; and many who may have a curiosity, have not the advantages
beforementioned, to acquaint themselves even with the most material facts and
circumstances relating to those enterprises. We are by no means to censure such
a curiosity in our countrymen and fellow subjects, whose situation in life will
not admit of their giving much of their time to reading. It is at least
innocent; the author of the foregoing discourses thinks, laudable; and such an
one as ought to be encouraged rather than damped. He therefore proposes in some
measure to gratify it, by this appendix. Besides; reflecting on these former
unsuccessful expeditions, has a natural tendency to heighten our joy and
gratitude on account of the last, which has been so prosperous. Such a contrast
will probably have a good effect. So that this may answer a valuable end,
beyond that of merely gratifying the curiosity of the less informed reader.

WERE the ensuing account to be prolix, it would not be adapted to the
circumstances of those, for whom it is principally designed. It will therefore
consist chiefly of a narration of facts, and some material circumstances. These
will be mostly collected from Sir H. Walker's Journal, and the Appendix
thereto; Campbell's Lives of the Admirals, and Mather's Life of Sir W. Phips;
which I here mention once for all. But when the expressions of either of those
writers are used, notice will be given by the usual sign of a quotation.
However, this account, though short, will contain some brief hints and
observations respecting the causes of our miscarriages and disasters, in the
two former attempts against Canada.

BUT it will not be amiss, before we proceed to the account proposed, just to
observe that Quebec was long ago reduced by the English; because this will
furnish us with an observation or two, very pertinent by way of introduction;
as tending to lay open, both the motives of the French in giving us such
frequent disturbances from that quarter, and the great reason we have had on
our side, repeatedly to attempt the reduction of that place.

QUEBEC was reduced 130 years since, in the reign of K. Charles I. viz. A. D.
1629, by admiral Kirk or Kertk, with a fleet from England. But it was soon
after delivered up to France again in pursuance of a treaty, viz. 1632. And as
it did not fall directly within the design of this appendix to speak at all of
this expedition, it is passed over with a bare mention of these facts; which
are taken notice of chiefly with a view to the following observations.

FATHER Charlevoix, the noted French Jesuit and historian, tells us, that though
the French court was much shocked and offended at the English for taking
Quebec; yet, excepting reasons which touched their honor, there were many who
doubted whether they had sustained any real loss thereby; and whether it were
expedient to demand the restitution of it. -- Mais les raisons d' honneur a
part, bien de gens douterent si l'on avoit fait une veritable (...), and si'l a
propos de demander la restitution de Quebec.
It seems, according to this historian, that there was a great division in the
Court of France upon this point. It was warmly debated; and many reasons were
assigned by some, why the restitution of Quebec should not be insisted on.
These reasons, or objections, were particularly answered by those on the other
side of the question, who finally prevailed. By the latter it was said, amongst
other things, that the climate of New France would grow milder by degrees as
the country was more and more opened: That this could hardly be doubted, since
it was situated under the same parallels with the most temperate countries of
Europe: That the climate was healthy, the soil fertile: That with a little
labor the inhabitants might procure all the conveniences of life: That France
might every year send a small number of families, some soldiers, with some
young women that could well be spared, for breeders, and dispose of them in
Canada, in such a manner that they might extend themselves in proportion as
they multiplied: That this would be an excellent nursery for seamen: That the
peltry, or furr-trade, would also be of considerable advantage: That for
ship-building, the forests of Canada would furnish them with an ample supply,
being, as they said, without contradicton, the finest in the universe: And
lastly, That only the motive of keeping the English from making themselves too
powerful in this part of America, by joining both sides of the river St.
Lawrence to so many other provinces, where they were already well established,
was more than sufficient to induce them to make a point of recovering Quebec,
whatever it cost them. Ensin, que le seul motif d'empecher les Anglois de se
render trop puissans dans cette party de l'Amerique, en joignnant les deux
bords du Fleuve S. Laurent a tant d'autres provinces, ou ils avoient deja de
bons etablissemens, etoit plus que suffisant pour nous engager a recouvrer
Quebec, a quelque p^ix que ce fuut. Hist. et Descript. de la N. France, Tome I.
Live. IV.


IT is not to be wondered at, that these reasons prevailed in the court of
France. It were needless to observe how punctually the French have regarded
them ever since; particularly in sending over a number of families and some
soldiers every year, with some women, that they might extend themselves
gradually as they increased; or, in other words, make encroachments upon us;
and, in conjunction with the savages, keep us from becoming too powerful in
North America. At the same time, these things, and the French acting all along
upon these maxims, without any regard to justice, humanity or honor, equally
show that our repreated struggles and efforts to retake Quebec, though not by way
of treaty, as they did, and as they have taken many other places first and
last, but by force of arms, were not without sufficient grounds. Whether the
same reasons will, or will not, hold equally good for maintaining Quebec to the
last, or at any rate whatever within the bounds of justice, belongs not to us
to determine. -- There are others who know far better, what can, and what is
fit to be done, than we can pretend to; in whose wisdom, integrity and
patriotism, we may safely confide, as it is our duty to do.

I FEAR I have been too long in this introductory part of the appendix: But the
best apology that can be made, is to proceed directly to the proposed narrative.

THE first of the two former expeditions against Quebec and Canada, of which
some account was to be given, was in the reign of K. William III. sixty-nine
years ago, viz. A. D. 1690. No British troops were employed therein. But the
people of New England, having been continually molested by the Canadians, and
the Indians in their interest; and having been very successful this same year
in reducing Port Royal, now Annapolis, with all Nova Scotia, resolved on this
more important and arduous enterprise against Quebec. For it was then, and
indeed long before, plainly seen, that we were never to expect any peace or
quiet in these northern British colonies, while Quebec was in the hands of such
neighbors as the French. Sir William Phips, the next Year Governor of the
Massachusetts Bay, was a lover of his native country, and of an active genius.
He was accordingly a zealous promoter of this expedition, and was put at the
head of it, as commander in chief.

IN this expedition there sailed from the port of Boston, thirty-two frigates
and transports, having on board, besides seamen, about 2000 New England troops.
The largest ship, or admiral, carried 44 guns. The season was far too much
advanced before the fleet took its departure from Boston, which was not till
the 9th of August. It did not arrive before Quebec till the 5th of October. A
1000 English provincial troops, with 1500 Indians, were to have marched about
the same time from Albany, and to have proceeded by the way of lake Champlain,
in order to attack Montreal, or at least to divide the French forces, and make
a diversion that way, in favor of the fleet and army up the river St.
Lawrence; and thereby facilitate the design of reducing Quebec, which was the
grand point in view. But, for certain reasons which cannot here be particularly
mentioned, the forces did not proceed at the westward, according to the
original plan. Which, in part, occasioned the subsequent miscarriage of the
expedition up the river: I say in part; for there were other causes concurring;
particularly sickness amongst the troops there, and, possibly, want of
sufficient experience in the officers for such an undertaking; to the success
whereof, bravery was not the only thing necessary.

October 6th, Sir William summoned the French governor, count Frontenac, to
surrender; from whom he received the following answer, That Sir William Phips,
and those with him, were traitors to their King, James II.
and had taken up with that Usurper the PRINCE of ORANGE, and had made a
revolution, which if it had not been made, N. England and the French would have
been ALL ONE; and that no other answer was to be expected from him, but what
should be from the mouth of his cannon. [Magnal.] The winds continued so high
and boisterous, that it was impracticable for the army to land before the 8th,
when all the effective men, being about 1400, were landed under the command of
lieut. general Walley, about 5 miles below the city, on the north side of the
river. They had that day some skirmishes with the enemy; a few being killed on
both sides. They advanced some way toward the city; but the cold was now so
severe, that the feet and hands of many were frozen; and others were taken sick
with the Smallpox. Besides: the enemy having seasonably learnt, a considerable
time before, that they were in no danger of having any disturbance toward
Montreal, our army that way having returned, drew all their strength from those
parts; regular troops, Canadians and Indians; and in short made themselves much
superior in the field. These were sufficient reasons for not advancing farther
toward the city, in order to assault, or besiege it; and the troops were soon
re-imbarked. Sir William, however, in the mean time, had brought some of the
ships up to bombard the city; and had his own ship shot through in near 100
places. A French writer, Baron LaHonton, then at Quebec, makes himself very
merry with this bombardment; telling his reader, that hereby the place suffered
damage to the amount of about "5 or 6 pistoles." He is also very severe on the
conduct of Sir William. He says, "he could not have done less than he did, if
the French had hired him to stand still with his hands in his pockets." This is
doubtless an injurious reflection on him. For considering the bad weather, the
cold, the sickness, the smallness of his force, the failing of the intended
diversion at the westward, and the consequent strength of the enemy at Quebec,
it was hardly possible to have done more than he did; though that was indeed but
very little to the purpose.

IT was Sir William's design, notwithstanding these discouragements, afterward
to have landed the troops in the face of the city, under cover of his cannon,
and to have taken it by storm; the troops, as well as himself, being still full
of spirit and resolution. But soon after, a violent storm arose that separated
the fleet, and the snow and the cold became so extreme, that they could not
continue in those quarters any longer. And it was probably well for them, all
circumstances being considered, that they did not attempt to put this latter
design into execution; the enemy being at least 3 or 4,000, and perhaps 5 or
6,000 strong.

To say that the same number of veteran troops, under an experienced commander,
and other regularly bred officers, could not have done more under the same
circumstances, is much more than I presume to do. But yet it can hardly be
supposed possible, even for such to have reduced the city, under all those
disadvantageous circumstances.

THUS ended this expedition, with the loss of about 1000 men in the whole, and
several transports in their return from Quebec: An expedition, certainly
ill-timed, being undertaken so late in the year. And hereby was incurred an
heavy charge to this government; which gave rise to the first emission of a
paper currency among us; a most pernicious scheme, the bad effects of which we
have not got over to this day; the fortunes of many, and perhaps the morals of
more, having been ruined by it.

HOWEVER, we ought to speak with honor of Sir William Phips. Though neither his
education, nor his experience afterward, and possibly not his genius,
qualified him either for the profoundest policy, or for a great military
command, he was a brave, honest man, of an enterprising turn, a lover of his
country, and zealous for its honor and service; qualities which certainly make
his character and memory respectable. And here, at the close of this brief
account of his unfortunate expedition, it will not be amiss to speak of one
circumstance to his honor, told in the Lives of the Admirals before mentioned,
though relating to quite another Affair. Sir William, then only captain Phips,
had, by the intercession of Christopher Duke of Albermarle, obtained a ship of
King Charles II. in order to fish on a rich Spanish wreck on the coast of
Hispaniola. He went, and returned without making the desired discovery; a
considerable proportion of the profits arising from which, was to have gone
into the King's coffers, for the expense he had been at in fitting out the
ship. Captain Phips being again fitted out by private adventurers on the same
design, made the discovery; and returned to England with L. 300,000 Sterling. in
silver. "On his arrival, there wanted not some, who would have persuaded the
King to seize his ship and cargo, under the pretense that captain Phips had not
given an exact information, when he applied for license, and the royal
assistance: but his Majesty generously answered, that he knew the captain to be
an honest man, and a man of honor; and that if he had brought home twice as
much treasure, his proprietors should divide it. His Majesty farther expressed
his satisfaction by knighting him." Lives of the Admirals, vol. 2. p. 376.

THE other former, and much greater expedition against Quebec and Canada, was
in the reign of Queen Ann, twenty one years after the above mentioned, viz. A.
D. 1711. The late Lord Viscount Bolinbroke, then only Mr. St. John, secretary
of state to the Queen, appears to have had the chief hand in planning and
directing this expedition. There were sent from England either 11 or 12 line of
battle ships, (for accounts differ) 1 frigate, 2 bombs with their tender, and
32 transports with several regiments, making in all upwards of 5000 men; as
also 8 transports and tenders belonging to the train of artillery. Sir Hovenden
Walker was the admiral of the fleet, and general Hill commander in chief of the
British troops. It seems they were delayed some time in the channel of England
by contrary winds; which Mr. secretary St. John, in his letters then written to
the admiral, expresses the greatest concern and uneasiness. After being put
back several times, from the 28th of April to the 5th of May, the fleet at
length proceeded from Plymouth, and continuing its voyage, arrived at Boston
June 24th, without any material disaster; when the troops were debarked, and
encamped for some time on Noddle's island. To these were joined two regiments
from the Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and New Hampshire; all which were
destined against Quebec and Canada, by the way of St. Lawrence.

GENERAL Nicholson was at the same time to take under his command a body of
militia from Connecticut, New York and the Jersies, together with the Indians
of the five, alias six nations, which we commonly, though not quite properly,
blend all together under the general name of Mohawks. This army under the last
mentioned general, was to proceed by the way of Lake Champlain, in order to
attack Montreal, or at least to make a diversion in those parts; and by keeping
the enemy at bay there, to forward the reduction of Quebec by the fleet and
principal army. With this view they proceeded from Albany toward the lake;
though not till the 20th of August. Of what number this army consisted, I have
either never exactly learnt, or have forgotten; probably about 3000 including
Indians. This army we now leave in its progress toward the lake, and return to
the other army and the fleet.

IT is said by some, that these were delayed at Boston a long time for want of
necessary provisions, some seamen, etc. and this through the negligence, or
rather the mercenary and wicked designs of certain persons here, whose business
it was to forward them with all possible expedition. The admiral and general,
to be sure, were loud in their complaints, not against particular persons only,
but the government in general. For the former, in one of his letters to
governor Dudley, then in the chair, expresses himself in the following terms:
"I concur, says he, with the opinion of all the sea and land officers here,
that the government of this colony have prejudiced the present expedition,
instead of assisting it." And such representations were sent home, of this
matter, as left, for some time, impressions on the minds of many persons there,
much to the prejudice and disadvantage of this government. As to the
negligence, ill designs, or ill conduct of some particular persons; thus far
the accusation might possibly be just; which, however, I do not assert. But the
imputation, as it respected the government, and people in general, was
doubtless a very unworthy one, to say nothing worse of it. No government could
well be more zealous in promoting any expedition; all the people in general had
the success of it greatly at heart: and it may be added, that as much was done
by the government to promote it, as could well be done, considering their
circumstances, and that they had little or no previous warning to make the
needful preparations. A great genius, Jer. Dummer, Esquire while agent for this
province at the court of London, in his excellent defense of our charter, long
since did the government and province justice; and wiped off these foul and
base aspersions, by setting this matter in a true and clear light.

BUT to whatever cause or causes, the delay of the fleet and army at Boston was
owing, the fact is, that they did not proceed from hence on the expedition till
July the 30th; much too late for such an enterprise, at such a distance, through
such a navigation, and in such a country as Canada. The fleet, when it took its
departure from hence for the river, consisted of about 68 or 70 sail, having on
board 6,463 troops, including the provincials. Being got into the gulf of St.
Lawrence, and having taken a French prize, the people of which gave the most
discouraging and formidable accounts possible, the admiral in his journal
writes thus, August 15th; from whence it will appear, not only how much he was
deceived in some respects, but how much he was disconcerted by that means:
"Having informed myself by all means possible, says he, of the nature of Canada
river, both from the French and English, I still perceive there were more
difficulties to surmount than could have been imagined; for the master of the
French prize, who had made forty voyages, as he told me, in that river, out and
home, assured me no ship ever wintered there, but hazarded every thing, rather
than let the frost overtake them. That between the mouth of the river and
Quebec, being about 130 leagues, there was neither road, bay, or harbor, where
ships could be in tolerable security; that he never found ground, though he tried
with a line of 400 fathom; that the shore was steep too all along, being
exceeding high and mountainous, and in most places you should have 100 fathom
within a cable's length of the shore; in some parts as deep water, and the
ships sides touching the rocks. That it has been impossible for any person --
to know the currents --; that fogs and storms were so frequent, as they might
well be esteemed continual," etc. etc. But these things I leave without
pretending to determine, whether this admiral were then the more easy believer,
or the Frenchman the greater L -- r.

ON the 18th of August the fleet was not far from the mouth of the river; but
the wind blowing hard against them, as the admiral says, he put into the bay of
Gaspee, to the southward. There they were detained till the 20th, when they
made sail for the river. The night of the 23d, being thick and dark, and the
advice of the English pilots, as they declared, not being followed by the
admiral, proved fatal to part of the fleet, and put an end to this expedition.
Being entered the river as far as the egg-islands on the northern shore, eight
transports were there cast away, and near 1000 people perished; amongst whom,
however, there were none of the New England troops. About ten days after, the
fleet put into Spanish river in the island of Cape-Breton. After consulting
there some time, what was to be done, particularly whether any thing should be
attempted against the enemy at Placentia on Newfoundland, it was at length
determined in a council both of land and sea officers, that it was
impracticable to do any thing; except to return directly to England, after
giving general Nicholson, whom we left in his progress toward Montreal, advice
of the disaster which had befallen them: For his now going forward could answer
no valuable end. The fleet accordingly took its departure from Spanish river
Sept. 16. In a short passage they were in soundings near the British channel;
and Oct. 16. the admiral's ship then lying at anchor at Spithead, was blown up,
with most of his papers, and many people on board, the admiral himself being on
shore. No discovery was ever made, by what means this happened. Some have
thought it was not an accidental thing, but done with design, as being the most
expeditious and safest way of settling the voyage. However this suggestion
seems hardly credible.

THUS ended the second, grand expedition against Canada; that of admiral Kirk
mentioned above, not being here reckoned as one. "The charge incurred by the
province of the Massachusetts Bay was something more than L. 24,000 sterling,
allowed by parliament." Doug. Sum.

THERE were three circumstances especially, attending this expedition, either
of which might probably have proved fatal to the success of it without the
other two. In the first place, it was much too late in the year before the
fleet sailed from England. In the next, seasonable notice had not been given
here, to make preparation for its arrival, and for that part which the colonies
were to bear in the enterprise. And lastly, there was want of a number of
thoroughly and sufficiently experienced pilots for the river; at least, of such
as the admiral, who was doubtless a gentleman of very good sense and
accomplishments, could place full confidence in, and rely upon; which seems to
have entirely disconcerted him. Some have hinted at deep, dark and treacherous
designs, relative to this expedition. Nor is it strange that there should have
been some suspicions of this sort, considering who were then at the helm, and
how some other matters were carried on about that time. But that there was
really any treachery in the case, is by no means clear, or certain; and
perhaps, upon laying all things together, very improbable. However, it is quite
beyond the design of this appendix, to make any sort of inquiry into that
matter; which, to be sure, would be of no advantage to those, whose
gratification was proposed hereby.

AS the account of these two expeditions was introduced with the mention of one
which preceeded them, when both Canada and New England were in their infant
state; it may be followed with the mention of another, which was planned since
these; but without being carried into execution, or so much as attempted,
except so far as the enlisting of troops here for that end. This was during the
last war, viz. in 1746. The orders from Great Britain for making these levies,
were dated in April that year. Many troops were raised in the colonies on so
important an occasion; some of which were rendezvous'd at Saratoga above
Albany. But at length, to our great surprise and mortification, in October of
the following year, orders were received here for disbanding the troops. Why
this design was not then prosecuted, there are others that know better than the
author of these few pages.

BUT be thankful, my countrymen and fellow subjects, that what all who have
well understood, and heartily desired, the true interest of British America,
ever esteemed the grand, essential point, is now gained. QUEBEC, after repeated
struggles and efforts, is at length reduced: QUEBEC, I had almost called it
that Pandora's box, from whence unnumber'd plagues have issued for more than an
hundred years, to distress, to enfeeble, to lay waste, these northern colonies;
and which might, perhaps, in the end have proved fatal to them! An acquisition,
the consequence of which, if maintained, must prove, not only the utter ruin of
the French power and interest in America; but in time, according to the natural
course of things, the exalting of these little provinces and colonies, as it
were into as many kingdoms; and consequently, the raising of the British empire
in Europe, on which they will continue dependent, to an height and dignity
amongst the nations, which it never knew before. However, although this is not a
sermon, it may be just added here, that under the government and providence of
God, all this will depend, in some measure, on our own wisdom, virtue and
piety: For even our prosperity, without these qualities, may prove our ruin. A
pagan said wisely, whether justly or not, as applied to ancient Rome, "Diis te
minorem quod geris, imperas:
"Hinc omne principium, huc refer exitum"!
Which being put into a more christian style, in plain prose, may be expressed
thus: You are exalted above other nations, because you are virtuous, and walk
humbly with your God: From hence deduce the origin of your power, its increase
and grandeur; and to the contrary ascribe its fall! -- Or you may take the sum
of it in the words of a certain wise King, who flourished in the days of old:
"Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people."

TO conclude: However unfortunate the former expeditions against Canada were,
in the reigns of K. William and Q. Ann, especially the latter, wherein the
fleet met with such difficulties and disasters; the last of all has been
attended with such prosperity, as will gloriously distinguish the reign of K.
GEORGE II. In the success of whose fleets and arms the elements seem now to
interest themselves, for bringing down the pride of France.

"O nimium DILECTE DEO, cui militat ether,
"Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti!" Claud.
O HEAV'N-BELOV'D! The skies their succors lend;
Thy arms the tides, and rolling seas, befriend,
And winds conspiring on thy fleets attend!
TILL pride shall cease its neighbors to invade,
And swains at ease enjoy their humble shade:
Till guilty spears shall cease to blush with gore,
And swords be drunk with christian blood no more;
Till harmless those in pruning hooks are found,
And these in plough-shares mark the furrowed ground:
Till exiled PEACE returning from above
To human-kind propitious, heavenly dove!
Shall olive to each clime, each country bring,
And spread ore nations wide her fost'ring wing:
Till wrath and hate are banished in their turn,
And every bread with purer flames shall burn!
Till then, O HEAVEN! till then indulgent smile,
Freedom thy guardian care, and BRITAIN'S isle!
Till then HER liberties pro^^^^; for those,
Not to her Monarchs, but (...) THEE she owes.
GREAT SOURCE of liberty! the Tyrant's AWE,
Boundless in power, but goodness still thy law,
Till then such Kings as GEORGE to Britain lend;
Such ministers as PIT successive send;
Such admirals as late have ruled the main;
Such generals as fought on ABRAH'M'S The late field of battle near Quebec, so
called*
plain;
(WOLF, not till death immortal; NAME renowned!)
Or AMHERST still with annual laurels crowned! --
So lawless power shall bend, and Britain's rise,
That creep in dust, and this ascend the skies,
While earth's oppressors half-repentant stand,
Awed by the justice of her lifted hand;
And wild ambition feels THY chast'ning rod
Till KINGS MOST CHRISTIAN may -- believe A GOD!

