The WISDOM of GOD In the Permission of SIN, VINDICATED; In Answer to a late
Pamphlet, Entitled, An ATTEMPT, etc.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, A.M. Author of the SERMONS on the WISDOM of God in the
Permission of SIN.

HE is the Rock; his Work is perfect: For all his Ways are Judgment: a God of
Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right is he.

DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 4. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite to the
Probate-Office in Queen Street. 1760.

The PREFACE.
IF the divine Conduct toward the intellectual System can be vindicated there
will be no Room for any Dispute about his Decrees. If God always does what is
best for him to do, his decreeing from Eternity to do so, cannot be objected
against: Unless we can suppose it to be wrong, for God to determine upon a
Conduct in all Respects right. -- All God's Decrees primarily respect his own
Conduct. First, what a World to create. Secondly, how to be have toward his
Creatures, in every particular Circumstance For, "God executes his Decrees in
the Works of Creation and Providence." -- The whole of the divine Conduct
toward intelligent Beings, after they are brought into Existence, may be
arranged under these two general Heads. (1.) What he does. (2.) What he
forbears to do. -- For Instance, He placed our first Parents in the Garden: he
forbid them to eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, on Pain of Death.
These Things he did. -- He did not hinder the Serpent from tempting; nor our
first Parents from eating. These Things he forbore to do. -- If he always has a
good Reason for doing what he does, and for forbearing what he forbears; then
(...) whole Conduct, as comprehending both (...) justifiable. --

To vindicate the Conduct of the Holy One of Israel, was the Design of my
Sermons on the Wisdom of God in the Permission of SIN. But the Author of the
Attempt not believing, that God has done so well in this Affair as he might
have done, has undertaken to write against -- Against whom? against me? -- no,
-- rather, to write against his Maker. -- For he does not deny the Fact, viz.
that God permits Sin. But endeavors to prove, that God in this, as well as in
some other things, has not done "what was most for his own Glory." -- So that
the Design of the following Pages, is not to vindicate my self, but to
vindicate the GOD that made us all. -- I have certainly the best Side of the
Question; and could I do Justice to the Subject, I might expect the Approbation
of all the Friends of God. -- For, as a dutiful Child loves to hear, the
righteous Cause of his injured Father pleaded; so does every true Christian,
every real Child of God, love to hear the Works and Ways of the holy One of
Israel justified. And even when they cannot fully see the Reasons of the divine
Con^^^^, they are disposed to believe that he (...) done well; because he is an
absolutely perfect Being, who cannot err. -- Nor do I know how to be so
uncharitable to the Author of the Attempt, as to suppose that he will, on
second Thoughts, in good Earnest, abide by what he has published. Rather I
hope, his Belief, that "supreme Wisdom cannot err," will finally prevail over
his Doubts, that "God does in Fact what is not most for his own Glory."

CONTENTS.
THAT God permits Sin, is plain Fact. (p. 1.) -- Is no secret Thing. (p. 2.) --
And if we give up his Conduct in this as unjustifiable we must give up the
absolute Perfection of his Nature, and all Religion. (p. 2, 3.) -- The Author
of the Attempt does not deny the Fact, (p. 4.) -- But condemns the Divine
Conduct, (p. 7, 8*) -- Which is proved to be wise and good, from the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, (p. 9.) -- The Approbation of all holy Beings
in Heaven and Earth, (p. 10, 11.) -- From the Nature of Religion in general,
(p. 11.) -- From the Proceedings of the Day of Judgment. (p. 11, 12.) --
OBJECTIONS answered, (p. 13.) -- If Sin is a Device of the Devil, yet God
suffered him to devise this Evil, (p. 13.) -- For wise Ends. (p. 14.) -- The
Author of the Attempt implicitly owns it, (p. 13.) -- Denies it, (p. 14.) --
owns it, (p. 15.) and denies it, (p. 16.) -- He endeavors to prove, that God
is not obliged, from the Perfections of his own Nature, to do what is most for
his own Glory. (p. 18.) -- Dr. Cudworth and others, condemn his Reasoning, as
Atheistical, etc. (p. 19 -- 21.) -- It plainly savours of the greatest Vanity,
Arrogance, and Impiety, (p. 21, 22.) -- As the Author of the Attempt implicitly
acknowleges, (p. 23.) -- And so he is condemned of himself. (p. 24, 25) -- His
Objections against the Works of Creation considered, (p. 25 -- 28.) -- His
Manner of Reasoning in general against the Wisdom of the Divine Conduct,
contrary to Common Sense, (p. 29.) -- His particular Objections, the Result of
Ignorance, or Perverseness, (p. 29, 30.) -- GENESIS xlv. 5. explained. (p. 31.) --
Sin, as evil in its own Nature, to be as much hated, and mourned for, on that
Account, as if no Good was ever brought out of it, (p. 30 -- 35.) -- And that
notwithstanding it is God's Will to permit it. (p. 35, 36.) -- And God's
Conduct in forbidding, and in permitting, perfectly consistent, (p. 35, -- 45.)
-- No Encouragement to Sin, but the contrary, to the highest Degree, (p. 38,
39.) -- God not the Author of Sin, (p. 40, 41.) -- The true Scripture-Reason
why God permits Sin, (p. 44, 45.) -- GENESIS vi. 6. It repented the Lord, and it
grieved him at his Heart, explained, (p. 45 -- 48.) -- Scripture-Instances of
God's permitting Sin for wise and holy Ends, (p. 49, 50.) -- How these
Instances are to the Purpose, (p. 51, and 75.) -- We may believe, there was no
better Way to answer the glorious Ends God had in View, (p. 54) -- Without
limiting the holy ONE of Israel, (p. 55.) -- The Inhabitants of Heaven pleased
with the Divine Conduct, how dark soever it appears to us, (p. 55, 56.) -- Good
Ends answered, (p. 56, 57.) -- Holy Beings capable of eternal Progress in all
Divine Virtues, (p. 57.) -- The present Plan, of Use to confirm holy Beings;
and the best Plan for a swift Progress in Holiness and Happiness, (p. 56 --
62.) -- Our natural Prejudices against it, from a vicious Temper, and wholly
unreasonable, (p. 60 -- 68.) The meaning of that Saying, " Sin is not God's
Scheme, but a Device of the Devil." (p. 68.) -- The absolute Necessity of
believing the Wisdom of the Divine Conduct, in order to true Holiness, (p. 69
-- 71.) -- The whole Scheme of the Author of the Attempt sum'd up, (p. 71, 72.)
A summary Answer to the whole, (p. 72, etc.) -- The Government of the World
entirely in God's Hands, (p. 72.) -- His Providence extends to all the less,
and therefore much more to all the greater Concerns of the intellectual System,
(p. 73 -- 75.) -- And as he is an absolutely perfect Being, so he cannot but
order all things in the best Manner, (p. 76.) -- And as he is immutable,
omniscient, and all-sufficient, so it is impossible that he should alter his
Plan himself, or that any of his Creatures should disconcert his Schemes, (p.
76 -- 79.) -- And as he is perfectly happy, so he must be perfectly pleased
with his own Conduct, (p. 79, 80.) -- Nor have we the least Reason to doubt the
Wisdom of his Ways, because we cannot understand them, (p. 80, 81.) -- The
Fault not in God, but in us, (p. 81 -- 84.) -- It becomes us to mend our
selves, and not blame the Holy One of Israel, (p. 85, 86.) for supreme Wisdom
cannot err, (p. 86.)

ERRATA.
PAge 30. l. 20. read FOR -- P. 49. l. 35. r. Pi-hahiroth -- P. 79. l. 6. r.
rise -- ibid. l. 29. r. tried. --

Lately Published, and Sold by S. Kneeland, in Queen Street.
SIN, through Divine Interposition, an Advantage to the Universe; and yet, this
is no Excuse for Sin, or Encouragement to it; illustrated and proved: And GOD's
Wisdom and Holiness in the Permission of Sin; and that his Will herein is the
same with his Revealed Will, shown and confirmed.

In three Sermons from ROMANS III. 5, -- 8. Preached at Sheffield, January 1759.
By Samuel Hopkins, A. M.

N. B. These Sermons may be considered as an Appendix to the Rev. Mr. Bellamy's
Discourses on the Wisdom of GOD in the Permission of Sin, lately published.

And are calculated to show the Weakness and Absurdity of an anonymous
Pamphlet, which has lately made its Appearance, entitled, An ATTEMPT, etc.
Being a full Answer to the Substance of said Pamphlet; though composed and
preached before that made its Appearance.

A VINDICATION Of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin.
The INTRODUCTION.
THAT God permits Sin, is plain Fact, cannot admit of Dispute, and needs no
Proof. Or if any should be so weak as to deny the Fact, it may be easily
proved. For all acknowledge that Sin is in the World; but if God had
interposed, and effectually hindered its ever coming into the World, it never
would have been. That he did not interpose and effectually hinder it, is
therefore as certain, as that Sin is now in the World. And God's not hindering
Sin, is what I call his permitting it. -- And this Fact, that God permits Sin,
gives Rise to this Question, viz. Is it wisest and best, that God should
conduct as he does in this Affair?

HAD we a comprehensive View of God's universal Plan, and a perfectly holy
Taste, the whole of the divine Conduct toward the intellectual System, of
Course, must appear to us now in this World, perfect in Wisdom, Glory and
Beauty; as, it is acknowledged, it will, to all holy Beings at the Day of
Judgment. But as the evil and dreadful Consequences of Sin to us at present
engross our Attention, and the Good to be bro't out of Evil, how great soever
it may be, is almost entirely out of Sight, to be sure, to the Generality of
Men; and not at all suited to please a vicious Taste, were it in ever so clear
View; it is no wonder if it be very difficult to bring a guilty apostate World
to think well of the divine Conduct in this Affair. And yet if we once
conclude, that the holy One of Israel has not done what is most for his own
Glory, nor what was wisest and best to do; we must inevitably give up the
absolute Perfection of the divine Nature, -- which will overturn all Religion
by the Roots.

To say, that secret Things belong to God, and we ought not to think of this
Part of the divine Conduct; nor is it our Duty to believe it to be wise, or to
acquiesce in it, as such; will not satisfy a pious, judicious Mind. Indeed,
were it a secret Thing, and had we no Evidence of the Fact, it might justly put
an End to all our Enquiries. But God's permitting Sin is in Truth no secret
Thing. It is revealed, it is as open and manifest as that God made and governs
the World. It is often, very often held up to our View in the holy Scriptures,
by God himself, on Purpose that we might think of it. And it is acknowledged on
all Hands, that it is our Duty to search the Scriptures, and take special
Notice of what we find written there, and meditate on every Part of the divine
Conduct therein held forth to our View; since the whole is calculated and
designed for our Instruction. 2 Timothy iii. ^ -- And as it is an acknowledged
Fact, that God has permitted Sin in Millions of Instances, from the Beginning
of the World to this Day, and will continue to do so through eternal Ages; so
there is no avoiding a View of his Conduct, but by the greatest Stupidity, or
shutting our Eyes in the most obstinate Manner. -- Nay, this will not do it; we
cannot but think of it sometimes in this World, and shall for ever think of it
in the World to come. And we must approve or disapprove; for it is so
interesting an Affair, that we cannot stand Neuter. If we disapprove now, and
for ever; we cannot acquiesce in God's Ways in this World, nor join the
heavenly Hosts at the Day of Judgment, in saying, Amen, Hallelujah! And God, of
Necessity, must look upon us as Enemies to him, and Malcontents in his
Kingdom, and treat us accordingly. It is therefore of the last Importance that
we approve. -- But if God's Conduct is not wise, it is not our Duty to approve
of it. Rather we ought to be sorry, and lament, that God has done as he has:
Which would suppose him to be to Blame: Which would imply that he is not an
absolutely perfect Being. And if so, he is not God. And if there is no God, all
Religion is overthrown. Therefore we must believe the divine Conduct to be
wise. -- But how shall this Belief be obtained? -- Firstly and chiefly by an
implicit Faith in the absolute Perfection of the divine Nature. -- Which --
Secondly, may be strengthened, by a View of the Wisdom of such Parts of the
divine Conduct as we can more fully comprehend. -- Which -- Thirdly, may be
still more confirmed by right Views of the true Nature of God's universal Plan.
-- All these I have endeavored to lead my Readers to attend unto, in my
Sermons on the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin.

AND had the Author of the Attempt carefully attended to the Subject, as I had
stated it, and entered thoroughly into my Reasonings, I should naturally have
been led to review the whole, and to retract or confirm, as Light and Truth
appeared. -- But this he has not done; but rather, to use his own Words,
according to his professed Design, he has exerted himself to the utmost to set
out the Doctrine, "if possible, in all its Horror and Deformity." (p. 8.) So
that what I have to do, is to take off this ill Dress, and array it in its
native Beauty; that the divine Conduct in the Permission of Sin may not be
blasphemed by ignorant and wicked Men through his Means; and the moral Rectitude
of the divine Nature given up, to the Subversion of all Religion. Nor shall any
thing in his Piece that needs an Answer, pass unconsidered.

SECTION I. Several Particulars, wherein the Author of the SERMONS on the
Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin, and the Author of the ATTEMPT, are
agreed.
WE should always exactly state the Point in Controversy before we begin to
dispute. Wherefore let us see how far this Author agrees with us; that the
Point of Difference may be made to stand out in clear View. -- And

1. WE agree, that Sin is in the World, and that dreadful have been the
Consequences for above 5000 Years: And it is likely to issue in the eternal
Ruin of great Multitudes of God's Creatures.

2. WE agree, that Sin is the very worst of Evils in its own Nature, and it
naturally tends to evil, and only to evil; to dishonor God, and ruin the System.

3. WE agree, that the eternal Ruin of such great Multitudes of God's
Creatures, considered in it is self, is an infinitely dreadful Thing.

4. WE agree, that all the Sin and Misery, that has, or ever will take Place in
the System through eternal Ages (how infinitely dreadful soever the whole must
appear to one who has a perfect comprehensive View of it all at once) even the
whole lay open, full and plain to the divine View, before God created the
World. And that he had as full, perfect and lively an Apprehension of it,
before he began to create, as he ever will have to eternal Ages.

5. WE agree, that, if God had pleased, he could have hindered the Existence of
Sin, and caused Misery to have been forever unknown in his Dominions, with as
much Ease, as to have suffered Things to take their present Course.

6. WE agree, that God knew with infallible Certainty, that Things would take
their present Course, and issue as they will issue, in the eternal Ruin of
Millions, unless he himself should interpose, and effectually hinder it.

7. WE agree, that God did, as it were, stand by, and take a perfect View of
the whole Chain of Events, in which his Honor and the Good of his Creation was
infinitely interested: and in a full View, and under a most lively Sense of the
whole, did deliberately forbear to interpose effectually to hinder the
Introduction of Sin into his World, when he could have hindered it, as easily
as not.

8. WE agree, that Angels and Men were under the greatest Obligations to love
and obey God, and were left to their own free Choice: and that God was not
obliged, in point of Justice, to do any more for them than he did: And that the
whole Blame lies at the Creatures Door: and that God is righteous in punishing
his sinning Creatures, according to the Declarations of his Word. -- All these
Particulars I had asserted: -- None of them has he denied: -- Nor does it
appear that we differ in any of these Things.

SECTION II. The grand Point in Controversy exactly stated.
THE grand Point of Difference is precisely this -- I believe that the
infinitely holy and wise God, in every Part of his Conduct, relative to the
intellectual System, does that which is really wisest and best for him to do;
most for his Glory and the Good of the System, in the whole; and therefore,
that God's present Plan is, of all possible Plans, the best; most for his Glory
and the Good of the System. -- On the Contrary, the Author of the Attempt
believes, that God is not obliged to do, and that in fact he does not do, that
which is most for his own Glory, or most for the Good of the System; and is
fully persuaded that the present Plan is so far from being the best, that it
had been infinitely more for the Glory of God, and Good of the System, if Sin
had never happened.

IN the Sermons he objects against (p. 104, 105.) it had been said, that from
the Perfections of the divine Nature alone, we have such full Evidence, that he
must always act in the wisest and best Manner, as that we ought not in the
least to doubt it: -- Before the Foundation of the World, this System now in
Existence, and all other possible Systems, all equally lay open to the divine
View, and one as easy to Almightiness as another: He had his Choice; he had
none to please but himself: Besides him there was no Being: he had a perfectly
good Taste, and nothing to bias his Judgment, and was infinite in Wisdom: This
he chose: and this, of all possible Systems, therefore was the best, infinite
Wisdom and perfect Rectitude being Judges.

BUT the Author of the Attempt esteems this Reasoning quite inconclusive, as it
proceeds on a false Hypothesis. "A Fallacy," he says, to suppose that God "must
necessarily always will and do that which is most for his own Glory." A Point
he does not believe, "that in fact he always does" or that "he is obliged to."
He thinks it plain in the Works of Creation, that God has not done what would
have been most for his own Glory, and that he might have done much better.
Which emboldens him to argue, that in the Works of Providence, he did not mean
to do his best. (p. 12, 13.) And he attempts to prove at large by 9 Arguments,
that it had been much better, in the whole, more for God's Glory and the
general Good of the System, if Sin and Misery had been for ever unknown. (p.
20, -- 24.) -- And if it had been better for God to have hindered Sin, it was
not wise in God to permit it.

SO that this is the fundamental and most essential Point of Difference, and
that on which the whole Controversy, between him and me, turns, viz. Whether
the whole, and every Part of the divine Conduct, be agreeable to infinite
Wisdom. -- Or, in other Words, Whether God means in the whole, and every Part
of his Conduct, to do that which he knows to be for the best, most for his
Glory and the Good of the System, on the whole. -- For we both agree, that God
always knows what is for the best, and never acts under Mistake. -- So that the
only Question really is, Whether God always means to do, what he knows to be
for the best, in the whole? -- For if he does, the grand Point is proved. The
Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin is demonstrated. -- And it is in vain to
raise Objections against that which infinite Wisdom knows to be best. -- It is
proud and arrogant, it is impious and blasphemous, for a Worm of the Dust to
take up, and dispute against his Maker. Isai. xlv. 9. Romans ix. 20.

SECTION III. God, who is a Being of infinite Wisdom and perfect Rectitude,
always conducts agreably to his own most glorious Perfections; that is, in the
most wise, holy and perfect Manner. Particularly in this Case.
WE are agreed, that this Affair of the Permission of Sin was an infinitely
important Affair. And, indeed, considering it in all its Consequences; there,
perhaps, never was a more important Affair, that God ever had to decide. It
involved in it the Welfare of the angelic World, and the Welfare of the whole
human Race; the Honor of God was infinitely concerned in the Affair; yea, the
very Life of God's own Son, did, as it were, lie at Stake: for if Sin was
permitted, the Son of God was to die. That if God ever thoroughly considered
and weighed any Affair whatever, no doubt, he did this. -- And if ever he was
concerned to act according to his best Judgment (if I may be allowed to use
such a Phrase) in any one Case, no doubt he was in this. And if God is an
absolutely perfect Being, it was simply impossible, that he should conduct, in
this infinitely important Affair, contrary to the Light of his own Mind, and
the joint Declaration of all his Perfections, infinitely to his own Dishonor,
and infinitely to the Damage of the System, absolutely without any Motive so to
do; yea, against infinite Motives to the Contrary. Nay, to suppose, that God
would deliberately and voluntarily, absolutely without any Motive, suffer his
Creatures, his own Creatures, to sin; when he knew it would be, in the whole,
infinitely better for him to hinder it; is in the most barefaced Manner to
give up the moral Rectitude of the divine Nature.

DID the Inhabitants of Heaven view the divine Conduct in the Permission of
Sin, in this blasphemous Light, and firmly believe God to be such a Being, in
Stead of crying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is
full of his Glory, as they did when God gave up Israel of old to Blindness of
Mind and Hardness of Heart ( Isai. 6.) They would rather sink down into amazing
Grief, and fill all Heaven with loud Lamentations.

AND Saints on Earth, in Stead of singing their ancient melodious Song, The
Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice; let the Multitude of Isles be glad
thereof; might rather, if these Things were so, with the captive Jews, hang
their Harps on the Willows, put on Sackcloth, sit down in Sorrow, and refuse to
be comforted.

A firm Belief of the infinite Wisdom and perfect Rectitude of the divine
Nature and Government, is essential to the very Foundation of all true
Religion: For it is the very Reason of our Love to God, of our Joy in him,
rejoicing in his universal Government, acquiescing in all his Dispensations,
even those which we cannot understand, and of our cheerful Obedience to all his
Commands. If therefore we give up this Belief, we must give up all Religion:
and shall be in as bad or worse Condition than if we believed there were really
no God at all.

AND this Doctrine of the Wisdom and Rectitude of the divine Government is also
the very Foundation of that Doctrine plainly taught in Scripture, and
universally believed by all Christians, viz. That at the Day of Judgment the
Righteousness of all God's Ways will be made manifest to all the World, and the
Wisdom of all his Conduct cleared up before the intellectual System, to God's
everlasting Honor, to the Joy of all holy Beings, and to the eternal Confusion
of all God's Enemies. ( Jude 15.) For then will the Lord come with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly among them -- of all their HARD SPEECHES, which ungodly Sinners
have spoken against him. -- But if God's Ways have not in fact been wise and
good, they cannot, at the Day of Judgment, when all Things will be bro't to
Light, appear to be so. -- If God has done wrong (Heaven forbid the Blasphemy!)
all the World will know it then. And if God has deliberately and voluntarily
acted contrary to his better Judgment, in this infinitely important Affair of
the Permission of Sin, absolutely for no good End at all, and absolutely
without any Motive, it will then appear before the Eyes of Angels, Men and
Devils, to God's eternal Reproach, to the eternal Grief of all his Friends, and
to the eternal Triumph of all his Enemies, who will be glad to see the Being,
they most of all hate, fall under Blame, as well as themselves.

IF this were the Case, it would be (for aught I can see) more for God's Honor,
that there never should be a Day of Judgment, and that the Truth of things
never should come to Light. Yea, it had been better if God had never made the
World.

AND now does the Author of the Attempt in very Deed believe all this horrid
Blasphemy; that he should blame me so much, for being so confident, that all
God's Conduct is wise and good; and his present Plan, of all possible Plans,
the best! For, why should he blame me so much for my Belief, unless he is
strong in the Belief of his own Scheme!

A DIALOGUE between A. the Author of the ATTEMPT, and B. the Author of the
SERMONS on the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin.
A. No. I abhor all this Blasphemy with all my Heart. I firmly believe that all
the divine Conduct is "good, right, best" -- "Right in Matter, Manner and Aim"
-- the Result of "supreme Wisdom, which cannot err." -- But I affirm, that Sin
is "no Part of God's Scheme; but a Device of the Devil." -- "God's original
Scheme was to have all holy and happy." -- The Devil has disconcerted it by his
Rebellion, and God is heartily grieved. -- Did I believe the present Scheme to
be God's, I should think it extremely dangerous opposing it; and that it would
argue the highest Vanity, Arrogance and Impiety. (p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 24, etc.)


B. IF by "Sin not being God's Scheme, but the Device of the Devil," you mean,
that God did not voluntarily permit Sin; but that the Devil brought it in, in
Spite of all that God could do to hinder him; why do you maintain, that God did
not mean to do, in this Affair, what he knew was most for his own Glory? For
according to this, God exerted himself to the utmost, to secure his own Glory,
and the Good of the System too; and would have obtained his End, had not his
almighty Power been overmatch'd by the Devil. This therefore cannot be your
Meaning: unless you would be inconsistent with your self.

IF you only mean, that the Devil sinned, and not God; I grant it. But the
Question still remains unanswered. Pray, therefore, tell me, why did the
infinitely wise and almighty God permit such a glorious Angel, as Satan once
was, ever to devise such Mischief? ever to perpetrate so shocking a Deed? a
Deed pregnant with infinite and eternal Woes! -- Pray, tell me plainly, did God
act wisely in this Affair, or did he not? -- He had some End in View, or no
End. -- Not no End: for that would reflect upon his Wisdom. -- If some End, it
was a good End, or a bad one. -- Not a bad one: for he is a most perfect Being.
Therefore it must be a good one. That is, when God determined to permit Sin,
upon a full View of the whole Affair, he knew it wisest and best, to permit it
-- i. e. he knew, that that Plan, in which so much Sin and Misery should take
Place, would be better, in the whole, than a Plan in which Sin and Misery
should for ever be effectually prevented by his constant Interposition. And it
he knew this to be the best Plan, it was doubtless his "original" Plan: for an
infinitely wise and perfect Being, who "cannot err," would originally choose,
what, upon the whole, he knew to be the best. This is not a Point peculiar to
calvinistic Divines; but as strongly asserted by Men of Learning in general. If
the Author and Governor of the World be infinitely perfect, then -- of all
possible Systems he has chosen the best." -- "That is, the System in which the
greatest Quantity of Happiness and Perfection obtains, that can in the Nature
of things take Place. -- This is the joint Doctrine of Reason and Revelation.
Dr. Turnbull, Chris. Phil. p. 35, 47.



A. "THIS is what, I conceive, I have a Right, as a Man, and a Christian, to
oppose." (p. 4.) It is a mere "Fallacy" to pretend, "that the present Scheme
"is most for the Glory of God; because he must necessarily always will and do
that which is most for his own Glory." I think you much to blame for being so
"positive." For my Part, I do not believe, "that God does in Fact, or that he
is obliged to do, what is most for his declarative Glory." (p. 12, 13.) And I
can prove by a Variety of Arguments, that it had been better, infinitely
better, infinitely more for the Honor of God, and Good of the System, if Sin
had never been. (p. 19, 24.)


B. WHAT! -- plainly contradict yourself so soon, my Friend! -- However, --
pray, do give me an Instance, wherein infinite Wisdom ever erred; and wherein
God did not do what was on the whole most for his own Glory.


A. IT is plain God might, have made the World much better than he did: And if
after he had made the World, he had hindered the Existence of Sin, it had been
infinitely more to his Honor, and to the Good of the System. (p. 12, 13.
compared with p. 20, -- 24.)


B. PRAY, how then do you think, the whole of the divine Conduct will appear at
the Day of Judgment? If not only his Works of Creation are defective; but if,
in this infinitely important Affair of the Permission of Sin, God has done what
he knew was not for the best; permitted Sin, when it had been infinitely
better, if he had hindered it.


A. I AM of the Opinion, that, at the Day of Judgment, all God's Works and Ways
will appear to be good. Full Day will be then poured on all the Ways and Works
of God; to the unspeakable Joy of those, who now heartily acquiesce in the
Dispensations of supreme Wisdom; and humbly admire and adore, where they cannot
fully comprehend. (p. 31.) For I firmly believe, that all the divine Conduct is
the Result of "supreme Wisdom which cannot err." (p. 14.)


B. DEAR Sir, what do you mean? -- All the divine Conduct the Result of
"supreme Wisdom which cannot err." -- So that "all his Works and Ways will bear
the Light of full Day." -- And when brought into the clearest View, will appear
to be "the Dispensations of supreme Wisdom," worthy to be "heartily acquiesced
in" by all wise and holy Intelligences, with "unspeakable Joy." -- Although they
all will see in the clearest Light, that God has made and governed the World in
such a Manner, as he himself knew was not for the best, not most for his Glory,
nor most for the Good of the System! -- What! will all holy Beings at the Day
of Judgment, think it best, that God has not done best! and wisest, that he has
counteracted his Wisdom! -- And most glorious, that he should do what he knew
was not most for his Glory, and for the Good of the System! And humbly "admire
and adore" his acting contrary to his own infinite Wisdom, Holiness and
Goodness, as firmly believing this was the Result of "supreme Wisdom which
cannot err!" -- Pray, explain yourself on this Point.


A. WHAT I say, is really true. "Supreme Wisdom cannot err." -- So far as God
has been concerned in the Transactions of the System, they must be good, right,
best. But "Sin is no Part of God's Scheme, but a Device of the Devil." (p. 14,
16.)


B. VERY well, Sir. -- And do I understand you now? -- Do you really mean, that
God in permitting the Devil and other wicked Beings to do as they do -- that
God in this has done what was indeed "good, right, best"? -- For if God's
Conduct is but approved of (you may condemn the Devil as much as you please) my
Point is gained -- the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin is acknowledged.
-- Pray, speak plainly. --


A. INDEED, Sir, I do doubt, whether God does in Fact, and therefore whether he
is obliged to do, what is most for his declarative Glory. (p. 13.) And I do
believe, it had been infinitely better if Sin had never been. (p. 20, -- 24.)


B. WHY then do you profess firmly to believe, that the whole of the divine
Conduct "is good, right, best"? And that "supreme Wisdom cannot err"? And that
"all the divine Dispensations are to be heartily acquiesced in, as being
supremely wise"? (p. 14, 31.) How can these Things be consistent?

HAD you, Sir, justified your Maker, fully acknowledged the Wisdom of God in
the Permission of Sin; and wherein my Solutions of Difficulties appeared to you
not sufficient, had you given better; still endeavoring to justify the Ways of
God to Men, and to assist the People of God in their Belief of the Wisdom of
all the divine Conduct; and so to animate their Love, and quicken their
Obedience; you had merited the Thanks of the Public, and the Love of all pious
People, and might have been approved of even in Heaven. -- But do you think,
Almighty GOD will be pleased, to have his Conduct in the Permission of Sin
disputed against, and set in the "most horrible, deformed Light possible," by
one of his own Subjects, who ought to love him, approve of all his Ways, and
plead his Cause, in this revolted World! Or do you expect, that the Friends of
God in Heaven or Earth, will be suited with your ATTEMPT, who are all united in
believing concerning God, as it is written in Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4. He is the Rock,
his Work is perfect: For all his Ways are Judgment: a God of Truth, and without
Iniquity, just and right is he!


A. WHETHER what I have published, is consistent or no, I should be extremely
glad of a Reply to my Objections. (p. 30.)


B. A FULL Reply to almost all your Objections has been already given: partly
in Mr. Edwards on Liberty, partly in My Sermons on the Wisdom of God in the
Permission of Sin, and still more fully in Mr. Hopkins's Sermons on Romans iii.
5, -- 8. to which you may be referred.


A. BUT there is one Argument, on which I lay great Weight. Yea, on which I
build my whole Scheme, viz. that as "God does not in Fact, so he is not obliged
to do, what is most for his declarative Glory." -- An Argument you have none of
you answered. I have expressed it in these Words, viz.

IT is allowed by all, that God is infinite in Power, and that Space is
infinite. Now here is evidently Room for endless Displays of divine Glories. In
no definite Period of Time; in no given Quantity of Space, can there be a full
Discovery of God's Glories; because they are absolutely infinite. And therefore
may we not with the utmost Safety affirm, there is not now such a Display? We
know there is now a greater Display of God's various natural and moral
Perfections, than seven thousand Years ago: for there are now Multitudes of
rational Beings, which then were not; and an Infinity of other Objects; in
which are surprising Manifestations of Wisdom, Power and Goodness, etc. Had God
been obliged to make as great Displays, as he could, of his Perfections, he
must from Eternity have produced into Existence all possible Beings; the
Contrary of which is evident. And may we not be naturally led from this to
doubt, whether God has so much Glory from the Things which now exist, as he
might have had? Especially when we consider the obvious Defects and Blemishes
there are; and can easily imagine how these might be corrected by infinite
Wisdom. (p. 13.)


B. TRUE, Sir, we have none of us answered this Argument. Nor did we expect it
would be used by any in this Country, as I believe it never was before. It has
often been used by professed Atheists, in other Countries; who, from the
pretended Defects of the natural World, have argued that it could not be the
Work of an absolutely perfect Being; and so that we have no Evidence that there
is such a Being. And it has been abundantly answered by some of the most
learned Writers in our Nation, in their Attempts to establish the Belief of a
God, i. e. of an absolutely perfect Being.

SUFFER me, Sir, to give you two or three short Extracts out of Dr. Cudworth's
intellectual System, where, writing in Confutation of Atheism, he says, Their
first Objection is against Providence, as to the Fabric of the World, from the
Faultiness of the Mundane System, intellectually considered, and in order to
Ends; quia tanta stat praedita Culpa; that because it is so ill-made, therefore
it could not be by a God. Where the Atheist takes it for granted, that
whosoever asserts a God, or a perfect Mind, to be the Original of all Things,
does therefore ipso facto suppose all Things to be well made; and as they
should be. And this doubtless was the Sense of all the ancient Theologers. (p.
875.) -- As in some modern Theists, who pretend to solve the Difficulty by
saying, "quia Deus non tenetur ad optimum, because God is no where bound or
obliged to the best," he shows the Absurdity of their Scheme. p. 873, etc. --
In p. 874, he says, God is -- an impartial Balance -- weighing out Heaven and
Earth, and all the Things therein, in the most just and exact Proportion, and
not a Grain too much or too little of any thing. Nor is the Deity therefore
bound or obliged to do the best, in any Way of Servility, much less by the Law
and Command of any Superior, but only by the Perfection of its own Nature,
which it cannot possibly deviate from, no more than ungod itself. In Conclusion
therefore, we acknowledge the Atheists Argument to be thus far good; that if
there be a God, then of Necessity must all Things be well made; and as they
should be; and vice versa. But no Atheist will ever be able to prove, that
either the whole System of the World could have been better made, or that so
much as one thing therein is made ineptly.

AND having spent several Pages in answering various Objections of atheistical
Writers against the Works of Creation, and Providence, he concludes the whole
(p. 899.) in these Words. And now having fully confuted all the atheistical
Grounds, we confidently conclude, that -- there is one only necessary Existent,
the Cause of all other Things; and this an absolutely perfect Being, infinitely
good, wise, and powerful; who has made all things that were fit to be made,
and according to the best Wisdom, and exercises an exact Providence over all.
Thus far Dr. Cudworth.

AND this doubtless is the Belief of Christian Divines in general, of whatever
Denomination. To be sure Dr. Whitby is full in it. These are his Words, As it
would be in us an intolerable Piece of Insolence to say, against the plainest
Declarations of the Scripture, that God did not in Wisdom make the World,
because we are not able to discern the Wisdom of all things framed in it; so
must it be an equal Insolence in us to say, God does not act in the preserving
it, and in the ordering of Affairs in it, according to the Measures of true
Goodness, because we -- cannot dive into the Reasons of his Dispensations. See
Dr. Whitby's Discourses, IId Edit. p. 495.

TO which let me add a short Extract out of Dr. Turnbull's Christian
Philosophy, p. 35. The Creation of an all-perfect Mind must be the Image of
it is Creator; and therefore it must be perfect, it must be chosen by infinite
Wisdom and Goodness as the most perfect System, that is, the System in which
the greatest Quantity of Happiness and Perfection obtains, that can in the
Nature of things take Place; and this being the Case, all the seeming
Imperfections and Evils in it, are such only in a partial View; and with
Respect to the whole System they are Goods.

YEA, Mr. Chubb himself, though justly numbered among infidel Writers, had juster
Notions of God's moral Character, than to think, that God might do better than
he does. These are his Words, I shall take it for granted, that God is, and
that he is necessarily an immense, eternal, all-knowing, all-powerful, a
self-sufficient, and an unchangeable Being. This being allowed, from hence it
will follow, that as God is always capable of doing what is most worthy and
valuable, in it self, and which in the Nature of things, is right, good, best
and fittest to be done, seeing he knows wherein the Goodness, Fitness, and
Valuableness of every Action lies: So he always will act thus, because right,
good, fit, etc. are so very beautiful, and excellent in themselves; and are so
preferable, in the Nature of things, to their Contraries, that they always will
afford a proper and sufficient Motive, etc. Tracts, p. 252.

BUT to come to a more particular Consideration of your Argument, the grand
Argument on which your whole Scheme is built; yea, the only Argument you use,
to prove, that God might permit Sin, although he knew it was not for the best;
not most for his Glory, or the Good of the System: and that therefore we can
have no Certainty that he would not, from the absolute Perfection of his
Nature. -- And this, in a few Words, is the Sum of it.

GOD in the Work of Creation has not done his best, but might have done
infinitely better. -- If this be so in one Instance, it may in another. --
Therefore we can have no Assurance, from the absolute Perfection of the divine
Nature, that God means to do what is best in his Works of Providence; but have
Reason to think he might have done infinitely better.

WELL, if it be really so, that God does not mean to order the Affairs of the
Universe in the best Manner, I have had too good an Opinion of God, and have
put too much Confidence in him. And I must learn for the Time to come to have
lower Thoughts of God, and higher Thoughts of my self. I must begin to think my
self a suitable Judge, to set up and censure God's Works and Ways, and point
out wherein he might have done better; not in the least suspecting, that God is
wiser and better than I am, and more able and willing to order Things for the
best; or that it savours of Arrogance and Pride, for a Worm of the Dust, to say
to the infinitely wise God, -- In This, O Lord, and in That, thou might have
done better. Had I been at thy right Hand, chief Director, I could have laid a
Plan for a better natural World, and for a better moral System. -- Not once
imagining, that God may have wise Reasons for all his Works and all his Ways,
which lie beyond my Reach. But rather confident, that he had no good Reason;
because I see none. Wherefore I may venture safely to censure, as unwise, any
Steps of divine Providence, the Wisdom of which I do not see. And so, the more
blind I am to the Wisdom of the divine Ways, the more Faults I may find, and
the more fully point out the divine Errata. -- And so, God must no longer be
esteemed as always acting agreeable to infinite Wisdom; because I cannot see it;
and, in the Vanity of my Mind, am entered into a Way of thinking and reasoning,
that is the Result of the greatest Folly, and pregnant with the grossest
Blasphemy.

A MORE particular Answer to your Argument is, Sir, I humbly conceive, really
needless. For if I can imagine, to my own Fancy, a better natural World, and a
better moral System; yet, as I do not know that my own Imaginations are right I
have not the least Reason to call in Question he Wisdom of the divine Conduct;
unless I put more Confidence in my Imaginations, than in "supreme Wisdom which
cannot err." But you expressly own, that you "cannot pretend to prove to a
Demonstration, that the present Scheme is not the best." (p. 5.) -- And merely
because I cannot see the Reason and Wisdom of God's Works and Ways, at once, to
doubt, whether God has acted so wisely as he might have done, just as if he
might not have good Reasons in View, which never entered into my Mind, becomes
me, neither "as a Man or a Christian." We, who do not see the whole of God's
universal Plan, nay, not the millionth Part of it, are not in a Capacity to
pronounce it a bad Plan. It becomes us rather to put an implicit Faith in the
divine Wisdom; and to believe it to be good, because it is God's. -- I a little
wonder, Sir, how you dare so freely censure the Works and Ways of God, your
Maker and final Judge!


A. COULD it be made appear, that the present Scheme is God's, I readily own it
would be extremely dangerous opposing it: And argue the highest Vanity,
Arrogance and Impiety. (p. 13, 14.)


B. VERY well, Sir, and don't you know that the natural World is wholly the
Work of God? God, and God alone was the Creator of the Universe. The Devil had
no Hand in the Work of Creation. And yet, here you oppose, "dangerous" as it
is. Yea, here you begin your Opposition. Here you discover such Defects and
Blemishes, and can easily imagine how things might have been better done; the
World might have been created much sooner and larger; and, it seems, you think,
infinitely better in the whole; infinitely more to the Glory of God, and
containing infinitely more Happiness. -- So that, for aught appears, you have
near or quite as low an Opinion of the natural, as of the moral World; and
could mend the one, as easily as the other. -- Yea, from God's not any more
consulting his own Glory in the Works of Creation, you are led to doubt whether
he has consulted it, so much as he might have done, in the Works of Providence.

BUT this arguing, you see, is directly and professedly against God's Works,
and that considered as such. And yet you say, If it could be made appear, that
the present Scheme is God's, it would be indeed extremely dangerous opposing
it. But let the Danger be greater or less, you have ventured to oppose, and
censure the Works of Creation, which you own to be God's Work. Yea, and finding
the Works of Creation so little to the Glory of God, to what they might have
been; you are induced to doubt, whether God means always to do that which he
knows would be most for his own Glory. And from this grow bold to think, that
God might, consistent with his Perfections, permit Sin (a thing he has done not
merely once, but persisted in every Day, Hour and Moment, near six thousand
Years, in almost an infinite Number of Instances) when he knew, that in the
whole, it would have been infinitely more to his Honor and the Good of the
System, if he had hindered it. -- And so, at last, really give up the moral
Character of the Deity. -- For, it is capable of strict Demonstration, that
infinite Wisdom cannot err. Find one Error therefore in all God's Works, and it
will prove to a Demonstration, that he is not infinitely wise. Much more, if
you find an Error infinitely great, and persisted in for almost six thousand
Years.


A. SIR, I proposed this "with the greatest Humility." (p. 13.)


B. PRAY, but how does it look, to make a Proposal "with the greatest
Humility," which is of such a Nature, as that the Proposer himself, at the same
Time, is obliged to own, must argue "the greatest Vanity, Arrogance and
Impiety!" -- And then by the mere Strength of such a Proposal, to attempt to
overthrow the Wisdom of God's universal Plan, even to the Ruin of the moral
Character of the Holy ONE of Israel!

IF, to all this, you should reply, This Way of Reasoning does not convince me.
I cannot believe, a Work is done in the wisest and best Manner, and most for
God's Glory, merely because God has done it. If it is arrogant and impious to
object, yet I feel inclined to object, and must do it. -- I DO DOUBT, WHETHER
GOD ALWAYS DOES IN FACT, AND THEREFORE WHETHER HE IS OBLIGED TO DO, WHAT IS
MOST FOR HIS DECLARATIVE GLORY. -- I say, if you should make this Reply, pray
suffer me, without Offense, to desire you to read Isai. xlv. 9. We unto him
that striveth with his Maker. Let the Potsherd strive with the Potsherds of the
Earth. -- It may do, sometimes, my Friend, for Worms of the Dust to find Fault
with the Works and Ways of their Fellowworms; but it is "extremely dangerous,"
to find Fault with the Works and Ways of the GREAT JEHOVAH. -- Besides,

YOU often insist, "that we should acquiesce in that Account of things we have
in Scripture." But the Scripture no where leads us to think, that God, in the
Works of Creation or Providence, ever does "what is not most for his own
Glory": but every where to the Contrary. Yea, we ourselves are required,
"whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, to do all to the Glory of God."
And can we at the same Time imagine, that God allows himself, in the most
important Affairs, to do "what is not most for his own Glory"? Would God have
us aim at his Glory more than he himself does? -- Besides, the Scriptures
inform us, that when God had finished the Work of Creation, and surveyed the
whole, he pronounced it all to be "very good;" notwithstanding all the
Objections you have to make against it. And the pious Psalmist cries out, O
Lord, how manifold are thy Works! In Wisdom have thou made them all. Psalm. civ.
24.


A. BUT why did not God from Eternity produce into Existence all possible
Beings? Would not this have displayed his Perfections more fully and to better
Advantage? (p. 13.)


B. Is there not an Absurdity in the Notion of creating from Eternity? Yea,
does it not imply a Contradiction, very evidently, to say, that any Being might
have been brought into Existence from Eternity? For if it was from Eternity, it
was always in Existence; and so could never have been brought into Existence.


A. I DID not mean strictly "from Eternity." But there is no "Period of Time"
can be mentioned, in which, God might not have created the Universe. (p. 13.)


B. ACCORDING to Scripture, In the Beginning God created the Heavens and the
Earth. -- Then TIME began. -- Strictly speaking, there was no Time before --
Nothing but Eternity. --

BUT you will say, God might have created the World SOONER.

"SOONER"! -- Pray, in what Sense? -- Not nearer the beginning of Eternity. For
Eternity never had a Beginning. -- Not so soon, but it might happen, that the
World should be just as old as it is now, when it was no older. -- Not so soon,
but that the Inhabitants of the Earth, about five or six thousand Years after
the Creation, might, with as fair Show of Reason as can now be pretended by
any, object and say, Why was not the World created SOONER? -- Not so soon,
therefore, as to obviate this Difficulty, any better than it is at present.


A. BUT God might have brought "all possible Beings" into Existence at once;
which would have given a greater Display of his Perfections. (p. 13.)


B. I BELIEVE, that God knew exactly how large it was best to create the
Universe; and in what Order to bring Beings into Existence, so as in the wisest
Manner to answer the best Ends. And I believe, he created it exactly to his
Mind: For he meant to please himself. Rev. iv. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory, Honor, and Power: For thou have created all Things, and for THY
PLEASURE they are, and WERE CREATED.

AND how know we, dear Sir, if God thinks best to have a larger Number of
Intelligences to behold his Glory, and be happy in him, but that he judges it
best not to bring them into Existence, till the present "Grand Drama" shall be
finished, at the Day of Judgment? That they may, without sharing the Hazard of
the present confused State of Things, reap the Benefit of the whole, through
eternal Ages; while Angels and Saints may be appointed their Instructors, to
lead them into the Knowledge of all God's Ways to his Creatures, and of all
their Ways to him, from the Time of Satan's Revolt in Heaven, to the final
Consummation of all Things. And so, as the Jewish Dispensation was introductory
and preparatory to the Christian; so this present Universe may be introductory
and preparatory to one, after the Day of Judgment, almost infinitely larger. If
the divine Conduct, on the present Plan, is perfect in Wisdom, Glory and
Beauty; then the present Plan may be a good Introduction to as many future
Systems, as God pleases: till the whole Sum of Good is raised to the highest
possible Degree. -- Or rather the Knowledge, Humility, Holiness and Happiness
of finite Intelligences may continually augment, with the greatest Celerity,
through eternal Ages; while System after System comes into Existence under the
best possible Advantages for the swiftest Progress in all divine Improvements.
-- But if God has missed it in the beginning of his Works, there is a
Foundation laid for ill Thoughts of him to be handed down to all succeeding
Systems through eternal Ages, if any such should ever be: And the Damage of what
is past can never be repaired, to Eternity. -- If our Author's Hypothesis is
true, it seems as if it would be a Pity any more Worlds should ever be created,
to come to the Knowledge of their Maker's Dishonor. -- Yea, a Pity the present
System ever came into Being.
That this will be the Case, I don't pretend so much as to conjecture. But I
firmly believe, that what is best, in the whole, That infinite Wisdom always
has done, and always will do. -- And here I rest.

I WILL only add, that the Death of Christ, and the Work of our Redemption,
gives a Display of the divine Perfections, infinitely fuller; and shows what
God is, in an infinitely clearer and brighter Manner, than the Creation of
Systems. -- It is a small thing with the Almighty to create Worlds; a Work
scarce worth our Notice, or worthy ever to be thought of, compared with the
Work of Redemption by the Death of his Son. To be sure, God himself, who is
infinitely the best Judge, views Things in this Light. -- For behold! (says
the Lord, speaking of this very thing) I create new Heavens, and a new Earth:
And the former shall not be remembered, nor come into Mind. Isai. lxv. 17.

THE SON of God only spoke a Word, and the old Creation came into Being: an
easy Work! But for the new Creation, all his Glory must be laid aside, he must
put on the form of a Servant, groan in the Garden, and die on the Cross! And as
his thus dying was a Work infinitely greater, than speaking a Word; so the new
Creation will be proportionably more glorious than the old. As it is written,
For behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: And the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into Mind. -- But this greatest and most glorious of all
God's Works, could never have been, had God interposed and prevented the
Existence of Sin. -- Did you, Sir, view the Work of Redemption in the Light of
Scripture, surely it must give you a different Idea of God's universal Plan.
Nor could you, if you love what God loves, think so meanly of that, which to
God appears so infinitely glorious.


A. BUT I have many Arguments to prove, that it had been infinitely better,
infinitely more to the Honor of God, and Good of the System, if Sin had never
been. Yet it is plain Fact God has permitted Sin to be. Therefore it is
certain, God does not always mean to do that which is best. (p. 13. compared
with p. 19, -- 24.)


B. HOWEVER, according to your own Concession, all your Arguments do not amount
to a Demonstration. For you say, "that you cannot pretend to prove to a
Demonstration, that the present Scheme is not the best." (p. 5.) But we may be
as certain, that infinite Wisdom and perfect Rectitude cannot err, as that two
and two make four. Now to attempt to confute, what we are certain to a
Demonstration is true, by Arguments, we are sensible, fall short of
Demonstration, is very weak. And to give up the infinite Wisdom and perfect
Rectitude of the divine Nature and Conduct, on such Grounds, how can it be but
inexcusable Impiety? -- To censure the Conduct of Civil Rulers, known to be Men
of superior Abilities, and of great Integrity, when we are not under Advantages
to enter into the Secrets of State, or to know scarce any of the Reasons they
act upon, is always deemed arrogant and wicked. Much more must it be so here:
As we have the greatest Certainty, that the supreme Ruler of the Universe is a
Being of infinite Understanding, and of perfect Rectitude; and as we are at an
infinite Remove from a full Comprehension of his grand universal Scheme.


A. I GRANT, this Reasoning looks plausible, and that "some pious conscientious
Persons may have been induced to believe" the Wisdom of God in the Permission
of Sin, by it. (p. 25.) -- But it does not convince me. -- For if once I should
believe, that it was wisest and best in God to permit Sin, most for his Glory,
and for the Good of the System; I should feel my self under a Necessity to look
upon Sin as being in its own Nature a good Thing, for the Glory of God, and
Good of the System; and that God delights in it as such. And that therefore in
Stead of hating Sin, mourning for it in our selves, lamenting it in others; we
ought rather to esteem it as really a good and virtuous Thing; and as such to
rejoice in it, and even to keep an everlasting Jubilee in Remembrance of
Satan's Revolt, and Adam's Fall: Events so infinitely glorious! (p. 16, 17, 18,
19.) -- Absurdities so shocking, that I never can believe them.


B. AND, Absurdities, let me tell you, that if you did but understand the
Scheme you are opposing, you would know, are so far from following from it,
that they are absolutely inconsistent with it.

FOR the Doctrine of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin, supposes Sin,
in it self and in all its natural Tendencies, to be infinitely evil, infinitely
contrary to the Honor of God, and Good of the System. For herein consists the
Wisdom of God in the Affair, not in bringing Good out of Good, but in bringing
infinite Good out of infinite Evil, and never suffering one Sin to happen in
all his Dominions, but which, notwithstanding its infinitely evil Nature and
Tendency, infinite Wisdom can and will overruled to greater Good, in the whole.
So that all these Objections are the Result of Ignorance or Perverseness.

FOR Sin, in itself, and its natural Tendencies, being just as evil as tho God
never meant to, and in fact never did, bring any Good out of it; it is as much,
to be hated for its evil Nature and Tendency, to be repented of in ourselves,
and lamented in others, mourned for, watched and prayed and preached against;
as if no Good was ever to be brought out of it.

JUST as it was in the Affair of Joseph. It was a vile, an impious and
barbarous thing, for his Brethren to do as they did: Hateful in itself, and in
the Eyes of God, and of all good Beings: And to be mourned for, and lamented,
and testified against, as such. It was dishonorable to God, whose Authority
they despised, and whose Design to advance Joseph they intended to frustrate:
Cruel to their aged pious Father, and barbarous to their Brother. -- And in
fact they were verily Guilty; as their Consciences testified, in the Day of
their Distress. ( Genesis xlii. 21.) -- And if after all this, contrary to their
Intentions, great Good comes out of this Affair, no Thanks to them for that.
They were still verily Guilty; and even every Whit as much to blame, as ever;
and had as great Reason for godly Sorrow, and true Repentance; as is plain to
the weakest Capacity. -- I appeal to the common Sense of all Mankind. In Genesis
xlv. 5. Joseph speaking to his Brethren, says, Now therefore be not grieved,
nor angry with your selves, that ye sold me hither: For God did send me before
you to preserve Life. -- Which POOL thus explains. -- Be not grieved, to wit,
immoderately, etc. He does not dissuade them from godly Sorrow. -- Nor angry
with your selves. In the Hebrew it is, Neither let there be Anger in your Eyes.
i. e. Neither excessively torment your selves with the Remembrance of the Fact,
neither break forth into Contentions and Wrath, and Upbraidings of one another.
-- For God did send me before you to preserve Life. i. e. God by his wise,
powerful, and gracious Providence overruled your evil Intentions to an happy
End, etc. which tho it does not lessen your Sin, yet ought to qualify your
Sorrow. See POOL on the Place.

N. B. JOSEPH'S Brethren had been for some Time in external Circumstances very
distressing; their Minds full of Heaviness and Grief from that Quarter; and
they ready sometimes in their Anguish to be angry at, and upbraid one another,
for what was past. Which kind of Grief was not of the Nature of godly Sorrow.
And this was what Joseph referred to. He would not have them grieve and afflict
themselves, etc. in that Sort; for that all was brought to a happy Issue. He
did not mean to dissuade them from godly Sorrow. He knew, the more they saw of
the Wisdom, Holiness and Goodness of God in this Affair, the more would they
love him, and loath themselves; and mourn after a godly Sort, that they had
endeavored to counteract him. The more Beauty they saw in God's Scheme, the
more would they hate their own, which was designed to frustrate his.

GOD'S Scheme was to advance Joseph, etc. Their proud Hearts could not endure
it. They viewed him as having a native Tincture of Vanity. They envied him, and
wanted to keep him down; and laid a Scheme for it; which God overruled,
directly contrary to their very Hearts. -- Now for them to look upon God's
Scheme as glorious, must imply in its very Nature, that they looked upon their
own Scheme with the utmost Abhorrence. Which must suppose deep Humiliation, and
sincere Repentence. They could not really and heartily like God's Scheme,
without a sincere Abhorrence of their own. Nor can any one Being in the System
heartily like God's Scheme in permitting Sin in general, without a sincere
Abhorrence of Sin in general: and a hearty Desire that all sinful Schemes may
be frustrated, just as this was, which Joseph's Brethren had laid; for this is
God's Design. -- Had Joseph's Brethren, before they were soundly humbled, been
let into God's Scheme, to see what he had done to advance their Brother, their
Envy would have revived; and they felt an Inclination to lay some new Scheme to
take him down. They must be soundly humbled, before they would heartily approve
God's Scheme, and be willing to bow to Joseph. But let their proud Hearts be
humbled, and they love their Brother as they ought; and they would be glad to
see him exalted, and ashamed to think of what they had done, and cheerfully pay
him the Honor which was his due. -- So a perfectly humble and holy Temper
would lead us perfectly to acquiesce in God's universal Plan, which is designed
to exalt God, and make all his happy Subjects feel their comparative
Nothingness, to the highest possible Degree -- That God may be all in all. --
See this illustrated at large in my Sermons.





A. SIR, I am of another Opinion. I affirm, that "if Sin is the Occasion of
greater Good, in the whole, there is no Reason to repent of it." (p. 18.) "For
it ceases to be Sin." (p. 19.)


B. YOU affirm so, it is true: But it is impossible, if you will consider the
Case, that you should believe so. -- Pray, tell me, was it not a sinful thing,
for Joseph's Brethren to sell their Brother? Or for the Jews to crucify the
Lord of Glory? Because God, in both Cases, contrary to their Design, brought
great Good out of these great Evils. -- I appeal to your own Conscience.


A. NAY, but if you appeal to me, I must frankly tell you, that if greater Good
is brought out of Evil, we are not to be sorry, but rather to rejoice that we
have sinned. This Principle I take for granted, as self-evident. And on this
Hypothesis I build my Reasoning. (p. 17, 18.)


B. THEN it seems, you think, that Joseph's Brethren had no Cause to repent of
their Sin, in attempting to frustrate God's Design to advance their Brother;
because in Spite of all their Malice and Envy, God overruled all they did to
bring about his designed Advancement, to the best Advantage. Their Sin, you
say, God in infinite Wisdom overruled for the Advancement of Joseph; the
Preservation of Jacob and his Family; and a Train of the most happy Events to
the Church of God, from that Day to this. (p. 6.) To which you add, It must be
confessed, much of the divine Power, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. was displayed in
bringing so much Good from such Treachery. Therefore Joseph's Brethren ought,
in Stead of Sorrow, rather to "keep an everlasting Jubilee" in Remembrance of
their Malice, Envy, Cruelty and Impiety exercised in that Deed. This is one of
the "pernicious Consequences" not of mine, but of your own Scheme. Nor can it
be got rid of, as to those Instances of Sin, which you acknowledge God has
overruled to greater Good. And as you own "you cannot prove to a
Demonstration" but that greater Good will finally be brought out of all Sin, in
general; so upon your Scheme you cannot be certain, that you or any other
Sinner has Reason to repent of Sin. You do not know as yet, whether to be
sorry, or glad. Yea, according to you, "it is above your, or perhaps any human
Talents" to decide this Question. (p. 5, 6.) Therefore upon your Scheme, all
Sinners must put off their Repentance, until by some new Revelation from Heaven
it is declared, that God never will overruled all to greater Good. And as soon
as ever we are assured, that God does not intend to overruled all Things to his
Glory and to the Good of the System; then, and not till then, must we begin to
be sorry that we have sinned: -- that is, to be sorry that we have not sought
the Glory of God and Good of the System, with all our Might. -- But why should
we be sorry now? For, if God does not seek his own Glory, why should we? if He
does not aim at the general Good, why should we? ought we to be more holy than
God himself? No: the utmost Extent of our Duty is only to be perfect, as our
Father which is in Heaven, is perfect. -- So that finally, your Scheme, in
whatever Light considered, will exclude true Repentance out of the World. --
However, there is this Comfort by the way, that your Scheme is so plainly
inconsistent with common Sense, that it can never be believed by a rational
Creature. To suppose, that my Sin is lessened, because, contrary to my Design,
Good is brought of it by another Being, let the Good be ever so great, instead
of being self-evidently true, is really self-evidently false.


A. "CAN that be evil, which exactly coincides with the divine Will?" (p. 19.)


B. The Jews did nothing, but what God's Counsel determined before to be done;
as the Apostles, full of the holy Ghost, expressly declare, and that even in
their Prayer to God. ( Act. iv. 28.) And they tell the Jews in so many Words,
Him, being delivered by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, ye
have taken, and by WICKED Hands have crucified and slain. (Act. ii. 23.) Which
very Doctrine the Spirit of God set home on the Consciences of their Hearers,
and they were pricked at the Heart, in a Sense of their Sin and Guilt; and cry,
What shall we do? and the Apostles call upon them to Repent. But do you, Sir,
verily think, that the holy Spirit, these divinely inspired Apostles, and their
Converts, were all inconsistent with themselves! and will you contradict the
Spirit of God, the Apostles, the primitive Converts, and the universal Sense of
Mankind, rather than not oppose the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin!


A. How an infinitely holy Being could lay a Plan, which was infinitely wrong
and wicked to execute; I cannot conceive. (p. 16.)


B. You will doubtless readily own, that the following Plan was laid by "an
infinitely holy Being:" because you have it from his own Mouth. Exodus xiv. 1,
2, 3, 4. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the Children of
Israel; that they turn, and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the
Sea, over against Baal-Zephon: before it shall ye encamp by the Sea. -- But
why? -- For (says the holy One of Israel, who knew what the Consequence would
be) Pharaoh -- when he hears where you are encamped -- will say of the Children
of Israel, They are entangled in the Land, the Wilderness has shut them in --
They cannot escape: I have them at my Mercy. -- And I will -- by this
Circumstance -- harden Pharaoh's Heart, that he shall follow after them, and I
will be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Host: that the Egyptians may
know that I am the Lord. -- Here was a Plan laid by an infinitely holy Being,
which was infinitely wrong and wicked for Pharaoh to execute." However, he did
execute it. -- Ver. 5. And it was told the King of Egypt, that the People fled:
and the Heart of Pharaoh and of his Servants was turned against the People, and
they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
And he made ready his Chariot and took his People with him. -- And what was the
issue? They sank like Lead in the mighty Waters. And Israel sang, The Lord has
triumphed gloriously. -- And thus God ordered Things as he did, professedly on
Design, that Pharaoh might do as he did. And when he had done what God intended
he should do, he wrought a Miracle to destroy him. And Moses without the least
Difficulty, saw the Holiness and Wisdom of God in laying this Plan, and the
Wickedness of that bloody Tyrant in executing it, and the Righteousness of his
Destruction.

So again, the whole Plan of Christ's Crucifixion was laid by the holy ONE of
Israel, before the World began; and was so very particularly described in the
Types and Prophecies of the old Testament, some Hundreds of Years before it was
accomplished; and so plainly foretold by our Savior before his Death, and
compared with the ancient Types and Prophecies after his Resurrection, that the
Apostles plainly saw, that Jews and Gentiles had done nothing but what God had
before determined should be done: and yet they could easily see, that this did
not in the least Measure lessen their Guilt. And so can any Body else. For it
is plain, that the Jews did not mean to accomplish the glorious Scheme, which
God had in View, in the Death of his Son; but only to gratify their Pride,
Malice, Envy and Revenge, in the Death of One whom they hated, without a Cause.


A. BUT if God is perfectly pleased with his own Plan, why is he not perfectly
pleased with wicked Men for executing of it? (p. 7, 8. Marg.)


B. THUS says the Lord in Isai. x. 5, 6. O Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger,
and the Staff in their Hand is mine Indignation. I will send him against an
hypocritical Nation; and against the People of my Wrath will I give him a
Charge, to take the Spoil, and to take the Prey, to tread them down like the
Mire of the Streets. This was God's Plan, and it was perfectly agreeable to him,
and the Assyrians executed it thoroughly in the Destruction of the Kingdom of
Israel, a few Years after. (2 Kin. xvii) -- But was God pleased with the
Assyrians for what they did? No; so far from it, that He devoted them to
Destruction therefore. ( Isai. x. 12.) -- But why? Because they did not mean to
serve God, but only to gratify their own Lusts. ver. 7. He means not so,
neither does his Heart think so: but it is in his Heart to destroy, and to cut
off Nations not a few.


A. BUT it is certainly most for God's Glory, that those Things should be done,
which when done, most advance his Glory: for had they been neglected, some
Things most for his Glory would have been neglected: Therefore all the Sin,
that ever was or ever will be, "is best" on this Scheme; "most for God's Glory,
and most for the Happiness of the Creation in general." (p. 26.)


B. AS to wicked Men, as has been said, they mean not so, neither does their
Heart think so. They are Enemies to God and to his Glory, and aim only to
gratify their Corruptions. But as to God, it is true, as it is written in Psalm.
lxxvi. 10. The Wrath of Man shall praise thee; and the Remainder of Wrath shall
thou restrain. All the Sin, that has been or ever will be, God will turn to his
Glory. Nor will he ever suffer any one Sin to be committed, but what, he sees
with absolute Certainty, is best to permit in this View. And this is so far
from reflecting upon God's Holiness, that it is the only way to vindicate his
Conduct. And while you oppose this, you are obliged to say, that "in Fact God
does not do that which is most for his Glory."


A. Can a Crime which is "infinitely to God's Dishonor, be infinitely to his
Honor?" (p. 26.)


B. GOD can bring infinite Honor to himself out of such Crimes, as in their
own Nature are infinitely dishonorable to him; as you your self will not deny.
(p. 6.)


A. WELL, if this be so, the more Sin, the better. (p. 28, 29.)


B. I hope you have not forgot the Doom St. Paul gives those who say, Let us do
Evil, that Good may come: viz. that their Damnation is just, Romans iii. 8.


A. BUT upon your Scheme "all Sinners do sincerely seek the Glory of God in the
Gratification of their Lusts: and so, they are all good Men, and will be
saved." (p. 29.)


B. THAT is, Because God intended to glorify himself by all Pharaoh's
Haughtiness; therefore Pharaoh himself, when he bid Defiance to the God of the
Hebrews, sincerely sought the Glory of God; and so was a good Man, and is gone
to Heaven! -- Do you really believe this! or do you mean to banter, on so
serious and grave a Subject!


A. I believe "your Scheme will encourage Wickedness: and your Libertine young
Gentlemen will be extremely obliged to you for a Scheme so favorable to their
Indulgences." (p. 28.)


B. NO, Sir, by no Means. For it is a Prospect of Success, that encourages Men
to Action. This encouraged Joseph's Brethren to sell their Brother; they hoped
to prevent his Advancement: and this encouraged Pharaoh to try his Strength
with the God of the Hebrews: he hoped to conquer at last. Had they in both
Cases foreknown how Things would have issued, they would have had no Courage to
do as they did. But my Scheme is, that all Sinners will, sooner or later, be
disappointed, as much as they were: And all their wicked Schemes and Conduct be
overruled to answer Ends as contrary to their Intentions: therefore were my
Scheme universally believed with all the Heart, it would put an everlasting End
to all the Courage of all wicked Beings in the whole System. -- Pray, Sir, put
it to your own Case. Would you be encouraged to write against the Wisdom of God
in the Permission of Sin once more; if you knew that God would overruled it, to
confirm the Doctrine, and bring you to Shame in the Sight of all the Country?
that is, Is a Certainty of complete Disappointment, the great Encouragement to
Action?


A. BUT if God thinks it for the best, that Sin should be, why does he forbid
it, and take so much pains to hinder it? (p. 27.)


B. ASK Moses, if God thought it best to suffer Pharaoh to refuse to let Israel
go, why did God send him, so often, to say to Pharaoh, in the Name of the Lord,
Let Israel go, that he may serve me? -- Or, rather, as your Question most
immediately reflects upon the holy Majesty of Heaven and Earth, whom you
implicitly charge with inconsistent Conduct, if you have Courage, ask him. --
Or, rather, recall your Question, as it is so plain a Case, that in the whole
of that Affair God's Conduct was perfectly consistent. For, by the whole, God
meant, to let it be known that he was the LORD, and to fill the whole Earth
with his Glory. Which End was answered, by all the Methods he took to make
Pharaoh sensible of his Duty, and by his leaving him after all, to harden his
Heart, and act against the clearest Light; whereby he was prepared for so
remarkable a Destruction; in which God showed his Power, and caused his Name to
be declared throughout all the Earth.


A. BUT can you forbid your Child to do a Thing, and then stand by and permit
it to transgress, consistently with your self? (p. 16)


B. PARENTS and Tutors and Masters often do so; that while they catch their
Children, or Pupils, or Servants, at their bad Tricks, they may be under the
better Advantages to convict and reform them; and so have one and the same End
in forbidding and in permitting: And Children of four Years old are able to see
the Consistence of such Conduct.

JOSEPH'S Brethren were very proud and very envious: this prompted them to sell
their Brother. God hated their Pride and Envy. God intended to reform them. God
suffered them to exercise and gratify their Pride and Envy in selling their
Brother, and then overruled this their Wickedness, so as greatly to humble
them. -- They bow to their Brother. Yea, they are glad to bow to him, and pay
him Honor. -- And all this was, in God, perfectly consistent, and perfectly
wise.


A. BUT "this is making God do Evil, that Good may come of it." (p. 17.)


B. NO, Sir, not unless it is "doing Evil," for God to act in the wisest and
most perfect Manner: i. e. not unless you call Good, Evil; and Evil, Good. And
I leave it to the impartial World, which Scheme makes God the "Author of Sin":
That which supposes that he always acts according to his infinite Wisdom and
perfect Rectitude, and does what he infallibly knows is most for his Glory and
the Good of the System; Or that, which supposes just the contrary, viz. "that
in Fact God does not do what is most for his own Glory." (p. 13.) Pray, read
Isai. v. 20. If God has wise, holy and good Ends in the Permission of Sin, then
he is charged with being "the Author of Sin." And if he has no good End in the
Permission of Sin, then he does what he knows is "not most for his own Glory."
And this is the Case with respect to every Sin, that ever was or will be
committed, by Men or Devils. So that according to this Writer, God is the
greatest Sinner in the Universe. For either he is "the Author of all Sin"; or,
which is no better, acts contrary to his best Judgment in the Permission of
every Sin that is committed: doing what he knows is "not most for his own
Glory." Mean while the Devil is represented as the greatest Saint: as one who
has done most for the Advancement of God's Glory, and Good of the Universe. (p.
17.) The Sins of all wicked Beings he puts to God's Account. He is the "Author
of all." And the Good which God brings out of all, is put to their Account. So
God must answer for all the Sin, and the Devil and his Adherents have the
Praise of all the Good, in the Universe. And all this is to set the Scripture
Doctrine of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin, "in the most horrible
and deformed Light possible."



A. BUT "if Obedience had not been, upon the whole, for the best, a perfect
Being could not have enjoined it." (p. 20.)


B. The very best things we can aim at, are the Glory of God, and the Good of
the System: and the only way we can take, that we may actively promote these
Ends is to do as God has bid us: Love the Lord with all our Heart, and our
Neighbor as our selves. Therefore God, the most perfect Being, may well enjoin
this upon us. About all this there is no Dispute. -- The only Question is, What
is wisest and best for God to do? To interpose and prevent Sin, in all Cases?
or else, in some Cases, to suffer his Creatures to sin? -- If God can promote
the Glory of God and Good of the System, to better Advantage, by the Permission
of Sin, than by hindering it by his own Interposition; it is best, in the
whole, for him to permit it. As in the Case of Joseph, Pharaoh, and Christ's
Crucifixion, etc. etc. -- God could have sent more than twelve Legions of
Angels, and rescued Christ out of the Hands of his Enemies; as is plainly
intimated in Mat. xxvi. 53, 54. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of Angels? But
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? -- This would
have disconcerted the infinitely wise Plan, which God had laid in the Days of
Eternity; of which he had given Intimations in the sacred Writings of the old
Testament. The Reason our Savior did not desire his Father to interpose and
effectually hinder that horrid Sin the Jews were now about to commit, is very
remarkable, and worthy our attentive Consideration. -- It was not because God
did not know they would commit that Sin, if left to themselves: -- nor because
God could not hinder them: -- nor because they would cease to be moral Agents,
if hindered: -- nor because Interpositions are inconsistent with the
established Laws of Nature, and the Good of the whole in that Respect
(according to Ramsey, or Clark, or Turnbull, learned and ingenious (...)) --
Nor because it was not God's original Scheme, that Christ should be put to
Death; but a Device of the Devil, which God thought himself not (...) to
hinder, although he knew his permitting of it would not be most to his own Glory
(according to the new Scheme of our Author) -- But because it was inconsistent
with God's original, infinitely wise, holy and glorious Plan, which had
subsisted in his own Mind from Eternity, and which he had revealed in his own
Word: as his Son, from his Bosom, who could not be mistaken in this thing, told
the Jews. How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? It
would have disconcerted God's Scheme, to have sent twelve Legions of Angels,
and hindered the Execution of this wicked Design. For God had before determined
it should be accomplished. ( Act. iv. 27, 28.) Therefore when the Time came for
it is Accomplishment, God permitted the Jews to take their own Course: i. e. he
did not hinder them, as he easily could have done. For he knew, it was not best
to hinder them: neither most for his Glory, nor for the Good of the System. And
I am persuaded that even our Author, himself, will not venture to say, "I do
doubt whether in this God did what was most for his own Glory." -- But if God
ever acted wisely in the Permission of Sin, in any one Instance, it overthrows
this Author's Scheme, which supposes such a thing absolutely inconsistent with
the divine Perfections. (p. 8, 17. etc.) And that it makes God the Author of
Sin. (p. 16.) And gives the greatest Encouragement to all Wickedness, (p. 28,
29.)



A. BUT God, at first, made all rational Beings perfect in Holiness, and
perfect in Happiness; which, with me, is a satisfactory Evidence, that such a
State was most for his Glory and their Happiness. (p. 24.)


B. ALL the Evidence you can have, merely from this Fact, must depend upon the
Truth of this Proposition, viz. that "God always does what is most for his own
Glory and the Good of the Creation." And if this Proposition is true, it will
equally prove* both, that it was best God should "create all rational Beings
perfect in Holiness," as he did at first; and that he should permit some of
them to fall, as he did afterward. -- I believe the Proposition to be true:
and I believe both the Consequences, which equally follow. -- You believe the
Proposition to be true, when you think it will serve your turn: but at another
time say, "I do doubt whether God in fact does what is most for his own Glory."

AS God intended before the Foundation of the World to permit Sin, for holy and
wise Ends, it was of the utmost Importance, that he should do it under such
Circumstances, that the whole intellectual System might see and know, that he
did not do it, as looking upon Sin, as being Good in it self, or as tending to
Good: yea, under such Circumstances, that his Permission of it might not, in
the Eyes of finite Intelligences, lessen, but rather infinitely increase the
Horrors of it. Therefore he not only created all holy, at first; but also
"forbid Sin under the severest Penalties;" yea actually executed the infinitely
dreadful Penalty on the sinning Angels, who were the first Transgressors,
without any Mercy. And while he exercised Mercy toward fallen Man, he did it
in such a Way, as will finally, and on the whole, show his Hatred of Sin, as
much, nay more than it he had treated them as he did the fallen Angels. But
while the whole Tenor of his Conduct thus joins to set his Hatred of Sin in a
most striking Light; his actual Permission of it, at the same time, equally
proves, that he did not think it best, to prevent it by his own immediate
Interposition. Which demonstrates, that he saw a better Way than that, to
advance his own Glory and the Good of the System. In what Respects his present
Method is better than that, I have endeavored to show in my Sermons. (p. 125,
-- 209.) But while you take for granted, that God could not wisely permit Sin,
unless he looked upon Sin, as in it self Good; you run your self into the
utmost Confusion; and even necessitate your self to believe, either that God
thinks Sin a good Thing, or that God did not act wisely, "did not do what was
most for his own Glory," in permitting it. (p. 13, 16, 17.)


A. "Best to stand, and best to fall; best to obey, and best to rebel; sound at
least like Contradictions." (p. 20.)


B. MANY Propositions may "sound like Contradictions," which are perfectly
consistent. For the same thing may be best, and not best, in different
Respects. As to the Crucifixion of Christ, for Instance, it may be said, it was
best to be, and best not to be. For the Death of Christ, considering the Good
to be brought out of it, was a most glorious Event. But the Death of Christ,
considered as a Murder committed by the spiteful Jews, was a very horrid Crime.
-- So it was best that Joseph should be sold, considered as one Step toward
that Advancement, which God designed; but it was not best, considered as an
effectual Means to prevent his Advancement, as his Brethren intended it. -- So,
it might be best that Adam should fall, if in the Eyes of the OMNISCIENT GOD,
the only proper Judge, his Fall would give Opportunity for infinite Wisdom to
bring more Glory to God and Good to the System, than otherwise could be: but it
was not best, merely as an Act of open Rebellion against the Maker and Lord of
all Things; subjecting all this lower World to Ruin.


A. BUT the holy Scriptures assure us, God is so far from thinking it best that
Sin should be, that rather it grieves him to the Heart. Genesis vi. 6. And it
repented the Lord that he made Man upon the Earth, and it grieved him at the
Heart. viz. because they had become so exceeding Wicked. Wherefore the Lord
destroyed the Earth by a Flood. (p. 19. 25.)


B. THAT Sin, in it self, is infinitely disagreeable to the divine Nature, is
granted. That it was nevertheless best, that Sin should be, with a View to the
Good to be brought out of it by God; and that therefore God acted agreeable to
all his Perfections in the Permission of it, is still affirmed. Nor do these
Words, considered with their Context, militate against, but rather greatly
confirm this Truth.

FOR the true Sense of those Words is plainly this, viz. that the sinful State
of Mankind before the Flood was in it self infinitely disagreeable to God, who
is an infinitely holy and benevolent Being; and viewed therefore merely in it
self, had the greatest Tendency, in Fact, to grieve and distress the HOLY ONE;
and make him sincerely repent that ever he made the World. And therefore, were
Things always to be so, and no Good ever to come of it, he never would have
made the World; nor would he have continued it in Being when made, to grieve
his Heart, and wear out his Life with continual Sorrow; infinitely vexed and
grieved, crossed and disappointed, in a continued Series of Wickedness, from
the beginning to the end of the World. Therefore as these Words, in the
strongest Manner, express the infinite Holiness and Goodness of the divine
Nature; so they are quite favorable to the present Truth. -- For,

IF God does really look upon Sin in this Light, why did he ever make the
World, as he knew how Things would issue? Or, why did not he destroy all
Mankind at the general Deluge, as he knew what they were, and how they would
prove afterward? ( their Imaginations evil from their Youth. Genesis viii. 21.)
and make a new World, and People it with a better Race? Which he might have
done with infinite Ease. -- The plain and only Answer, which we can possibly
give to these Questions, is, that although Sin was so infinitely disagreeable to
the Divine Nature, considered in it self; yet, on the whole, he chose the
present Plan, with a View to the infinitely greater Good, he knew he could, and
he knew he would, bring out of all this Evil. And so all this Evil, in the
issue, be but like the Drops of Rain, in which the Rainbow is formed, when the
Sun breaks forth in his Strength, (an Emblem of the Sun of Righteousness) and
as the Blackness of the Cloud after a Storm, which does but add Beauty and
Brightness to the Rainbow; which the most High appointed as a Token of his
Covenant, and which, perhaps as an Hieroglyphic, was designed to suggest the
true Reason of God's continuing the World in Being. -- Therefore, when Noah
after the Flood offered Sacrifice, a Type of the great Sacrifice of Christ;
that Seed of the Woman, which was by Heaven's high Decree, to bruise the
Serpent's Head, and by superior Wisdom turn all his Mischief to greater Good,
the only Way to crush the Head and for ever perfectly subdue that old Serpent,
which is the Devil: I say, therefore when Noah, according to divine
Institution, offered Sacrifice, and brought into View the great Messiah, and
all his glorious Work, God was well pleased -- Good will come out of Evil --
And the LORD smelled a sweet Savor; -- (in the Hebrew, a Savor of Rest. God's
Heart was now well pleased) and the LORD said in his Heart, (as being perfectly
pleased with his perfect Plan, upon the whole,) I will not again curse the
Ground any more for Man's Sake; although the Imagination of Man's Heart is evil
from his Youth. Genesis viii. 21. -- As if he had said, I know Mankind will be as
bad as ever. However, I will destroy them no more; but continue Summer and
Winter, Seed-Time and Harvest, for the Benefit of the human Race; because the
Seed of the Woman will, in the issue, bruise the Serpent's Head, disappoint his
whole Scheme, and bring greater Good out of all this Evil.

BUT to return to the Sense you put on the Text. It repented the Lord that he
had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved him at the Heart. -- But, Dear Sir,
why repent and be grieved at the Heart, that he made Man; and yet after all,
continue this Race in Being! and so, practically prefer the present Plan before
any other: when, of all possible Plans, he still had his Choice; and the very
best, by one Word's speaking, you think, might with infinite Ease have been, by
him, brought into Existence; and so, He perfectly pleased for ever! -- Or, when
all Man kind, but eight, were destroyed by the Flood, it had been an easy thing
to have destroyed them; and so made thorough Work: and to have created another
Adam and Eve, and effectually prevented their Fall; and so have had all things
perfectly to his Mind. -- To be grieved with, and repent of his old Plan,
considered in the whole; and yet to go on with it, at the same time; when of
all possible Plans, he still had his Choice, even at the Flood, is perfectly
inconsistent. -- Your Sense of the Words therefore, Sir, cannot be right: and
unless you will make the HOLY ONE of Israel inconsistent with himself, you must
come into the Sense which I have given.

BUT we have had enough, quite enough, of this kind of Objections. I wish you
would urge something more directly to the Purpose. Pray, prove, if you can,
either that God has not in Fact permitted Sin; or, that he is not an absolutely
perfect Being: for if both these are true, a thousand Objections cannot
overthrow the Doctrine of the Wisdom of God in the Permission of Sin. --
Rather, you will be found fighting against God; which, as you own, is an
"extremely dangerous" thing.


A. I do not choose to say, that in Fact God has not permitted Sin: but this I
am bold to say, that there is not "one single Scripture-Text," which teaches,
that God ever permitted Sin, in one single Instance, with a View to the Good,
that he intended to bring out of it. -- (p. 3.)


B. WELL, this is to the Purpose indeed, were it true. -- But it is strange
that a Man, with his Bible in his Hands, and his Eyes in his Head, should ever
say so. -- Ye thought Evil against me, says Joseph to his Brethren. "Your
Design, in what was done, was an evil Design. But God's Design, in what was
done, was a good Design. God meant it unto Good." Which, it is plain, refers
not to God's after-Act, but to his original Intention. -- God meant it, i. e.
God meant I should be sold. He meant it as much as you did. Your Scheme was to
prevent my Advancement. But God meant it unto Good. i. e. "God intended that
Event should come to pass, to answer the good Ends he had in view." -- What can
be plainer!

BUT if you want another Instance, you may have it in Pharaoh: Where the
Expressions used are much stronger than such as I have been wont to use, (as
indeed Scripture-Expressions relative to this Subject generally are,) and
evidently take in some Ideas over and above a more Permission, as I have
explained that Word. For God not only left Pharaoh to the hardness of his own
Heart, but ordered external Circumstances so, as considering Pharaoh's Temper,
God knew would infallibly strengthen his Obstinacy. Particularly, in suffering
the Magicians to imitate several of the Miracles of Moses, and from time to
time removing the Plagues, and so giving Opportunity for Pharaoh to regain his
Courage, and renew his Opposition etc. And God plainly intended by all, that
Things should be carried to such an Extremity as they were, that he might the
better answer his own holy, wise and glorious Ends. Yea, God expressly declares,
that this was his Design. Exodus xiv. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Speak unto the Children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before
Pi-hahirvoth, between Migdol and the Sea, over against Baal-Zephon: before it
shall ye encamp by the Sea. For Pharaoh will say of the Children of Israel,
They are entangled in the Land, the Wilderness has shut them in. And I will
harden Pharaoh's Heart, that he shall follow after them, and I will be honored
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the
Lord.

WHEN God first sent Moses into Egypt to Pharaoh, he told him beforehand, I am
sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty Hand. And
I will stretch out my Hand, and smite Egypt with all my Wonders, which I will
do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go. Exodus iii. 19, 20.
And the whole Scheme is opened in Chap. x. 1, 2. Where nothing can be plainer
than that God had holy and wise Ends in view in all he did. I have, says the
HOLY ONE of Israel, hardened his Heart, and the Heart of his Servants: -- but
for what End? -- that I MIGHT show these my Signs before him: -- but to what
Purpose? -- and that thou MAY tell in the Ears of thy Son, and of thy Son's
Son, what Things I have wrought in Egypt, and my Signs which I have done
amongst them. -- And all for what? -- THAT YE MAY KNOW THAT I AM THE LORD. --
Compared with Chap. ix. 16. And in very Deed, says God himself, for this Cause
have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my Power; and that my Name may be
declared throughout all the Earth. -- But as it is of Importance, to know in
what Light the holy Scriptures set this Subject, pray read and compare Genesis xv.
12 -- 16. and xlv. 5 -- 8. and l. 20. Exodus iii. 18 -- 20. and iv. 21. and vii.
3, 4, 5, 13. and ix. 12, 16. and x. 1, 2, 20, 27. and xi. 9, 10. and xiv. 1, 2,
3, 4, 8, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. ii. 30. Josh. xi. 20. 2 Samuel xii. 11, 12. and xvi. 10,
11, 21, 22. 1 King. xi. 9, 14, 23, 26 -- 39. and xii. 15. and xxii. 19 -- 23. 2
King. xxiv. 20. 2 Chronicles. x. 15. and xxv. 20. and xxxii. 31. Job i. 6 -- 12, 21,
22. and ii. 1 -- 6, 10. Psalm. cv. 17, 25. Isai. x. 5 -- 15. Jer. 25. 9. and
xxvii. 1 -- 7. and li. 20 -- 25. Matthew. xxvi. 53, 54. Luke xxii 21, 22. and
xxiv. 25 -- 27. Job. xix. 24, 33 -- 37. Act. ii. 23. and iii. 18. and iv. 24 --
28. Romans ix. 18, 22, 23. and xi. 7 -- 11. 1 Cor. xi. 19. 2 These. ii. 11, 12.
Rev. xvii. 17. -- Pray, read these "Scripture-Texts," my Friend, and then tell
me, whether the Doctrine of God's permitting Sin for wise and holy and good
Ends, be from Heaven, or of Man.


A. AS to the Affair of Joseph, which you so much insist upon, I grant, it was
by infinite Wisdom overruled for Good. But however, it is not at all "to your
Purpose." (p. 6.)


B. BUT, Sir, perhaps others will think it much to the Purpose. For, if God
has, in only one Instance, permitted Sin for wise and holy Ends, it is at least
possible, that he may have done so in all Instances. And if he always acts like
himself, no doubt, this is, in fact, the very Case.

BESIDES, if God did permit Sin in the Affair of Joseph, for wise and good
Ends, all your ten Objections in P. 16, 17, 18, 19. are answered all at once;
and indeed the Substance of your Book. -- Unless you will adopt the very
Absurdities you pretend to abhor, and maintain for Truth, that God was the
Author of that Sin, and loved it; and that Joseph's Brethren acted like the
greatest Saints in that Affair; had no Cause to mourn for their Sin, nor their
Father to lament his want of Success in the Education of his Children, or to be
at all grieved for their Wickedness. Yea, that their Sin was no Sin, but rather
a Virtue. And if Jacob or Joseph approved and admired the Wisdom of God in that
Affair, it must argue, they had very unworthy Conceptions of God, to think he
could not bring about his good Designs without suffering so much Evil; and had
they been consistent with themselves, they must have turned Infidels; or at
least have discarded all those Texts of Scripture, which represent God as
hating Sin, being grieved with it, and angry because of it. -- If in fact God
did permit Joseph to be sold, meaning it unto Good; if this was God's Scheme,
in such a Sense as that Joseph might justly say, GOD sent me hither; then may
you do well to reconsider your own Words, with Application to your self; If the
present Scheme be GOD's, it would be extremely dangerous opposing it; and argue
the highest Vanity, Arrogance and Impiety. It is plain Fact, that Joseph viewed
and considered that whole Affair as GOD's Scheme, as much as I do, and uses as
strong Expressions, as I have any where done. Only read Genesis xlv. 5 -- 8. and
be impartial.


A. BUT it is not parallel in one material Circumstance. Nay, the Case is
wholly different, and therefore quite foreign to the Purpose: For all concerned
in the Conduct and Consequences of that Affair, were in a State of Sin; and
therefore deserved all the Chastisements they received. They had all Blemishes
in their Characters, which may easily account for their Sufferings. (p. 6, 7.)


B. TRUE. "They deserved their Sufferings." Nor did God ever inflict Pain, no,
not the least Degree of it, in any one Instance, in the whole intellectual
System, but in which it was deserved, as much as they deserved their
Sufferings. -- To be sure, we in this World "are in a State of Sin," and
deserve our Sufferings, and need our Chastisements, as much as they did. Nor
did God begin to chastise us, until after we had become Sinners.

IF you should say, "that Joseph's Brethren deserved to be chastised for their
Pride and Envy; and that therefore God left them to themselves, to fall into
that Sin, that he might in the Issue humble them, and bring them to a better
Mind:" this would overthrow your whole Scheme. For according to this, God did
permit Sin for wise and holy Ends; the very Point, that I affirm, and the very
Point, that you deny.

OR, if you should say, "However, as they were Sinners, God might justly leave
them to Sin; but God could not, consistent with Justice, leave innocent Beings
to Sin;" this would suppose, that God was obliged, in Justice, to keep all
innocent Beings from falling. And consequently, that God's permitting Sin was
an Act of Injustice; and consequently, that God is not a just Being.

OR, if you should only say, that "they had provoked God to leave them; but
innocent Beings had not;" it is easy to observe, that according to
Scripture-account, God permitted Joseph to be sold, not so much in anger at
Joseph or Jacob's Family; as out of love to them, for their Good. As it is
written, God meant it unto Good. God had his own Glory and the general Good in
View, in that Affair, just as I suppose he had in suffering our first Parents
to fall.

OR, if I should grant, "God suffered Joseph's Brethren to fall into that Sin,
out of Anger at them, as was doubtless the Case with Pharaoh, when God suffered
him to pursue Israel into the red Sea:" yet it is plain, that in both Cases, he
had his own Glory and the general Good in view. And so both Cases are analogous
to his Conduct relative to the whole System, for Substance. And only granting,
what none deny, that it was no Injustice to innocent Beings, for God to permit
them to fall; there is no "material Difference," which at all hurts the
"parallel," for the "Purpose," for which it is used in my Sermons. For this is
my Argument, as I just now stated it: "If in some Instance; God permits Sin for
wise and holy Ends, it is possible he may in all. And if he always acts like
himself, then, no doubt, in fact, he always does." (See my Sermon. p. 103, etc.)
An Argument you have no way to answer, but by giving up the absolute Perfection
of the divine Nature. Because God educes many happy Consequences from moral
Evil in this State, therefore he thought best that moral Evil should be, etc.
(p. 6, 7.) is a false Principle, this Author says, I had laid down. But let the
Principle be true or false, it is all his own. I never laid it down: nor built
any Part of my Reasoning upon it. My Argument is stated above, in brief: And at
large in my Sermons (p. 103, etc.) and is entirely different; And, for aught
appears, is absolutely unanswerable, on this Side downright Atheism, or, which
is the same thing, the Denial of the Existence of an absolutely perfect Being.
For, if there is such a Being, he cannot but "always act like himself." And
then the Consequence is (...).



A. BUT Joseph needed humbling, and to have his Corruptions mortified: holy
Beings did not need to be humbled, and had no Corruptions to mortify. (p. 7, 8,
9.)


B. FINITE Intelligences, holy as they originally were, needed to have their
holy Biasses farther confirmed; as is plain from the Apostasy of some of them.
And they were capable of vast, and almost infinite Improvements in Knowledge,
Humility, Holiness, and Happiness; and the greater Advantages for Improvement
afforded them, the swifter would be their Progress; as was observed in the
Sermons you object against


A. BUT I affirm, there might have been as great Advantages for all divine
Improvements, in the intellectual System, if Sin and Misery had been for ever
unknown, as on the present Plan. (p. 10, 11.)


B. THIS, Sir, you can never prove. And as the infinitely wise God has chosen
the present Plan, we ought in honor to his Wisdom, and as we would not give up
the moral Rectitude of his Nature, to believe it to be the best. For, as St.
Augustine says, Unless it were good that there should be Evil, it would by no
Means be permitted by the Almighty God, who is able to hinder the Commission of
that Evil, if he would. ( Enchi^id. Cap. 95.)


A. BUT it is "to limit the holy One of Israel," to say, that he could not
manifest and communicate himself to finite Intelligences on any other Plan, so
well as this. (p. 11, 18, 19.)


B. NO, Sir; but rather, if infinite Wisdom has chosen the best, it is the
highest Arrogance in us, to say, there might have been a better. It is to set
up our Wisdom above God's. -- And to say, that God did not mean to choose the
best, is gross Blasphemy; as has been fully demonstrated.


A. HOWEVER, for my Part, I cannot see any good End, but what might have been
as well, nay infinitely better answered, if Sin and Misery had been for ever
unknown. (p. 9 -- 12, 19 -- 25.)


B. THAT is, you have lived in God's World, perhaps, these forty Years, his
Works before your Eyes, his Word in your Hands; and while the Inhabitants of
Heaven, in the view of the Divine Conduct, are constantly crying, The whole
Earth is full of his Glory; to you, it is all as dark as Egypt. You see no
Wisdom in God's present Plan. Yea, it appears infinitely to God's Dishonor,
and to the Damage of the System. So that you are even tempted to look upon
almost the whole of it, as the "Scheme of the Devil." And when you see how God
permits the Devil to practice and prosper, you are ready to doubt, whether the
holy ONE of Israel so much as means to do that which he knows is most for his
own Glory.


A. But the Hypothesis you go upon, is entirely false, viz. that it was worth
while, that all the Misery which is or ever will be in the System, should be,
merely to give holy Beings a higher Relish for their own Happiness. Just as if
a View of Misery, as such, were the chief Source of the Happiness or Heaven;
and a View of the Vengeance of God and Misery of the Creature, the most
ravishing Sight in the Universe. -- A shocking Scheme! (p. 9, 10, 11.)


B. YES, Sir, a shocking Scheme indeed! but it is one of your own Invention. It
is none of mine.

I BELIEVE that "Love is the Sum of God's moral Perfections;" and in one Sense
(an ill Sense) there is no such thing as Vengeance in the Divine Nature. I
believe, that Love is the very essence of vindictive Justice. -- Love to God,
to Virtue, to the best Good of the System, bearing down in a wise and righteous
Manner the Enemies of God, of Virtue, and of the System, is the Definition I
gave of it in my Sermons. (p. 190.) -- "An amiable Perfection in the Deity!"
(p. 191.) -- And I believe, that the chief Advantages, which will accrue to
holy Beings from a View of the Misery of the Damned, will be, as the Scriptures
teach, ( Romans ix. 22.) to give them the most lively and affecting Sense of the
glorious Perfections of the Divine Nature; viz. boundless Power, Holiness, and
Goodness; or in other Words, God's infinite Hatred of Sin, and Ability to
punish it, and the infinite Riches of his Grace in the Work of Redemption by
Jesus Christ. (p. 191.) For it is a View, not of Deformity, but of Beauty; not
of Misery, as such, but of the glorious Perfections of the Divine Nature,
manifested in the moral Government of the World, -- an absolutely perfect Plan,
which is the Source of the Happiness of the heavenly State. -- And I believe,
that it is Love, to God, to Virtue, and to the best Good of the System, which
is the chief Source of the exalted Joys of the heavenly Inhabitants; who, on a
View of the just Punishment of God's obstinate Enemies, cry, Amen! Hallelujah!
for the Lord God omnipotent reigns! -- Again they said, Hallelujah. And her
Smoke rose up for ever and ever. -- Let us be glad and rejoice, and give Honor
to him: for the Marriage of the Lamb is come. (Rev. xix. 1 -- 7.) -- They do
not rejoice in their Misery as such, nor in their Misery as giving themselves a
higher Relish for their own Happiness; but they rejoice to see God exalted, his
Authority vindicated, his Law honored, Sin discountenanced, Satan and his
Cause subdued, the Messiah victorious. And this "tremendous Scene," by Way of
Contrast, tends to give the most affecting Sense of all the Divine Perfections,
as shining forth in the Work of Redemption, the most glorious of all God's
Works. So that, upon the whole, the Saved will be under the best Advantages for
ever to have a fresh Remembrance of what they once were, and to see what they
deserved, and where they might have been, and what God has done, and to behold
all his glorious Perfections as shining through all his Works of Mercy and of
Justice, in a Light infinitely bright, and under Circumstances most suited to
engage their Attention, and affect their Hearts, and to give them the highest
Sense of their Dependence on God, and Obligations to him. So that they will
have the best Means to make the swiftest Progress in divine Knowledge,
Humility, Holiness and Happiness for ever. -- But you must be referred to my
Sermons, where these Points are more fully discussed, than my intended Brevity
will now admit.


A. BUT, "had we a just Sense of the Worth of our Mercies, could we need any
thing to raise it higher?" And was our Gratitude equal to the worth of our
Mercies, could we need any thing to make us more thankful? i. e. if we were
perfect, could we be more than perfect? (p. 9, 10.)


B. THAT perfect Intelligences in Heaven may and will make Progress in Holiness
and Happiness for ever, you may see proved at large by Dr. WATTS on the
Happiness of separate Spirits. -- It is too plain a Case to admit of Dispute.
For the Favor granted to the meanest Inhabitant of Heaven, being of eternal
Duration, is of infinite Worth. And so he never can have a full Sense of its
worth; or exercise a Degree of Gratitude equal to its worth; i. e. be as
thankful to God for it, as it deserves. No, not if his Progress in a grateful
Disposition, if I may compare things spiritual to things natural, should be
eternally as swift as a Ray of Light from the Sun; which they say, will fly
eighty Millions of Miles in about seven Minutes. --


A. BUT it is a Reflection upon the intellectual System, to suppose they stood
in Need of this "tremendous Scene" for their Instruction, or Confirmation. If a
Consideration of the dreadful Consequences of Sin is of no use to confirm holy
Beings, as this Author thinks, (.p. 12.) why was Death threatened to deter Adam
from Sin? -- If a mere threatening tends to deter, much more an actually
Execution. -- Since Satan and his Hosts were driven out of Heaven, down to an
eternal Hell, for Sin; and Adam turned out of Paradise, and all this lower
World doomed to Death, for the first Transgression; there has not been one
Instance of the Apostasy of a holy Being in all God's Dominions. -- This Author
seems to think, that because holy Beings love God supremely, therefore they
love themselves not at all. Which is contrary to Reason, and to Scripture. Genesis
ii. 17. Heb. xii, 2. -- However, he attempts to prove the Point, from 1 Job.
iv. 18. Perfect Love casts out Fear. Although it is plain from the Context,
that the perfect Love there spoken of, is nothing more than that high Degree of
Love, which some good Men attain to in this Life. Which although it delivers them
from that Fear, which arises from want of Evidence of their good Estate; yet by
no Means tends at all to set them above being moved to watch and pray, from a
Sense of the infinitely dreadful Consequences of Sin. As is plain from Luke
xxi. 36. Romans viii. 13. 1 Cor. ix. 27.
And a Reflection upon "the Benevolent Father of the Universe," to suppose,
that he really chose "this awful Expedient", when there was no Need of it; when
all good Ends might have been answered as well without it; nay, infinitely
better, infinitely more to the Honor of God, and the Good of the System. (p.
11.12, 19 -- 24.) The benevolent Father of the Universe wanted neither Power
nor Will, in Ways inconceivable to us, to raise his Creatures Happiness to the
highest possible Degrees, without this awful Expedient. (p. 11.)


B. IF "the benevolent Father of the Universe wanted neither Power nor Will" to
lay and prosecute the very wisest Plan; then, to a Demonstration, God's present
Plan is such; -- "a most glorious Expedient!" -- And if the all-wise God knew,
that of all possible Plans this was the best, most adapted to the finite
Capacities of finite Intelligences, and most suitable to answer all the good
Ends he had in View; then, without any Reflection upon the intellectual System,
or upon himself, he might prefer the present Plan to all others, as in fact he
has. -- And you say, "that you cannot pretend to prove, to a Demonstration,
that the present Scheme is not in fact the best." (p. 5) -- Wherefore, since
God has in fact chosen it before all others, and is so "benevolent, that he
cannot want a Will" to choose the best; I appeal to you, I appeal to the World,
-- Which becomes us, as we would be consistent with our selves, or regard the
Honor of "the benevolent Father of the Universe;" either, to believe it to be
best, because it is God's; or to "doubt whether God has in fact done what is
most for his own Glory," in this Affair! (p. 13.)


A. BUT "would not the least Reflection have assured them, that if God
delighted in Truth, Holiness and Justice, he must hate the contrary? that if
"he rewarded the loyal, he must punish the disobedient?" (.p. 11.)


B. DOUBTLESS the Angels that sinned, had, before their fall, Time for some
Reflection: but it is not to be supposed, that they sinned in a full and
certain Assurance of being driven immediately out of Heaven into an eternal
Hell. -- It Is certain, our first Parents had time for Reflection, and did
reflect; but their "Assurance of God's Holiness, Truth and Justice" was not
sufficient, in the Hour of Temptation, to make them believe "he would punish
the disobedient." For although God had expressly declared, In the Day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die, yet Satan persuaded them to believe they should
be as Gods; and to disobey their Maker, in Expectation thereof. -- These are
Facts: and Facts are stubborn Things. -- How know we therefore, but that God
saw it really necessary for the best Good of his eternal Kingdom, that he
should have Opportunity to exemplify all his Perfections in his Conduct, in the
Manner he does (...) the present Plan? -- After the present "Grand Drama" is
finished at the Day of Judgment, a Sense of all the Divine Perfections will be
impressed almost infinitely deeper, on the Minds of holy Beings, than when they
first came into Existence. Then they believed, that God was true; but now they
will see it, and know it. Then they believed, that God hated Sin, and would
punish it; but now, while Satan and all his Adherents are for ever tormented in
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, in their Presence, before their Eyes, it will
give them quite a new Sense of God's "Holiness, Justice and Truth;" and an
inconceivably greater "Assurance that he will punish the disobedient." -- And
if the Holiness and Happiness of Heaven arise from the Knowledge of God; the
better they know him, the more holy and happy will they be. -- Besides, God has
had Opportunity to exemplify his Faithfulness as to his Promises, as well as
his Truth in his Threatenings; and that in a great variety of Instances, since
the Beginning of the World. And when at last all holy Beings shall see all
God's past Promises fulfilled to a tittle, it will give them the highest
Assurance of the Fulfillment of what will then remain; viz. of their secure
Enjoyment of the Glories and Joys of Heaven to all Eternity. And they will
believe it, and as it were see it, and enjoy it all at once.


A. BUT "would not the least Reflection "have given holy Beings all that
Knowledge of the Divine Perfections, which was "essential" to their holiness
and happiness, without "this tremendous Scene"? (p. 11.)


B. AS soon as they began to think, they would begin to know God, and love him,
and rejoice in him. And the more they thought of him, the more their Knowledge,
Love and Joy would be increased. But yet there would be an infinite Degree of
Perfection, Glory and Beauty in God, still unseen. Their Knowledge, Love and
Joy, although free from sinful Defects, were capable of an eternal Increase. And
the more completely and clearly the Divine Nature should be exhibited to their
view in the Divine Conduct, the swifter Progress would they make. And if the
present Plan gives God Opportunity to make the brightest and fullest
Manifestations of himself, then it is, in this Respect, of all possible Plans
the best. And holy Beings will know more of God, and so love him more, and
rejoice more in him. But these Thoughts are largely dwelt upon in my Sermons;
to which you may be referred. (See Page 155, -- 164.)


A. BUT could not these and all other Ends have been answered as well, "in ways
inconceivable to us, without this awful Expedient"? (p. 11.)


B. CAN you conceive (pray, think a little and try!) of any possible Way,
wherein the Divine Perfections might have been set in so full, clear, and
affecting a Light, and so well adapted to engross the whole Attention of all
holy Beings, and fill them with the most exalted Thoughts of the Divine
Majesty, as that which God has taken in the Work of Redemption by the Death of
his own Son? -- But you say, there may be "Ways inconceivable to us." -- True
-- But not inconceivable to God. For all possible Ways lay open to his View;
and he had his Choice: and in fact he has chosen the present Plan: but if this
had not been the best Expedient, God would not have preferred it to all others;
because, on your own Concession, he is the benevolent Father of the Universe,
who wants neither Power nor Will to choose and accomplish, of all possible
Plans, the best. -- And to call this "an awful Expedient," as though it were the
very worst in Nature, which "the benevolent Father of the Universe" esteems the
best, casts no small Reproach on the infinite Wisdom and perfect Rectitude of
the holy One of Israel. -- But, dear Sir, is it not true, that however we feel,
and whatever we say, yet God will in fact abide by his original Choice, and
prosecute and accomplish his original Scheme? And no other Plan, conceivable or
inconceivable, will ever be come into. Nor will God ever own, however boldly we
may push the Charge, that he does not do "what is most for his own Glory." --
But rather, having endured with all Long-suffering the ill Treatment of an
apostate World, his own Son will at last come, with ten Thousands of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly --
of all their hard Speeches, which they have spoken against him, (Jude 15.) and
all the Inhabitants of Heaven will cry, Amen, HALLELUJAH! ( Rev. xix. 1 -- 6.)


A. ALL this I had for Substance heard before, and I looked upon it "infinitely
worse than nothing." Yea, I durst boldly tell the World, that I was "ready to
embrace the Manichean Principles," rather than to come into your Opinion. (p.
8.)


B. THE Manicheans maintained, that there was an Evil Principle or Being,
independent on God, and superior to his Control, which loved and promoted Evil
for its own Sake. And consequently, that a great Part of the present System is
and eternally will be Evil; answer no good End; but be absolutely Evil. On the
contrary, I maintain, that the whole Universe is entirely under the Government
of a Being infinitely Good. And that, consequently, there is not, nor ever will
be, any Evil in the Universe, but what shall answer good Ends, in the whole.
That is to say, There is no absolute Evil in the Universe. -- Now, which of
these two Schemes is the best, most agreeable to a holy and truly benevolent
Mind?

THAT there is much Evil, much Sin and Misery in the Universe, now, and for
ever will be, we are both agreed. The grand Question is, Whether, in the whole,
all will be overruled to Good, or not? For if it will, no doubt God originally
intended it should be; and conducted as he did, with that in View.

Now since it is plain Fact, that Sin and Misery do take Place in the System;
methinks every one, who is a Friend to God and to the System, should rejoice
with all his Heart to hear, that the Seed of the Woman will bruise the
Serpent's Head, bring Glory to God, and Good to the System, out of all the
Evil, that ever has or ever will happen; (and the more Good the better.) And so
completely disappoint the Devil. What can there be in human Nature, to incline
one to feel easier in the Belief, that God had no good End in View in the
Permission of Sin, and that no Good will ever come of it? -- I will put it to
my own Case. -- I am a Sinner: -- I have acted freely in sinning: -- God's
Decrees never influenced me to Sin: -- God's permitting, or not hindering, did
not influence me: -- I acted as I chose: -- no Fault on God's Part: -- all the
Blame lies on me: if I go on impenitent and die in my Sins, I only am to blame:
if I am an Enemy to God, and to the System, and to all Good, I deserve to be
cast off by God; and the whole System may, on good Grounds, say, Amen,
Hallelujah! -- and if my eternal Destruction is perfectly right and just, I
have in Fact no Reason to complain: -- And now, if I do perish, and perish
justly, why should I be loath, that God should bring Glory to himself and Good
to the System out of my Sin and Ruin? He did so, in the Instance of Pharaoh;
and to Moses the divine Conduct appeared exceeding glorious. ( Exodus xv.) And if
I deserve eternal Destruction, as much as Pharaoh did to be drowned, why should
I be loath it should be overruled to as much Good? -- Because I am no Friend to
God or to the System, but the contrary. There can be no other Reason. For, if I
loved God and the System, I should be glad to have God glorified, and the
System instructed by my Example; if I must be punished for my Crimes. As
sometimes a penitent Malefactor on the Gallows, from Benevolence to his
Fellow Creatures, may sincerely wish the Spectators might take Warning by him.
-- But to the impenitent Sinner, who is an Enemy to God, and to the System, and
to all Good; and who sees not the great Evil of Sin, nor his Desert of
Damnation; and cares only for himself; Things must appear in a very different
Light. -- Had Pharaoh, for Instance, (whom St. Paul views as a Specimen of
obstinate Sinners in general, Romans ix.) at the Bottom of the Red Sea, heard the
Hebrews sing, "The Lord has Triumphed gloriously;" and upon it remembered the
Word once sent to him, "For this Cause have I raised thee up, for to show in
thee my Power, and that my Name may be declared throughout all the Earth:" it
would have been a Comfort to him "infinitely worse than nothing." -- If he must
be drowned, he had infinitely rather it should answer no such End. Yea, nothing
could be more cross to the temper of his Heart, or put him to greater Pain. --
To think, that, in the midst of all his Haughtiness, he had been in God's Hand,
as Clay in the Hand of the Potter (Romans ix. 21) -- to see, that all his proud
Opposition to the Almighty had but exactly accomplished the Plan which was in
God's Mind, in the Days of Abraham, three or four hundred Years before he was
born ( Genesis xv 12 -- 16) or had done Good or Evil (Romans ix 11 -- 23.) -- to
consider, that God's last End was "to show his Power, and that his Name might
be declared throughout all the Earth" (Exodus ix. 16.) and that his elected, his
chosen People, the Hebrews, whom he hated, "might tell it to their Sons, and to
their Sons Sons, what God had done, THAT THEY MIGHT KNOW THAT HE WAS THE LORD."
(Exodus x. 1, 2.) -- This, O Pharaoh, was the wise and glorious End, God had in
View, in permitting thee to harden thy Heart, and run such a great Length in
Wickedness! And in this View the Conduct of the God of Israel toward thee will
be approved of and adored by all holy Beings in the intellectual System for
ever. -- "O horrible!" cries Pharaoh. This way of accounting for it, appears to
me, infinitely worse than nothing.

N. B. If I can heartily approve of the Divine Conduct toward Pharaoh, I can
just as well, toward all obstinate Sinners. -- If I cannot approve of the
Divine Conduct toward Pharaoh, my Quarrel is not with this or that Calvinistic
Divine; but with the God of Israel -- And whether the Fault is in God, or in
me, will be known by all the World at the Day of Judgment; when the
Righteousness of all God's Ways will be laid open before the whole intellectual
System. (Romans ii. 5) -- And if such Doctrines tend to make me turn Infidel; I
am, at Heart, an Infidel already: Yea, an Enemy to the God that made and
governs the World. But to use the Words of our Author, -- We ought to be
disposed to acquiesce in the Account of this Matter which we have from him who
cannot err, in the Oracles of Inspiration" (p 15.) -- A Way of accounting for
the Divine Conduct, that will afford "Libertines" and all obstinate Sinners, an
"Encouragement" to continue in Sin, which is "infinitely worse than nothing,"
as this Author himself must be sensible.




PRAY, my Friend, what think you? When Joseph was in Fact sold, -- that wicked
Deed actually committed; which of the two, would good Jacob have chosen? either
that no Good should ever be brought out of that Evil; or that it should be made
the Occasion of an hundred, or a thousand, or ten thousand times more Good, in
the whole, than to counter-balance the Damage done to his Family? If so much
Good was brought out of Evil, in the Affair of Joseph; why may it not be so, as
to the System in general? or why should it be thought unlikely, when it would
be just like God to do it? The very unlikeliest Thing that could happen, has
already happened. The SON of GOD has DIED. And how gloriously that Affair will
issue, in which the Creator of the Universe was so infinitely engaged, as to
become incarnate and die, I am of the Opinion, never yet entered into the Heart
of the most exalted Angel in Heaven fully to conceive. And however the Author
of the Attempt, like the unbelieving Lord in Samaria, (2 Kin. vii. 2.) is ready
now to ridicule the Thought of such great Good; (p. 23) yet if he may be so
happy, and God (...) that he may, as to be an everlasting Partaker of it
himself, and join in the new Song which none can learn but the Redeemed,
((...). xiv. 3) I doubt not, he will then be of a very different mind.
-- Joseph's wicked Brethren wished, no Good might come of it -- But, I dare
say, that neither the God that made them, nor the Father who begat them, were
of that Spirit. -- No. God meant it unto Good: and Jacob was even ravished with
Joy, when God's glorious Designs began to open to his View.

INDEED, Sir, perhaps it may be the Opinion of all judicious Men, that the
Manichean Scheme, bad as it is, is still preferable to yours. For they
supposed, that God would have ordered the Affairs of the whole Universe in the
wisest, best and most perfect Manner, if he (...); but he was so counteracted
by the Evil Principle, that he could not. So that even they believed, that
God's Intention was Good: But you think God never designed to do what he knew
was most for his Glory; although he could have done it with infinite Ease, and
had not one, Motive against it, but all possible Motives, of infinite Weight,
for it. But Want of natural Power is not a Detect so ill, by infinite odds, as
Want of moral Rectitude.

YEA, my Friend, what if it should be thought, that your Scheme is little, if
any, better than downright Atheism? To be sure, if your Scheme is true, all
Religion is overthrown. For if God has suffered infinite Evil and Mischief to
come into his own World, a World absolutely under his Government, in which he
does according to his Pleasure, absolutely without any good End; yea, contrary
to his better Judgment; and when he could easily have hindered it; he is
infinitely far from being an absolutely perfect Being, as has been proved. Nor
can any holy, truly benevolent Being in the Universe heartily love him, or
cordially acquiesce in his Government: For it is strictly impossible, that
absolute Evil should be acquiesced in by a good Being. For it implies a
Contradiction. And if all holy Beings cease to love God and acquiesce in his
Government, there is an End to all Religion.


A. BUT, Sir, I pray you carefully to mind, that I say it, and insist upon it,
that "Sin is not God's Scheme, but a Device of the Devil." -- It is "no Part of
God's original Scheme," (p. 13, 14, 15, 16.)


B. AND I pray, Sir, what do you mean by this Manner of speaking? -- Do you
mean only, "that it was the Devil that sinned, and not God? that other wicked
Beings sin, and not God? and that sinning Creatures act freely, and are solely
and wholly to blame?" -- All this is exactly true; but not at all to your
Purpose. For the Question is not, Who is it that has sinned? God, or the
Creature? About this there is no Dispute: The Creature, and none but the
Creature, has sinned. But the Question is, Why did the infinitely wise and holy
Creator and Governor of the World permit the Creature to Sin, when he could
easily have hindered it? -- To this Question, you say nothing; only "that you
do not believe that God is obliged to do, or that in Fact he actually does,
what is most for his own Glory." (p. 13.) Which is really to give up the
absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature.

OR do you mean, "that it was God's original Intention and Design, that Sin
should never happen? and that God did all he could to prevent it? but unawares
the Devil laid a Scheme, and over-matched the Almighty; and by Craft or Power
brought it in, notwithstanding all God could do? And so God's Scheme was
disconcerted, and he disappointed, and his World in a great Measure ruined, in
Spite of the utmost Exertion of his infinite Wisdom and almighty Power!" --
Some of your Readers, perhaps, may think this your Meaning. But it cannot be;
if you mean to be consistent with your self. For according to this, God did all
he could to secure his own Glory. Which is a Point you do not believe, (p. 13.)

AND yet this must be your meaning: or what you say, is not at all to the
Purpose. For if God knew, Sin was likely to happen, and could have hindered it,
and yet in Fact did not; the whole Question remains entirely unanswered; viz.
Why did God permit Sin?

THE Truth, perhaps, was, you had no distinct Meaning at all, in saying, that
"Sin is not God's Scheme, but a Device of the Devil."


A. INDEED, Sir, I was greatly "embarrassed." (p. 31.) Expressly to deny, that
God permits Sin; I durst not do. To justify his Conduct, I could not. Yea, I
esteemed you guilty of great Vanity and Presumption in pretending to do it. --
It was my Opinion, "that no satisfactory Account could be given" of the Divine
Conduct in this Affair. (p. 15.) For I imagined, that in very deed God had not
in this Affair done that which would have been "most for his Glory" to have
done. (p. 13.) This Author speaks of "resting in the natural and easy Account
we have of this Affair in the sacred Scriptures. (p. 15.) and of finding
Satisfaction and Repose therein." Which he supposes "the Heart of every good
Man does." (p. 25.) -- But, pray, what Rest! what Repose! what Satisfaction!
can he, or any Man of common Sense, "Good" or "not Good," find in believing,
that in this Affair God has done "what was in Fact not most for his own Glory?"
Which he thinks is the true State of the Case. -- And when he was so
"embarrassed" himself, why should he desire to embarrass others likewise? --
And after so serious and repeated Professions, that he meant to propose his
Thoughts with the greatest Modesty and Humility (p. 5. 13, etc) why did he,
instead of a serious Answer to the late President Edwards his Reasonings on
this Subject, to which I had referred; rather cry out, "boasted Metaphysics"?
(p 25.) -- "Several Professors in the Dutch Universities have sent him their
Thanks" for that Book. And how could the "modest humble Temper" of this
Gentleman prompt him to ridicule, what the learned World so much admire? He had
a Right to answer it, if he could: But if he could not; to ridicule it, will
but render himself ridiculous. -- And it is a Pity he should not know it. -- The
candid Reader is desired carefully to peruse what Mr. Edwards has said on this
Subject, in his Book on Freedom etc. p. 252 -- 267,



B. HOWEVER, I hope, by this time, you are thoroughly convinced, that whether
we can find out the Reasons of the Divine Conduct in this Affair, or no; yet it
is of the utmost Importance, that we firmly believe, that God has acted wisely,
and in a Manner agreeable to all his glorious Perfections. For it is an Affair
of so great Moment, and so infinitely interesting; that if we habitually
believe, that God acted contrary to his better Judgment in it, we must entirely
give up the absolute Perfection of his Nature. And if God is not an absolutely
perfect Being, he is not God. We may compliment him with the Name; but we take
away the Thing. -- "We Christians" (says Origin) say, that God can do nothing
which is in it self evil, no more than he is able not to be God. For if God do
any evil, he is not God. God wills nothing unbecoming himself -- This is
inconsistent with his Godship. (See Dr. Cudworth's intel. Syst. p. 874.) --
Agreeable to holy Scripture, 2 Timothy ii. 13. He cannot deny himself. Heb. vi. 18.
It is impossible for God to lie. -- And if we give up the absolute Perfection
of the Divine Nature; and so ungod the Deity; it will become impossible, were
our Hearts ever so holy, to love, worship, and trust in him as God, as an
absolutely perfect Being; or rejoice in his universal Government, and be
sincerely glad that he is at the Head of the Creation, and can and will do
according to his Pleasure in the Armies of Heaven, and amongst the Inhabitants
of the Earth. -- Yea, it would be a thing infinitely desirable, that some
better Being, some absolutely perfect Being, might be in his Place and take his
Throne. -- And so your Scheme really justifies a Spirit of Discontent and
Rebellion throughout all God's Dominions. -- But this ill Idea of the Divine
Majesty, which is harbored in many a Heart in this apostate World, is of the
Nature of Blasphemy, the abominable Thing which God's Soul hates, and ought to
be entirely rooted out of our Minds.


A. I think it of much greater Importance for us to endeavor to get Sin out of
the World; than fruitlesly to enquire how it came in. (p. 15.)


B. A great Part of the Wickedness of this Godhating World consists in hard
Thoughts and hard Speeches against God. (Jude 15.) Therefore "Sin cannot be got
out of the World," till Men are brought to think well of God, and of all his
Ways. At least, so far as to put an implicit Trust and Confidence in him, as an
absolutely perfect Being, fit to be at the Head of the Universe, and to have
the Management and Ordering of all the Affairs of the whole System in his Hands.

IT is in vain, to pretend to make Men holy, without Love to God. For it is the
first and greatest Part of Holiness, to love God; and the chief Foundation of
all Religion. ( Mat. xxii. 37.) And it is impossible Men should love God, while
they believe, habitually believe, that there is no God: i. e. no Being of
absolute Perfection at the Head of the Universe, ordering all Things in the
wisest and best Manner. ( Psalm. xiv. 1, 2.)


A. SIR, I did think my Attempt an unanswerable Piece: And that I had a good
Right in the most public Manner to call upon you to "retract." (p. 30.) -- But,
upon the whole, I think my self under the strongest Engagements to make the
most grateful Acknowlegements for so distinguishing a Favor as your Reply to
my Remarks. (p. 30.) -- Indeed, the Permission of Sin has always appeared to me
as an unaccountable Affair. (p. 15.) I could never see how God could do it,
consistent with his own Glory or the Good of the System (p. 12, 13. 19 -- 24.)
or consistent even with his own perfect Happiness: as a Being of infinite
Benevolence, I thought, must have had "greater Pleasure," if Sin and Misery had
been for ever unknown in his World. (p. 22.) Therefore, I thought, that "Sin
was not God's Scheme, but a Device of the Devil." (p. 13, 14, 15, 16.) And
because it is plain Fact, that God has not hindered the Devil from doing all
this Mischief, as he might easily have done, I have been led "to doubt whether
God does in Fact, and so whether he is obliged," from the absolute Perfection
of his Nature, "to do, what is most for his Glory." (p. 13.) -- You see my
whole Scheme, and you have replied to the whole and every Part of it; but if
after all, I should feel not satisfied, what shall I do?


B. I WILL tell you, Sir, what to do. And may the Lord give you an hearing Ear,
and an understanding Heart.

1. BE firmly persuaded, that not the Devil, but God, and God alone, is the
absolute Governor of the World.

REASON teaches, that God never will, and never can, voluntarily give up the
Government of his own World, into the Hands of his greatest and most avowed
Enemy, the Devil. And, if the Devil is one of God's Creatures, as God himself
has taught us in his Word, he is so inferior to the God that made him, as to
be in his Hands as the Clay is in the Hands of the Potter, absolutely at his
Control; unable by Power or Policy to bring any thing to pass, but by the
Permission of the great God; who from Heaven has declared, saying, My Counsel
shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure, (Isai. xlvi. 10.) And whose Schemes
cannot possibly be disconcerted, by the united Powers of Earth and Hell. --
Nay, the Powers of Darkness are so entirely at the Control of the Almighty,
that Satan could not touch holy Job, or any Part of his Substance, nor so much
as put a Lie in the Mouth of Ahab's lying Prophets, without the Divine
Permission. Nor could the affrighted Devils so much as enter into the Herd of
Swine, till our Savior said, Go. (1 Kin. xxii. 22. Job i. 12. and xi. 6. Mat.
viii. 31, 32.) How then could the Devil seduce our first Parents, and break up
God's original Plan, and ruin his new-made World; in spite of the utmost
Exertion of infinite Wisdom and almighty Power!

THE whole Tenor of Divine Revelation leads us to believe, that the Providence
of God extends to all Things which come to pass. If the Devil or wicked Men
were not under the Divine Control, we should have Reason to fear them: but our
Savior assures us, they cannot hurt an Hair of our Heads, without God's
Permission; whose Providence extends even to the very Sparrows, a Bird so
insignificant, that two of them were sold for a Farthing: and much more to the
Concerns of Men, who are of more Value than many Sparrows: and he enjoins his
Disciples, in the belief of this, not to fear the most cruel Persecutors; but
to fear God only: for, says he, The very Hairs of your Heads are all numbered.
Mat. x. 16 -- 31. -- And indeed wicked Men (so absolute and universal is the
Divine Government) are, according to the Language of Scripture, which is the
Language of God's Heart, in God's Hand, as a Rod, an Ax, or a Saw, and as much
at his Control. Isai. x. 5 -- 15. And therefore St. Paul, viewing Things in
this Light, taught Christians in his Day, to consider all their Persecutions,
as coming from the Hand of their heavenly Father, and designed by him as kind
loving Chastisements, for their Benefit: and on this Hypothesis, encourages
them not to faint, nor be discouraged: but rather to take all well, and improve
all to their spiritual Good. ( Heb. x. xi. xii.) And in this Light all the
People of God, from the very earliest Ages, have been wont to view the Injuries
they received from wicked Men, as coming from the Hand of God. So Job, when the
Sabeans and Chaldeans had robbed him, views them only as Instruments used by
God to answer holy and wise Ends. The Lord has given; and the Lord has taken
away: blessed be the Name of the Lord. (Job i. 21.) So when Eglon King of Moab
came against Israel in the time of the Judges, it was looked upon that God had
strengthened him to do it, thereby to chastise them for their Crimes. ( Judge.
iii 10.) So when Shimei in a most malicious manner cursed David, he saw the
Hand of God in it, and said, The Lord has bidden him. (2 Samuel xvi. 11.) So
when Hadad the Edomite, and R^^^n the Son of Eliadah, endeavored to disturb
Solomon's peaceful Reign, it was believed by good People, that God stirred them
up to do it, to chastise Solomon for his Sins. As was also the Case with
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that wicked "Pretender," who afterward made Israel
to sin. (1 King. xi.) And when Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, through the Pride of
his Heart, and the ill Advice of his young Men, returned a rough Answer to his
Subjects, which issued in the loss of ten Tribes, and was followed with a long
Series of Calamities for many Generations, it was said, that the Cause was of
God, that he might perform his Word, etc. (2 Chronicles. x. 15.) And when Amaziah
King of Judah, through the Vanity of his Mind, challenged Joash the King of
Israel to Battle, which issued in his own Overthrow, it was viewed as coming
from God. For it came of God, that he might deliver them into the Hands of
their Enemies, because they sought after the Gods of Edom (2 Chronicles. xxv. 20.)
And when Ahab was seduced by his false Prophets to go up to Ramoth-Gilead to
Battle, to the loss of his Life, the whole Plan is represented as being laid in
Heaven. (1 King. xxii.) And when that proud Tyrant, the King of Babylon, the
Hammer of the whole Earth, had destroyed Jerusalem, burnt down the holy Temple,
and laid all their Country in Ruins, pious People all saw the Hand of God in
it, and believed, that at the Commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, 2
King. xxiv. 3. -- But time would fail, to mention all the Instances of this
Nature recorded in God's holy Word. And surely it must be needless, when, as in
our present War, we, through all New England, have in so public a Manner joined
universally to profess and act upon this very Principle; that wicked Men are in
the Hands of God, and can do nothing but by his Permission, and are absolutely
at his Control. For which Reason we have had public Fasts, and public
Thanksgivings, relative to the War, as tho we firmly believed the universal
Extent of Divine Providence.

BUT if the Providence of God extends to the lesser, it much more does to the
greater Concerns of the intellectual System, as our Savior reasons, Mat. x.
29, 30, 31. If it extends to the sinful Actions of Men in this fallen World,
which are comparatively but of little Consequence; much more to the original
Introduction of Sin into the moral System; which was an Affair, strictly
speaking, of infinite Consequence. -- If it extends to the Sparrows (one of
which was valued at but half a Farthing) so that they could not any of them
fall on the Ground without God's all-seeing Eye and all-ordering Hand; much
more to the fall of Angels, and to the fall of Man, Beings of more Value than
many Sparrows. -- If the very Hairs of our Heads are all numbered; much more is
God concerned about the spiritual and eternal Welfare of the whole intellectual
System. -- So that we may have the greatest Assurance, that ever since the
Creation, not one evil Thing has come to pass, but under the Eye of the
OMNISCIENT; determined, permitted, and overruled by infinite Wisdom and
perfect Rectitude. -- Do you believe this, my Friend? Indeed you must believe
it with all your Heart, -- for this is "the Scripture-Account of the Matter."
Besides,

2. GOD is a Being of absolute Perfection; infinite in Wisdom, perfect in
Rectitude, boundless in Goodness; who has an infinite Regard to his own Honor
and to the Good of the System: as Reason and Revelation join to teach. And as,
from the absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature, it is impossible for God to
Lie; so, for the same Reason, it is impossible he should counteract any of his
Perfections. Therefore the whole of his Conduct toward the intellectual System
is absolutely perfect. And is no more capable of Emendation, than God is of
becoming holier and wiser than he is. For he must necessarily choose the best
Plan from Eternity, and necessarily abide by it to Eternity. -- For,

3. The holy Scriptures give us the fullest Assurance, that God is the same
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever, (Heb. xiii. 8.) of one Mind, (Job xxiii. 13.)
With whom there is no Variableness, neither Shadow of Change, (Jam. 1.17.) and
that his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure. (Isai. xlvi.
10.) So that he never did, and never can, alter his original Plan; or suffer
himself to be disappointed. ( Psalm. xxxiii. 10, 11.)

HE laid a Scheme to bring the Israelites to the Land of Canaan, and promised
to do the thing: nor could all their Wickedness in the Wilderness provoke him
to give up the Design. Yea, he was disposed to prosecute it, just as much as if
they had not sinned: as he informed Balaam, to the terror of Balak. God is not
a Man, that he should Lie, neither the Son of Man that he should Repent: -- he
has not behold Iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen Perverseness in Israel.
(Number. xxiii. 16 -- 21.) -- He had laid a Scheme to continue the Jews his
visible People, until the coming of the Messiah, and the setting up of the
Christian Church: nor could all their Sins before the Babylonish Captivity, nor
all their Perverseness afterward, induce him to cast them off, and give up his
Design. No. I am the Lord, says he; I change not, I abide by my original Plan:
therefore ye Sons of Jacob, infinitely provoking as your Conduct is, are not
consumed. (Mal. iii. 6.) -- He wrought for his great Name's Sake, through the
whole Affair. ( Ezekiel. xx.) And his infinite Resolution to accomplish his
glorious Plan, kept him immovable, and finally carried him through, in Spite
of all possible Provocations from a most ungrateful perverse People even as he
himself had declared, in Isai. ix. 7. when speaking of this very thing, he
says, The ZEAL of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

AND, as nothing could ever induce the unchangeable God to alter any of his
Plans himself; God laid a Scheme to bring the Ninevites to Repentance. He sent
Jonah to preach, and threaten Destruction. The Ninevites are brought to
Repentance, exactly according to his Design. So that he did not alter, but
exactly accomplish his Plan in that Case. The same may be said of all other
Instances of the like Kind, recorded in Scripture. Which however, are
sometimes, contrary to all Reason, used to prove, that the omniscient God may,
on new Views, alter his Purposes; when, in Fact, he would not be omniscient,
were he capable of so much as one new Idea.
so none of his Creatures were ever able to disconcert his Schemes. Joseph's
Brethren attempted to do it in one Instance, and Pharaoh struggled still much
more to do it in another; but in both Cases all they did was overruled to
accomplish the Divine Designs, to the best Advantage. -- God had laid a Scheme
to bring the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity back again to their own Land.
The Thing looked, to them, almost impossible ever to be accomplished. They
walked in Darkness, and saw no Light: Trust in the Lord, and stay your selves
on your God, said the Almighty, speaking of this very Thing. For my Counsel
shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure. (Isai. xlvi. 10. and l. 10.) -- And
if the Almighty would not suffer himself to be disappointed in his lesser
Schemes, which were of smaller Importance; much less will he suffer himself to
be frustrated in his Grand universal Plan, which is of infinitely greater
Concern, and in which his own Honor and the eternal Welfare of the whole
System are infinitely interested.

BESIDES, if we do but really and firmly believe the absolute Omniscience and
All Sufficiency of Him, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, we cannot but
see the Reason of the Thing; and be still farther assured, that he can neither
alter any of his Plans himself, nor possibly be disappointed by any of his
Creatures. For, from Eternity, all possible Plans lay open to his View, he had
his Choice, he chose the best; and what in all Nature can induce him to alter
his Choice, and prefer one not so good? Upon after-Consideration we often have
new Thoughts, or view Things in a different Light, and so alter our Schemes for
the better. But God has not had one new Idea since he has been in Existence.
From Eternity he existed, and from Eternity all Things were perfectly in his
View. It is therefore absolutely impossible, he should ever see any Reason to
change his Purposes; and equally impossible, he should change them absolutely
without any Reason at all. -- And his infinite Wisdom and almighty Power,
whereby he is absolutely All-sufficient, and able, with the greatest Ease, to
do according to his Pleasure, in the Armies of Heaven, and amongst the
Inhabitants of the Earth, renders it simply impossible that any of his
Creatures, by Power or Policy, should be able to disconcert any of his Schemes.
And this he knows; -- and this lays a solid Foundation for his perfect
Tranquillity, and complete Self-Enjoyment. And in the view of this he can be
perfectly happy, and even without one uneasy Thought, at the Head of the
Universe, let the Storms here below rise ever so high. The Lord on high is
mightier than the Noise of many Waters, yea, than the mighty Waves of the Sea.
(Psalm. xciii. 4.) And this renders him a fit Object of Trust, a secure Refuge
to his People, though the Earth be removed, and the Mountains cast into the midst
of the Sea. (Psalm. xlvi. 1 -- 7.) -- But this leads me to add,

4. BE firmly persuaded of the perfect and unchangeable Happiness of the holy
One of Israel. Or in other Words, Believe with all your Heart, that he is, not
only in Name, but in deed and in truth, over all, God BLESSED FOR EVER. (Romans
ix. 5.)

I GRANT, he is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; an infinitely holy and
good Being; infinitely engaged to advance his own Honor and the Good of his
own World. I grant, that Sin in its own Nature is infinitely to his Dishonor,
and tends to the utter Ruin of the whole Universe. I grant also, that to set
forth God's infinite Abhorrence of Sin, and its Contrariety to his perfect
Felicity, and natural Tendency really to put him to Pain and distress his
Heart, God is often said, in the Language of Scripture, to be grieved, to be
vexed, to be wearied, to be tired, to be pressed as a Cart full of Sheaves; and
could Sin finally disappoint God's glorious Designs, and frustrate the original
Scheme he had in View in the Creation of the Universe, break up the Plan on
which his Heart was so infinitely set; could this be, I grant, that he would be
not only less happy (as you inadvertently have intimated that in Fact he now
is, in saying, that he would have had "greater Pleasure," if Things had been
otherwise, p. 22.) I say, not only less happy, but really miserable; and that
to an infinite Degree: even equal to his infinite Regard to his own Honor, and
to the Good of the Universe. -- To see himself disappointed finally and for
ever, in what was infinitely dear to him; and that in Spite of the utmost
Exertion of his infinite Wisdom and almighty Power; and disappointed by his own
Creatures, the Clay in his own Hands; headed by the Devil, his avowed Enemy
(were such an Event possible) would make him feel himself not to be Almighty
and All-sufficient; -- not to be God; -- not to be King, Supreme and
Independent; but to lie at the Mercy of his Creatures; yea, (horrible as the
Expression is) to lie at the Mercy of the Devil, the grand Enemy to God and to
all Good. Which Feeling must render the Misery of such a Being as God is,
absolutely complete. For if the Devil can break up God's Schemes, just when he
pleases; God is absolutely at his Mercy, as to the Accomplishment of any of
them.

So certain, therefore, as we are, that he is, in Fact, over all God BLESSED
FOR EVER; just so certain may we be, that his Counsel shall stand, and he will
do all his Pleasure. And the whole Universe shall know that he is the LORD, and
the whole System be filled with his Glory.

AND the Omniscient Almighty God, perfectly conscious to all this, perfectly
enjoys himself, absolutely superior to so much as one uncomfortable Idea; and
without the least Uneasiness, in perfect Tranquillity, is possessed of an
infinite Degree of Happiness. Or to express all in one Word, He is over all God
blessed for ever. -- Of whom, and by whom, and to whom are all things; to whom
be Glory for ever. Amen.

AND what if we cannot see fully into the Reasons of the Divine Conduct in the
Permission of Sin, shall we think he has acted unwisely? Shall we think he does
not mean to do what is best? Shall we give up the absolute Perfection of the
Divine Nature? Shall we ungod our Maker? rather than suspect our own Judgment!
-- Or shall we give up our belief of the perfect Happiness of the infinitely
glorious and blessed God, and believe him to be a very miserable Being, rather
than to think, that he can be pleased with that very Plan, which he has in Fact
chosen, before all possible Plans? -- Or if he is perfectly pleased with his
own Plan, shall we fly in his Face? Charge him with being the Author of Sin?
and represent the Devil, as the greatest Saint; and God, as the greatest
Sinner? as you seem to have, dear Sir, with dreadful boldness, ventured to do.
(p. 16, 17.) Were it natural to all Mankind, heartily to acquiesce in all the
Dispensations of Divine Providence, as being perfectly wise, holy, just and
good, excepting only the Permission of Sin, it would not seem so likely, at
first Glance, that the Fault was wholly in us in this Case It would be an
exempt, strange Case. And we might be more at a loss to account for it. But it
is not at all uncommon or strange for Mankind to dislike the Divine Conduct in
other Instances, as well as this. -- Thus, it is a common Thing for the Crosses
and Troubles of Life to sit heavy on the Spirits of Mankind. And a general
Murmuring goes round the World. And Thousands think that none meet with so much
Trouble as themselves: and that they have good Reason to be discontented. Yet
if they have good Reason to be discontented, they are not to blame: but the
Fault is in God, in whose Hand the Rod is, and from whom all our Afflictions
come -- O how hard is it for many a one under great Afflictions to bring their
Hearts sweetly to approve of the Divine Conduct, and love and bless the God
that chastises them! O how difficult to get and maintain that Frame of Spirit,
which holy Job expressed in these Words, The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken away: blessed be the Name of the Lord! -- But whence arises all this
Difficulty? Not from any Fault in God, all whose Ways are wise, holy, just and
good. It is really best, most for the Honor of God and Good of Mankind, that
this apostate Race, who have rebelled against the great King of the Universe,
turned their Backs upon the God that made them, and are Idolizing the good
Things of this World, should be thus chastised, that they may know, that it is
an evil and bitter Thing to despise the Lord, to forsake the Fountain of all
Good, and be experimentally convinced that all Cisterns are broken Cisterns;
and driven to an absolute Necessity to confess their Sin, humble themselves,
forsake their Idols, and return to the only true and living God. But naturally
we do not love to have our Hearts humbled, weaned from the World, and to have
God for the alone Portion of our Souls. And as we do not like the Ends; so we
cannot be pleased with the Means. Did we like the one, the other might appear
full of Wisdom and Beauty. -- If all the Dispensations of Providence were
calculated to render us rich, honorable and happy, in the Fullness of all
earthly good Things, no Reproach, no Sickness, no Losses, no Troubles of any
Kind, that this World might be our Heaven and our Home, this would suit such
ungodly, proud, worldly Hearts as ours naturally are: and we could love such a
God, and think well of all his Ways. -- But alas, besides all our present
Troubles, we are soon to die, leave this World we are so fond of, and to go and
appear before our Judge, and receive according to our Deeds. This is still more
Shocking. O how glad would many be, if there was no such Thing as Death, and no
such Day as the Day of Judgment! -- But above all, nothing is so dreadful as
the eternal Torments of Hell. This shocks Thousands and Millions, and tempts
them to call in Question all the Divine Perfections. -- Especially, when all
this is threatened in God's Law, for the first Transgression, for the least
Sin. ( Gal. iii. 10.)

Now, if it is as difficult, to bring our Hearts to be reconciled to all this,
as to God's permitting Sin; although in all these Particulars we must own God's
Conduct is wise, holy, just and good, or give up the whole of Divine Revelation
at once; have we not great Reason to think that there is something amiss in our
own Hearts? Some general Cause, which produces all these Effects? -- And if we
are indeed natively Enemies to God in the Temper of our Minds, as the
Scriptures teach, it is not strange that we should feel a general Dislike to
all his Ways. If we are blind to his Glory, and regardless of his Honor, and
unconcerned about the spiritual Good of the System, the best Good of God's holy
and eternal Kingdom; and attached only to our own particular, unholy and merely
carnal Interests, it is not strange that we should dislike the Divine Conduct
toward the intellectual System, as much as the Israelites in the Wilderness
did God's Conduct toward them. ( Romans viii. 5 -- 11.) For although, in the whole,
greater Glory may be brought to God, and greater spiritual Good to the System;
yet if our Hearts naturally are not suited with God's Ends, neither will they
be with his Means: And so his whole Plan, in Stead of appearing perfect in
Wisdom, Glory and Beauty, may look as dark and gloomy to us, as did the Divine
Dispensations to Israel of old. -- On the whole, I think we have infinitely
more Reason to believe, that the Fault is in us, than in God: and that it much
better becomes us to suspect our own Hearts, than to "doubt whether God does
what is most for his own Glory" See these Sentiments more enlarged upon in my
Sermons (p. 115 -- 121, 192.)


Wherefore,

5. I pray you, lay it down for a Maxim, that Sin is in its own Nature, just
exactly the same abominable odious Thing, and not one whit the better, because
God permits it to be, and because he intended, and because he will overrule it
to Good. -- And believe it firmly, and act upon it steadily, that there is not
the least imaginable Reason to suspect the Wisdom of the whole, or of any Part
of the Divine Conduct; because we cannot see what good Ends he can have in
View. -- The Truth of both which Observations has been at large illustrated
already.

Is it not Pride, my Brother, unsufferable Pride, in us, poor contemptible
Worms, to get up into the Judgment Seat, call Almighty God to our Bar, examine
his Conduct, and then boldly pronounce it bad? And publicly tell the World,
that he has not done that "which is most for his own Glory"? And all, because
we cannot see the Reasons of his Conduct; although we know at the same time, that
our Views are so contracted, that we are no proper Judges; and that is
impossible we should prove his present Plan not to be the best? -- Yea, to be
so engaged to slur our Maker's Conduct, as to be vexed with a fellow-Worm, who
thinks it impossible God should act unwisely, and would therefore speak in
behalf of the injured Majesty of Heaven, and plead his Cause, and endeavor to
justify his Ways to Men? And with Indignation to cry out, "You have no Right to
be so violently confident, that the present Scheme is most for God's Glory and
the Good of the moral System;" -- "I can offer Reasons sufficient to balance
yours, and make the contrary appear highly probable!" (p. 5, 6.) For I think,
I can prove "that in Fact, God does not do what is most for his own Glory": And
it is "a mere Fallacy" to pretend that he "is obliged to!" (p. 12, 13.)

I PRAY you, Sir, Give up this impious blasphemous Principle, that "God does
not do what is most for his Glory." And if you think it Condescension, pray
condescend, at least, so far as to believe that God knows better than you do;
and is infinitely more concerned, than you ever was, to do as well as he knows
how. -- You would think it an intolerable Reflection, if all your Acquaintance
should join to give you this Character, viz. that in your daily Conduct, and
even in the most important Affairs, you do not make Conscience of acting
according to your best Judgment. -- O, blush, be ashamed, and be confounded,
and never open your Mouth to justify the impious Reflection, you have, in the
Sight of all the Country, cast upon the Character of the holy One of Israel.
Lest, if you allow your self, Pharaoh-like, to oppose your Maker, you, in the
End, meet the same dreadful Fate.

RATHER, let us seek Divine Grace, from the God of all Grace, that our Hearts
may be prepared to approve and love the Works and Ways of God, that when they
shall in the next World more fully open to our View, we may be ready to join
the General Assembly of Heaven, and cry, "AMEN, HALLELUJAH!" -- O, let us get
an Heart to love his Law, and to love the Gospel of his Son, and heartily
approve the daily Dispensations of his Providence; all which, analogous to the
whole of his universal Plan, are calculated to exalt God, and humble the
Creature. And if we can but be heartily reconciled to those Parts of the Divine
Government, which are more near to our View; we shall be prepared heartily to
approve of those Parts, which are more remote; yea, and of the whole. -- For it
is all of a Piece.

WHEN a Sinner is at first savingly converted, he sees but a very small Part of
God's universal Plan of Government; but what he sees, he heartily approves and
loves. And so he begins to be habitually prepared to approve and love the
whole. -- He grows up into this Divine Temper. -- At the Day of Judgment this
Divine Temper will be perfect. -- And so then he will be perfectly prepared to
approve, admire, and with all his Heart love and delight in God's universal
Plan; which then will be opened to the View of the intellectual System. But
those, who when on Earth, had not the least Disposition to approve and love any
Part of God's moral Government, rightly understood, but were Enemies to God, to
his Law, and Gospel, and common Dispensations of his Providence toward Mankind
in this World, will, when the whole of God's universal Plan is opened to View,
feel no Approbation; but rather their Enmity against God, and all his Ways,
will break out, and rage to Perfection, to eternal Ages.

Wherefore,

6. and lastly, in Stead of indulging a quarelling, cavilling, disputatious
Temper, and spending our precious Time in finding Fault with God's Ways; let us
rather spend our leisure-hours, in reading God's holy Word, and in fervent
Prayer for Divine Instruction.

IT had been infinitely wiser for the Israelites in the Wilderness, to have
spent their Time in Prayer to God, than in murmuring against him. Their
Corruptions made them so blind, that they could not see: and then they laid all
the Blame upon God. For which, God doomed them to wander and fall in the
Wilderness, and never reach the holy Land. -- And they were our Ensamples; and
these Things were written for our Instruction. -- O, therefore, my Brother, let
us in this benighted World, how dark soever things appear, not cavil against
any of the Ways of God; but rather humbly cry to him for divine Grace, to
enable us to believe, thoroughly to believe, that "supreme Wisdom cannot err;"
And accordingly, "heartily to acquiesce in the Dispensations of supreme Wisdom;
and humbly admire and adore, where we cannot fully comprehend;" in a firm
Belief that all the Affairs of the Universe are by him conducted in such an
infinitely perfect Manner, as that when "full Day shall be poured on all the
Ways and Works of God," they will appear in such a Light as to bring the
greatest Glory to God, and Good to the System; and so fill all holy Beings with
"unspeakable Joy," and the most exalted Thoughts of God. And even be a Source
of eternal Instruction, and Means of the swiftest Progress in Humility,
Holiness and Happiness, in the intellectual System for ever and ever. -- While
all join in eternal Praises to the infinitely wise God, of whom, and through
whom, and to whom, are all Things: To whom be Glory for ever. Amen.


FINIS.

