Mr. Foxcroft's Thanksgiving-SERMON, ON The Conquest of CANADA.

Grateful Reflections on the signal Appearances of Divine Providence for GREAT
BRITAIN and its Colonies in AMERICA, which diffuse a general JOY.

A SERMON Preached in the Old Church in BOSTON, October 9. 1760. Being The
THANKSGIVING-DAY, On Occasion of The Surrender of MONTREAL, and the complete
Conquest of CANADA, by the Blessing of Heaven on his Britannic MAJESTY's brave
Troops, under the auspicious Conduct of that truly great and amiable Commander,
General AMHERST.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, A. M. One of the Pastors of the said Church.

Praise ye the LORD for the Avenging of Israel, when the People willingly
offered themselves. -- My Heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that
offered themselves willingly among the People: Bless ye the LORD -- They that
are delivered from the Noise of Archers in the Places of drawing Water, there
shall they rehearse the righteous Acts of the LORD* even the righteous Acts
toward the Inhabitants of his Villages in Israel. Song of DEBORAH and BARAK.
BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND in Queenstreet, 1760.

GRATEFUL REFLECTIONS on the Divine Appearances in behalf of BRITAIN and its
American Colonies, particularly in the Conquest of CANADA.
PSALM. cxxvi. 3. The LORD has done great Things for us: whereof we are glad.
ONE grand Design of the holy Scriptures is to rebuke the common Stupidity of a
degenerate World, in not regarding the mighty Acts of Divine Providence; to
call GOD to our Remembrance; and point our Attention to his Agency, as the
prime Efficient, the sovereign Moderator of all Events, whether in the natural
or moral World. -- The Book of Psalms, in particular, is most excellently
calculated to serve this important Design; especially as Example carry's with
it a peculiar Force, the most striking and attractive to human Nature. For this
Part of the sacred Records very singularly abounds with admirable Patterns of
devotional Exercises, Meditation, Prayer and Praise: every where confessing and
adoring GOD, in Character of the first Cause and supreme Agent, the original
Creator and constant Preserver, Benefactor, Proprietor, and Lord of all;
celebrating the Perfections of his Being and Government; recounting the
Operations of his Hand; and rendering to Him all religious Honors and
Acknowledgments, -- many of which are in the Strain of Thanksgiving and
Blessing, -- which were recorded in Scripture for our Instruction and Imitation.

In the Psalm now before us (thought to be penned by Ezra, or some other Man of
God, about the Time of the Jews Return from the Babylonish Captivity) we find
the Church of Israel avouching the Agency of GOD in the glorious Transactions
and happy Revolutions of that extraordinary Day. They had lately seen very
interesting and surprising Occurrences in Favor of Zion; which they
contemplate with sacred Pleasure and Wonder. It is a devotional Admiration and
Joy they express on this mirthful Occasion; uttering their Words before the
LORD, and ascribing to Him the Praise of those signal and prosperous Events
they were now rejoicing in. The LORD (say they) has done great Things for us:
whereof we are glad.

Amidst the present Tumult of different and blending Passions, betwixt
melancholy Reflections and pleasant Prospects intermingling with one another,
on their sudden emerging out of Servitude and Sorrow, into Liberty and Joy,
they seemed to themselves like them that dream. Their former Distress was so
recent in every one's Memory, and had been so long and heavy upon them, that
they still seemed to feel it, and could hardly realize their actual Recovery
out of it. Their present Enlargement was so sudden, was attended with such
wonderful Circumstances, and promised such glorious Consequences, superior to
their highest and most sanguine Expectations, that they were astonished at it,
and could scarce "believe it for Joy." As it is story'd of the Apostle Peter,
when miraculously delivered out of his Imprisonment, "He wist not that it was
true, which was done by the Angel; but thought he saw a Vision": so in the
present Case, the People of God, marvellously rescued from the Oppression of
the Enemy, and restored to glorious Liberty, say of themselves, "We were like
them that dream". They were even lost in a pleasing Confusion and Amazement, to
find their Mourning turned to Laughter so unexpectedly, and joyful Songs so
suddenly succeeding their Tears and Groans. Such a Revolution seemed almost
incredible to them.

The very Pagans round about them were alarmed, and struck with Surprise, to
observe what Wonders the God of Israel had wrought for his Favourite-Nation.
"Then said they among the Heathen, The LORD has done great Things for them".
Such uncommon Events, and of so favorable an Aspect, had Divine Providence
effected in behalf of his People, that they became the Topic of Conversation
every where; the striking News apace flew abroad, and spread universal
Surprise. The Heathen themselves were not insensible of a Divine Interposition
in this Affair; but saw and confessed the Hand of the LORD working Salvation
for the Israelites. How much soever they hated the Jews, they were convinced,
and could not but own, the LORD their GOD had signally appeared on their Side,
and wrought Wonders for their Relief and Welfair. -- Besure, the Jews
themselves were conscious of this; and while their Pagan Neighbors made these
Providential Wonders the Subject of common Talk only, the Jews acting in
Character, in a just Correspondence with their professed Attachment to the
Service of the God of Heaven, and in Order properly to signify their Gratitude,
as became a People laid under such distinguishing Obligations, made these
Things the Matter of their devotional Acknowledgments; and in a Way of Address
to the GOD of Israel, they uttered the grateful Confession in our Text, "The
LORD has done great Things for us: whereof we are glad".

The Heathen, that saw or heard of the stupendous Dispensations of Providence
which gave such Gladness to the Jews, might be affected in a Way of Surprise:
but still might conceive little Pleasure, and offer no Thanks to God, on the
Occasion; nay rather, from the Power of Prejudice and Superstition, might give
Way to invidious and indignant Passions, when they viewed these astonishing
Events as the Products of a special Divine Agency in behalf of them who were
Partakers of the Benefit; when they considered these Wonders as wrought, not by
any of their own gods, but by the GOD of the Jews, whom, in his super-eminent
Character of "the only living and true God, the Holy One of Israel", they were
truly Haters of; and when they considered the same as wrought in Favor of a
Nation, whom, in their Character of "a holy Nation, and the peculiar People of
the most High", the Heathen rather maligned and despised. However, while others
might be vexed at these Things, and might envy the Jews, or at best only stand
amazed at these great Events, the obliged People themselves, conscious of their
being highly favored of the Lord, took Pleasure therein, and devoutly
confessed GOD the Author of them; saying, "The LORD has done great Things for
us: whereof we are glad".

As Cheerfulness is usually expressed by Songs, and Thanksgiving is the proper
Language of Joy, on the Receipt of Divine Benefits, they expressed the Gladness
of their Hearts in an Address of Thanks, a Hymn of Praise; which is handed down
to us in the inspired Records. It is one of the "Songs of Zion", in which the
Words of our Text occur. The People of God had been "sowing in Tears", but were
now "reaping in Joy": And their present Rejoicing was "after a godly sort", as
we may presume their antecedent Sorrowing had been. They "walked mournfully
before the Lord", while "their Harps hung on the Willows", untuned to "sing the
Lord's Song" in their suffering State. But upon their Deliverance they "awaked
up their Glory, and sang, and gave Praise". They now "rejoiced before the
Lord", and paid their grateful Honors to the God of their Salvation. "Then
(say they) was our Mouth filled with Laughter, and our Tongue with Singing". It
is a Dictate of Reason, as well as a Precept of Revelation, "Is any merry? let
him sing Psalms". This is universally the Temper and Tendency of devout Souls.
They are disposed to "sanctify the Name of God" on all Occasions of Mirth. Not
resting in Laughter, in natural and civil Merriment, the Children of Zion have
their devotional Singing. Not contented with entertaining one another, by
singing Ballads or rehearsing Poems among themselves, on the joyful Themes in
View, they address Heaven with sacred "Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing and making Melody in their Hearts to the LORD", in Proportion as they
are "filled with the Spirit." So Mary said, "My Soul does magnify the Lord, and
my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior." -- And surely, it must be granted,
this is our reasonable Service. "For it is good, to sing Praises unto our God:
for it is pleasant, and Praise is comely".

Verily " every Day we should bless the Lord," and "rejoice in every good Thing
which the Lord our God bestows on us". But when he does great Things for us,
as these furnish us with Matter of exceeding Joy, so they should proportionably
warm our Hearts, and fill our Mouths with Praise; introducing the liveliest
Accents and most cheerful Notes into our Songs of Joy, while extolling Him who
is great and greatly to be praised. When God exalts the Horn of his People,
when he beautify's them with Salvation, crowns them with Loving Kindness, and
marvellously operates in his Providence for their Safety and Welfair, he then
expects they be abundantly joyful in Glory, and sing aloud the high Praises of
their Divine Benefactor. On such Occasions, very eminently, the Call from
Heaven is in those emphatical Strains -- "Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the
Lord a new Song, and his Praise in the Congregation of Saints. Let Israel
rejoice in Him that made him: let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King.
-- "Praise him for his mighty Acts: praise him according to his excellent
Greatness. -- Declare his Doings among the People; make mention that his Name
is exalted. Sing unto the Lord; for he has done excellent Things: be it known
in all the Earth. Shout, thou Inhabitant of Zion; for great is the Holy One of
Israel in the midst of thee. -- O clap Hands, all ye People; shout unto God
with the Voice of Triumph. Sing Praises to God, sing Praises. For God is King
of all the Earth: sing ye Praises with Understanding. The Shields of the Earth
belong unto God: He is greatly exalted. -- "Sing ye to the Lord; for he has
triumphed gloriously. -- Ascribe ye Greatness unto God. -- "O sing unto the
Lord a new Song: for he has done mavelous Things; his right Hand, and his
holy Arm has gotten him the Victory. -- "Sing unto the Lord with the Voice of
a Psalm: make a joyful Noise before the Lord, the King. -- "Let Mount Zion
rejoice; let the Daughters of Judah be glad, because of his Judgments. -- "O
give Thanks to Him who alone does great Wonders. O give Thanks unto the God of
Heaven. -- "Sing unto the Lord with Thanksgiving. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem:
praise thy God, O Zion." -- In this pathetic Language, and with much
Re-iteration, the Scriptures urge the Duty of Praise, joyful Praise, and
fervent Thanksgiving, to Him whose Name alone is excellent, and who does
excellent Things, great and mavelous Things, without Number.

In Conformity to these Divine Injunctions, that is the Saint's Disposition and
Resolution, and his Heart's Desire, in the Language of the holy Psalmist --
"Thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy Work: I will triumph in the Works of
thy Hands. O Lord, how great are thy Works! -- "I will extol thee, my God, O
King; and I will bless thy Name for ever and ever. I will speak of the glorious
Honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous Works. My Mouth shall speak the
Praise of the Lord: and let all Flesh bless his holy Name for ever and ever."
--

Not satisfied with his own personal Thanksgivings and Praises, or with those
of the happy Few, like-minded with himself, the good Man (with the Spirit of
the Royal Psalmist) wishes, that "all the Earth" may sing unto the Lord; that
"all the Kindreds of the People" may give unto the Lord the Glory due to his
Name; that "the People" may praise him, that "all the People" may praise him;
that "every one that has Breath" may praise the Name of the Lord. --

Not only does he stir up his own Soul, and all that is within him, to bless
the Lord; but conscious of his Inequality to the heavenly Business, he calls in
Help, and would fain associate others with himself herein. He would have all
unite their Praises with his, to honor God more suitably to his Greatness, and
to the Worthiness of the Occasion, on receiving of great and common Salvations,
great and general Benefits. The Man who is animated with the Psalmist's
excellent Spirit, is ready to resound and echo to those his pious and
affectionate Exhortations -- "O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his
Name together. -- "O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful
Noise to the Rock of our Salvation. Let us come before his Presence with
Thanksgiving and make a joyful Noise unto Him with Psalms. For the Lord is a
great God, and a great King above all gods. -- "Bless the Lord, O house of
Israel; bless the Lord, O house of Aaron; bless the Lord, O house of Levi; ye
that fear the Lord, bless the Lord -- "Kings of the Earth; and all people;
Princes, and all Judges of the Earth; both young Men and Maidens, old Men, and
Children; let them praise the Name of the Lord." -- This now I think, must be
the Voice of every pious Observer of the Times, and Lover of Zion, concurrent
with the Voice of God in his Word and Providence, respecting our Nation and
Land at this Day. For, with the strictest Propriety and upon the justest
Grounds, we may adopt the Language of our Text (and may we all, by a special
Influence from the Spirit of Christ, unite in an Acknowledgement so apposite to
our Case, with the like Fervor of Devotion, Gratitude and holy Triumph, as did
the Church that first made this exulting Speech!) The LORD has done great
Things for us: whereof we are glad.

Consonant to this is the Language of the PROCLAMATION By His Excellency
FRANCIS BERNARD Esquire. Governor of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay. --
appointing the present Solemnity: and it may not be amiss now to refresh your
Memories by the Recital of its principal Part; especially as I propose it for
the Model of my following Discourse. N. B. As I had preached from the Text, on
a preceding Lord's Day, a Sermon adjusted to the usual Form, the present
Discourse is to be considered as a Supplement to that, and an Application of
it, upon the Plan of the Proclamation -- Nor was it till after I had resigned
it up to the Importunity of some of my Friends, for the Press, that I
recollected, the same Text is the subject of several excellent Sermons, two of
the Ministers of the Town had given the Public, the last Year, on the Reduction
of QUEBEC: which, I confess, might well have superseded the Publication of
mine, and its likely would have been an insuperable Argument against it, if I
had called to Mind that Circumstance before I had put it out of my Power to
suppress it with any Decency, or a just Reserve of Respect to the Gentlemen
that (...) seeing the Light.


GREAT and manifold have been the Mercies of GOD toward us: He has given
Victory to the KING, and caused his Enemies to flee before him; and has at
length completed the Deliverance of this Country, by the entire Reduction of
CANADA; whereby the future Security of our religious and civil Privileges is
[under God] put into our own Hands: Wherefore, that all the People of this
Province may at one Time and with one Voice express their Thankfulness on this
glorious Occasion, the present Day is appointed to be a Day of public and
solemn THANKSGIVING within this Province, --

Accordingly we are assembled this Morning jointly "to return Thanks to
Almighty GOD," in general for "his great and manifold Mercies toward us", and
in particular "for his having so visibly supported us in this just and
necessary War"; and at the same Time, to accompany our Praises with our Prayers
to GOD, "beseeching Him, that he would continue to direct and assist his
MAJESTY's Counsels and Arms unto the Establishment of a firm and honorable
Peace." --

In the first place, you see, our public and thankful Acknowledgments are
demanded for "the great and manifold Mercies of God toward us," in general. --
And surely, upon the least Reflection, all must confess, the merciful Favors of
Providence toward us (I mean the People of Great Britain, and of these its
dependent Colonies) have been both great and manifold; and if viewed in a
proper Light, must be owned the worthy Subject of our devout Meditation, and
just Matter of our joyful and solemn Thanksgiving to God; whose Presence and
Blessing are the original Sources of all true Prosperity and Happiness. If we
should compare Britain and its Colonies with other Kingdoms or States and
Provinces; If we should particularly recollect the great Deliverances (great in
their Nature, Circumstances, or Consequences) which God has wrought for us in
Times of Distress; the great Preservations he has granted us in Times of
Danger; and the great positive Blessings, Liberties, Privileges, and
Advantages, Successes, Increases, Improvements, Extent of Dominion and
Commerce, Superiority in War, intestine Tranquillity, Health, Wealth, Plenty, a
well-ballanced Constitution of civil Government, salutary Laws, and innumerable
other Instances of national Glory and Bliss, by which God has signalized his
Goodness and Bounty toward us; it would, on the whole, be abundantly manifest,
that the Lord has done great Things for us: and indeed, has not dealt so with
any Nation besides on the Face of the Earth. Britain, and in some Measure the
British Plantations too, at this Day, are very much the Wonder and Envy of all
the World, acquainted with their Situation, Circumstances, and Affairs. -- But
it would carry me beyond my present Purpose, and oblige me vastly to exceed the
scant Limits of Time allowed the Pulpit on these Occasions, should I go into
any distinct Illustrations of the comprehensive Articles hinted at. I must
therefore leave them for the Entertainment of your private Thoughts: and I am
persuaded, if you have any suitable Conceptions upon these Heads, you will
readily join with me in acknowledging, The LORD has done great Things for us;
whereof we have Reason to be glad.

What I have chiefly in View at present, is a brief Recognition of some
remarkable Events, that have been plainly owing to the kind Interposition of a
Divine Hand, for our Safety and Welfair: which alone may sufficiently evidence
the LORD's having done great Things for us, and which loudly bespeak a thankful
Commemoration.

Certainly GREAT BRITAIN is that happy Island, where many the most notable
Transactions of a favorable Providence have been seen, both in former and
later Ages. To go but a little further back than one or two of the last
Centuries -- Among the memorable Events in Favor of our English and Scottish
Nations, now so happily connected in one Kingdom, and among the lasting Glories
of Britain, we may very justly set an Asterism on that capital and leading
Instance, the REFORMATION. Which was the Kingdom's Deliverance from the Tyranny
of the Bishop of Rome, and his detestable Enormities; the Church's Purification
from Abundance of vile Errors, Idolatries and Superstitions; the restoring of
the Holy Bible to common Use; the spreading of Christian Knowledge, and the
obtaining of a more scriptural Worship than Britain for Ages before had ever
seen; and in Consequence of a Divine Blessing on Divine Institutions, the
Recovery of Multitudes of Souls from Darkness to Light, from Bondage to
Liberty, and from Death to Life, in a moral and spiritual Sense. A Work this,
which must needs appear truly surprising, if we review it in its Rise and
Beginning; if we trace it in its Progress; if we attend to its Consequences and
Effects; if we reflect, how it has been guarded and watched over by a special
Providence, and carried safe through many a dangerous Crisis; how it has been
supported against the most powerful Efforts of the combined Forces of Earth and
Hell in Opposition to it; how it has been revived, when sometimes fallen into
Decay and Languishment; and even when threatened with utter Ruin, has been
renewed and re-established, if not further advanced, by some happy and
seasonable, but unexpected Turn of Affairs, in which have appeared very plain
Signatures of a Divine Interposition. And tho the Reformation, so successfully
begun, and so long subsisting, has never been prosecuted to such a Degree of
Perfection, as to leave no Room for future Improvements and Refinements,
according to Scripture-Rule; yet was it, even from its first Commencement and
in its lowest State, such a Wonder of Mercy to Britain, as deserves to be had
in everlasting Remembrance, and justly claims a very thankful Mention whenever
we are thus in the solemn Assembly commemorating the great and manifold Mercies
of God toward us.

The short Reign of that illustrious young Prince (our english Josiah) King
EDWARD the sixth, who stood at the Head of the Reformation in England, truly
meriting his hereditary Title "the Defender of the Faith", and approving
himself the Patron of pure Religion, as well as a conspicuous Example of Royal
Virtue and early Piety; his short Reign, I say, if we had Leisure to take a
particular View of it, would present us with some of the most admirable Scenes
of Providence, and entertain us with a pleasing Variety of great Things done
for the British Israel, especially in the Conduct and Success of that glorious
Enterprise, the Reformation, then so happily in Pursuit.

And when, upon the Demise of that incomparable Royal Reformer, a Popish Queen,
the infamous MARY, succeeded to the Crown, who set her self to ruin the
Protestant Interest, and soon prevailed to reduce Things into the old Channel
of Corruption; reviving the Heresies and Idolatries, that had been exploded and
purged away; prostituting Majesty by an abject Submission to a foreign Yoke,
and reconciling her Court and Realm to his offended Holiness of Rome; but
kindling the Flames of Persecution against the Puritan Reformers, and pursuing
with Vengeance all such as were brave and honest enough not to strike in with
her impious and tyrannous Measures; which drove great Numbers of her best
Subjects into Exile, impoverished Multitudes, ruined many a fair Estate, and
sacrificed many a precious Life; -- O what a merciful Interposition of
Providence was it, by the Queen's Decease, to put a quick Period to her bloody
Reign, and so to the most shocking Scenes of Horror!

How admirable too was the Kindness of Heaven in reserving at the same time a
Protestant Princess, that illustrious ELISABETH, for the Successor, and
hastening her Advancement to the Throne! Which brought on a blessed Revolution
in Politics, and put a new Face upon religious Affairs; once more broke off
the Realm from its Subjection to the Sea of Rome; purged the Church from those
grosser Superstitions in Worship, it had relapsed into; restored Truth in
Doctrine; called home many famous Lights of the Reformation from foreign Parts,
to which they had retired for Liberty of Conscience, and for the Safety of
their Persons; and in short, gave a fresh Revival to the Hopes of Protestants,
at a Juncture when all seemed to be lost. -- How great, moreover, was the
Goodness of God in distinguishing this Protestant Queen, not only by endowing
her with superior Abilities for Government and War, but by giving her Length of
Days; and so, prolonging her Reign (a Reign prosperous and full of Glory, though
in some Respects not without its Clouds) to the firmer Establishment of the
Protestant Religion at Home, and its greater Security abroad! For Britain was
then the common Asylum of Protestant Refugees; and truly the Bulwark of the
Protestant Interest. -- In fine here, How mavelous was the Divine Apperance
for Britain, in the total Dissipation and Destruction of the Spanish Armada, by
a terrible Storm; when attempting an Invasion, and threatening to carry all
before it! That vastly numerous and powerful Fleet, which boasted it self
invincible, and seemed superior to all Opposition; which therefore, had it not
met with the signal Blasts of a vindictive and resisting Providence, might have
succeeded in its dreadful Errand, the subduing the Queen and her Realm to the
Spanish Yoke; and so, might have been the unhappy Means of a triumphant
Re-entrance of Popery, and a fresh Persecution of Protestants, if not the utter
Extinction of the Protestant Religion, in Britain, at least.

The next remarkable Instance I shall mention of an interposing Providence on
behalf of the British Israel, occurred in the following Reign, that of King
JAMES the First; and it was the so opportune Discovery of that horrid Popish
Plot, commonly called Gunpowder Treason, just at the critical Moment, when
ripe for Execution; which being happily prevented, the King and Parliament were
wonderfully rescued from a sudden and universal Destruction by one fatal
Stroke; that, had it taken Place, might eventually have proved the Destruction
of English Liberty, and Subversion of the Protestant Faith, and have brought on
new Triumphs of Papal Tyranny and Rage. Great indeed was the Deliverance
Britain now received.

In the Reign of King CHARLES the First, when, under the too prevalent
Influence of a Popish Queen, and the Counsels of a Popishly affected Party
about the Court, such large Strides were taken toward arbitrary Power, and
when the Nation was groaning under such Stretches and Abuses of the
Prerogative, and such Incursions upon Liberty and Property, to which violent
and illegal Measures all the Calamities of that impolitic and improsperous
Reign seem to have been radically and primarily owing; what a signal
Interposition of Divine Providence on behalf of a People so injured and
threatened with Ruin, was to be seen in that seasonable and noble Stand, a
spirited and free, but loyal Parliament made, in Support of civil Right, and
for the Redress of national Grievances! And was there not visibly the Hand of
God in such a general Coalescence and firm Union of all Ranks of People, Gentry
and Commonalty, on the Side of the Opposition! And indeed it seems to have been
the natural Right of the People, if not their indispensable Duty, to adhere to
the Parliament, at least so long as they acted in Character, as authorized
Guardians of the Community, as the public Conservators of their legal Rights
and civil Liberties, and went into none but true Patriotic Measures. Nor can I
but suppose, the heroic Parliamentary Stand then made, has had lasting good
Effects, and Britain is reaping Advantages from it to this very Day. -- In
Addition to the civil Oppressions of that inglorious Reign, there were
ecclesiastical Impositions, and in Consequence hereof, violent Prosecutions of
the Nonconforming Clergy (or Protestant Dissenting Ministers) which were the
Means of driving Thousands of the King's best Subjects over to these remote
Regions of America, in View of a secure Retreat from the angry Storm; and so
proved the unexpected Occasion of some blessed Events, at once enlarging the
Kingdom of CHRIST, and extending the Dominions of Britain, to the great
Advancement of its Wealth, Strength and Glory, as at this Day. -- And what is
wonderful to reflect on, at the same Time the King's Heart, by the good Hand of
God, was bowed to favor these his emigrant Subjects with his Letters Patent,
or Royal Charters, planning a good civil Government for them, and vouchsafing
them ample Powers, Privileges, Immunities and Rights; which have contributed
signally to the Preservation, Growth and Flourishing of the New England
Colonies, from whence a Series of vast Advantages and Benefits have been
derived to the Mother-Kingdom. -- The unhappy civil Wars, that so long
subsisted, between the King and Parliament, and which were overruled in
Providence to an amazing Issue; yet seem to have laid the Foundation for
Consequences, that not a little affected the Weal of the Nation, and have been
subservient to its Safety and Prosperity. -- The tragical Fate of that unhappy
KING has left a standing Monument of the Absurdity and Danger there is in a
Protestant Prince's giving Ear to Popish Counsels, and the Folly of risking his
Crown by straining his Prerogative, or neglecting his Parliament, or despising
the Populace.

The Interregnum that followed, however some Circumstances attending it, or
some of its Transactions, might cast a Gloom over it, yet I think, was not
without a Mixture of such Events in Providence, in that Day, as conspired to
advance the Glory and Felicity of Britain, and such as may justly strike the
calm unprejudiced Reflector with Admiration. How signally did the interposing
Hand of God appear, in that, notwithstanding the long-continued Rage of an
intestine War, which so commonly corrupts the Manners of a People, there should
be such Remains, yea, a visible Increase, of Sobriety and Virtue in the Nation!
That notwithstanding such Emulations and Clashings among a Variety of Parties,
and such Changes in the Administration of civil Government, there should be so
much good Order maintained, and the Course of Justice so well preserved! In
short, that there should still be so much of the Face of a Kingdom kept up, and
so many Tokens of a flourishing Nation; such a Degree of national Strength, of
national Fame, and Influence abroad -- and above all, such an apparent Growth
in Christian Knowledge, and so many Signs of a prosperous State of Religion!
How mavelous the Goodness of God to Britain, in not suffering either Anarchy
or Tyranny at any Time to be its Ruin, but overruling the Mischiefs of both to
produce good Effects in the Issue!

When the Restoration of Monarchy in the Person of King CHARLES the Second came
on, it is observable, though together with this there was a Restoration of
arbitrary Measures of Government, though a Deluge of Corruptions and Disorders
broke in with it, and though the Persecution of Protestant Dissenters was
renewed and carried on with a high Hand, yet by a Divine overruling Providence
Good was brought out of Evil, and Britain's Happiness the more advanced, and
better secured, in the Event. For Instance, the Turning such a Multitude of
worthy Magistrates out of their Offices, because they did not see Light to make
solemn Renunciation of an important political Principle, which if sincerely and
universally abhorred, and the Contrary espoused, there had no Place been left
for such a glorious Event as the Revolution, or the Protestant Succession, --
this doubtless had its Influence to confirm those Gentlemen in their Attachment
to British Liberty, and by their Example to diffuse and perpetuate a generous
Warmth in the same righteous Cause; which served to pave the Way for those
glorious Events; that have been the effectual Means of its Recovery and
Establishment. -- So, the Silencing such a large Body of Nonconformist
Ministers, perhaps as useful and truly valuable a Set of Gospel-Preachers as
any Nation was ever blessed with, who were thrust out of their Livings, driven
into Corners, and miserably harrassed with penal Laws. -- this eventually
turned to the Honor of those persecuted Dissenters, and the greater Credit of
their Cause, as these hard Measures afforded them an Opportunity to signalize
their Integrity, and give glorious Proofs of the Purity of their Zeal for a
further Reformation. -- The People also, who had been sincerely engaged in the
same Cause, became naturally now but the more attached to this persecuted
Cause, and to its suffering Patrons: and a growing Fervor of love to the
Divine Word and Ordinances, in their purer Administration, easily drew them
into private Assemblies for the Enjoyment of these blessed Privileges, by Means
whereof the Dissenting Interest was kept up. Nor could all the Opposition made
ever prevail to suppress it: but rather served to support and promote it; and
in the final Result, this turned to the Establishment and Security of the
Dissenting Interest, by being the Occasion of bringing on a Legal Toleration,
in a subsequent Reign; and thus, indeed, it turned in the Issue to the
strengthening of the Protestant Interest in general, by enforcing the Principles
of the Reformation, and strengthening the Foundations on which it stands. -- On
the whole, the Conduct of Divine Providence in this Affair, I think, is greatly
to be admired; and the Goodness of God in thus overruling the most adverse
Measures, rather to the Advantage of the noble Cause of civil Liberty and pure
Religion. N.B. Some of the foregoing Reflections were either for Brevity omitted
in delivering my Sermon, or else escaped me in the hasty composing it. But I
could not avoid inserting them in my Transcript for the Press, without some
Injustice to the Subject, and perhaps as much to my self.


Most of these Remarks are equally applicable to the Case as it stood in the
next Reign, that of King JAMES the Second. I shall therefore only observe here
in general, that as he was in Principle a zealous Papist, he was bent on the
Restoring of Popery in Britain, but was strangely infatuated in his Counsels,
and left of God to pursue such Measures, relative both to Church and State, as
only served to defeat his Intentions and frustrate his Hopes. For Instance,
while he strove, by various Methods, by Frowns and Flatteries, by Persecutions,
by illegal Dispensations etc. to widen the Differences between his Protestant
Subjects, with Reference to their religious Disputes in special, sometimes
gratifying one Party, and at other times courting the other, and all with an
Aim to weaken the common Cause, these Managements only served to draw their
Attention to the common Danger, to drive the contending Parties nearer
together, to make them willing to come to a Temper among themselves, and unite
their Efforts for the common Safety. And such at length was the Union of the
whole Nation in Opposition to the KING's Religion and Politics, that an
Invitation was sent to that celebrated General and Politician, the PRINCE of
Orange (the King's Son in Law) to come over to their Help, for the Redress of
Grievances, the Rescue of civil Liberty, and Security of the Protestant
Interest. A Conduct highly becoming a free People, justifiable by the great Law
of Self-Preservation, and in my Views of it, so near akin to the Parliamentary
Opposition to King CHARLES the First, that I know not how any can consistently
approve the one and condemn the other. This Precedent may suffice forever to
silence all Pleas for indefeasible hereditary Right, Nonresistance and passive
Obedience; which have sometimes made such a Noise, but now seem happily laid
asleep. This Conduct, at least, has declared the general Sense of the Nation,
and left a notable Testimony to the Cause of civil Liberty, and the Protestant
Religion. In this a wonderful Hand of God is to be seen and acknowledged. --
This prepared the Way for the Nation's Deliverance. And a blessed Deliverance
it was, when King JAMES, either through Consciousness of Guilt, or through
Cowardice, under the Apprehension of approaching Danger, made his Exit (as
inglorious a one perhaps as that of his Royal Father, though not in the same
Manner) first abdicating his Crown, and then forsaking his Kingdom, and going
into a kind of voluntary Exile. By which Means a civil War was happily
prevented; and hereby, pursuant to natural Right, the Nation was at Liberty to
fill the vacant Throne by Election of a Successor.

And upon whom should the Eyes of the Nation more naturally be turned, than
their glorious Deliverer, who stood so nearly related to the Throne, especially
by his Consort, the eldest Princess of the Blood? This wise and great Prince
and his most amiable Consort were accordingly by the united Voice of the Lords
and Commons, with the general Consent, constituted KING and QUEEN. -- A
surprising Revolution this, attended with such Circumstances, and followed with
such Consequences, as loudly speak it a Wonder of Mercy to Britain, and owing
to a special Interposition of Divine Providence! -- This was an Event fruitful
of abundant Happiness and Glory to the Nation: particularly, in the
Establishment of civil Liberty, and Provision for the Security of the
Protestant Religion, by a Parliamentary Settlement of the Succession to the
Crown in the Protestant Royal Line; hereby greatly superadding to the Security
and Strength given to both by the then present, just, mild, Protestant Reign.
For King WILLIAM's great and generous Soul, not satisfied with having rescued
Britain out of the Hands of it is Enemies, nor with making it happy, by securing
it is Religion and Liberty, during his own Reign, looked forward, even to
distant Futurity, and studied how to perpetuate the same Happiness in all
following Reigns. As a Medium to this blessed Purpose, God put it into the
King's Heart, to get the Crown legally entailed, in such a Manner, that Britain
might hope for a glorious Race of Protestant Princes, to sway the Scepter in
Righteousness and in Mercy. -- And the Royal Favor, not restrained by Bigotry
to any one Set of the King's Protestant Subjects, but conducted by an
impartial View to the public Good, procured an Act of Parliament to establish a
Toleration and Allowance of Protestant Dissenters; to their great Relief and
Quiet, as well as to the greater Advantage and firmer Security of the common
Cause, wherein all, whose Hearts are truly Protestant, are constantly united.
-- However, while he esteemed it his Glory to rule over a free People, and
consulted the general Good in allowing a reasonable Liberty to all his loyal
Subjects; yet, as became a true Father, he at the same time took Care to fence
them about with wholesome Laws, for the Security of good Manners, and would
indulge none in a wicked Licentiousness. His Heart appeared warmly engaged in
the noble Design of exalting the National Character, and improving the Genius
of his People, by rectifying and raising their Morals. And it is not the least
among the Glories of his auspicious Reign, that those excellent "Societies for
Reformation of Manners" had their Rise in it, and flourished under his powerful
Patronage. -- Nor was his Royal Care limited to the Shores of Britain, but
extended it self to the remotest British Factories and Plantations beyond Sea.
As a Father mindful of his Children absent, the King sought the Weal of his
Protestant Subjects abroad, as well as at home, and was equally concerned to
secure their Religion and Liberty. Where any of them were in Hazard of being
seduced to Popery, and so of being drawn into Slavery, he was in Care to have
them provided with a good Preservative; and where any Factory or Settlement had
not Strength enough within it self to procure and maintain the Ministry of the
Word, he took Care to make Provision for their Assistance; and even for the
Support of Protestant Missions, to proselyte the Heathen to Christianity. On
such heroic Designs, and not on any little narrow Party. Views, was founded
that Royal Institution of the "Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign
Parts". -- [Nor can I believe, it ever entered into the KING's generous Heart,
that the Charities given on this noble Foundation, should be principally
applied to serve the Intention of reclaiming Protestant Dissenters to the
Episcopal Communion, whether at home or abroad. If such Application of these
Charities be justifiable in the latter Case, why not also in the former? Were
the Experiment made of such an Application at Home, perhaps it might have the
good Effect, to put the Application Abroad under a different Direction. But
this by the Way.] -- I go on to observe, how the benign Influences of the Royal
Favor and Justice reached to us in these New England Colonies. The King's
loyal Subjects here, in the last preceding Reigns, had been not only deprived
of their invaluable Charter-Privileges, but cruelly harrassed and oppressed by
various despotic Measures, and in imminent Danger of losing both their Religion
and Liberty. A Crisis, that no true Friend of either can review without some
painful Feelings! But through the Mercy of an interposing Providence, these
Colonies were delivered from impending Ruin, by Means of the glorious
Revolution, and the happy Accession of King WILLIAM to the Throne: who of his
Royal Grace renewed or continued their Charters, and with a Paternal Pleasure
saw them cased of their Grievances, and restored to a secure and prosperous
State. Now were their Complaints turned into Songs, and they were like unto
them that dream. They now found Repose and Solace, in the undisturbed
Possession of Liberty and Property, of their Laws, their civil Rights, and
their religious Privileges; partaking largely in the National Happiness, under
the wise, the equal, the Protestant Government of King WILLIAM, whose Memory is
blessed: And it may fitly be subjoined here, on whose Royal Head (even after
the Loss of his excellent Partner in the Throne) still the Crown sat safe and
flourishing, to the Joy of his loyal Subjects, both at home and abroad. But his
Enemies were covered with Shame, by finding themselves frustrated in all their
Attempts (whether in the Methods of Insurrection and Invasion, or of
Assassination and Murder) to wrest the Scepter out of his Royal Hand, in order
to replace a fugitive and abjured King in the British Throne. For it is very
remarkable, how a gracious Providence watched over the Deliverer of the Nation,
and the Shield of its Liberty, civil and sacred; to defend his Person, to
support his Throne, and to crown his Reign with Prosperity and Fame, to the
great Glory and Happiness of Britain and its Dependences. -- These surely are
Wonders of interposing Mercy, never to be forgotten; such as must always make a
distinguishing Figure in the English Story; and well deserve a grateful Mention
on this Occasion.

Nor was Queen ANNE's Reign, who next succeeded to the Crown, without those
Instances of a benevolent overruling Providence in Favor of Britain and its
Colonies, that merit our grateful Reflections. The peaceable Accession of this
Protestant Princess to the Throne, upon the Foot of the late
Revolution-Settlement of the Succession, happily delivered the Kingdom at
present from the painful Apprehension of a Popish Successor. The Security of
her Person, and the Support of the Protestant Succession as then by Law
established, being the Objects of public Attention, and the common Care; her
Reign likewise commencing with a Variety of great Blessings and Glories, and
proceeding for a while with a progressive Prosperity and very promising
Appearances, -- these Circumstances gave further Encouragements to the Friends
of the Protestant Succession, and new Checks to the Hopes of its Enemies. It
must be acknowledged, this female Reign was for a Course of Years very much
signalized and honored in Providence. It was highly dignified in particular,
by a just, a mild, a wise Administration of civil Government; by a
Parliamentary Confirmation of the Revolution-Entail of the British Crown; by a
Ratification of the legal Allowance or Toleration of Protestant Dissenters; by
the Union of England and Scotland in one common Kingdom, to the strengthening
their common Interests, in respect of civil Liberty and the Protestant
Religion; by the Reduction of Port Royal in America, which opened the way for
the Conquest and Recovery of all Nova Scotia; -- in fine, by an almost
incredible Series of prodigious Victories, and triumphant Successes in War,
under the Conduct of that consummate martial Genius, the Duke of MARLBOROUGH a
General most deservedly of the first Character in his Day. -- But alas, in
Process of Time much of the Glory departed. Several of the last Years of this
Reign make no very honorable or consistent Figure in its Annals. The Queen,
through some unhappy Weakness, was tempted to discard her old and best Servants;
and a Change of her Ministry brought on a Change of her Measures. This
Revolution in the public Counsels soon produced an Alteration in the State of
public Affairs, both at home and abroad. The Queen was betrayed into an
inglorious Peace; at a Crisis, when her Majesty's Sword, in the almost
resistless Hand of her brave General, had humbled the Pride of France, and
"reduced its exorbitant Power nearly to its native Bounds, and had by the
French King's own Confession just cut open an Entrance into the very Heart of
his Kingdom; which he acknowledged would have been of the most fatal
Consequence to him; and, no Doubt, would have for ever set us free from any
Apprehensions of his Power," though before so very formidable to all Europe,
and the grand Support of the Pretender to her Majesty's Crown; whose Hopes
therefore had been for ever extinguished, had that just and necessary War with
France still been prosecuted, with equal Vigor and Success, as it was before
the Queen was seduced to terminate it with an ill-judg'd and dishonorable
Peace: which, if She had long survived it, might have been followed with a
dreadful Train of evil Consequences, both to Britain and its Colonies. -- The
Queen was betrayed into some persecuting Measures, relative to her Protestant
dissenting Subjects; which, if an interposing Providence had not hindered their
taking Effect, would have opened a Fountain of Mischiefs to them and their
Posterity; and would so far, at least, have been an Injury and Disgrace to the
Nation. In a Word, the Plots of a strong and restless Faction, in Opposition to
her Majesty's Reign, and in Favor of an abjured Popish pretender, began to
produce some bad Effects, of a very dangerous Tendency, and even threatened the
very worst Catastrophe; which I know not how any Protestant or Briton can
reflect on without a sensible Pain. -- But, in great Mercy to the Kingdom and
its Dependencies, GOD, who is the Governor among the Nations, and in whose Hand
our Breath is, by surprising Means prevented the impending Evil. -- The Hand of
Providence, in the sudden Vacation of the Throne, and the unexpected general
Union in immediately proclaiming the true Successor by Law, made Way for the
peaceful Accession of the illustrious House of HANOVER to the British Crown, in
the Person of his late Majesty King GEORGE the First. He was great Grandson to
King JAMES the First; whose Daughter ELISABETH, the Consort of that Protestant
Elector Palatine, whom the Emperor stripped of his Dominions, was the Mother of
SOPHIA, Consort to the Elector of Brunswick and Duke of Hanover, who by her had
this Son, King GEORGE I. born ANNO 1660, the Year of King Charles the Second's
Restoration, So that in that Day a kind Providence was preparing greater and
better Things for Britain, than the Nation then dreamed of!
This at once disconcerted the whole Scheme of that bigo^ed Party in the
Pretender's Interest; which, if suffered to have been carried into Execution,
might have involved Britain, and these Colonies with it, in Blood and Ruin, and
might have entailed Chains and Misery on the latest Posterity. But, as Israel
sang of old, "Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth.
Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler: the Snare is
broken, and we are escaped."

As the Accession of the present Royal Family to the British Throne was thus at
a critical Juncture, that speaks a great Deliverance thereby given us, so it
was attended with a Coincidence of favorable Circumstances, and followed with a
Train of national Benefits; such as, if reviewed in their just Light, would
open to us very glorious Scenes of Providence, and evidence that God had
therein showed his People a Token for Good. What an Increase of Strength and
Glory must it give Great Britain -- What Weight to its Counsels -- What Terror
to its Arms -- to have a Prince on the Throne, of such superior Wisdom and
Experience, of such distinguishing Abilities for Government and for War, of
such extensive Fame and Influence abroad, and in such high Esteem at home,
equally the Delight of his Friends, and the Dread of his Enemies! -- What a
Favor to the Nation, that the King brought with him to the Throne a numerous
Progeny, which gave the joyful Prospect of a long Race of Protestant Successors
to the Crown? And that he had his important Life so lengthned out, the more
firmly to establish the Tranquillity of his Kingdom, and the better to secure
the Protestant Succession; to remove the Fears of its Friends, and dash the
Hopes of its Adversaries?

When King GEORGE, the First by a sudden Death was taken away, while on a Visit
to his German Dominions, what a favorable Circumstance was it, that he left his
Royal SON and Heir behind, immediately to take up the Reins of Government; who
came to the Crown in maturity of Years, and with improved Qualifications for
Government, -- and who having obtained Help from God, happily remains in the
Throne to this Day!

What Wonders of Mercy to Great Britain, and its dependent Colonies, has GOD
wrought from Time to Time in continuing this Protestant Royal Family in
Possession of the Throne; in securing it against the repeated Invasions of a
Popish Pretender, abetted and aided by France, and Rome, and Hell; in
suppressing once and again the Insurrections of an infatuated Faction, enslaved
to the Delusions of Popery, at best to the Notions of an indefeasible
hereditary Right of Princes, an uninterrupted Succession of Bishops, and the
like; which sometimes put them upon the most desperate Conspiracies and
Rebellions; but all in vain! Their Counsels have ever been turned into
Foolishness, their Attempts defeated, the King's Throne established; and the
Hopes of his Enemies seem now extinguished, or else their Reason awakened, so
that at present they appear to be among the Quiet in the Land, and the old
Distinctions of Tory and Whig, High Church and Low, seem to be much out of
Date, and next to being buried in Oblivion.

The prolonging of his present MAJESTY's important Life and Royal Abilities to
so advanced an Age, -- the Continuance of so many Branches of the Royal Family,
-- the excellent Spirit and Talents for Government so conspicuous already in
the Heir apparent, -- the extraordinary Genius and Application of the prime
Minister, -- the uncommon Degree of Harmony in the great Court of Parliament;
-- the public Spirit of all Ranks in contributing so readily and liberally for
the Support of a vigorous War; -- the Establishment of a well-regulated
Militia, and Revival of a martial Spirit at home; the best disciplined and
brave Troops abroad; the most powerful Navy, that gives Britain, if not the
Sovereignty of the Seas, yet at least a Superiority, that its Enemies feel and
own, and that gives it peculiar Advantages, as well to obstruct and annoy them,
as to facilitate its own Maritime Expeditions, to cover its Land-Enterprizes,
and to protect its Fishery and Trade; the admirable Valor and Conduct of the
British Fleets and Armies, under the Command of great Generals and great
Admirals; the Unanimity of their Counsels, and inviolate Union of their
military Efforts; and as the happy Fruit hereof, their late very signal and
almost uninterrupted Course of Successes; their heroic Exploits, both in the
Sea and Land-Service; their Triumphs over the Enemy, in all Quarters of the
World, wherever the War has reached; the large, the numerous, and very
important Acquisitions of Territory (besides the taking of many Fortresses and
Ships of War) that have gloriously added to the Strength, as well as Extent of
the British Empire, but are so many depressing and very enfeebling Defalcations
from the Gallic Dominions, which have perplexed the Counsels and confounded the
ambitious Designs of France: and at the same time, what none can but observe,
and the Enemy must needs envy, the peaceful State of Britain within itself, its
Freedom from Murmurs and Discontents, its Security and Defense against hostile
Invasions and Depredations, its few Losses by Sea or Land, its comparatively
little Loss of Blood, its extensive and flourishing Commerce, its Improvement
and Success in gainful Husbandry and in all Kinds of profitable Manufactures;
and in Consequence of all, its unrivaled Plenty and Opulence, which enables the
Subject with such a Degree of Ease to supply the manifold Exigences of his
Majesty's Service, and cheerfully bear the Burden of so expensive a War -- This
is an uncommon Accumulation of glorious Events, a rare Concurrence of
felicitating Circumstances, that can be paralleled perhaps in no other Kingdom
this Day upon Earth. These Things conspire to reflect a superlative Luster on
the latter Years of the KING's Reign, and will make them shine with an
unexampled Glory in the Annals of Great Britain. -- Well may "the KING joy in
God's Strength -- "His Glory is great in God's Salvation -- "Honor and Majesty
are put upon him -- "On him the Crown flourishes, and his Enemies are clothed
with Shame." -- He confesses GOD to be "his Strength and his Shield, and the
Lifter up of his Head"; and calls upon his People by his Royal Example, as well
as Proclamations, to give all the Praise to God most High, "whose is the
Kingdom, and the Power, the Victory, and the Majesty."

And surely the mavelous Interpositions of an all-governing Providence in
Favor of Britain, whether of former or later Date, appear (by this imperfect
Representation of them) to have been such as challenge the most grateful
Acknowledgements to our God; nor are to be reflected on without Admiration, Joy
and Praise, not only by those residing in the Kingdom thus highly favored, but
even by us in the Colonies, who, although at such a Distance, have felt the
kindly Influence of these national Salvations and Blessings.

But now to come nigher home, I must beg your Attention, while I briefly remind
you of some Specialties in Divine Providence, that have a more immediate Aspect
on the British Colonies, and on New England in particular; but which ultimately
redound to the Advantage and Glory of Britain itself.

"We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us", what great and
good Things have formerly been done in Providence for the Inhabitants of the
Villages in this new World, and especially for those in the Parts where we
dwell -- How God cast out the Heathen Natives, by antecedent Wars among
themselves, and by various destroying Sicknesses, "to prepare a Place of
Habitation" for the first Founders of these english Colonies -- How he sifted,
as it were, whole Nations, to plant this Land with a right Seed -- How he
stirred up the Spirits of Multitudes (remote and unknown to one another) to
emigrate from their native Country, to venture on a tedious and difficult
Voyage across the wide Atlantic, and come over to the uncultivated Regions of
America, principally with a View to enjoy, unmolested, their Religion and
Liberty, and transmit the same to their Posterity -- How he raised up Friends
to assist and animate them in their pious and heroic Enterprise -- How he laid
remarkable Restraints upon those who were Enemies to the great Errand, on which
our Ancestors came over into this inhospitable Wilderness; and struck a visible
Terror on the numerous lawless Savages around them, who quickly envied and
maligned these new Guests, but for a long Time dared not to hurt or disrest
them -- How "they got not the Land by their own Sword, nor did their own Arm
save them" -- How wonderful a Care the Lord their God, "under whose Wings they
came to trust," exercised over them in their Wilderness-State; screening them
from Dangers, relieving them in Distresses, supplying their Necessities,
sometimes very unaccountably, and almost miraculously -- How he "multiplied
both Man and Beast," and provided for their increasing Numbers -- How he
"prevented his People with the Blessings of Goodness"; not only granting them
great Deliverances, but great positive Good; in the Healthiness of the Climate;
in their Strength to labor; in the Produce of their Fields; in the Privileges,
Liberties, and Benefits they enjoyed both of a civil and ecclesiastical
Reference, by Virtue of those Royal Charter-Grants they obtained; in the pious
Magistracy and the faithful Ministry they were favored with; in the College,
and Schools, private as well as public for the training up of Youth, which were
made the Preservatives and Nurseries of useful Knowledge and good Manners, and
which were long a singular Ornament and Characteristic of New England; -- in
the comely Order and Harmony that generally subsisted here, in Church and
State, and in the Overruling of such Dissensions as sometimes happened, to a
desirable Issue; in the intestine Peace and Tranquillity enjoyed here at a Time
when a horrid civil War raged in the Mother Country, and the Nation were all in
Confusion and Tumult among themselves; -- in the notable Victories obtained
over the Indian Natives, when they proceeded to commit Hostilities against the
English; and in the Recovery of their Charter-Liberties, which had been taken
away, at a Time of general Shipwreck of Charters, in an arbitrary Reign (as
before hinted) but were happily restored, when those who envied them, imagined
they had fallen Victims to their Malevolence, beyond all Hope of Relief. -- In
a Word it is wonderful, how our Fathers were enabled to go through the immense
Fatigues, and support the vast Expenses of planting, cherishing, and defending
these New England Settlements, and that with little Assistance from Home, and
no Charge to the Crown. -- In these and many other Respects, the first
Generations of this People experienced very signally the Care of an indulgent
Providence. "Have I been a Wilderness unto Israel?" the Lord may now say, as to
his People of old.

And "the Goodness of God endures continually". We of the present Generation,
though "risen up in our Fathers Stead an Increase of sinful Men", yet have not
been forsaken of our Fathers God; but he is still in some Measure with us, as
he was with them. Though he has not left us altogether unpunished for our
growing Degeneracies, which so defile and expose the Land, yet neither has he
left himself without a Witness, that He remembers the Love of our Espousals,
and has still a Kindness for the Posterity of a People who had suffered for
Righteousness Sake. -- We enjoy to this Day the great Privileges of God's Word
and House and Day, of the Ministry and Church Order: nor are without those
spiritual Blessings, which show that God's SPIRIT remains among us. -- We
still enjoy the Benefits of Magistracy, good Laws, and civil Liberties, hedged
about with our Royal Charters. -- We still enjoy the Advantage of Schools, and
Means of Education, truly of inestimable Consequence. -- Superadded to all, God
is causing his Goodness to pass before us in a Variety of secular Enjoyments,
terrene Blessings, and temporal Salvations, which are so many Evidences of a
continuing Providential Care for our Safety and Happiness. Surely, Salvation is
nigh to us; and in some desirable Measure, Glory still dwells in our Land.
God has been crowing these latter Years with his Goodness, in very remarkable
Instances, What Years of general Health have we seen, in our Dwellings, in our
Garrisons, in our Armies, in our Fleets, without those wasting Sicknesses that
might have brought a Cloud on all our Affairs! -- What Years of Plenty, what
fruitful Seasons, what superabundant Harvests, by the Blessing of God upon our
extensive Plantations, furnishing us for large Exportation, while Enough has
been left for a generous Home-Consumption! -- What a remarkable Protection on
our Borders, East and West, even where they were wont sometimes to get their
Bread with the Peril of their Lives! What unmolested Roads! What untroubled
Fields! What quiet Habitations, almost as secure as in Days of Peace! (I speak
of these Northern Provinces especially; for it has been sadly otherwise with
some of the Southern.) At the same Time, what a Degree of Protection on our
Seacoasts, our Fishery, and Navigation! [I cannot but notice here, tho out of
Place, how that formidable naval Armament from France, in the last War, that
came to visit and annoy these parts, was by the Hand of God in Sickness and
Storm amazingly destroyed; and we marvellously delivered -- The Design was,
Revenge upon New England, for the Reduction of CAPE-BRETON by our Provincial
Forces. -- Events so recent, I wonder they did not occur to my Mind before; and
so great and interesting, they ought never to be forgotten.] Verily, there has
been as it were "a Wall of Fire" round about us.

And tho in the Course of this War, God has sometimes hid his Face, and not
seemed to "go out with our Armies", but saw fit to exercise and try us greatly,
by inactive and fruitless Campaigns, by Repulses, by Defeats, by Slaughters, by
Captivations, by Surrenders of our Fortresses, etc. insomuch that many began to
despair of Success, and upon a signal Occasion not very long since, a general
Panick run through the Country, from an Apprehension left the Enemy should finally
prevail against us, notwithstanding our boasted Superiority in Numbers, Skill
and Valor: yet at Length we have had our Fears dissipated; and no Room left
for that old Complaint, "The Summer is ended, and we are not saved"!

God has in his own Time and Way (always the best and wisest) returned, and
visited his People; put our Enemies to Confusion, and brought them down
wonderfully. We behold them this Day repel'd from all their perfidious
Encroachments, and his Britannic Majesty's just Rights recovered and secured;
his original View in this American War. Not only so, but beyond our most
sanguine Hopes at the Beginning, we behold his Majesty's victorious Troops even
treading upon the high Places of the Enemy; the Enemy quite subdued, and driven
out of all their strong Holds; the'r last Fortress now delivered up, and their
whole Country surrendered to the KING of Great Britain, in the Person of his
General, -- the intrepid, the serene, the successful AMHERST; that great
General, to whom Louis-burgh surrendered at the Beginning of the Operations of
his Majesty's Arms in this Part of this World; the same to whom a Train of
important Surrenders have since been made; and who now, by completing the
Reduction of all CANADA, has had the Honor to crown the glorious Achievements
of the British Sword, and to shut up the Scenes of War, in North America.

In vain had there been repeated Attempts before, to effect what is now so
happily accomplished. Long had it been the common Opinion (CARTHAGO est
delenda) The American Carthage must be reduced, CANADA must be conquered: or we
could hope for no lasting Quiet in these Parts. Long had this been the Object
of our Attention, and the Matter of our Prayers: but judged an Event rather to
be wished, than hoped for. Yet now at length, through the good Hand of our God
upon us, we see the happy Day of its Accomplishment. We hear the joyful News,
-- not of this or the other Fortress of the Enemy reduced, -- not of this or
the other Town surrendered, but of their whole Country conquered, conquered by
British Arms, and subjected to British Government.

An Acquisition this, of vast Importance to the Interest and Influence of
Britain, and of the last Consequence to the Safety and Happiness of these its
Colonies. -- But after the ingenious Pieces already in your Hands, I need not
offer a Word upon this Argument. -- It seems, under God, "the future Security
of our Privileges religious and civil, is put into our Hands", beyond the Reach
of Envy; and we now have none to make us afraid. -- And if we can find a Heart
for so good and great an Enterprise, a favorable Opportunity now presents for
propagating our Religion and Liberty, civil Government and Gospel Order, among
our new Fellow Subjects, and our old Allies. And if by the Blessing of God,
they can be brought to taste the Sweet and feel the good Effects of these
inestimable Privileges, it is one happy Consequence we may hope for, at least,
That it will conquer all Remains of Enmity between us, and procure a lasting
Friendship for the future. -- Such a Conquest following upon This which we are
now celebrating, will make it doubly glorious, and add abundantly to the Joy we
have on the present "glorious Occasion", tho truly so in it self, and perhaps
not inferior in Glory to any of the Kind, this Day to be found in the British
Annals.

I congratulate my Country upon so illustrious an Event, so felicitous a
Conclusion of these martial Enterprises, and upon the joyful Prospects now
before us.

We join our Thanks with those of the General, In the " Journal of the
Proceedings of the Army under Genesis AMHERST", we find this Article among the
Orders, dated "Camp before MONTREAL, Sept. 9" being the Day after the Surrender
-- The GENERAL fees with infinite Pleasure the Success, that has crowned the
indefatigable Efforts of his Majesty's Troops, and faithful Subjects in
America. -- The three Armies are entitled to the General's Thanks on this
Occasion; and he assures them, that he will take the first Opportunity of
acquainting his Majesty with the Zeal and Bravery, which has always been
exerted by the Officers and Soldiers, of the Regular and Provincial Troops, and
also by his faithful Indian Allies.
-- to the brave TROOPS, that have fought our Battles for us, and been
otherwise Instrumental in doing for us those great Things, whereof we are glad.

We owe our Thanks to the GENERAL himself, who has by his respectable Presence
and Example been the very Soul of this decisive Enterprise, and in his Conduct
and Success united shines unrivald.

We owe our Thanks to that great Patriotic MINISTER, first in the Direction of
these Affairs, for his unwearied Attention to the Interest of the Colonies, and
his consummate Care, both in planning these Expeditions, and in pointing out
the proper Officers to have the Command.

We owe our Thanks to the Provincial GOVERNMENTS, that have with so much
Alacrity and Resolution exerted themselves in the most zealous Efforts to
assist and promote his Majesty's Service, on these Occasions.

We owe our Thanks to the British PARLIAMENT, for their liberal Grants, in
Support of his Majesty's wise Measures, and toward refunding the Expenses of
the Colonies, who otherwise must have sunk under an immense Load of Debt.

Above all, we owe our humble Thanks to his MAJESTY: and with loyal Hearts,
full of joyous Gratitude, we bless the King for his Paternal Goodness in
sending such effectual Aids to his American Subjects, in our distressed State,
when we so needed the Royal Protection; as the Enemy were daily increasing in
their Advantages against us, and threatening our Ruin; which is now happily
prevented, by the extraordinary Turn of Affairs, upon his MAJESTY's gracious
Interposition.

But still our Thanks are not to center and determine here. No; they must rise
above all human Agents, and ascend to the supreme Efficient, the God of Armies,
the King of Kings, and the primary Source of every prosperous Event. "The Race
is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong"; but "Victory is of the
LORD". It is "through God", that our Forces "have done valiantly". It is God,
who has "trodden down our Enemies". It is God, who has "given us Rest",
incircling us on all Sides. To the Majesty of Heaven we are supremely indebted,
for the glorious Salvations and Successes we are this Day rejoicing in. To God
most High therefore our humble Thanks are supremely owing; as indeed the
Solemnity of this Day implicitly confesses.

Now then that "our Heads are lifted up above our Enemies round about", we
should raise our wondering Eyes and our thankful Hearts up to God in the
Heavens; "offering in his Tabernacle the Sacrifices of Joy"; with joyful Lips
singing Praises to the LORD, who has done for us all these great Things,
whereof we are glad; but the Accomplishment whereof we once looked upon as
hopeless; and for the one half or even any small Part whereof, we should have
been very thankful, at least very glad, some few Years ago. A Reflection this,
which may well exalt our Joy, warm our Gratitude, and raise every pious and
pleasing Affection to an uncommon Height, while on an uncommon Occasion we are
presenting our Thanks to the LORD, who has done such great Things for us.

Worthy our Attention and Imitation is that Example of King Jehoshaphat and his
People's uniting their joyful. Thanksgivings to God, on an Occasion something
similar. The Scripture-Story (2 Chro. 20.) informs us, how "on the fourth Day"
after a signal Conquest, the King and his People on the Field of Action,
assembled themselves, and blessed the LORD. Then they returned every Man, and
Jehoshaphat in the Forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with Joy: for
the LORD had made them to rejoice over their Enemies. -- And the Fear of GOD
was on all the Kingdoms of those Countries, when they had heard that the LORD
had fought against the Enemies of Israel. So the Realm of Jehoshaphat was
quiet: for his God gave him Rest round about. The Success they had, and their
Joy upon it, are ascribed to God, as equally the Author of both. Doubtless, as
to the Royal General, and many of his People, it was that Joy which is the
Fruit of the Spirit, -- a religious Exultation, a "Rejoicing before the Lord",
and "triumphing in his Praise". They triumphed and rejoiced over their Enemies;
but still in a Frame and Manner becoming such as saw and owned the Hand of God
in their Success, and meant to "give Glory to his Name". This Scripture-Pattern
serves to justify the present Festival; and recommends to our Practice the
solemn, but cheerful Duties, we are now called together jointly to perform.

Let us then give ourselves, on this delightful Occasion, to holy Rejoicing,
Thanksgiving and Praise. Let us " consider how great Things God has done for
us", particularly respecting the important Conquest, whereof we are glad. Let
us realise what abundant Reason we have to admire the Conduct of Divine
Providence, relative to this Affair, viewed in its whole State, from its
Beginning, through all its Progress, to its happy Termination. We should take
Notice of GOD's Goodness in putting into the King's Heart such an earnest Care
for our Security and Welfair: and in guiding the Counsels of the King's
Ministry, to project the best Measures, and to employ the best Agents in
executing the wife Plan of Operations. In short, every Instance of good
Conduct, and of Resolution, and Fortitude, every Instance of Support and
Success in this grand Affair, from its Commencement to its Conclusion, should
be taken Notice of, as the Effect of a propitious Providence super-intending
and presiding in it. Every advantageous Circumstance, every subservient and
auxiliary Incident, as well as the grand and final Event, is to observed, as
the Fruit of Divine Benignity. All tends to heighten the Glory and the Mercy of
the Success: and all conspires to demand our grateful Acknowledgments to "the
Lord of Hosts" the supreme Author of Victory.

We are called, on this Occasion to sing both of Mercy, and of Judgment; to
sing of both "to the Lord our God" to celebrate the Wonders of Mercy to us, and
of Judgment on our Enemies. -- Yea, his Judgments on ourselves, in the general
Calamity of War, and in particular Disasters, are not to be forgotten, even in
our Songs of Praise. As mournful and joyful Events are mingled in Providence,
we should have our Reflections on both, in the Exercise of various Passions,
corresponding to each. Antecedent humbling Events might be designed in
Providence to prepare a just Allay to future Joys: And the Evil intermixed with
the Good we receive at the Hand of the LORD, may well serve to correct and
qualify the Pleasure his Benefits give us. It will be wife in us to to temper
the Joy that now expands our Breasts, by proper Reflections on the inauspicious
and dark Appearances preceding our late Successes, and on the disastrous Events
attending them. One Circumstance, in particular, should not a little affect us,
that human Life has so often been sacrificed (by the Sword, or Disease, or
Accident) in the Pursuit of Victory; and as Victory is apprehended to have been
lost, in one memorable Instance, by "the Fall of the Mighty, The brave Lord
How. in that fruitless Attempt at Ticonderoga.
so it has in several Instances been purchased at the Expense of some of the
most precious Blood, in the Fall of heroic Generals Genesis WOLF, and Genesis
PRIDEAUX, who both expired amidst Glory, in the near View of Conquest.
and other gallant Officers and Men. These are striking Events, at the
Remembrance of which we can scarce refrain mingling Tears with our present
Joys. But the Sorrow for former Losses, of this Kind, we must balance with the
Joy of our last Successes being obtained without any such aggravated Losses,
and with an uncommonly small Effusion of Blood. -- However, I think, no
Reflections whatever should suppress our Joy on this grand Occasion, though they
may be needful to restrain and moderate it.

A Transport of Mind, on the News of a Conquest and Acquisition, so big with
Salvation and Blessing to one's Country as this we are now rejoicing in, is
scarce avoidable, and is certainly allowable. And the more nearly we are
interested in the Success, naturally the more elevated will the Pleasure be. In
this Respect, though the Prosperity of the Prussian, Hanoverian, and British
Arms in Germany at this Day is just Matter of Joy and Praise; yet it is
reasonably to be expected, that Victory nearer Home, and more immediately
affecting our selves, should strike our Minds with a singular Force, and that
so great and important a Conquest as that which occasions this Day's Solemnity,
should open all the Springs of pleasing Passions, and swell the Tide of Joy
beyond its common Bounds.

Nevertheless, let it not be merely a rejoicing over our Enemies, nor only
rejoicing in our own Prosperity. But let the Joy be sublimated, spiritualized,
and carried up to its proper ultimate Object, "the Captain of our Salvation,"
the Giver of Victory. -- By all Means let us see to it, that our rejoicing on
the present Occasion be duly regulated -- Not the mere Mirth of Brutes,
centring in animal Pleasures -- Not the Mirth of Fools, conducted as if we had
no Fear of God before our Eyes, and expressed only in Laughter and Levity, in
lawless Feasting and Frolicking -- Nor yet only the more sober and temperate
(but almost as carnal) Joy of Hypocrites, who honor God with joyful Lips,
while yet in their Hearts and Lives they dishonor Him; being in truth "evil
and unthankful". -- Nor let it be a proud and self-boasting Joy, as if "our own
Arm had saved us", or our own Worthiness had procured us the Victory. "Neither
glory ye in Men." -- "All such Rejoicing is evil." -- "But he that glories,
let him glory in the LORD."

Let our Rejoicing be manly, rational, spiritual, devotional, and "after a
godly Sort", in all its Exercises and Expressions. -- Let the Joy of our Hearts
transpire through our Lips in the most grateful Acknowledgments and Praises to
God, in the Name of Jesus Christ. Thus will our Joy be consecrated, and turned
into a Sacrifice; a "spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ".
And the sacred Pleasure will be gradually increased by daily renewed
Thanksgivings and Praises. -- Only, at the same Time, "let our Conversation be
as becomes the Gospel", that by our obedient Lives, as well as joyful and
thankful Lips, we may testify our Delight in God, and prove the Sincerity of
our Gratitude to Him. Surely the Call of Heaven to us at this Day is in such
Language as that (1 Samuel 12. 24.) " Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth:
for consider how great Things he has done for you. Or, that (Psalm. 2. 11.)
Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. As God has been doing
great Things for us, surely he expects great Things from us, in a way of
practical Returns. And be it remembered, He that has done great Things for us,
the same can also do great Things against us. We see, his almighty Hand can
bring about great Changes in a little Time. And when we reflect on the
Mutability of human Affairs, together with our Unworthiness of Divine Favors,
and our Desert of Judgments, it becomes us to "rejoice with Trembling." In
unspotted Justice, God might have made our Enemies to rejoice over us: and he
may do it still. What can we expect, but the Tokens of his Displeasure, in this
or some other tremendous Way, unless his Goodness effectually leads us to
Repentance!

To our Praises therefore let us add our Prayers, that Prosperity may be
sanctified to us, and made a prevailing Argument with us, from a Sense of
Ingenuity and Gratitude, to serve the LORD with Gladness. Let us pray that the
Spirit may be poured from on high, to restore Religion to a prosperous and
victorious State. Let us implore a Divine Blessing on the King's Counsels and
Efforts for a safe and advantageous Peace. But above all, let it be our Care
and Prayer, that the Kingdom of the Son of God may be advanced; that the
Conquests of his Power and Grace over the Souls of Men may spread through the
World; that there may be Glory to God in the highest, Peace on Earth, and
Goodwill toward Men.

FINIS.

