A SERMON, Delivered March 6th 1760. Being a DAY appointed, By Order of his
MAJESTY, As a Public THANKSGIVING, For the late Signal SUCCESSES, Granted to
the BRITISH ARMS.

By MATHER BYLES, A. M. Pastor of the First Church of CHRIST, in New London.

Psalm XLVIII, 9. We have thought of thy loving Kindness, O GOD, in the Midst
of thy Temple.

NEW LONDON: Printed and sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, MDCCLX.

A Thanksgiving SERMON.
PSALM XCVI.7, 8. Give unto the LORD, O ye Kindreds of the (...) give unto the
LORD Glory and (...). Give unto the LORD the Glory (...) unto his Name; bring
an Offering, and come into his Courts.


THE Belief of a GOD and a Providence, certainly lies at the Foundation of all
Religion; and as Religion was designed, by our all-wise Creator, to be the main
Business of human Life, there is accordingly no Truth capable of more strict
Demonstration than this; that there is a supreme Spirit, who is the grand
Superintendant of the Universe, and overrules in every Event. This
Proposition, therefore, I shall take for granted, in the present Discourse; as
I hope there is no Person in this Assembly, who doubts it.

Wherever we turn our Eyes, we behold evident Traces of Infinite Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness, the Perfections of the Deity shining in his Works; and there are,
frequently, marvelous interpositions of Divine Providence; which, it would be,
in the highest Degree, stupid in us, not to perceive; and ungrateful, not to
acknowledge. All of us, who have lived any considerable Time upon Earth, must
needs recollect many critical Seasons of their Lives, when they have been
preserved in most imminent Dangers, by the immediate Hand of GOD; and plucked
as Brands out of the Burning. And, no doubt, the wonderful Discoveries of
another Day, will point us to many more such surprising Instances of unbounded
Grace, which we are not now conscious to. I cannot but imagine that there are
many Things of this Nature, which we know not now, but shall know hereafter;
and that this constitutes one principal Part of the Entertainment of the
glorified Spirits above; to review these critical Seasons, in all their
Circumstances; and adore their Almighty Guardian, with rapturous Thanksgivings.
-- Seasons, in which, if Matters had not happened exactly as they did, by a
mysterious Concurrence of second Causes, influenced by Him who constantly
guides and animates the whole; (by him alone, without any Forethought, or
Assistance of theirs; nay, in some Instances, contrary to their Wishes and
Expectations) they must inevitably have been miserable through all their
Pilgrimage upon Earth, and perhaps to all Eternity.

But if the Finger of GOD is thus visible in all the minute Incidents of human
Life; if he graciously consults the Happiness of every Individual, determines
the Times before appointed, and the Bounds of his Habitation; if the Hairs of
our Head are all accurately numbered, and not a Sparrow falls to the Ground
without our heavenly Father; certainly he is not an idle Spectator of the more
important Transactions of the Globe, the Tumults of the People, the Revolution
of States and Kingdoms. No; -- He does his Sovereign Pleasure among the Armies
of Heaven above, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth beneath; and it becomes
us to regard the Work of the LORD, and to consider the Operation of his Hands.
The Kingdom is the LORDS, and He is the Governor among the Nations. He blows
the Trumpet, and they are roused to universal Battle: He waves the Olive
Branch, and they are lulled in profound Peace.

When he pleases, he elevates the most detestable of Mankind to the Pinnacle of
human Glory; the Disgrace of their Species, and the Scourge of their unhappy
Subjects. When he pleases, he disappoints the haughty Tyrant, in the midst of
his ambitious Enterprises; deposes him from his exalted Station; and dashes him
to Pieces, as a Potter's Vessel. When he pleases, he places upon the Throne a
Man of an excellent Spirit; gives Wisdom to his Counsels, and vigor to his
Arms; preserves his invaluable Life, prevents him with the Blessings of
Goodness, and sets a Crown of pure Gold upon his Head; makes him the Terror of
his Enemies, and the Protector of his People. The proud Nebuchadnezzar, and the
amiable Cyrus, are equally his Servants, and subject to his Control; and, when
he pleases, the abandoned Saul must fall a Sacrifice to his just Vengeance;
that the devout David, the Man after his own Heart, may take the Charge of his
distinguished Israel, and sway the Scepter in Righteousness.

He overules in all the various Revolutions of an Earthly Court; manages the
minute Springs, which actuate the Wheels of Government; and influences the
unsearchable Heart of Kings. Sometimes, for wise and holy Ends, He permits a
corrupt Minister to obtain the Favor of his Sovereign, preside in the Cabinet,
and sit at the Helm of Government; permits him to abuse the Confidence, and
betray the Interests of his Royal Master; to embezzle the public Revenue, and
prey upon the Bowels of the Constitution; to maintain a clandestine
Correspondence with the open Enemies of his Country; to receive Bribes and
Pensions from a foreign Court; and to triumph, perhaps, for a long Course of
Years, in the Success of his treacherous and arbitrary Schemes; while the
contemptible Tools of his Power grow rich with Rapine and Oppression, the
wicked walk on every side, and the vilest of Men are exalted. When he pleases
he raises up an honest Patriot, inspired with Sentiments of Virtue, who acts
perpetually from the noblest Principles, despises the Gain of Oppression, and
shakes his Hands from Holding of Bribes; animates him with a public Spirit,
and a warm Affection to his bleeding Country; furnishes him with an extensive
Capacity, and what is still more valuable, an uncorrupted Heart; enlarges his
Influence, and succeeds his Measures; makes him, at once, the Darling of his
Prince, and the Favorite of a flourishing Nation; while his Eyes are upon the
Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with him, and he is served by such as
walk in a perfect Way. So the infamous Haman was brushed from the Presence of
King Abasuerus, and received the just Demerit of his Crimes; that the upright
Mordecai might succeed him, accepted of the Multitude of his Brethren, seeking
the Wealth of his People, and speaking Peace to all his Seed.

But let us leave the Confinement of the Court, extend our Views, and take a
Survey of the Warlike Field; covered with regular Encampments, furrowed with
Trenches, or glittering with hostile Arms. There we behold the resolute Troops
in their intrepid March; the gallant Commanders levelling the destructive
Instruments of Death; and the gilded Banners, unfurled, and waving in the Wind.
Suddenly, the gay Scene vanishes from our Eyes; all is enveloped in Smoke, and
Flame, and Sulphur. Hark! how confused the Din of the Battle, the Thunder of
the Captains, and the Shouting; while the Groans of the Vanquished, and the
Acclamations of the Conqueror, and all the horrid Discord of War, rore through
the Valley, and are echoed from the neighboring Hills! Anon, the Noise abates,
the Smoke dissipates, and what a ghastly Spectacle is exhibited to our View!
the most vigorous and athletick Bodies, with their brawney Limbs, once the
Terror of the Mighty in the Land of the Living; but now, pale, bloody, and
scattered promiscuous* Thousands and ten Thousands, Heaps upon Heaps, cover the
Plain, and complete the Carnage. And is not the Almighty Hand still
conspicuous? should we not acknowledge and adore it? It Is He alone who can give
the Victory, and determine the dubious Contest, when the Fate of an Empire
hangs in Suspense, and waits for the Decision of an Hour. When he pleases he
can scatter a Panick through the bravest Troops, and infatuate an Army of the
most experienced Veterans. It Is He who directs the military Counsels, and
steels the Heart of the successful General. Every descending Sword is guided by
Him, and every random Shot executes his Commission.

He can level the proudest Cities, demolish their lofty Bulwarks, and lay low
the Haughtiness of the Terrible. At his sovereign Nod, the Walls of Jericho
must fall down prostrate, and pave a Path for the conquering Joshua.

It Is He also who reigns LORD of the boundless Ocean, holds the Winds in His
Grasp, and comprehends the Waters in the Hollow of His Hand. Fleets and Navies,
protected by Him, ride in Triumph upon the Face of the Deep. He steers them in
their trackless Course, swells their prosperous Sails, and wafts them to the
whish'd-for Haven. When He pleases, he scatters them in His Wrath, and
disperses them with the Breath of His Mouth. The Clouds gather and blacken, the
Tempest rages, the loud Surges foam, and the foundering Vessels sink like Lead
in the fathomless Profound, only broken upon the Shore in shattered Fragments.
He commands, "Peace, be Still;" the Winds and the Waters obey Him; -- not a
Breath of disobedient Air ruffles the serene Surface of the Flood.

It Is He overrules, when contending Squadrons dispute the Sovereignty of the
Seas, and denounce Vengeance from the Mouth of their Cannon. He sits the
irresistible Umpire, weighs their different Pretensions in his impartial
Balance: He frowns and they are defeated; and Victory attends His Smile.

Thus we have taken an imperfect Survey of the Infinite GOD, as He manages the
Wheels of Providence, and determines the Fate of Nations; one Foot being upon
the Sea, and the other upon the dry Land. Should we not acknowledge His Supreme
Authority; and fall prostrate at His Footstool, in humble Adoration; when, like
the Prophet, in captured Vision, we behold this Appearance of the Likeness of
the Glory of the LORD? Should we not unite in the sublime Ascription of the
Psalmist? Psalm. lxxxvi.8. -- 10. Among the Gods there is none like unto Thee, O
LORD; neither are there any Works like unto thy Works. All Nations whom Thou
have made, shall come and worship before Thee, O LORD; and shall glorify thy
Name. For Thou art Great, and do wondrous Things: Thou art GOD alone.

Were our Nation, at this Day, in calamitous Circumstances, would it not be
incumbent upon us, to humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of GOD, to
deprecate the Divine Wrath, and implore the Smiles of His Countenance? And
while we are blessed with so remarkable a Series of Prosperity and Success, while
the Almighty so wonderfully asserts our Cause, and our Enemies flee before us;
while every Express that arrives from our Frontiers, and every Packet that
crosses the Atlantic, adds a new Article to the joyful Tidings, and a fresh
Laurel to the British Brows; it is equally our Duty to adore the Supreme
Benefactor, and comply with the Injunction of the Text; Give unto the LORD, O
ye Kindreds of the People, give unto the LORD Glory and Strength. Give unto the
LORD the Glory due unto His Name; bring an Offering, and come into his Courts.

It is the Honor and the Happiness of this much-favoured Nation, that we have a
devout Monarch upon the Throne, who enjoins this Practice upon us by his
Authority, and recommends it by his royal Example: and it is at his Call, by an
express Order from the Throne, that we now assembled together at this solemn
Festival.

And now, what a Scene of Wonder opens to our View! Good GOD! what an
astonishing Scene of Wonders! Methinks, a universal Transport animates every
Countenance, and sparkles in every Eye. Who can recount the innumerable
Favors, bestowed upon our Nation and it is Allies, in the Year past; that Year
much to be remembered; that distinguished Year in the Annals of Great Britain?
Who is equal to the boundless Task? What Tongue but falters, while the big
Ideas crowd upon the Mind, and labor for Utterance? A few, out of the immense
Multitude, the Time will suffer me but just to hint at.

The LORD of Hosts has wonderfully appeared in Vindication of the Protestant
Cause, even our Enemies themselves being Judges. He has supported our
illustrious Ally, the King of Prussia; a Name ever dear to those who have the
Cause of Religion and Liberty at Heart; -- supported him against one of the
most dangerous Confederacies, that could be formed by the Powers of Antichrist;
while the Arms of the Empire have been levelled against him, the turbulent
Court of France have conspired his Ruin, and the barbarous Troops of Russia
have thirsted for his Blood. Exposed as he frequently has been, amidst all the
Tumult and Horrors of Battle; Thousands falling at his Side and Ten Thousands
at his right Hand; GOD has ever protected him, and for the most Part, has
crowned him with Conquest.

The Preservation of his Majesty's German Dominions; the Expulsion of the
French from the Electorate of Hanover; and the repeated Successes which have
attended the glorious Prince Ferdinand, call also this Day for our Gratitude
and Praise.

When we leave these foreign Prospects, and take a short Survey of those which
still more nearly concern us; When we behold one of the best of Kings placed
upon the British Throne, who has ever approved himself the benevolent Father of
his People; who justly supposes his own Honor to consist in the Freedom of his
Subjects, and places his highest Happiness in their Prosperity; who despises
the abject Submission of Slaves, while he possesses all th^se (...) that are
not dead to every grateful Sentiment; -- his invaluable Life protracted to an
Age beyond that of any of his Predecessors, his uncommon Virtues blossoming in
his Royal Race, and his Counsels influenced by one of the most unspotted
Characters in the Nation; -- a Minister, whose Wisdom and Integrity have been
sufficiently proved, whose honest Heart knows no Disguise, whose Hands were
never stained with Bribery and Oppression, and who bears a steady Testimony
against the prevailing Luxury of the Age; -- no (...) of Tyranny, no Slave to
Ambition, no (...) to the Court of France; -- When we behold the glorious GOD,
in the most critical Season, when we had become the Derision of our Enemies,
and the Contempt of our Neighbors, raising up such a Deliverer to the Nation,
and restoring it at (...) to the utmost Pitch of its primitive Glo^^: -- our
Arm^es again formidable upon the Continent, our Fleets sovereign upon the
(...), Victo^^ constantly attending our Flags, the British ^hunder alarming the
most dist^^t (...) irresistible in all Quarters of the Earth: -- and when we
hear our venerable Sovereign pronouncing, with amiable Devoties, I thank my GOD
for these signal Victories; -- Can we forbear ascribing the Victory to him,
acknowledging that His right Hand and His holy Arm have gotten it?

In vain has the proud Monarch of France endeavored to retrieve his Glory, by
a threatened Invasion of Great Britain: his vast military Preparations, and
empty Gasconades, have only served to sink the Royal Bankrupt so much the
deeper in Distress, and render him more completely contemptible and ridiculous.
For the most Part, his insignificant Squadrons have thought it prudent to
anchor quietly in Port, guarded by a British Fleet: or if, at any Time, they
have ventured to parade upon the Ocean; they have had sufficient Reason to
repent of their Rashness. Their Supplies have been cut off, and Numbers of
their Capital Ships have been demolished. Nay, one of their principal Harbors
has been actually entered: the British Standard has floated triumphant upon the
Continent of France; while their Stores and boasted Magazines have blazed as a
Bonfire, upon the joyful Occasion.

In the West Indies, we behold Guadaloupe and its Dependencies, surrendering to
a small naval Force, and a handful of gallant Troops; -- one of the most
valuable and important of the American Islands.

When we turn our Eyes to this Continent, we have opened a new Theater of
marvelous Events; we are surrounded with a fresh Series of surprising Mercies.

It will not be amiss for us to recollect, upon this Occasion, that it is but a
little while, since our Affairs wore a most melancholy Aspect; and a universal
Consternation appeared in every Countenance. You may remember the dismal
Season, when, Year after Year, the ALMIGHTY frowned upon our Enterprises and
Expeditions; and an insulting Enemy ravaged our Borders. Our Fortresses were
taken and demolished; our Troops intimidated and destroyed, or carried Captive
to a foreign Land: or, perhaps, they were overwhelmed with a groundless Panic;
perhaps, they saw the Shadow of the Mountains as if they were Men, and mistook
Rocks for an Encampment; -- the Sound of a shaken Leaf terrified them, and they
fled when none pursued! Perhaps, the mighty Men of Babylon were affrighted,
they had forborne to fight, they remained in their Holds, their Might failed,
and they became as Women! -- Be that as it will, for it is not my Business to
charge the Fault any where; certain it is, that one Year of Disappointments
rolled away after another: The Harvest was past, the Summer was ended, and
still we were not saved. The howling Inhabitants of the Wilderness triumphed
upon our Frontiers, were decorated with our Spoils, and glutted with the Blood
of our dearest Friends. -- O! that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a
Fountain of Tears, that I might weep, Day and Night, for the Slain of the
Daughter of my People! -- Then it was, that we poured out our Complaint in the
Bitterness of our Souls: we wept between the Porch and the Altar, Spare thy
People, O LORD, give not Thine Heritage to Reproach, suffer not the Heathen to
triumph over us! -- At length GOD has heard our Prayer, and avenged the Cause
of his suffering Servants.

And now, my Brethren, what a striking Contrast! How is the Scene reversed! GOD
has prospered us in every Attempt, and caused our Enemies to flee before us. --
Let us pause a little, and enumerate our Conquests. -- We are possessed of the
important Pass and Fort of Niagara; and have defeated a large Body of the
Enemy, which were marching to its Relief. -- Fort du Quesne, (a Dispute
concerning which, if you remember, was one principal Occasion of the present
War,) has now changed its Name to Pittsburgh; in Honor of that Immortal
Patriot, who needs no such feeble Monument to perpetuate his Memory. -- The
formidable Li^es at Ticonderoga, where our Army met with such a shameful
Repulse, about a Twelvemonth before, are surrendered to the well known
Conqueror of Leuisbourg. -- And the Fortress at Crown-Point, which has been the
Object of so many fruitless Expeditions, from these Northern Colonies, is
abandoned by the Enemy, and occupied by a British Garrison.

We may justly, upon this Occasion, applaud the Bravery of our Troops, and the
wise Conduct of our experienced General. This is but equitable: It is rendering
Honor to whom Honor is due. But still we must remember that this is the LORD's
Doing, and it is marvelous in our Eyes! Give unto the LORD o ye Kindreds of the
People, give unto the LORD Glory and Strength. Give unto the LORD the Glory due
unto His Name; bring an Offering, and come into His Courts.

And yet, these were but small Things in Thine Eyes, O our GOD; for we have
still a new Song to sing, and the most glorious Instance of Success is yet
unrelated. Shout, said Joshua, for the LORD has given you the CITY! The proud
City of QUEBECK compleats our Conquests, and adds new Luster to the Important
Year. This is, properly, striking at the Foundation of the French Power in
America. In our former Acquisitions, we did, as it were, but lop the Branches:
but, Thanks be to GOD! the Ax is now laid to the Root of the Tree. Happy would
our pious Predecessors have been, could they have seen this distinguished
Period: but it was denied them! -- Blessed are our Eyes, for they behold it;
and our Ears, for they hear the joyful Tidings! The Capital of Canada, the
Metropolis of French America, is ^^^endred to our Arms! When we consider how
many fruitless Attempts have been made by us and our Fathers, for the Reduction
of this important Place; how immense the Blood and Treasure which have been
expended, to no Purpose, in former Armaments; and the inconsiderable Number of
Troops by which it was at last accomplished; it should aggrandise our Ideas of
this glorious Action, as it will consecrate the memorable Name of WOLF, to the
latest Posterity.

Amidst all our Rejoicing this Day, that gallant General demands a Tear, to be
dropped upon his Funeral Urn; -- that gallant General who, in the Bloom of Years,
displayed such consummate military Skill; and expired so bravely, in the Arms
of Conquest; Great while he lived, but greater when he died. But, my Brethren,
we should realise the Voice of GOD in this Event. Cease ye from Man, whose
Breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? We should look
beyond second Causes; and acknowledge that there is none like unto the GOD of
Jesurun, who has ridden in the Heaven, for our Help; and in His Excellency upon
the Skies. Give unto the LORD, O ye Kindreds of the People, give unto the LORD
Glory and Strength Give unto the LORD the Glory due unto His Name; bring an
Offering and come into His Courts.

And indeed, the Hand of GOD is conspicuous in every Article of this
Expedition. It was He who guided our Fleet through the difficult Navigation of
St. Lawrence; and protected them in a violent Tempest, to which they were
exposed soon after their Arrival. It was He who enabled our Forces to make
their Encampment, with scarce the Loss of a Man; who plentifully furnished them
with the Necessaries of Life; who was the Health of their Countenance, and
their GOD; and who preserved their scattered Parties from the lurking Savages
of the Wilderness. It was He who supported them through all the Fatigues of a
dangerous Campaign, and guarded them from the fatal Messengers of Death. It was
He who infatuated the unhappy Montcalm, to forsake the Advantages of his
Situation, and risk a decisive Engagement. It was He who, in the Day of Battle,
inspired our Army with irresistible Resolution, and gave them the Victory over
such superior Numbers. It was He who intimidated the vanquished Enemy, and
opened the Gates of the devoted City.

Give unto the LORD, O ye Kindreds of the People, give unto the LORD Glory and
Strength. Give unto the LORD the Glory due unto his Name; bring an Offering,
and come into his Courts. Certainly, our Thanksgiving, this Day, should be
something more than an empty Form; an insignificant Compliance with Custom* Our
Mirth should not be carnal and sensual: but we should realise that we are
reasonable Creatures, and Professors of the Name of JESUS. Shall we suffer the
sacred Solemnities of this Day, to degenerate into a dissolute Frolic; or to
be closed with Midnight Uproar? -- "Forbid it, "O our GOD!" -- Amidst all our
Flow of Spirits, and all the plentiful Entertainments that crown our Tables,
may we remember, and adore our dear Benefactor; and may our Praises ascend
before Him, from pure Hearts* graceful as Incense. -- It is the LORD who has
done these great Things for us, whereof we are glad. -- What then shall we
render to the LORD, for all His Benefits?

FINIS.

