THE INTEREST OF GREAT BRITAIN CONSIDERED With Regard to Her COLONIES AND THE
ACQUISITIONS of CANADA and GUADALOUPE.

To which are added, ORSERVATIONS concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling
of Countries, etc.

As the very ingenious, useful, and worthy Author of this Pamphlet [ B -- n F
-- n, LL. D.] is well-known and much esteemed by the principal Gentlemen in
England and America; and seeing that his other Works have been received with
universal Applause; the present Production needs no further Recommendation to a
generous, a free, an intelligent and publick-spirited People.

LONDON, Printed. MDCCLX.

BOSTON: Reprinted, by B. Mecom, and Sold at the New Printing-Office, near the
Townhouse. 1760.

[Price ONE SHILLING.]

THE INTEREST OF GREAT BRITAIN, CONSIDERED With Regard to Her COLONIES.
I Have perused with no small pleasure the Letter addressed to Two Great Men,
and the Remarks on that letter. It is not merely from the beauty, the force and
perspicuity of expression, or the general elegance of manner conspicuous in
both pamphlets, that my pleasure chiefly arises; it is rather from this, that I
have lived to see subjects of the greatest importance to this nation publicly
discussed without party views, or party heat, with decency and politeness, and
with no other warmth than what a zeal for the honor and happiness of our king
and country may inspire; -- and this by writers whose understanding (however
they may differ from each other) appears not unequal to their candor and the
uprightness of their intention.

But, as great abilities have not always the best information, there are, I
apprehend, in the Remarks some opinions not well founded, and some mistakes of
so important a nature, as to render a few observations on them necessary for
the better information of the public.

The author of the Letter, who must be every way best able to support his own
sentiments, will, I hope, excuse me, if I seem officiously to interfere; when
he considers, that the spirit of patriotism, like other qualities good and bad,
is catching; and that his long silence since the Remarks appeared has made us
despair of seeing the subject farther discussed by his masterly hand. The
ingenious and candid remarker, too, who must have been misled himself before he
employed his skill and address to mislead others, will certainly, since he
declares he aims at no seduction, Remarks, p. 6
be disposed to excuse even the weakest effort to prevent it.

And surely if the general opinions that possess the minds of the people may
possibly be of consequence in public affairs, it must be fit to set those
opinions right. If there is danger, as the remarker supposes, that "extravagant
expectations" may embarrass "a virtuous and able ministry," and "render the
negotiation for peace a work of infinite difficulty;" Remarks, p. 7.
there is no less danger that expectations too low, through want of proper
information, may have a contrary effect, may make even a virtuous and able
ministry less anxious, and less attentive to the obtaining points, in which the
honor and interest of the nation are essentially concerned; and the people
less hearty in supporting such a ministry and its measures.

The people of this nation are indeed respectable, not for their numbers only,
but for their understanding and their public spirit: they manifest the first,
by their universal approbation of the late prudent and vigorous measures, and
the confidence they so justly repose in a wise and good prince, and an honest
and able administration; the latter they have demonstrated by the immense
supplies granted in parliament unanimously, and paid through the whole kingdom
with cheerfulness. And since to this spirit and these supplies our "victories
and successes" Remarks, p. 7.
have in great measure been owing, is it quite right, is it generous to say,
with the remarker, that the people "had no share in acquiring them?" The mere
mob he cannot mean, even where he speaks of the madness of the people; for the
madness of the mob must be too feeble and impotent, armed as the government of
this country at present is, to "overruled," Remarks, p. 7.
even in the slightest instances, the "virtue and moderation" of a firm and
steady ministry.

While the war continues, its final event is quite uncertain. The Victorious of
this year may be the Vanquished of the next. It may therefore be too early to
say, what advantages we ought absolutely to insist on, and make the sine quibus
non of a peace, If the necessity of our affairs should oblige us to accept of
terms less advantageous than our present successes seem to promise us, an
intelligent people, as ours is, must see that necessity, and will acquiesce.
But as a peace, when it is made, may be made hastily; and as the unhappy
continuance of the war affords us time to consider, among several advantages
gained or to be gained, which of them may be most for our interest to retain,
if some and not all may possibly be retained; I do not blame the public
disquisition of these points, as premature or useless. Light often arises from
a collision of opinions, as fire from flint and steel; and if we can obtain the
benefit of the light, without danger from the heat sometimes produced by
controversy, why should we discourage it?

Supposing then, that heaven may still continue to bless His Majesty's arms,
and that the event of this just war may put it in our power to retain some of
our conquests at the making of a peace; let us consider whether we are to
confine ourselves to those possessions only that were "the objects for which we
began the war." Remarks, p. 19.
This the remarker seems to think right, when the question relates to Canada,
properly so called, it having never been mentioned as one of those objects in
any of our memorials or declarations, or in any national or public act
whatsoever. But the gentleman himself will probably agree, that if the cession
of Canada would be a real advantage to us, we may demand it under his second
head, as an " indemnification for the charges incurred" in recovering our just
rights; otherwise according to his own principles the demand of Guadaloupe can
have no foundation.

That our claims before the war were large enough for possession and for
security too, Ibid.
though it seems a clear point with the ingenious remarker, is, I own, not so
with me. I am rather of the contrary opinion, and shall presently give my
reasons. But first let me observe, that we did not make those claims because
they were large enough for security, but because we could rightfully claim no
more. Advantages gained in the course of this war, may increase the extent of
our rights. Our claims before the war contained some security; but that is no
reason why we should neglect acquiring more when the demand of more is become
reasonable. It may be reasonable in the case of America to ask for the security
recommended by the author of the letter, P. 30 of the Letter, and p. 21 of the
Remarks.
though it would be preposterous to do it in many other cases: his proposed
demand is founded on the little value of Canada to the French; the right we
have to ask, and the power we may have to insist on an indemnification for our
expenses; the difficulty the French themselves will be under of restraining
their restless subjects in America from encroaching on our limits and
disturbing our trade; and the difficulty on our parts of preventing
encroachments that may possibly exist many years without coming to our
knowledge. But the remarker does not see why the arguments employed concerning
a security for a peaceable behavior in Canada, would not be equally cogent for
calling for the same security in Europe. Remarks, p. 24.
On a little farther reflection, he must I think be sensible, that the
circumstances of the two cases are widely different. Here we are separated by
the best and clearest of boundaries, the ocean, and we have people in or near
every part of our territory. Any attempt to encroach upon us, by building a
fort, even in the obscurest corner of these islands, must therefore be known
and prevented immediately. The aggressors also must be known, and the nation
they belong to would be accountable for their aggression. In America it is
quite otherwise. A vast wilderness thinly or scarce at all peopled, conceals
with ease the march of troops and workmen. Important passes may be seized
within our limits and forts built in a month, at a small expense, that may cost
us an age and a million to remove. Dear experience has taught us this. But what
is still worse, the wide extended forests between our settlements and theirs,
are inhabited by barbarous tribes of savages that delight in war and take pride
in murder, subjects properly neither of the French nor English, but strongly
attached to the former by the art and indefatigable industry of priests,
similiarity of superstitions, and frequent family alliances. These are easily,
and have been continually, instigated to fall upon and massacre our planters,
even in times of full peace between the two crowns, to the certain diminution
of our people and the contraction of our settlements. A very intelligent writer
of that country, Dr. Clark, in his Observations on the late and present conduct
of the French, etc. printed at Boston 1755, says,

The Indians in the French interest are, upon all proper opportunities,
instigated by their priests, who have generally the chief management of their
public councils, to acts of hostility against the English, even in time of
profound peace between the two crowns. Of this there are many undeniable
instances. The war between the Indians and the colonies of the Massachusets-Bay
and New Hampshire, in 1723, by which those colonies suffered so much damage,
was begun by the instigation of the French; their supplies were from them, and
there are now original letters of several Jesuits to be produced, whereby it
evidently appears, that they were continually animating the Indians, when
almost tired with the war, to a farther prosecution of it. The French not only
excited the Indians, and supported them, but joined their own forces with them
in all the late hostilities that have been committed within His Majesty's
province of Nova Scotia. And from an intercepted letter this year from the
Jesuit at Penobscot, and from other information, it is certain that they have
been using their utmost endeavors to excite the Indians to new acts of
hostility, against His Majesty's colony of the Massachusets-Bay, and some have
been committed. -- The French not only excite the Indians to acts of hostility,
but reward them for it, by buying the English prisoners of them; for the ransom
of each of which they afterward demand of us the price that is usually given
for a slave in these colonies. They do this under the specious pretense of
rescuing the poor prisoners from the cruelties and barbarities of the savages;
but in reality to encourage them to continue their depredations, as they can by
this means get more by hunting the English than by hunting wild beasts; and the
French at the same time are thereby enabled to keep up a large body of Indians
entirely at the expense of the English.


And though it is known they are supplied by the French and carry their prisoners
to them, we can by complaining obtain no redress, as the governors of Canada
have a ready excuse, that the Indians are an independent people, over whom they
have no power, and for whole actions they are therefore not accountable. Surely
circumstances so widely different may reasonably authorize different demands of
security in America, from such as are usual or necessary in Europe.

The remarker, however, thinks, that our real dependence for keeping France or
any other nation true to her engagements, must not be in demanding securities
which no nation whilst independent can give, but on our own strength and our
own viligance. Remarks, p. 25.
No nation that has carried on a war with disadvantage, and is unable to
continue it, can be said, under such circumstances, to be independent; and
while either side thinks itself in a condition to demand an indemnification,
there is no man in his senses, but will, caeteris paribus, prefer an
indemnification that is a cheaper and more effectual security than any other he
can think of. Nations in this situation demand and cede countries by almost
every treaty of peace that is made. The French part of the island of St.
Cristopher's was added to Great Britain in circumstances altogether similar to
those in which a few months may probably place the country of Canada. Farther
security has always been deemed a motive with a conqueror to be less moderate;
and even the vanquished insist upon security as a reason for demanding what
they acknowledge they could not otherwise properly ask. The security of the
frontier of France on the side of the Netherlands, was always considered, in
the negotiation that began at Getruydenburgh, and ended with that war. For the
same reason they demanded and had Cape Breton. But a war concluded to the
advantage of France has always added something to the power, either of France
or the house of Bourbon. Even that of 1733, which she commenced with
declarations of her having no ambitious views, and which finished by a treaty
at which the ministers of France repeatedly declared that she desired nothing
for herself, in effect gained for her Lorrain, an indemnification ten times the
value of all her North American possessions.

In short, security and quiet of princes and states have ever been deemed
sufficient reasons, when supported by power, for disposing of rights; and such
disposition has never been looked on as want of moderation. It has always been
the foundation of the most general treaties. The security of Germany was the
argument for yielding considerable possessions there to the Swedes: and the
security of Europe divided the Spanish monarchy, by the partition treaty, made
between powers who had no other right to dispose of any part of it. There can
be no cession that is not supposed at least, to increase the power of the party
to whom it is made. It is enough that he has a right to ask it, and that he
does it not merely to serve the purposes of a dangerous ambition. Canada in the
hands of Britain, will endanger the kingdom of France as little as any other
cession; and from its situation and circumstances cannot be hurtful to any
other state. Rather, if peace be an advantage, this cession may be such to all
Europe. The present war teaches us, that disputes arising in America, may be an
occasion of embroiling nations who have no concerns there. If the French remain
in Canada and Louisiana, fix the boundaries as you will between us and them, we
must border on each other for more than 1500 miles. The people that inhabit the
frontiers, are generally the refuse of both nations, often of the worst morals
and the least discretion, remote from the eye, the prudence, and the restraint
of government. Injuries are therefore frequently, in some part or other of so
long a frontier, committed on both sides. Resentment provoked, the colonies
first engaged, and then the mother countries. And two great nations can scarce
be at war in Europe, but some other prince or state thinks it a convenient
opportunity, to revive some ancient claim, seize some advantage, obtain some
territory, or enlarge some power at the expense of a neighbor. The flames of
war once kindled, often spread far and wide, and the mischief is infinite.
Happy it proved to both nations, that the Dutch were prevailed on finally to
cede the New Netherlands (now the province of New York) to us at the peace of
1674; a peace that has ever since continued between us, but must have been
frequently disturbed, if they had retained the possession of that country,
bordering several hundred miles on our colonies of Pensylvania westward,
Connecticut and the Massachusetts eastward. Nor is it to be wondered at that
people of different language, religion, and manners, should in those remote
parts engage in frequent quarrels, when we find, that even the people of our
own colonies have frequently been so exasperated against each other in their
disputes about boundaries, as to proceed to open violence and bloodshed.

But the remarker thinks we shall be sufficiently secure in America, if we
raise English forts at such passes as may at once make us respectable to the
French and to the Indian nations. Remarks, p. 25.
The security desirable in America, may be considered as of three kinds; 1. A
security of possession, that the French shall not drive us out of the country.
2. A security of our planters from the inroads of savages, and the murders
committed by them. 3. A security that the British nation shall not be obliged
on every new war to repeat the immense expense occasioned by this, to defend
its possessions in America. Forts in the most important passes, may, I
acknowledge be of use to obtain the first kind of security: but as those
situations are far advanced beyond the inhabitants, the expense of maintaining
and supplying the garrisons, will be very great, even in time of full peace,
and immense on every interruption of it; as it is easy for skulking parties of
the enemy in such long roads through the woods, to intercept and cut off our
convoys, unless guarded continually by great bodies of men. The second kind of
security, will not be obtained by such forts, unless they are connected by a
wall like that of China, from one end of our settlements to the other. If the
Indians when at war, marched like the Europeans, with great armies, heavy
cannon, baggage, and carriages, the passes through which alone such armies could
penetrate our country, or receive their supplies, being secured, all might be
sufficiently secure; but the case is widely different. They go to war, as they
call it, in small parties, from fifty men down to five. Their hunting life has
made them acquainted with the whole country, and scarce any part of it is
impracticable to such a party. They can travel through the woods even by night,
and know how to conceal their tracks. They pass easily between your forts
undiscovered; and privately approach the settlements of your frontier
inhabitants. They need no convoys of provisions to follow them; for whether
they are shifting from place to place in the woods, or lying in wait for an
opportunity to strike a blow, every thicket and every stream furnishes so small
a number with sufficient subsistence. When they have surpised separately, and
murdered and scalp'd a dozen families, they are gone with inconceivable
expedition through unknown ways, and it is very rare that pursuers have any chance
of coming up with them. Although the Indians live scattered, as a hunter's life
requires, they may be collected together from almost any distance, as they can
find their subsistence from their gun in their traveling. But let the number
of the Indians be what it will, they are not formidable merely on account of
their numbers; there are many other circumstances that give them a great
advantage over the English. The English inhabitants, though numerous, are
extended over a large tract of land, 500 leagues in length on the seashore;
and although some of their trading towns are thick settled, their settlements in
the country towns must be at a distance from each other: besides, that in a new
country, where lands are cheap, people are fond of acquiring large tracts to
themselves; and therefore in the out settlements, they must be more remote: and
as the people that move out are generally poor, they sit down, either where
they can easiest procure land, or soonest raise a subsistence. Add to this,
that the English have fixed settled habitations, the easiest and shortest
passages to which the Indians, by constantly hunting in the woods, are
perfectly well acquainted with; whereas the English know little or nothing of
the Indian country, nor of the passages through the woods that lead to it. The
Indian way of making war is by sudden attacks upon exposed places; and as soon
as they have done mischief, they retire, and either go home by the same or some
different rout, as they think safest; or go to some other place at a distance,
to renew their stroke. If a sufficient party should happily be ready to pursue
them, it is a great chance, whether in a country, consisting of woods and
swamps, which the English are not acquainted with, the enemy do not lie in
ambush for them in some convenient place, and from thence destroy them. If this
should not be the case, but the English should pursue them, as soon as they
have gained the rivers, by means of their canoes, to the use of which they are
brought up from their infancy, they presently get out of their reach: further,
if a body of men were to march into their country, to the places where they are
settled, they can, upon the least notice, without great disadvantage, quit
their present habitations, and betake themselves to new ones. Clark's
Observations p. 13.

It has been already remarked, that the tribes of the Indians living upon the
lakes and rivers that run upon the back of the English settlements in
North America, are very numerous, and can furnish a great number of fighting
men, all perfectly well acquainted with the use of arms as soon as capable of
carrying them, as they get the whole of their subsistence from hunting; and
that this army, large as it may be, can be maintained by the French without any
expense. From their numbers, their situation, and the rivers that run into the
English settlements, it is easy to conceive that they can at any time make an
attack upon, and constantly annoy as many of the exposed English settlements as
they please, and those at any distance from each other. The effects of such
incursions have been too severely felt by many of the British colonies, not to
be very well known. The entire breaking up places that had been for a
considerable time settled at a great expense, both of labor and money; burning
the houses, destroying the stock, killing and making prisoners great numbers of
the inhabitants, with all the cruel usage they meet with in their captivity, is
only a part of the scene. All other places that are exposed are kept in
continual terror; the lands lie waste and uncultivated from the danger that
attends those that shall presume to work upon them: besides the immense charge
the governments must be at in a very ineffectual manner to defend their
extended frontiers; and all this from the influence the French have had over,
but comparatively, a few of the Indians. To the same or greater evils still
will every one of the colonies be exposed, whenever the same influence shall be
extended to the whole body of them. Ibid. p. 20.


In short, long experience has taught our planters, that they cannot rely upon
forts as a security against Indians: The inhabitants of Hackney might as well
rely upon the tower of London to secure them against highwaymen and
housebreakers. As to the third kind of security, that we shall not in a few
years, have all we have now done to do over again in America; and be obliged to
employ the same number of troops, and ships, at the same immense expense to
defend our possessions there, while we are in proportion weakened here: such
forts I think cannot prevent this. During a peace, it is not to be doubted the
French, who are adroit at fortifying, will likewise erect forts in the most
advantageous places of the country we leave them, which will make it more
difficult than ever to be reduced in case of another war. We know by the
experience of this war, how extremely difficult it is to march an army through
the American woods, with its necessary cannon and stores, sufficient to reduce
a very slight fort. The accounts at the treasury will tell you what amazing
sums we have necessarily spent in the expeditions against two very trifling
forts, Duquesne and Crown Point. While the French retain their influence over
the Indians, they can easily keep our long extended frontier in continual
alarm, by a very few of those people; and with a small number of regulars and
militia, in such a country, we find they can keep an army of ours in full
employ for several years. We therefore shall not need to be told by our
colonies, that if we leave Canada, however circumscribed, to the French, "we
have done "nothing; Remarks, p. 26.
we shall soon be made sensible ourselves of this truth, and to our cost.

I would not be understood to deny that even if we subdue and retain Canada,
some few forts may be of use to secure the goods of the traders, and protect
the commerce, in case of any sudden misunderstanding with any tribe of Indians:
but these forts will be best under the care of the colonies interested in the
Indian trade, and garrisoned by their provincial forces, and at their own
expense. Their own interest will then induce the American governments to take
care of such forts in proportion to their importance; and see that the officers
keep their corpse full, and mind their duty. But any troops of ours placed there
and accountable here, would, in such remote and obscure places and at so great
a distance from the eye and inspection of superiors, soon become of little
consequence, even though the French were left in possession of Canada. If the
four independent companies maintained by the Crown in New York more than forty
years, at a great expense, consisted, for most part of the time, of faggots
chiefly; if their officers enjoyed their places as sine cures, and were only,
as a writer Douglass.
of that country styles them, a kind of military monks; if this was the state
of troops posted in a populous country, where the imposition could not be so
well concealed; what may we expect will be the case of those that shall be
posted two, three or four hundred miles from the inhabitants, in such obscure
and remote places as Crown Point, Oswego, Duquesne, or Niagara? they would
scarce be even faggots; they would dwindle to mere names upon paper, and appear
no where but upon the muster rolls.

Now all the kinds of security we have mentioned are obtained by subduing and
retaining Canada. Our present possessions in America, are secured; our planters
will no longer be massacred by the Indians, who depending absolutely on us for
what are now become the necessaries of life to them, guns, powder, hatchets,
knives, and clothing; and having no other Europeans near, that can either
supply them, or instigate them against us; there is no doubt of their being
always disposed, if we treat them with common justice, to live in perpetual
peace with us. And with regard to France, she cannot in case of another war,
put us to the immense expense of defending that long extended frontier; we
shall then, as it were, have our backs against a wall in America, the seacoast
will be easily protected by our superior naval power; and here "our own
watchfulness and our own strength" will be properly, and cannot but be
successfully employed. In this situation the force now employed in that part of
the world, may be spared for any other service here or elsewhere; so that both
the offensive and defensive strength of the British empire on the whole will be
greatly increased.

But to leave the French in possession of Canada when it is in our power to
remove them, and depend, as the remarker proposes, on our own "strength and
watchfulness" P. 25.
to prevent the mischiefs that may attend it, seems neither safe nor prudent.
Happy as we now are, under the best of kings, and in the prospect of a
succession promising every felicity a nation was ever blessed with: happy too
in the wisdom and vigor of every part of the administration, particularly that
part whose peculiar province is the British plantations, a province every true
Englishman sees with pleasure under the principal direction of a nobleman, as
much distinguished by his great capacity, as by his unwearied and disinterested
application to this important department; we cannot, we ought not to promise
ourselves the uninterrupted continuance of those blessings. The safety of a
considerable part of the state, and the interest of the whole are not to be
trusted to the wisdom and vigor of future administrations, when a security is
to be had more effectual, more constant, and much less expensive. They who can
be moved by the apprehension of dangers so remote as that of the future
independence of our colonies (a point I shall hereafter consider) seem scarcely
consistent with themselves when they suppose we may rely on the wisdom and
vigor of an administration for their safety.

I should indeed think it less material whether Canada were ceded to us or not,
if I had in view only the security of possession in our colonies. I entirely
agree with the Remarker, that we are in North America a far greater continental
as well as naval power; and that only cowardice or ignorance can subject our
colonies there to a French conquest. But for the same reason I disagree with
him widely upon another point. I do not think that our "blood and treasure has
been expended," as he intimates, "in the cause of the colonies," and that we
"are making conquests for them:" Remarks, p. 26.
yet I believe this is too common an error. I do not say they are altogether
unconcerned in the event. The inhabitants of them are, in common with the other
subjects of Great Britain, anxious for the glory of her crown, the extent of
her power and commerce, the welfare and future repose of the whole British
people. They could not therefore but take a large share in the affronts offered
to Britain, and have been animated with a truly British spirit to exert
themselves beyond their strength, and against their evident interest. Yet so
unfortunate have they been, that their virtue has made against them; for upon
no better foundation than this, have they been supposed the authors of a war
carried on for their advantage only. It is a great mistake to imagine that the
American country in question between Great Britain and France, is claimed as
the property of any individuals or public body in America, or that the
possession of it by Great Britain, is likely, in any lucrative view, to redound
at all to the advantage of any person there. On the other hand, the bulk of the
inhabitants of North America are land-owners, whose lands are inferior in value
to those of Britain, only by the want of an equal number of people. It is true
the accession of the large territory claimed before the war began, especially
if that be secured by the possession of Canada, will tend to the increase of
the British subjects, faster than if they had been confined within the
mountains: yet the increase within the mountains only, would evidently make the
comparative population equal to that of Great Britain, much sooner than it can
be expected when our people are spread over a country six times as large. I
think this is the only point of light in which this question is to be viewed,
and is the only one in which any of the colonies are concerned. No colony, no
possessor of lands in any colony, therefore wishes for conquests, or can be
benefited by them, otherwise than as they may be a means of securing peace on
their borders. No considerable advantage has resulted to the colonies by the
conquests of this war, or can result from confirming them by the peace, but
what they must enjoy in common with the rest of the British people; with this
evident drawback from their share of these advantages, that they will
necessarily lessen, or at least prevent the increase of the value of what makes
the principal part of their private property. A people spread through the whole
tract of country on this side the Mississipi, and secured by Canada in our
hands, would probably for some centuries find employment in agriculture, and
thereby free us at home effectually from our fears of American manufactures.
Unprejudiced men well know that all the penal and prohibitory laws that ever
were thought on, will not be sufficient to prevent manufactures in a country
whose inhabitants surpass the number that can subsist by the husbandry of it.
That this will be the case in America soon, if our people remain confined
within the mountains, and almost as soon should it be unsafe for them to live
beyond, though the country be ceded to us, no man acquainted with political and
commercial history can doubt. Manufactures are founded in poverty. It is the
multitude of poor without land in a country, and who must work for others at
low wages or starve, that enables undertakers to carry on a manufacture, and
afford it cheap enough to prevent the importation of the same kind from abroad,
and to bear the expense of its own exportation. But no man who can have a piece
of land of his own, sufficient by his labor to subsist his family in plenty,
is poor enough to be a manufacturer, and work for a master. Hence while there
is land enough in America for our people, there can never be manufactures to
any amount or value. It is a striking observation of a very able pen, that the
natural livelihood of the thin inhabitants of a forest country, is hunting;
that of a greater number, pasturage; that of a middling population,
agriculture; and that of the greatest, manufactures; which last must subsist
the bulk of the people in a full country, or they must be subsisted by charity,
or perish. The extended population, therefore, that is most advantageous to
Great Britain, will be best effected, because only effectually secured by our
possession of Canada. So far as the being of our present colonies in North
America is concerned, I think indeed with the remarker, that the French there
are not an enemy to be aprehended, Remarks, p. 27.
but the expression is too vague to be applicable to the present, or indeed to
any other case. Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, unequal as they are to this nation
in power and numbers of people, are enemies to be still apprehended; and the
Highlanders of Scotland have been so for many ages by the greatest princes of
Scotland and Britain. The wild Irish were able to give a great deal of
disturbance even to Queen Elizabeth, and cost her more blood and treasure than
her war with Spain. Canada in the hands of France has always stinted the growth
of our colonies: In the course of this war, and indeed before it, has disturbed
and vexed even the best and strongest of them, has found means to murder
thousands of their people, and unsettle a great part of their country. Much
more able will it be to starve the growth of an infant settlement. Canada has
also found means to make this nation spend two or three millions a year in
America; and a people, how small soever, that in their present situation, can
do this as often as we have a war with them, is methinks, an enemy to be
apprehended.

Our North American colonies are to be considered as the frontier of the
British empire on that side. The frontier of any dominion being attacked, it
becomes not merely "the cause" of the people immediately affected, (the
inhabitants of that frontier) but properly "the cause" of the whole body. Where
the frontier people owe and pay obedience, there they have a right to look for
protection. No political proposition is better established than this. It is
therefore invidious to represent the "blood and treasure" spent in this war, as
spent in the cause of the colonies only, and that they are "absurd and
ungrateful" if they think we have done nothing unless we make conquests for
them, and reduce Canada to gratify their "vain ambition," etc. It will not be a
conquest for them, nor gratify any vain ambition of theirs. It will be a
conquest for the whole, and all our people will, in the increase of trade and
the ease of taxes, find the advantage of it. Should we be obliged at any time
to make a war for the protection of our commerce, and to secure the exportation
of our manufactures, would it be fair to represent such a war merely as blood
and treasure spent in the cause of the weavers of Yorkshire, Norwich, or the
West, the cutlers of Sheffield, or the button-makers of Birmingham? I hope it
will appear before I end these sheets, that if ever there was a national war,
this is truly such a one: a war in which the interest of the whole nation is
directly and fundamentally concerned.

Those who would be thought deeply skilled in human nature, affect to discover
self-interested views every where at the bottom of the fairest, the most
generous conduct. Suspicions and charges of this kind, meet with ready
reception and belief in the minds even of the multitude; and therefore less
acuteness and address than the remarker is possessed of, would be sufficient to
persuade the nation generally, that all the zeal and spirit manifested and
exerted by the colonies in this war, was only in "their own cause" to make
conquests for themselves, to engage us to make more for them, to gratify their
own "vain ambition." But should they now humbly address the mother country in
the terms and the sentiments of the remarker, return her their grateful
acknowledgments for the blood and treasure she had spent in their cause,
confess that enough had been done "for them;" allow that English forts raised
in proper passes, will, with the wisdom and vigor of her administration be a
sufficient future protection; express their desires that their people may be
confined within the mountains, lest if they are suffered to spread and extend
themselves in the fertile and pleasant country on the other side, they should
"increase infinitely from all causes," live wholly on their own labor and
become independent; beg therefore that the French may be suffered to remain in
possession of Canada, as their neighborhood may be useful to prevent our
increase; and the removing them may in its consequences be even dangerous
Remarks, p. 50, 51.
. I say, should such an address from the colonies make its appearance here,
though, according to the remarker, it would be a most just and reasonable one;
would it not, might it not with more justice be answered; We understand you,
gentlemen, perfectly well: you have only your own interest in view: you want to
have the people confined within your present limits, that in a few years the
lands you are possessed of may increase tenfold in value! you want to reduce
the price of labor by increasing numbers on the same territory, that you may
be able to set up manufactures and vie with your mother country! you would have
your people kept in a body, that you may be more able to dispute the commands
of the crown, and obtain an independency. You would have the French left in
Canada, to exercise your military virtue, and make you a warlike people, that
you may have more confidence to embark in schemes of disobedience, and greater
ability to support them! You have tasted too, the sweets of TWO or THREE
MILLIONS Sterling per annum spent among you by our fleets and forces, and you
are unwilling to be without a pretense for kindling up another war, and thereby
occasion a repetition of the same delightful doses! But, gentlemen, allow us to
understand our interest a little likewise: we shall remove the French from
Canada that you may live in peace, and we be no more drained by your quarrels.
You shall have land enough to cultivate, that you may have neither necessity
nor inclination to go into manufactures, and we will manufacture for you, and
govern you.

A reader of the remarks may be apt to say; if this writer would have us
restore Canada on principles of moderation, how can we consistent with those
principles, retain Guadaloupe, which he represents of so much greater value! I
will endeavor to explain this, because by doing it I shall have an opportunity
of showing the truth and good sense of the answer to the interested application
I have just supposed. The author then is only apparently and not really
inconsistent with himself. If we can obtain the credit of moderation by
restoring Canada, it is well: but we should, however, restore it at all events;
because it would not only be of no use to us, but the possession of it (in his
opinion) may in its consequence be dangerous Remarks, p. 50, 51.
. as how? Why, plainly, (at length it comes out) if the French are not left
there to check the growth of our colonies, they will extend themselves almost
without bounds into the inland parts, and increase infinitely from all causes;
-- becoming a numerous, hardy, independent people, possessed of a strong
country, communicating little or not at all with England, living wholly on
their own labor, and in process of time knowing little and enquiring little
about the mother country. In short, according to this writer, our present
colonies are large enough and numerous enough, and the French ought to be left
in North America to prevent their increase, lest they become not only useless
but dangerous to Britain.

I agree with the gentleman, that with Canada in our possession, our people in
America will increase amazingly. I know that their common rate of increase,
where they are not molested by the enemy, is doubling their numbers every
twenty-five years by natural generation only, exclusive of the accession of
foreigners. The reason of this greater increase in America than in Europe, is,
that in old settled countries, all trades, farms, offices, and employments are
full, and many people refrain marrying till they see an opening, in which they
can settle themselves, with a reasonable prospect of maintaining a family: but
in America, it being easy to obtain land which with moderate labor will afford
subsistence and something to spare, people marry more readily and earlier in
life, whence arises a numerous offspring and the swift population of those
countries, It Is a common error that we cannot fill our provinces or increase
the number of them, without draining this nation of its people. The increment
alone of our present colonies is sufficient for both those purposes.
I think this increase continuing, would probably in a century more, make the
number of British subjects on that side the water more numerous than they now
are on this; but I am far from entertaining, on that account, any fears of
their becoming either useless or dangerous to us; and I look on those fears to
be merely imaginary and without any probable foundation. The remarker is
reserved in giving his reasons, as in his opinion this "is not a fit subject
for discussion." I shall give mine, because I conceive it a subject necessary
to be discussed; and the rather, as those fears, how groundless and chimerical
soever, may, by possessing the multitude, possibly induce the ablest ministry
to conform to them against their own judgment, and thereby prevent the assuring
to the British name and nation, a stability and permanency that no man
acquainted with history durst have hoped for, till our American possessions
opened the pleasing prospect.

The remarker thinks that our people in America, finding no check from Canada,
would extend themselves almost without bounds into the inland parts, and
increase infinitely from all causes. The very reason he assigns for their so
extending, and which is indeed the true one, their being invited to it by the
pleasantness, fertility and plenty of the country, may satisfy us, that this
extension will continue to proceed as long as there remains any pleasant
fertile country within their reach. And if we even suppose them confined by the
waters of the Mississipi westward, and by those of St. Laurence and the lakes
to the northward, yet still we shall leave them room enough to increase, even
in the sparse manner of settling now practiced there, till they amount to
perhaps a hundred millions of souls. This must take some centuries to fulfill,
and in the mean time, this nation must necessarily supply them with the
manufactures they consume, because the new settlers will be employed in
agriculture, and the new settlements will so continually draw off the spare
hands from the old, that our present colonies will not, during the period we
have mentioned, find themselves in a condition to manufacture even for their
own inhabitants, to any considerable degree, much less for those who are
settling behind them. Thus our trade must, till that country becomes as fully
peopled as England, that is, for centuries to come, be continually increasing,
and with it our naval power; because the ocean is between us and them, and our
ships and seamen must increase as that trade increases.

The human body and the political differ in this, that the first is limited by
nature to a certain stature, which, when attained, it cannot, ordinarily,
exceed; the other by better government and more prudent police, as well as by
change of manners and other circumstances, often takes fresh starts of growth,
after being long at a stand; and may add tenfold to the dimensions it had for
ages been confined to. The mother being of full stature, is in a few years
equalled by a growing daughter: but in the case of a mother country and her
colonies, it is quite different. The growth of the children tends to increase
the growth of the mother, and so the difference and superiority is longer
preserved.

Were the inhabitants of this island limited to their present number by any
thing in nature, or by unchangeable circumstances, the equality of population
between the two countries might indeed sooner come to pass: but sure experience
in those parts of the island where manufactures have been introduced, teaches
us, that people increase and multiply in proportion as the means and facility
of gaining a livelihood increase; and that this island, if they could be
employed, is capable of supporting ten times its present number of people. In
proportion, therefore, as the demand increases for the manufactures of Britain,
by the increase of people in her colonies, the numbers of her people at home
will increase, and with them the strength as well as the wealth of the nation.
For satisfaction in this point let the reader compare in his mind the number
and force of our present fleets, with our fleet in queen Elizabeth's time Viz.
Forty sail, none of more than 40 guns.
before we had colonies. Let him compare the ancient with the present state of
our towns and ports on our western coast, Manchester, Liverpool, Kendal,
Lancaster, Glasgow, and the countries round them, that trade with and
manufacture for our colonies, not to mention Leeds, Halifax, Sheffleld and
Birmingham, and consider what a difference there is in the numbers of people,
buildings, rents, and the value of land and of the produce of land, even if he
goes back no farther than is within man's memory. Let him compare those
countries with others on this same island, where manufactures have not yet
extended themselves, observe the present difference, and reflect how much
greater our strength may be, if numbers give strength, when our manufacturers
shall occupy every part of the island where they can possibly be subsisted.

But, say the objectors, "there is a certain distance from the sea, in America,
beyond which the expense of carriage will put a stop to the sale and
consumption of your manufactures; and this, with the difficulty of making
returns for them, will oblige the inhabitants to manufacture for themselves; of
course, if you suffer your people to extend their settlements beyond that
distance, your people become useless to you:" and this distance is limited by
some to 200 miles, by others to the Apalachian mountains. Not to insist on a
very plain truth, that no part of a dominion, from whence a government may on
occasion draw supplies and aids both of men of money, though at too great a
distance to be supplied with manufactures from some other part, is therefore to
be deemed useless to the whole; I shall endeavor to show that these imaginary
limits of utility, even in point of commerce, are much too narrow.

The inland parts of the continent of Europe are much farther from the sea than
the limits of settlement proposed for America. Germany is full of tradesmen and
artificers of all kinds, and the governments there, are not all of them always
favorable to the commerce of Britain, yet it is a well-known fact, that our
manufactures find their way even into the heart of Germany. Ask the great
manufacturers and merchants of the Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, Manchester and
Norwich goods, and they will tell you that some of them send their riders
frequently through France or Spain and Italy, up to Vienna, and back through
the middle and northern parts of Germany, to show samples of their wares and
collect orders, which they receive by almost every mail, to a vast amount.
Whatever charges arise on the carriage of goods, are added to the value, and
all paid by the consumer. If these nations over whom we have no government,
over whose consumption we can have no influence, but what arises from the
cheapness and goodness of our wares; whose trade, manufactures, or commercial
connections are not subject to the control of our laws, as those of our
colonies certainly are in some degree: I say, if these nations purchase and
consume such quantities of our goods, notwithstanding the remoteness of their
situation from the sea; how much less likely is it that the settlers in
America, who must for ages be employed in agriculture chiefly, should make
cheaper for themselves the goods our manufacturers at present supply them with;
even if we suppose the carriage five, six, or seven hundred miles from the sea
as difficult and expensive as the like distance into Germany: whereas in the
latter, the natural distances are frequently doubled by political obstructions,
I mean the intermixed territories and clashing interests of princes. But when
we consider that the inland parts of America are penetrated by great navigable
rivers; that there are a number of great lakes, communicating with each other,
with those rivers and with the sea, very small portages here and there
excepted; From New York into lake Ontario, the land carriage of the several
portages altogether, amounts to but about 27 miles. From lake Ontario into lake
Erie, the land carriage at Niagara is but about 12 miles. All the lakes above
Niagara communicate by navigable straits, so that no land carriage is
necessary, to go out of one into another. From Presqu'isle on lake Erie, there
are but 15 miles land-carriage, and that a good wagon road, to Beef River a
branch of the Ohio, which brings you into a navigation of many thousand miles
inland, if you take together the Ohio, the Mississipi, and all the great rivers
and branches that run into them.
that the sea coasts (if one may be allowed the expression) of those lakes
only, amount at least to 2700 miles, exclusive of the rivers running into them;
many of which are navigable to a great extent for boats and canoes, through vast
tracts of country; how little likely is it that the expense on the carriage of
our goods into those countries, should prevent the use of them. If the poor
Indians in those remote parts are now able to pay for the linen, woolen and
iron wares they are at present furnished with by the French and English
traders, though Indians have nothing but what they get by hunting, and the goods
are loaded with all the impositions fraud and knavery can contrive to inhance
their value; will not industrious English farmers, hereafter settled in those
countries, be much better able to pay for what shall be brought them in the way
of fair commerce?

If it is asked, what can such farmers raise, wherewith to pay for the
manufactures they may want from us? I answer, that the inland parts of America
in question are well known to be fitted for the production of hemp, flax,
potash, and above all, silk; the southern parts may produce olive-oil, raisins,
currants, indigo, and cochineal. Not to mention horses and black cattle, which
may easily be driven to the maritime markets, and at the same time assist in
conveying other commodities. That the commodities first mentioned, may easily
by water or land carriage be brought to the sea ports from interior America,
will not seem incredible, when we reflect, that hemp formerly came from the
Ukraine and most southern parts of Russia to Wologda, and down the Dwina to
Archangel, and thence by a perilous navigation round the North Cape to England
and other parts of Europe. It now comes from the same country up the Dnieper
and down the Duna with much land carriage. Great part of the Russia iron, no
highpriced commodity, is brought 3000 miles by land and water from the heart of
Siberia. Furs, [the produce too of America] are brought to Amsterdam from all
parts of Siberia, even the most remote, Kamschatska. The same country furnishes
me with another instance of extended inland commerce. It is found worth while
to keep up a mercantile communication between Peking in China, and Petersburgh.
And none of these instances of inland commerce exceed those of the courses by
which, at several periods, the whole trade of the East was carried on. Before
the prosperity of the Mamaluke dominion in Egypt fixed the staple for the
riches of the East at Cairo and Alexandria, whither they were brought from the
Red Sea, great part of those commodities were carried to the cities of Cashgar
and Balk. This gave birth to those towns, that still subsist upon the remains
of their ancient opulence, amidst a people and country equally wild. From
thence those goods were carried down the Amu, the ancient Oxus, to the Caspian
sea, and up the Wolga to Astrachan, from whence they were carried over to, and
down the Don to the mouth of that river, and thence again the Venetians
directly, and the Genoese and Venetians indirectly by way of Kaffa and
Trebisonde, dispersed them through the Mediterranean and some other parts of
Europe. Another part of those goods was carried over-land from the Wolga to the
rivers Duna and Neva; from both they were carried to the city of Wisbuy in the
Baltic, so eminent for its sea-laws; and from the city of Ladoga on the Neva,
we are told they were even carried by the Dwina to Archangel, and from thence
round the North Cape.

If iron and hemp will bear the charge of carriage from this inland country,
other metals will as well as iron; and certainly silk, since 3 d. per lb. is
not above 1 per cent. on the value, and amounts to L. 28 per ton.

If the growths of a country find their way out of it, the manufactures of the
countries where they go, will infallibly find their way into it. They who
understand the economy and principles of manufactures, know, that it is
impossible to establish them in places not populous; and even in those that are
populous, hardly possible to establish them to the prejudice of the places
already in possession of them. Several attempts have been made in France and
Spain, countenanced by the Government, to draw from us and establish in those
countries, our hard-ware and woolen manufactures, but without success. The
reasons are various. A manufacture is part of a great system of commerce, which
takes in conveniences of various kinds, methods of providing materials of all
sorts, machines for expecting and facilitating labor, all the channels of
correspondence for vending the wares, the credit and confidence necessary to
found and support this correspondence, the mutual aid of different artizans,
and a thousand other particulars, which time and long experience have gradually
established. A part of such a system cannot support itself without the whole,
and before the whole can be obtained the part perishes. Manufactures where they
are in perfection, are carried on by a multiplicity of hands, each of which is
expert only in his own part, no one of them a master of the whole; and it by
any means spirited away to a foreign country, he is lost without his fellows.
Then it is a matter of the extremest difficulty to persuade a complete set of
workmen, skilled in all parts of a manufactory, to leave their country together
and settle in a foreign land. Some of the idle and drunken may be enticed away,
but these only disappoint their employers, and serve to discourage the
undertaking. If by royal munificence, and an expense that the profits of the
trade alone would not bear, a complete set of good and skilful hands are
collected and carried over, they find so much of the system imperfect, so many
things wanting to carry on the trade to advantage, so many difficulties to
overcome, and the knot of hands so easily broken, by death, dissatisfaction and
desertion, that they and their employers are discouraged together, and the
project vanishes into smoke. Hence it happens, that established manufactures
are hardly ever lost, but by foreign conquest, or by some eminent interior
fault in manners or government; a bad police oppressing and discouraging the
workmen, or religious persecutions driving the sober and industrious out of the
country. There is in short, scarce a single instance in history of the
contrary, where manufactures have once taken firm root. They sometimes start up
in a new place, but are generally supported like exotic plants at more expense
than they are worth for any thing but curiosity, until these new seats become
the refuge of the manufacturers driven from the old ones. The conquest of
Constantinople and final reduction of the Greek empire, dispersed many curious
manufacturers into different parts of Christendom. The former conquests of its
provinces had before done the same. The loss of liberty in Verona, Milan,
Florence, Pisa, Pistoia, and other great cities of Italy, drove the
manufacturers of woolen cloth into Spain and Flanders. The latter first lost
their trade and manufacturers to Antwerp and the cities of Brabant, from whence
by persecution for religion they were sent into Holland and England. The civil
wars during the minority of Charles the first of Spain, which ended in the loss
of the liberty of their great towns, ended too in the loss of the manufactures
of Toledo, Segovia, Salamanca, Medina del Campo, etc. The revocation of the
edict of Nantes, communicated, to all the Protestant parts of Europe, the
paper, silk, and other valuable manufactures of France, almost peculiar at that
time to that country, and till then in vain attempted elsewhere.

To be convinced that it is not soil and climate, or even freedom from taxes,
that determines the residence of manufacturers, we need only turn our eyes on
Holland, where a multitude of manufactures are still carried on (perhaps more
than on the same extent of territory any where in Europe) and sold on terms
upon which they cannot be had in any other part of the world. And this too is
true of those growths, which by their nature and the labor required to raise
them, come the nearest to manufactures.

As to the commonplace objection to the North American settlements, that they
are in the same climate and their produce the same as that of England; in the
first place it is not true; it is particularly not so of the countries now
likely to be added to our settlements; and of our present colonies, the
products, lumber, tobacco, rice, and indigo, great articles of commerce, do not
interfere with the products of England: in the next place, a man must know very
little of the trade of the world, who does not know, that the greater part of
it is carried on between countries whose climate differs very little. Even the
trade between the different parts of these British islands, is greatly superior
to that between England and all the West India islands put together.

If I have been successful in proving that a considerable commerce may and will
subsist between us and our future most inland settlements in North America,
notwithstanding their distance, I have more than half proved no other
inconveniency will arise from their distance. Many men in such a country, must
"know," must "think" and must "care" about the country they chiefly trade with.
The juridical and other connections of government are yet a faster hold than
even commercial ties, and spread directly and indirectly far and wide. Business
to be solicited and causes depending, create a great intercourse even where
private property is not divided into different countries, yet this division
will always subsist where different countries are ruled by the same government.
Where a man has landed property both in the mother country and a province, he
will almost always live in the mother country: this, though there were no
trade, is singly a sufficient gain. It is said, that Ireland pays near a
million Sterling annually to its absentees in England: The balance of trade
from Spain or even Portugal is scarcely equal to this.

Let it not be said we have no absentees from North America. There are many to
the writer's knowledge; and if there are at present but few of them that
distinguish themselves here by great expense, it is owing to the mediocrity of
fortune among the inhabitants of the Northern colonies; and a more equal
division of landed property, than in the West India islands, so that there are
as yet but few large estates. But if those who have such estates, reside upon
and take care of them themselves, are they worse subjects than they would be If
they lived idly in England? Great merit is assumed for the gentlemen of the
West Indies Remarks, p. 47, 48, etc.
, on the score of their residing and spending their money in England. I would
not depreciate that merit; it is considerable, for they might, if they pleased
spend their money in France: but the difference between their spending it here
and at home is not so great. What do they spend it in when they are here, but
the produce and manufactures of this country; and would they not do the same if
they were at home? Is it of any great importance to the English farmer, whether
the West India gentleman comes to London and eats his beef, pork, and tongues,
fresh, or has them brought to him in the West Indies salted; whether he eats
his English cheese and butter or drinks his English ale at London or in
Barbados? Is the clothier's, or the mercer's, or the cutler's, or the
toy-man's profit less, for their goods being worn and consumed by the same
persons residing on the other side of the Ocean? Would not the profits of the
merchant and mariner be rather greater, and some addition made to our
navigation, ships and seamen? If the North American gentleman stays in his own
country, and lives there in that degree of luxury and expense with regard to
the use of British manufactures, that his fortune entitles him to; may not his
example (from the imitation of superiors so natural to mankind) spread the use
of those manufactures among hundreds of families around him, and occasion a
much greater demand for them, than it would do if he should remove and live in
London?

However this may be, if in our views of immediate advantage, it seems
preferable that the gentlemen of large fortunes in North America should reside
much in England, it is what may surely be expected as fast as such fortunes are
acquired there. Their having colleges of their own for the education of their
youth, will not prevent it: A little knowledge and learning acquired, increases
the appetite for more, and will make the conversation of the learned on this
side the water more strongly desired. Ireland has its university likewise; yet
this does not prevent the immense pecuniary benefit we receive from that
kingdom. And there will always be in the conveniences of life, the politeness,
the pleasures, the magnificence of the reigning country, many other attractions
besides those of learning, to draw men of substance there, where they can,
apparently at least, have the best bargain of happiness for their money.

Our trade to the West India islands is undoubtedly a valuable one: but
whatever is the amount of it, it has long been at a stand. Limited as our sugar
planters are by the scantiness of territory, they cannot increase much beyond
their present number; and this is an evil, as I shall show hereafter, that will
be little helped by our keeping Guadaloupe. The trade to our Northern Colonies,
is not only greater, but yearly increasing with the increase of people: and
even in a greater proportion, as the people increase in wealth and the ability
of spending as well as in numbers. I have already said, that our people in the
Northern Colonies double in about 25 years, exclusive of the accession of
strangers. That I speak within bounds, I appeal to the authentic accounts
frequently required by the board of trade, and transmitted to that board by the
respective governors; of which accounts I shall select one as a sample, being
that from the colony of Rhode Island Copy of the Report of Governor Hopkins to
the Board of Trade, on the Numbers of People in Rhode Island.
In obedience to your lordship's commands, I have caused the within account to
be taken by officers under oath. By it there appears to be in this colony at
this time 35,939 white persons, ana 4697 blacks, chiefly negroes.

In the year 1730, by order of the then lords commissioners of trade and
plantations, an account was taken of the number of people in this colony, and
then there appeared to be 15,302 white persons, and 2633 blacks.

Again in the year 1748, by like order, an account was taken of the nmber of
people in this colony, by which it appears there were at that time 29,755 white
persons, and 4373 blacks.

STEPHEN HOPKINS.
Colony of Rhode Island, Dec. 24. 1755.




; a colony that of all the others receives the least addition from strangers.
For the increase of our trade to those colonies, I refer to the accounts
frequently laid before Parliament, by the officers of the customs, and to the
custom-house books: from which I have also selected one account, that of the
trade from England (exclusive of Scotland) to Pensilvania An Account of the
Value of the Exports from England to Pensylvania, in one Year, taken at
different Periods, viz.

In 1723 they amounted only to L. 15,992: 19: 4 1730 they were 48,592: 7: 5
1737 56,690: 6: 7 1742 75,295: 3: 4 1747 82,404: 17: 7 1752 201,666: 19: 11
1757 268,426: 6: 6

N. B. The account for 1758 and 1759 are not yet completed; but those
acquainted with the North American trade, know, that the increase in those two
years, has been in a still greater proportion; the last year being supposed to
exceed any former year by a third; and this owing to the increased ability of
the people to spend, from the greater quantities of money circulating among
them by the war.


; a colony most remarkable for the plain frugal manner of living of its
inhabitants, and the most suspected of carrying on manufactures on account of
the number of German artizans, who are known to have transplanted themselves
into that country, though even these, in truth, when they come there, generally
apply themselves to agriculture as the surest support and most advantageous
employment. By this account it appears, that the exports to that province have
in 28 years, increased nearly in the proportion of 17 to 1; whereas the people
themselves, who by other authentic accounts appear to double their numbers (the
strangers who settle there included) in about 16 years, cannot in the 28 years
have increased in a greater proportion than as 4 to 1: the additional demand
then, and consumption of goods from England, of 13 parts in 17 more than the
additional number would require, must be owing to this, that the people having
by their industry mended their circumstances, are enabled to indulge themselves
in finer clothes, better furniture, and a more general use of all our
manufactures than heretofore. In fact, the occasion for English goods in North
America, and the inclination to have and use them, is, and must be for ages to
come, much greater than the ability of the people to pay for them; they must
therefore, as they now do, deny themselves many things they would otherwise
choose to have, or increase their industry to obtain them; and thus, if they
should at any time manufacture some coarse article, which on account of its
bulk or some other circumstance, cannot so well be brought to them from
Britain, it only enables them the better to pay for finer goods that otherwise
they could not indulge themselves in: so that the exports thither are not
diminished by such manufacture but rather increased. The single article of
manufacture in these colonies mentioned by the remarker, is hats made in New
England. It is true there have been ever since the first settlement of that
country, a few hatters there, drawn thither probably at first by the facility
of getting beaver, while the woods were but little cleared, and there was
plenty of those animals. The case is greatly altered now. The beaver skins are
not now to be had in New England, but from very remote places and at great
prices. The trade is accordingly declining there, so that, far from being able
to make hats in any quantity for exportation, they cannot supply their home
demand; and it is well known that some thousand dozens are sent thither yearly
from London, and sold there cheaper than the inhabitants can make them of equal
gohdness. In fact, the colonies are so little suited for establishing of
manufactures, that they are continually losing the few branches they
accidentally gain. The working brasiers, cutlers, and pewterers, as well as
hatters, who have happened to go over from time to time and settle in the
colonies, gradually drop the working part of their business, and import their
respective goods from England, whence they can have them cheaper and better
than they can make them. They continue their shops indeed, in the same way of
dealing, but become sellers of brasiery, cutlery, pewter, hats, etc. brought
from England, instead of being makers of those goods.

Thus much as to the apprehension of our colonies becoming useless to us. I
shall next consider the other supposition, that their growth may render them
dangerous. Of this I own, I have not the least conception, when I consider that
we have already fourteen separate governments on the maritime coast of the
continent, and if we extend our settlements shall probably have as many more
behind them on the inland side. Those we now have, are not only under different
governors, but have different forms of government, different laws, different
interests, and some of them different religious persuasions and different
manners. Their jealousy of each other is so great that however necessary an
union of the colonies has long been, for their common defense and security
against their enemies, and how sensible soever each colony has been of that
necessity, yet they have never been able to effect such an union among
themselves, nor even to agree in requesting the mother country to establish it
for them. Nothing but the immediate command of the crown has been able to
produce even the imperfect union but lately seen there, of the forces of some
colonies. If they could not agree to unite for their defense against the French
and Indians, who were perpetually harassing their settlements, burning their
villages, and murdering their people; can it reasonably be supposed there is
any danger of their uniting against their own nation, which protects and
encourages them, with which they have so many connections and ties of blood,
interest and affection, and which it is well known they all love much more than
they love one another? In short, there are so many causes that must operate to
prevent it, that I will venture to say, an union amongst them for such a
purpose is not merely improbable, it is impossible; and if the union of the
whole is impossible, the attempt of a part must be madness: as those colonies
that did not join the rebellion, would join the mother country in suppressing
it.

When I say such an union is impossible, I mean without the most grievous
tyranny and oppression. People who have property in a country which they may
lose, and privileges which they may endanger; are generally disposed to be
quiet; and even to bear much, rather than hazard all. While the government is
mild and just, while important civil and religious rights are secure, such
subjects will be dutiful and obedient. The waves do not rise, but when the
winds blow. What such an administration as the Duke of Alva's in the
Netherlands, might produce, I know not; but this I think I have a right to deem
impossible. And yet there were two very manifest differences between that case,
and ours, and both are in our favor. The first, that Spain had already united
the seventeen provinces under one visible government, though the states continued
independent: The second, that the inhabitants of those provinces were of a
nation, not only different from, but utterly unlike the Spaniards. Had the
Netherlands been peopled from Spain, the worst of oppression had probably not
provoked them to wish a separation of government. It might and probably would
have ruined the country, but would never have produced an independent
sovereignty. In fact, neither the very worst of governments, the worst of
politics in the last century, nor the total abolition of their remaining
liberty, in the provinces of Spain itself, in the present, have produced any
independency that could be supported. The same may be observed of France. And
let it not be said that the neighborhood of these to the seat of government
has prevented a separation. While our strength at sea continues, the banks of
the Ohio (in point of easy and expeditious conveyance of troops) are nearer to
London, than the remote parts of France and Spain to their respective capitals;
and much nearer than Connaught and Ulster were in the days of Queen Elizabeth.
No body foretells the dissolution of the Russian monarchy from its extent, yet I
will venture to say, the eastern parts of it are already much more
inaccessiable from Petersburgh, than the country on the Mississipi is from
London; I mean more men, in less time, might be conveyed the latter than the
former distance. The rivers Oby, Jenesea and Lena, do not facilitate the
communication half so well by their course, nor are they half so practicable as
the American rivers. To this I shall only add the observation of Machiavel, in
his Prince, that a government seldom long preserves its dominion over those who
are foreigners to it; who on the other hand fall with great ease, and continue
inseparably annexed to the government of their own nation, which he proves by
the fate of the English conquests in France.

Yet with all these disadvantages, so difficult is it to overturn an
established government, that it was not without the assistance of France and
England, that the United Provinces supported themselves: which teaches us, that
if the visionary danger of independence in our colonies is to be feared,
nothing is more likely to render it substantial than the neighborhood of
foreigners at enmity with the sovereign government, capable of giving either
aid or an asylum, as the event shall require. Yet against even these
disadvantages, did Spain preserve almost ten provinces, merely through their
want of union, which indeed could never have taken place among the others, but
for causes, some of which are in our case impossible, and others it is impious
to suppose possible.

The Romans well understood that policy which teaches the security arising to
the chief government from separate states among the governed, when they
restored the liberties of the states of Greece, (oppressed but united under
Macedon) by an edict that every state should live under its own laws. Omnes
Graecorum civitates, quae in Europa, quaeque in Asia essent, libertatem ac suas
leges haberent, etc. Live. lib. 33. c. 30.
They did not even name a governor. Independence of each other, and separate
interests, though among a people united by common manners, language, and I may
say religion, inferior neither in wisdom, bravery, nor their love of liberty to
the Romans themselves, was all the security the sovereigns wished for their
sovereignty. It is true, they did not call themselves sovereigns; they set no
value on the title; they were contented with possessing the thing; and possess
it they did, even without a standing army. What can be a stronger proof of the
security of their possession? And yet by a policy similar to this throughout,
was the Roman world subdued and held: a world composed of above an hundred
languages and sets of manners different from those of their masters. When the
Romans had subdued Macedon and Illyricum, they were both formed into republics
by a decree of the senate, and Macedon was thought safe from the danger of a
revolution, by being divided, into a division common among the Romans, as we
learn from the tetrarchs in scripture. Omnium primum liberos esse placebat
Macedonas atque Illyrios; ut omnibus gentibus apareret, arma populi Romani non
liberis servitutem, sed contra servientibus libertatem afferre. Ut et in
liberate gentes quae essent, tutam eam sibi perpetuamque sub tutelq populi
Romani esse: and quae sub regibus viverent, and in presens tempus mitiores eos
justioresque respectu populi Romani habere se; and si quando bellum cum populo
Romano regibus fuisset suis, exitum ejus victoriam Romany, sibi libertatem
allaturum crederent. -- In quatuor regiones describi Macedoniam, ut suum quaque
concilium haberet, placuit: and dimidium tributi quam quod regibus far soliti
erant, populo Romano pendere. Similia his and in Illyricum mandata.

Live. lib. 45. c. 18.
Yet this dominion was unshakeable, till the loss of liberty and corruption of
manners overturned it.

But what is the prudent policy inculcated by the remarker, to obtain this end,
security of dominion over our colonies: It is, to leave the French in Canada,
to "check" their growth, for otherwise our people may increase infinitely from
all causes. Remarks, p. 50, 51.
We have already seen in what manner the French and their Indians check the
growth of our colonies. It Is a modest word this, check, for massacring men,
women and children. The writer would, if he could, hide from himself as well as
from the public, the horror arising from such a proposal, by couching it in
general terms: it is no wonder he thought it a subject not fit for discussion"
in his letter, though he recommends it as a point that should be the constant
object of the minister's attention! -- But if Canada is restored on this
principle, will not Britain be guilty of all the blood to be shed, all the
murders to be committed in order to check this dreaded growth of our own
people? Will not this be telling the French in plain terms, that the horrid
barbarities they perpetrate with their Indians on our colonists, are agreeable
to us; and that they need not apprehend the resentment of a government with
whose views they so happily concur? Will not the colonies view it in this
light? Will they have reason to consider themselves any longer as subjects and
children, when they find their cruel enemies halloo'd upon them by the country
from whence they sprung, the government that owes them protection as it
requires their obedience? Is not this the most likely means of driving them
into the arms of the French, who can invite them by an offer of that security
their own government chooses not to afford them? I would not be thought to
insinuate that the remarker wants humanity. I know how little many good-natured
persons are affected by the distresses of people at a distance and whom they do
not know. There are even those, who, being present, can sympathize sincerely
with the grief of a lady on the sundden death of her fovourite bird, and yet
can read of the sinking of a city in Syria with very little concern. If it be,
after all, thought necessary to check the growth of our colonies, give me leave
to propose a method less cruel. It is a method of which we have an example in
scripture. The murder of husbands, of wives, of brothers, sisters and children,
whose pleasing society has been for some time enjoyed, affects deeply the
respective surviving relations: but grief for the death of a child just born is
short and easily supported. The method I mean is that which was dictated by the
Egyptian policy, when the "infinite increase" of the children of Israel was
apprehended as dangerous to the state. And Pharaoh said unto his people, behold
the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we; come on,
let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply and it come to pass that when
there falls out any war, they join also unto our enemies and fight against
us, and so get them up out of the land. -- And the king spoke to the Hebrew
midwives, etc. Exodus, Chap. 1.
Let an act of parliament, then be made, enjoining the colony midwives to
stifle in the birth every third or fourth child. By this means you may keep the
colonies to their present size. And if they were under the hard alternative of
submitting to one or the other of these schemes for checking their growth, I
dare answer for them, they would prefer the latter.

But all this debate about the propriety or impropriety of keeping or restoring
Canada, is possibly too early. We have taken the capital indeed, but the
country is yet far from being in our possession; and perhaps never will be: for
if our M -- rs are persuaded by such counselors as the remarker, that the
French there are "not the worst of neighbors," and that if we had conquered
Canada, we ought for our own sakes to restore it, as a check to the growth of
our colonies, I am then afraid we shall never take it. For there are many ways
of avoiding the completion of the conquest, that will be less exceptionable and
less odious than the giving it up.

The objection I have often heard, that if we had Canada, we could not people
it without draining Britain of its inhabitants, is founded on ignorance of the
nature of population in new countries. When we first began to colonize in
America, it was necessary to send people, and to send seed-corn; but it is not
now necessary that we should furnish, for a new colony, either one or the
other. The annual increment alone of our present colonies, without diminishing
their numbers, or requiring a man from hence, is sufficient in ten years to
fill Canada with double the number of English that it now has of French
inhabitants. In fact, there has not gone from Britain to our colonies these 20
years past, to settle there, so many as 10 families a year; the new settlers
are either the offspring of the old, or emigrants from Germany or the north of
Ireland.
Those who are protestants among the French, will probably choose to remain
under the English government; many will choose to remove, if they can be allowed
to sell their lands, improvements and effects: the rest in that thin-settled
country, will in less than half a century, from the crowds of English settling
round and among them, be blended and incorporated with our people both in
language and manners.

In Guadaloupe the case is somewhat different; and though I am far from
thinking Remark, p. 30, 34.
we have sugarland enough It is often said we have plenty of sugar-land still
unemployed in Jamaica: but those who are all well acquainted with that island,
know, that the remaining vacant land in it is generally situated among
mountains, rocks and gullies, that make carriage impractiable, so that no
profitable use can be made of it unless the price of sugars should so greatly
increase as to enable the planter to make very expensive roads, by blowing up
rocks, erecting bridges, etc. every 2 or 300 yards.
, I cannot think Guadaloupe is so desirable an increase of it, as other objects
the enemy would probably be infinitely more ready to part with. A country fully
inhabited by any nation is no proper possession for another of different
language, manners and religion. It is hardly ever tenable at less expense than
it is worth, -- But the isle of Cayenne, and its appendix Equinoctial-France,
would indeed be an acquisition every way suitable to our situation and desires.
This would hold all that migrate from Barbados, the Leeward Islands, or
Jamaica. It would certainly recall into an English government (in which there
would be room for millions) all who have before settled or purchased in
Martineco, Guadaloupe, Santa-Cruz or St. John's; except such as know not the
value of an English government, and such I am sure are not worth recalling.

But should we keep Guadaloupe, we are told it would enable us to export L.
300,000 in sugars. Admit it to be true, though perhaps the amazing increase of
English consumption might stop most of it here, to whose profit is this to
redound? to the profit of the French inhabitants of the island: except a small
part that should fall to the share of the English purchasers, but whose whole
purchase-money must first be added to the wealth and circulation of France.

I grant, however, much of this L. 300,000 would be expended in British
manufactures. Perhaps, too, a few of the land-owners of Guadaloupe might dwell
and spend their fortunes in Britain, (though probably much fewer than of the
inhabitants of North America). I admit the advantage arising to us from these
circumstances, (as far as they go) in the case of Guadaloupe, as well as in
that of our other West India settlements. Yet even this consumption is little
better than that of an allied nation would be, who should take our manufactures
and supply us with sugar, and put us to no expense in defending the place of
growth.

But though our own colonies expend among us almost the whole produce of our
sugar, Remarks, p. 47.
can we or ought we to promise ourselves this will be the case of Guadaloupe.
One 100,000 L. will supply them with British manufactures; and supposing we can
effectually prevent the introduction of those of France, (which is morally
impossible in a country used to them) the other 200,000 will still be spent in
France, in the education of their children and support of themselves; or else
be laid up there, where they will always think their home to be.

Besides this consumption of British manufactures, much is said of the benefit
we shall have from the situation of Guadaloupe, and we are told of a trade to
the Caraccas and Spanish Main. In what respect Guadaloupe is better situated
for this trade than Jamaica, or even any of our other islands, I am at a loss
to guess. I believe it to be not so well situated for that of the windward
coast, as Tobago and St. Lucia, which in this as well as other respects, would
be more valuable possessions, and which, I doubt not, the peace will secure to
us. Nor is it nearly so well situated for that of the rest of the Spanish Main
as Jamaica. As to the greater safety of our trade by the possession of
Guadaloupe, experience was convinced us that in reducing a single island, or
even more, we stop the privateering business but little. Privateers still
subsist in equal if not greater numbers, and carry the vessels into Martinico
which before it was more convenient to carry into Guadaloupe. Had we all the
Caribbees, it is true, they would in those parts be without shelter. Yet upon
the whole I suppose it to be a doubtful point and well worth consideration,
whether our obtaining possession of all the Caribbees, would be more than a
temporary benefit, as it would necessarily soon fill the French part of
Hispaniola with French inhabitants, and thereby render it five times more
valuable in time of peace, and little less than impregnable in time of war; and
would probably end in a few years in the uniting the whole of that great and
fertile island under a French government. It is agreed on all hands, that our
conquest of St. Christopher's, and driving the French from thence, first
furnished Hispaniola with skilful and substantial planters, and was
consequently the first occasion of its present opulence. On the other hand, I
will hazard an opinion, that valuable as the French possessions in the West
Indies are, and undeniable the advantages they derive from them, there is
somewhat to be weighed in the opposite scale. They cannot at present make war
with England, without exposing those advantages while divided among the
numerous islands they now have, much more than they would, were they possessed
of St. Domingo only; their own share of which would, if well cultivated, grow
more sugar, than is now grown in all their West India islands.

I have before said I do not deny the utility of the conquest, or even of our
future possession of Guadaloupe, if not bought to dear. The trade of the West
Indies is one of our most valuable trades. Our possessions there deserve our
greatest care and attention. So do those of North America. I shall not enter
into the invidious task of comparing their due estimation. It would be a very
long and a very disagreeable one, to run through every thing material on this
head. It is enough to our present point, if I have shown, that the value of
North America is capable of an immense increase, by an acquisition and
measures, that must necessarily have an effect the direct contrary of what we
have been industriously taught to fear; and that Guadaloupe is, in point of
advantage, but a very small addition to our West India possessions, rendered
many ways less valuable to us than it is to the French, who will probably set
more value upon it than upon a country that is much more valuable to us than to
them.

There is a great deal more to be said on all the parts of these subjects; but
as it would carry me into a detail that I fear would tire the patience of my
readers, and which I am not without apprehensions I have done already, I shall
reserve what remains till I dare venture again on the indulgence of the public.

IN Confirmation of the Writer's Opinion concerning Population, Manufactures,
etc. he has thought it not amiss to add an Extract from a Piece written some
years since in America, where the Facts must be well known, on which the
Reasonings are founded. It is entitled OBSERVATIONS concerning the Increase of
Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc. Written in Pensylvania, 1751.
1. TABLES of the proportion of marriages to births, of deaths to births, of
marriages to the numbers of inhabitants, etc. formed on observations made upon
the bills of mortality, christenings, etc. of populous cities, will not suit
countries; nor will tables formed on observations made on full settled old
countries, as Europe, suit new countries, as America.

2. For people increase in proportion to the number of marriages, and that is
greater in proportion to the ease and convenience of supporting a family. When
families can be easily supported, more persons marry, and earlier in life.

3. In cities, where all trades, occupations and offices are full, many delay
marrying, till they can see how to bear the charges of a family; which charges
are greater in cities, as luxury is more common; many live single during life,
and continue servants to families, journeymen to trades, etc. hence cities do
not by natural generation supply themselves with inhabitants; the deaths are
more than the births.

4. In countries full settled, the case must be nearly the same; all lands
being occupied and improved to the height; those who cannot get land, must
labor for others that have it; when laborers are plenty, their wages will be
low; by low wages a family is supported with difficulty; this difficulty deters
many from marriage, who therefore long continue servants and single. -- Only as
the cities take supplies of people from the country, and thereby make a little
more room in the country, marriage is a little more encouraged there, and the
births exceed the deaths.

5. Great part of Europe is full settled with husbandmen, manufacturers, etc.
and therefore cannot now much increase in people: America is chiefly occupied
by Indians, who subsist mostly by hunting. -- But as the hunter, of all men,
requires the greatest quantity of land from whence to draw his subsistence,
(the husbandmen subsisting on much less, the Gardener on still less, and the
manufacturer requiring least of all) the Europeans found America as fully
settled as it well could be by hunters; yet these having large tracts, were
easily prevailed on to part with portions of territory to the new comers, who
did not much interfere with the natives in hunting, and furnished them with
many things they wanted.

6. Land being thus plenty in America, and so cheap as that a laboring man,
that understands husbandry, can in a short time save money enough to purchase a
piece of new land sufficient for a plantation, whereon he may subsist a family;
such are not afraid to marry; for if they even look far enough forward to
consider how their children when grown up are to be provided for, they see that
more land is to be had at rates euually easy, all cirmcumstances considered.

7. Hence marriages in America are more general, and more generally early, than
in Europe. And if it is reckoned there, that there is but one marriage per
annum among 100 persons, perhaps we may here reckon two; and if in Europe they
have but four births to a marriage (many of their marriages being late) we may
here reckon eight; of which if one half grow up, and our marriages are made,
reckoning one with another, at twenty years of age, our people must at least be
doubled every twenty years.

8. But notwithstanding this increase, so vast is the territory of North
America, that it will require many ages to settle it fully; and till it is
fully settled, labor will never be cheap here, where no man continues long a
labourer for others, but gets a plantation of his own; no man continues long a
journeyman to a trade, but goes among those new settlers, and sets up for
himself, etc. Hence labor is no cheaper now, in Pensilvania, than it was
thirty years ago, though so many thousand laboring people have been imported
from Germany and Ireland.

9. The danger therefore of these colonies interfering with their mother
country in trades that depend on labor, manufactures, etc. is too remote to
require the attention of Great Britain.

10. But in proportion to the increase of the colonies, a vast demand is
growing for British manufactures; a glorious market wholly in the power of
Britain, in which foreigners cannot interfere, which will increase in a short
time even beyond her power of supplying, though her whole trade should be to her
colonies.* * * * * * * * *

12. It Is an ill-grounded opinion that by the labor of slaves, America may
possibly vie in cheapness of manufactures with Britain. The Labor of slaves
can never be so cheap here as the labor of working men is in Britain. Any one
may compute it. Interest of money is in the colonies from 6 to 10 per Cent.
Slaves one with another cost 30 l. Sterling per head Reckon then the interest
of the first purchase of a slave, the insurance or risque on his life, his
clothing and diet, expenses in his sickness and loss of time, loss by his
neglect of business (neglect is natural to the man who is not to be benefited
by his own care or diligence) expense of a driver to keep him at work, and his
pilfering from time to time, almost every slave being from the nature of
slavery a thief, and compare the whole amount with the wages of a manufacturer
of iron or wool in England, you will see that labor is much cheaper there than
it ever can be by negroes here. Why then will Americans purchase slaves?
Because slaves may be kept as long as a man pleases, or has occasion for their
labor; while hired men are continually leaving their matter (often in the
midst of his business) and seting up for themselves. 8.

13. As the increase of people depends on the encouragement of marriages, the
following things must diminish a nation, viz. 1. The being conquered; for the
conquerors will engross as many offices, and exact as much tribute or profit on
the labor of the conquered, as will maintain them in their new establishment;
and this diminishing the subsistence of the natives, discourages their
marriages, and so gradually diminishes them, while the foreigners increase. 2.
Loss of territory. Thus the Britons being driven into Wales, and crowded
together in a barren country insufficient to support such great numbers,
diminished till the people bore a proportion to the produce, while the Saxons
increased on their abandoned lands, till the island became full of English. And
were the English now driven into Wales by some foreign nation, there would in a
few years be no more Englishmen in Britain, than there are now people in Wales.
3. Loss of trade. Manufactures exported, draw subsistence from foreign
countries for numbers; who are thereby enabled to marry and raise families. If
the nation be deprived of any branch of trade, and no new employment is found
for the people occupy'd in that branch, it will soon be deprived of so many
people. 4. Loss of food. Suppose a nation has a fishery, which not only employs
great numbers, but makes the food and subsistence of the people cheaper: if
another nation becomes matter of the seas, and prevents the fishery, the people
will diminish in proportion as the loss of employ, and dearness of provision
makes it more difficult to subsist a family. 5. Bad government and insecure
property. People not only leave such a country, and settling abroad incorporate
with other nations, lose their native language, and become foreigners; but the
industry of those that remain being discouraged, the quantity of subsistence in
the country is lessened, and the support of a family becomes more difficult. So
heavy taxes tend to diminish a people. 6. The introduction of slaves. The
negroes brought into the English sugar islands, have greatly diminished the
whites there; the poor are by this means deprived of employment, while a few
families acquire vast estates, which they spend on foreign luxuries, and
educating their children in the habit of those luxuries; the same income is
needed for the support of one, that might have maintained one hundred. The
whites, who have slaves, not laboring, are enfeebled, and therefore not so
generally prolific; the slaves being worked too hard, and ill fed, their
constitutions are broken, and the deaths among them are more than their births;
so that a continual supply is needed from Africa. The northern colonies having
few slaves, increase in whites. Slaves also pejorate the families that use
them; the white children become proud, disgusted with labor, and being
educated in idleness, are rendered unfit to get a living by industry.

14. Hence the prince that acquires new territory, if he finds it vacant, or
removes the natives to give his own people room; the legislator that makes
effectual laws for promoting of trade, increasing employment, improving land by
more or better tillage, providing more food by fisheries, securing property,
etc. and the man that invents new trades, arts or manufactures, or new
improvements in husbandry, may be properly called Fathers of their Nation, as
they are the cause of the generation of multitudes, by the encouragement they
afford to marriage.

15. As to privileges granted to the married, (such as the jus trium liberorum
among the Romans) they may hasten the filling of a country that has been
thinned by war or pestilence, or that has otherwise vacant territory, but
cannot increase a people beyond the means provided for their subsistence.

16. Foreign luxuries and needless manufactures imported and used in a nation,
do, by the same reasoning, increase the people of the nation that furnishes
them, and diminish the people of the nation that uses them. -- Laws therefore
that prevent such importations, and on the contrary promote the exportation of
manufactures to be consumed in foreign countries, may be called (with respect
to the people that make them) generative laws, as by increasing subsistence
they encourage marriage. Such laws likewise strengthen a country doubly, by
increasing its own people and diminishing its neighbors.

17. Some European nations prudently refuse to consume the manufactures of
East India: -- They should likewise forbid them to their colonies; for the gain
to the merchant is not to be compared with the loss by this means of people to
the nation.

18. Home luxury in the great increases the nation's manufacturers employed by
it, who are many, and only tends to diminish the families that indulge in it,
who are few. The greater the common fashionable expense of any rank of people,
the more cautious they are of marriage. Therefore luxury should never be
suffered to become common.

19. The great increase of offspring in particular families, is not always
owing to greater fecundity of nature, but sometimes to examples of industry in
the heads, and industrious education; by which the children are enabled to
provide better for themselves, and their marrying early is encouraged from the
prospect of good subsistence.

20. If there be a sect therefore, in our nation, that regard frugality and
industry as religious duties, and educate their children therein, more than
others commonly do; such sect must consequently increase more by natural
generation, than any other sect in Britain. --

21. The importation of foreigners into a country that has as many inhabitants
as the present employments and provisions for subsistence will bear, will be in
the end no increase of people, unless the new comers have more industry and
frugality than the natives, and then they will provide more subsistence and
increase in the country; but they will gradually eat the natives out. -- Nor is
it necessary to bring in foreigners to fill up any occasional vacancy in a
country; for such vacancy (if the laws are good, 14, 16) will soon be filled by
natural generation. Who can now find the vacancy made in Sweden, France, or
other warlike nations, by the plague of heroism 40 years ago; in France, by the
expulsion of protestants; in England, by the settlement of her colonies; or in
Guinea, by 100 years exportation of slaves that has blackened half America? --
The thinness of the inhabitants in Spain, is owing to national pride and
idleness, and other causes, rather than to the expulsion of the Moors, or to
the making of new settlements.

22. There is in short no bound to the prolific nature of plants or animals,
but what is made by their crowding and interfering with each other's means of
subsistence. Was the face of the earth vacant of other plants, it might be
gradually sowed and overspread with one kind only; as for instance, with
Fennel; and were it empty of other inhabitants, it might in a few ages be
replenished from one nation only; as for instance with Englishmen. Thus there
are supposed to be now upwards of one Million English souls in North America,
(though it is thought scarce 80,000 have been brought over sea) and yet perhaps
there is not one the fewer in Britain, but rather many more, on account of the
employment the colonies afford to manufacturers at home. This million doubling,
suppose but once in 25 years, will in another century be more than the people
of England, and the greatest number of Englishmen will be on this side the
water.

What an accession of power to the British empire by sea as well as land! What
increase of trade and navigation! What numbers of ships and seamen! We have
been here but little more than 100 years, and yet the force of our privateers
in the late war, united, was greater, both in men and guns, than that of the
whole British navy in queen Elizabeth's time. -- How important an affair then
to Britain, is the present treaty 1751.
for settling the bounds between her colonies and the French, and how careful
should she be to secure room enough, since on the room depends so much the
Increase of her people?

23. In fine, a nation well regulated is like a polypus; A water-insect,
well-known to naturalists.
take away a limb, its place is soon supplied; cut it in two, and each
deficient part shall speedily grow out of the part remaining. Thus if you have
room and subsistence enough, as you may by dividing, make ten polypuses out of
one, you may of one make ten nations, equally populous and powerful; or rather
increase a nation tenfold in numbers and strength. * * * * * * * * * *

SINCE the foregoing sheets were printed off, the writer has obtained accounts
of the Exports to North America, and the West India Islands, by which it
appears, that there has been some increase of trade to those Islands as well as
to North America, though in a much less degree. The following extract from
these accounts will show the reader at one view the amount of the exports to
each, in two different terms of five years; the terms taken at ten years
distance from each other, to show the increase, viz.

First Term, from 1744 to 1748, inclusive.

Northern Colonies. West India Islands. 1744 L. 640,114 12 4 L. 796,112 17 9
1745 534,316 2 5 503,669 19 9 1746 754,945 4 3 472,994 19 7 1747 726,648 5 5
856,463 18 6 1748 830,243 16 9 734,095 15 3 Total, L. 3,486,268 1 2 Tot. L.
3,363,337 10 10 Difference, 122,930 10 4 L. 3,486,268 1 2

Second Term, from 1754 to 1758, inclusive.

Northern Colonies. West India Islands. 1754 1,246,615 1 11 685,675 3 0 1755
1,177,848 6 10 694,667 13 3 1756 1,428,720 18 10 733,458 16 3 1757 1,727,924 2
10 776,488 0 6 1758 1,832,948 13 10 877,571 19 11 Total, L. 7,414,57 4 3 Tot.
L. 3,767,841 12 11 Difference 3,646,215 11 4 L. 7,414,057 4 3

In the first term, total for West India Islands, 3,363,337 10 10 In the second
Term, ditto, 3,767,841 12 11 Increase only L. 0,404,504 2 1

In the first Term, total for Northern Colonies, 3,486,268 1 2 In the second
Term, ditto, 7,414,057 4 3 Increase, L. 3,927,789 3 1

By these accounts it appears, that the Exports to the West India Islands and
to the Northern Colonies were in the first term nearly equal; the difference
being only 122,936 l. 10 s. 4 d and in the second term, the exports to those
islands had only increased 404,504 l. 2 s. 1 d. -- Whereas the increase to the
Northern Colonies is 3,927,789 l. 3 s. 1 d. almost Four Millions.

Some part of this increased demand for English goods, may be ascribed to the
armies and fleets we have had both in North America, and the West Indies; not
so much for what is consumed by the soldiery; their clothing, stores,
ammunition, etc. sent from hence on account of the government, being (as is
supposed) not included in these accounts of merchandise exported; but, as the
war has occasioned a great plenty of money in America, many of the inhabitants
have increased their expense.

These accounts do not include any exports from Scotland to America, which are
doubtless proportionably considerable; nor the exports from Ireland.

THE END.
Advertisement. Lately published in London, and to be sold by said Mecom (Price
8s. L. M.) [ Ascribed to Mr. F.]
AN Historical Review of the Constitution and Government of Pensylvania, from
its Origin; so far as regards the several Points of Controversy which have,
from Time to Time, arisen between the several Governors of that Province, and
their several Assemblies. Founded on authentic Documents. Dedicated to the
Right Honorable ARTHUR ONSLOW, Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Those who would give up ESSENTIAL LIBERTY to purchase a little TEMPORARY
SAFETY, deserve neither Liberty nor Safety. In the Dedication are these Words:

The Cause we bring is in Fact the Cause of all the Provinces in one: It is the
Cause of every British Subject in every Part of the British Dominions. It is
the Cause of every Man who deserves to be free every where.

To the above Quotation from the Dedication, the following Paragraphs are
added, as a Specimen of the Author's Ability to handle and apply those
authentic Documents in an accurate and just Manner. "TO obtain an infinite
Variety of Purposes, by a few plain Principles, is the Characteristic of
Nature. As the Eye is affected, so is the Understanding: Objects at distance
strike us according to their Dimensions, or the Quantity of Light thrown upon
them; near, according to their Novelty or Familiarity; as they are in motion or
at rest. It Is the same with Actions. A Battle is all Motion; a Hero all Glare:
While such Images are before us, we can attend to nothing else. Solon and
Lycurgus would make no Figure in the same Scene with the King of Prussia; and
we are at present so lost in the military Scramble on the Continent next us, in
which it must be confessed we are deeply interested, that we have scarce Time
to throw a Glance toward America, where we have also much at Stake, and where,
if any where, our Account must be made up at last. Introduct.

"We love to stare more than to reflect, and to be indolently amused at our
Leisure, than to commit the smallest Trespass on our Patience by winding a
painful tedious Maze, which would pay us in nothing but Knowledge. Introduction.

"Surely, to a Nation born to Liberty like This, bound to leave it unimpair'd
as they received it from their Fathers in Perpetuity to their Heirs, and
interested in the Conservation of it in every Appendix of the British Empire,
the Particulars of such a Contest cannot be wholly indifferent. Intro.

"On the contrary, it is reasonable to think,the first Workings of Power
against Liberty, and the natural Efforts of unbiassed Men to secure themselves
against the first Approaches of Oppression, must have a captivating Power over
every Man of Sensibility and Discernment amongst us. Introd.

"It is a known Custom among Farmers to change their Corn from Season to Season
for the Sake of filling the Bushel: And in Case the Wisdom of the Age should
condescend to make the like Experiment in another Shape, from hence we may
learn, whither to repair for the proper Species. Intro.

"Courage, Wisdom, Integrity and Honor are not to be measured by the Sphere
assigned them to act in, but by the Trials they undergo, and the Vouchers they
furnish: And if so manifested, need neither Robes or Titles to set them off.
Intro.

From the Body of the Book.

"There is something in Connection and Dependence which gives a secret Biass to
all we think and with, as well as what we say: And in all Disputes this must be
duly allowed for on both Sides.

"Men who want a present Convenience must not be over-solicitous about future
Contingencies; and, in general, we choose to be blind to such Obstacles as we
fear we have not Strength enough to remove.

"Though Protection is the Reason, and, consequently should be the End of
Government, we ought to be as much upon our Guard against our Protectors as
against our Enemies,

"Power, like Water, is ever working its own Way; and wherever it can find or
make an Opening, is altogether as prone to overflow whatever is subject to it.

"And though Matter of Right overlooked, may be reclaimed and reassumed at any
Time, it cannot be too soon reclaimed and reassumed.

"To unite the Subtilty of the Serpent with the Innocence of the Dove, is not
so easily done as said.

Speaking of a Party-Dispute, the Author says --

"Thus Heat kindled Heat: Animosity excited Animosity: And each Party resolving
to be always in the Right, were often both in the Wrong.

Speaking in Justification of the Conduct of the several Assemblies, in a
certain Dispute, he says, "Men they were: Passions and Interests they
consequently had: And if they were sometimes carried away a little too far by
them, it is obvious the Passions and Interests of others worked up the Ferment
first, and never relented to the last.

"It is true, an over-rigid Performance of Conditions is not to be expected of
Government, and seldom can be exacted from it. But then if the Representative
Part is not tenacious, almost to a Fault, of the Rights and Claims of a People,
they will in a Course of Time lose their very Pretensions to them.

He also affirms, that "Of all political Cements, Reciprocal Interest is the
strongest: And the Subjects Money is never so well disposed of as in the
Maintenance of Order and Tranquillity, and the Purchase of good Laws.

Toward the Conclusion are the following Paragraphs.

"The TRUE STATE of Pensylvania is now before us. -- It is apparent the
Assemblies of that Province have acted from the Beginning on the defensive
only: The Defensive is what every Man, by the Right and Law of Nature, is
entitled to. -- Jealousy is the first Principle of Defense: If Men were not to
suspect, they would rarely, if ever, be upon their Guard. -- Magna Charta is
apparently founded upon this Principle; nay, provides, That Opposition should
be always at Hand to confront and obviate Danger. -- Penn, the Founder of the
Colony, founded it upon Magna Charta: And, as we have seen, the Birthrights of
his Followers were rather enlarged than diminished by his Institutions. -- That
the latter Part of his active Life, therefore, was employed in undermining his
own Foundations, only serves to excite our Concern, That so few should be of a
Piece with themselves; and to make him answerable in Part for the Trespasses of
his Heirs.

"Fatally verified, however, we see, both there and every where else, the Fable
of the Ax, which having been gratified with as much Wood only as would serve it
for a Handle, became immediately the Instrument to hew down the Forest, Root
and Branch, from whence it was taken.

"It is as apparent, on the other Hand, That these Proprietaries have acted an
offensive Part; have set up unwarrantable Claims; have adhered to them by
Instructions yet more unwarrantable; have availed themselves of the Dangers and
Distresses of the Province, and made it their Business (at least their Deputies
have) to increase the Terrors of the Times, purposely to unhinge the present
System; and, by the Dint of Assumptions, Snares, Menaces, Aspersions, Tumults,
and every other unfair Practice whatsoever, would have either bullied or
wheadled the Inhabitants out of the Privileges they were born to: Nay, they
have actually avowed this perfidious Purpose, by avowing and dispersing those
Pamphlets in which the said Privileges are insolently, wickedly, and foolishly
pronounced repugnant to Government, the Sources of Confusion; and such as,
having answered the great End of causing an expeditious Settlement, for which
alone they were granted, might be resumed at Pleasure, as incompatible with the
Dictatorial Power they now challenge and would fain exercise.

"And This being the Truth, the plain Truth, and Nothing but the Truth, there
is no need to direct the Censures of the Public; which, on proper Information,
are always sure to fall in the right Place.

"The Parties before them are the Two Proprietaries of a Province, and the
Province itself. -- And Who or What are these Proprietaries? In the Province
unsizeable Subjects and unsufficient Lords. -- At Home, Gentlemen, it is true,
but Gentlemen so very private, that in the Herd of Gentry they are hardly to be
found: -- Not in Court; not in Office; not in Parliament.

"And which is of most Consequence to the Community; Whether their private
Estate shall be taxed, or the Province shall be saved?

"Whether these Two private Gentlemen, in Virtue of their absolute
Proprietaryship, shall convert so many Fellow Subjects, born as free as
themselves, into Vassals? Or, Whether so noble and useful a Province shall for
ever remain an Asylum for all that wish to remain as free as the Inhabitants of
it have, hitherto, made a Shift to preserve themselves?

Sub Judice Lis est.

"What Part the Offices here at Home have taken in this Controversy, it will be
Time enough to specify when it is over: And Appeals, respectively made, argue a
Presumption, That Right will be done.

To the said Review is added an APPENDIX containing sundry original Papers,
relative to the several Points of Controversy between the Governors and
Assemblies of Pensylvania.


