Ruth's RESOLUTION: A DISCOURSE, Delivered By the late Reverend JONATHAN
EDWARDS, Of Northampton.

HARTFORD: Reprinted by THOMAS GREEN, at the Heart and Crown, opposite the
Courthouse.

Ruth's Resolution.
RUTH I. 16. And Ruth said, entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee; for whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest,
I will lodge; thy People shall be my People and thy God my God.


THE Things that we have the History of in this Book of Ruth, seem to be
inserted into the cannon of the Scripture especially on two Accounts.

1. Because Christ was of Ruth's Posterity. The Holy Ghost thought fit to take
particular Notice of that Marriage of Boaz with Ruth, whence sprang the Savior
of the World. -- We may often observe it, that the Holy Spirit that indicted the
Scriptures often takes Notice of little Things, minute Occurrences, that do ^^t
remotely relate to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Because this History seems to be typical of the Calling of the
Gentile Church, and indeed of the Conversion of every Believer. Ruth was not
originally of Israel, but was a Moabitess* and Alien from the Commonwealth of
Israel: But she forsook her own People, and the Idols of the Gentiles, to
worship the God of Israel, and to join herself to that People: Herein she seems
to be a Type of the Gentile Church, and also of every sincere convert. Ruth was
the Mother of Christ; he come of her Posterity: so the Church is Christ's
Mother, as she is represented Rev. 12. at the Beginning. And so also is every
true Christian his Mother. Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the Will of my
Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, Sister and Mother. Christ is
what the Soul of every one of the ^^lect is in Travail with, in the new Birth.
Ruth forsook all her natural Relations, and her own Country, the Land of her
Nativity, and all her former Possessions there, for the sake of the God of
Israel; as every true Christian forsakes all for Christ Psalm 45.10. He^^i^^ O
Daughter, and con^^^er* and incline thin^ Ear; forget also there ^w^ People,
and thy Father's House.

Naomi was ^ow returning act of the Land of Moab, into the Land of Israel, with
her two Daughters in-law, Orpha and Ruth, who well represent to us two Sorts of
Professors of Religion; Orpha that Sort that indeed make a fair Profession, and
seem to set out well, but d^^e but for a while, and then turn back; Ruth that
Sort that are sound and sincere, and therefore are steadfast and persevering in
the Way that they have set out in. Naomi in the preceding Verses represents to
these her Daughters the Difficulties of their leaving their own Country to go
with her. And in this Verse may be observed.

1. The remarkable Cond^ct and Behavior of Ruth on this Occasion; with what
inflexible Resolution ^he cleaves to Naomi and follows her. When Naomi first
arose to return from the Country of Moab into the Land of Israel, Orpha and
Ruth both set out with her; and Naomi exherts them both to return: And they
both of them wept, and seemed as if they could not bear the Thoughts of leaving
her, and appeared as if they were resolved to go with her. Verse 10. And they
sai^ (...) her, surely we will return with that unto the People. Then Naomi
says to them again, Turn again my Daughters, go your Way, etc. And then they
were greatly affected again, and Orpha returned and went back. Now Ruth's
Steadfastness in her Purpose had a greater Trial, but yet is not overcome* She
cla^^ unto her, Ver. 14. Then Naomi speaks to her again. Ver. 15. Behold thy
Sister-in-law is g^^e back (...) her People, and unto her Gods: return thou
after thy Sister-in law. And then she shows her immovable Resolution in the
Text and following Verse.

2. I would particularly observe that wherein the Virtuousness of this her
Resolution consists, viz. That it was for the Sake of the God of Israel, and
that she might be one of his People that she was thus resolved to cleave to
Naomi. Thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God. It was for God's Sake
that she did thus; and therefore her so doing is afterward spoken of as a
Virtuous Behavior in her. Chap. 2.11 12. And S^^^ answered and said unto her,
it has sa^^ been showed me* all that th^^ ^^st done unto thy Mother-in law,
since the Death of thy Hu^band, and how (...) have ^eft thy Father and thy
Mother, and the Lord of ^^y Nativity, and art came unto a People which thou
know was heretofore. The Lord recompense thy Work, and a full Reward be
given th^^ of the Lord God of Israel, under whose Wings thou art came to trust.
She left her Father and Mother, and the Land of her Nativity, to come and trust
under the Shadow of God's Wings; and she had indeed a full Reward given her, as
Boaz wished; for besides immediate spiritual Blessings to her own Soul* and
eternal Rewards in another World, she was rewarded with plentiful and
prosperous outward Circumstances, in the Family of Boaz: and God raised up
David and Solomon of her Seed, and established the Crown of Israel (the People
that she chose before her own People) in her Posterity, and (which is much
more) of her Seed he raised up Jesus Christ, in whom all the Families of the
Earth are blessed.

From the Words thus opened, I observe this for the Subject of my present
Discourse.

When those that we have formerly been conversant with, are turning to God and
joining themselves to his People* it ought to be our f^r^ Resolution that we
will not leave them: but that their People shall be our People* and their God
our God.

It is sometimes so* that of those that have been conversant one with another
that have dwelt together as Neighbors, and have been often together as
Companions, or have been united in near Relation, and have been together in
Darkness, Bondage and ^tilery, in the Service of Satan some are enlightened and
have their Minds changed, are made to see the great End of Sin, and have their
Hearts turned to God, and are influenced by the Holy Spirit of God to leave
their Company that are on Satan^s Side, to go it join themselves with that
blessed Company that are with ^^t^s (...): they are made wil^^^g^ of ^^ake the
Tents of Wickedness, to dwelt in the Land of Up^^g^tness with the People of God.

And sometimes this proves a ^in^ Parting or ^eparation between them and t^^se
that they have been formerly conversant with Though it may be o^ p^^ting in
outward Respects, they may still dwell together and may converse one with
another; yet in other Respects it (...) them at a great distance one from
another: One as a (...) G^d, and the Other the Ene^y of God: One is in a
miserable and the Other in a happy Conditi^^; One is a Citizen of the heavenly
Zion* the Other i^ under Condem^^to^ to Hell They are no longer together in
those Respects wherein they used to be together: They used to be of one Mind to
serve Sin* and do Satan's Work: now they are of contrary Minds: They used to be
together in Wor^^liness, and (...) Vanity, no^ they are o^ exce^ting different
Dispositions. -- They are separated as they are in different Kingdoms: the
(...) remains in the Kingdom of Darkness* the Other is translated into the
Kingdom of God's dear Son: And sometimes they are finally separated in these
Respects: While One dwells in the Land of Israel, and in the House of God; the
Other, like Orpha lives and dies in the Land of Moab.

Now it is lamentable when it is thus: It Is awful being parted so: It Is doleful,
when those that have formerly been together in Sin, some turn to God and join
themselves with his People, that it should prove a parting between them and
their former Companions and Acquaintance. -- It should be our firm and
inflexible Resolution in such a Case, that it shall be no parting, but that we
will follow them, that their People shall be our People, and their God our God;
and that for the following Reasons.

I Because their God is a glorious God. There is none like him, who is infinite
in Glory and Excellency* He is the most high God glorious in Holiness fearful
in Praises* doing Wonders. His Name is excellent in (...) the Earth* and his
Glory is above the Earth and the Heavens: Among the Gods there is more like
unto him; there is none in Heaven that can (...) compared to him, (...) are
there any among the Sons of the Mighty to be liken'd unto him. -- Their God is
the Fountain of all Good, and an inexhaust^^le Foantain; he i^ (...) al^ (...)
a God that is able to protect and defend them and to all Things for them: He is
the King of Glory the ^^rd strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle: A
strong (...) and (...) There is ^o^e like the (...) of (...) Heaven in their
Help, and in his Excellency ^n the ^^y: The (...) God is their Refuge* and
uncleene (...) are (...): He is a God that has all Things i^ his Hands (...)
he ple^^es: He ^^^rth* and ^^keth (...) Gr^ve* and broketh up; (...): The
Pillars of the Earth are the (...) Their God is an infinitely ho^y God: There
is (...) and ^e is (...) good and merciful (...) Gods, are true ^^ings (...)
that (...) the (...) Souls: ^^t this is a God the deligate^ (...) is infinite
and endures forever. He is (...) ^^^^tain and Ocean of it.

Such (...) ^od is (...) Such is the Excellency of Jacob! Such is the God of
(...) for^ake^ their Sins and are (...)! They ^^^e made a (...) who have chosen
this God for their God They have made a happy Exchange indeed that have
ex^^^^ged Sin and the (...) such a God! They have an excellent and (...), who
is the only begotten Son of God; the Brightness of his Father's Glory; One in
whom God from Eternity had infinite Delight: A Savior of infinite Love; One
that has shed his own Blood, and made his Soul an Offering for their Sins; and
One that is able to save them to the uttermost.

II. Their People are an excellent and happy People. God has re^e^^ed them, and
in lamped his own Image upon them and made them Partakers of his Holiness. They
are more excellent than their Neighbors. Pr^v. 12 26. Yea, they are the
excellent of the Earth, Psalm 10.3 They are lovely in the Sight of the Angels;
and they have their Son^s adorned with those Graces, that in the Sight of God
himself are of great Price.

The People of God are the most excellent and happy Society in the World. That
God whom they have chosen for their God, is their Father; he has pardoned all
their Sins, and they are at Peace with; and he has admitted them to all the
Privileges of his Children. As they have devoted themselves to God, so God has
given himself to them: He is become their Salvation and their Portion: His
Power and Mercy, and all his Attributes are theirs. They are in a safe State*
free from all Possibility of perishing: Satan has no Power to destroy them. God
carries them* on Eagle's Wings, far above Satan^s Reach, and above the Reach of
all the Enemies of their Souls. God is with them in this World; they have his
gracious Presence; God is for them, who then can be against them? As the
Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so JEHOVAH is round about them. God is
their Shield, and their exceeding great Reward; and their Fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: and they have the divine Promise and
Oath, that in the World to come they shall dwell forever in the glorious
Presence of God.

I^ may well be sufficient to induce us to resolve to cleave to those that
forsake their Sins and Idols, to join themselves with this People, that God is
with them. Zech 8.23. Thus says the Lord of H^st^, in th^se Days it shall come
to pass, that ten Men shall take ho^d, out of all Languages of the Nations:
even shall take hold of the (...) of him that is a Jew, saying. We will go with
you: for we have heard that God is with you. So should Persons as it were take
hold of the Skirt of their Neighbors and Companions that have turned to God,
and resolve that they will go with them* because God is with them.

III Happiness is no where else to be had, but in their God, and with their
People. There are that are called God's many, and Lords many. Some make Gods of
their Pleasures; some choose Mammon for their God; some make Gods of their own
supposed Excellencies, or the outward Advantages they have above their
Neighbors; some choose one thing for their God, and others another: But Men
can be happy in no other God but the God of Israel. He is the only Fountain of
Happiness. Other Gods cannot help in Calamity; nor can any of them afford what
the poor empty Soul stands in Need of. Let Men adore those other Gods never so
much, and call upon them never so earnestly, and serve them never so
diligently, they will nevertheless remain poor, wretched, unsatisfied, undone
Creatures. All other People are miserable, but that People whose God is the
Lord. -- The World is divided into two Societies: There are the People of God,
the little Flock of Jesus Christ, that Company that we read of Rev. 14.4. These
are they which were not defiled with Women; for they are Virgins: These are
they which follow the Lomb whithersoever he goes: These were redeemed from
among Men, being the first Fruits unto God and to the Lamb. And there are those
that belong to the Kingdom of Darkness; that are without Christ, being Aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of Promise,
having no Hope, and without God in the World. All that are of this latter
Company, are wretched and undone; they are the Enemies of God, and under his
Wrath and Condemnation: They are the Devil's Slaves, that serve him blindfold,
and are befooled and ensnared by him, and hurried along in the broad Way to
eternal Perdition.

IV. When those that we have formerly been conversant with, are turning to God,
and to his People, their Example ought to influence us. Their Example should be
looked upon as the Call of God to us, to do as they have done. God, when he
changes the Heart of One, calls upon Another; especially does he loudly call on
those that have been their Friends and Acquaintance. -- We have been influenced
by their Examples in Evil, and shall we cease to follow them when they make the
wisest Choice that ever they made, and do the best Thing that ever he did? If
we have been Companions with them in Worldliness, in Vanity, in unproffitable
and sinful Conversation, it will be an hard Case, if there must be a parting
now, because we be not willing to be Companions with them in Holiness, and true
Happiness. Men are greatly influenced by seeing one another's Prosperity in
other Things. If those that they have been much conversant with, grow rich, and
obtain any great earthly Advantages, it awakens their Ambition and eager Desire
after the like Prosperity: How much more should they be influenced, and stirred
up to follow them, and be like them, when they obtain that spiritual and
eternal Happiness that is infinitely more worth than all the Prosperity and
Glory of this World.

V. Our Resolutions to cleave to and follow those that are turning to God, and
joining themselves to his People, ought to be fixed and strong, because of the
great Difficulty of it. If we will cleave to them, and have their God for our
God, and their People for our People we must mortify and deny all our Lasts,
and cross every evil Appetite and Inclination, and forever part with all Sin.
But our Lusts are many and violent. Sin is naturally exceeding dear to us; to
part with it is compared to plucking out our right Eyes. Men may refrain from
wonted Ways of Sin for a little While, and may deny their Lusts in a partial
Degree, with less Difficulty; but it is heart rending Work finally to part with
all Sin, and give our dearest Lusts a Bill of Divorce, utterly to send them
away. But this we must do if we would follow those that are truly turning to
God: Yea, we must not only forsake Sin, but must, in a Sense, forsake all the
World, Luke 14.33 Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my Disciple. That is, he must forsake all in his Heart* and must
come to a thorough Disposition and Readiness, actually to quit all for God, and
the glorious spiritual Privileges of his People, whenever the Case may require
it; and that without any Prospect of any Thing of the like Nature, or any
worldly Thing whatesover to make Amends for it; and all to go into a strange
Country, a Land that has hitherto been unseen; like Abraham, who being called
of God, went out of his own Country, and from his Kindred, and from his
Father's House, for a Land that God would show him, not knowing whither he went.

Thus it was a hard Thing for Ruth to forsake her native Country, and her
Father and Mother, her Kindred and Acquaintance, and all the pleasant Things
she had in the Land of Moab, to dwell in the Land of Israel, where she had
never been. -- Naomi told her of the Difficulties once and again. They were too
hard for her Sister Orpha; the Consideration of them turned her back after she
was set out. Her Resolution was not firm enough to overcome them. But so firmly
resolved was Ruth that she break through all; she was steadfast in it, that let
the Difficulty be what it would, she would not leave her Mother-in law. So
Persons had need to be very firm in their Resolution to conquer the
Difficulties that are in the Way of cleaving to them that are indeed turning
from Sin to God.

VI. Our cleaving to them, and having their God for our God, and their People
for our People depends on our Resolution and Choice: and that in two Respects

1 The Firmness of Resolution in using Means in order to it, is the the Way to
have Means effectual There are Means appointed in order to our becoming some of
the true Israel, and ha^^n, ^hei^ God for our God; and the thorough Use of
these Means is the Way to have Success; but not a slack or flighty Use of them.
-- And that we may be thorough, there is need of Strength of Resolution, a firm
and inflexible Disposition and ^ent of Mind to be universal in the Use of
Means, and to do what we do with our Might, and to persevere in it M^tth 11 12
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence and the^^: ^^nt take it b^ Force.

2 A choosing of their God, and their people with a full Determination, and
with the whole Soul is the Condition of an Union with them. God gives every Man
his Choice in this Matter; as Orpha and Ruth had their Choice, whether they
would go with Naomi into the Land of Israel, or stay in the Land of Moab. A
natural Man may choose Deliverence from Hell: but no Man does ever heartily
choose God and Christ and the spiritual Benefits that Christ h^s purchased, and
the Happiness of God's People till he is converted. On the Contrary* he is
averse to them; he has no Relish of them; and is wholly ignorant of the
inestimable Worth and Value of them.

Many carnal Men do seem to choose these Things* but do it not really; as Orpha
seemed at first to choose to forsake Moab to go into the Land of Israel: But
when Naomi came to set before her the Difficulty of it, she went back; and
thereby showed that she was not fully determined in her Choice, and that her
whole Soul was not in it as Ruth's was.

APPLICATION.
The USE that I shall make of what has been said, is to move Sinners to this
Resolution, with Respect to those amongst us that have lately turned to God,
and joined themselves to the Flock of Christ. It is ^o^ through the abundant
Mercy and Grace of God to us in this Place, that it may be said of many of you,
that are in a Christless Condition, that you have lately been left by those
that were formerly with you in such a State. There are those that you have
formerly been conversant with, that have lately forsaken a Life of Sin, and the
Service of Satan, and have turned to God and fled to Christ, and joined
themselves to that blessed Company that are with him. They formerly were with
you in Sin and in Misery, but now they are with you no more, in that State or
Manner of Life: They are changed, and have fled from the Wrath to come: They
have chosen a life of Holiness here, and the Enjoyment of God hereafter. They
were formerly your Associates in Bondage and were with you in Satan's Business;
but now you have their Company no longer in these Things Many of you have seen
those that you live with under the same Roof, turning from being any longer
with you in Sin, to be with the People of Jesus Christ. Some of you that are
Husbands, have had your Wives; and some of you that are Wives have had your
Husbands; some of you that are Children, have had your Parents; and Parents
have had your Children; many of you have had your Brothers and Sisters; and
many your near Neighbors, and Acquaintance, and special Friends; many of you
that are young have had your Companions: I say* many of you have had those that
you have been thus concerned with, leaving you, forsaking that doleful Life,
and wretched State that you still continue in* God of his good Pleasure, and
wonderful Grace, has lately caused it to be so in this Place, that Multitudes
have been forsaking their old Abodes, in the Land of Moab, and under the Gods
of Moab, and going into the Land of Israel, to put their Trust under the Wings
of the Lord God of Israel. Though you and they have been nearly related, and have
dwelt together, or have been often together, and intimately acquainted one with
another, they have been taken, and you hitherto left! O let it not be the
Foundation of a final parting! But earnestly follow them; be firm in your
Resolution in this Matter. Don't do as Orpha did, who though at first she made as
though she would follow Naomi, yet when she had the Difficulty of it set before
her, went back: But say as Ruth, I will not leave thee, but where thou go I
will go: Thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God. Say as she said,
and do as she did. Consider the Excellency of their God, and their Savior, and
the Happiness of their People, the blessed State that they are in, and* the
doleful State that you are in.

You that are old Sinners, that have lived long in the Service of Satan, have
lately seen some that were with you, that have traveled with you in the Paths
of Sin, these many Years, that with you enjoyed great Means and Advantages,
that have had Calls and Warnings with you, and with you passed through
remarkable Times of the pouring out of God's Spirit in this Place, and have
hardened their Hearts, and stood it out with you, and with you have grown old
in Sin; I say, ^ou have seen some of them turning to God, i e* you have seen
those Evidences of it in them whence you may rationally judge that it is so. O!
let it not be a final parting! You have been thus long together in Sin, and
under condemnation; let it be your firm Resolution now if possible you will be
with them still, now they are in an holy and happy State, and that you will go
with them into the holy and pleasant Land.

You that tell of your having been seeking Salvation for many Years though
without Doubt, in a poor low Way, in comparison of what you ought to have done:
You have seen some that have been with you in that Respect, that were old
Sinners, and old Seekers as you are, obtaining Mercy. God has lately roused
them from their Dullness, and caused them to alter their Hand, put them on more
thorough Endeavors; and they have now after so long a Time, heard God's Voice,
and have fled for Refuge to the Rock of Ages. Let this awaken Earnestness and
Resolution in you. Resolve that you will not leave them.

You that are in Youth, how many have you seen of your Age and Standing, that
have of late hopefully chosen God for their God, and Christ for their Savior!
You have followed them in Sin, and perhaps followed them into vain Company; and
will you not now follow them to Christ?

And you that are Children, there have lately been some of your Sort that have
repented of their Sins, and have loved the Lord Jesus Christ, and trusted in
him, and are become God's Children, as we have Reason to hope: Let it stir you
up to resolve to your utmost to seek and cry to God, that you may have the like
Change made in your Hearts, that their People may be your People, and their God
your God.

You that are great Sinners, that have made yourselves distinguishingly guilty,
by the wicked Practices you have lived in, there are some of your Sort that
have lately (as we have Reason to hope) had their Hearts broken for Sin, and
have forsaken it* and have trusted in the Blood of Christ for the Pardon of it,
and have chosen an holy Life, and have betaken themselves to the Ways of
Wisdom: Let it excite and encourage you, resolutely to cleave to them, and
earnestly to follow them. Here let the following Things be considered.

1. That your Soul is as precious as theirs. It is immortal as well as theirs;
and stands in as much Need of Happiness, and can as illy bear eternal Misery.
You was by Nature in the same miserable Condition that they were, and had the
same Wrath of God abiding on you. You must stand before the same Judge, who
will be as strict in Judgment with you as with them; and your own Righteousness
will stand you in no more Stead before him than theirs; and therefore you stand
in as absolute Necessity of a Savior as they. Carnal Confidences can no more
answer your End than theirs; nor can this World or its Enjoyments, serve to
make you happy without God and christ more t^an them (...) ^hen the Bridegroom
comes the foolish Virgins stand in as much Need of Oil as the Wise Mat 25 at
the Beginning

2 Unless you follow them in their turning to God, their Conversio^ will be a
Foundation of an eternal ^eparation between you and them You will be in
different Interests and in exceeding different States as long as you live; they
the Children of God and you the ^hildren of Satan: and you will be parted in
another World; when you come to die there will be a vast Separation between you
Luke 16 26 And besides all this, between us and you there is a great Gulf
fixed so that they that would pass from hence to you cannot* neither can they
pass to us* that would come from thence. And you will be parted at the Day of
Judgment. You will be parted at Christ's first Appearance in the Clouds of
Heaven* While they are caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the ^i^, to
be ever with the Lord* you will remain below con^^^ed to this cursed Ground,
that is kept in Store, reserved unto Fire, against the Day of Judgment and
Perdition of ungodly Men. You will appear separated from them, while you stand
before the great Judgment Seat, they being at the Right Hand, while you are set
at the Left. Matthew 25.32 33. And before him shall be gathered all Nations; and
he shall separate them one from another as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from
the Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on his Right Hand but the Goats on the
^eft And you shall then appear in exceeding different Circumstances: While you
stand with Devils, in the Image and Deformity of Devils and in ineffable Horror
and Am^^ement* they shall appear in Glory, sitting on Thrones, as Assess^rs
with Christ, and as such passing Judgment upon you 1 Cor. 6 2 And what ^i^^me
and Co^^usion will then cover you, when so many of your Contemporaries, your
Equals, your Neighbors, Relations and Companions* shall be honored, and openly
acknowledge^ and confessed by the glorious Judge of the Universe, and Redeemer
of ^aints* and shall be seen by you sitting with him in such Glory and you
shall appear to have neglected your Salvation and not to have improved your
Opportunities, and rejected the Lord Jesus christ the same Person that will
then appear as your great Judge and you shall be the Subjects of such Wrath,
and as it were trodden down in eternal Contempt and Disgrace^ ^an. ^2.2 Some
shall rise to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt. And
what a wide Separation will the Sentence that shall be then p^ss^d and executed
make (...) you and them! When you shall be sent away out of the (...) ^sence of
the Judge* with ^^^ignation and ^bhorrence as (...) and loathsome ^reatures*
and they sh^^l be s^cetly accoste^ (...) and invited into his Glory, as his
dear Friends* and the (...) ^ssed of his Father! when you, with all that ^a^l
Through (...) wicked and accursed Men and Devils, shall descend with (...)
Lamentings, and horrid Shrieks, into that dreadful Gulf (...) Fire and
Brimstone, and shall be swallowed up in that great and everlasting Furnace
while they shall joyfully, and with sweet Songs of Glory and Praise, ascend
with Christ, and all that beauteous and blessed Company of Saints and Angels
into eternal Felicity, in the glorious Presence of God, and the sweet Embraces
of his Love; and you and they shall spend Eternity in such a Separation, and
immensely different Circumstances! And that however you have been intimately
acquainted and nearly related, close-un^^ed and mutually conversant here in
this World; and how much soever you have taken Delight in each other's Company!
Shall it be so after you have been together a great While, each of you in
undoing yourselves, enh^^sing your Guilt, and heaping up ^rath, that their so
wisely changing their Minds, and their Course, and choosing such Happiness for
themselves, should now at length be the beginning of such an exceeding and
everlasting Separation between you and them? How awful will it be to be parted
so!

3 Consider the great Encouragement that God gives you, earnestly to strive for
the same blessing that Others have obtained. There is great Encouragement in
the Word of God to Sinners, to seek Salvation; in the Revelation that we have
of the abundant Provision made for the Salvation even of the ch^^f of Sinners,
and in the Appointment of so many ^leans to be used with and by Sinners, in
order to their Salvation; and by the Blessing which God in his Word connects
with the Means of his Appointment. There is hence great Encouragements for a^^*
^t all ^imes, that will be thorough in using of these (...). But now God gives
extraordin^^y Encouragement in his Providence by pouring out his Spirit so
remarkably unto g^t us, and bringing savingly Home to himself* all Sorts, young
and old, rich and poor, wise and unwise* sober and vicious, of self righteous
Seekers, and profligate Livers; -- no Sort are exempt There is now at this Day,
amongst us, the loudest Ca^l, and the greatest Encouragement, and the widest
Door opened to Sinners, to escape out of a State of Sin and Condemnation, that
perhaps God ^ver granted in New-^^^^^^d. Who is there that has an immortal
Soul, that is so (...) as not to improve such an Opportunity, and that will not
be^ ^^mself with all his Might now? How unreasonable is Negligence* and how
unseasonable is Discouragement at such a Day as this! Will you be so stupid as
to neglect your Soul now? Will a^^ Mortal amongst us, be so unreasonable, as to
lagg ^ehind, or (...) back in Discouragement, when God opens such a Door! Let
every single Person be thoroughly awake! Let every one encourage himself now to
press forward, and fly for his Life!

4. Consider how earnestly desirous they that have obtained are that you should
follow them, and that their People should be your People, and their God your
God. The* desire that you should partake of the great Good that God has given
them, and that unspeakable and eternal Blessedness that he has promised them:
They wish and long for it. If you don't go with them* and are not still of
their Company, it will not be for Want of their Willingness, but your own. That of
Moses to Hobab, is the Language of every true Saint of your Acquaintance to
you. Numb. 10.29 We are jour^^ying unto the Place of which the Lord said I will
give it you: C^^e thou with us, and we will do thee Good; for the Lord has
spoken Good concerning Israel. As Moses, when on his Journey through the
Wilderness* following the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, invited Hobab, that he had
been acquainted with, and nearly allied to, out of the Land of Median, where
Moses had formerly dwelt with him, to go with him and his People to Canaan, to
partake with them in the Good that God had promised them; so do those of your
Friends and Acquaintence, invite you out of a Land of Darkness and Wickedness,
where they have formerly been with you, to go with them to the heavenly Canaan.
The Company of Saints, the true Church of Christ invite you The lovely Bride
calls you to the Marriage Supper. She has Authority to invite Guests to her
own Wedding; and you ought to look on her Invitation and Desire as the Call of
Christ the Bridegroom; for it is the Voice of his Spirit in her, Rev. 22.17 The
Spirit and the Bride say come. Where seems to be a ^eference to what had been
said, Chap 19 7, 8, 9 The Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made
herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine Linen
clean and white; for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints. And he
says unto me, Write; Blessed are they which are called to the Marriage Supper
of the Lamb It Is with Respect to this her Marriage Supper that she, from the
Motion of the Spirit of the Lamb in her, says Come. So that you are invited on
all Hands; all conspire to c^l^ you. God the Father invites you: This is the
King that b^^ made a Marriage for his Son; and he sends forth his Servants the
Ministers of the Gospel, to invite the Guests. And the Son himself invites you:
It Is he that speaks. Rev. 22.17. And let him that hears, say come; and let
him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him come. He tells us who he
is in the foregoing Verse. I Jesus, the Root and Offspring of David, the bright
and m^^ning Star. And God's Ministers invite you, and all the Church invites
you; and there will be Joy in the Presence of the Angels of God, that Hour that
you accept of the Invitation.

5. Consider what a doleful Company that will be that be left after this
extraordinary Time of Mercy is over. We have Reason to think that there will be
a Number left. We read that when Ezekiel's healing Waters increased so
abundently, and the healing Effect of them was so very general; yet there were
certain Places where the Waters came, that never were healed. Eze. 47.9, 10.11.
And it shall come to pass, that every Thing that lives, which moves,
whithersoever the Rivers come, shall live. And there be a very great Maltitude
of Fish, because these Waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed, and
every Thing shall live, whither the River comes. And it shall come to pass,
that the Fishers shall stand upon it, from En-gedi, even unto Eneglaim; they
shall be a Place to spread forth Nets: There Fish shall be according to their
Kinds, as the Fish of the Great Sea, exceeding many. But the miry Places
thereof, and the Marshes thereof, shall not be healed, they shall be given to
Salt. And even in the Apostles Times, when there was such wonderful Success of
the Gospel, yet wherever they came there were some that did not believe. Acts
13.48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the Word
of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal Life believed. And Chap.
28.24 And some believed, and some believed not. So we have no Reason to expect,
but there will be some left amongst us. It Is to be hoped it will be but a small
Company: But what a doleful Company will it be! How darkly and awfully will it
look upon them! -- If you shall be of that Company, how well may your Friends
and Relations lament over you, and bemoan your dark and dangerous
Circumstances! -- If you would not be one of them, make haste, delay not, and
look not behind you. -- Shall all Sorts obtain, shall every one press into the
Kingdom of God, while you stay loitering behind in a doleful, undone Condition?
Shall every one take Heaven, while you remain with no other Portion but this
World? ^ow take up that Resolution, th^^ if it be possible you cleave to them
that have fl^d for Reinge to lay hold of the Hope set before them Count the
cost of a thorough, violent* and perpetual Pursuit of Salvation, and forsake
all, as Ruth forsook her own Country, and all her pleasant Enjoyment in it
Don't do as Orpha did; who set out, and then was discouraged, and went back:
But hold out with Ruth through all Discouragement and Opposition. When you
consider others, that have chosen the better Part, let that Resoluti^^ be ever
firm with you, Where thou g^est I will go; where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy
People shall be my People, and thy God my God.

FINIS.

