DIRECTIONS CONCERNING INOCULATION, Chiefly collected from the late Pieces on
that Subject.

WITH INSTRUCTIONS how to prepare those who are soonest likely to take the
SMALLPOX in the Natural Way.

The Whole being carefully adapted to TOWN and COUNTRY, By a Person properly
Qualified.

First Published, this Year, by FRANKLIN and HALL, of Philadelphia; and now
Reprinted and Sold by B. Mecom, at the New Printing-Office, near the
TownHouse, in BOSTON. 1760.

[ Price Six Coppers.]

PREFACE.
AS Inoculation is a very interesting Affair, and, if prudently managed, may
probably become universal in America, it having been much more used of late
than ever; what follows, it is hoped, will greatly contribute to promote so
useful a Practice. It is chiefly collected from the late Pieces that have
appeared on that Subject; the Authors of which, I am well assured, are of
Character sufficient to give all due Weight to their Performances; and the
other Directions are added by a Person properly qualified, and are particularly
adapted to the Cases and Circumstances of such, who have no Practicioner near
them, and are settled too far back in the Country to be able to get the
properest Medicines when wanted; which Directions, if well followed, will
prepare them so as to have a much greater Chance of having it milder in the
natural Way. Therefore I advise my Readers to keep this little Piece as a
Production of great Value, that may even be the Means, by the Blessing of GOD,
of preserving their Childrens Children.

THE Smallpox, being a Disease so universally infectious, and so often fatal
to Mankind, has, in every Age, not only engaged the Attention of the ablest
Physicians, but induced many of them to favor the World with Dissertations on
it; wherein they have given those Methods of Practice which they found most
successful; and thereby have rendered the Treatment of that Disease, when taken
in the natural Way, perhaps, as certain as ever we may expect it will be,
allowing for Difference of Climate, and other Circumstances, which require the
Judgment of a Physician.

But of all the Improvements, none have been found equal to that of
Inoculation, whereby the Chance in that Disease has been found to be, at the
least, as One to Seventy, and, in some Instances, as One to Two Hundred, and
Two Hundred and Sixty-seven; whereas, in the natural Way, One in Four to Seven
have usually died; and when there has been but One in Eleven, it has been
thought uncommonly favorable, as appears by a Pamphlet published in England by
Doctor Heberden; wherein is stated the different Calculations made in Boston,
and other Places in America, and in the Smallpox and Foundling Hospitals in
London.

Since the Smallpox last appeared among us, within these two or three Years
past, more have been inoculated here, and in the neighboring Provinces, than
is supposed to have been from the first Settlement of them, and with amazing
Success, considering the Malignity of it in the natural Way.

As it was not doubted but some Preparations of Mercury and Antim. were the
principal Medicines used, which was confirmed by the Manner of Operation of
such as were given by those who pretended to the grand Secret, every one used
such Preparations and Combinations thereof, as his own Judment directed; all
concurring in one Thing, to prepare, not only before, but also between the
Inoculation and Eruption; endeavoring thereby to counteract the variolous
Venom in the Beginning of its Operation on the Blood, and thus seasonably
prevent those direful Effects it produces, which often terminate in Death.

What those Medicines are, wherewith Patients may be best prepared, and the
Manner of administering them, are extracted from two late Publications. -- The
first of which directs:

The Night before you inoculate, give a few Grains of Calomel, well levigated
with a like Quantity of diaphoretic Antimony, unwashed; proportioning the
Quantity of Calomel to the Constitution of your Patient; from four Grains to
ten for a grown Person, and from one to three for a Child, to be made up in a
Bolus, or small Pill, with a little Conserve of Roses, or any common Syrup. The
next Morning give a Purge of the Pulvis Cornachini, made with equal Parts of
diaphoretic Antimony, Scammony, and Cream of Tartar. Repeat the Bolus or Pill
three Times, that is, once every other Night after Inoculation, and on the
fifth Day give a Dose of Boerhaave's Golden Sulphur of Antimony; about four
Grains of it for a grown Person, with two or three Grains of Calomel, made into
a small Pill, will operate both as a Vomit and Purge at the same Time.

In the intermediate Days, give two or three Papers of the following Powders,
viz. Diaphoretic Antimony, ten Grains; Sal Prunel, six Grains; and Calomel, one
Grain, mixed together, for a grown Person; and about one fourth Part of a Paper
for a Child. These Powders are to be continued until the Variolous, or
Smallpox Fever is over.

It appears, by the nearest Calculation, that, under this Treatment, there has
not died more than one Person in 700, and in general, the Distemper is very
light, not above one in an Hundred has it full; when, in the common Way of
Infection, one dies out of five.

In the second of these Publications, the Method is thus:

Take of Calomel, finely levigated, two Parts; Sulphur Aurat. Antimonii, one
Part; and with a strong Solution of Gum Arabic, or Tragacanth, make into a Mass
of Pills; which, for Distinction Sake, I will call the Mercurial or Antimonial
Pill.

Take of Stib. Nitrat. or unwashed diaphoretic Antimony, Cremor Tartar, Sal
Polychrest, and Flor. Sulphur, of each equal Parts; mix and make a refrigerant
Powder, of which 30 or 40 Grains is a Dose for an Adult.

Take the Powder of Jalap; Scammony, Stib. Nitrat. and Cremor Tartar, of each
equal Parts, mix and make a purging Powder.

The Day before Inoculation, give two Scruples of the purging Powder, with five
Grains of Mercurius Dulcis, to Adults, and to others in Proportion to their
Age. The Night after Inoculation, give a Dose of the Mercurial Pill (which is
ten Grains, or twelve, if robust, to an Adult, diminishing according to the
Age, so as to give to one from nine to twelve Months two Grains) and repeat it
three Nights successively. The Morning after the third Pill, give a second
Purge; after which repeat the Pills 2 or 3 Nights and then the Purge again. The
Pill frequently purges and vomits the first Time of taking it. Every Morning,
including the Day of Inoculation, give a Dose of the refrigerant Powder (except
the Day the Purges are administered) continuing them till the Eruption.

But finding that the Pill was full strong, even for those of six Months, I
gave the following Powder, viz. of testaceous Powder, and Nitrum Stibiatum,
each Half a Dram; of Cinnabar of Antimony and Calomel, each ten Grains, mix
and rub them into a fine Powder, of which give eight Grains to a Child of six
Months, and four or five Grains to one of six Weeks or two Months old: And to
promote a little Puking, I add to their Purges, which should be Rhubarb and
Calomel, a small Quantity of Sulphur Aurat. Ant. e. g. Half a Grain for one of
six Months old.

Sometimes a universal Rash appears with the Fever, and alarms those concerned
very much; but it rather portends Good than Ill, and need not be regarded,
unless attended with other known bad Symptoms, and then Venesection may be
proper, even to Infants. I have generally used the Powder for Children in the
Form abovesaid, but have occasionally varied the Proportions a little. I have
to some used only the Pills and Purges, with equal Success. I am also fully
satisfied, that it is a Matter of Indifference, whether the Incision in the
Skin, and the infectious Lint placed therein, be large or small.

The Authors of both these Methods agree in Bleeding, once or twice, those that
are of a full Habit of Body, within the first eight Days, viz. on or about the
Day of Inoculation, and the Day you expect them to be seized with the Fever,
which is generally the eighth or ninth; and also in ordering to abstain
entirely from animal Food, and all Kinds of Oil or greasy Substances, Salt,
Spice, or Spirituous Liquors, great Fatigue and violent Exercise, together with
all intense Thinking, and Application to perplexing Business. But Vegetables
and Acids they may use plentifully. They should not be closely confined, except
when the Air is cold or moist; and when the variolous Fever comes on, they
should be kept rather cool than hot. Let their Drinks be cooling, acescent and
laxative, especially Tartar Whey.

If their Mouths and Throats should be sore, give them a Teaspoonful of Flour
of Brimstone, instead of the refrigerant Powder, for two or three Times.

As soon as they begin to complain, they should bathe their Feet in warm Water,
for ten or twelve Minutes, Morning and Evening (till the Eruption is complete)
and if the Head is much affected, bleed them in the Arm or Foot, and apply
emollient Poultices of Bread and Milk, and a little Oil or Hog's Lard, to the
Feet.

If they should be costive during the eruptive Fever, especially if very
delirious, or have Fits, give an opening Clyster once or twice a Day, till
those Symptoms are removed.

The following general Rules for Inoculation, necessary to be known, are
chiefly taken from Dr. Heberden.

All Seasons of the Year are equally proper. There is certainly this Advantage
attending warm Weather, that it allows us to keep the Doors or Windows of the
Room open, whence arises such a constant Renovation and Purity of the Air, as
abundantly makes Amends for all the Inconveniences arising from Heat. On the
other Hand, the Disadvantages attending Winter, may be sufficiently remedied by
Fires, and these too will help to make the Air of the Room constantly fresh;
but avoid keeping so great Fires as to heat the Room very much.

Children are very successfully inoculated at a Month or six Weeks old; and
there is a particular Advantage in their undergoing it while they are at the
Breast, as they make no Difficulty of Sucking; and the Milk is the best Food
and Physic which they can take. From the Time of their being weaned to the
tenth Year, every Year seems equally proper.

After the first ten Years, every Year is, perhaps, better than the following
one; though Inoculation may always be practiced with great Advantages over the
other Ways of receiving the Smallpox, at all Ages.

Breeding Women should, on no Consideration, be inoculated, unless we can
suppose an absolute Certainty of their catching it in the common Way. It is
thought of no great Consequence, whether the Person from whom the Matter is
taken, has few or many, a good or bad Sort; though Prudence would direct to
take it from as good a Sort as possible. The proper Time for taking the Matter
is just before it begins to dry; opening the Pustule with a Lancet or Needle,
and drawing a Thread or Piece of Lint along one, or more, if necessary, till it
is well wetted with the Matter that ouzes out, and then put into a little Box
to dry; it will be stiff, if properly soaked in the Matter. About half an Inch
of such Thread will be sufficient for the Operation, which is performed by
making a slight Incision through the Skin, till Blood appears, on the Outside
of the Arm, about the Middle between the Elbow and Shoulder, long enough to put
the Thread in, and cover it with a Bit of any stiking Plaster, over which a
small Compress and Roller is proper to keep it on. After a Day or two the
Thread may be removed, and the Plaster continued or not, just as you please.
But when it begins to inflame, which it does as the Fever comes on, then apply
a fresh Plaster daily, of Diapalma, or such like; and if it swells and grows
very hard and red, wash it with warm Milk and Water, and apply a Poultice of
Bread and Milk twice or thrice a Day, till the Pock is turned a few Days, and
then use the Plaster again till it is well; if it keeps an open Sore a Week or
two, it is the better.

During the eruptive Fever they may lie in Bed (if they choose it) but should
not be covered hot; or it may be best only to lie on the Bed, and lightly
clothed If a Vomiting, which is usual at this Time, should be excessive, a few
Grains of Ipecacuana given as a Puke, will check it the most effectually.
, drinking plentifully of Barley Water, Sage and Balm Tea, or Toast and Water,
with Tamarinds; and, when filling, let them use Milk and Water, Panada, Sagoe,
Chocolate, Gruel, Puddings, Greens and Roots. If they are a little costive
while the Pock is filling, it is no great Matter, and may generally be
prevented by drinking warm Small Beer, eating a roasted Apple, or a few
Tamarinds now and then; but if very costive, at the Turn of the Pock, an
opening Clyster of Water Gruel or Milk, with a Spoonful or two of Melasses and
Oil in it, will be proper every Day or two. As soon as the Pox are dry they
should be purged three or four Times, at two or three Days Distance, with the
same Purges as at first: And if a Cough or sore Eyes succeeds, bleeding will be
proper.

Upon the Whole, if the Chance were only as two to one in Favor of the
Practice among Children, would it not be sufficient to induce a tender Parent
to lay hold of the Advantage? But when it is so much greater, as it appears to
be by these Accounts (in some even as Thirty to One) surely Parents will no
longer refuse to accept and thankfully use a Discovery God in his Mercy has
been pleased to bless Mankind with; whereby some Check may now be put to the
Ravages that cruel Disease has been accustomed to make, and the human Species
be again suffered to increase as it did before the Smallpox made its
Appearance.

The above Account of Inoculation, Manner of performing the Operation, and
Method of Treatment, while it tends greatly to encourage it, and assist those
who are inclined, is mostly adapted to those who are somewhat versant in
Practice, or are near enough to some public Places where they can be supplied
with the necessary Medicines, and timely Assistance, in Case of Danger, should
they have Resolution sufficient to perform it themselves. -- But there are many
Parts of this Country where they neither have any Practicioner near them, nor
can be supplied with Medicines, but those of the most ordinary and common Sort;
by which Means they are not likely to get their Families inoculated by others,
or to do it themselves; either for Want of Resolution to perform it, or
administer the Medicines, if to be got; or perhaps from Prejudice and real
Scruples of Conscience. To such, it is thought, some familiar Method proposed
might be of more Service than a long Dissertation on Inoculation.

Let it therefore be observed first, that those who are likely soon to be
seized with the Small Pox in the natural Way, from its being in the
Neighborhood, or in the same House, should follow, as near as they can, the
Directions before given, as to their Diet, Drinks, Air, Clothing and Exercise,
both before, and at the coming on of the Fever, by which their Humors will be
kept in so temperate a State, as greatly tends to prevent the bad Symptoms, and
dangerous Issue of the Disease. And then, as to Medicines, it will be proper to
use, before they are taken ill (if they have timely Notice to prepare for it)
all, or as many of those before mentioned for inoculated Persons, as they can
obtain, or have Resolution to give, only with this Difference, that after every
three Pills and a Purge, they may intermit three or four Days, and then begin
again, and so go on till they are seized, or the Disease gone out of the
Neighborhood. But if they cannot get these Medicines, or dare not use them,
then let them take an Ounce of AEthiops Mineral (which may be bought cheap at
any Apothecary's) and dividing it into 8 Parts, give to a grown Person one
eighth every Night, going to Bed, in Melasses, Honey, or Sugar and Water, and
next Morning a Teaspoonful of Flour of Brimstone, or Cremor Tartar, or both
mixed, if to be had. But if only one of those three Things is to be got, then
take the Quantity of that one aforesaid, Morning and Evening; and every five or
six Days take any Purge Those that live by the Sea, perhaps a Pint of Sea Water
would be as good a Purge as any.
, if it works upwards and downwards the better. But if neither of these can be
got, which probably may be the Case, far back in the Country, then it is
advised (what is frequently kept in the Country for the Use of the Cattle) to
take some common crude Antimony, in as fine Powder as possible Unless extremely
fine, will have no Effect.
, and common Brimstone in Rolls or Lumps, rubbed also into fine Powder, of each
of these separate, or of both mixed, let a grown Person take a Teaspoonful
every Morning and Evening, and a Purge once a Week. Thus much for Preparation
before the Disease. But when taken ill, it is proper, as soon as you can, to
bleed all who are above the Age of Children, or have not been much weakened by
some other Disease; and to give for Drink such Things as have been already
mentioned, or as many of them as can be got, especially Tartar Whey, which is
made by putting two Teaspoonfuls of Cremor Tartar, powdered, into a Pint of
boiling Milk, and then adding as much boiling Water, and when strained, drink
frequently of it; or, if this cannot be had, then give, instead of it, Rennet
Whey, with half Water, or, what is thought better still, Whey made by turning
Milk with Vinegar, and then diluting it with Water, sufficient to make it
palatable to the sick Person, keeping the Body open, in the first Fever, with
Clysters, and nourishing it while the Pock fills, with Milk, Panada, Gruel, and
such like; not forgetting to purge when the Pock is dried, and bleed also, if a
Cough or sore Eyes remain.

FINIS.

