A DECLARATION of what GOD has done for our Souls.
By some Baptist People, called Quakers, in New London County, in Connecticut
Colony. March 25, 1760:
To any of the Flock of Christ, that may be scattered among the Churches of
New England, that desire to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and not by the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men.
WE cannot find one Word in the Bible, for keeping the first Day of the Week as
a Sabbath; and, therefore we have continued in earnest Prayer to God; begging
of him, to direct us in his Ways, and especially concerning this pretended
Sabbath; and he has taught us by his Spirit, and the Scriptures, to labor on
it publicly as on other Days, and not fear what Man can do; according to the
Scriptures: And when we have so labored publicly on said pretended Sabbath,
to please God, he has showed us plainly by his Spirit, that we pleased him in
so doing; and also, opened our Understanding, to understand the Scriptures. And
when the Authority have been suffered to punish us, God has been with us, and
comforted us by his Holy Spirit; and showed us plainly, that he that is in us,
is greater than he that is in our Persecutors; as in John iv. 4. Especially in
the Whippings, Imprisonments, and Spoilings of Goods, which we have endured
within two Years. And this we have written, to encourage all them that God has
enlightened, to see that the first Day of the Week is not his Sabbath; that
they may be encouraged to take up their Cross, in this and all other Things;
that he does enlighten them by his Spirit, and the Scriptures; and not fear
them which kill the Body, and after that have no more that they can do: But
fear him that is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell: According to Mat.
x, 28, and Luke xii, 4. See also, Mat. xvi, 24, etc. Then said Jesus unto his
Disciples, if any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me: For whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it, and
whosoever will lose his Life for my Sake, shall find it: For what is a Man
profited if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul. Also, Mat. x,
36, etc. A Man's Foes shall be those of his own Household. He that loves Father
or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son or Daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me: He that finds his Life, shall lose it; and
he that loses his Life for my Sake, shall find it. Also Luke xiv, 26, If any
Man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and
Brethren and Sisters; yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple.
Thus by Christ's Testimony, we may see, that if any Man will be held back from
following Christ by these worldly Things, though it be his own Life, he cannot be
Christ's Disciple. For though by Grace we are saved, through Faith, and that not
of ourselves, it is the Gift of God; yet by the Scriptures above quoted, and
many more, if we do not take up our Cross, we shall not be worthy of this Gift.
Also, 2 Timothy ii. 11, 12. For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him: If we deny him, he also will
deny us. And whereas Christ says, he that takes not his Cross, and follows
after me, is not worthy of me. By which we may also understand, that all them
which do take up their Cross, and follow after him, are worthy of him. And we
can boldly testify, that in our taking up this Cross, and working publicly on
the first Day of the Week, to please God, he does own us to be worthy of his
Son Jesus Christ: For he has witnessed it by his Holy Spirit in our Hearts: By
which we also know, that the Scripture is true; and that the Practice of
keeping this pretended Sabbath, in this Colony, is Superstition, Idolatry, and
Abomination in the Sight of God. Also, every Text of Scripture, that the
Ministers have ever brought, to convince us that the first Day of the Week is a
Sabbath, has another Meaning, and not as they pretend: For by perusing those
Scriptures, it appears plainly, that Christ, and the holy Men that spoke them
Scriptures, did not mean to teach People to keep the first Day of the Week;
neither was it in their Mind to teach any such Thing; So that there is not one
Word in all the Bible, according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, for
this pretended Sabbath; and the Scripture says, Where no Law is, there is no
Transgression, Romans iv, 15, and Sin is not imputed when there is no Law, Romans
v. 13; and the Confession of Faith of this Colony, says, in page 7, Believe in
all Divine Worship: It is not enough, that this or that Act of Worship is not
forbidden in the Word of God; if it be not commanded, and you perform it, you
may fear you will be found guilty. Thus by their own Confession of Faith, they
may fear they will be found guilty for keeping their pretended Sabbath
themselves; then how much more guilty will they be found, for persecuting
others, to force them to keep it, by spoiling their Goods, and imprisoning and
torturing their Bodies! even them that God has enlightened to see that this
Sabbath is of Men, and that they ought not to conform to it; because God
requires them to worship him in Spirit and in Truth: The Scripture says, It is
vain to worship God by the Commandments of Men.

WE desire People to search the Scriptures, and see whether these Things are
so, or no: And for Encouragement, the first Person that shows us the Chapter
and Verse in the Bible, that says one Word about keeping the first Day of the
Week for a Sabbath, shall have Ten Pounds Lawful Money Reward for his Trouble,
paid by us, or either of us,

John Bolles, John Walterhouse, Joseph Bolles, Samuel Rogers, John Rogers,



