A LETTER ADDRESSED TO Two GREAT MEN.

N. B. Who was the Compositor of this very reputable Pamphlet, is, perhaps,
absolutely uncertain with every Body, but the excellent Author of it: He says I
am an anonymous Writer, and hope never to be known. -- The Two Great Men are
supposed to be the Duke of NEWCASTLE and Mr. PIT.

A LETTER ADDRESSED TO Two GREAT MEN, ON THE PROSPECT of PEACE; And on the
TERMS necessary to be insisted upon in the NEGOTIATION.

Mea quidem sententia, paci, quae nihil habitura sit insidiarum, semper est
consulendum.

De Offic. Lib. 1. There is a Tide in the Affairs of Men,
Which taken at the Flood, leads on to Fortune;
Omitted, all the Voyage of their Life
Is bound in Shallows and in Miseries.
On such a full Sea are we now a-float,
And we must take the Current when it serves,
Or lose our Ventures.
SHAKESP. LONDON, Printed. MDCCLX. BOSTON: Reprinted, by B. Mecom, and Sold at
the New Printing-Office, near the Townhouse. 1760.

A LETTER ADDRESSED TO Two GREAT MEN.
My LORD, and SIR,
YOU will be surprised at an Address made to you jointly in this Manner; but as
I have not the Honor to be much acquainted with either of you, though I esteem
you both, (at least while you remain connected) I hope you will forgive me for
troubling you, in this public Way; and the rather, as I think the Matters I
shall write upon, to be of very great Importance; and as you will discover by
what I am going to suggest to you, that I am a true Friend to Old England, and
a sincere Lover of my Country.

I have long thought that our Ministers of State may be much assisted, in their
Deliberations, by Persons who have not the Honor of sitting at the Council
Board. (...) wisest Measures have often been pointed out, in the Course of
parliamentary (...); and Members of either House, perhaps those l^ast cons^^^^d
by Government, have frequently been earliest in suggesting such Plans of public
Policy, as Government itself has been glad to adopt. The Ex^inction of factious
Opposition, the Un^nimity of every Party, and the Acquiescence of every
Connection, in whatever Scheme is proposed by his Majesty's Servants, while it
has produced infinite Advantages to the Public, has deprived those who direct
the Cabinet, of all such Parliamentary Instruction, as their Predecessors in
Power used to receive. You, my Lord, of late, scarcely hear any Speech in the
House of Lords, but that of a Lawyer on a Scotch Appeal; and the hereditary
Council of the Nation rarely assemble for higher Purposes than to alter
Settlements and deliberate on Bills of Divorce. And you, Sir, in the other
House, where so many skilful Champions used formerly to engage and struggle for
Victory, remain single in the Field of Battle; and your Speaker takes the Chair
only to vote Millions and levy Thousands, without the least Debate or
Opposition.

The Channel of Parliamentary Instruction being thus stopped, no other but that
of the Press is left open, for those Heads of Advice to which it may be worth
your While to attend. For this Reason it is, that I have thought of addressing
you in this Manner. Who I am, it matters not. Let it suffice, that, unpe^sioned
and unemployed, I can vie, (...) Zeal for the Public, with those who taste the
Sw^ets of exorbitant Salaries, and unfathomed Perquisites. Whether my Knowledge
be equal to my Zeal; whether my Acquaintance with the World, and Experience in
Business, have enabled me to offer any Thing that may be (...) real Utility,
must be determined by you, and by the Public. This I am certain of, that my
Intention is honest; and while I please myself, I shall endeavor, at the same
Time, not to offend either of you. Some Productions, in which you have, of
late, been jointly taken Notice of, proceeded from a fa^tious Disposition,
which I am unacquainted with, and detest. For, far from wishing to disunite and
separate your Interests, I am fully persuaded that without your perfect Harmony
and Union, the great Events which have happened under your Administration, will
not have those permanent good Consequences so much to be wished for: And it is
only from your joint Concurrence, that we can hope for any of those prudent,
spirited and national Measures concerning which I propose to offer you a few
Hints, in this Address.

Considering the present distressed Condition of France, fallen from its
alarming Power, and Greatness, into the lowest State of Distress and Impotence;
unfortunate in its military Operations in every Quarter of the Globe* beaten
all Europe over by Sea and Land; its Fleets sailing, only to be destroyed; its
Armies marching, only to run away; without Trade; no Credit; stopping Payments,
protesting Bills, and to all Intents and Purposes a Bankrupt Nation; their
King, the Princes of the Blood, the Nobility, and the Clergy carrying in all
their Plate to be coined, for the present extreme Exigency of their Affairs;
disappointed and baff^ed in all their Schemes on the Continent, and taught to
think no more of Invasions, by the Destruction of the only Fleet they had left;
-- I say, considering all these Circumstances, which I have not exaggerated, in
the least, it is not unnatural to imagine, that a Period will soon be put to
the Troubles of Europe. France, (...) on the War, must soon be reduced to the
Necessity of suing for Peace.

We have had Bloodshed enough. God forgive those who have occasioned this
terrible Destruction of the human Species, and spread Misery, and Devastation,
for so long a Time, in almost every Corner of the Globe. The great Success with
which the Arms of Britain have been blessed, puts it in our Power to give Peace
to Europe: and it is to the Honor of his Majesty and those who direct his
Councils, that the Distresses of our Enemies have only enabled him to give the
World a Proof of his Moderation; and to show that his Inclination to make
Peace, keeps Pace with the Inability of France to prolong the War.

As his Majesty entered into this War, not from Views of Ambition, so he does
not Wish to continue it, from Motives of Resentment. The Desire of his
Majesty's Heart is, to see a Stop put to the Effusion of Christian Blood.

What was declared in the above Paragraph of his Majesty's Speech from the
Throne, to our own Parliament, at the Opening of this Session, has since that,
been notified in Form to our Enemy. The Readiness of England, and Prussia, to
enter into a Treaty, and to give Peace to Christendom, which Prince Lewis of
Wolfenbuttle has been authorized to communicate to the French Minister at the
Hague, will, no Doubt, open the Door for a Negotiation, in a Manner the most
likely to be embraced by the Court of Versailles; whose Disgraces and
Distresses, (too great to be dissembled, and too extensive to be remedied) will
dispose them to listen with Attention to every Proposal of Accommodation, made
to them by an Enemy whose Sword was unsheathed only to punish Perfidy; and
whose Successes, as appears from their (...) first Advances toward a Treaty,
have not infatuated them to prefer unnecessary and ruinous Conquest, to a
reasonable and solid Peace.

It is, therefore, to be hoped, and to be believed, that Peace is not at a
great Distance; and upon this Supposition I shall beg Leave to offer a few
Considerations to you, as to the Persons on whom the Fate of this Country
depends; Considerations which are equally important as they are seasonable; and
an Attention to which, before you enter upon any Negotiation, may, perhaps,
assist you (if I may be allowed to suppose you stand in Need of any Assistance)
in directing this Negotiation to such an Issue, as may be equally honorable to
yourselves, and useful to the Public.

In this Situation of Affairs, one of the first Matters relative to the future
Negotiation, which, no doubt, must occur to you, will be the Choice of those
Persons who are to be trusted with the great Concerns of this Nation as
Plenipotentiaries. As much will depend upon this Point, I shall beg Leave to
begin with giving you my Thoughts upon it, and the other Topics on which I
propose to trouble you will naturally arise from each other without observing
any other Order, or Connection, besides that in which they shall present
themselves to a Mind intent upon its Subject.

With regard then to the Choice of Plenipotentiaries, I cannot but lament the
Difficulties you have to encounter, before you will be able to find such as the
Public will have Reason to thank you for. -- I am not totally unknowing in the
Characters and Capacities of many among the great. But when I cast my Eyes
around me, I own that I am surprised, greatly sur^^^zed, but still more
grieved, to find so few among us, ^^pable of conducting the arduous Task (...)
Peace. Whether this has arisen from Neglect in the Education of our Men of
Quality; or whether the Qualifications which fit them for Statesmen, have been
neglected, in Comparison of such as fit them for Arthur's or Newmarket; or
whether it be owing to the State Policy so systematically adopted, of late
Years, of giving Places, not to Persons who can best execute the Business --
but to those who can best do a Job; whatever be the Cause, the Fact is certain;
and it is Matter of Amazement that there should be so few in this Island, who
have given any Proofs that they are capable of conducting with Ability, much
less with Dexterity, this important Business of a Negotiation with France. Men
who are versed in Treaties, knowing the Interests, Pretensions, and Connexions
of the several Princes of Europe; skilled in the Principles of public Law, and
capable of applying them on every particular Occasion; acquainted with the
Commerce, the Colonies, the Manufactures of their own Country; Masters of all
the Instances of Infraction of former Treaties, which occasioned the War we are
now engaged in: In a Word, Men whose Rank and Consequence amongst ourselves,
may command Respect, and procure them Authority, amongst our Enemies; and who,
to every other Qualification, already enumerated, can boast of an Integrity not
to be corrupted, and a Steadiness in supporting the Interests of their Country,
which no Difficulties can discourage, and no Temptations can shake: -- Such are
the Men, whom you must endeavor to employ, in the approaching Negotiation, and
such, I hope, ye will be able to find; though, I own, I am puzzled to guess on
whom the Choice will fall, none being, as yet, ^ointed out by the public Voice,
nor, perhaps (...) upon by yourselves. Times have been, (...) have expected, to
see One named to such an important Office, merely because he was a Favorite,
or a Favourite's Favorite; because he was connected with this Minister, or was
a Relation of that great Man. But if we have too frequently trifled with our
national Concerns, by trusting them in such Hands, I need not say that there
are Circumstances at present which give us reasonable Ground for hoping that
the same Sagacity, and Desire to serve the Public which has found out, and
employed the properest Persons to conduct the Operations of the War, will be
exerted to find out the properest Persons (few as there are to be found) to
conduct the Deliberations of the Treaty.

Very deplorable indeed must be the Inabilities of the Persons we shall employ,
if their Negotiations for Peace be conducted so awkwardly as to rob us of the
Advantages we have gained by the War. If we may judge from late Events, France
seems as little to abound with Wisdom in the Cabinet, as it does with Courage
and Conduct in the Field. And if the Negotiations at Utrecht, in which almost
all the Advantages of War equally successful with the present, were given up,
be urged as an Instance of the superior Dexterity of French Politics, it ought
to be remembered that this was more owing to our own Divisions, than to their
Sagacity, and the Inabilities of our Plenipotentiaries at Utrecht, though we had
no great Reason, God knows, to brag of them. What, therefore, may we not expect
from a Negotiation to be begun in very different Circumstances; when there
exists no Faction whose Interest it may be to perplex and defeat it; and when
that national Unanimity to which we, in a great (...) owe the Success of the
War, will still (...) it is blessed Effects, till it make (...) and honorable
Peace? -- However, favorable as these Circumstances are, the Choice of such
Plenipotentiaries as may be likely to conduct the Negotiation, with Dignity,
Dexterity and Integrity, becomes a Consideration which the Public will expect
should be weighed with the utmost Attention. And, if such Persons cannot be
found amongst us (which I hope may not be the Case) there is a very desirable
Alternative still in your Power. Fix the Scene of Negotiation, where, indeed,
for the Honor of our Country, I could wish to see it fixed. Name no other
Plenipotentiaries to conduct the Peace but those Ministers who directed the
War: And a Treaty of London, in such Hands, will make ample Amends for our
wretched Management at Utrecht.

But let Peace be ever so well made; let Ministers plan Treaties with the
greatest Sagacity, and Plenipotentiaries negotiate the Articles with the utmost
Skill and Dexterity, yet we know from History and Observation, that they never
can be perpetual, and, most commonly, are not lasting. Princes, too frequently,
seem to own no other Rule of Action, than present Convenience; and the Law of
Nations is seldom appealed to, but to sanctify Injustice, and save Appearances.
Nor are the positive Compacts solemnly agreed upon between Nation and Nation,
better observed. For how seldom do we see a Treaty religiously adhered to, by
the Parties whose Interest it is to break it, and who think they are in such
Circumstances as to be able to break it with Impunity? -- If such Infidelity be
too common amongst Princes in general, Experience, long Experience teaches us,
that the Nation with whom we are soon to treat, excel us, at least, in this
Part of Policy. For no Cord^ are strong enough to bind them.

Gallic Faith is become proverbial, and the Neighbors of France can reproach
her with innumerable Instances of a most profligate Disregard to the most
solemn Treaties. And the Reason seems to be obvious, without supposing that
Nation more perfidious than others. The Power, the Populousness, the Extent,
the Strength of the French Monarchy, free them from those Apprehensions which
bind the weaker Side to be faithful to it is Engagements; and depending upon the
Inability of their Neighbors, considered singly, to procure to themselves
Justice, this, too frequently, has tempted them to the most shameful and
barefaced Instances of national Breach of Faith.

It well becomes us, therefore, at this Juncture, when the Distresses of the
French, we may hope, will oblige them to consent to Terms of Peace,
unfavourable to the Interest, and disgraceful to the Glory of their Monarch, to
take every Method in our Power to secure the Observance of those Concessions
they may make; and to insist upon their giving us such Proofs of their
Sincerity, before any Negotiation be entered upon, as may give us some
Assurance that they mean to be more faithful to their future Engagements.

What Proof of their Sincerity, I would recommend it to you to demand, what
Concessions it will be necessary to insist upon, I shall beg Leave to mention;
after having first satisfied you by a Detail of some Particulars, that such
Demands as I would propose cannot be looked upon as the Insolence of a
Conqueror, but as the wise Foresight of a People whom dear-bought Experience
has taught the proper Way of doing itself Justice.

It may not, therefore, be unnecessary to place before your Eyes, (...) the
most remarkable Instances of French (...) ^^ich have give Rise to all the
Troubles of Europe for above these hundred Years.

The Peace of Westph^lia 1643.
, while it secured the Liberties and Religion of Germany, also laid the
Foundation of that Power which has made France, ever since, the Terror of
Europe. By this Treaty Article 73, and seq.
, the Upper and the Lower Alsace, a Country of great Extent, and of infinite
Consequence in Point of Situation, was ceded to France. In this Country there
were Ten Imperial Cities, whose Privileges and Liberties were in the most
solemn Manner secured by the same Treaty, which expressly says, Article 88. Le
Roi de France ne s'arroger^ (...) les villes de la Prefecture, que le simple
Droit de Protection (...) appartenoit a la Maison d'Au^r^che.
that they shall preserve their Freedom, and that the King of France shall not
assume over them, any Thing more than the bare Right of Protection. How was
this Article observed? The ten Imperial Cities have been humbled to receive the
French Yoke, equally with the Rest of Alsace, and remain now, lasting
Monuments, what others may expect from Power unrestrained by Justice.

The Treaty of the Pyrenees still enlarged the Boundaries of France, especially
on the Side of Flanders; and the Spaniards thought themselves safe from farther
Losses, by the Marriage of their Infanta to Louis the XIV. who, upon that
Occasion, jointly with her, made a formal Renunciation of all her Rights, to
succeed to any Part of the Spanish Possessions. And yet, with unparalleled
Insolence, seven Years had scarcely elapsed before Flanders was again attacked,
on Pretense of those very Rights which had been so lately renounced, and which
even though they had not been renounced, must have appeared chimerical, unless a
Sister can have a Right to succeed in Preference to her Brother.

The Peace of Nimeguen 1679.
restored the Tranquillity of Europe, which the Invasion of Holland by the
French had disturbed. But scarcely was the Peace signed before it was
shamefully violated. The Decrees of the Chambers of Reunion, by which Lewis
the XIV. seized so many Territories, to which he had not the least Right; the
Surprisal of Strasburg, and the Blockade of Luxemburgh, showed such a
Wantonness of Perfidy, as no History of the most barbarous and unpolished
Savages could well exceed; and justly drew upon the common Oppressor, the joint
Vengeance of offended Europe.

Who is ignorant of the Story of the Partition Treaty? Solemnly entered into to
preserve that Tranquillity which the Treaty of Reswick had just restored to
Europe, it was no sooner made than it was shamefully abandoned by the Court of
France; and for such Reasons as will, upon every Occasion, justify every
Injustice. The Letter of the Treaty, indeed, was violated, they must own; --
but the Spirit of it was what ought to be attended to. And by such a Comment,
worthier of a pitiful Sophister, than of a most Christian King, his Grandson
was assisted in placing himself on the Throne of Spain.

The Politics of Lewis the XV. have been faithfully copied from those of his
Great-Grandfather; and the Behavior of France, upon the Death of Charles the
VI. is a fresh Proof, of how little Use are the most solemn Treaties, with a
Power that knows no Ties but those of Interest. -- The Treaty of Vienna had but
two or three Years before In 1738.
, annexed to the Crown (...), the Duchy of Lorrain; a Cession which was
purchased, and purchased cheaply, by the Guarantee of the Treaty of (...)
A^ticle 10.
Pr^g^atic Sanction. By this Stipulation* France was under the most solemn
Engagements to support the Queen of Hungary in the Possession of all her
Father's Dominions. But how was the Engagement fulfilled? (...) will scarcely
believe such barefaced Perfi^y (...) possible, as our Times saw was actually
avo^ed upon that Occasion. Germany was instantly, covered with the Armies of
France, to as^^st the Elector of Bavaria, in an Attempt to overturn the
Pragmatic Sanction so lately guaranteed by France and to dethorne that Princess
whom the French were bound by a Treaty, sworn to in the Name of the Holy
Trinity, to protect and defend from all her Enemies.

I have brought down this Sketch of French Faith to the present Times;
imperfect indeed; but, as far as it goes, strictly conformable to Historical
Truth. -- What Confidence, then, can France expect any of its Neighbors will
put in her, after so many and such flagrant Instances of national Perjury, as
she appears to be guilty of? -- The Catalogue of her Infidelities will still be
increased; and the little Reason that our Island, in particular, has to trust
Her, will still be more apparent, by reminding you of some of the many Proofs,
which Great Britain itself can appeal to, of French Ingenuity in
Treaty-breaking. -- I shall go no higher than the Peace of Utrecht, because the
Instances in which it has been violated by France, have produced the present
War; and because the Enumeration of them will lead me, naturally, to those
Hints which I mean to throw out, as necessary to be attended to, in our future
Negotiations; and which, if neglected, will lose to (...) Nation all the Fruits
of those Successes, to gain which, we have strained every Nerve, and loaded
ourselves with a Burden under which it is a Miracle that we have not already
sunk.

The War which was closed by the Peace of Utrecht had been undertaken with
Views confined, altogether, to the Continent of Europe, and carried on, though
at an immense Expense, more to gain Conquests for our Allies, than for
ourselves. However, in the Treaty of Peace, some Advantages and Concessions
were stipulated in Favor of the Crown of Great Britain, and its commercial
Interests.

By the 12th Article, All Nova Scotia or Acadia, with its ancient Limits, and
with all its Dependencies, is ceded to the Crown of Great Britain.

And by the 15th Article, The Subjects of France Inhabitants of Canada, and
elsewhere, shall not disturb or molest, in any Manner whatever, the Five Indian
Nations which are subject to Great^Britain, nor its other American Allies.

Let us now see how these Articles have been observed. The French seem to have
had two Capital Views in all their American Schemes, ever since they have
thought Trade and Commerce an Object worthy of their Attention. The first was
to extend themselves from Canada, Southwards, through the Lakes along the Back
of our Colonies; by which Means they might answer a double Purpose, of cutting
off our Communication with the Indian Nations, and of opening a Communication
for themselves, between the Rivers St. Lawrence and Missisippi, and thus to
join, as it were, their Colonies of Canada and Louisiana. The other Part of
their Plan, equally important, and more immediately fatal to our Interests in
North America, was to gain a Communication with the Ocean; the only Access they
now have to Canada, through the River St. Lawrence, being shut up half the Year.

Full of this favorite Project of American Empire, soon after the Treaty of
Utrecht, they began to enlarge their Boundaries on that Continent, in direct
Violation of the solemn Concessions they had so lately made.

As long ago as 1720, they seized and fortified the most important Pass in
America, at Niagara; in that very Country of the Five Indian Nations, from
which the 15th Article of the Treaty of Utrecht had excluded them. The infinite
Consequence of Niagara made them less scrupulous, no Doubt, about Treaties. For
by Means of this Usurpation they, in a Manner, became Masters of the Lakes, and
could, at Leisure extend themselves to the Ohio, and carry their Chain of Forts
and Settlements down to the Missisippi.

The Plan of Usurpation on the Back of our Colonies went on gradually and
successfully from Year to Year; the Indians owned by the Peace of Utrecht to be
our Subjects, were debauched from our Interest, and spirited up to massacre,
and scalp the English; and in 1731, the Insolence of the French grew to such an
Height, that they erected their Fort at Crown-Point, in a Country indisputably
ours; whether considered as in the Center of the five Nations, or as actually
within the Limits of New York. And whoever casts his Eye upon the Situation of
this Fort, in the Map, will see how greatly the Possession of it facilitated
the Completion of the great Object of opening a Communication with the Ocean;
and how much it exposed our most valuable Colonies to Indian Massacres and
French Invasions.

If it should be asked, what was our Ministry in England employed about, during
such Instances of French Perfidy -- the Answer must be, (though I wish I could
draw a Veil over this Period) that our Affairs were then conducted by a
Minister who was awake, indeed, to every Scheme of Corruption; eager to buy a
Borough, or to bribe a Member; but slow to every Measure of national Importance
and Utility. His first, his only Object, was to preserve himself in Power; and
as, in Prosecution of such interested and mercenary Views, he had actually
engaged this Nation in an Alliance with France, in Europe, (to pull down the
exorbitant Power of our old and natural Ally) it was no Wonder that he heard
unmoved, and suffered with Impunity, the French Usurpations in North America.

Let us next trace the French Infidelity with Regard to Nova Scotia or Acadia.
Though that Province had been yielded to us at Utrecht, we had taken very few
Steps to settle it effectually, till 1749, after the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle.
And then the French Court gave us a Specimen of Chicane worthy indeed, of those
whom no Treaty ever bound, in Opposition to their Convenience. They began to
speak out, and to tell us, nay to insist upon it seriously in Memorials, that
the Country ceded to us under the Name of Nova Scotia, comprehended only the
Peninsula, and did not extend beyond the Isthmus. Whereas the Charters of King
James I. to Sir William Alexander; and Sir William's own Map, as old as the
Charter, demonstrate that the ancient Limits of the Country so named included a
vast Tract of Land, beyond the Peninsula, reaching along the Coast till it
joined New England; and extending up the Country till it was bounded by the
South Side of the River St. Lawrence. Of such an Extent of Country they had
formed a Plan to rob us; hoping, no Doubt, to find the same Supineness in the
British Administration which had overlooked their former E^croachments. With
this View they desired that Commissaries might meet to settle the Limits,
promising not to act in America, till those Commissaries should agree, or the
Conferences break up. But how was this Promise observed? While the Commissaries
trifled away their Time at Paris, the Usurpations went on in America;
Incursions were frequently made into the Peninsula of Acadia, the Possession or
which they did not pretend to dispute with us; Forts were built by them in
several Places, and particularly a most important One to command the Isthmus;
thus decid^ng by the Sword, in Time of full Peace, that Controversy which they
themselves had agreed should be amicably adjusted by their Commissaries; and
furnishing a lasting Warning to us, that a Treaty which leaves Points of
Consequence to be determined by any After-Conferences, only serves to light up
another War.

While the French Usurpations went on so insolently in Nova Scotia; the Plan
was carrying on with equal Perfidy on the Banks of the Ohio; a Country, the
Inhabitants of which had been in Alliance with the English above an hundred
Years ago; an Alliance frequently renewed; to which also we had a Claim as
being a Conquest of the Five Nations, and from which, therefore, the French
were excluded by the 15th Article of the Treaty of Utrecht above recited. But
what avail Treaties when Interest comes in Competition? The Possession of the
Ohio was absolutely necessary, that the great Plan of connecting Canada with
Louisiana might succeed: And, therefore, they began their Hostilities against
us, in that Country very soon after the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle; insulted our
Traders, plundered and made them Prisoners; erected Fortresses, and established
Settlements; and our Governor of Virginia having sent Washington, in 17^3, to
complain of ^^ese Hostilities, he returned with an Answer from the French
commanding Officer on the Ohio, which only showed how much in earnest they were
to maintain themselves in their new Usurpations.

From this Period we may look upon the War as begun. Our Governors in
North America had Orders from England, to oppose the French Encroachments by
Force of Arms; and, in 17^4, Washington was sent again to the Ohio, with some
Troops; but being defeated, by the superior Numbers of the Enemy, who had just
before taken the English Fort, they made themselves Masters of this important
Country.

No Doubt the French Ministers flattered themselves that England, inattentive
to the Interests of its Colonies for so many Years before, and who, so lately,
had submitted to a Disadvantageous Peace, would not have the Spirit to oppose
Force to Force, and do itself Justice by other Weapons than the Complaints of
Lord Al^^marle, and the Memorials of Mr. Mildmay. But the Hour of Vengeance
was, at last, come; the Interests of the Kingdom were attended to by those in
Power; the infinite Importance of our American Colonies was understood, and a
Resolution taken to have Recourse to Arms. And thus England, which, for half a
Century, had been wasting its Millions, and lavishing its Blood, to obtain a
Barrier in Flanders, which those for whom we conquered it could not defend, or
rather did not think it worth while to keep; began the present War, a War truly
NATIONAL.

If there be Merit in this spirited Conduct of the British Administration, from
the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, to the breaking out of the present War, tell your
Enemies, My Lord, that you, and a near Relation (...) yours (whose Memory
Though this great Minister died in 1754, and the present War was not declared
in Form till 175^, he certainly has a Claim to share in the Merit of the
spirited Conduct here spoken of. Our American Concerns were properly attended
to, in his Time; our Colony of Nova Scotia liberally supported, and its ancient
Limits asserted; the Complaints of our Colonies, in general, against the French
Encroachments were not sufied or neglected, but Orders were sent from England
to repel Force by Force; in Consequence of which Orders, Washington's
unfortunate Expedition to the Ohio in 1754, was undertaken. I leave this Note
to the Consideration of those minute Critics, who thought they had detected an
Anachronism here. Perhaps I cannot so well justify my having omitted (though it
was not by Design) to give a Share of Commendation to the great and learned
Lord (who retired from the highest Station in the Law, after having filled it
with so remarkable Abilities and Integrity) whose Behavior, upon this
Occasion, deserved as well of his Country, as it had done many Years before,
when his Spirit, in contributing, jointly with the two Relations here meant, to
call forth national Vengeance, procured him, from the Wags of those Days, the
military Title of C -- l Y -- ke.
will always be respected) had then the chief Direction of public Business. And
you, Sir, will pardon me for paying this Compliment to those who began the War
with Spirit; while I, at the same Time, declare it as my Opinion that your
coming into Power after it was begun, has contributed to its being carried on
with a Success equally glorious and important to the Nation.

But before I make the Application of the above Deduction concerning For the
Particulars of the French Encroachments in America, which I have only given a
Sketch of, see the Memori^ls of our Commissaries, Dr. Mitchell's Contest in
Ameri^a; the Doctor's and Mr, Evans's Maps, and many other Treatises.
our American Complaints (which I shall, by and bye, make Use of, when I come
to speak to the Terms which it will be necessary to insist upon at the
approaching Treaty) it will be proper to mention another most important
Instance of French Perfidy in Europe.

Dunkirk, by its Situation, almost opposite the Mouth of the Thames, had done
amazing Mischief to the Trade of England, during King William's and Queen
Ann^'s Wars. The Demolition of Dunkirk* therefore, very naturally became a
favorite Object of the Nation; the Parliament, in 1708, addressed her Majesty
to make no Peace without this Condition M^r^^ 2d. 1^^8. The Lords having sent
down an Add^ess to the C^mm^^s ^or their Concurrence, relating to certain
Conditions to be insisted upon* ^ the ^ine (...). of a Treaty with Fran^^, Mr.
Secretary B^yl^ represented. That the British Nation having been at a (...)
E^pence of Blood and Treasure, for the Prosecution of this necessary War, it
was but just they should reap some Benefit by the Peace: And the Town of
Dunkirk being a Nest of Pirates, that infested the Ocean, and did infinite
Mischief to Trade, He, therefore, moved that the demolishing of its
Fortifications and Harbors be insisted upon, in the ensuing Treaty of Peace,
and inserted in the Address, which was unanimou^ly appro^ed of. and carried
back to the Lords. See (...) of Parliament, Vol. vii. p. 122.
, and though after a War so successful, much more might have been obtained for
England than really was, this Point was carefully insisted upon, and the Ninth
Article of the Peace of Utrecht obtained.

By this Article, the French King engages to demolish all the Fortifications of
the City of Dunkirk; to rui^ the Harbor; to break the Dykes and (...). -- The
Works toward the Se^ to be destroyed in Two Months, and th^s^ to the Land in
Three Months after; all this to be done at his own Exp^^ce; (...) the
Fortifications, Harbou^, Dykes, and (...), never after to ^e restored. Could
Words be ^evised in all the Extent of Language to stipulate, in a stronger
Manner, the effectual and speedy D^molition of this Pl^ce? And yet all Eur^pe
saw with Amazement, and England beheld with Indignation, the Peace of Utrecht
violated, with Regard to this important Condition, almost as soon as it was
signed.

By the Article above-recited we see that Dunkirk was to be demolished within
five Months after the signing the Peace; and yet, near a Year after, I find Mr.
Walpole, in our House of Commons, insisting that the Peace had already been
broken with Regard to Dunkirk; Since instead of ruining the Harbor, the French
were then actually repairing the (...), and working on a new Canal C^andler's
Debates, Vol. 8. P. 69.
. And though the pacific Inclinations of the Ministry in 1713, when Mr. Walp^l^
pushed this Affair, overruled the Inquiry, the Facts on which it would have
proceeded were certain.

The spirited Remonstrances of Lord Stair at Paris, on the Accession of George
I. concerning this Infraction of the Peace, were the last Instances of
Humiliation which Lewis XIV. saw himself exposed to; and, perhaps, he would
have found himself obliged to do us that Justice, by Necessity, which the
Regent, who soon after came into Power, willingly agreed to from Views of
private Interest. Though the Peace of Utrecht had obliged the Spanish Branch of
the Bourbon Family to renounce their Right of Succession to the Crown of
France, the Duke of Orleans, who, by this Regulation, saw only an Infant's Life
between him and the Throne, knew well, that though the Renunciation had been
solemnly sworn to, the Doctrine of its Invalidity, of its being an Act, void,
ab initio, had been publicly avowed. T^r^y, as appears by his See the Report
of the secret Committe^, P. 13. The following Extract from a Letter of Mo^sr.
Ter^y to Mr. St. John is remarkable. The Renunciation desired would be null and
invalid by the fundamental Laws of France; according to which Laws the most
near Prince to the Crown is, of Necessity, the Heir thereto. -- This Law is
looked upon, as the Work of him who has established all Monarchies, and we are
persuaded in France that God only can abolish it. No Renunci^tion therefore can
destroy it; and if the King of Spain should renounce it for the Sake of Peace,
and in Obedien^e to the King his Grand^^ther, they would deceive themselves
that received it as a sufficient Expedient to prevent the Mischief we propose
to avoid,
Correspondence with Lord Bolingbroke, very frankly made no Scruple of telling
the English beforehand, that this Expedient, which had been devised to prevent
the Union of France and Spain under one Monarch, would be of little Force, as
being inconsistent with the fundamental Laws of France; by this Declaration
giving us a very remarkable Instance of the Weakness, or of the Wickedness of
our then Ministers, who could build the Peace of Europe on so sandy a
Foundation, and accept of Terms which France itself was honest enough to own
were not to be kept.

However, the Regent was resolved to support his Claim to the Crown of France,
in Exclusion to the Spanish Branch; and, as the Support and Assistance of
England was necessary for this Purpose, it is not to be wondered at that he
should court the Friendship of a Nation from whom he had so much to expect; and
therefore, he was wise enough to do us Justice, by carrying into Execution, in
some Degree, the Article relating to Dunkirk.

The personal Interest of the Regent was the only Reason for this Compliance:
But succeeding Administrations in France not being influenced by the same
private Views to adhere to Treaties solemnly ratified, Dunkirk began gradually
to rise from its Ruins; its Port again received Ships; its Trade flourished;
England saw itself deprived of this favorite Advantage gained at Utrecht; and
such was the Ascendency of French Councils over those of this Island, at the
Period I speak of, that we were actually engaged in Alliances with France,
while that Nation was thus openly insulting us, and insulting us, without
Obstruction, in so essential an Article. We all remember what passed in
Parliament in 1733, relating to the Point now before us. -- Such was the tame
Acquiescence of the British Administration, that Dunkirk, by this Time, stood
upon our Custom-House Books as a Port* from whence great Imports were made; and
when an Inquiry concerning this was proposed in the House of Commons by a great
Parliament Man Sir W. Wyndham.
since dead, the then Minister hung his Head, in the House, for Shame. And who
could have believed it possible, that the same Person who had been so ready to
promote a Parliamentary Inquiry into this Violation of the Peace in 1713,
should obstruct such an Inquiry, when he himself was in Power, though the
Reasons for it had become much stronger? Who could see Him, without
Indignation, s^ut his Eyes to the Re-establishment of Dunkirk, and obstruct the
proposed Inquiry, by getting from Cardinal Fleury (who then governed France,
and, I blush to say it, England too) a delusive, ministerial Letter, promising
what he knew would not be performed; -- and obtained, perhaps, only because the
Cardinal was assured, that the Breach of the Promise would not be resented.

While England remained so averse to do itself Justice, no Wonder that France
improved the Opportunity. At the Time when that Minister was obliged to retire
from Power, the Re-establishment of Dunkirk was completed. For, in a little
more than a Year after The Memorial is dated July 1, 1742.
, we find a Memorial presented by Lord Stair to the Dutch, complaining of this
Violation of the Peace of Utrecht, and urging it as a Reason for their joining
us against France. And as it was for the Honor of the new Administration, that
they began with Measures so spirited and national, it is equally remarkable,
that the same Person, who had threatened Lewis XIV. in his own Palace, for his
Slowness in demolishing Dunkirk, lived to be again employed by his Country at
the Distance of near thirty Years, when the Restoration of Dunkirk became an
Object of national Resentment.

The two Nations had not, as yet, begun the late War, when we saw, in One
Instance, both a Proof that Dunkirk was again a Port, and a Port which may be
made Use of, to endanger the Safety of Britain. At the Time I now speak of I^
1743-4.
, we beheld the Harbor of Dunkirk crowded with Transports to embark Count Saxe
and the Pretender to invade us. And, if that Invasion had then taken Effect,
from that very Port which was to be no Port (happily the Winds were contrary to
the Fleet from Breast) the infinite Mischief which this Nation may suffer from
its Re-establishment, would have been fatally experienced.

Though we have no great Reason to brag of the Treaty made at the Conclusion of
the last War (which I am ashamed to call a Peace, as it settled nothing that
was before in Doubt between the two Nations) the Peace of Utrecht concerning
Dunkirk, was, nevertheless in its most essential Part, restored to its full
Force. I say, in its most Essential Part; because, though the 17th Article of
the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle left Dunkirk in the State it then was, with
Regard to its Fortifications to the Land; the same Article revived our Right,
to the Demolition of its Port, by stipulating That ancient Treaties are to be
observed in regard to the Port, and the Works on the Sea Side.

Little or nothing was done between the Conclusion of the Peace, and the
breaking out of the present War, toward carrying into Execution this fresh
Promise. On the contrary, the enlarging of the Fortifications of Dunkirk, is
mentioned in his Majesty's Declaration of War, three Years ago, as one of the
fresh Heads of Injury offered to England. And whoever reflects upon the
Transactions, since that Period, will see that Dunkirk is restored to its
original Importance. Its Privateers have done infinite Mischief to our Trade; a
Squadron of his Majesty's Navy, in vain blocked up its Harbor lately, to
prevent the sailing of Thurot's Fleet: and, it is well known, that the long
threatened Invasion of these Kindoms, which France, in Despair, certainly
meditated, would have been attempted from this Place, if the Destruction of
their Ships of War by Hawke, had not taught them the Absurdity of invading us
in their much celebrated flat bottom Boats, which, we may well suppose, will
hardly be tried, when their Fleets, really formidable, have been destroyed in
the Attempt.

The above Enumeration of French Infidelities, in general, and in particular
their Behavior to England with regard to Dunkirk, and with regard to
North America, so naturally points out the Expediency and Necessity of the
Hints I shall now offer, that, in proposing them, I may well hope not to have
them ridiculed as the Reveries of a chimerical St. Pierre, but rather attended
to, as the sober Dictates of Prudence, and of a Zeal not altogether devoid of
Knowledge.

First, Then, my Lord and Sir, before you enter upon any New Treaty, or listen
to any plausible Proposals whatever, insist that Justice may be done this
Nation, with regard to former Treaties. Show France the strong, the solemn
Engagement she entered into at Utrecht to demolish Dunkirk; put her in Mind of
the amazing Perfidy with which she, from Time to Time, eluded the Performance
of that Engagement; and demand immediate Justice on that Article, as a
preliminary Proof of her Sincerity in the ensuing Negotiation.

Be not deceived any longer in this Matter. The French will, no doubt, assure
you that the Demolition of Dunkirk shall be an Article in the New Treaty. But
let them know, you are not to be so imposed upon. They wlll, to be sure, when
this becomes a new Article, reckon it a new Concession on their Side, and
expect something in return for it, -- perhaps Guadaloupe, or some such Trifle,
as they will call it. But tell them with the Firmness of wise Conquerors, that
the Demolition of Dunkirk is what you are entitled to by Treaties made long
ago, and violated; and that it shall not be so much as mentioned in the ensuing
Negotiation, but complied with before that Negotiation shall commence.

Or, admitting that no Concession should be required by France in the New
Treaty, in Consideration of a new Article to demolish Dunkirk, place to them,
in the strongest Light, the unanswerable Reasons we have against putting any
Confidence in them, that such an Article would be better executed, than that in
the Treaty of Utrecht has been.

If they refuse doing us this immediate Justice, previous to the Peace; ask
them how they can expect that we should have any Reliance on their Sincerity to
fulfill the New Engagements they may enter into, when they afford us so strong,
so glaring an Instance of Infidelity, in an Article of such Consequence, made
so many Years ago? Can you have any Dealings with a Power, who, if he refuses
this, at the very Time he is treating, affords you such manifest Proof, that
his Word is not to be relied upon, and that you cannot trust to the Execution
of any Promise ever so solemnly made?

Perhaps France may think it a Disgrace to them, to comply with any Thing
previous to the Beginning of a Negotiation. Tell them, that acting honorably,
and doing what Justice requires, can never be disgraceful. But if it be a
Disgrace, tell them, with the Spirit of honest Men, that we owe it them, for
the greater Disgrace they put, not long ago, upon us, by requiring us to send
two Peers of this Realm to remain in France as Hostages, till we surrendered
Louisbourg; an Indignity which I cannot call to Mind without Pain, and which, I
always thought, was submitted to without Necessity.

It is now our Turn to vindicate the Honor of our Nation; and as Dunkirk was
put into our Possession before the Treaty of Utrecht, as a Pledge of the French
Sincerity, and to continue in our Possession, till the Demolition should be
completed; let some such Expedient be now agreed upon; with this Difference
only, that instead of five Months after the Peace, the Time fixed, for the
Demolition, at Utrecht, let no Peace be signed, at present, till this Right
acquired to us by former Treaties, and of which we have been so perfidiously
robbed, be actually carried into full Execution.

However, if any insuperable Difficulties should attend the doing ourselves
Justice, on this Head, before the Peace; if, for Instance, which perhaps may be
the Case, it should be found that it cannot be complied with, unless we consent
to a Cessation of Arms, during the Time of Negotiation; rather than give France
that Opportunity of recovering from its Distresses, and of being protected from
the Superiority of our Arms, before we have, finally, obliged them to accept of
our own Terms of Peace (which was one Cause of the Ruin of our Negotiation at
Utrecht) I would wave insisting upon the Demolition of Dunkirk, before the
Treaty, and think it sufficient to demand Hostages from them, as a Security
that it shall be faithfully complied with, within a limited Time after the
Treaty shall be concluded. The Parisians had two English Milords to stare at,
upon the last Peace; and I do not see why the Curiosity of our Londoners should
not be gratified, in the same Way; and Two Ducs and Pairs of France be sent as
Hostages to England, till Dunkirk cease to be a Port.

I know well, that Political Opinions, concerning the Importance of any
particular Object, are as frequently dictated by Whim and Fashion, as built on
solid Reason and Experience. Perhaps, some may think, that this is the Case,
with Regard to the Necessity of demolishing Dunkirk. But, though it may not at
present be so favorite an Obj^ct of National Politics, as it was in the
Queen's Time; this has not b^^n owing to any real Ch^ng^ of Circumstances; but
to another Cause, to the (...) Disputes betw^^n the two Nations, which have
been the great Object of the present War, and scarcely permitted us, hitherto,
to (...), in what other Instances, the (...) of France must be checked at the
i^s^ing Peace. -- But as th^^^ ef^^able Event now approaches, we cannot forget,
or forgive the Behavior of our Enemies with Regard to Dunkirk; and it will be
equally necessary for the Honor and for the Interest of this Nation to make no
Peace, without obtaining full Satisfaction on this Head. It will be necessary
for the Honor of the Nation to insist upon this, if it were only to show to
Europe in general, and to France in particular -- That we have too much Spirit
not to resent Injuries; and too much Wisdom not to take Care, when we have it
happily in our Power, to prevent them for the future. -- But the Demolition of
Dunkirk, is also necessary, if we would take Care of the Interest of the
Nation. Such has been our Success, in destroying the Navy of France; and so
unable does that Kindom now appear, to carry on its ambitious Projects by Land,
and to vie at the same Time, with England, for Dominion on the Sea; that we may
reasonably suppose, there is an End of Breast and Toulon Squadrons, to face our
Fleets; and a future War with England, will leave the French no other Way of
distressing us by Sea, than to lie in watch for our Merchant Ships, with
numberless Privateers. In such a piratical War, Dunkirk, if its Harbor be not
now destroyed, will, too late, be found to be of infinite Consequence; and we
shall fatally experience it again, what it was in the Queen's Time, and in the
Language of her Parliament, a N^^t of Pyrac^^, inf^ssing the Ocean, and doing
infini^^ Mis^hief to Trad^ See above, P. 18.
.

For these Reasons, therefore, I am so (...)-fashioned to as expect that our
Plenipotentiaries will have this Point properly stated to them in their
Instructions, and that Del^nda est Cart^age, Demolis^ Dunkirk, will be a
Preliminary Article in the ensuing Negotiation.

The War having begun, principally, with a View to do ourselves Ju^tice in
North America, the Regulation of Matters, on that Continent, ought to be, and
no Doubt, will be, the capital Article relating to England, in the coming
Treaty. It will be necessary, therefore, to give you my Sentiments, on this
Head; and while I do it, with all becoming Diffidence, I shall, at the same
Time, support what I may offer, with Reasons appearing so strong to me, as may
perhaps recommend it to your farther Consideration, though it should fail of
producing Conviction.

Now it is with the greates^ Pleasure, I would observe, that with Regard to
North America, we have nothing to ask, at the Peace, which we have not already
made ourselves Masters of, during the War. We have been blessed by Heaven, with
a Success, in that Part of the World, scarcely to be paralleled in History. The
Rashness of Br^dd^ck, the Inex^erience of Shirley, the Inactivity of Londoun,
and the Ill-success of Aber^romb^^, seem only to have been so many necessary
Means of producing that Unanimity in our Colonies, that Spirit in our Troops;
and that steady Perseverance in our Ministers, as has not only recovered from
the Enemy all his Usurpations, but Lo^i^bourg is an English Harbor; Q^ebec,
the Capital of Canada, is already in our Possession; and the Rest of that
Country will fall of Course. It is a Prospect still more agreeable; that by
destroying the Naval Force of France our North American Conquests cannot be
retaken; and the Principle I would now lay down, and which I would recommend it
to you to adopt, is, not to give up any of them. And I shall now endeavor to
prove to you, that such a Demand may be insisted upon, without giving the Enemy
any Pretense for accusing us of Insolence toward them* and cannot be omitted
without giving the Nation just Reason to complain, that we have consented to a
treacher^us and d^lusive Peace.

It cannot, surely, ever enter the Imagination of a British Administration, to
make Peace, without, at least, keeping in our Possession, all those Places,
where the French had settled themselves, in Violation of former Treaties, and
from which we have, fortunately, driven them. Upon this Plan, then, we shall,
at the Peace, be left in Possession not only of the Peninsula of Acadia, but of
all Nova Scotia, according to its old Limits; the Bay of Fundi, and the River
St. John. -- The important Conquests of Crown Point* and Niagara, will not be
relinquished; and Fort du Quesite, and the Country near the Ohio, will remain
Ours. -- They are already Ours; the French know they cannot get them back
during the War, and they do not expect that we shall give them up at the Peace.

But though Care should be taken to keep all those Places just mentioned;
something more must be done, or our American Colonies will tell you, you have
done Nothing. In a Word, you must keep Canada, otherways you lay the Foundation
of another War.

The Necessity of this may be placed in so striking a View, as to silence the
French Plenipotentiaries, and to convince all Europe, of the Justice of our
Demand.

Ask the French, what Security they can give you, if we restore Canada to them,
however restrained in its Boundaries, that they will not again begin to extend
them at our Expense? If the Treaty of Utrecht could not keep them from
Encroachments, what Reason can we have to suppose the future Treaty will be
better observed? If the French are left at Montreal, and the three Rivers, can
we be certain they will not again cross the Champlain Lake, and attack
Crown-Point? If the North Side of the River St. Lawrence be still theirs, what
is to insure us against an Expedition to Niagara? Can we flatter ourselves,
that a People, who in full Peace, erected those two Fortresses, in direct
Violation of their Faith plighted at Utrecht, will be restrained by any future
Treaty, from attempting, also in full Peace, to recover them? After having seen
the French carrying on a regular Plan of Usurpation, in North America, for
these Forty Years past, shall we be so weak as to believe that they will now
lay it aside? No, depend upon it, if the French think it worth their while to
ask back that Part of North America, which was their own, they mean to take a
proper Opportunity, of Elbowing all our Colonies round about, and of resuming
the same ambitious Views of Enlargment which the most sacred Ties of former
Treaties could not restrain.

The Truth of the Matter is, they were tired of Canada. The Inclemency of the
Climate, the difficult Access to it; and a Trade scarcely defraying the Expense
of the Colony, would long ago have induced them to abandon it, if the Plan of
extending its Boundaries, at the Expense of the English; and of opening its
Communication with Louisiana and with the Ocean, had not made them persevere.
-- Canada itself is not worth their asking; and if they do desire to have it
restored to them, it can only be with a View to repeat the same Injuries and
Infidelities, to punish which, we engaged in the present War. Unless,
therefore, we be resolved, with our Eyes open, to expose ourselves to a
Repetition of former Encroachments; unless we would choose to be obliged to
keep great Bodies of Troops, in America, in full Peace, at an immense Expense;
we can never consent to leave the French any Footing in Canada. If we do not
exclude them, absolutely and entirely from that Country; we shall soon find we
have done Nothing. Let the Treaty be drawn ever so accurately; let the
Boundaries between Canada and our Colonies be described ever so precisely, and
regulated ever so much, in our Favor; what has happened already, ought to
teach us what we may expect again; the future Treaty will be observed no better
than the former have been; Usurpation and Encroachment will gradually revive;
and thus shall we have thrown away all our Successes; so many Millions will
have been expended to no Purpose; and the Blood of so many Thousands of our
brave Countrymen spilt, only to remind us, that though we knew how to conquer,
we knew not how to improve, perhaps, the only Opportunity we shall ever have,
of putting it out of the Power of France to violate its Faith.

I take it for granted that, in the future Negotiation, the Island of Cape
Breton will follow the Fate of Quebec: I shall only observe with Regard to it,
that though the Harbor and Fortification of Louisbourg be of infinite Service
to France; it can be of little or no Use to England, if Canada be left to us.
It is of Consequence to France, as a Retreat to their Ships fishing on the
neighboring Banks of Newfoundland; and as a Security to the Entrance of the
Gulf of St. Laurence. But the Possession of Newfoundland itself, makes
Louisbourg of no Utility to the English, in the former Respect; and Halifax,
where we have a good Harbor, answers very nearly the latter Purpose. Upon this
View therefore, may we not hope and expect, that, the Necessity of garrisoning
Louisbourg having ended with the Conquest of Quebec, its Fate will be
determined, without troubling the French Plenipotentiaries? Without waiting for
a Congress, let Orders be forthwith sent to demolish it, so as not to leave one
Stone upon another, of the Fortifications; to remove the Inhabitants to Nova
Scotia, a better Country; and to leave the Island, a bare and barren Rock; the
State it was in, before the Peace of Utrecht gave Leave to France to fortify
it. If the Right given to the French by the 13th Article of the same Peace, to
fish in some Parts of those Seas should be continued (and I could wish to see
it continued, as the Refusal of it would be rather unreasonable) let Cape
Breton unfortified, and ungarrisoned be left open to them; and a few Men of War
kept at Halifax, will effectually prevent Louisbourg's being again made a Place
of Strength.

If you adopt this Measure, I should be inclined to think, France will see that
you know your true Interests; and that you are resolved steadily to pursue
them. And if they should make any Remonstrances against it, tell them they may
follow our Example, and demolish, if they please, the Fortifications of Mahon;
which we see them possess with as great Indifference as we remember the
Circumstances of its Loss, with Shame: Which, as being of no Use to them they
will not desire to keep, and which, having been kept, by us, at an Expense, not
counterbalanced by its Utility, we shall not be very sanguine about recovering.
Or rather tell them, that in demolishing Louisbourg, before the Peace, we only
copy a former Example given us by themselves, when their Troops were employed
in dismantling the Frontier Towns in Fland^rs, at the very Time that their
Plenipotentiaries at Aix la Chapelle were consenting to give them up.

The Plan which I have had the Honor of sketching out to you, besides being so
reasonable in itself, is perfectly agreeable to that Moderation expressed by
his Majesty in his Speech, of not having entered into the War with Views of
Ambition. The Possession of Canada, is no View of Ambition; it is the only
Security the French can give us, for their future Regard to Treaties. We have
made other Conquests, of great Importance, our Management of which will give us
sufficient Means of showing our Moderation. And though I shall not presume to
give any Opinion about the future Disposal of them, I think, however, I may be
allowed to hint, that "the Possession of Guadaloupe," an additional Sugar
Island, when we have so many of our own, ought not to be insisted upon so
strenuously as to make it a necessary Condition of the Peace. And though "
Senegal and Goree," are of real Importance in the Slave and Gum Trades, our own
African Settlements have hitherto supplied us with Slaves, sufficient for our
American Purposes: And the Trade for Gum is, perhaps, not of Consequence enough
to make us Amends for the annual Mortality which we already lament, of our
brave Countrymen to guard our African Conquests. The People of England,
therefore, will not, I believe, blame the giving them back, for a valuable
Consideration, -- provided Canada be left to us.

To consider this Affair in its proper Light, it will be necessary to reflect
on the infinite Consequence of North America to this Country. Our Colonies
there contain above a Million of Inhabitants, who are mostly supplied with the
Manufactures of Great Britain; our Trade to them, by employing innumerable
Ships, is one great Source of our maritime Strength; by supporting our Sugar
Islands with their Provisions, and other Necessaries, they pour in upon us all
the Riches of the West Indies; we carry their Rice, and Tobacco, and Fish, to
all the Markets of Europe; they produce Indigo, and Iron; and the whole Navy of
England may be equipped, with the Products of English America. And if,
notwithstanding our having lost several Branches of Commerce, we formerly
enjoyed in Europe and to the Levant, we have still more Commerce than ever; a
greater Demand for our Manufactures, and a vast Increase of our Shiping; what
can this be owing to, but to the Trade to our own American Colonies; a Trade
which the Successes of this War, will render, every Day, more and more
advantageous? If this Matter, then, be considered, in the above Light, by those
whom I now address, they will make our North American Conquests, the sine qua
non of the Peace, as being the only Method of guarding our invaluable
Possessions there, from Usurpations and Encroachments; and they will look upon
every other Conquest, we have made, or may make, in other Parts of the World,
as Instruments put into our Hands by Providence, to enable us to settle Affairs
on the Continent of Europe, as advantageously to our Allies, as our Gratitude
could wish, and as their Fidelity does deserve.

Here, then, let me change the Scene, and having settled our Affairs in Canada
(would to God they were so settled at the Peace!) permit me to finish my Plan
of Negotiation, by giving my Sentiments on the Part we ought to act, to obtain
a proper Settlement of Affairs in Germany.

If a great Number of Allies can make themselves formidable to a common Enemy,
during the Operations of the War, they are apt to ruin every Advantage they may
have gained, by quarrelling amongst themselves, when they begin their
Negotiations for Peace. Like an Opposition, in our Parliament carried on
against an overgrown Minister, all Sorts of Parties and Connections, all Sorts
of disagreeing and contradictory Interests, join against him, at first, as a
common Enemy; and tolerable Unanimity is preserved amongst them, so long as the
Fate of this Parliamentary War continues in Suspense. But when once they have
driven him to the Wall, and think themselves sure of Victory; the Jealousies
and Suspicions, which, while the Contest depended, had been stifled, break out;
every one who shared in the Fatigue, expects to share in the Spoils; separate
Interests counteract each other; separate Negotiations are set on Foot; till at
last, by untimely and mercenary Divisions, they lose the Fruits of their
Victory, and the Object of the common Resentment is able to make Terms for
himself The true History of the Transaction here alluded to, may, possibly some
Time or other, appear; though, as yet, we are persuaded, the World knows very
little of it.
. ^his was exactly the Case in the Contest between Lewis XIV. and the Princes
of Europe united against him, before the Peace of Utrecht; and the unhappy
Divisions of the Allies (Divisions too likely to have sprung up, even though
there had not been a Party in England, who to gratify their private
Resentments, blew up the Coals of Dissension) gave the French the Means of
procuring more favorable Terms of Peace, than they could well have hoped after
so unsuccessful a War.

I have mentioned this with a View to observe, that the Circumstances of the
present War on the Continent are very different; no such unfortunate Disunion
seems possible to happen to us though it may happen amongst the Confederates
who are engaged on the same Side with France, against Hanover and the King of
Prussia.

It may be collected from more than one Hint dropped in the Course of this
Letter, that I am no Friend to Continental Measures in general; especially such
continental Measures as engaged us during the three last Wars, as Principals;
when we seemed eager to ruin ourselves, in Support of that Austrian Family whom
we now find, with unparalleled Ingratitude, and incredible Folly, in close
Alliance with France. -- But the Continental Measures now adopted by England
were necessary, both with Regard to* Our Honor and our Interest. Hanover has
been attacked by France, on a Quarrel entirely English; and though Care was
taken, by the Act of Settlement, that England should not be involved in Wars on
Account of Hanover; yet Gratitude, Honor, the Reputation of our Country, every
Motive of Generosity, bound us, not to allow the innocent Electorate to be
ruined for England's American Quarrel with France. In Regard to our Interest,
no English Minister, however inflexible, in his Attachment to his native
Country, could have devised the Means of making the best Use of our American
Conquests, if the French could have treated with Hanover in their Hands. It was
with a View to prevent this, to oppose the French in their Projects in Germany,
the Success of which would have been so detrimental to England, that we
honestly and wisely have formed and have maintained the Army now commanded by
Prince Ferdinand; and have entered into an Alliance with the King of Prussia.

But though this was a Measure of Prudence, it was scarcely possible for the
wisest Statesmen to foresee all those great Consequences which it has already
produced. The Efforts which the French have made in Germany, and the Resistance
they have there met with by the Care of the British Administration; have
contributed more than perhaps we could expect, to our Success in America, and
other Parts of the World. Full of the Project of conquering Hanover, France saw
herself obliged to engage in exorbitant Expenses; Armies were to be paid, and
maintained in Westphalia and on the Rhine; vast Sums were to be advanced to the
Court of Vienna always as indigent as it is haughty; the ravenous Russians, and
the degenerate Swedes, would not move, unless allured by Subsidies; and the
Mouth of every hungry German Prince was to be stopped, with the Louis D'ors of
France. Involved in Expenses thus enormous, our Enemies have been prevented
from strengthening themselves at Sea, where England had most Reason to dread
their becoming strong.

The infinite Advantages which this Nation has reaped from the German War, are
indeed now so so well understood, that we have seen the greatest Enemies of
this Measure acknowledge their Mistake.

They now confess that if we had not resisted France, in her Projects of German
Conquests, her best Troops had not been destroyed; her own Coasts would have
been better protected; she would have been able to pay more Attention to her
American Concerns; England might have been threatened, so seriously, with
Invasions, as to be afraid of parting with those numerous Armies which have
conquered at such a Distance from Home. In a Word, that universal Bankruptcy,
which has crowned the Distresses of France, and gives England greater Reason
of Exultation, than any Event of the War, might have been prevented. It is
entirely owing to the German Part of the War that France appears thus low in
the political Scale of Strength and Riches; that she is found to be a sinking
Monarchy, nay a Monarchy already sunk. And, perhaps, it might be an Inquiry
worthy of another Montesquieu, to assign the Causes of the Rise and Fall of the
French Monarchy; and to point out those silent Principles of Decay which have,
in our Times, made so rapid a Progress, that France, in 1712, after upwards of
twenty Years, almost constant War, maintained against all Europe, was still
more respectable, and less exhausted than she now appears to be, when the
single Arm of Great Britain is lifted up against her, and the War has lasted no
more than three or four Years.

If this then be the State of the War, in Germany; if England be bound to take
a Part in it, by every Motive of Honor or Interest; and if the infinite
Advantages it has already produced, be stated by me fairly -- the Inference I
would draw, and which, I believe, the whole Nation will also draw, is, that we
should continue to exert those Endeavors which hitherto have been so
effectual, in defeating the Designs of France to get Possession of Hanover.

His Majesty, as Elector of Hanover, has no Views of Ambition: His Country has
been attacked only because it belonged to the King of Great Britain: and
nothing more is required of us, but to be true to ourselves, by neglecting no
Step that may prevent Hanover from falling again into the Hands of France,
after having been so miraculously rescued from the Contributions of the
rapacious Richli^u, and saved from the Military Desert of Belleis^e. -- I need
not say any Thing of the Glory acquired by that Army, which notwithstanding
it is great Inferiority, has driven the French twice from the Weser to the
Rhine. I shall only observe, that the next Campaign (if another Campaign should
preceed the Peace) will, in all Probability, lose us none of the Advantages we
have gained, on that Side; if our Army, still headed by Prince Ferdinand, who
has already gained so many Laurels, be rendered more formidable, as I hope it
will, by sending to it some Thousands more of our national Troops; who now,
since the Conquest of Canada, and the Defeat of the long threatened Invasion,
have no other Scene of Action left, but to contribute to another Victory in
Germany.

It would be a very pleasing Prospect, if we could speak with equal Confidence,
and Probability of Success, concerning the future Operations of the King of
Prussia. However, when we reflect on the amazing Difficulties he has had to
struggle with; attacked on every Side by a Number of Confederates, each of
whom, singly, one would have thought, an equal Match for his whole Strength;
bearing up, at the same Time, against the formidable Power of the House of
Austria; the brutal Ferocity of the Russians; the Attacks of the Swedes; the
Armies of the Empire; and, at one Time, having the additional Weight of the
French Arms upon him; when, I say, we reflect on the uncommon Difficulties this
magnanimous Prince has to resist, we must rather express our Wonder, and our
Satisfaction that his Situation is still so respectable, than indulge our
Fears, that it is likely to be worse. The severest Checks he has me^ with
during this War, have only served to show how calm he possesses himself under
Distress, and how ably he can extricate himself. The Hour of Adversity has
called forth all his Abilities, and if he has failed some Times, from too great
an Eagerness to conquer, he has always been able to retrieve his Affairs, and
like Ant^us, gained fresh Strength from every Overthrow.

And, upon this Principle, I flatter myself, his Prussian Majesty will still be
able to secure to himself the greater Part, if not the whole of Saxony for his
Winter Quarters, and to recruit his Army, no Doubt much shatte^ (...) with its
Losses and Fatigues, before the Opening of another Campaign. It is to be hoped
also, that besides the amazing Resources He has still left in his own unbounded
Genius, and the generous and effectual Support which his Connection with
England, affords him; the Power of the Confederacy against him may be broken,
by disuniting the Confederates. History satisfies us how seldom a Confederacy
of many Princes, has ever ruined a single Power attacked. I have give one
Instance of this already, when I spoke of the Grand Alliance against Lewis XIV.
and the League of Cambray against the Venetians, in the 16th Century, is an
Instance still more remarkable.

But, if contrary to our Hopes, our Wishes, our Endeavors, this should fail;
if his Prussian Majesty, like a Lion caught in the Toils (after a Resistance
already made, which will hand him down to Posterity as the greatest of Men)
should at last be unable to defend himself; let him not despair while he is in
Alliance with Britain: For I would inculcate a Doctrine, which I think will not
be unpopular amongst my Countrymen, and which, therefore, I hope, will not be
opposed by our Ministers, That whatever Conquests we have made, and whatever
Conquests we may still make, upon the French, except North America, which must
be kept all our own; should be looked upon as given back to France for a most
important Consideration, if it can be the Means of extricating the King of
Prussia from any unforeseen Distresses.

Perhaps my Notions on this Subject may seem to border on Enthusiasm; but,
however, I cannot but be persuaded, that Things are come to that Pass in
Germany, that the Ruin of the King of Prussia will be soon followed by the Ruin
of the Protestant Religion in the Empire. The blind Zeal of the bigoted
Austrian Family will have no Check, if the Head and Protector of the German
Protestants be destroyed; and the War begun only to wrest Silesia from him,
will, in the End, be found to be a War that will overturn the Liberties and
Religion of Germany. If, therefore, the noble Perseverance of the King of
Prussia deserves the Esteem of a generous People; if his Fidelity to his
Engagements, which has contributed to save Hanover and to ruin France, can
demand our Gratitude; if the Danger of the only Protestant Sovereign in
Germany, able to preserve the Privileges of his Religion from being trampled
under Foot, can call forth the warm Support of this Protestant Nation; may I
not hope, may I not be confident, that our Ministers will dictate, and our
People approve, of Terms of Peace in his Favor, though they should be
purchased by relinquishing some of our Conquests; while the Possession of
Canada will be so reasonable a Bound to the Demands we may make for ourselves?

I have stated this Point upon a Supposition that the Event of the War may turn
out to the Disadvantage of the King of Prussia. But if the Fortune, the
Capacity, the Perseverance of that Great Prince should enable him (as I think
we may still hope) to extricate himself from the Dangers that surround him --
it may be asked, What is to be done with the Conquests which, besides Canada,
we shall be in Possession of when we treat of a Peace? -- My Proposal is
honest, and, perhaps, will not be treated as chimerical: Employ them to
recover, out of the Hands of France, those Towns of Flanders, gained for the
Austrian Family by the Valor, and at the Expense of England; and which have
been so perfidiously sacrificed. A British Administration must tremble at the
Prospect of seeing Newport and Ostend become French Property, and, therefore,
should use their utmost Endeavors to prevent this at the Peace; though those
Endeavors may serve the Court of Vienna, whose Ingratitude to Bri^ain never
will be forgotten; though, at the same Time, I must own we shall draw no small
Advantage from it. We shall learn, for the future, to prefer our own Interest
to that of others; to proportion our Expenses on the Continent, to the
immediate Exigencies of our own Country, and never to assist a new Ally,
without remembering how much we did for our Old one, and what Return we have
had!

I have, now, nearly executed my principal Design, in the present Address;
which was to give my Thoughts on the important Business of the approaching
Treaty. And if it be conducted with as much Ability, as the War has been
carried on with Spirit and Success, there is great Room for flattering
ourselves, that the Voice of the Public demands no Advantages or Cessions in
Favor of England, which the Ministers of England are not resolved to insist
upon.

But amidst the signal Successes of our Arms, which give us so reasonable an
Expectation of an honorable Peace, and have exalted our Country to the highest
Pinnacle of Glory and Reputation abroad -- I wish it could be said that our
Constitution was not greatly in Danger of being hurt, and almost lost, at Home.
-- I shall beg Leave to take this Occasion of touching this equally melancholy
and important Subject; with a View, not to blame, but to lament; not to bring
any railing Accusation against those who are now in Power, but to exhort and to
excite them to endeavor, before it be too late, to add to the Services they
have done their Country, in saving it from the open Attacks of France, the
still more important Service of saving our Constitution, which some unhappy
Circumstances of our present Situation have already greatly changed, and seem
to threaten with entire Destruction; -- Nay, I may say, would have actually
destroyed, if it were not for the good Heart of our gracious Sovereign, who
scorns to take Advantage.

Considerably above an hundred Millions of Debt, the Sum we must be obliged to
sit down with, at the End of the present War, is the Burden which, however
immense, Experience has taught us, contrary to all Theory, we shall be able to
bear without Bankruptcy. As our Expenses have increased, we have found,
contrary to the Predictions of gloomy Politicians, that our Abilities to bear
them have increased also. -- But though our Debts be not too great for the Riches
of our Country, they are much too great for the Independency of its
Constitution. For, when I consider the infinite Dependence upon the Crown,
created by Means of Them, throughout the Kingdom, amongst all Degrees of Men;
when I reflect on the many Thousands of Placemen, of every Denomination, who
are employed in the Collection of the vast Variety of Taxes now levied on the
Public; and take a Review of a far greater Number of Servants of the Crown,
both Civil and Military, for whose Support so considerable a Share of the
public Revenue is set apart, too many of whom, I fear, might be tempted to
assist in extending the Influence of the Prerogative to the Prejudice of public
Liberty; when I consider our vast Load of Taxes, in this Point of View, I
cannot help observing the amazing Revolution in our Government which this
single Article has brought about; nor enough lament the unhappy Circumstances
of Affairs, and the Necessities of the War which have forced us to an annual
Expense, unknown to former Times, and which will almost be incredible to
Posterity. I believe I can venture to say upon Memory, that the Expenses of the
War, for all King William's Reign, about 13 Years, were not, at a Medium, above
3 Millions and a half a Year; and Queen Anne's, though the last Years were
exorbitant, were little more than 5 Millions. What they are now I sigh to think
on. Twelve or fourteen Millions are demanded without Reserve; and, what is
still more, voted without Opposition. Nay, of so little* Consequence it is now
thought, by our Representatives, to deliberate on the weighty Business of
raising Money on the Subject, that scarcely can Forty of them be got together,
to hear the Estimates for at least One hundred and fourscore Thousand Men, for
so many have we now in our Pay; and to borrow Eight Millions, the Sum of which
our Expenses exceed our Income.

These are alarming Considerations; but another Object, no less threatening the
Ruin of our Constitution, also presents itself.

I am old enough to remember what Uneasiness and Jealousies disturbed the Minds
of all true Patriots, with regard to standing Armies, and military
Establishments. Principles of Liberty in general, and, in particular, Whig
Principles* excited this Uneasiness, and produced those Jealousies, which from
Time to Time, have been a fruitful Source of Parliamentary Debate. It was no
longer ago than the late King's Time, that the vesting Courts Martial, in Time
of Peace, with the Power of punishing Mutiny and Desertion with Death, was
carried in the House of Commons by a small Majority In 1717-18 the Numbers on
the Division were 247 to 229.
. Nay, that a Court Martial, however limited in its Jurisdiction, was
inconsistent with the Liberties of a free People, in Time of Peace, was the
Doctrine of Whigs in those Days; it was the Doctrine, in particular, of Sir
Robert Walpole then in Opposition; whose remarkable Expression, in this great
Debate, That they who gave the Power of Blood, gave Blood, never can be
forgotten. And though afterward when he became to be a Minister, he was better
reconciled to standing Armies and Mutiny Bills, in Time of Peace, seventeen
Thousand Men, was all the Army he durst ask; yet even that Demand produced an
annual Debate; and the annual Reason, on which he founded the Necessity of his
Demand -- being the Danger from the Pretender and the Jacobites; was the
strongest Proof, that even in Sir R. Walpole's Opinion, the Reduction in the
Army should take Place, when this Danger from Disaffection should cease. But
how are Things changed? -- I own indeed that amidst the Dangers of this War,
and the Threats of an Invasion, the vast Army now on our Establishment; is
necessary: But what I lament is to see the Sentiments of the Nation so
amazingly reconciled to the Prospect of having a far more numerous Body of
regular Troops, kept up, after the Peace, than any true Lover of his Country in
former Times thought, could be allowed without endangering the Constitution.
Nay, so unaccountably fond are we become of the military Plan, that the
Erection of Barracks, which, twenty Years ago, would have ruined any Minister
who should have ventured to propose it, may be proposed safely by our Ministers
now Adays, and, upon Trial, be ^ound to be a favorite Measure with our
Patriots, and with the Public in general.

But what I lament as the greatest Misfortune that can threaten the public
Liberty, is to see the Eagerness with which our Nobility, born to be the
Guardians of the Constitution against Prerogative, solicit the Badge of
military Subjection, not merely to serve their Country, in Times of Danger,
which would be commendable, but in Expectation to be continued Soldiers, when
Tranquillity shall be restored, and to be under military Command, during Life.
When I see this strange, but melancholy Infatuation, so prevalent, I almost
despair of the Constitution. If it should go on in Proportion as it has of
late, I fear the Time will, at last, come, when Independence on the Crown, will
be exploded as unfashionable. Unless another Spirit possess our Nobility;
unless they lay aside their Military Trappings; and think that they can serve
their Country more effectually as Senators than as Soldiers, what can we expect
but to see, the System of military Subordination extending itself throughout
the Kingdom, universal Dependence upon Government influencing every Rank of
Men, and the Spirit, nay, the very Form of the Constitution destroyed? We have
generally beaten the French, and always been foolish enough to follow their
Fashions; I was in Hopes we should never have taken the Fashion of French
Government; but from our numerous Armies, and the military Turn of our
Nobility, I am afraid we are running into it as fast as we can. And, unless
something can be done, to bring back our Constitution to its first Principles,
we shall find that we have triumphed, only to make ourselves as wretched as our
Enemy; that our Conquests are but a poor Compensation for the Loss of our
Liberties; in a Word, that, like Wolf, falling in the Arms of Victory, we are
most gloriously -- undone!

But though I have drawn so melancholy a Picture, of the Dangers which threaten
us with the Loss of our Liberties, it is with no other Design, than to exhort
those who are placed at the Helm, to set about the Repairs of our shattered
Vessel, as soon as she can be brought safe into Harbor. After the Peace is
once settled, it ought to be the great Object of our Ministers, to devise every
Expedient, and to adapt every Plan, that may extricate this unhappy
Constitution from the Dangers I have described. Considering the low Ebb of
France, we have some Reason to hope that when Peace is once restored, upon
solid Terms, it will not soon be interrupted. Much, therefore, may be done
during those Years of Tranquillity; if our Ministers be diligent and faithful in
this great Work of reviving the Constitution. The sacred and inviolable
Application of the Sinking Fund, which the Increase of our Trade, and other
Circumstances, have so greatly augmented, and must still augment, will operate
gradually, and effectually. Universal and unvariable Economy, must be
introduced into every Branch of Government; the Revenues of the Kingdom may be
vastly increased by adopting Schemes that will prevent Frauds, and lessen the
Expense of Collection; innumerable unnecessary Places may be abolished, and
exorbitant Perquisites, in those we leave, may be restrained; Attention must be
had to the Morals and Principles of the Nation, and the Revival of Virtue and
of Religion will go Hand in Hand, with the Revival of Liberty. But no Object
will deserve more Attention, than our Military Encroachments on Constitutional
Independence. When this War shall be over, there will be less Reason, than
ever, for numerous Armies. The Kingdom now happily being united, and
Disaffection to the Royal Family at an End, we need fear no Rebellions among
ourselves; and Invasions from France are less likely than ever. Besides, by the
Care and Perseverance of some Patriots, we have acquired a new internal
Strength, a Militia trained up to be useful, and consequently, we may without
any Danger to the Public, reduce the Number of our Guards and Garrisons, so
low, as to destroy great Part of the huge Fabric of Military Influence and
Dependence. But whatever you do, if you mean to restore the Constitution, you
must secure the Dignity and Independence of Parliament. After passing such Laws
as may still be necessary to preserve the Freedom of Elections, from Influence
of every Sort; to punish Bribery both in the Electors and in the Elected;
something, perhaps, may still be done by Way of Place-bill, to lessen
Ministerial Influence over Parliaments, without having Recourse to an Oliverian
Self- denying Ordinance; or to so total an Exclusion of Placemen, as was
established, in the original Act of Settlement.

And an House of Commons thus chosen, and thus made independent, now that (...)
is rooted out, can never be formidable but to those who have Reason to tremble.
Such an House of Commons, will cooperate with the Administration in every Plan
of public Utility, and at the same Time inquire carefully into the Abuses of
Government; Supplies will be voted; but only in Proportion to the real Income
and Abilities of the Nation; and we may expect to see, what we have not seen
above these forty Years, a Parliamentary Commission of Accounts erected to
inquire into the Disbursement of near Two Hundred Millions. And unless we see
this soon, I shall look upon our Constitution, as lost, for ever.

These, and many such Regulations, as these, may, under an honest and virtuous
Administration, be adopted when once Peace is restored: And the Prospect of
seeing them adopted, and steadily pursued, keeps me from despairing altogether
of the Commonwealth.

To you, therefore, whose Power, most likely, will not terminate with the War;
and whom I have presumed to address with Regard to the Terms that should be
demanded, to secure us from a perfidious Foe; To you, My Lord, and Sir, let me
earnestly recommend, the still more important Care, of saving us, from
ourselves; and as you have with an Unanimity, that does you both great Honor,
directed our Councils, so as to humble France, let me entreat you to preserve
your Union, till it re-invigorate the almost lost Powers of the British
Constitution.

If you have any Regard to Virtue, to Liberty, to your Country; if you would
live great, and die lamented; if you would shine in History, with our
Clarendons and Southhamptons; let not this Opportunity, perhaps, this last
Opportunity of saving British Liberty, and Independence, be thrown away. You,
My Lord, whose Rank, whose extensive Influence, and personal Authority, have
given you the Pre-eminence, in public Affairs, as it were by Prescription; much
will depend upon you, in the carrying on this important Work. But when I direct
my Address to you, Sir, you must be conscious that besides the general
Expectations we have from you, as a Lover of your Country, we have your own
repeated Promises and Declarations, to make us flatter ourselves that you will
not stop short, in your Schemes of national Reformation. Not tutored in the
School of Corruption, but listed, from your earliest Years, under the Banner of
Patriotism; called into Power, by popular Approbation, and still uniting, the
uncommon Characters of Minister and Patriot; Favorite of the Public, and
Servant of the Crown; be not offended, Sir, if I remind you, not to disappoint
that Confidence the Public places in your future Endeavors to prop the sinking
Constitution. Nor let it ever fall from your Memory, that the Nation expects
from your Virtue, your Economy, your Plans for Liberty, during the future
Peace, as great Advantages as we have already gained, from your Spirit, your
bold Councils, and vigorous Efforts, in carrying on the present War.

Perhaps I grow too warm, on a favorite Subject; and, therefore, from Schemes
which cannot take Effect, till the War be closed, let me turn your Attention
again, for a little While longer, to the Object immediately before our Eyes --
the ensuing Conferences for Peace. And, with Regard to these, though I suppose,
they will begin before the Winter be over, I think there is some Reason for
being of Opinion that we must have another Campaign, before they can be finally
closed. France is too low, to think seriously of a Peace, without making some
desperate Effort. She never would have exposed her Weakness to all Europe, by
so shameful and so ^umbling a Bankruptcy; She never would have ruined her
public Credit, and melted her Plate, the last Resource, when every other has
been exhausted, only to receive Terms from England. No, she knows she is
undone, for ever, if she gets no Footing in Hanover; and, therefore, we may
expect to see another Attempt made for that Purpose. But, if we are not wanting
to ourselves, another Attempt, will end, as unfortunately for her, as the
former have done; and her Ruin only be more confirmed. In the mean While, I
make no Doubt, the Plenipotentiaries will meet at a Congress; but the Events of
the Field, must regulate the Deliberations of the Cabinet. We, no Doubt, shall
be firm in our Demands, whatever they are; and the French will endeavor to
gain Time, to know whether there is any Likelihood of obliging us to offer them
better. In this Situation, then, France must hear with Terror, that without
breaking our national Faith, without injuring private Property, without giving
exorbitant Premiums, we have already provided immensely for the Supplies of
another Year (and Supplies for Years may still be had) to meet them; -- not in
America; there they are no more; -- not on the Ocean -- the Destruction of
their Fleets leaves that Empire free to us -- but once more, on the Plains of
another Minden, again to feel and to confess the Superiority of British Valor.

I have only a Particular or two, to add, before I conclude. And I cannot help
congratulating the Public, on the Wisdom of our Manner of Opening the
Negotiation for Peace. I mean to observe, that our Ministers have happily got
rid of a set of very useless, or very pernicious Gentlemen called Mediators, by
applying directly to the Enemy himself. Nothing can be more ridiculous than the
Figure of the Pope's Nuncio, and the Ambassador of (...), a^ting the F^rce of
Mediation at Munster, for several Years, while the War went on, till its Eve^^s
regulated the Terms of Peace. The Mediation of Insignificant Powers is
therefore absurd; and the Danger of calling in a powerful Mediator, who may
threaten to declare against you, if you do not submit to his partial Decisions,
is too obvious to be insisted upon. You have done wisely, therefore, to keep
the Negotiation in your own Hands; the Nation, from this Instance, has a full
Confidence that her Interests are skilfully conducted; and, therefore, I shall
only add, another Particular, which however subordinate, will, no Doubt, be
attended to by you; though some late Negotiators of ours, with France,
neglected it.

The French, by taking the Lead in Europe of late, have, of Course, been able
to introduce their Language in all public Negotiations; so that, perhaps, the
French is the only Tongue, by the Channel of which Plenipotentiaries and
Ministers of different Countries, can converse. But when the Negotiation is to
be put into Writing, to be drawn up in that Form which is to be binding upon
all the Parties, and signed jointly by the treating Powers, neither the Honor,
nor the Interest of the State, ought to allow us, to accept of the Original
Treaty in the Native Tongue of our Enemies. The Honor of the Nation forbids
this; as it would be a Confession of Superiority, to which Britain, at no Time,
much less after so glorious a War, should submit; especially as we cannot
submit to it, without giving the Enemy a real Advantage, and laying the
Foundation for future Cavils. -- Cardinal Mazarine, in his Letters, boasts,
that by a latent Ambiguity and Nicety in the French Style, he had been able to
outwit Don Louis de Haro, in the Conferences at the Pyren^es. And a much later
Instance, in which we ourselves were partly concerned, should confirm us, in
our Refusal to treat with the French in their own Language. -- I mean the
famous Capitulation of the Dutch Garrison of Tournay in 1745; which, though
only restrained from acting, for a limited Time in any of the Barrier Towns I
have not the original Capitulation before me, but I remember pretty exactly on
what the Cavil turned. The Troops were not to act, I think, for two Years, in
any of the Places le plus reculees de la Barriere. The Dutch, no Doubt,
understood, de la Barriere to be the Genitive Ca^e, but the French said they
meant it in the A^lative.
, as the Dutch believed, when they accepted of the Capitulation, was soon after
interpreted by France, as tying them up from acting in any Part of the World;
and might have been fatal to this Country, if the Rebellion in Scotland, to
assist in quelling which the Dutch lent us those very Troops, had been so
successful, as to oblige us, to put our foreign Allies to the Test.

We have no great Reason, no more than other Nations, to trust Gallic Faith, as
appears from the many Instances of their unp^lliated Perfidy which I have
collected above. Let us not, therefore, be so weak as to give them Room for
obtruding upon us, any fallacious Interpretations of the Words, in which they
plight their Faith. They are too ready to break it when the Terms are ever so
clear; and, therefore, let us take Care not to give them that Advantage which
superior Skill in their own Language, naturally confers, and which upon some
future Occasion, they may improve to our Detriment. Let the original and
authentic Copy of the Treaty, therefore, be in a dead Language, the Phrases of
which cannot vary, and whose Meaning is equally understood by both Parties. We
had once a very learned Plenipotentiary in Queen Elizabeth's Time, who, in a
Negotiation with Spain, when it came to be debated in what Language the Treaty
should be made, ludicrously enough proposed to the Spaniard, who was giving
himself Airs of Superiority, to treat in the Language of his Master's Kingdom
of Jerusalem. But, leaving the Hebrew for our Divines, I would only have our
Negotiators treat in Latin: Which seemed, as it were by Prescription, to have a
Right to be the Language of the Public Law of Europe; till some late* Instances
have shown that the French was beginning to be substituted in its Room; by the
Laziness or Neglect of those who treated. As we are sanguine in our Hopes of a
much better Peace than we had at Utrecht, with Regard to the Terms, let it not
be worse than that at Utrecht, which preserved the Old Custom of settling the
Negotiation in Latin. We then had a Bishop indeed, as Plenipotentiary; but
without having Recourse to the very learned Bench, or choosing a
Plenipotentiary from Cambridge (I hope in a little Time one may join the other
University without giving Offense) the Negotiators at the ensuing Peace, may be
accommodated with Latin enough for the Purpose I mention, at a very moderate
Expense -- If their Secretary or Chaplain cannot assist them.

But when I begin to be ludicrous on so serious a Subject, it is Time to have
done: And my Address has already swelled to such a Size as surprises myself, as
much, as I fear it will tire the Reader. However, the vast Variety of Facts and
Particulars which naturally offered themselves to me, and which could not be
omitted without hurting the Connection, and weakening my Argument, will,
perhaps, procure Indulgence for so long a Pamphlet: And, for the same Reason, I
flatter myself, that if I should happen to have been mistaken in any Thing I
advance, to have erred in a Date, or to have misquoted a Treaty, some
Allowances will be made to me, as I have been obliged to trust much to my
Memory, for Want of a proper Opportunity of consulting many of those Books,
which furnish the Materials I have made use of. However, I believe a candid
Reader will find no capital, at least, no wilful, Mistake.

I am far from the Vanity of thinking that my Notions on the important Subject
of the Peace, are a regular Plan or System for the Administration to proceed
upon. I throw them out, only as loose Hints for my Superiors, to improve as
they may think proper. Should there be any Weight in all, or any of them, you,
My Lord and Sir, will be able to work them into Utility for this Kingdom. If
they are not worth your Notice; as I am an anonymous Writer, and hope never to
be known, I can neither loose nor gain Reputation by them. All I can say, if
they are neglected, is, Operam et Oleam perdidi.

I am, My Lord and Sir, Yours, etc. etc.

FINIS.
A Short SPEECH and CHARACTER of Mr. PIT, extracted from Smollett's History.
IN 1^40 a very hot Contest arose, in Parliament, from a Bill relating to the
Impress of Seamen. Mr. H. WAL^OLE thought proper to attack Mr. PIT with some
personal Sarcasms. He reflected upon his Youth; and observed that the Discovery
of Truth was very little promoted by pompous Diction and theatrical Emotion,
These Insinuations exposed him to a severe Reply. Mr. PIT, standing up again,
said He would not undertake to determine whether Youth could be justly imputed
to any Man as a Reproach: But he affirmed, that the Wretch, who, after having
seen the Consequences of repeated Errors, continues still to blunder, and whose
Age has only added Obstinacy to Stupidity, is surely the Object of either
Abhorrence or Contempt, and deserves not that his gray Head should secure him
from Insults. Much more is he to be abhorred* who, as he has advanced in Age,
has receded from Virtue, and becomes more wicked with less Temptation; who
prostitutes himself for Money which he cannot enjoy; and spends the Remains of
his Life in the Ruin of his Country.

WILLIAM PIT, Esquire. had been originally designed for the Army, in which he
actually bore a Commission; but Fate reserved him for a more important Station.
In Point of Fortune he was barely qualified to be elected Member of Parliament,
when he obtained a Seat in the House of Commons, where he soon outshone all his
Compatriots. He displayed a surprising Extent and Precision of political
Knowledge, and irresistible Energy of Argument, and such Power of Elocution, as
struck his Hearers with Astonishment and Admiration: It flashed, like the
Ligh^ning of Heaven, against the Ministers and Sons of Corruption, blasting
where it smote, and withering the Nerves of Opposition. But his more
substantial Praise was founded upon his disinterested Integrity, his
incorruptible Heart, his unconquerable Spirit of Independence, and his
invariable Attachment to the Interest and Liberty of his Country.


