THE TRIAL OF SPIRITS, BOTH IN TEACHERS and HEARERS. WHEREIN IS HELD FORTH The
clear Discovery, and certain Downfall, of the CARNAL and ANTICHRISTIAN CLERGY
of these Nations.

Testified from the Word of GOD, to the University Congregations in Cambridge.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Caius
College, in Cambridge.

LONDON: First printed in the Year 1666. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by B.
FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. MDCCLX.

THE TRIAL of SPIRITS.
1 John iv. i. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone forth into the World.

2. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God.

3. And every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God: And this is that Spirit of Antichrist whereof you have
heard, that it should come, and even now already it is in the World.

4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them, because greater is
be that is in you, than he that is in the World.

5. They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World, and the World
hears them.

6. We are of God; be that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God,
hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error.


IN this Scripture, we may take Notice of these six Things.

1. The Apostle gives Notice to the beloved Congregations of spiritual
Christians, of a great Evil risen up in the World, which (if not carefully
heeded) might occasion some great Trouble and Danger to them; many false
Prophets (says he) are gone out into the World, V. 1. 2. He prescribes them a
sufficient Remedy against this Evil, saying, Believe not every Spirit, but try
the Spirits, whether they are of God. 3. That the Faithful may be able to make
a right Judgment of Spirits, he gives them one short Rule of Trial, which yet
comprehends in itself all Rules; Verses 2 and 3. Hereby know we the Spirit of
God; every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of
God; and every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God, etc. 4. He shows them with whom these false Prophets, who
have the Spirit of Antichrist, should not prevail; viz. with none of the true
Christians of God, Verse 4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome
them; because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World. 5. He
shows them with whom the false Prophets, should prevail, viz. with the World
and carnal People; Verse 5. They are of the World, therefore speak they of the
World, and the World hears them. The World, seeking its own Things, receives
Antichrist, and his Prophets. 6. He shows how the Spirit of Truth and Error
may be known in the People, as well as in the Teachers; viz. by the Peoples
cleaving, either to the Teachers of Truth, or to the Teachers of Error; Verse
6. We are of God, he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God,
hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error.
These six Things are held forth to us, in this Scripture, and they are all
very profitable and necessary for the true Church to be acquainted withal,
especially in these last of the last Times. I shall begin with the first, which
is,

The FIRST POINT. The great and dangerous Evil, of which the Apostle gives
Notice to the Church of Believers; and that is, the going out of false Prophets
into the World.
Many false Prophets are gone out into the World.
AND here it is to be noted, that from the very Beginning of the World, there
have been two Seeds or Generations of Men, very contrary the one to the other;
as is evident in Genesis iii. 15. where God says to the Serpent, I will put
Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; so that
the Serpent has his Seed, as well as the Woman her Seed; and this was the
Woman's Curse, to have her Sorrows and Conceptions multiplied, and to bring
forth the Serpent's Seed, as well as her own, that is, the Children or Seed of
the first Blessing; and both these contrary Seeds do partake of one and the
same common Nature, or Humanity. And one of these Seeds are called, The Sons of
God; the other, The Sons of Men, Genesis vi. 6. And both these, being the
Children of one Adam, according to the Flesh, are yet distinguished by several
Spirits, that dwell in them, and inspire them: For the Spirit of God, that is,
the Spirit of Righteousness and Truth, does inspire the one, and these are
truly called the Children of God, as Paul says, Romans viii. As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. And the Spirit of Satan,
which is the Spirit of Wickedness and Error, does inspire the other; and these
are truly called, the Sons of Men, who all have sinned, and are deprived of the
Glory of God.

Now these two different and contrary Spirits, which have dwelt in these two
distinct Seeds, have begun to act presently from the very Beginning of the
World, each one according to its own Nature, and to trade and traffic about
Mankind, and out of it, to bring forth Children to themselves, like to
themselves in all Things; and so one has endeavored to beget and bring forth
the Children of God, and of Truth; the other, the Children of Men, and of
Error: And to this End, the one has held forth the Truth of God, by the true
Spirit of God; the other has held forth Error and Falsehood, yet as it were the
Truth: The one has endeavored to bring Man unto God, through true Faith and
Repentance; the other to turn Men from God, through Sin: The one has sought to
work Salvation in Men, the other Destruction.

Now the false Spirit has been the most common in the World, and has had the
greatest Opportunities and Advantages to multiply itself, seeing it finds the
whole World already lying in Wickedness, and fully prepared to receive itself.
But the true Spirit has been found in very Few, and that from the Beginning;
for there have been but few true Prophets, who have had the true Spirit, and
have spoken the true Word; as you may see all along in Scriptures, especially
in the Times of Elijah and Micajah, but Christ says, many false Prophets shall
arise, and deceive many; and Peter says in his second Epistle, Chapter ii.
Verses 1, 2. That as there were false Prophets among the People, that is, the
Jews, so there shall be false Doctors and Teachers among the Christians, who
should privily bring in damnable Heresies; and that many should follow their
pernicious Ways.

So that as there have been many false Prophets from the Beginning, so
especially in the Days of the New Testament; for the more Christ has appeared
by his spirit to lead Men into Truth, the more has the Devil appeared by his
Spirit to lead Men into Error; and this is properly called Antichrist; For
Flesh and Blood is not Antichrist; but a Spirit contrary to Christ's Spirit,
that dwells in Flesh and Blood, and chiefly among those that profess the
Christian Religion; this is Antichrist.

No Spirit, in the Jews or Gentiles, is properly called Antichrist, but the
Spirit of Satan in false Christians, appearing as an Angel of Light, this is
Antichrist. Before Christ came in the Flesh, the Devil was an evil Spirit, and
a Liar, and a Murderer, and the unclean Spirit, and Prince of this World; but
he was not properly Antichrist, because Christ was not then come in the Flesh.
The Devil was the Devil before, and did dwell and work in evil Men; but from
the Beginning of the Christian Church, he is called Antichrist, and that not
every where, but in the Church or Kingdom of Christ: For Antichrist is a
Spirit that dissolves Jesus, and that not openly, but subtly and cunningly,
yea, under the Name and Pretense of Jesus, he is wholly contrary to him.
Wherefore, the discerning of Spirits, as it has been necessary from the
Beginning of the World, so also it is especially necessary in the Days of the
Gospel, wherein the Mystery of Iniquity is become most mysterious, through the
Operation of Antichrist, in those many false Prophets which are gone forth
into the World. And so we proceed to the second Point.

The SECOND POINT.
And that is this, That sufficient Remedy, which the Apostle prescribes to the
true Church, against that great Evil of many false Prophets being gone out into
the World.

Now the Remedy the Apostle prescribes to the Faithful against these false
Prophets, is not that they should stir up the secular Power to imprison, banish
or burn them, that so they might be rid of them; for this is Anti-christ's
proper Remedy against those that oppose him; but the Apostle shows a more
Christian Remedy, which is this, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits,
whether they be of God; and this Remedy alone is sufficient for the true
spiritual Church of the Faithful in every Age, to preserve it safe and sound
against all false Teachers whatsoever, and their false Doctrines; neither does
it desire or need any other. Wherefore in this Case the Apostle contents
himself to give only this Caution to the Faithful, Believe not every Spirit,
but try the Spirits, whether they be of God.

Believe not every Spirit, etc. That is, every one that speaks of spiritual
Things. Whence it is plain, that we neither ought rashly and h^^^^ly to believe
every Man's Doctrine, nor yet rashly and unadvisedly to censure and condemn it,
till it be heard and known what it is: But it is a Christian's Duty to prove
all Things, and to hold fast that which is Good, upon Proof, as Paul advises;
wherefore John also adds here, But try the Spirits, whether they be of God.

Whence we note, That Christians have Right and Power to try and judge the
Spirits and Doctrines of their Teachers: And this is evident by many plain
Scriptures; as,

Matthew vii. 15. Beware of false Prophets (says Christ to the Faithful) which
come unto you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves; ye
shall know them by their Fruits.

Matthew xvi. 6. Jesus said unto them, take heed and beware of the Leaven of
the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.

Matthew xvi. 4. Jesus said, take heed that no no Man deceive you, for many
shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

John x. My Sheep hear my Voice, and know my Voice, and a Stranger will they
not hear, but flee from him, for they know not (that is, own not) the Voice of
Strangers. And all that came before me are Thieves and Robbers, but the Sheep
did not hear them.

By all which Scriptures, and many more that might be added, it is manifest
that the Faithful, the true Sheep of Christ, have Right and Power to judge of
the Spirit and Doctrines of the Teachers.

Let Fathers, Schoolmen, Doctors, Councils, Assemblies of Divines,
Universities, Ministers, propound and publish what Doctrine they please, the
Sheep of Christ, the faithful Flock, have Power and Authority from Christ
himself to try and judge, whether the Things they speak be of Christ, or of
themselves, and of Antichrist. And this Power the faithful People ought not to
part with, neither for any Fear, nor for any Favor.

Yea, it most nearly concerns the Faithful to try the Spirits, and judge the
Doctrines of the Teachers, for these two Considerations, among others.

First, Because we must each one give an Account for ourselves before the
Judgment Seat of Christ: Wherefore it concerns every one of us to look to our
own eternal Condition, and not to leave this Care to others for us. In Death
and Judgment, each one must answer for himself; and therefore we ought to be as
certain of the Word of God, on which we build our immortal Souls, as we are
sure we live, and are Creatures; we ought, I say, to be sure ourselves, and not
to trust any Body for us in this great Matter, whereon depends either eternal
Life, or eternal Death.

Secondly, It concerns us to try the Spirits and Doctrines, because otherwise
we may easily mistake, and instead of Antichrist, and his Disciples, dash
against Christ himself, and his precious Saints. Yea, we have seen how the
World, and worldly Church, not being able to try the Spirits and Doctrines,
have contradicted and crucified the Son of God himself, and have reproached and
persecuted all his People, who are baptized into one Spirit with him; and doing
this, they have thought they have done God good Service too; and all because
they were not able to judge of the Spirit and Truth of Christ in himself and
his Members, but have followed the Judgment and Counsel of the chief Guides in
the outward Church, who have caused them to err, and to mistake Truth for
Error, and Error for Truth, Christ for Antichrist, and Antichrist for Christ.

Wherefore it concerns every one to be wise to Salvation for himself, and to
try the Spirits for himself, and not to content himself to say; thus said
Augustine, Ambrose, Hierom, etc. or this was the Judgment of the Fathers, or
thus have the Councils or Universities determined, or thus do our Ministers
teach us; but if thou art one of Christ's Flock, thou must have Skill to know
and judge for thyself, which is Christ's Spirit and Doctrine, and which is
Anti-christ's; otherwise thou will certainly miscarry in this great Matter, and
be undone for ever. If thou build on Men in these Things, and can not judge
for thyself, thou will be sure to be undone.

But now this Power of trying Spirits, and judging Doctrines, which Christ has
given his true Flock, and which they ought to have upon so good Grounds, the
Teachers of the false and Antichristian Church, that is, the common Clergy,
distinguished by several Names, Titles, and Degrees, have robbed them of, and
have falsely and treacherously arrogated to themselves the Power of trying
Spirits, and judging Doctrines, and have said, that it belongs to the Clergy,
or national Ministry, and their Councils, and Assemblies of Divines, to judge
of Spirits, whether they be right or false; and to judge of Doctrines, whether
they be agreeable to God's Word, or no; and that all Christians ought to expect
their Judgment and Determination, and to submit to it, and to depend on it, as
on an Oracle from Heaven, yea, though it be not only without, but also against
their own particular Judgment.

And these Men (I mean the Clergy) through the ecclesiastical and temporal
Power which they had gotten, have stricken great Fear into the whole World, and
have miserably vexed innumerable Consciences with a grievous and lasting
Bondage, and have even driven them to Despair, whilst none durst approve or own
any Spirit or Doctrine, though never so manifestly of Christ and his Gospel,
without their Allowance and Approbation; so mightily has the Power of
Antichrist prevailed in the World, and that against the express Word of Christ.

Now the Ground of this their antichristian Pride and Usurpation is this, that
they arrogate to themselves, that they are the Guides and Shepherds of all
Christian Men, and are to teach them the Gospel, which they are only to receive
from their Lips; whereas Christ has promised his true Church, that they shall
be all taught of God, and shall hear and learn themselves from the Father, and
has also promised to send them the Spirit, to lead them in all Truth, and to
give them an Anointing, to teach them all Things.

Now they, by robbing the Faithful of this Power, and arrogating it to
themselves, have made themselves, contrary to Christ's Command, Lords and
Masters in the Church of God, and have usurped to themselves Superiority and
Authority over other Believers, and have subjected all the World to their
Opinion and Judgment in the Things of God; by which Means, they have set wide
open the Floodgates to Antichrist, and his Kingdom, to break in upon the
World, and to overflow it, whilst they had robbed all Christian People of their
own Judgment in all Things of God, and had made them to depend wholly on the
Judgment of the Clergy.

And had not Christian People thus unchristianly delivered up their Judgments
to the Clergy, and that in the very highest Points of Religion, Christianity
had not been so miserably blinded and corrupted as it is, and the Mystery of
Iniquity had not so much prevailed in the World, as now it has. For when
Christians would not try the Spirits, whether they were of God, and the
Doctrines, whether they were the Word of God or no, but thought this a Matter
too high for them, and would refer and submit all to the Judgment of their
Ministers; then Antichrist (the Apostle of the Devil) came forth boldly, and
proudly exalted himself above all that is called God, and his Kingdom, above
all the Kingdoms of the World, having first put out both the Eyes of
Christians, by taking away from them their Right and Power of trying Spirits,
and judging Doctrines.

But when true Christians shall search the Scriptures (as God I trust has now
fully put into their Hearts to do) and shall justly and lawfully take to
themselves the Power which God has given them, to try Spirits and Doctrines,
then Antichrist, and his Agents, the carnal Clergy, must soon be brought down:
For the Faithful, by that Word, shall soon perceive that they are not of God,
nor their Doctrine of that right Gospel, which is after the Mind of Christ.

Well then, by what has been said, you who are of Christ's true Sheep may
perceive, that it is evident by the Word, that faithful Christians have Right
and Power to try Spirits and Doctrines, though Antichrist, for many Ages, has
robbed them of this Privilege.

For (that I may speak a little more to this Matter) the Trial of Spirits does
unquestionably belong to all Men, who have received the Spirit of God: For to
this Spirit of God which dwells in the Faithful, the Gift of discerning Spirits
is inseparably annexed: And the Spirit of Christ, which truly dwells in all
true Christians, cannot deceive, nor be deceived in the Trial of Spirits. So
that this now is a common Grace, that in some Measure belongs to all true
Christians, who have received the Unction that teaches them all Things, and is
true, and is no Lie.

And though there be in the Church Diversities of Gifts from the same Spirit,
which are given to some, and not to others, as Tongues, and Interpretation of
Tongues, and Miracles, and Gifts of healing, etc. mentioned by Paul, I Cor.
xii. yet this Gift of trying Spirits is given to all, in some Measure, that
have received the Spirit. For as in the natural Body there are several Gifts
given to several Members, which are no given to all the Members, as Seeing to
the Eye. Hearing to the Ear, Walking to the Foot, etc. but Feeling is given to
all the Members; so also in the Body of Christ, that is, the spiritual Church,
several Gifts are given to several Saints, but the Trial of Spirits and
Doctrines to Saints, who have received the Spirit; and if any have not Christ's
Spirit, he is none of his; and if any have not Christ's Spirit, he can, in some
Measure, discern and judge of all Spirits in the World: And the more any Man
receives Christ's Spirit, the more able is he to judge of all other Spirits.

Wherefore they who are true Believers, and have received Christ's Spirit,
their Judgment is to be preferred in the Trial of Spirits, before the Judgment
of a whole Council of Clergymen.

And they only, who can try Spirits by the Spirit of God, and Doctrines by the
Word of God, written in their Hearts by the Spirit, and fit to commend
Ministers to the Work of God: That is, the Congregations of the Faithful, and
not Universities, and Assemblies of Divines.

And thus you may perceive that, seeing many false Prophets are gone out into
the World, it concerns the Faithful, as they tender their own everlasting
Salvation, not to believe every Spirit that speaks of Christ, and his Kingdom,
and his Things, but to try the Spirits, whether they be of God.

Object. But now (it may be) some will be ready to say, we ought indeed to try
the Spirits, seeing there are many false Prophets in the World, but we hope
there are no such Persons among us, but only some up-start Men, with their new
Light, who with their Novelties and Fancies trouble the Nation, and would fain
turn all Things Up-side down, and we know these well enough already, and do
sufficiently despise them.

Answ. It is very like you do; but yet let me say to you, Men, Brethren, and
Fathers, understand yourselves, and know what ye do in this Matter. For at the
Beginning of the Reformation by the Ministry of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and
diverse others, precious Servants of Jesus Christ, the Popish Clergy applied all
these Scriptures, Try the Spirits, whether they be of God, for many false
Prophets are gone out into the World; and beware of false Prophets, which come
to you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves; I say, these, and
the like Places of Scriptures, they applied to these godly Men, and yet they
themselves were the false Prophets indeed, and the others, whom they termed
such, were true Ones. Wherefore it is possible for you to be mistaken as well
as they, and no Doubt but you will be mistaken, except the Lord be gracious to
you, and give you his own Spirit, by which alone you can make a right Judgment
in this Matter.

Wherefore, that he that reads may understand, you must know, that the false
Prophets are not so easily discerned as you think; for they seem to be true
Prophets, and godly, holy, learned, orthodox Men, Men of Eminency and Renown in
the Church and State: And so to Flesh and Blood, and the Wisdom and Religion of
the World, it will be a difficult, yea, and impossible Thing to find them out:
For the false Prophets have several glorious Vails over them, to hide and
obscure them from common Knowledge.

Wherefore we declare unto you from the Word of the Lord, touching these false
Prophets, who shall do so much Mischief.

1. That they shall not proceed, or come forth from among the Jews, or Turks,
or out of the barbarous Nations, but they shall arise out of such as are called
Christians. 2. Seeing among Christians some are openly profane and evil,
others seem to be religious and godly, the false Prophets shall be found among
the better Sort; and therefore, says Christ, they shall come in Sheeps
Clothing, as if they were of Christ's own Flock: And Paul says, They have a
Form of Godliness, that is, they shall be painted over gloriously, with all
Appearances of Truth, Righteousness, Honesty, Goodness; and all the Names of
Godliness. 3. Seeing amongst those that seem to be the better Sort of
Christians, some give themselves to the Ministry of the Word, and some do not;
the false Prophets shall be found among those Christians, who take upon
themselves to be Preachers, as Paul testifies, Acts xx. where having called
together the Elders and Teachers of the Church of Ephesus, he says to them, Ex
vohis ipsis; Out of your ownselves shall Men arise, speaking perverse Things,
to draw away Disciples after them.
And seeing among those who are Ministers, some are light, and vain, and
carnal, and formal Persons, and others are Men of great Worth and Reputation,
and seem to be the precious Members of Christ, and even Pillars in the Church,
so that the common People think, that all Religion would go down with such good
Men, they having some Gifts and Enlightenings of the Spirit, and seeming more
than ordinarily godly, religious, wise, holy, sober, devour; now the false
Prophets shall be found among these. And as they who opposed Christ at his
first coming in the Flesh, seemed more wise, and holy, and eminent in the
Church than the rest, as the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat in Moses's Chair,
and had the outward Letter of the Word in all Exactness, and the outward Form
of Religion in all Strictness; so they, who do, and shall most oppose Christ in
his coming in his Spirit, and shall contradict his Word, and resist his
Servants and Witnesses of his Truth, do, and shall appear more wise, holy,
learned, and godly, than the rest of the Teachers of the Church.

And thus you see, that the false Prophets of Antichrist shall arise among
Christians, and among such Christians as seem to be godly; and among such
seeming godly Christians as preach the Word; and among such Preachers of the
Word as seem to be of greater Worth and Eminency than the rest: And so in all
these Regards it will be a hard Matter to discern them.

2. Again, such Persons, of such Appearance of Worth and Holiness as these, do
usually get to their Side the greatest and highest Persons in the Kingdoms and
Nations, and do obtain, not only their Countenance and Favor, but also their
Power and Authority for themselves.

3. By both these Means ( viz. their seeming Holiness, and their Interest with
worldly Powers) they exceedingly enlarge their Credit and Reputation with the
World, and do get Multitudes of People and Nations to entertain them.

For Antichrist could not deceive the World with a Company of foolish, weak,
ignorant, profane, contemptible Persons, but he always has the greatest,
wisest, holiest, and most eminent in the visible Church for him, and by these
he seduces and subjects to himself even the whole World.

Besides, they that are against him, and his false Prophets, are but a very
Handful of Saints, who have the Spirit of Christ, and through his Spirit
discern them, and oppose them; and for so doing are despised and hated of all
the World.

Wherefore it is a harder Matter to try these false Prophets than we are well
aware of. And yet, as hard as it is, the Apostle, by the Spirit, has given us
a manifest and certain Rule of Trial: And this is the third general Thing I
named.

The THIRD POINT.
To wit, The sufficient Rule, whereby the true Church may thoroughly try the
Spirits and Prophets, how cunningly and subtly soever they are disguised; and
this he lays down, Verse 3.

Hereby know we the Spirit of God; every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God. And every Spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God, etc.

Now this Scripture we may understand two Ways.

1. Of a right Knowledge of Jesus Christ in his own Person. 2. Of a true
Receiving of this Christ into us by Faith.
First. Of the right Knowledge of Christ in his own Person.

1. For whereas he says, Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh, etc. This gives us to understand, that he is true God, and
was before he came into the Flesh.

2. Whereas he says, Every Spirit that confesses that Christ is come in the
Flesh; this gives us to understand, that he is true Man, our very Brother,
Partaker of the same Flesh and Blood with us.

3. Whereas he says, Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh, etc.

This also gives us to understand, that in him, true God and true Man are
united into one inseparable Person.

4. Whereas he says, Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh, etc. This gives us Occasion to consider the End of his Coming;
seeing God did not become Man in vain, or for some slight Cause, but that he
might redeem unto God, all those whom the Father had elected in him, and save
them perfectly from the Law, Sin, Death and Hell: And hence we may rise up to
conceive of his Offices, viz. of his Priestly, Prophetical and Kingly Office,
and of the infinite Virtue and Efficacy of them.

Now he that makes this Confession of Jesus Christ, from the Revelation of the
Father, is of God; and he that speaks otherwise, is not of God.

2. But secondly, We may understand this Scripture, not only of the true
Knowledge of Jesus Christ, but also and especially of the true Receiving of him
by Faith: Every Spirit (says he) that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh, is of God; that is, he is of God, that believes and acknowledges
that the Son of the living God is come, not only into that Humanity of Christ,
that was born of the Virgin, but also that he is come into us, and dwells in
us; according to these Scriptures, That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by
Faith: And Christ in you the Hope of Glory: And Know ye not that Christ is in
you, except you be Reprobates, etc. Wherefore the Jesus Christ is come into his
own Flesh, but also into theirs, which by this Means is made his; and that
Christ is in them, of a Truth, and dwells in them.

For Antichrist himself, and his Ministers, do all acknowledge, that Jesus
Christ is come into that Flesh, which he did assume of the Virgin; but they
will not confess, that this is true in him, and in us: They will acknowledge
the Mystery of God manifested in the Flesh, as to Christ the Head, but they
will deny it as to the Church his Body: And so, whilst they separate the Head
from the Body, and the Body from the Head in this Mystery, they do solvere
Jesum, they dissolve Jesus.

I say some hold, that the eternal Word, or divine Nature, came indeed into
that Flesh which was born of the blessed Virgin, but they will by no Means
allow it to come into ours, through our Union with him by Faith: Only they say,
some created Habits, or Gifts of Grace come into us, or in our Flesh, but not
Christ himself, or the divine Nature, or Son of the living God. And so these
Men set up these created Gifts and Graces in the Members, instead of Christ
himself, the Head.

And yet these Teachers make a glorious Show in the Flesh; and this is
Antichrist, viz. when Men think that these created Habits of Grace (which they
fancy) will renew, comfort, sanctify and save them; and so do make to
themselves of them, a glorious, but yet a false Christ.

Wherefore let us know, that he that denies Jesus Christ in the Members, is,
though not so great, yet as true Antichrist, as he that denies Jesus Christ in
the Head: And he that denies Christ dwelling in our Hearts by Faith, to be, and
to be alone, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption to us, as he
that denies him to be the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God in himself.

The Sum of this Matter is this, that the true Spirits or Prophets do
acknowledge, not only that Christ, the Son of the living God, is come into that
Son of Man, which was born of the Blessed Virgin, but also that Christ is come
into them, and dwells in them, as in his own true and proper Members.

And so, he that has Jesus Christ dwelling in his Heart, is a true Prophet;
and he that has not Christ dwelling in his Heart, is a false Prophet, though
his Knowledge and Religion be never so high, and glorious, and holy also in the
Opinion of the World. And this is the chief Sign and Mark, whereby we may know
the true Prophets and true Christians, from the false Prophets and false
Christians.

Object. Now if any shall say, but how shall we know whether a Man has Christ
dwelling in his Heart or no? And so consequently, whether he be a true or false
Prophet?

Answ. I answer, you shall certainly know it, by the Truth of the Word of
Christ in him, and by the Truth of the Life of Christ, in Reference to his
Office in the Word.

1. First then, the true Prophets are to be discerned from the false,

By the Truth of the Word of God in them.

For the true Prophets speak the true Word of God, even the Word of Wisdom, the
Word of Righteousness, the Word of Life, the Word of Power, the Word that is
able to save, which is the true Gospel Word. For this is the Covenant that God
has made with Christ and his Seed, saying, Isa. lix. 21. My Spirit which is
upon thee, and my Word which is in thy Mouth, shall never depart out of thy
Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds
Seed, from henceforth and for ever.

And this was perfectly fulfilled in Christ; for that Word, which in the
Beginning was with God, and was God, was made Flesh in him, and dwelt in him;
and out of that Word Jesus Christ spoke all that ever he spoke; his whole
Doctrine did flow from that eternal Word which dwelt in him.

And Christ communicated to the Disciples the same Word which he had received,
as he says, John xvii. 8. I have given to them the Words that thou gave me
(that is, the word of Righteousness and Life) and they have received them, and
have known surely, that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou
did send me; and so that Word, which they themselves received by Faith, they
also held forth to others, as John says, I John i. 4. That which was from the
Beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our Hands have handled, of the Word of Life, declare we unto
you.

And to this also John the Baptist gives Testimony, John iii. 34. where he
says, He whom God has sent speaks the Words of God, not the Words of Men,
or Angels, but of God; and this is true, both in Christ, and in his Seed.

But now the false Prophets speak not the Word of God, for they have it not in
their Hearts; but what Word they have in their Hearts, that they speak; and so
they speak the Words of their own Reason, Wisdom and Righteousness, or of other
Men's, but beyond human Things they do not go, whether they pretend to high
Notions on the one Hand, or to sound orthodox Doctrine on the other Hand.

Now of this true Christians are to take special Notice; because, as the true
Word of God is the greatest Commodity to the Church that can be, and brings the
Presence of Christ, and all the Things of Christ along with it; so the Word of
Man is the greatest Mischief to the Church that can be; for it brings
Antichrist, and his Kingdom, and all his Things along with it. And thus does
vain Philosophy, and School Divinity (which is an unlawful mixing of Philosophy
with the outward Letter of the Word) pervert all Things in the Church of carnal
and false Christians.

2. As the true Prophets speak the true Word of God, so also they speak it by
the true Spirit of God, and not by their own Spirit: And thus did Christ, who
says of himself, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me to
preach the Gospel, and so he spoke the Word of God by the Spirit of God.

And Christ commanded his Disciples to stay at Jerusalem till they had received
the Spirit, and then to go forth and preach; because he knew they could not
preach God's Word aright, without God's Spirit; and also Christ says of all
the Faithful, that it is not they that speak, but the Spirit of their Father
that speaks in them; year, and the whole Gospel is called, the Ministration of
the Spirit.

Now the true Prophets, speaking the Word of God by and in his Spirit, do also
speak it in the right Sense, and after the true Mind of Christ, as Paul says
of himself, and of other Believers who had received the Spirit, We have the
Mind of Christ.

But the false Prophets, though they speak the Word of the Letter exactly, and
that accordingly to the very Original, and Curiosity of Criticisms, yet
speaking it without the Spirit, they are false Prophets before God and his true
Church; seeing all right Prophecy has proceeded from the Spirit in all Ages of
the World, but especially it must so proceed in the Days of the New Testament,
wherein God has promised the largest Effusion of his Spirit.

And they, speaking the Word of the Letter without the Spirit, do wholly
mistake the Mind of Christ in all, and under the outward Letter of the Word of
God do only bring in the Mind of Man. And this is one of the greatest
Delusions, and most mischievous Snares that can be laid in the Church, to bring
in the Word of Christ without the Mind of Christ, yea, to bring in the Word of
Christ, against the Mind of Christ, and according to the Mind of Antichrist:
This is the effectual Operation of Error, whereby all Hypocrites and false
Christians are deceived, and that without all Hope of Recovery.

And thus you see, that the true Prophets bring the true Word, and bring it
also by the true Spirit, and this manifests them to be of God; but the false,
either bring not the true Word, or if they bring the Word in the Letter, yet
they bring it without the Spirit, and thus it is manifest, they are not of God.

Object. But some will object here; if a Man preach the Word in the Letter,
even good, sound and orthodox Doctrine, no Doubt but such a Man is to be heard,
and he may do much Good in the Church, though he wants Christ's Spirit: This I
have heard from very many, who have though they have said something,

Answ. But to this I answer, That they who want Christ's Spirit, which is the
Spirit of Prophecy, though they preach the exact Letter of the Word, yet are
false Prophets, and not to be heard by the Sheep.

1. Because, under the New Testament, we are not to regard the Letter without
the Spirit, but the Spirit as well as the Letter; yea, the Spirit more than the
Letter: And therefore Paul says, that Christ shall destroy Antichrist with
the Spirit of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his coming: He scarce takes any
Notice of the Letter, but calls the true Preaching of the Gospel, the Spirit of
Christ's Mouth, or the Ministration of the Spirit. And therefore the spiritual
People cannot join to that Ministry, where the Spirit of Christ is wanting,
though there be the outward Letter of the Word in it.

2. They that preach only the outward Letter of the Word without the true
Spirit, they make all Things outward in the Church, and so carry the People,
with whom they prevail, only to outward Things, to an outward Word, to outward
Worship, outward Ordinances, outward Church, outward Government, etc. whereas,
in the true Kingdom of Christ, all Things are inward and spiritual, and all the
true Religion of Christ is written in the Soul and Spirit of Man, by the Spirit
of God; and the Believer is the only Book, in which God himself writes his
New Testament.

3. They who preach the outward Letter of the Word, though never so truly,
without the Spirit, do (as has been said) wholly mistake the Mind of Christ in
the Word for want of the Spirit, which is the only true and infallible
Interpreter of his Mind; and so under the outward Letter of the Word, preach
their own Mind, and not Christ's Mind; and do make all the Scriptures serve
their own Turns, even their own wordly Ends and Advantages, and nothing else.

4. They that preach the outward Letter of the Word without the Spirit, can,
with such a Word, both live themselves in all the inward Evils of corrupted
Nature, and allow others to do so too. And thus the Gospel, which, in the
Spirit of it, is the Judgment of Sin, is made, in the Letter of it, the
Covering for Sin, and the Encourager of it; seeing such Men, who have the
Letter of the Word in their Mouth, do live, in the inward Corruptions of their
Hearts, more securely and quietly than other Men.

5. Last of all, let us know, that whoever does agree with Christ never so
exactly in the Letter, and yet differs from him in Spirit, is a very
Antichrist. And therefore, when the Devils in him that was possessed said to
Christ, We know thee who thou art, the holy One of God, and so agreed very
exactly with the Gospel in the Letter, yet Christ forbad them to speak, because
they spoke not by a right Spirit. And Christ has said, Whoever is not with me
(that is, in the Spirit) is against me, though he have the same outward Letter
of the Word with him.

And so, as Christ builds up his Church by his Spirit through his Word; so
Antichrist builds up his Church by the Word without the Spirit: And Christ's
Church and Anti-christ's do often differ very little or nothing in Word or
Letter, yet do always infinitely differ in Spirit.

Wherefore to conclude, let us know, that that Church that has the Word, if it
wants the Spirit, is Anti-christ's Church; and that that Ministry that uses
the Word, and wants the Spirit, is Anti-christ's Ministry; and that all Works,
Duties, Prayings, Preaching, Fasting, Thanksgiving, etc. without Christ's
Spirit, are nothing but the very Kingdom of Antichrist, and the Abomination of
Desolation.

And so I proceed to the second general Rule of Trial, which I propounded,
whereby we may discern the true Prophets of Christ from the false Prophets of
Antichrist, and that is,

By the Truth of the Life of Christ, in Reference to his Office in the Word.

And here I shall give you many Trials, how you may certainly know and discern
the false Prophets of Antichrist from the true, humble, and faithful Ministers
of Jesus Christ.

And the Lord Jesus Christ, before whom we are all present this Day, and before
whose Tribunal we shall all be judged, he knows, that I shall not purposely
speak any Thing at this Time, either to please myself, or to displease you; but
I shall desire to speak all out of very Faithfulness to him, who has
remembered me when I was in low Condition, for his Mercy endures for ever.

The first Sign then, whereby the true Prophets may be discerned from the
false, is this,

First, the true Prophets are all sent of God. So was Moses whom God sent to
the Children of Israel, and bid him tell them, that I AM, even the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, has sent him to them; and he gave him a
porportionable Measure of his Presence, to cause them to believe it. And
Christ, a greater Prophet than Moses, even the Head of all the Children of God,
said by Isaiah, xlviii. 16. Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not
spoken in secret from the Beginning, and now the Lord and his Spirit has sent
me. And every where in the Gospel, he still declares, how be came not of
himself, but his Father sent him.

And as the Father sent Christ, so Christ sends all his Seed, the true
Ministers of the Gospel, as is manifest, John xx. 21. where Christ said to his
Disciples, As my Father sent me, so send I you; which he spoke not only
touching them, but touching all that should believe in his Name through their
Word: And Paul also says. Romans x. 15. How shall they teach except they be
send? So that true Preaching comes from true sending, and this comes from the
Grace of God.

Now I desire you farther to take Notice, that God has reckoned the Choice of
his Ministers, one of the weightiest Things that belong unto his Kingdom;
wherefore he would never commit the ^rust of this to any Sort of Men
whatsoever. Yea, Christ himself did not choose his Disciples at his own human
Will, but only at the Will of God, and therefore was much in Prayer before he
chose them.

And the Apostles themselves durst not of themselves, when they were all met
together, choose any one into the Room of Judas, but they betook themselves to
Prayer, and desired the Lord to show whom he had chosen. And Acts xiii. the
Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work whereunto I have called
them. And Paul tells the Galatians, that he was an Apostle, not of Men, nor by
Men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father.

By all which Scriptures we may perceive what Care the Lord has always had, to
send his own Ministers himself into his own Church, and would have his true
Church receive no Ministers but such as he sends them.

And the great and chief Sending into the Church is from God himself, as we see
in Moses, and all the Prophets, and in Christ himself, the Head of them, and in
all the Apostles, and in all Believers.

Now the Proof of a Man's sending from God is this, to be anointed with the
Spirit; as John xx. 22. when Christ said to his Disciples, As my Father sent
me, so send I you, he breathed upon them, and said, receive the holy Spirit:
For his Father sent him only by pouring out his Spirit on him; and he sends
them so only; and he that says, The Unction of the Spirit alone is not
sufficient for the Ministry of the New Testament, he denies Christ and his
Apostles to have been sufficient Ministers, and he perverts the Scripture, and
seduces the People.

Now the true Teachers, through the pouring forth of the Spirit on them, they
do truly know Christ himself, and the great Mystery of the Gospel, and all the
Things that are freely given us of God; and they are also filled with Love to
their Brothren, and are enabled to confess the Truth, and to do thereafter, and
to contemn the World, and patiently to suffer Rebukes, etc. all which is a
sufficient Proof of any One's sending from God.

And thus the true Prophets are all sent of God, which is their great Comfort
and Support in all Trouble and Difficulties, because he that sends them, is
still with them. Lo (says Christ) I am with you always, to the End of the
World.

But now, on the contrary, the false Prophets and Ministers of Antichrist are
not sent of God, but are sent and appointed by Men, and that through their own
Desire and Seeking. And of such the Lord complains, Jer. xxiii. 21. I have not
sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied: But because I sent them not, neither commanded them, they shall not
profit this People at all, says the Lord, Verse 32.

And Christ says, Many false Christ's, and false Prophets, shall arise; i. e.
are not sent of God, but shall arise of themselves. And Paul says to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts xx. Out of yourselves shall Men arise,
speaking perverse Things, to draw Disciples after them. They arise of
themselves, they are not sent of God.

Now such Teachers as these do usually spring up in the Church, through
academical Degrees, and ecclesiastical Ordination; which two Things have poured
forth into the Church whole Swarms of false Prophets, and Antichristian
Ministers, never sent of God, nor anointed of his Spirit, to the irreparable
Damage, Prejudice, and Ruin of the People and Nations who have received them,
with their false and poisonful Doctrine.

Wherefore all those Teachers who are not sent of the Lord and his Spirit, but
arise of themselves, and come into the Church in the Strength and Might of
their Degrees and Orders, they are all false Prophets.

The SECOND SIGN.
The true Prophets, who are sent of God, take all their Warrant and Authority
from God for what they teach, and do not at all regard Men, or build on them.
And this has all along made the true Teachers so bold, and so confident, in
the Name of God, against the World and worldly Church; So Isaiah I. 4. etc.
says, The Lord God has given me the Tongue of the Learned, that I should know
how to speak a Word in due Season to him that is weary; he wakeneth Morning by
Morning; he wakeneth my Ear to hear as the Learned.

The Lord has opened mine Ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away
back.

For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded; therefore
have I set my Face as a Flint, and I know I shall not be ashamed.

He is near that just fies me; who will contend with me? Let us stand together;
who is mine Adversary? Let him me near me.

Behold the Lord will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? Lo they all
shall wax old as a Garment, the Moth shall eat them up. See here the admirable
Confidence of a Teacher sent from God.

And so also our Lord Jesus Christ in the Days of his Flesh, how bold was he in
his Ministry, coming in the Name of the Lord, and having his Authority and
Doctrine from him! How boldly did he reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, the
chief Teachers of the Jewish Church! And what a clear and glorious Confession
of the Truth of God, did he hold forth against all their Opposition and
Contradiction?

And the Apostles, when the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, and Annas, the High
Priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and all the Kindred of the High
Priest were gathered together, and threatened them, and straightly charged them,
to preach no more in that Name, they answered, Whether it be right in the Sight
of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye: For we cannot but
speak the Things which we have seen and heard, Acts iv. 19.

And so Wicklisse, John Hus, and Luther, who were sent of God, did take all
their Authority from God alone, and so were bold and confident, each of them in
their Time, against the whole World.

But now the false Prophets, who come of themselves, and by the sending of Men,
they do all by the Authority and Warrant of Man; and accordingly do join
themselves together, by secular Power, to bring about their Doctrines and
Designs in the Church; and from the civil Authority they procure Leave and
Power to publish their Doctrine, and set up their Discipline in the Church, and
to suppress whatever is contrary thereto; and without this worldly License and
Authority, they neither can nor dare do any Thing; and are never bold, but when
the Authority of Man is for them. But the true Prophets (as has been said) do
only take their Authority from Christ for what they teach, and are bold in his
Name only, to hold it forth: And so after they have published the Word in
Faith, in the same Faith they leave the Maintenance and defending of it to him
alone, whose Word it is; and they neither publish it for Man's commanding, nor
smother it for Man's forbidding.

Wherefore those Teachers, who have not their Warrant from Christ for their
Doctrine, and are not bold in his Name alone, but do derive all their Authority
and Encouragement from Men, to speak and act in the Things of God, they are all
false Prophet s, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The THIRD SIGN.
The true and faithful Teachers, as they are sent of God, and take their
Authority from God, so in all their Doctrine, they only hold forth Jesus
Christ. And this they have learned from God himself.

For the Father speaking immediately from Heaven, preached nothing but Christ,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him: And this
he spoke thrice from the excellent Glory; manifesting, that he himself had no
higher Thing, nor no other Thing to declare to the World, than his Son Jesus
Christ, in whom alone are hid all the Treasures of all true and spiritual
Wisdom and Knowledge.

The Son also in all his Ministry, only declared who himself was, whom the
Father had given to the elect Church, saying, Psalm ii. I will publish the
Decree, whereof the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this Day have I
begotten thee: And in all his Ministry only declared who he was, and to what
End his Father had given him, saying, I am the Bread of Life, which comes down
from Heaven; he that comes to me shall never bunger; and he that believes in
me shall never thirst: And, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man
comes to the Father but by me. And all his Doctrine and Works were to this
End, that we might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that believing in
him, we might have eternal Life.

The Apostles also of the Lord, after they had received the Spirit, did go up
and down the World, only preaching Jesus, and Repentance, and Remission of Sins
in his Name.

And Paul, a laborious Preacher, through the Grace of God, did renounce and
reject all his worldly Learning, and all his human Accomplishments and
Excellencies in the Ministry of the Gospel, and preached nothing but the right
Knowledge of Christ, and right Faith in him, as he himself testifies, Phil.
iii. 7. etc. saying, What Things were Gain to me, those I counted Loss for
Christ; yea doubtless, and I count all Things but Loss for the Excellency of
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have suffered the Loss of all
Things, and do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
not having my own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; that I may
know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his
Sufferings, and be made conformable to him in his Death, if by any Means I
might attain to the Resurrection from the Dead.

And he also tells the Corinthians, that he desired to know nothing amongst
them, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

And thus the true Teachers preach nothing but Christ, and him they preach, not
according to their own human Conceptions and Apprehensions, but according to
the Revelation they have received from the Father by the Spirit.

But, on the contrary, the false Teachers preach nothing less than Christ, and
Faith in him: But they chiefly teacher the Law, and moral Doctrine, and Works,
or else Philosophical Subtilties and Speculations, which yet the Apostle has
expressly forbidden, Col. ii. 8, saying to the Faithful, Beware lest any Man
spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after
the Elements of the World, and not after Christ; for in him dwells the Fullness
of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him, who is the Head of all
Principality and Power: And so we need not turn from Christ to Philosophy, that
vain Deceit.

Wherefore they who preach not the Mystery of Christ, through the Revelation of
the Father, and the Spirit, but moral Virtues and vain Philosophy, instead of
Christ, are all of them false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The FOURTH SIGN.
The true Ministers and Prophets of Christ, as they only hold forth Christ, so
they hold him forth only for the Love of God, and their Brother, and not for
any worldly Profit or Gain.

Thus Christ taught his Disciples, out of the Love of God; as he says, I
delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea thy Law is within my Heart; that is, his
Love to God. And also out of Love to his Brother; for having loved his own, he
loved them to the End; and out of this Love taught them; as he says, I have
called you Friends; for whatsoever I have heard from my Father, I have declared
unto you.

And as he taught out of Love himself, so he has commanded all his Seed to
teach one another out of the same Love, and has given them his Spirit, which
is Love, that thereby they might love both him, and their Brethren; and
therefore Christ (knowing how difficult a Work it was, to feed his Sheep with
the right and sound Doctrine of the Gospel; and that none could or would
perform this, except they loved Christ from their very Heart Root) said thrice
to Peter, Peter, do thou love me? Do thou love me? Do thou love me? Then
feed my Sheep, my Lambs, my Sheep: And Paul says, The Love of Christ
constrained him to teach the Gospel. And the Fruit of the Spirit, in all
Believers, being Love; in this brotherly Love, they serve one another in the
Gospel.

And as Christ himself did not sell his spiritual Travel to his Church, for
worldly Profit or Gain; no more do his true Seed and Servants; for says Paul,
Acts xx. 33. I have coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; yea,
yourselves know, that these Hands have ministered to my Necessity, and to them
who were with me: And 2 Cor. xii. 14. Behold the third Time I am ready to come
to you, I will not be burdensome to you, for I seek not yours, but you. And
Verse 17. Did I make a Gain of you, by any of them whom I sent unto you? Or did
Titus make a Gain of you? Walked we not both in the same Spirit?

And thus the true Teachers do not seek any temporal Gain or Commodity, from
the Hands of Men, by their preaching, but do truly and cheerfully teach out of
the Love of Christ, and their Brother.

But, on the contrary, the false Teachers, though they do not teach the Gospel
(being destitute of the Spirit) but vain Philosophy and human Doctrines instead
of it, yet will they live by the Gospel, and not by the Labor of their Hands,
in a lawful Calling; they will have the temporal Goods of the Church, and yet
not minister the spiritual Treasure of it; and what they do minister they do it
for Reward, as it is written, Micah iii. 11. The Priests teach for Hire, and
the Prophets divine for Money; and he that puts not into their Mouths, they
even prepare War against him.

And to show they preach for the Love of Gain, they are brought up to the
Ministry as to a Trade to live by; and they run in this Way, from one Place to
another, from a lesser to a greater Living, and where they may gain most of
this World, there will they be sure to be: Yea, so much are they addicted to
their worldly Advantage, that they had rather Christ's Kingdom should never be
set up in the World, nor Anti-christ's never be thrown down than suffer any
Loss or Diminution in their Profit, Power, Dignity, Authority, or in any
worldly Thing, whereof they have got the Possession and Enjoyment.

Wherefore they that teach Christ, not for the Love of Christ, and their
Brother, but for temporal Gain, and worldly Advantage only, are all of them
false Teachers, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The FIFTH SIGN.
The true Teachers teach Christ to others, as they have been taught him of God,
only for the Glory of God, and not out of Vainglory. Wherefore Christ said of
himself, John viii. 50. I seek not mine own Glory. And John vii. 18. He that
speaks of himself, seeks his own Glory; but he that seeks the Glory of
him that sent him, the same is true, and no Unrighteousness is in him. So that
whoever speaks from God, seeks God's Glory: And so also Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 6. Nor of Men sought we Glory, neither of you, nor yet of others.

So that true Teachers do not preach the Word to win to themselves Glory in the
World, and Praise, and Applause from Men; but do rather seek the Glory of God
by their Doctrine, though Hypocrites and carnal People, for this Cause do
deride and scorn them.

But, on the contrary, the false Teachers seek above all Things their own Glory
by the Ministry, and to this End,

1. They get to themselves Titles and Degrees in the University, for their
pretended Knowledge in Divinity above other Christians; and by these Degrees
they get the uppermost Seats in the Synagogues, and Greetings in the Markets,
and are called of Men, Doctor, Doctor, which Christ has expressly forbidden in
his Gospel. 2. Having got such Titles, they go forth in their own Name as Men
of approved Religion, Learning, Reputation and Worth, and for such they make
Account the World should receive them. 3. They especially desire to preach to
rich Men, and great Men, and Men in Place and Authority, that from them they
may have Protection, Favor, Preferment, and a quiet Life, and care not much to
preach to the poor, plain, mean People, by whom they can expect no worldly
Advantage. 4. To this End also, they speak in the Words which Man's Wisdom
teaches, and so mingle Philosophy with Divinity, and think to credit the
Gospel with Terms of Art, and do sprinkle their Sermons with Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, as with a Perfume acceptable to the Nostrils of the World.
In a Word, they preach all Things in a pleasing Spirit to the World, that they
by all may get Glory to themselves, and may be accounted, with Simon Magus,
some great Ones. And in all this, they show they speak of themselves, and not
of God; seeing they seek not God's Glory, but their own; for, He that speaks
of himself, seeks his own Glory.

Wherefore they who by their Ministry do not seek the Glory of God alone, and
of his Son Jesus Christ, but seek their own Glory, and the Praise of Men, as
the Clergy generally do, and not least of all in this Place, they are all of
them false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The SIXTH SIGN.
The true Preachers and Ministers of Christ, when they are opposed, resisted,
slandered and persecuted for the Word's Sake, they endure it with all Meekness,
Humility and Patience. Thus Christ endured all the Reproaches, Contradictions,
Revilings, and Persecutions from the Jew; and when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that
judges righteously, 1 Pet. ii. 23. And Paul says of himself to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. xii. 12. You had the Signs of my Apostleship in all
Patience.

But, on the contrary, the false Teachers, when any Truth is preached that they
know not, or that is against their Gain or Glory, they snarl and bark at it,
and bite them that bring it. And therefore says Paul, Beware of Dogs, Phil.
iii. 2. not Dogs by Nature, but by Practice and Condition. Now a cursed Dog,
lying on a rich Garment, or soft Carpet, at his Ease, as long as he may lie
still he is very quiet, but if you would remove him from his Place, he soon
snarls and flies at you, and shows of what Mettle he is made. So the false
Teachers, who have gotten a carnal Knowledge of the Word, and have thereby
gotten Preferment, and great Advantages in the World, they lie quiet on these
soft Things, as long as they may lie still; but if any seek by the Word of God
to rouse them up from these Things, they rise up like angry Dogs, and bark at
them, and rend them, as much as they can or dare.

Wherefore those Teachers who cannot patiently suffer Wrongs for the Word's
Sake, but, on the contrary, when they are reproved by the Word, and their
Sheeps Clothing pulled off, even their false Vizard of Religion, do presently
grow impatient and furious; and they that bark and foam against the late
revealed Truth, which touches them very near, they all are false Teachers, and
Ministers of Antichrist.

The SEVENTH SIGN.
The true Prophets, and Ministers of Christ, do not force any Body to hear
them, and obey their Doctrine against their Wills, neither do they vex and
trouble them with secular Power, who will not obey them, and be subject to
them; but they leave all such People as they found them, lest they should seem
by their Doctrine to seek any worldly Thing.

Thus Christ when he taught the Gospel, still cried out, He that has Ears to
hear, let him hear; and he that had not Ears to hear, he did not punish him:
And again says Christ, If any Man with be my Disciple, let him deny himself,
and take up his (...), and follow me; and still left Men to their own Freedom,
whether they would be his Disciples or no.

And as Christ did thus himself, so he left the same Thing in Command with all
his true Disciples; and when he sent them forth to preach, Matthew x, he
charged them, saying, Whoever will not receive you, nor hear your Words, when
you depart out of that House or City, shake off the Dust of your Feet, as a
Testimony against them; he does not bid them, if they be refused, to betake
themselves to the secular Power, to get Authority from thence to stay and abide
there, whether they will or no, or otherwise to punish them, but bids them only
to shake off the Dust of their Feet, that they might know, they came not to
them for the Love of earthly Things. And when the Apostles, out of a false
Zeal, would have had Christ to have commanded Fire to have come down from
Heaven to have destroyed them that would not receive him, he plainly reproved
them, saying, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are; for the Son of Man is not come
to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them.

It is recorded in the Life of Simon and Jude the Apostles, as both Gullelmus
de Sancto Amore, and John Hus relate, that when the chief Ruler was very angry
with those who defamed the Doctrine of those Apostles, and in great Zeal
commanded a great Fire to be made, that such Opposers might be cast into it,
the Apostles fell down before the Emperor, saying, We beseech you (Sir) let not
us be the Authors or Causers of this Destruction, who are come to publish the
Doctrine of eternal Salvation; neither let us who are sent to revive those who
are dead through Sin, become the Killers of those who are alive.

Wherefore those Teachers who, for worldly Advantage Sake, will force
themselves upon those Men against their Wills, who will not willingly receive
them; and will provoke the worldly Powers and Magistrates to punish those who
will not hear and receive them and their Doctrine, they all are false Prophets
and Ministers of Antichrist.

The EIGHTH SIGN.
The true Teachers are content that others should teach as well as they, and
would not make a Monopoly of the Ministry to themselves alone, for worldly
Advantage Sake.

Thus our Lord Jesus Christ did not content himself to preach the Gospel alone,
but he sent forth others, as his Father sent forth him, yea, he pours forth his
Spirit on all Flesh, that Sons and Daughters, and Servants, and Handmaids may
prophesy, and so Knowledge may cover the Earth, as Waters the Seas: And to make
the World willing to receive such Teachers, he says, He that receives you,
receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.

And when Eldad and Medad, upon whom the Spirit of the Lord did rest, did
prophesy in the Camp of Israel, without asking any License from Moses, and one
told Moses of it in great Displeasure, and Joshua thereupon wished Moses to
forbid them to prophesy, then Moses, the meek Servant of the Lord, replied,
Enviest thou for my Sake, would God (says he) that all the Lord's People were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them all, Numb. xi. 29.
And so the godly Mind of any faithful Teacher, desires to be helped in the
Work of the Word, that the precious Truth of the Gospel, which he himself alone
cannot sufficiently express, all Men's Tongues might declare. And so they do not
envy in others those spiritual Gifts which God has given them, but do wish,
that every Man had a Mouth and Wisdom given him, to declare the Mystery of the
Gospel, and the infinite Love, Mercy, Wisdom, Truth, Power, Redemption, and
Salvation of God, by Jesus Christ, which cannot by all Men's Tongues be
sufficiently published in the World.

Farther, as no worldly Prince or Magistrate has such unlimited Power over the
Goods of the People, as to forbid them to give corporal Alms to them that stand
in Need, as Occasion is ministered; no more has any Power, whether
ecclesiastical or civil, such Dominion over the Word and Truth of God, written
by the Spirit in the Hearts of Believers, but that they may at all Times, and
upon all Occasions, minister spiritual Alms to them who stand in Need, by the
teaching of the Gospel.

Wherefore those Teachers, who are envious that any should preach the Word but
themselves, and their own Tribe, as they call it (because they get great
worldly Advantage thereby, whereas otherwise they would be contented that any
should preach) and so would have the civil Magistrate only to license them to
be Preachers because of their Degrees and Orders, and to forbid all others,
they all are false Teachers, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The NINTH SIGN.
The true Teachers do not only teach the Word, but are also ready to seal to
the Truth of it, with their Estates, Liberties and Lives.

Thus did Jesus Christ, as was foretold by Isaiah, Chap. 1. 5. where Christ
says by his Spirit, The Lord has opened mine Ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned away back; I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them
who plucked off the Hair; I hid not my Face from Shame and Spitting. And in the
Days of his Flesh, how willingly did he seal to the Truth of his New Testament
Doctrine with his Suffering, and suffered himself to be apprehended by the
Hands of Men, and to be crucified, when he could have commanded Legions of
Angels for his Succor, if he had pleased, and would not have made use of his
own Infinite and Almighty Power.

And this Submission and Willingness to suffer for the Truth, Christ has
commanded all his Disciples, saying, He that will save his Life, shall lose it;
and he that will lose his Life for my Sake shall save it: And if any Man will
be my Disciple, let him deny himself, take up the Cross, and follow me: And
again, I send you forth as Sheep among Wolves, and ye shall be brought before
Kings and Rulers for my Name's Sake, that is, for the true and spiritual
Teaching of the Gospel.

Now as nothing will procure us more Enmity, than the spiritual holding forth
of the Gospel, which will cause the worldly Church to cast out our Name as
evil, and to cast our Persons out of their Synagogues, yea, and also to kill
us, when they can get Power; so, if we be true Teachers, must we be ready and
willing to suffer all this for Christ's Name's Sake.

Wherefore those Teachers who embrace the Height and Honor of this Life, and
will not own the Gospel of Christ, farther than they may thereby procure to
themselves Credit, Reputation, Profit, and Preferment in World; and to this
End, in doubtful and difficult Times, carry themselves so subtly, that
whatever Party shall prevail, they may still stand on their Legs, and enjoy
their present Prosperity and Preferment, and so are neither hot nor cold,
neither truly for the Truth, nor openly against the Truth, but seek by all
subtle Means to decline the Cross of Christ. And though in Christ himself, they
praise his Meanness, Plainess, Simplicity, Suffering, and Cross, yet they
themselves are delicate, and cannot endure these Things for Christ's Sake in
themselves, but bend and frame the whole Course of their Ministry so, as they
may obtain all good Things from the World, and avoid and escape all evil Things
from it; these all are false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

By these nine Signs (for I shall name no more now) may the true Prophets and
Ministers of Christ be manifestly distinguished and discerned from the false
Ones of Antichrist, by all the true People of God, who have received his
Spirit.

Now let God and his Word be true, and every Man a Liar.

And now I shall make but two Uses of this Discourse briefly, and so conclude
for this Time. And the first shall be to those of you, who are spiritual
Christians; and the second to the carnal Clergy.

First, You who are true Believers, and spiritual Christians, may judge aright,
by what you have heard, of the present Clergy, or common Ministry of the
Nation; and may see, by the clear Light of the Word, that they, for the
Generality of them, are not true, but false Prophets; not the Ministers of
Christ, but of Antichrist; not sent of God, nor anointed by his Spirit, but
ordained and appointed by Men, at their own Desire and Seeking, for worldly
Advantage Sake; Men who stand and minister in the Church, only in the Strength
of their academical Degrees, and ecclesiastical Ordination, but do not stand
and feed the People in the Strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of the Name
of their God. And this corrupt Ministry, or carnal Clergy, have deceived the
People and Nations, with a corrupt and carnal Understanding of Christ, and of
the Scriptures, and of the Kingdom of Christ, and of the Government of his
Kingdom, and of all the Things of Christ: Yea, they have, under the Name and
Pretense of Christ, set up a Church to Antichrist every where, and do
continually mislead Thousands of poor Souls, and carry them Captive to Hell,
and that under the Color and Pretense of Religion.

And this, I say, is the great Evil in these false Teachers, that, under the
Name of Christ, they fight against Christ, and under the Name of the Word, they
fight against the Word, and under the Name of the Church, they fight against
the Church: And this is a grievous Abomination of Desolation in the Temple of
God, that they who should be the Chief for the Truth, are the Chief against it;
and that they who should be faithful Witnesses to the holy Truth of Christ,
should prove lying Witnesses against it. If a profane Person, or Heathen,
should do this, it would be Wickedness and Impiety even in them; but this is
horrible Abomination, and Anti-christianism in the Church of Christ; that they,
who are come into it as Friends, and have obtained the chief Places in it,
should yet, under this Vizard, be indeed very Enemies, and Seducers, and
Hinderers of the Word of Christ crucified. Wherefore, says the Truth against
such, Psalm. lv. 12. It was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have
borne it; neither was it he that hated me, that magnified himself against me,
for then I would have hid myself from him; but it was thou, a Man, mine Equal,
my Guide, and my Acquaintance; we took sweet Counsel together, and walked unto
the House of God in Company, etc.

And so these false Teachers are these familiar Enemies, who exercise all their
Hatred under the Pretense of Love, all their Enmity under Pretense of
Friendship, and practice all their Wickedness under a Form of Godliness; and by
this Subtilty have they deceived the World. They will not plainly contradict
the Words of the Prophets, Apostles and Christ, in the Letter of it, but will
pr^^^^^, and speak well of it; but yet they are utter Enemies to the true and
spiritual Meaning of it, both in their Lives and Doctrine: And the more these
Men make a Show of Religion and Holiness, the greater Antichrists they be in
the Church.

Wherefore to you who are true Christians, and have received an Anointing from
God, this is the Word and Charge of God, Come out from among them, my People,
and touch not the unclean Thing; that is, their carnal Doctrine; have nothing
to do with such Prophets and Ministers, but remember what Christ says, John x.
that his Sheep hear his Voice, and will not hear the Voice of Strangers; for
they know the Voice of Strangers. And if any of you live in any Town or Parish,
where such false Prophets are, though they go under the Name of Godly and
Orthodox, yet touch not the unclean Things; but know, that it is better for you
Believers to assemble together among yourselves, though you be but few, than to
communicate with the false Prophets in their false Ordinances; seeing Christ
has promised his Presence to his Believers, even where but two or three meet
together in his Name; yea, he has said, If any two of you shall agree together
to ask any Thing on Earth, it shall be done of my Father which is in Heaven.
And if you, having these Promises, shall meet together among yourselves, in the
Name and Spirit of Christ, in the Use of the Word and Prayer of Faith, lo
Christ himself will be with you; and though you be but few, yet are you the
Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and of that very
Church, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. And thus much to you
spiritual Christians.

2. And now for the carnal Clergy, or false Prophets, their Burden is this from
the Lord. You have run when you were not sent; you have said, Thus says the
Lord, when the Lord has not spoken by you; you have grieved the Hearts of the
Faithful, and strengthened the Hands of the Wicked; you have been forward to
advance the Form of Godliness, whilst you have been bitter Enemies to the Power
of it; you have deceived the Nations, and made them drunk with the Cup of the
Wine of your Fornications; you have done more against Christ and his true
Church, and more for Antichrist and his false Church, than all the People in
these Nations besides. Wherefore this is the Word of the Lord God to you,
throughout all your Quarters, that the Nations shall not much longer be
deceived by you, nor buy any more of your Merchandise; for your Wine is the
Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps; your Doctrine being the Word of
Philosophy, and not of Faith; after the Mind of Man, but contrary to Christ's
Mind; to set up yourselves, and your own Interest, to the Prejudice of Christ's
Word and People. Wherefore, how much you have glorified yourselves, and lived
deliciously by this Trade, of making Merchandise of the Word of God, so much
Torment and Sorrow shall God give you, and your Plagues shall come upon you in
a Day, and your Judgment in an Hour; and your Lovers shall not be able to help
you, nor the Petitioners for you, to uphold you; but God shall bring you down
wonderfully, by the clear Light of his Word, and his mighty and unresistable
Providence accompanying it; and the World shall tremble and wonder at the Noise
of your Downfall; and the Heavens, and holy Apostles, and Prophets, shall
rejoice over you, when God shall avenge their Cause upon you. And the Lord will
save his Flock; and they shall be no more a Prey to you, neither shall you any
more serve yourselves of them. And he will set up one Shepherd over them, even
Jesus Christ; and he shall feed them, and be their Shepherd. And till these
Things be fully brought to pass, you shall be clothed with Trembling, when you
shall perceive the Lord is risen up to perform all these Things, according to
his Word.

And now for Conclusion, if any of you, or most of you, or all of you, are
offended at these Things, in such Sort, that you cannot contain yourselves from
Anger and bitter Zeal, I do entreat you to consider seriously, how much better,
and more profitable to your eternal Salvation it would be, for you to resist
and to refrain from such Evil and unchristian Passions, and that you would
rather (if there be any Hope) return to your own Hearts, and try your Works,
and repent before our holy and righteous Lord, and return truly and speedily to
Christ from Antichrist, lest you be inwrapped both in his temporal and eternal
Destruction.

And thus much was delivered to the University Congregation in Cambridge, for a
Testimony against them, except they repent.

FINIS.

