A plain NARRATIVE Of the UNCOMMON SUFFERINGS, and REMARKABLE DELIVERANCE OF
THOMAS BROWN, Of Charlestown, in New England; (...) Father's House the
Beginning of Jan 1760, after having been absent three Years and (...) eight
Months.

CONTAINING An Account of the Engagement between a Party of (...), commanded by
Maj. (...), and a Party (...) and (...), in J^n. (...); in which (...) was
killed; and (...) Author of his Narrative having receiving three Wounds (one of
which through his Body) he was left for Dead on the Field of Battle: --

How he was taken Captive by the Indians, and carried to Canada, and from
thence to the Mississippi where he lived about a Year, and was again sent to
Canada -- During all which time, he was no^ in constant Peril of his own Life:
but had (...) Mortification of being an Eyewitness of di^^^^ (...), and
shocking (...), that were (...) by the Indians on several ^^^^^sh Prisoners
(...) of whom he saw (...) to death; another (...) and his Entrails drawn out,
etc. etc.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by FOUL and DRAPER, at their Printing Office (...)
1760.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
AS I am but a Youth, I shall not make those Remarks on the Difficulties I have
met with, or the kind Appearances of a good GOD for my Preservation, as one of
riper Years might do; but shall leave that to the Reader as he goes along, and
shall only beg his Prayers, that Mercies and Afflictions may be sanctified to
me, and relate Matters of Fact as they occur to my Mind. --

I was born in Charlestown, near Boston in New England, in the Year 1740, and
put an Apprentice by my Father to Mr. Mark White of Acton, and in the Year
1756, in the Month of May, I inlisted into Major Rogers's Corpse of Rangers, in
the Company commanded by Capt. Spikeman. --

We marched for Albany, where we arrived the first of August, and from thence
to Fort-Edward. I was out on several Scouts, in one of which I killed an Indian.

On the 18th of Jan. 1757, we marched on a Scout from Fort William-Henry; Major
Rogers himself headed us: All were Volunteers that went on this Scout. -- We
came to the Road leading from Tionderoga to Crown-Point, and on Lake Champlain
(which was froze over) we saw about 50 Sleys; the Major thought proper to
attack them and ordered us all, about 60 in Number, to lay in Ambush, and when
they were near enough we were ordered to pursue them. I happened to be near the
Major when he took the first Prisoner, a Frenchman: I singled out one and
followed him; they fled some one Way and some another, but I soon came up with
him and took him. We took seven in all, the rest escaping, some to Crown-Point,
and some returned to Tionderoga: When we had brought the Prisoners to Land the
Major examined them, and they informed him that there were 35 Indians and 500
Regulars at Tionderoga.

It being a rainy Day we made a Fire and dried our Guns.

The Major though it best to return to Fort William-Henry in the same Path we came,
the Snow being very deep; we marched in an Indian-File and kept the Prisoners
in the Rear, lest we should be attacked: We proceeded in this Order about a
Mile and an half, and as we were ascending a Hill, and the Center of our Men
were at the Top, the French, to the Number of 400, besides 30 or 40 Indians,
fired on us before we discovered them: The Major ordered us to advance. I
received a Wound from the Enemy (the first Shot they made on us) through the
Body, upon which I retired into the Rear, to the Prisoner I had taken on the
Lake, knocked him on the Head and killed him, lest he should escape and give
bad Information to the Enemy; and as I was going to place myself behind a large
Rock, there started up an Indian from the other Side; I threw myself backwards
into the Snow, and it being very deep, sunk so low that I broke my Snow-shoes
(I had Time to pull 'em off, but was obliged to let my Shoes go with them) one
Indian threw his Tomahawk at me, and another was just upon seizing me; but I
happily escaped and got to the Center of our Men, and fixed myself behind a
large Pine, where I loaded and fired every Opportunity; after I had discharged
6 or 7 Times, there came a Ball and cut off my Gun just at the Lock. About half
an Hour after, I received a Shot in my Knee; I crawled again into the Rear, and
as I was turning about received a Shot in my Shoulder. The Engagement held, as
near as I could guess, 5 Hours, and as I learnt after I was taken, we killed
more of the Enemy than we were in Number. -- By this Time it grew dark and the
Firing ceased on both Sides, and as we were so few the Major took the Advantage
of the Night and escaped with the well Men, without informing the wounded of
his Design, lest they should inform the Enemy and they should pursue him before
he had got out of their Reach.

Capt. Spikeman, one Baker and myself, all very badly wounded, made a small
Fire and sat about half an Hour, when looking round we could not see any of our
Men; Captain Spikeman called to Major Rogers, but received no Answer, except
from the Enemy at some Distance; upon this we concluded our People were fled.
All hope of Escape now vanished; we were so wounded that we could not travel; I
could but just walk the others could scarce move; we therefore concluded to
surrender ourselves to the French: Just as we came to this Conclusion, I saw an
Indian coming toward us over a small Rivulet that parted us in the Engagement:
I crawled so far from the Fire that I could not be seen, though I could see
what was acted at the Fire; the Indian came to Capt. Spikeman, who was not able
to resist, and stripped and scalp'd him alive; Baker, who was lying by the
Captain, pulled out his Knife to stab himself, which the Indian prevented and
carried him away: Seeing this dreadful Tragedy, I concluded, if possible, to
crawl into the Woods and there die of my Wounds* But not being far from Capt.
Spikeman, he saw me and begged me for God's sake! to give him a Tomahawk, that
he might put an End to his Life! I refused him, and exhorted him as well as I
could to pray for Mercy, as he could not live many Minutes in that deplorable
Condition, being on the frozen Ground, covered with Snow. He desired me to let
his Wife know (if I lived to get home) the dreadful Death he died. As I was
traveling as well as I could, or rather creeping along, I found one of our
People dead; I pulled off his Stockings (he had no Shoes) and put them on my
own Legs.

By this Time the Body of the Enemy had made a Fire, and had a large Number of
Centries out on our Path, so that I was obliged to creep quite round them
before I could get into the Path; but just before I came to it I saw a
Frenchman behind a Tree, within two Rods of me, but the Fire shining right on
him prevented his seeing me. They cried out about every Quarter of an Hour, in
French, ALL IS WELL! And while he that was so near me was speaking, I took the
Opportunity to creep away, that he might not hear me, and by this Means got
clear of him and got into our Path. But the Snow and Cold put my Feet into such
Pain, as I had no Shoes, that I could not go on; I therefore sat down by a
Brook, and wrapped my Feet in my Blanket. But my Body being cold by sitting
still, I got up, and crawled along in this miserable Condition the Remainder of
the Night.

The next Day, about 11 o'Clock, I heard the Shouts of Indians behind me, and I
supposed they saw me; within a few Minutes four came down a Mountain, running
toward me: I threw off my Blanket, and Fear and Dread quickened my Pace for a
while; but, by Reason of the Loss of so much Blood from my Wounds, I soon
failed. When they were within a few Rods of me they cocked their Guns, and told
me to stop; but I refused, hoping they would fire and kill me on the Spot;
which I chose, rather than the dreadful Death Capt. Spikeman died of. They soon
came up with me, took me by the Neck and kissed me. On searching my Pockets
they found some Money, which they were so fond of, that in trying who could get
most they had like to have killed me. They took some dry Leaves and put them
into my Wounds, and then turned about and ordered me to follow them.

When we came near the main Body of the Enemy, the Indians made a Live-Shout,
as they call it when they bring in a Prisoner alive (different from the Shout
they make when they bring in Scalps, which they call a Dead-Shout.) The Indians
ran to meet us, and one of them struck me with a Cutlass across the Side; he
cut through my Clothes, but did not touch my Flesh; others ran against me with
their Heads: I asked if there was no Interpreter, upon which a Frenchman cried,
I am one: I asked him, if this was the Way they treated their Prisoners, to let
them be cut and beat to Pieces by the Indians? He desired me to come to him;
but the Indians would not let me, holding me one by one Arm and another by the
other: But there arising a Difference between the four Indians that took me,
they fell to fighting, which their commanding Officer seeing, he came and took
me away and carried me to the Interpreter; who drew his Sword, and pointing it
to my Breast, charged me to tell the Truth, or he would run me through: He then
asked me what Number our Scout consisted of? I told him 50: He asked me where
they were gone? I told him, I supposed as they were so numerous they could best
tell. He said I told him wrong; for he knew of more than 100 that were slain: I
told him we had lost but 19 in all: He said, there were as many Officers. On
which he led me to Lieut. Kennedy. I saw he was much tomhawk'd by the Indians.
He asked me if he was an Officer? I told him, he was a Lieutenant: And then he
took me to another; who, I told him, was an Ensign: From thence he carried me
to Captain Spikeman, who was laying in the Place I left him; they had cut off
his Head, and fixed it on a Pole.

I begged for a Pair of Shoes, and something to eat; the Interpreter told me, I
should have Relief when I came to Tionderoga, which was but one Mile and a off,
and then delivered me to the 4 Indians that took me. The Indians gave me a
Piece of Bread, and put a pair of Shoes on my Feet.

About this Time Robert Baker, mentioned above, was brought where I was; we
were extremely glad to see each other, though we were in such a distressed
Condition: he told me of five Men that were taken. We were ordered to march on
toward Tionderoga: But Baker replied, he could not walk. An Indian then pushed
him forwards; but he could not go, and therefore sat down and cried; whereupon
an Indian took him by the Hair, and was going to kill him with his Tomhawk: I
was moved with Pity for him, and, as weak as I was, I took his Arms over my
Shoulders, and was enabled to get him to the Fort.

We were immediately sent to the Guard House, and, about half an Hour after,
brought before the Commanding-Officer, who, by his Interpreter, examined us
separately; after which he again sent us to the Guard-House. The Interpreter
came and told us, that we were to be hanged the next Day, because we had killed
the 7 Prisoners we had taken on the Lake; but was afterward so kind as to tell
us, this was done only to terrify us. About an Hour after came a Doctor, and
his Mate, and dressed our Wounds; and the Commanding-Officer sent us a Quart of
Claret. We lay all Night on the Boards, without Blankets. The next Day I was
put into the Hospital, (the other Prisoners were carried another Way) here I
tarried 'till the 19th of Feb. and the Indians insisted on having me, to carry
to their Homes, and broke into the Hospital; but the Sentinel called the Guard
and turned them out; after which, the commanding Officer prevailed with them to
let me stay 'till the 1st of March, by which Time I was able to walk about the
Fort.

As I was one Day in the Interpreter's Lodging, there came in 10 or 12 Indians,
with the Scalps they had taken, in order to have a War-Dance: They set me on
the Floor, and put 7 of the Scalps on my Head while they danced; when it was
over, they lifted me up in triumph: But as I went and stood by the Door, two
Indians began to dance a Live-Dance, and one of them threw a Tomhawk at me, to
kill me, but I watched his Motion and dodg'd the Weapon.

I lived with the Interpreter 'till the first of March, when General Rigeau
came to the Fort with about 9000 Men, in order, as they said, to make an
Attempt on Fort William-Henry: Their Design was to scale the Walls; for which
Purpose I saw them making Scaling-Ladders. -- The Day before they marched the
General sent for me, and said, Young Man you are a likely Fellow; it is Pity you
should live with such an ignorant People as the English, you had better live
with me. I told him I was willing to live with him: He answered, I should, and
go with him where he went: I replied, Perhaps he would have me go to War with
him: He said, That was the Thing; he wanted me to direct him to Fort
William-Henry, and show him where he might scale the Walls. I told him, I was
sorry that a Gentleman should desire such a Thing of a Youth, or endeavor to
draw him away from his Duty. -- He added, He would give me 7000 Livres on his
Return. I replied, that I was not to be bought with Money, to be a Traitor to
my Country and assist in destroying my Friends: He smiled, and said, In War you
must not mind even Father or Mother. -- When he found that he could not prevail
with me, by all the fair Promises he made, he ordered me back to the Fort; and
had two other Prisoners brought before him, to whom he made the same Proposals
as he had made to me; to which they consented. The next Day I went into the
Room where they were, and asked them if they had been with the General; they
said, they had, and that they were to have 7000 Livres a-piece, as a Reward: I
asked them, if that was the Value of their Fathers and Mothers, and of their
Country? They said they were obliged to go. I said, the General could not force
them; and added, that if they went on such a Design, they must never return
among their Friends; for if they did, and Baker and I should live to get Home,
we would endeavor they should be hanged. At this Time a Smith came and put
Irons on my Feet: But the General gave those two Men who promised to go with
him, a Blanket, a Pair of Stockings and Shoes. They were taken out of the
Guard-House, and marched with the French as Pilots. -- The General did not
succeed; he only burnt our Battoes, etc. and returned to Tionderoga. -- The
poor Fellows never had their Reward, but, instead of that, were sent to the
Guard-House and put in Irons.

Soon after this I was taken out of Irons, and went to live with the
Interpreter 'till the 27th of March; at which Time the Indians took me with
them, in order to go to Montreal, and set me to draw a large Sled, with
Provisions, my Arms being tied with a Rope. By the Time we got to Crown-Point,
I was so lame that I could not walk. The Indians went ashore and built a Fire,
and then told me I must dance: to which I complied, rather than be killed. When
we sat off again, I knew not how to get rid of my Sled, and I knew I was not
able to draw it; but this Fancy came into my Head; I took three Squaws on my
Sled, and pleasantly told them, I wished I was able to draw 'em: All this took
with the Indians; they freed me of the Sled, and gave it to other Prisoners:
They stripped off all my Clothes, and gave me a Blanket. And the next Morning,
they cut off my Hair and painted me, and, with Needles and Indian-ink, pricked
on the back of my Hand the Form of one of the Scaling-Ladders, which the French
made to carry to Fort William-Henry. I understood they were vexed at the
French, for the Disappointment.

We traveled about nine Miles on Lake Champlain, and when the Sun was two
Hours high we stopped; they made a Fire, and took one of the Prisoners that had
not been wounded, and were going to cut off his Hair, as they had done mine: He
foolishly resisted them, upon which they prepared to burn him; but the
Commanding-Officer prevented it at this Time. But the next Night, they made a
Fire, stripped and tied him to a Stake, and the Squaws cut Pieces of Pine, like
Scures, and thrust them into his Flesh, and set them on Fire, and then fell to
powwawing and dancing round him; and ordered me to do the same: Love of Life
obliged me to comply; for I could expect no better Treatment if I refused. With
a bitter and heavy Heart I feigned myself merry. They cut the poor Man's Cords,
and made him run backwards and forwards. I heard the poor Man's Cries to Heaven
for Mercy; and at length, through extreme Anguish and Pain, he pitched himself
into the Flames and expired.

From thence we traveled, without any Thing worthy of Notice happening, 'till
we came to an Indian Town, about 20 Miles from Montreal. -- When we were about
a Gun's-shot from the Town, the Indians made as many live Shouts as they had
Prisoners, and as many dead Ones as they had Scalps. The Men and Women came out
to meet us, and stripped me naked; after which they pointed to a Wigwam, and
told me to run to it, pursuing me all the Way with Sticks and Stones.

Next Day we went to Montreal, where I was carried before Governor Vaudreuill
and examined: Afterward I was taken into a French Merchant's House, and there
I lived three Days. The third Night two of the Indians that took me came in
drunk, and asked for me; upon which the Lady called me into the Room, and as I
went and stood by the Door, one of them began to dance the War-Dance about me,
designing to kill me; but as he lifted up his Hand to stab me, I caught hold
of it with one of mine, and with the other knocked him down, and then ran up
Garret and hid. -- The Lady sent for some Neighbors to clear the House of her
Guests, which they did: It was a very cold Night, and one of the Indians being
excessive drunk, fell down near the House, and was found in the Morning froze
to Death. The Indians came to the House, and finding their Brother dead, said I
had killed him; and gathering a Number together, with their Guns, beset the
House and demanded me of the Lady, saying, I should die the most cruel Death:
The Lady told me of it, and advised me to hide myself in the Cellar, under the
Pipes of Wine; which I did* They searched the House, and even came down Cellar,
but could not find me. The Lady desired a Frenchman to tell the Indians, That
he saw me without the City running away; they soon took after me, every Way. --
The Merchant pitying my Condition, covered me with a Blanket, and carried me in
his Conveyance about five Miles, to a Village where his Wife's Father lived, in
order to keep me out of the Way of the Indians. When the Indians that pursued
me had returned, and could not find me, they concluded that I was concealed by
the Merchant; and applied to the Governor that I might be delivered to them, in
order that they might kill me for killing their Brother; adding, by Way of
threatening, that if I was not delivered up to them, they would turn and be
against the French. The Governor told them, he had examined into the Matter,
and found that I did not kill the Indian, nor know any Thing about it; but that
he froze to Death. On this they said they would not kill me, but would have me
to live with them: The Governor then informed them where I was, and they came
and took me with them to Montreal again, and dressed me in their Habit.

On the 1st of May we set off to go to the Missisippi, where my Indian Master
belonged, and two other English Prisoners with them. For several Days the
Indians treated me very ill; but it wore off. We went in Bark Canoes, 'till we
came to Lake Sacrament, the first Carrying-Place. We continued our Journey till
we came to the Ohio, where General Braddock was defeated. Here they took one of
the Prisoners, and with a Knife ripped open his Belly, took one End of his Guts
and tied to a Tree, and then whipped the miserable Man round and round 'till he
expired; obliging me to dance, while they made their Game at the dying Man.

From hence we set off to go to an Indian Town about 200 Miles from the Ohio,
where we arrived in 15 Days, and tarried three. The third Night one of the
Indians had a mind to kill me; as I was standing by the Fire, he ran against me
to push me into the Flames, but I jumped over, and escaped being burnt: he
followed me round and round, and struck me several Times with his Head and
Fist; which so provoked me, that as he was coming at me again, I struck him and
knocked him backwards. The other Indian laughed, and said I was a good Fellow.

The next Day we set off for the Missisippi, where we arrived the 23d of
August, having passed over thirty-two Carrying-Places from our leaving
Montreal. When we came here, I was ordered to live with a Squaw, who was to be
my Mother. I lived with her during the Winter, and was employed in Hunting,
dressing Leather, etc. being clothed after the Indian Fashion.

In the Spring a French Merchant came a Trading in Bark Canoes, and on his
Return wanted Hands to help him; he prevailed with my Mistress to let me go
with him to Montreal. When we came there, and the Canoes were unloaded, I went
into the Country and lived with his Wife's Father, and worked at the
Farming-Business for my Victuals and Clothing; I fared no better than a Slave.
The Family often endeavored to persuade me to be of their Religion, making
many fair Promises if I would: Wanting to see what Alteration this would make
in their Conduct toward me, one Sunday Morning I came to my Mistress, and
said; Mother, will you give me good Clothes if I will go to Mass? She answered,
Yes, Son, as good as any in the House. She did so, and I rode to Church with
two of her Daughters; in giving me Directions how to behave, they told me, I
must do as they did. When we came Home, I sat at the Table and ate with the
Family, and every Night and Morning was taught my Prayers.

Thus I lived 'till the next Spring, when my Master's Son-in-Law, that bro't me
from the Missisippi, came for me to return with him, as he was going again
there to trade. I refused to go, and applied to the Governor. I was then put
into Goal, where I tarried 5 Weeks, living on Bread and Water and Horse-Beef.
When some Prisoners were going to be sent to Quebeck, in order to be
transported to Old-France, I went with them: Here we laid in Goal 6 Weeks. But
happening to see one of my Master's Sons, he prevailed with me to go back with
him and work as formerly; I consented, and tarried with him 'till the 8th of
September.

There was at the next House an English Lad, a Prisoner; we agreed to run away
together, through the Woods, that so, if possible, we might get home to our
Friends: But how to get Provisions for the Way, we know not; 'till I was
allowed a Gun to kill Pigeons, which were very plenty here. I shot a Number,
split and dried them, and concealed in the Woods. We agreed to set off on a
Sunday Morning, and were to meet at an appointed Place; which we did, and began
our Journey toward Crown-Point. After we had traveled 22 Days, 15 of which we
had no Provision except Roots, Worms, and such like, we were so weak and faint
that we could scarce walk: My Companion gave out, and could go no further; he
desired me to leave him, but I would not. I went and found three Frogs, and
divided them between us. The next Morning he died. I sat down by him, and, at
first, concluded to make a Fire, as I had my Gun, and eat his Flesh, and if no
Relief came, to die with him; but, finally came to this Resolution; -- To cut
off of his Bones as much Flesh as I could, and tie it up in a Handkerchief, and
so proceed as well as I could: Accordingly did so, and buried my Companion on
the Day I left him, I got three Frogs more the next Day. Being weak and tired,
about 9 o'Clock I sat down; but could not eat my Friend's Flesh. I expected
soon to die myself; and while I was commending my Soul to GOD, I saw a
Partridge light just by me, which I thought was sent by Providence; I was so
weak, that I could not hold out my Gun; but by resting, I brought my Piece to
bear so that I killed the Partridge. While I was eating of it, there came two
Pigeons, so near, that I killed 'em both. As I fired two Guns, I heard a Gun at
a Distance: I fired again, and was answered twice. This roused me; I got up and
traveled as fast as I could toward the Report of the Guns; and about half a
Mile off, I saw three Canadians: I went to 'em and pretended to be a Dutchman,
one of their own Regulars, that was lost in the Woods. They brought me to
Crown-Point; upon which I desired to see the Commanding-Officer: He knew me
again, and asked me, how I came there? I told him my Story, and what
Difficulties I had met with. He ordered me to the Guard-House, and to be put in
Irons: About an Hour after he sent me a Bowl of Rice.

After I had been at (...) or twelve Days, the Commanding-Officer sent me back,
under (...), to Montreal, in a Battoe, and wrote a Letter (as I afterward
understood) to my Master not to hurt me.

When I came to the House, one of his Daughters met me at the Door, and pushed
me back, and went and called her Father. At this House there was a French
Captain, of the Regulars, billeted; he was a Protestant: He hearing my Voice,
called me to him, and asked me where I had been? Upon my telling him, he called
me a Fool, for attempting a Thing so impossible. My Master coming in, took me
by the Shoulder, and threatened to kill me for stealing his Gun when I run away:
But the good Captain prevented him from using any Violence. The Captain asked
me if I had been before the Governor; I told him, I had not; and then he
advised my Master to send his Son with me (who was an Ensign among the
Canadians.) When We came to a small Ferry, which we were to pass, I refused to
go any further; and after a great deal of do, he went without me. On his
Return, he said he had got Leave of the Governor, that I should go back to his
Father and work as formerly. Accordingly I lived with him 'till the 19th of
November; and when Col. Schuyler was coming away, I came with him to Albany.

Here I was taken Sick, and some of the Light-Infantry promised me, if I would
inlist, that they would provide for me; and having neither Friends or Money, I
was obliged to consent. They ordered me a Bed, and Care to be taken of me: Five
Days after, they put me on board a Sloop, and sent me to Kingston, and put me
into a Hospital; where I was three Months.

The Regiment remained here 'till May, when we went to Albany, from thence to
Fort William-Henry, and then to Tionderoga and Crown-Point; both of which
Places surrendered to General AMHERST.

On Sept. 19th, I went Pilot of a Scout to Cackanowaga, with Lieutenant
M'Curdy, and on our Return, as we were on Lake Champlain, turning a Point of
Land, and under great Way, we discovered in a large Cove a French Brig; but it
was unhappily too late for us to make our Escape: We were pursued and taken
Prisoners, (being 7 in Number) and the next Morning sent to Nut-Island: where
we were stripped (...) the Indians and dressed after their (...). From thence
we were conduct^^ to Montreal, and examined before the Governor; after which we
were ordered (...). I applied to the Governor, and (...), That I had been a
Prisoner there (...) had lived with such a Far^^^ and desired Liberty to go to
him again, (...) which he sent for my Mas^^^ (...) being informed of the Truth
(...) what I related, consented.

I carried with the Farmer 'till November. ^^th, when by a Flag of Truce 250
English Prisoners came to Crown-Point; where (...) my Regiment.

After repeated Application (...) General AMHERST, I was dismissed, and
returned in Peace to my Father's House the Beginning of January, 1760, after
having been absent 3 Years and almost 8 Months.

O! that Men would praise the LORD for his Goodness, and for his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men. --

"Bless the LORD, O my Soul! --

FINIS

