Dr. Mayhew's TWO Thanksgiving-Discourses, October 9th, 1760.

TWO DISCOURSES Delivered October 9th, 1760.

Being the Day appointed to be observed As a Day of public THANKSGIVING For the
Success of His Majesty's Arms, MORE ESPECIALLY In the entire Reduction of
CANADA.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the West-Church in Boston.

THOU art MY SON -- Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the UTTERMOST parts of the earth for thy possession.

Psalm II. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by R. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street; EDES and
GILL, in Queen Street; and T. and J. FLEET, in Cornhill, 1760.

Considerations on divine Providence in the Success and Consequences of
national Wars; with some short, general Reflections on the Success of His
Majesty's Arms in the present War.
PSALM XCVIII. 1, 2. O SING unto the Lord a new song, for he has done
mavelous things: his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.

THE Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the heathen.


WHOEVER has been much conversant in the holy scriptures, has, I suppose, made
the two following observations. The first, That the prophetic writers, after
speaking of some recent, common events, and things of a secular nature, often
slide, almost imperceptibly, into futurity; or into the mention of those things
that pertain to the kingdom of God under the reign of the Messiah. So that
while a person thinks he is reading only about certain ordinary occurrents, and
expects to meet with nothing else, he finds himself suddenly carried into
future times with the prophet; even into the later periods of the christian
dispensation, concerning which the most glorious things are foretold.

THE other observation alluded to above, is, That in the prophetic writings,
what is spoken primarily concerning worldly things and events then present,
past, or speedily to come to pass, has often a reference to other matters; to
things spiritual and future; and not only future, but far distant; and indeed
principally respects these: viz. the person, offices, and reign of Christ; and
the glory of his kindgdom in the latter days. So that in one view, the same
passage is sometimes common history, and in another view, illustrious prophecy;
some word or clause being purposely inserted, which determines the passage to
be of the prophetical kind; and chiefly to relate to the kingdom of Christ,
even while a great, or perhaps the greater part of it, has a plain reference to
other matters, more common and familiar.

MANY of the psalms As for instance, the 2nd, 72nd and 89th psalms. The
passages of scripture which have such a double meaning, are indeed numerous,
both in the old and new testament. And they partake of the nature of parables,
or allegories; which are sometimes literally true, either in part or whole: But
what is chiefly intended in them, is the moral, or spiritual meaning couched
under those common words and phrases. And, what this secondary, yet principal,
and ultimate sense is, may generally at least, if not always, be determined
with great ease and certainty by the discerning and judicious. Though it must not
be denied, that some whimsical, but well meaning people, have made very odd
work with such passages, by over straining them; and have sometimes conceited a
double meaning without any apparent reason for it: whereby they have given too
much occasion to others to ridicule the whole notion of types, and a double
sense, as though it were in itself absurd.
of David are plain examples, and undeniable proofs, of both these
observations. And the 98th psalm, the beginning of which I have chosen for the
ground of my discourses on the present joyful occasion, is an example of the
latter of them.

IN this psalm David praises God, and exhorts others to praise him, on account
of some signal appearances of his providence in favor of his chosen people; in
saving them from, and giving them victory over their enemies; hereby openly
showing his righteousness to the heathen nations around them. This is doubtless
the primary design of the psalm; at least, of the former part of it: But it is
not the principal, or ultimate. In its chief and ultimate view, it is a
prophecy of what was to come to pass in the days of the Messiah; when God was,
by him, to make known his salvation in a far higher, and more illustrious
sense; and to reveal his righteousness, not only to the heathen nations in, and
round about the land of Canaan, but to the uttermost parts of the earth. So it
is said, ver. 3d, in the time past (as is common in the language of prophecy,
to denote the immutable certainty of the thing spoken of) He has remembered
his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: ALL THE ENDS OF THE EARTH
have seen the salvation of our God. In consequence whereof, not only Israel,
but all the earth, is called upon in the following verses, to make a joyful
noise unto the Lord, to rejoice and sing his praises. Yea, the sea, and the
fullness thereof, are bid to join in this concert; the world, and they that
dwell therein, while the floods clap their hands, and the hills are joyful
together.

THIS is both extremely sublime, and very natural; since the main subject of
the psalm, is that glorious reign of Christ, before the conclusion of which
there is to be a general "restitution", or renovation of all things; even of
the material earth and heavens. For behold, says the Lord, I make all things
new: And we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness. And indeed this psalm itself, though a short one,
looks forward to the time of our Lord's second coming; whom the heavens must
receive, [only] until these times of restitution of all things, which God has
spoken of by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the world began. Acts
III. 21.
For it is to be observed, that all things rational and irrational, animate and
inanimate, are called upon thus to rejoice together, BEFORE THE LORD; for he
comes to judge the earth: With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the
people with equity; as the psalm concludes.

BUT to return to the text: O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done
mavelous things: his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the
victory. The Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he
openly showed in the sight of the heathen. This passage, as before observed,
has undoubtedly a reference to some very remarkable deliverance which God had
vouchsafed to his people Israel, and to his subduing their enemies under them;
hereby making manifest his righteousness to their heathen neighbors. In
consequence whereof, the Israelites are admonished to sing a new song; which
was not used to be done, but upon some very signal occasion. But while the
passage has such a retrospect to things and events already past, it does,
without all reasonable doubt, look forward to things and events then, and even
still future. And this new song, considered in the ultimate view of the
passage, may probably be no other than that mentioned in the revelation of St.
John.

THE present occasion, you are sensible, leads us directly and immediately to
consider this passage, only as an exhortation to praise God for the temporal
salvation, the successes and victories, with which at any time he favors his
people: but especially when these are very signal and illustrious; so that by
them, God may be said to make known his salvation, and openly to show his
righteousness in the sight of the heathen. Which is strictly and literally
applicable to what he has lately done for us, at least here in America. But
having considered and applied the passage in this view of it, I am persuaded,
you will think it proper for us then to extend our views beyond these temporal
concernments; and briefly to consider what aspect our military successes have
upon the kingdom of Christ, the extension thereof, and its establishment in its
power and purity throughout the earth. For this is not only that event, to which
the passage ultimately relates; but it is what we all do, or should, firmly
believe and pray for, whenever we repeat those words -- Thy kingdom come; thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven! And our late victories and successes
may, not improbably, contribute to the accomplishment of this great event.

BUT before I come to speak particularly of these successes, which have lately
attended the arms of our king; and of our obligation to sing a new song on
account of them; it will be proper to observe and illustrate one most important
point of doctrine contained in the text; and which is really the foundation of
all the gratitude and praise, which we owe to almighty God for them. It is
this; That God is truly the author of all our deliverances from, successes
against, and victories over, our worldly enemies. You see that these are in the
text ascribed to God; there being no particular mention made, so much as of any
means or instruments, employed by him in bringing them to pass. Although means
and instruments are at least generally, if not always supposed, in such cases;
yet the psalmist here takes no particular notice of any, but attributes all
directly to God. The Lord has done mavelous things, says he; his right hand,
and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. He is accordingly said to have
made known his salvation hereby; and to have openly showed his righteousness to
the heathen: Though possibly there might have been nothing of a miraculous kind,
strictly speaking, in the deliverance and successes wherewith God had favored
his people, and which are here primarily intended. At least this is
supposeable; for the same kind of language is often used in scripture,
respecting those successes and victories, which were confessedly brought about
only by natural, ordinary and human means; which is sufficient to my present
design. And so much it was needful to observe, previously to my entering upon
it. For, entirely setting aside the case of miraculous interpositions, with
which we our selves are not now concerned; it is proposed, by divine
assistance, to illustrate and confirm the proposition mentioned above, on the
supposition that things come to pass according to what is called the
established course of nature, and the settled order of things. For even upon
this supposition, as well as in those cases where miracles are to be admitted*
all our temporal deliverances, victories and successes are from almighty God:
-- Otherwise indeed, I know not what reason we have to praise him for them,
however great or important they are in themselves. And this is certainly a
point, very suitable to employ our thoughts at this season, and upon the
present occasion.

HOWEVER, you will observe that it is not so much the proof, strictly speaking,
as the illustration of this point, that is now intended: Because it is taken
for granted, that we all in general believe this to be true already; and
therefore do not need to have it proved to us in a formal manner. But yet it
may be profitable to many, and indeed to all of us, to hear some reflections
and remarks upon it, by way of illustration.

SOME general notion of a providence superintending the world, and the concerns
of mankind, has been common in all parts and ages of the world; and also common
to all persons, with a very few exceptions. The ancient epicureans, indeed,
denied a providence, while they professed to believe there were Gods in great
number; so many, that it were easier to call all the stars by their names, than
to give a catalogue of them. But perhaps they acknowledged a deity, or deities,
only to avoid the general odium of mankind, being nothing better than atheists
in disguise; if indeed there be any such thing as speculative, or philosophical
atheism. But at this day all professed theists, to be sure all christians,
believe a providence; however crude, indigested, and partial, the conceptions
of many persons may be concerning it. None of these imagine, as the epicureans
affected to do, that God is too indolent, or that he disdaineth, to concern
himself about the things that are done on earth, even though he humbles himself
when he beholds them that are done in heaven; in those heavens, which are not
clean in his sight, and the angels whereof he charge with folly.

NOW, if there be any such thing as a providence, conversant and active about
men, and their temporal concernments, which is taken for granted; certainly
national wars and their events, must be under God's particular inspection and
superintendence; these being, in their nature, of the highest importance, and
the consequences of them most extensive and interesting. It is on the conduct,
success and issue of battles and wars, that the temporal welfare of nations
principally depends, from generation to generation. And not only their
temporal, but their spiritual welfare also, depends in a great measure upon the
management and issue of wars. For hereby it is frequently determined, in
effect, not only whether people shall enjoy their native country, their laws,
their civil rights and liberties; but also whether they shall lose or enjoy
their religion, with their spiritual privileges; and whether their posterity
shall be of this or that religion, or perhaps of none at all.

WHOEVER is conversant in history, or is tolerably acquainted with the past and
present state of the world, knows that the religious state of countries is
often determined, almost unavoidably, to be what it is in general, by wars and
conquests; almost as certainly as their political and civil state. How often
does the conqueror deprive the conquered of their old religion, either in whole
or in part; and give them a new one in its room? Which is done, either by right
down tyrannical imposition, or else by allowing some peculiar privileges of a
secular nature to those who will make an exchange; which latter, though it be a
gentler and more humane way of bringing about a revolution in religion, and may
require more time, is not perhaps a less efficacious and certain one in the
end. Sometimes both these methods are employed at once. And what is it, for
example, that has made almost all the East, mahometans? those who, at least
whose forefathers, were once christians? What is it that has produced so
prodigious an alteration in the religious state of those countries, in so
considerable a part of Europe, Asia and Africa? The visible, apparent causes
hereof, were the wars and conquests of the Saracens; of Mahomet and his
successors, and the various methods used by them to suppress the religion of
Christ, and to propagate the imposture of the Coran. Or mohammedan bible.
This is only mentioned as one remarkable example of what is usually the effect
of conquests in a greater or less degree. It cannot, however, be denied, that
the changes thus introduced in religion, are sometimes for the better, as well
as often for the worse. As, for instance, since the time of Oliver Cromwell, at
least of William III, the roman catholic religion has, I suppose, been
gradually losing, and the protestant gaining ground, in Ireland: And this,
without persecution, inquisitions and racks; which are abhorrent from the
principles of the latter, though very consonant to the spirit and temper of too
many of its professors. Now, if this be indeed God's world, and in any proper
sense under his inspection and government, it is impossible but that he must,
in some way or other, order and determine these great events of war, by which
almost all other things are, in effect, determined; both in the religious and
civil state of nations. If we should suppose that success and victory are not
owing to the influence and operation, or the providential government of God, we
should take a great and most material part of his work out of his hands;
leaving him, I had almost said, but very little to do in the administration of
this world. On this supposition, the world would be governed almost without
him; even with respect to the greatest, and most interesting events and
revolutions, that come to pass therein from age to age! And if we could once
suppose, that God does not concern himself about these matters, the wars of
nations, their conduct, and various issues; if we could once imagine, that some
mighty empires are reduced, overturned and ruined, while other kingdoms are
founded, extended, and made formidable, independently of God, or without his
providential influence and ordination; we might then come into this farther
conclusion, naturally, if not necessarily flowing from such premises, viz. That
all other events in this world also come to pass independently of God; they
being apparently of less consequence to the world than these. But as this would
be directly to adopt the old epicurean system, which was really no better than
disguised atheism, it is concluded, nothing needs to be said in confutation of
it in a christian assembly.

BUT, from these general reflections on the overruling providence of God in the
success and issue of wars, we will, if you please, proceed now to take a nearer
and more particular view of these important events. We will consider, what are
the usual, the visible, and more immediate causes of military successes and
victories: In doing which, we shall trace the vestiges of divine providence. We
shall hereby see something of the manner, in which God operates to the
production of these effects in ordinary cases, by the instrumentality of
secondary causes, or natural means: Which, it is hoped, will be a useful
entertainment to us, and particularly seasonable at this time.

WHEN nations are engaged in war, there are diverse things, to which success is
apparently, and more visibly owing, whenever obtained; sometimes to one of
them, sometimes to another; and sometimes to a coincidence of several together.
And a cursory review, or brief consideration of these things, will serve to
illustrate and confirm the main point before us; by showing, that there is no
victory, no success in war, but what is ultimately to be resolved into the holy
will, the active influence, or providential government of God.

1. TO begin then at the visible source and fountain of military enterprises
and operations: Success is sometimes more plainly owing to a superiority of
wisdom in the cabinet, in a king, or his council and ministry, than to any
other secondary cause. For when there is an equality of advantage in all other
respects, such a superiority of wisdom at the helm, at least ordinarily
determines the success. It is in courts, that the scheme and plan of wars, and
the general manner of conducting them, are laid and fixed upon. And one nation
often becomes victorious and triumphant, rather than its enemy, because there
is more wisdom and prudence at the helm, in directing and pointing its military
efforts. But from whom, or from whence, did some kings, their councils or
ministers, derive this superiority of wisdom and genius? How, for example, does
it come to pass, that a GEORGE and a PIT have more wisdom than a Louis and a
Belleisle? Is their wisdom self-derived? or have they more than they received
from above? You know, who it is that teaches man knowledge; whose inspiration
gives him understanding; and from whence all sound judgment and counsel comes.
It is all originally from God, as truly as the wisdom of prophets and apostles;
though not of the same kind, nor designed to answer exactly the same ends. So
that whenever success and and triumph are more visibly owing to such a
superiority of wisdom at the helm, than to any other cause, you see to whom the
glory thereof is ultimately due.

2. SUCCESS is often owing to a superiority of military skill, courage and
stratagem, in the general or generals, who have the more immediate direction
and conduct of a war committed to them. All other circumstances being supposed
alike, such a difference between the capacities of the respective commanders of
armies, commonly at least determines the victory. Many a general and admiral
have lost the day, merely by being outwitted; and as many, of consequence, have
come off with success and applause, by means of their superior skill and
address. But is not the wisdom and penetration of generals, or military
commanders, derived from the same divine source, with that of kings, their
ministers and counselors? Does not God make a difference in this respect
between the former, as well as between the latter? Did not the DUKE of
MARLBOROUGH, for example, receive that military genius from heaven, which gave
him such a superiority over the French commanders, the beginning of this
century? Who made a FERDINAND superior to Richlieu and a Contade? perhaps to a
Broglio also? And who but God was the author of those military accomplishments,
that penetration, address, and true martial ardor, which appeared in the late
general WOLF; and which have rendered both HIM, and the HEIGHTS OF ABRAHAM,
forever memorable? Or who gave ANOTHER general, whom I need not name, the
wisdom and magnanimity to conduct the war in this part of America, to a
conclusion at once so glorious to himself, so happy for us, and for
Great Britain? -- But without a regard to any particular times or facts, it is
unquestionably true in general, that superior sagacity, a thorough knowledge of
military affairs, bravery, and a right judgment in a chief commander, are of
the utmost importance; and that success is often more visibly owing hereto,
than to any other cause. And if we know from whom those qualities are derived,
we can be at no loss, to whom the successes obtained by means of them are to be
ascribed. Certainly God did not originally make all generals and military
commanders equal; or give them the same capacity and genius for war: We have
seen a very remarkable difference even amongst our own, during the present war.
--

3. SUCCESS and victory are sometimes most apparently owing to a superiority on
one side in respect of numbers. And indeed, when there is equal wisdom in the
cabinet, equal skill, discipline and bravery in the field, and all other
circumstances are alike favorable to both sides; whenever this is the case, it
is plain that, without a miracle, victory must declare for the most numerous
host. And numbers have often prevailed against a superiority in almost all
other respects; though not so often as other things have prevailed against
numbers. But since this is sometimes the case, let us consider whence it is,
that one nation or country is more populous than another; and able to send more
troops into the field. Do men grow spontaneously out of the ground, like trees?
or rather, as they do not? For it is God's hand that plants and waters, and his
sun that warms, even the meaner shrubs, as well as the spreading oak, the
hanging elm, and the cedars of Lebanon, those tall and ancient sons of the
forest. Now does God cause the trees, and even the lowly shrubs, to abound more
in one country than another; and do men, who are styled "his offspring,"
increase and multiply with him! Surely they do not. God has not only made all
nations to dwell upon the face of the earth; but has determined the times
before appointed, in which they live, whether in succession or at once; and has
even fixed the bounds of their habitation respectively Acts XVII. 26.
. If, while one nation is increased and enlarged, another is diminished by
plagues, earthquakes, famine, or any other means, doubtless it is the
providence of God that makes this difference. It is therefore evident, that
when one nation is successful in carrying on a war, by reason of its being
greater and more populous than another, such success is ultimately to be
attributed to God, who multiplieth one, and diminishes another by various
methods, as he pleases.

4. SUCCESS and victory are sometimes more apparently owing to neither of these
things, but to the superior courage and strength, patience and resolution of
the troops; I mean, of the common soldiery. These qualities often prevail over
superior numbers, and many other advantages, to such a degree almost, that one
has been known to chase an hundred; and two, to put ten thousand to flight: As
in some of the wars of the Jews of old; and in others also, where nothing
praeternatural is supposed to have taken place; particularly in the wars
between the ancient Greeks and the Persians: Wherein a few thousands, or even
hundreds of the former, sometimes put to the rout almost incredible hosts of
the latter; armies, the number of which, as is said of Gog and Magog, was as
the sand of the sea; and which went up on the breadth of the earth Rev. XX.
against them. But whence is it that some men, yea whole nations in general,
have more bodily strength, and more fortitude than others? Some are doubtless
weaker, more timed and faint-hearted than others, even by nature. Or if this
apparent difference amongst men, be in part owing to a difference in the
climates, who made this difference? Or if it be owing partly to different ways
of living, different discipline, etc; yet the providence of God is not to be
excluded, even here. There is indeed no reason to doubt but that courage, and
even bodily strength, may be acquired and improved by proper methods of living,
exercise and discipline. But this is never actually done independently of
divine providence, giving opportunity and occasion for it, and leading the way
to such improvement. There is often a co-incidence of many things and events,
and a long train of particular circumstances, by means whereof the courage and
martial prowess of one nation are raised and improved to a prodigious height;
while in another nation there is no such train of circumstances, no such
co-incidence of things and events, favorable to a martial spirit: But, on the
contrary, such an one as tends to enfeeble and enervate, to dispirit and debase
the people. Now this long train of connected circumstances and events, tending
to raise the military spirit of one nation, and to depress that of another, is
certainly never, in the whole of it, the effect of human contrivance, foresight
and ordination, of which it appears to be, at least in a great measure,
independent. It must be ascribed at last to that divine providence, which
superintends and overrules all things. It is, in short, like the fabulous
golden chain of the poets, hung down from heaven to earth; the upper end
whereof is far above mortal reach and sight, and there fastened to the throne
of God! -- Whenever, therefore, success in war is more immediately owing, as it
often is, to such a superiority of martial prowess and bravery, it may be said,
with the greatest truth and propriety, that God's right hand, and his holy arm
has gotten him the victory.

5. SUCCESS is sometimes owing, more immediately, to neither of the things
already mentioned; but to one nation's having a greater plenty than another of
military stores, provisions, and all things necessary for prosecuting a war to
advantage: Or, to its being richer, which comes to much the same thing at last;
for, as Solomon has observed, Money answers all things. But whence is it that
one country abounds with provisions, with all things needful in carrying on a
war, or with riches; while another is barren, destitute of these conveniences,
and poor? None of my hearers, certainly, need to be informed from whence, or
from whom, these differences originally proceed: Who it is that gives corn and
wine, wool and flax; that multiplieth the flocks of the shepherd, and feeds
the cattle upon a thousand hills; that has apappointed a vein for the silver,
and a place for the gold where they fine it; while iron is taken out of the
earth, and brass is molten out of the stone, where he has deposited them: Or,
who it is that has ordained and opened the canals of commerce between country
and country, either more or less convenient for mercantile intercourse, for the
exchange of commodities, and supplying those places with silver and gold, which
are naturally destitute of them. Will you exclude God and his providence from
having done these things? Surely you will not. Whenever, therefore, success in
war is owing more visibly and immediately to such plenty, abundance, or
superior riches, the victory is plainly the Lord's: Who gives these supplies,
in various proportions as he pleases, out of his own exhaustless stores and
treasuries, to different nations, realms and kingdoms: None of which possess
more of them, than they possess by his favor and bounty.

6. WHERE nations are equal, or nearly equal, in all those respects that have
been mentioned, there is yet sometimes health enjoyed in one camp or army,
while sickness prevails in that of the enemy; which is the more immediate cause
of success and victory to the former. Yea, less numerous armies, and inferior
in every other respect, have prevailed by this means; while far superior ones
have become an easy prey to them. But whence does it come to pass, that
sickness rages in one country, camp or army, rather than in another? or this
particular year, rather than another, either fore the war commenced, or after
it is over, and all is decided? I will not suspect any present to be so
skeptical, or rather so atheistical, as to hesitate a moment for the true
answer to these demands. Whenever, therefore, victory or success is owing to
the greater health enjoyed in one army than in the opposite, you see to whom it
must be attributed at last.

7. SUCCESS, when all other circumstances are nearly alike, is sometimes most
apparently owing to winds, tides and weather; which prove favorable to one
fleet or army, and unfavourable to the opposite. In all maritime wars, and all
military operations which have any connection with, or relation to, the mighty
waters of the ocean, or even to lakes and navigable rivers (as indeed almost
all national wars have, especially in this age of the world); in all such wars,
a great deal depends upon weather, winds and tides. These are sometimes so
ordered, as to give success and victory even to the inferior fleet or army.
Sometimes the superior fleet suffers a terrible shipwreck, and all designs
miscarry therewith; while the inferior rides safely in port, or sails securely
just beyond the limits of the storm, under a serene sky, and prosperous gale.
Sometimes a numerous army is obliged to remain inactive, and is perhaps half
starved, because the wind has held long to the northward or the southward, to
the east or west; and the expected supplies have miscarried; perhaps, been
driven on the enemy's coast, as a seasonable relief to them. Yea, sometimes
when well appointed armies have met on the field, and have had no connection
with seas, lakes or rivers; the wind, rain and hail from heaven, by attacking
one of them in front in the time of battle, have been the means of putting it
to the rout, and giving the victory to the weaker army. History furnishes
examples of all these things. Now you are sensible, that winds and tides,
storms and tempests, which have such a mighty influence in wars, especially in
naval ones, are no ways dependent upon human wisdom or power; but upon almighty
God. So that whenever they prove favorable to one side, and unfavourable to
the other, and determine the success; we can ascribe such success to none but
to him, who holds the waters in the hollow of his hand; whose pleasure, snow
and hail, rain and vapor, and stormy winds fulfill; and of whom it is said,
There is none like the God of Jessurun, who rides upon the heavens in the help
of his people, and in his excellency upon the sky. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 26.

8. SOMETIMES success is owing, more immediately, to what is vulgarly termed a
mere accident, and which Solomon himself calls chance. I returned, and saw
under the sun, says he, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to
the strong -- but time and chance happens to them all Ecles. ix. 11. The word
chance is diverse times used in scripture in much the same sense; and
particularly in our Savior's account of the man that "fell among thieves."
Luke x 31. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way, etc.
. That is, some unforeseen, unsuspected turn, incident or circumstance, not
owing to any human providence or contrivance, sometimes gives the race to the
slower, and the victory to the weaker. It were indeed very absurd to suppose,
that the swifter should not win the race, all other things and circumstances
relative thereto being alike; and the only difference lying in the respective
swiftness of the runners. This were as absurd as to suppose, that a winged
arrow from a bow, would not reach a distant goal, though there were no
obstruction in the way, sooner than the sleeping, almost motionless snail would
crawl to do it. It were also irrational to suppose, that the stronger army
should not prevail in the field, all other things and circumstances being
alike; and the only difference lying in their respective power. This were as
absurd as to suppose, that a heavier weight should not preponderate in an equal
balance, and overcome a lighter. We may be sure that Solomon was too much of a
philosopher to intend either of these things, so contrary even to common sense.
His meaning, as intimated before, doutless is, that certain cross accidents,
sinister and unsuspected occurrents, or casualties, sometimes intervene as to
one side, or some favorable ones as to the other; and snatch the victory from
the stronger, yea, from the wiser and braver, giving an unexpected triumph to
the less numerous and valiant host. As also the swifter, and more expert
runner, may be vanquished by running at a disadvantage, by making one slip, or
a single mis-step. Thus it is that, in the language of Solomon, time and chance
happen to all men. And that great victories have sometimes been thus obtained
by inferior, over superior armies, without any real misconduct of the one, or
any wiser or braver conduct in the other, history abundantly attests. Thus, for
illustration, the better general, with the superior army, has not always had,
nor could have, his choice of ground: Perhaps he was a stranger to the country,
and a little too far advanced, or not quite far enough, when he was
necessitated to come to a battle at a great disadvantage; which has been the
occasion of victory to the weaker, by whom perhaps the particular time and
place of battle, were as unsought for, i. e. as accidental, as they were to the
former. So again, when the best dispositions have been made in an army before a
battle, upon a rational presumption that the opposite army would be drawn up
after such or such a manner, this has proved, perhaps, the loss of the day;
there being an order of battle in the latter, materially different from what
was, on good grounds, expected: And this possibly, rather by a mere mistake, or
blunder, than from any superior skill in the art military. So that wisdom on
one side, and want of it on the other, have, by a strange kind of fatality or
accident, contributed equally to take the victory from the stronger! Yea
farther: Battles have been lost by the stronger, through some unaccountable
mistake of orders, or only of a single word at a critical juncture, and gained
by the weaker; to which decision of the day, another, but fortunate mistake in
the latter, may have partly contributed! History, I think, affords examples of
all these things; at least, such examples as are a sufficient ground for these
representations: Though if it did not, yet these things are plainly supposeable
according to the course of nature; which is sufficient. And this may in some
measure serve to illustrate and verify the observation of Solomon, that the
battle is not always to the strong; but that time and chance happen to all.
Indeed some of those things which were mentioned under former heads, might be
reduced to this of time and chance, according to this notion of it;
particularly winds, weather, etc. under the last preceding head: which things
are, as to us, contingent, accidental or casual; no ways dependent upon human
providence and ordination.

AND how many things of this kind are there, which come to pass from age to
age, sometimes quite contrary even to rational probability, as well as without
any human contrivance, to frustrate the devices of men? For man knows not his
time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are
caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon them Eccles. ix. 12.
. Thus it is that Solomon illustrates his own meaning about time and chance, in
the verse immediately following. But are those things which are chance and
accident to us, short-sighted mortals, the same to God, to whom, it is said,
all his works are known from the beginning of the creation? Can we think that
such things, which though seemingly little in one view of them, yet give such
great turns to the affairs of nations, and are relatively of such prodigious
importance to the world, are accidental with regard to God; or that they happen
beyond, or beside, his intention! Certainly we cannot, without the greatest
impiety, and the greatest absurdity, in conjunction. No: The less man has to do
in the contrivance, ordination and production of them, i. e. the more
accidental and fortuitous they are with relation to man, the more immediately
and directly are they to be attributed to God. These things, by whatever name
or names they are called, are doubtless ordained by him to be productive of
such and such consequences; and, at the same time, to confound human pride and
arrogance, that no flesh might glory in his sight. In one word, these are,
without all doubt, a very material part of that great plan of divine providence
and government, which are carrying on in the world from one age and generation
to another. For even a sparrow does not fall to the ground without our Father;
and when men cast the lot or die, the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord
Prove. xvi. 33.
.

IT may just be added here, that the victory, and with it the civil and
religious state of nations, has sometimes been determined by an unpremeditated
resolution, or a lucky thought, as some would phrase it, coming into the mind
of a commander in a decisive moment, one can hardly tell how. Although it was not
owing to any superior sagacity habitual to him; yea, although the most wise and
experienced generals would perhaps have agreed in looking on it as rash and
unjustifiable, yet it has succeeded. Of this there have been examples. And to
what shall we attribute such victories and successes, but to that providence
which superintends and directs all things; and to the influence of which, even
chance and accident are subject, in accomplishing its own great designs!

MIRACULOUS interpositions being excepted, I cannot readily think of any other
things besides those mentioned above, which are the immediate, apparent causes
of victory, and military successes; at least, of any which may not easily and
naturally be reduced to them. And all these, we see, are to be resolved at last
into the pleasure and providence of God. The wisdom of kings, their ministers,
counselors, military commanders, is all originally from him. It is he that
multiplieth and increases nations; that gives superior strength, courage,
plenty, riches, health. Winds and seas, and storms, fulfill his pleasure: And
whatsoever is, with respect to us, accident or chance, we must, unless we are
epicureans or atheists, acknowledge to be in him fixed purpose, counsel and
destination.

BUT if there should be any other things besides those mentioned above, to
which success is ever more immediately owing; it must, however, be either owing
to some qualities, powers and acts of subordinate agents entirely dependent on
him; or else, to some more direct influence and operation of the supreme,
original cause; for there is no medium. If the former, still such successes are
truly from God, according to the same reasoning that has been used above: But
if the latter, then they are, by the very supposition itself, more immediately
from him. IT is very supposeable that the omnipresent Spirit, which is "above
all, and through all, and in us all", may often immediately influence the human
mind in its determinations, though quite imperceptibly. Or the ministry of angels
may be employed for that purpose, and in a great variety of other ways, to the
production of such effects and events as are spoken of above; of which there
are more than obscure intimations in the scriptures of the old and new
testament. And it is farther to be observed, that both these may be supposed,
without any alteration in, or infraction upon, the visible established course
of things, or the known laws of nature; such as is implied in the notion of a
miracle.
.

WHAT then is the result of all this, but that God really sits as Umpire on his
eternal throne, between contending nations in all their contests, whether for
right and justice only, or for proud dominion; giving success and triumph to
which soever he pleases? And it is always to be remembered, that he acts
herein the part, not merely of the sovereign, but of the infinitely wise and
holy, just and good governor of the world. His providential government is not
destructive of, but perfectly consistent with, the moral powers, the liberty,
and proper agency, of his rational creatures; being conformable to the nature
which he has given them. And he also exercises loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth, by defending and prospering one nation when engaged
in war, and humbling or destroying another; ordering all things in the most
perfect manner possible. Of this we may be sure in general, from what we know
of his perfections by reason and revelation; although, when we come to particular
events and dispensations, we are indeed often unable to see the special reasons
and designs of them. And how should it be otherwise? It were infinitely absurd
to imagine, that creatures of such very limited capacities as mankind, should
be able fully to comprehend the immense designs and works of an infinite being.
It were as rational to suppose that a child in the arms of its mother, should
be able to comprehend, not only the economy of the family, but of the great
kingdom or empire, of which it was born a subject!

LET me here subjoin without any comment, a few passages of scripture, which
being taken all together in one view, very fully and strongly express whatever
has been said upon this subject. -- "Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the
power, and the glory, and the victory and the majesty: for all that is in the
heaven and in the earth is thine. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou
reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it
is to make great, and to give strength unto all 1 Chronicles. xxix. 11, 12.
" -- "MINE UNDERSTANDING RETURNED UNTO ME, and I blessed the Most High -- whose
dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to
generation. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he
does according to his will -- All whose works are truth, and his ways
judgments; and those that walk in pride he is able to abase Dan. iv. 34.
". -- "There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength. An horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall
he deliver any by his great strength. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him Psalm xxxiii. 16.
" -- "Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight: my goodness, my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer
Psalm cxliv. 1.
" -- "God is the judge: he puts down one, and sits up another Ps lxxvii 7.
". -- "Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither
let the mighty man glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his
riches. But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight, says the Lord ix.
23.
". -- "Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reaches unto
the clouds. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a
GREAT DEEP" Psalm xxxvi. 5.6.
. -- "By his spirit he garnished the heavens; his hand has formed the crooked
serpent. Lo, these are PARTS of his ways; but how LITTLE a portion is heard of
him Job xxvi. 13, 14.
?" -- "Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the Almighty
unto PERFECTION? It is as high as heaven, what can THOU do? deeper than hell,
what can THOU know Chap. xi. 7, 8.
!"

THUS I have offered some things in order to illustrate and confirm that
important point of doctrine mentioned in the former part of this discourse. And
let the impious Mezentii of the earth boast ever so often, that their "right
hand is their God Contemptor Divum Mezentius --
Dextra mihi Deus, et telum, quod missile libro,
Adsint! --
Virg.
;" yet it appears that there is ANOTHER, whose right hand, and his holy arm,
does, and will, get HIM the victory. We are not to suppose a fatality in the
events of war, inconsistent with any real liberty in man. Neither are we to
suppose, that these important events are so precarious and fortuitous with
respect to our selves, that we can never form a rational or probable judgment
concerning them, beforehand. But, according to reason, to scripture and
experience, the Author and Lord of nature does so overruled and control
mankind in the exercise of all their powers and faculties (without destroying
them); and so order almost innumerable other things -- every thing indeed,
relative to the conduct and issue of wars, as to hold these events in his own
hand; and to keep men in a continual dependence on himself. A nation can never
be certain of success in war; so many things unexpectedly intervene from time
to time, by God's ordination, to frustrate the most sanguine hopes. And
sometimes, on the other hand, contrary to all apparent probability, God
supporteth, raises, and crowns with victory, those that were cast down,
without strength or spirits, and seemingly on the brink of destruction. That
some nations are in fact thus disappointed and humbled, and others exalted,
quite contrary to human probability, none will deny: And he that will ascribe
these events, ultimately, to any thing else than to divine providence, has an
evil heart of unbelief in dedeparting from the living God.

SOME of these last observations might be, in a measure, exemplified in the
turn which the present war has taken within about three years. There has seldom
been so great a change in the face of any war in so short a space, as this took
about that time. In what sea did our fleets, just before, support the ancient
honor of the British flag? Where were not our troops defeated and disgraced?
What part of our extended frontier in America, was not drenched with blood?
What countenances did not appear dejected, except of those, who were not the
friends, perhaps the enemies, of their country? In what nation were we not
become a bye-word and an hissing? while the very savages despised and insulted
us. How wonderfully is the scene changed since? Where are not the British
fleets and armies now victorious? How many? what important conquests and
acquisitions, have been made? What satisfaction appears in the face of every
well-wisher to Great Britain, and her dependencies? If war, horrid war, can
ever wear any other than a hidehus form, it may now be said to have put on a
smiling countenance with respect to us. But, like the fabled Janus, whose
temple was always open in a time of war, it has two faces. If with one it
smiles on us, with the other it certainly frowns on our enemies, particularly
here in America. They now feel all that we either felt or feared from them
heretofore, excepting the effects of savage cruelty and treachery; which God
grant they may never feel from the hands of Britons, or British subjects!
Whatever they may deserve, we certainly owe more reverence to our selves, and
to human nature, than at once to dishonor and debase both, by retaliating
their perfidy and barbarity. This were as much beneath us, and even more, than
for a man of virtue and true honor to become a common executioner. Such work is
fit only for them, and for him "whose works they use to do."

DIVERSE things have been mentioned in this discourse, as the more immediate,
apparent causes of military successes and victories; sometimes one of them,
sometimes another, and sometimes several of them in conjunction; all by the
determinate counsel and ordination of heaven. It would be an unnecessary,
perhaps an indecent inquiry, To which of these things the great change in the
face of the present war, and our military successes for several years past,
have been more especially owing? since this might lead to such comparisons as
ought not to be made. There has, I suppose, been a co-incidence of several of
these things, to the production of such happy and glorious events: Wisdom, and
sound policy at the helm: military skill, spirit and magnanimity in the
commanders of our fleets and armies Not, however, without some exceptions.
: courage, discipline, and martial prowess in the troops: plenty, health, etc.
And what may seem to have had as little hand, perhaps, as any thing, in most of
our successes, is that which was distinguished by the name of accident, or
chance. However, this is not to be wholly excluded from having had a share
therein: For in all military affairs and enterprises, after human policy,
wisdom and bravery have done their best, there will still be something, more or
less, left to the decision of chance; that is, in other words, left to be
determined more immediately by the hand and providence of God. Let it suffice,
that our successes are real and great; and that, by whatever means they have
most visibly been obtained, they are originally from God, to whom the glory of
them is therefore due.

I AM, by God's leave and help, in the afternoon to make some more particular
observations and reflections on our late military successes, especially in the
total reduction of Canada; and also briefly to consider, what aspect these
successes have upon the enlargement, and more general establishment of Christ's
kingdom in the world: which is the grand and glorious event to which my text,
and the whole psalm relates, in its ultimate view. And we should remember, that
in the common course of things, the great designs of God's kingdom and grace
are carrying on in the world, even by means of wars and the sword. All these
commotions are preparatory and introductory to the glorious things foretold of
the latter days; when, from the rising of the sun, even unto the going down of
the same, the name of God shall be great among the gentiles; and in every place
incense shall be offered unto his name, and a pure offering: for my name shall
be great among the heathen, says the Lord of hosts Mal. i. 5.
. While perhaps kings, or even whole nations, are proudly struggling for mutual
revenge, or for extended empire and dominion, without a thought of any thing
farther; there is ONE who, though invisible to mortal eye, presides over, and
directs all, with far other views and designs; with designs and views
infinitely more wise, just, benevolent and august: And whatever HE wills is
destiny. For there is no understanding, or counsel, or might against the Lord.
Sooner shall man that is a worm, and the son of man that is a worm, break God's
covenant of the Day, and his covenant of night, so that there shall not be day
and night in their season Jer. xxxiii. 20.
, than frustrate his purpose as expressed in the prophecy following -- The God
of heaven shall set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the
kingdom shall not be left to other people; but it shall break in pieces, and
consume all these kindgdoms, and it shall stand for ever Dan. ii. 44.
.

LET us, my Brethren, be truly sensible, that it is to God we are indebted, not
only for all our late military successes, but for life, breath, and every
blessing which we enjoy. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things
-- If we are now truly thankful to our God, and walk answerably to the
obligations which he has laid us under, we shall at length praise him without
weariness in a temple not made with hands; and begin that glorious
thanksgiving, those songs of victory and triumph with patriarchs and prophets,
with apostles and angels, wherewith the universe shall resound when these
heavens are folded up and changed -- In the mean time, O let us sing unto the
Lord a new song here on earth; for he has already done mavelous things; his
right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory -- Give unto the Lord,
O ye mighty; give unto the Lord, all ye kindreds of the earth; give unto the
Lord glory and strength; give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name --

The End of the first Discourse.
Discourse II. Concerning the late Successes of His Majesty's Arms, more
especially in the Reduction of Canada; and the Aspect they have upon the
Kingdom of Christ, its Extension, and farther Establishment; with Reflections.
PSALM XCVIII. 1, 2. O SING unto the Lord a new song, for he has done
mavelous things: his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.

THE Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the heathen.


HAIL, Happy day! and thanks to HIM that made it such! This is indeed a good
day, which the Lord has made for us to be glad and rejoice therein: A day
which, if not many prophets, yet many wise and righteous men have desired to
see; and which we their posterity are so highly favored of God, as now to
behold. Let us therefore sing a new song unto the Lord, whose right hand, and
his holy arm has gotten him the victory; whereby he has made known his
salvation, and showed his righteousness to the heathen.

WHEREVER the singing of a new song is mentioned in scripture, as it is in
diverse other places, it has a reference to some very singular event, by which
God manifests his power and glory; his loving kindness to his people, or his
just severity in the punishment of their enemies. And it was observed to you in
the morning, that this passage, and the psalm in general, has a retrospect to
some remarkable appearances of God's providence in behalf of his people Israel.
This is not, however, the ultimate view of the psalm, or of this passage in
particular. It is not merely of the historical, but also of the prophetic kind;
looking forward to the great things then, and still future; which are most
surely to come to pass in the latter days, under the reign of the Messiah: When
God will more signally display his salvation, and openly show his righteousness
to all the gentile nations; giving his son the heathen for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. Agreeably whereto, the
apostle John tells us, that he heard a new song sung; in which, it seems, the
whole rational creation bore a part -- And every creature which is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth; and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be unto
him that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever Vid. Rev.
v. 9 -- 13.
.

THE text in its ultimate design and view, leads our thoughts to the time when
this new song shall be sung, on occasion of those great things and glorious
events, hereafter to be accomplished; of which God's making known his salvation
to his people of old, and showing his righteousness to the heathen in, and
round about the land of Canaan, was typical, and a kind of pledge. But the
present occasion leads us more particularly to consider this passage, as an
exhortation to praise God for the temporal deliverances with which he favors
his people, and the successes and victories which he grants them over their
worldly enemies. However, it was intimated to you, that I should not quite lose
sight of this passage considered in its ultimate design, or as having a
prophetic reference to the glory of Christ's kingdom in the latter days:
Especially since those successes with which God has lately favored us against
our papal and heathen enemies, may possibly, or rather probably, be one means
of, and a step toward, the final accomplishment of those far greater things
which are shortly to come to pass.

THE main business of my discourse in the morning, was to illustrate and
confirm an important point of doctrine contained in the text: viz. That God is
truly the author of all our deliverances from, successes against, and victories
over, our worldly enemies. His right hand, and his holy arm, says the
psalmist, has gotten him the victory, etc. This is indeed the foundation of
all our religious joy and gratitude on such occasions as the present. It was
therefore thought proper to enlarge upon this point. And accordingly we traced
some of the footsteps of divine providence, and the various methods of its
operation, in giving salvation and victory to those whom it favors; and in
accomplishing its own great designs. But having already said what may serve in
some measure to clear up and establish this important principle of natural and
revealed religion; and also made some short, general reflections on our late
military successes: It will now be proper to take a nearer, and more particular
view of these successes, especially here in America, in the reduction of
Canada; which, you are sensible, is the principal occasion of our appearing
before God this day to sing a new song of praise to him. However, some other
successes with which God has lately favored the British arms in other parts,
will not be wholly omitted.

SOME of my hearers may probably remember, that on the day of our public
thanksgiving the last year on the surrender of Quebec, the capital of Canada, I
considered the importance of that acquisition, not so much in itself, as with
reference to what might probably be the consequence thereof another campaign,
viz. the entire reduction of the whole country: Some of the happy effects
whereof were then represented to you, upon a presumption that this must be the
consequence of that acquisition, with the ordinary blessing of providence on
the British arms; or unless something out of the common course of things,
should intervene to prevent it. I now heartily congratulate you, my friends and
brethren here present, and bless the great, the eternal God, who presides over
nations and their affairs, that he has not frustrated those our hopes; but
fulfilled and realized them, in some respects even beyond what we could have
reasonably expected. But having heretofore considered the surrender of Quebec
in connection with the supposed reduction of Canada, as the natural consequence;
and spoken somewhat particularly of the advantages which must result to
Great Britain and her colonies from such a conquest; you are sensible that I
have hereby in some measure anticipated the joy and gratitude of this day; and
precluded myself from saying diverse things, which might otherwise have been
proper on the present occasion: I mean, unless I should go into a repetition of
the same things; of which I am not fond.

HOWEVER, since it is proper to say something particularly upon this conquest,
in order to excite our gratitudge to the supreme Governor of the world, from
whom salvation and victory come; I shall not scrupulously avoid every thing
that was mentioned on the occasion aforesaid: But, touching briefly on those
things which were then chiefly enlarged upon, I shall now speak more especially
of such as neither were, nor could be, taken notice of at that time, without
the spirit of prophecy.

LET us then consider the compleatness of this conquest; the great importance
of it to Great Britain and her American colonies; the little loss of men with
which it has been effected; and some of the footsteps of providence therein.
After which, we will take a cursory notice of some other of our military
successes since the time of our last public and general thanksgiving: All which
together, afford us the agreeable hopes of seeing the present calamitous war
soon brought to a happy period, and demand our most grateful acknowledgments to
the God of armies.

WE may now, with the greatest propriety, consider the conqust of Canada as
completed. The French no longer hold a single sort, garrison, or fortified
place, in that country; but there has been a formal surrender of the whole by
the governor-general thereof to the British commander; the principal parts
whereof had indeed before been brought under, and subdued by force of arms.
From what we have already heard, it may be reasonably supposed that the far
greater part of the inhabitants of New France are before this time become
British subjects; having taken an oath of allegiance at least of fidelity, to
his Majesty: While the regular troops and marine companies of France, with all
officers civil and military, and other persons of any distinction who might
promote disturbances, are embarked, or embarking, for their mother country. The
British troops are actually in possession of all places and posts of any
consequence, such as they desire to possess; and in sufficient numbers. So that
if there should be any effort made by the French with their savages to recover
the country from their conquerors, it must certainly, without a miracle, be to
no purpose. Though there is not the least reason to suspect there will be any
such mad attempt made: Especially when we consider that the French who remain
in the country, are disarmed; that the savages in those parts, with whom they
are forbid any commerce, are become our allies; and lastly, that the English
general has shown so much clemency and humanity to the Canadians, as to have
endeared himself to them, and, as we are informed, to make them consider him,
not so much their conqueror, as their protector and deliverer from their old
tyrannical masters. It is credibly said, that M. Vaudreuil, the late
governor-general of Canada, was almost universally detested by the Canadians
for his pride, avarice and cruelty.
In short, we may look upon this country as effectually subdued; as effectually
as it could have been, unless fire and sword had been carried through it from one
end to the other, to devour without mercy all that came in their way: Which
were equally inconsistent with the genius of the religion we profess, and with
the true bravery and generosity of Britons, how agreeable soever it might be to
the bloody religion, to the savage spirit, and the butcherly conduct of our
enemies: And it may be added, how much provocation soever they have given us,
by their former treacheries and barbarities, to treat them in the same manner
whenever it should be in our power.

THIS conquest of New France is most important in its nature and consequences,
as well as complete. The country itself is large and fruitful; many parts of it
well cultivated, and much more populous, as well as fertile, than we were
taught to believe in times past. This conquest adds at once a large extent of
territory to the British empire in America; and a great number of subjects to
the British crown, who may in time become very useful ones. All the Indians
bordering on Canada, will, or rather are already, become our friends and
allies. None of the American savages are now our enemies, excepting two or
three tribes on the back of our southern colonies, in the interest of the
French of Louisiana. These have indeed lately committed the most horid
outrages, accompanied with the blackest treachery; taught them, doubtless, by
the great masters thereof, the French, at whose instigation they commenced
their hostilities. However, this rupture with those savages will probably be of
no long continuance. They received a considerable check the last summer, in the
destruction of some of their towns. And they will doubtless be awed by the late
successes of the British arms; and by plainly seeing the English now so
superior in America, that they can have no dependence upon the French, either
for supplies or protection. God has made known his salvation, and openly
showed his righteousness, to all the heathen nations in these parts of America;
who were no strangers to the persidy, the wicked designs and practices of the
French. These savages who, like some more refined politicians, choose always to
be on the strongest side, have in times past been industriously fed up by the
French with an opinion of their great superiotity; that they should be able at
length to subdue us, and make a conquest of the whole country. But the eyes of
almost all of them are now sufficiently opened; and those of the few others,
cannot long continue shut. They will probably expect in a short time to see
Louisiana in the same situation with Canada -- Nor are they slow to discern, or
backward to follow, their own interest. So that we may reasonably depend on
having them all in a manner our friends, from Hudson's Bay to Lake superior;
and from thence southward to the gulf of Mexico. Instead of having any of them
to disturb, and break up our infant settlements from time to time, as
heretofore, we shall have a large and profitable trade opened with them; even
with nations whose very names were lately unknown to us. Our colonies, it may
be supposed, will enjoy peace for the future; and with the common blessing of
providence, be greatly increased and enlarged in the course of a few years.

THESE things will directly and manifestly tend to the emolument of
Great Britain, by prodigiously increasing the demand for her manufactures,
enlarging her commerce, and augmenting her maritime power: Especially if the
North-american cod-fishery should be all, or chiefly, in the hands of British
subjects. The French themselves who shall remain in Canada, will be to be
supplied with European commodities from Great Britain, as well as the savages
in America, and her own colonies, probably in a short time increased beyond
what many persons will easily conceive at present. And even the inhabitants of
Great Britain will be greatly multiplied hereby, if not in proportion to those
of her colonies; since many more thousand persons of different occupations,
will, by such a vast demand and consumption of her manufactures, readily find
the means of subsistence, than can do so at present; which is doubtless the
reason why she is not more populous. So that if the strength and honor of a
nation consists in the number of its industrious people, in an extended
commerce, and in riches, whereby she is enabled to raise armies, to equip
mighty fleets, and to maintain both as occasion requires; these are the
advantages which will in the ordinary course of things result to the British,
from the late success of his majesty's arms in America. The things hinted in
this paragraph were more particularly mentioned in the Author's 2d discourse
the last year, occasioned by the surrender of Quebec: And they are since set in
a very full, clear and strong light in a Tract lately published in London, and
reprinted here, entitled, The Interest of Great Britain considered with
regard to her Colonies, etc. In this judicious Tract it is computed, that in
one century the number of British subjects on this side the Atlantic may
probably exceed that now on the other; and that Great Britain herself is
capable of containing and supporting ten times the number of people she does at
present, could they but find employment by the increased demand, and proper
returns, for her manufactures. To which nothing can contribute so much, and so
certainly, as the growth of her American colonies.


THE reduction of Canada, so important in its nature and consequences, has,
through the good providence of God, been completed with very little loss of men:
With far less, indeed, than could well have been imagined, considering the
number of the enemy, the vigorous effort they made to recover their capital
early in the spring; and (to give them their due) the spirit and resolution
which they have shown on some other occasions since this war commenced, to
defend their country, and to give trouble and annoyance to us. In which
attempts they have diverse times been far more successful, not only than we
could have wished, but than was to the honor of the British arms. Witness
Oswego, Fort William Henry, and more especially Ticonderoga! Witness also Fort
Du Quesne, and the banks of the Monongahela, still perhaps white with the
bones, if not red with the blood, of our slaughtered troops! When we reflect on
these things, adding thereto, that the enemy were lately in possession of
several posts and passes lying between our armies and them, strong both by
nature and art; and that they had the advantage of a perfect knowledge of the
country, of which we knew but little: When we reflect on these things, could it
have been supposed that general AMHERST, with all his address, his patience and
magnanimity, would have been able to complete the reduction of Canada almost
without any loss of men? Excepting those which were drowned in passing the
difficult and dangerous rapids above Montreal, and those who have been taken
off by sickness, I think the whole loss amounts but to about an hundred i. e.
Since the 25th of April, 1760.
; in taking the armed vessels of the enemy on the lakes, and several strong
forts advantageously situated, and vigourously defended, of which it was
necessary to become masters before the army, or rather armies, could arrive at
the island of Montreal, where it was commonly supposed the chief scene of
action would be. But when the three One by the way of lake Ontario, one by lake
Champlain, and the other from Quebec.
armies were drawn near together at that place by their respective leaders, but
all under the general direction and orders of ONE; it seems that general
AMHERST had little more to do than to make his own terms, and to receive the
surrender of Montreal and the whole country from the French governor: Little
else, I should have said, unless it were to keep their own enraged savages from
falling upon the French to plunder, butcher and scalp them in their turn, by
whom these savages had been so long deceived and abused.

THE enemy, though numerous and well supplied, were sensible of the superior
wisdom and military accomplishments of the British general, the bravery of his
officers and troops. They were astonished at his having surmounted all
obstacles in his advances toward them; wherein they though it they saw the evident
footsteps of divine providence, and from whence they presaged their approaching
fate. They were at the same time so well satisfied of the clemency and honor of
general AMHERST, that they prudently chose to lay down their arms and submit,
rather than hazard a battle. And by what we hitherto learn, the terms granted
to, or rather imposed on them, were as honorable to the British general and
arms as we could have desired; though still more favorable to the French than
such enemies, all circumstances considered, had any right to expect. For though
all that were found in arms, were to be sent out of the country, and not to
serve during the present war, against his majesty or his allies; together with
other persons of any distinction; yet it seems, the main body of the people are
permitted to continue in the country, and to enjoy their estates under the
protection of the British government, on taking an oath of allegiance, or
fidelity to his majesty. It is said, the articles of surrender were pretty
numerous; but what they are, is not yet particularly, at least not publicly
known amongst us. They were signed Sept. 8. 1760.


THUS has this great conquest been completed, as was said before, with an
inconsiderable loss of men: A conquest which will in all probability be
followed with very extensive happy consequences, both as to Great Britain and
her American colonies, whose true interests are absolutely inseparable: A
conquest which is likely to be advantageous to the Canadians themselves, who
with their posterity may live in the country under the English government, and
be far more happy than under the French tyranny: A conquest to the honor, not
only of the arms, but the humanity of Britons: And a conquest wherein the
vestiges of divine providence have been very conspicuous. There is no need of
adding, A conquest which will forever render memorable and illustrious the name
of that discrete, wise, and truly magnanimous general, who, under God, has
effected it; and thereby put so happy and glorious a period to the war in this
part of America.

THEY who are acquainted with the geography of North America, may possibly
suppose that the reduction of Montreal and Canada might have been sooner, and
more certainly effected, by one grand army by the way of St. Lawrence, than by
several smaller ones, conducted through such tedious and difficult routs as those
of the lakes; especially that of lake Ontario. But there are now probably none
but what are convinced, that the plan which has been laid and pursued, was,
upon the whole, far the best. The general, by thus dividing his army, and
coming against the enemy on all sides, hemmed them in, prevented their
escaping, or dispersing here and there in small parties; and so has
accomplished the whole business at once. Whereas, had they been attacked only
by the way of St. Lawrence by one grand army, they would doubtless have
abandoned Montreal at its approach; retreated together up the river, where they
could hardly have been pursued, or else gone off in parties to the southward
and westward, and otherways, with their arms. So that though Montreal had been in
our possession, yet the country might in effect have remained still unsubdued.
This, not to mention some other things, seems to show, that that which some
persons possibly imagined a more difficult, expensive and precarious way of
completing the reduction of Canada, was in reality the best; perhaps the only
one, in which the conquest could have been perfected this campaign -- But I
shall say no more of what may seem foreign from the business of a sermon -- It
is sufficient to our present purpose, that God has appeared very graciously for
us in conducting this great enterprise to so happy a conclusion; from whence we
may reasonably promise ourselves such great and permanent advantages as have
been hinted at above.

BUT when I speak of the importance of this acquisition, you will doubtless
observe, that I go wholly upon the supposition that it will be retained. What
may possibly be hereafter; what different turn the war may take; what real
occasion and necessity there may be for relinquishing this, or any other
conquests, in order to a peace, no one can certainly tell. But while things
continue in such a posture as they are at present through the goodness of God;
while we have so fair a prospect of having it in our power, as we shall on that
supposion certainly have a right, to insist upon indemnification for the
immense expense of treasure and blood, to which the ambition and injustice of
France has lately put us, as also upon security for the future to these
American colonies: while we have such a prospect, I say, I thought it hardly
decent to make the supposition of Canada's ever being delivered up to France;
which might be looked upon as a kind of treason. At least it might betray,
either such a disaffection to the welfare of Great Britain and her colonies, or
such a distrust of the wisdom and integrity of our superiors, as I would not on
any consideration be thought capable of. And one would think that the other
European nations should all in general rejoice to see some bounds set to the
power, and ambitious views of France. For, which of them has she not hectored
and threatened in its turn? Which of her neighbors has she not plundered and
robbed? some of them of wealthy cities, some of provinces, and others of whole
countries? Which of them can be secure against her intriegues, treachery, and
lawless violence, unless she is in some measure humbled and weakened? -- There
would doubtless be sufficient reason for a day of general thanksgiving throughout
Europe, if this were done to purpose.

AS was observed before, though we cannot tell what may yet come to pass in the
course of this war, we have reason to hope from present appearances, that there
will be no necessity of making such a dear and important sacrifice as that of
Canada, in order to procure a peace: the consequence of which would be, that
the almost immense treasure expended in driving the French from their
encroachments, and in reducing this country, would be scarce better than thrown
away. The French would soon renew their encroachments and hostilities, and set
their savages again to scalping. We can never live peaceably with them here as
neighbors: For it is almost as impossible for them to cease from those
treacherous and wicked practices, to which they have been so long "accustomed",
as it were for the "Ethiopian to change his skin, or the leopard his spots".
Nor would the interest of Great Britain be less affected in the end, than that
of her colonies, by their regaining their power and independence in Canada: Of
which there is at present, indeed, no apparent reason to be apprehensive,
considering how prosperous, by the blessing of heaven, his majesty's arms have
been in other instances: For an almost uninterrupted series of successes has
attended them for several years past.

AND here let me take occasion just to mention some other material successes
that have lately crowned the British arms in other parts of the world.

SINCE the day of our common and public thanksgiving on the surrender of
Quebec, October 25, 1759. The author in his discourses published on that
occasion, and in the year preceding* took notice of the most considerable and
important successes obtained by his majesty's arms by land and sea, since the
beginning of this war. For which reason he does not here look any farther back
than to the date above.
we have received advices here, of some considerable advantages obtained in the
East Indies, in the reduction of several of the enemy's fortresses and
factories, with some of their settlements there. And Pondicherry, according to
our latest accounts, was the only place of which the French were left possessed
in those parts.

THE Dunkirk squadron under the command of the valiant, but unfortunate Thurot,
has been chiefly taken or destroyed, after going through a long series of
calamities and disasters.

ABOUT the same time, one of our admirals Sir Ed. Hawke.
fell in with the grand fleet of the enemy from Breast, where it had been long
preparing, in order, as was given out, to cover a descent on the coast of
Britain or Ireland. This fleet was beaten, and dispersed amongst the shoals
upon the coast of France Quiberon bay.
; when five or six capital ships were taken and destroyed: While a number of
others, as it is said, were rendered useless, by being obliged to fly for
safety to land, to rocks, and into shallow rivers. In this important affair
there were some pretty remarkable circumstances. The British admiral's falling
in with this fleet, was most opportune and seasonable for us, as it was
unexpected to the enemy. The French fleet was going to take under her convoy a
large number of transports lying ready in different ports, after having gotten
out of Breast by stealth while the British fleet was withdrawn. And indeed the
latter did not again sail from its port in the English channel, 'till the very
day the other stole out; a circumstance not unworthy of notice, since, humanly
speaking, the French fleet had a fair prospect of reaching its port, or ports,
before it could be overtaken. And this it had probably done, had not an
inferior English squadron fallen in its way, by which means it was retarded for
some time. This fleet was so inferior to the French, that it must in all
probability have fallen an easy conquest thereto. But at the instant when so
unequal an engagement was to begin, appeared admiral HAWKE with the British
flag, and a formidable fleet: Which not only made the enemy glad to quit their
destined prey, but struck them with such terror, as even rendered them
incapable of a prudent and successful flight. Thus was the little English
squadron at once preserved; the design of the French fleet rendered abortive;
the great preparations of the enemy for a descent, insignificant; and their
most powerful fleet disgraced and ruined upon their own coasts: A mortifying
spectacle to the people! And upon the whole, this seems to have been almost a
finishing blow to the marine, and naval power of France, before reduced so low
by repeated disasters and losses. In all which, the hand of providence is very
conspicuous.

WE have lately had the report of the very signal victory obtained by his
majesty's army under prince FERDINAND, over the formidable French army
commanded by marshal Broglio. Which, if true, will not only preserve Hanover a
third time, when threatened with imminent danger; but must have an happy
influence on the affairs of his majesty's illustrious ally, the king of
Prussia. But this important news does not appear to be so authentic, that we
may be justified in giving full credence thereto at present We had this news
from Lisbon. It was reported that prince Ferdinand had killed and taken about
50,000 men, and entirely routed the French army on the borders of Hanover. But
we have since had the mortification to be assured, that this was a false
rumor; though it seems some considerable advantages have been gained by the
allied army. And since the delivering this discourse, we have also had the
authentic news of his Prussian majesty's defeating a large corpse of the
Austrian army; killing and taking about 10,000 men, with near 90 pieces of
cannon, ammunition, etc. etc. A most agreeable and important piece of
intelligence. --
. And indeed, if one half we have heard were known to be fact, our
apprehensions for Hanover might now be over, as also in part, those for his
Prussian majesty in this critical conjuncture. Our welfare even here in
America, is now nearly connected with that of this illustrious king, and of his
majesty's Hanoverian dominions. What the purposes of heaven are with respect to
them, time only will reveal. And if they should maintain their ground this year
(God almighty grant they may!) we should have good reason to hope, not only
that this may prove the last campaign of the present war; but that such a peace
will be concluded, as will be at once glorious to Great Britain and her allies,
and happy for all her dependencies; particularly for her colonies in America.
But if, contrary to our hopes, the war should still be protracted, we may take
it for granted that Great Britain, under so wise, firm and vigorous an
administration as the present, will pursue her advantages; and perhaps, by the
favor of heaven, add LOUISIANA at least to her other acquisitions: A conquest,
though of vast importance, yet, humanly speaking, of very little difficulty,
considering the naval power of Britain, and the number of British troops now in
America. Since this discourse was delivered, we hear there are more troops
actually embarked for North America. If it be so, it seems not improbable that
Louisiana may be the object of their destination: From which country, while the
French are possessed of it, our southern colonies will probably meet with
disturbance; at least by means of murdering and scalping parties sent from time
to time upon their frontiers.


BUT having thus reminded you of those successes with which God has lately
favored the British arms, more especially in the conquest of Canada; all which
seem to promise an honorable peace, future security to us here in America, and
many advantages both to Great Britain and her colonies; and which therefore
demand our grateful praises to the supreme Governor of the world: Having done
this, I say, let us now proceed, as was proposed, briefly to consider, what
aspect these victories and successes have upon the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ; its farther extension, and the accomplishment of those glorious things
which are to come to pass in the latter days.

IT would indeed be at once just matter of reproach to a christian minister,
and a kind of affront to a christian assembly, if in preaching upon such an
occasion as the present, he wholly confined his views and discourse to things
of a secular nature; without considering what relation these important
successes have to Christ's kingdom. This would betray in him a littleness and
narrowness of mind, and a want of due regard to, and zeal for, the honor of
God, or the interest of religion in the world. It would also be treating his
auditors as if he supposed them wholly immersed in worldly cares, without a
thought of any thing greater or better than a short-lived prosperity here
below; which, I persuade myself, is not the character of those to whom I am
speaking. And besides; that passage of scripture, on which my discourse is
grounded, naturally leads our thoughts to that time, when our Lord shall take
to himself his great power, and reign as the king of nations, as well as of
saints.

NOW there are two things to be laid down here, as principles on which to
proceed, they being certainly and plainly foretold in the holy scriptures. One
is, That God will at length in a most wonderful manner bring down, humble, and
even destroy, that corrupt and apostate, that idolatrous and persecuting
church, variously described in the holy scriptures; particularly under the
character of a woman, "having a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations
and filthiness of her fornications. And upon her forehead was a name written,
MYSTERY, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots, and abominations of the
earth" Rev. XVII. 4.5.
-- "The great whore, which corrupts the earth with her fornication." Chapter
XIX. 2.
-- "And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that
were slain upon the earth." Cha. XVIII. 24.
That that apostate, antichristian church, or kingdom, which is thus
emblematically described, is to have her plagues made wonderful, and to be
finally brought to ruin, is most manifest from the sacred scriptures. Nor can
protestants in this age, one would think, be at any great loss, what church, or
where she is --

THE other thing alluded to above, is, That the gospel of the kingdom is not
only to be "preached for a witness" among all nations, but to be actually
established throughout the world, amongst Jews and Gentiles. For "the kingdoms of
this world are to become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he
shall reign forever and ever." Rev. XI. 15.
The scriptures are full of prophecies to this purpose; which predictions
remain to be fulfilled, either sooner or later, unless we have believed fables
instead of the word of God, who cannot lie.

NOW we may consider the great successes which God has given to the British
arms in the present war, as tending, in some measure, to the accomplishment of
both these events; the destruction of the papal power, and the establishing of
christianity throughout the world.

FOR first, as to the former of them: These successes have been obtained by a
protestant king and nation, against the greatest and most powerful nation in
the communion of the church of Rome. The French monarch is unquestionably the
most potent of those kings who have "given their kingdom unto the beast." But
his power is now much diminished, and seems in a fair way to be farther
reduced. And this will be in effect diminishing that of the roman pontiff.
Every new accession of power to our own, and to other protestant kings and
states, will also tend to the reduction of that of Rome. It may be farther
observed here, that as learning increases, and runs to and fro in the earth,
the influence and authority of the pope declines, as the natural and necessary
consequence thereof: And it is now far less, even in most or all roman catholic
countries, than it was some centuries since. It has declined fast since the
beginning of the reformation; when, and since, diverse kings and nations, and
our own among the first, came to an open rupture with the pope; utterly
disowning his jurisdiction over them. The king of Portugal has also lately come
to such a rupture with him, as is not likely to be soon healed; and as may, not
improbably, issue in the pope's losing forever all authority in that kingdom,
however devoted the common people may be to him at present. Nor would it be
very strange if the king of Spain should soon break with him also: Since the
jesuits, most probably with the pope's connivance, if not by his direction,
have been plotting against that crown, as well as the king of Portugal; and
have actually been carrying on a war against the subjects of both, in South
America. But be that as it will, it seems morally impossible, considering the
progress which learning has made, and is still making, but that the eyes of all
the kings, states, and people in general, now in the communion of the church of
Rome, must before long be opened. And when they shall plainly see, how grossly
they have been deluded, and how impudently tyrannized over by her, they will of
course become her enraged enemies; and be avenged on her, as many have been
already. For, in the language of inspiration, These shall hate the whore, and
shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and
give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.
And the woman which thou saw, is that great city, which reigns over the
king's of the earth. Rev. XVII. 16.17.18.
-- This remarkable prophecy is partly fulfilled already, in the breaking off
of so many kings and states from the church of Rome; and their becoming
enemies, and sore scourges to her pride and impiety; of which nations our own
is the principal. And we may rest assured, that this prediction shall in the
whole of it, and possibly before long, be punctually accomplished. In the
prospect of which final ruin coming upon the great whore, or mystical Babylon,
the apostle John broke forth thus -- Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy
apostles and prophets; for God has avenged you on her. And a mighty angel took
up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with
violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no
more at all. Rev. XVIII. 20, 21.


BUT secondly, as to the propagation and establishment of the gospel amongst
all nations: Our military successes may be considered as one step toward the
accomplishing of that great event also. Not that the gospel of Christ is to be
propagated by force of arms; but these successes may in some measure open and
prepare the way for spreading it, by methods suitable to the genius and design
of this religion. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal; but mighty through
God -- And the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men;
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.

THERE are many heathen here in America, who have long had some intercourse
both with Us and the French. We have heretofore made attempts, by the blessing
of heaven to "turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of satan
unto God." But these our attempts have not been attended with any great
success; with less indeed, than the endeavors of the French missionaries, I
had almost said, to make them apostatize from heathenism to popery. Many
discouragements and obstacles have been in the way hitherto; some of which are
now removed. And there seems to be a fairer prospect, by the blessing of God,
of doing something considerable to this end, than ever there has been in times
past; provided there be wisdom, in conjunction with a proper zeal, in
undertaking and prosecuting so good a design. God has in some sense already
made known his salvation, and openly showed his righteousness in the sight of
these heathen, by the victories, and great successes which he has given us
over our enemies in these parts. So that we may suppose, they will be under
less temptation to say now, than heretofore, "Where is their God?" The
prejudices which many of them have imbibed against us and our religion, by
means of the French missionaries representing all protestants to them, as bad
or worse than atheists, may now in some measure be abated: At least we shall
have a better opportunity, and greater advantages, for removing these
prejudices, than formerly; and to convince all those pagans who have had any
knowledge of Us and of the French, that our God is indeed in heaven; and that
it is no other than he, whose right hand, and his holy arm has given us, or
rather gotten to himself, the victory. They will probably be influenced in some
degree to think favorably of us and our religion, by our great successes, and
triumphs over those who have ever represented us as the enemies of the true
God; and to whose vain boasts of their being his peculiar favorites, to whose
threatenings against us, and repeated constant treacheries, they have been no
strangers; and many of them indeed, the instruments of their wicked and
villainous designs.

TO these things it may be added, that these numerous tribes of heathen, when
they find themselves wholly dependent upon us, as they must be, will probably
become in all respects more submissive and tractable than they used to be,
either to us or to the French, in times past. They could formerly change sides,
and run from one to the other on any trifling occasion; and held, as it were,
the balance of power between us in their own hands. In these circumstances
they thought they had a right to be courted by both, as they actually were:
Which made them, if possible, more proud, insolent and barbarous than they
naturally are, as well as indocile to the last degree. But their having now
only one European people on which to depend for necessary supplies, if a
reasonable, just and wise use is made of this advantage, it will without doubt
give us such an ascendency over them, as will greatly facilitate the work of
humanizing and christianizing them.

WE find, agreeably to what has been said above, that the Six Nations are
within a few years become more tractable than they used to be; I mean, since
they have seen the French power upon the decline here, and in a fair way to be
entirely destroyed. Those of them who attended general AMHERST into Canada, it
is said, were very docile, subject to discipline and command. Yea, they were
tutored by him into some regard to clemency and mercy; to which they were
heretofore almost entire strangers. We are informed, that when they had taken
several hundred prisoners on Montreal, who expected nothing but to die in
tortures, the savages relieved their anxiety by telling them, their orders
were, not to put any of their captives to death; though, as they added, the
French used to order their Indians to kill all that fell into their hands. A
just and severe reproach; which shows, we need not despair of humanizing and
christianizing the American savages; and which must have stung their prisoners
to the soul, if they were not past feeling! And how agreeable? how edifying
must it have been, to hear those savages thus reproaching these good catholic
christians, the subjects of his most christian majesty, for their barbarity;
and trying as it were, by their own better example, to infuse into them some
sense of humanity! And, by the way, it may be hoped that the French themselves
who shall remain in Canada, or at least their posterity, will become
protestants, provided prudent and proper methods, consistent with justice and
humanity, are taken to make them so.

YOU see from what has been said, that we have now more encouragement than ever
to attempt the christianizing the American heathen; some of the obstacles
thereto being removed by the late signal successes of his Majesty's arms. And
were this accomplished, it would be at once a considerable enlargement of
Christ's kingdom, and partly the accomplishment of that promise, that the
uttermost parts of the earth should be his possession. Our successes in the
East Indies, and the growth of our settlements there, where the natives are
still more numerous, and less savage than in America, bids fair to be a means
in time of spreading christianity in those parts also -- And upon the whole
(for I may not enlarge) if we attentively look round the world; if we consider
the increase of knowledge, both religious and natural, ever since the
reformation began; and that it is growing more and common in all civilized
nations, whereas it used before to be confined to a few persons; if we reflect
on the dropping off of one kingdom and state after another from the church of
Rome; if we consider the great increase of navigation and commerce, carried on
from Europe into all parts of the known world, more especially by protestant
nations; and the many factories, settlements and colonies from christendom,
established in the most remote countries; if we reflect on these things, I say,
not to mention any thing at present of the order of the prophecies, there seems
to be some reason to hope the time is not far distant, when both the roman
papacy shall come to nothing, and the gospel shall be propagated throughout the
world; the knowledge of God covering the whole earth as the waters cover the
seas. Though, by the way, whenever these things shall be accomplished, whether
sooner or later, they will not probably be effected wholly by natural and human
means: But by them in conjunction with the extraordinary effusion of the Holy
Spirit, with the most signa!, undeniable manifestations of God's power and
grace in favor of his true worshippers, and the equally visible manifestations
of his wrath, and righteous displeasure against others; especially those who
wilfully uphold errors and corruptions in his church: For this is undeniably
the scripture account of the matter. Some of the obstacles hitherto in the way
of gospelizing the savage nations in North America being now removed, it may be
hoped that the right honorable and reverend SOCIETY for propagating the gospel
in foreign parts, will, amongst other objects of their charitable attention,
hereafter make this a principal one. And it was with great pleasure, that the
author of this discourse lately read the following passage in Dr. ELLIS'S
sermon before that venerable Society the last year, at their anniversary
meeting -- Out of gratitude for this wonderful goodness of God to us, says his
Lordship, we ought freely to contribute to the advancement of his glory, which
he graciously places in the welfare of mankind. And we are directed to FIT
OBJECTS of our charity -- There are on the borders of our national colonies and
plantations in America, multitudes of savages immersed in gross ignorance and
superstition, who either have not heard at all of the gospel of Christ, or at
least are very far from a competent knowledge, and due practice of it. For
these, WITHOUT QUESTION, we ought to have a proper concern, and to use our
endeavors for their effectual conversion, as there may be opportunity. -- Dr.
ELLIS, Lord Bp. of St. David's.

We may almost assure ourselves, that this very important and seasonable hint
of his Lordship, will have its due weight with the Society; and consequently,
that these American savages will not be so much forgotten and neglected as they
have been heretofore. All the good people in New England, where the gospel has
been generally so well preached ever since its settlement, would doubtless
rejoice to see such large sums as are annually expended in supporting episcopal
missions here, applied to the carrying on this good work amongst the heathen,
"who know not God." In New England only, near 30 of these missions (besides
schools) are now maintained at the charge of that venerable Society: The
members whereof can however certainly have no views in the particular
applications of their own and others charity, but what are worthy of persons of
the greatest fidelity, catholicism and honor, fired with a truly primitive zeal
to propagate primitive christianity, and only that. Though it is probable that
they have been grossly imposed upon by false representations of the state of
religion in these parts; which has been the occasion of their employing so much
of their charitable care about those who so little needed it, to the neglect of
those who were perishing for want of it: For which impositions, abuses and
misapplications, their deceivers are answerable; if not to them, yet certainly
to an HIGHER AUTHORITY.




A FEW reflections on the present subject and occasion, must now conclude this
discourse, almost too long, I fear, already.

IT becomes us to be sincerely and devoutly thankful to almighty God, who has
delivered us from our enemies in these parts, and crowned the arms of our king
with so many successes and victories. We have abundant cause for gratitude,
both on temporal and spiritual accounts: For both our civil and religious
privileges are secured to us by these successes; and there is a fair prospect,
that both we and our posterity may possess this good land in great peace and
prosperity. Let us be admonished to make it manifest, that we have a proper
sense of God's undeserved goodness to us, by forsaking all our evil practices;
whatever is displeasing in his sight, and serving him in holiness and
righteousness according to the gospel of his Son: As free, and not using our
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. "For so is
the will of God, that with well-doing we may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men." The praises of our lips, even though we sing unto the Lord "a new
song," without the obedience of our lives, will be a very inadequate return to
him for the many and great mercies which he has bestowed upon us, upon our
king and nation. Let us therefore keep all his holy commandments; especially
let us do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with our God.

LET us moreover, in this way of well-doing, place our hope and trust in God
for the continued smiles of his providence upon us, upon the British counsels,
government and arms, till the present calamitous war is brought to a happy
conclusion: And not only so, but till all the enemies of our holy religion are
either brought to repentance, or to ruin; and the gospel of peace shall every
where prevail. IT is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble his faithful and obedient people. And we may look upon our
late victories and successes, in conjunction with some other things, as pledges
and earnests of the final triumph of the church of Christ over all its enemies.
Though they were not, I suppose, particularly pointed at in any of the
prophecies; yet we may look upon them as a partial accomplishment of God's
general promises of deliverance and salvation to his people, and his
threatenings against the enemies, at least the corruptors, of his gospel. They
should therefore encourage us to hope in him for the entire and complete
fulfillment of both; when the just shall be established, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall come to an end.

HOW solid a foundation have the true worshippers of God according to the
gospel, for peace and composure of mind, in reflecting on his superintending
providence amidst all the wars and commotions of the nations, and all the
revolutions in states and kingdoms? The righteous are still secure under the
shadow of the Almighty. And these changes and revolutions, when the kingdoms
are moved, are in effect only God's overturning, overturning, overturning,
until He shall come in his kingdom, whose right it is; and every tongue shall
confess him to be Lord, to the glory of God the Father. "Therefore will not we
fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea: Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled; though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof -- There is a river, the streams
whereof shall make glad the city of God; the holy place of the tabernacles of
the most High. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall
help her, and that right early." Psalm XLVI.


WHILE we praise God for the late favorable, and very signal appearances of
his providence, in causing us to see our desire upon our enemies, we should
beware of every thing that has a tendency to frustrate the designs of his
goodness toward us, and to turn his blessings into curses; particularly of
pride, effeminacy and luxury. These are commonly the attendants of peace,
outward prosperity, riches and security; and therefore ought to be particularly
guarded against. When Jeshurun of old waxed fat, then he kicked, and forgot the
God that "rode upon the heavens in his help, and in his excellency upon the
sky." And thus it often comes to pass, that even the prosperity of fools
destroys them. All history, ancient and modern, sacred and profane, is a
proof of these things; and should serve for a warning to us. The Persians,
Greeks and Romans, amongst innumerable other nations, were successively
examples of the fatal consequences of great prosperity without wisdom and
virtue.

DURING the time of ancient Carthage, the only dangerous neighbor and rival of
Rome, when the conquest of the former was meditated by the latter, there was a
debate in the roman senate, whether this were expedient or not, if practicable.
While some thought it would be equally glorious and haphay for Rome to crush
the only dangerous rival of her power and greatness, others were apprehensive
of the consequences thereof. They feared lest they should by means of such a
conquest, and the peace, wealth and security naturally following, become
luxurious, effeminate and corrupt, to their own destruction in the end. This
proved no imaginary or groundless fear: When Carthage was no more, and Rome had
subdued all her neighboring enemies, she seemed indeed for a while to be more
happy than ever: But in process of time, riches and security produced the most
fatal effects; the most extravagant luxury, venality, and a total depravation
of manners. And when her citizens had no longer any foreign enemy to fear, they
fell into violent factions, contentions, and civil wars. They lost their
liberty in the end; became wretched by means of their own prosperity and
greatness; and so the roman power was destroyed. Thus did luxury, the most
formidable enemy to any state when it becomes common, invade and triumph over
ancient Rome, which had triumphed over all her other enemies; hereby fully
revenging on her, not only the fall of Carthage, but of a conquered world. --
Saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem.
Lucan.


SOMETHING not wholly unlike to this, may possibly befall us in time, the
American Carthage being subdued, unless God should give us the wisdom to avoid
those rocks and shelves on which so many have split, and suffered a wretched
shipwreck. Divine providence has set up beacons and landmarks in every age and
quarter of the world for our warning and direction; and if we do not take due
notice of them, our destruction will be almost certain, while, as an
aggravation of it, we shall have no claim even to pity.

BUT to draw to a conclusion: While we bless God for our repeated and great
successes against our heathen, and other idolatrous enemies, let us take heed
that we ourselves do not depart from the plain, simple doctrine and worship of
the gospel, or conform to any of the corrupt principles and modes of worship
established in the world. We ought not to leave the clear light of revelation,
and the "sure word of prophecy," to run after the ignes fatui of human creeds,
which appeared in the dark and corrupt times of the church, and have ever since
contributed more or less to mislead the christian world. It becomes us to
adhere to the holy scriptures as our only rule of faith and practice,
discipline and worship. The "mother of harlots" has many daughters in
christendom; "all nations have drank" more or less, of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication. Revel. XVIII. 3.
There has indeed been a great reformation in many nations from some of the
grosser errors, superstitions and corruptions introduced by the papacy, and
still upheld in the church of Rome. But in what country, in what nation, is the
reformation complete? In what national, or even provincial church, are not some
of these errors and corruptions found? It is worthy of observation, that
immediately after St. John heard a mighty angel pronounce the fall and utter
ruin of mystical Babylon, he heard ANOTHER voice from heaven, saying, Come out
of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues. Chap. XVIII. ver. 4.
It nearly concerns all those who still any ways symbolize with the leader in
the grand apostasy, seriously to attend to this divine admonition. There is ONE
who walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, holding the stars in his
right hand; whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and his voice as the sound of
many waters: And all the churches shall know, says he, that I am he which
searches the reins and hearts; and I will give unto every one of you according
to his works. Rev. II. 3.
His fan is in his hand, and he will ere long thoroughly purge his floor, his
church and kingdom, of those numerors errors and abuses which are found in
differents parts of it. And although these errors and corruptions are perhaps
even gloried in by some churches as their distinguishing ornaments and
excellencies, the breath of the Lord shall one day puff them all away like
chaff and rubbish, with the wilful authors and upholders of them, to be
consumed in the fire of his indignation. They alone, who worship the FATHER in
spirit and in truth, shall be established. Christianity, long obscured and
disgraced by the additions which human pride, human folly and wickedness, have
made to it, shall at length be restored to its primitive simplicity, beauty and
glory, and become a praise in the whole earth. We have Moses and the prophets,
and apostles, and the word of Christ himself; and if we will not hear them, we
shall be more inexcusable than the Jews. For the prophets and apostles have
foretold, that as Israel often revolted and brake the covenant, and upon
repentance renewed it; so there should be a falling away among the Christians,
soon after the days of the apostles; and that in the latter days God would
destroy the impenitent revolters, and make a new covenant with his people. And
the giving ear to the prophets is a fundamental character of the true church.
-- The authority of emperors, kings and princes is human. The authority of
councils, synods, bishops, and presbyters, is human. The authority of the
prophets is divine, and comprehends the sum of religion, reckoning Moses and
the apostles amongst the prophets. And if an angel from heaven preach any other
gospel, than what they have delivered, let him be accursed. Sir I. Newton's
observations on Daniel.

The event of things predicted many ages before, will then be a convincing
argument that the world is governed by providence. For as the few and obscure
prophecies concerning Christ's first coming, were for setting up the christian
religion, which all nations have since corrupted; so the many and clear
prophecies concerning the things to be done at Christ's second coming, are not
only for predicting* but also for effecting a recovery and re-establishment of
the long-lost truth, and setting up a kingdom wherein dwells righteousness.
Newton's observe. on the Apocalypse.




THOUGH heaven and earth should pass away and be dissolved, the word of the Lord
shall not pass away, till every promise and every threatening thereof is
fulfilled. "This," to adopt the language of the prophet, "This is the purpose
that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched
out upon all nations. For the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall
disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?" Isai.
XIV. 26 27.
Tremble! ye avowed enemies, and all ye wilful perverters of the gospel, or
upholders of error and superstition in the church of Christ, to subserve the
ends of your own vain ambition and secular interests: Your perdition lingereth
not! And lift up your heads with joy, ye sincere followers of the Lamb of God:
For your redemption draws nigh! And to encourage all such to adhere
steadfastly to the faith and worship of the gospel according to the holy
scriptures, in opposition to the many gross corruptions thereof at this day in
most parts of christendom: To this end, I say, let me now close this long
discourse with the words of our blessed Lord himself to the angel of the church
in Philadelphia: And whosoever has an ear to hear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the churches! -- "These things says he that is holy, he that
is true, he that has the key of David, he that opens, and no man shuts;
and shuts and no man opens: I know thy works -- Thou have a little
strength, and have kept MY WORD, and have not denied my name. Behold, I will
make them of the synagogue of Satan -- come and worship before thy feet, and to
know that I have loved thee. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I
also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold I come quickly: hold that
fast, which thou have, that no man take thy crown. Him that overcomes will I
make a pillar in the temple of MY GOD, and he shall go no more out: and I will
write upon him the name of MY GOD, and the name of the city of MY GOD, the new
Jerusalem WHICH COMES DOWN OUT OF HEAVEN FROM MY GOD. Revel. III. 6 -- 12.


THE END.
Corrections.
PAGE. Line. Read 17 5 bottom multiply without him! 23 9 top crawl to it. 25 3
bot. is carrying on 28 3 bot. judgment; 44 margin 28th of April 48 8 top
intrigues 51 1 top a very signal

Also in some copies, page 29, margin, for Deum, read Divum


