A PERSUASIVE, TO The RIGHT USE of the PASSIONS in RELIGION; OR, The Nature of
religious ZEAL EXPLAINED, its EXCELLENCY and IMPORTANCE OPENED and URGED, IN A
SERMON, On REVELATIONS iii. 19. Preached at PHILADELPHIA, January 27th, 1760.

BY GILBERT TENNENT, Minister of the Gospel of CHRIST.

ISAIAH lxii. 1. For Zion's Sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's
Sake I will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness,
and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by W. DUNLAP, M,DCC,LX.

PREFACE.
Candid Reader,
THE Reason of my choosing the Subject of the following Sermon, in the Course of
my stated Ministrations to my own Congregation, was the sorrowful Apprehension
I had of the low State of vital Religion, in general among us, at this Time;
and a sincere Desire to excite truly pious Persons, to more Earnestness and
Diligence in the Service of God: I had not the least Thought of its Publication
when it was preached; but being since Earnestly desired to commit it to the
Press, I have consented, hoping and praying, that it may through the divine
Blessing, be of some Use to Mankind: The Sovereign God sends by whom he will
send, he can, and has in many Instances, blessed weak Means; if we sincerely
endeavor as well as we can to promote his Kingdom, he will graciously accept
of our humble Endeavors, and probably bless them to some; both which
Considerations are great Incentives to Action: To prevent Prolixity, I have not
expressed in the Sermon, the Words of many Places of sacred Scripture, which
confirm and illustrate the Matters treated of: I would therefore entreat the
Reader, to turn to them for his own Satisfaction and Benefit; and I earnestly
beg his Prayers, for one who is less than the least of all Saints, that I may
obtain Mercy, to be faithful to the Death:

I am, Thy willing Servant, For CHRIST'S Sake, G. TENNENT.
Philadelphia, February 7th, 1760.
A PERSUASIVE, TO The RIGHT USE of the Passions in Religion; OR, The Nature of
religious ZEAL EXPLAINED, its EXCELLENCY and IMPORTANCE OPENED and URGED, IN A
SERMON, etc.
REVELATIONS iii. 19. Be ZEALOUS threfore, and Repent.


LIGHT and Heat are inseparable Companions in true Religion, without the
latter, the former is cold Formality; and without the former, the latter is
wild Enthusiasm: Though the Passions be bad Guides, they are notwithstanding good
Servants, and therefore should neither be neglected nor destroyed, but excited,
and duly regulated in their Tendencies, by Reason and Revelation, according to
the Nature and Importance of their Objects: This is the Remedy which the Lord
Jesus Christ proposes in the Words of our Text, to the lukewarm Church of
Laodicea, to cure her Degeneracy, and remove the Calamities consequent upon it;
which are supposed by the preceding Part of the Verse, from which the Text is
an Inference: As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be ZEALOUS therefore and
repent. q. d. Seeing the Afflictions I send to correct you for, and reclaim you
from your Remissness in Religion, proceed not from Prejudice, but regard to
your best Good, therefore they should be kindly accepted and faithfully
improved, by the exercise of Zeal and Penitence; without which they will not be
removed in Mercy: Certainly, the Wounds of a Friend, are better than the Kisses
of an Enemy; if therefore you have any gratitude to God, or regard to your own
Interest, Be ZEALOUS! Ardent Love is termed ZEAL, (Number. xi. 29. Psalm lxix. 9.)
By this Word, our Lord enjoins a laudable Emulation of Piety and Virtue, and an
ardent strong Affection in religious Worship: Camero vid. Pol. Synop. in Loc:
Zelos, ex Zeo, lian, valde ferveo, Pasor.
Be ZEALOUS, shake off your Sloth and Lukewarmness, and Labor earnestly in the
Use of all appointed Means to recover your first Love, your former Warmth,
Spirit, and Savor; that so you may be such burning and shining Lights, such
savory Salt, in a dark and degenerate World, that Men seeing your good Works,
may glorify your Father which is in Heaven: If the Salt looses its Savor, our
Lord assures us, it is good for Nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under
the Feet of Men! (Matthew. v. 13.) -- And repent: i. e. Heartily confess, and
sincerely lament your Coldness and Negligence in Time past, and resolve in the
Strength of God to do better in Time to come, in Pursuance of which, strive to
keep yourselves in the Love of God, strive to keep alive in your Souls the
sacred Fire of divine Grace, that ye may not be dead while ye live, but live in
Love, live to God, and feel you live! let your Spikenard incessantly diffuse to
all around you, its aromatic, delightful, and useful Fragrance, and your Hearts
glow with unremitting* pious, and noble Ardors!

THE Subject of our present Meditations is ZEAL, which is twofold, viz. bad and
good: Of the former Genus or Sort, there are various Kinds or Species,
particularly

1. THERE is a natural Zeal and Activity* unsanctified, which is the Effect of
a sprightly Temperature of Body; which, though it be not positively Evil, yet has
Nothing spiritual or saving in it, and so is comparatively Bad.

2. AN ignorant Zeal, when Persons are zealous and they don't know for what or
why; and hence it is said of the carnal Jews, that they had a Zeal for God, but
not according to Knowledge, for being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, or of the
Necessity and Sufficiency of the Righteousness of a Mediator, to the
Justification of a believing Sinner, which is of Gods Appointment; and going
about to establish their own in Place thereof, they did not sincerely submit
to, or entirely depend upon, the Righteousness of God, (Romans x. 2, 3.) And
thus Israel that followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to
the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith, but
as it were by the Works of the Law, (Romans ix. 31, 32.) But besides this
Self-righteous Vein, ignorant Zeal is equally liable to (...) into the wilds
and ^reaks of Enthusiasm; when Men leave the Guidance of the holy Scriptures,
and follow the blind Impulses of their own Minds, which they reckon sufficient
without them; contrary to the sacred Oracles, (1 Cor. ii. 14. Rev. iii. 17.
Luke xi. 13.) Ignorant Zeal is exceeding Dangerous, like a Sword in the Hand of
one that is blind, or mad! Witness the Boors Wars in Germany; and many other
Instances nearer Home.

3. A hypocritical Zeal, when Men affect to appear zealous before others, when
they are not so in Reality; thus the Pharisees wore broad Phylactery's, made
long Prayers, compassed Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, gave Alms in public,
built the Tombs of the Prophets, that they might be seen of Men, and esteemed
Religious; and yet they persecuted at the same Time, the Prince of Prophets.
Those Hypocrites our Lord accosts in the following Language, Ye Serpents, ye
Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation of Hell, (Matthew xxiii.
Chapter.)

4. A proud Zeal, when Men are fervent in any Matter that concerns them, their
Opinions, Humors, Honors, Interests, Friends, or any Thing that is theirs, and
principly because it is theirs: And yet such is the Deceitfulness of the human
Heart, that some are pleased with this sorry Mushroom Witness Jehu, who had the
Confidence to ask good Jonabab, to come and see his Zeal. (2 Kings x, 16.)

5. A factious Zeal, when Pride or Covetousness has engaged Men in a Party,
and they think it their Duty, at least their Interest, to contend earnestly for
all the Opinions and Customs of the Sect they have chosen, without examining
whether they be right or wrong: In the mean Time slighting and rejecting all
who are of other Denominations, and Sentiments in lesser Things; and
solicitously laboring to proselyte others, rather to a Party than to vital
Piety, that they may glory in their Flesh, and answer some mean Design, ( Gal.
vi. 13.) As if it was a great Catch to be damned, rather in this, than in that
Faction; but blessed be God, the Church of Christ is not confined to any Party,
( John x 16.) Nor does the Kingdom of God consist in Meats and Drinks, but in
Peace and Righteousness, and Joy in the holy Ghost, (Romans xiv. 17.) The Apostle
Paul expressed his Abhorrence of promoting Schisms in the Church of God, by a
noble Depression of himself on that Occasion, who then is Paul, and who is
Apollos? (1 Cor. iii. 5.) The main Point is to be holy in Heart and Life, such
will surely get to Heaven, and there their Differences in Sentiment will be
comfortably settled.

6. A superstitious Zeal, for small and indifferent Things while greater are
neglected, thus the Pharisees were fond of their Washings and Traditions, and
paid Tithes of Mint, Anise, and Cummin, while they omitted the weightier
Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. They strained at a Gnat, and
swallowed a Camel, (Matthew xxiii. 24.)

7. AN envious Zeal, against those that have the Precedence and cross their
Desires, contradict their Notions, or cloud their Honor: But if ye have bitter
Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth:
This Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly sensual, and devilish.
(James iii. 14, 15.)

8. A malignant Zeal, against the faithful Servants of Christ, for their
Soundness, Holiness, and Usefulness, and in Proportion thereto: Notwithstanding
all the plausible Pretexts with which it is artfully covered, ( See this
shocking PARADOX confirmed by divine Testimony: Genesis iii. 15. Gal. iv. 29. Luke
xii. 51, 52, 53. 1 John iii. 12. 1 Cor. xvi. 9. Rev. xii. 12, 13.)

As sinful ZEAL is manifold in Kind, so it is exceeding heinous and of
malignant Influence; it dishonoreth God by presuming to affix his sacred Name
to Error in Principle, and Impiety in Practice; it charges upon infinite Purity
all the Wickedness it commits; it injures the Church of God, as well as civil
Society and our own Souls; this made Paul exceeding mad against the Disciples
of Christ, so that he shut them up in Prisons and compelled them to blaspheme!
( Acts xxvi. 10, 11.) This breeds Contention, and oversets the Peace and Order
of Societies and Families: As pious Zeal is the Fervency of Grace, so is sinful
Zeal the Fervency of Sin, it makes Men doubly sinful, for hereby they are
induced to do much Evil in a little Time, and that in the Name of God, whereby
they fight against him by his own Authority: (Perverted) this blinds Men's
Minds, and prejudices their Hearts against Conviction; the zealous Sinner
justifies his Sin, and pleads Scripture and Reason in its Defense: Yea, he
thinks he is serving God, when he is murdering his Servants, and opposing the
Power and Spirit of Religion, a melancholy Case this indeed! Yea, even Zeal for
small and circumstantial Matters, when high in Degree, is of hurtful Tendency,
for it destroys Charity and Peace, and disparages holy Zeal by Accident,
making the profane think that all Zeal is no better than the foolish Passions
of deceived Men; and hence it disables those that have it to do Good, even when
they are zealous for important Truth and Duty, for many will be inclined to
think it of the same Nature with their eronious Zeal, and so disregard them.
Now seeing the Case of sinful Zeal is so awful and dangerous, it should put us
all upon our guard, lest we be deceived and ensnared by Satan and our own
Hearts!

BUT the PIOUS ZEAL enjoined in our Text, is of a very different Kind, and may
be thus described, viz. that it is a devout Fervor or Warmth, wrought in the
Affections of a regenerated Person by the holy Spirit, in the Use of appointed
Means, whereby they are carried out to the utmost, in promoting the Kingdom of
God, from Love to his Majesty, with an Eye to his Glory, and according to the
Directions of his written Word, (Romans xii. 11. James v. 16. 1 Peter i. 22 and
48.)

HERE observe, that love to God, is the Principle from which this pious Passion
proceeds, (2 Cor. v. 14.) His Glory is its End, (1 Cor. x. 31.) His Word is the
Rule by which it is regulated, ( Gal. vi. 16.) His Spirit its Efficient, (Romans
viii. 9.) And Regeneration its Antecedent, (Colossi. iii. 1, 2.) It is not a
distinct Grace by itself, but the Vigor and fervent Operation of every Grace;
and has the following Properties, viz.

1. IT is according to Knowledge, (Romans x. 2.) for Truth and Holiness, and not
for Error and Sin: It is such as a Man can give a Reason for, and so is a
reasonable Service, (Romans xii. 1.) Without Knowledge the Mind cannot be good, (
Prove. xiii. 2.) The popish and enthusiastical Notion therefore, that Ignorance
is the Mother of Devotion, is as false as it is foolish and pernicious, a
reproach to Christianity, yea, a scandal to human Nature!

2. SINCERE and simple, for God and his Kingdom, without mean Artifice and
selfish Design. (2 Cor. i. 12.) For our rejoicing is this, even the Testimony
of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly
Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World. For
we are not as many, who corrupt Capelusantes, adulterating it, as Hucksters who
for the sake of Gain, unjustly mix Water with the Wine they sell. Vid. Pasor.
Pools Synop. See 2 Corinthians. iv. 2.
the Word of God, but as of Sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God,
speak we in Christ, (2 Corin. ii. 17.)

3. TEMPERED with Humility and Love, and attended with Meekness, Self-denial
and Patience: True Zeal makes the Saints humble, Witness the Publican and
Apostle Paul, (Luke xviii. 13. 1 Timothy i. 15. Philip. iii, 8.) But while they
think meanly of themselves, they highly esteem others, and give them all that
Honor that is due to their several Places and Relations, ( Romans xiii. 7.) And
while their Indignation burns against the Sins of Men because of the dishonor
done thereby to God; they feel Bowels of Pity toward their Persons! ( Rev. ii.
2. Col. iii. 12.) When Moses though the meekest of Men, saw the Calf which the
People of Israel had made, and Dancing, his Anger waxed hot, and he broke the
Tables of Stone, ( Ezod. xxxii. 19.) Yet he earnestly plead for Mercy toward
their Persons, ( Exodus xxxiii. 19.) Thus our dear Lord looked on ungrateful
Impenitents with Anger, who sought to flay their kindest Benefactor; being
grieved for the Hardness of their Hearts, (Mark iii. 5.) And hence we may learn
that true Zeal is a compound of Anger and Grief, both which proceed from love
to God and Man, and therefore is inconsistent with Barbarity and Blood! ( See
Gal. iv. 12. 2 Cor. xii. 21. Luke ix. 53 to 57*) Wilt then that we command Fire
to come down from Heaven, and consume them? But he turned and rebuked them, and
said, Ye know not what Manner of Spirit ye are of: For the Son of Man is not
come to destroy Men's lives, but to save them. See how contrary Christ is to
Dragooning for Religion, and spreading his spiritual Kingdom by the carnal
Weapons of Sword and Terge: A Method which some fierce Bigots would fain tamper
with, to spread the Shibboleths of their Schisms! If Club-law be the proper
Method to convince Men's Understandings and propagate the Faith; then the
Spanish Inquisition is the Perfection of Christianity; the most worthy and
pious Discovery that has yet been made. O horrible! is it decent or consistent
for Protestants, who confess they are fallible; assert the Necessity of
Knowledge, and the right of private Judgment, and who blame the Papists for
their cruelty and bloodshed, to imitate the Mother of Harlots in her
Wickedness, by propagating her slavish and bloody Tenets; for if external Force
be necessary to promote Religion, it will necessarily follow, that eronious
Decrees have a binding Power; that implicit Faith is sound Doctrine; that
Knowledge is dangerous, and Ignorance the Mother of Devotion; because the less
we know, the more easily we can submit blind-sold to an absolute Authority: But
when any do so in Matters purely Religious, they admit and obey another King in
Christ's Kingdom, and so commence Rebels against his supreme Authority, who is
the only Lord, Lawgiver, and Master of his People; by prefering others before
him, and setting up their Authority in Opposition to his, ( James iv. 12*
Matthew xxiii. 10.)

LEARNED Mr. Warburton on this Subject, justly observes, That it has been
offered in excuse for this Behavior of the Protestant Churches, on their
Separation from the Church of Rome; (for their Perseverance in it afterward,
will admit of no Apology,) that the Spirit of Persecution has a marvelous
Malignity in its Nature, above all other Errors, to corrupt and deprave the
human Mind: So that when every other Iniquity of papal Power had been now
detected and expelled; this still sculked behind, within the close Recesses of
the Heart; and as often as it could disguise its Deformity under a Zeal for the
Work of Reformation, it was ready to step out and play the Devil!

4. PROPORTIONED in Degree to the Weight and Moment of Things, more careful
about the Substance than the Circumstance; and prefering great Things to small;
Righteousness and Peace to Meats and Drinks; the weightier Things of the Law,
to Mint; and a Camel to a Gnat, (Mat. ix. 13. Romans xiv. 17 and 20. Mat. xxiii.
23, 24.) Prefering Things plain and self-evident, to Things comparatively
doubtful and problematical, ( Romans xiv. 5 and 17, 18.) Prefering Matters that
concern vital and practical Holiness, to uncertain Opipinions about what is
remote from the Heart and Practice of Piety; such as foolish and unlearned
Questions, which gender Strife, Genealogies, and Contentions about the Law,
which are unprofitable and vain, ( Titus iii. 8, 9. 2 Timothy ii. 23.) And
striving about Words to no Profit, but to the Subversion of the Hearers, (2 Timothy ii. 14.) True Zeal contendeth not for small and doubtful Controversies, to
the loss or wrong of greater Truths and Duties, though it regards every Truth;
yet in a Degree proportioned to its Place and Weight in the Christian System,
or Analogy of Faith, (Romans xii. 6.) It is hottest in the greatest Things, and
coolest in the least; more earnest for a vital Faith, Love, and good Works,
than for doubtful Opinions, and mutable Ceremonies; more earnest for the
Foundation, than for some small Apendages in the Superstructure; more earnest
for the Life and Soul of Religion, than its Garb and Dress, (Col. ii. 19. and
iii. 14. Heb. xii. 14.) Nor can any Thing be more reasonable, for Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, and Faith and Holiness the Substance and Scope of the
Gospel, ( Romans xiii. 10. 1 Timothy i. 5. Gal. vi. 15, 16.) Carnal contests about
little Things, while the great are neglected; seem to express great Solicitude;
how most neatly to adorn a Carcass, or at best, how with greatest Art and
Curiosity, to Trim and Apparel gorgeously, a languishing Man, in the feared
approaches of Death, instead of endeavoring to save his Life The Reverend and
Learned Mr. JOHN HOW, in his Preface to the carnality of religious Contentions.
. But if we walk in the Spirit, we shall not fulfill this Lust of the Flesh; but
on the contrary, speak the Truth with Judgment, and in Love, (Gal. v. 16.
Philip. i. 9. Ephesians. iv. 15.) Some as Cyprian observes, are unfaithful for the
Faith, and sacrilegeous for Religion!

THINGS comparatively small, such as Mint, Anise and Cummin, ought to be
regarded according to their Moment, and observed in their proper Order, but not
put on a Par with the weightier Matters of the Law: And regarded they may be by
us, as to our own Persuasion and Practice; and modestly and peaceably
recommended to others by Reason and Argument, without imposing them as Terms of
Communion on others; a Claim we have no Authority for, from the King of the
Church, ( See Romans xiv. throughout, and xv. 1 and 7. Ephesians. iv. 2.) Our Lord
directed the superstitious and censorious Pharisees, to go and learn what that
meant, that God would have Mercy, rather than Sacrifice, (Matt. ix. 12.) That
is when a lesser Duty interferes with a greater, the lesser is to be at that
Time omitted; the offering of Gifts or Acts of external Worship, must give
Place to brotherly Love and Compassion: To say that there is no Difference in
respect of the Degrees of Importance, in different Truths and Duties, is to
oppose the plainest Dictates of Reason, as well as the positive Declarations of
Christ and his Apostles; and to say that these should not be regarded
accordingly, is to be guilty of the Iniquity which our Lord reproved in his
Enemies, the Pharisees, and to reject common Sense! To regard a Nail in the
Roof of a House, as much as a Stone in the Foundation; or, the Hair of a Man's
Head and his Nails, as much as his Heart and Lungs, is rediculous and absurd!

5. TRUE Zeal is ever tender of the Churches Peace and Unity, and therefore
avoids with Care, irregular Measures and Impositions which tend to Confusion
and Division: The Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and good Fruits, without
Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, (James iii. 17.) The Union of Christ's Body
mistical is her Strength and Comfort, her Beauty and Glory; this makes her the
Delight of her Friends, and the Terror of her Enemies. In this Situation, how
goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel? Who is she that
looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible
as an Army with Banners? (Cant. vi. 10.) Christ prays that his People may be
one, that the World may know the Father had sent him, (John xvii. 21.) And
shall not we labor to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace,
(Ephesians. iv. 3.) Labor to be one in Affection and Design, as Christ and the
Father are one: And as far as we have attained, be one in Conduct, ( Philip.
iii. 16.) Labor to be one in fundamentals, and as to lesser Points exercise
Forbearance, allowing that Liberty to others, which our great Master has left
to all, and which ourselves desire; and the Weakness of our present State,
renders so Necessary to our Comfort and Benefit, ( Tit. iii. 10. Ephesians. iv. 2.
Romans xiv. 1. Gal. v. 1.) Labor to adopt that ancient scriptural and rational
Maxim, In Necessariis Unitas, in non necessariis Lbertas, et in utrisq
Charitas. In fundamentals Unity, in circumstantials Liberty, and in both
Charity: O how happy would it be for the whole Christian Church, which is now,
alas for it, by her numerous and scandalous Divisions, become a Torment to
herself, a Grief to her Friends, and the Scorn of her Enemies! Would she
embrace and act up to this equitable Axiom! But what good can be expected,
while the ignorant and furious Biggots of every Sect, look on themselves and
their Party, to be the only true Church of Christ; in the mean Time excluding
all others, and saying, Lo Christ is here, or lo he is there, (Luke xvii. 21.)
As if the Redeemers Kingdom was reduced to a Nut-shell, and he had no Fold but
one; from such unhallowed Zeal, and uncharitable Charity, may the good Lord
deliver us!

6. TRUE Zeal is Impartial, it is as hot against our own Sins, and the Sins of
our Relations and Friends, as the Sins of others: It labors first to take the
Beam out of our own Eye, before we attempt to cast out the Mote of our Brothers
Eye, (Matthew vii. 5.)

7. UNIFORM, it respects all Gods Commands, (Ps. cxix. 6.) It is not hot for
one, and cold toward another: But aims at, and labors for a Perfection of
Obedience to all; and justly seeing all are of the same Tendency, and enjoined
by the same Authority, ( Philip. iii. 12, 13.) It consists principly in the
Fervor of our love to God, whereas a false Zeal consists chiefly in hatred
against Man; and therefore manifests itself in severe Censures upon the
Sentiments and Actions of those it dislikes, ( James 3 Chap.) As the Legs of
the Lame are not equal, so the Life of a Hypocrite or false Zealot, is not of a
Piece; like Ephraim, he is a Cake not turned, half raw and half roasted, (
Hosea vii. 8.) His Goodness is like the Morning Cloud, and early Dew, that soon
passes away, (Hosea vi. 4.) A sudden Flash that soon expires, like that of a
Fevor, or of the stony Ground Hearers, ( Mat. xiii. 5, 6.) But the Zeal of the
truly pious, is like the natural Heat of the Body, which regularly digests the
Nourishment it receives, and so animates and strengthens the Man: And like the
Light of the Morning which shines more and more to the perfect Day!

8. DISCREET, instead of magisterial Severity, or pharasaic Cruelty, it
introduces Reproof, with a Commendation of what is praiseworthy in the Person
reproved; this Method has an excellent Tendency to prevent or remove
Prejudices, and excite to receive the Admonition kindly, which makes it more
likely to answer the End designed: An Example of this, we have in our Lords
treatment of the Churches of Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, and Philadelphia,
(Rev. 2 and 3 Chap.)

I MAY add, that true Zeal is attended with undaunted Bravery of Mind, and a
generous princely Spirit; as appear in Nehemiah, Paul, and Araunah! Should such
a Man as I flee? (Nehem. vi. 11.) What mean ye to weep, and break my Heart? For
I am ready, not only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the
Lord Jesus! (Acts xxi. 13.) All these Things did Araunah, as a King, give unto
the King, (2 Samuel xxiv. 23.) But some Professors ingloriously change Shapes in
Danger, as often as the Camelion its Colors* and in Matters of Charity, do
more resemble Nabal than Araunah, (1 Samuel xxv. 10, 11.) When help for Zion is
asked, their little selfish Souls shrink within their Iron Bosoms, like a Snail
in its Shell, and are as impenitrable as Adamant, to all the Arguments of
Piety, Generosity, and public Spirit!

THE Excellency of a true Zeal appears, from the following Considerations,
which recommend it to our Choice and Practice, viz.

1. ZEAL being Nothing but the Fervor and Vigor of every Grace, it has in it
all the Beauty and Excellency of all those Graces, and that in a high Degree of
Eminence; if Love to God be excellent, then zealous fervent Love must needs be
most excellent!

2. THE Nature of holy Objects is such, so great, so excellent, and of such
transcendent and unspeakable Importance, that we cannot be sincere, in our
Esteem of them, and Pursuit after them, without Zeal: If it were about Riches
and Honors, a cold Desire and dull Pursuit might serve the turn, but about God
and Christ, and Grace and Heaven, such cold Desires and Endeavors are
virtually a Contempt! To love God without Zeal, is not to love him at all,
because it is not loving him as God: No desire of Christ, of Holiness, and
Heaven, is saving; but that which prefers them to all the Treasures and
Delights of Life; and that which does so, has certainly some Zeal in it; so
that Zeal is essential to every Grace, as Life and Heat is to a Man.

3. THE Integrity and Honesty of the Heart to God, consists much in Zeal; as
he that is true to his Friend is zealous for him, and not the Man that is
indifferent and cold; to do his Service with Zeal, is to do it willingly and
heartily; to do it without Zeal, is to do it heartlesly, and by halves, and
leave out the Life and Kernel of the Duty: It is the Heart that God does first
and most require, ( Prove. xxiii. 26.) My Son give me thine Heart, and let thine
Eyes observe my Ways. The End when valued according to its Worth, excites and
directs the Affections and Endeavors, in that Order and Measure, as is
proportioned to its Excellency, and the Difficulties of obtaining it: True Zeal
animates Endeavors, as the Motion of the Heart, diffuses the Blood into the
Veins, and the Spirits into the Arteries, to convey Life and Motion into all
Parts of the Body: One Thing, says the PSALMIST, have I desired of the Lord,
and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord, all the
Days of my Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee, (Psalm xxvii. 5, and lxxiii. 25.) No Man can serve two
Masters, God and Mamon: Either he will hate the one, and love the other, or
hold to the one, and despise the other, (Matthew vi. 24.)

4. ZEAL is the Soul and Strength of the Duty, and makes it like to attain its
End; the fervent Prayer of the Righteous is effectual. (James v. 16.)
Importunate Suitors are like to speed, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
Violence, and the Violent take it by Force, (Matt. xi. 12.) We are commanded to
STRIVE, as in an Agony, to enter in at the straight Gate. Agonizesthe agonize,
agonia, angor, trepidatio, animi estuatio, Anguish, trembling, and Fervency of
Mind, Luke xxii. 44. 1 Timothy vi. 12. -- Pasor.
And that for this Reason, Because many will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able, (Luke xiii. 24.) Not every one that seeks, finds; not every one that
striveth, is crowned; not every one that runeth, gains the Prize; but he that
does it lawfully, (2 Timothy ii. 5.) i. e. REGULARLY, HUMBLY, EARNESTLY,
PERSEVERINGLY, ( Isaiah lxvi. 2. Luke xi. 8, 9. 1 Cor. ix. 24. Heb. xii. 1.) No
wonder we are commanded to love God with all our Heart, Soul, and Mind, which
is a zealous Love; for that overcomes all other Love, and constrains to
Obedience: From what has been said it is evident, that Zeal is necessary to
Salvation, both in respect of Command and Mean, for it is not only enjoined by
divine Authority, and has a gracious Promise annexed, ( Rev. iii. 19.) but it
has an Aptness, a Becomingness, a Tendency in itself, to the Object and the End
proposed.

5. ZEAL embraces and improves the Opportunities, and Seasons of Mercy and
Grace; which Sloth and Negligence let slip: The zealous work while it is Day;
they seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near;
they know the Day of their Visitation and Salvation, while the Lukewarm and
Indolent stupidly delay and trifle; audaciously harden their Hearts, and sleep
with their Lamps unfurnished, and do not knock till the Door of Mercy be shut
against them: Lukewarmness and Negligence are the Grave of Mercies, where they
are ungratefully buried, till they rise up in Judgment against the Despisers of
them: Surely the Improvers of Nature shall condemn those Neglecters of Gospel
Grace, yea the very Beasts shall be Witnesses against many, who did not serve
God with that Diligence, as they served them.

6. ZEAL and Diligence are the victorious Enemies of Sin and Satan; they cannot
endure Sin; but are to it as a Fire to Thorns; they dally not with Iniquity,
but reject the Motion instantly with Abhorrence, and avoid the Appearance of
Evil; while the Vineyard of the Sluggard is overgrown with Thorns, and his
Soul famishes with fruitless Wishes, because his Hands refuse to Labor:
Impediments that stop a Sluggard, are as Nothing to a zealous Soul: As a Wheel
that moves slowly, is stopped by a little Matter, which a quicker Motion easily
Surmounts; a lively Servant makes a Pleasure of his Work, which a lazy one does
with Pain and Weariness.

7. ZEAL is faithful, constant and valiant, and therefore greatly pleases God;
it cleaves to him with unshaken Firmness, with a dving Gripe, in the midst of
the most formidable Dangers and Calamities; the Fire consumes it not, nor do
many Waters quench it; but such as have a lukewarm Religion, will be easily
drawn or driven from it, they are so indifferent that a little more of the
World put into the Scale, will weigh down Christ in their Esteem; the Hopes and
Fears of temporal Things, prevail with them against the Hopes of eternal. No
wonder therefore that God disowns such treacherous Servants, and turns them
away as unworthy of his Family! ( Luke xiv. 26, 27.) If a Man come to me, and
hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and
Sisters, i. e. Comparitively he cannot be my Disciple. Christian Prudence
instead of opposing, realy befriends true Zeal, by directing it in respect of
Time and Mode, so as to answer its Design, but carnal Cunning opposes all
Goodness,

IT is in vain to mask this malignant Iniquity of Lukewarmness, with the
plausible Pretext of Moderation, for that is only opposed to immoderate
Desires, Fears, and Cares about earthly Things, but not to Zeal about heavenly;
for herein it is lawful, laudible, and truly Noble to excel! Their Necessity,
Sublimity, Value, and Duration, require and deserve all the Ardor and
Vehemence, all the Vigor, the Fire, the Force, of an immortal Spirit; in its
boldest Salleys, its widest Expansions, and most intense Operations! It is true
as to Things in their own Nature indifferent; we may, yea we ought to be
indifferent; to rejoice as though we rejoiced not, and weep as though we wept not;
because the Fashion of this World passes away; all its Enjoyments are rather an
Appearance than a Reality, a mere Shadow that flee from our eager Embraces; a
Scene that often Shifts, and will soon come to its final Period: But to be
indifferent in a Matter of the greatest Moment, a Matter of Life and Death, a
Matter of everlasting Life, and everlasting Death, is shocking and horrible! As
irrational as it is ignoble, sinful, perilous, and damnable! Lukewarmness my
Brethren, is exceeding dishonorable to God and Religion; nor can it when
habitual and allowed, consist with the Truth of it: This monstrous Trifling
with God and Salvation, Marrs all our sacred Service, deprives us of Communion
with the divine Majesty, and exposes us to his Indignation and awful Judgments;
as our Text and Context assure us. This makes us uncomfortable to ourselves,
and unprofitable to others; the very Lumber of the Creation, a Burden to the
Earth, and a Poison to the Air; cumberers of the Ground, barren Trees accursed
by Christ; who are every Moment in danger of being cut down by the Ax of divine
Justice, and cast into the Fire of Hell! Luke xii. 7. Matthew xxi. 19. Matthew
iii. 10.
What can this crimson Iniquity proceed from, but a Contempt of God, and the
Things of God? -- An immoderate Love to the World, -- Ignorance,
Unwatchfulness, -- Laziness, -- Presumption, -- unnecessary and familiar
Conversation with the Secure, -- Conformity to the World, -- engaging in
unprofitable Questions, which do not warm the Heart, and mend the Life; and
carnal Contentions about Religion: -- Now the Badness of these Causes, manifest
the Meanness and Malignity of the Effect, and point to the Means necessary to
prevent or remedy it.

WHEN you grow cold and slothful, O! consider how great and good a Master you
serve; should any Thing be done negligently for God, your Creator and
Sovereign, your Redeemer and Benefactor? Can you ever do enough for that
glorious and gracious Being, to whom you are under so immense, innumerable, and
endearing Obligations? Nor will he ever suffer you to be Loosers by his
Service, which is indeed its own Reward.

O CONSIDER! that he is always present in every Duty you perform, and will you
loiter in his Sight, when a very Eye-servant will work, while his Master
stands by!

ONE serious Thought of the End and Consequence, one would think, should put
Life into the dullest Soul, say to thy sleepy frozen Heart, is it not Heaven
that I am seeking, is it not Hell that I am avoiding, and can I be cold and
slothful about so great Events?

THE Work I have to do is great and excellent, what Knowledge and Grace have I
to get, what Means to use, what Oppositions and Temptations to surmount, shall
I then be easy and indolent?

HOLINESS is the Ornament of our reasonable Nature, the Beauty of God: He is
glorious in Holiness, and clad with Zeal as a Cloak.

O CONSIDER my dear Brethren! that as the Master is great and good, and ever
present, the Work difficult and excellent; so the Reward is glorious,
incomprehensible, immortal: A Kingdom that is unshaken, a Crown that will never
fade away, an exceeding great and eternal Weight of Glory; compared with which,
all the light and momentary Afflictions of the present State, are not worthy to
be compared; and in View of which they appear as Dross or Dung, yea shrink into
Nothing, and are lighter than Vanity! This, this Felicity, will infinitely
over-balance all our Labor and Ardor in quest of it! Further,

THE Time we have to work in, is short and uncertain; O how fast does it fly!
How soon will it end, end for ever! All the Time we have to prepare for
Eternity is but a Moment, the present NOW; the Time past is elapsed and cannot
be recalled, and much of that Time, alas for it! spent in Sinning and Trifling;
the Time to come we may never possess, and will we spend any more Time in vain,
when Death is so near at Hand, and the great Judge at the Door? God forbid!
Shortly there will be no Praying, no Hearing, no Working for us any more on
Earth; look into the dark Grave, and go to the House of Mourning! O consider!
that this Heart has but a little more Time to think, this Pulse but a little
more Time to beat, this Tongue but a little more Time to speak, and all will
quickly end, end in awful Silence, end in the endless Recompense! Me thinks
this should quicken the coldest Heart, and rouse the most sluggish lethargic
Soul!

HOW many Millions are undone already by their Coldness and Negligence; how
many are in Hell, lamenting their Sloth on Earth; what if we saw them weltring
in Flames, and heard their Groans, would it not make us Serious? What if one of
them had Time and Leave to Hope again, would he be cold and careless?

HOW many Millions are now in Heaven, who all came there by Means of holy Zeal
and Diligence, and are now enjoying the Fruit of all their painful Labors and
patient Sufferings; should not this stir up our Zeal, or are we covered with
the Scales of Leviathan?

WHAT Thoughts will all the World have of Zeal and Diligence at last; how will
the best wish they had been better, and done more for God and their Salvation?
And how will the worst wish when it is too late, that they had been zealous and
diligent? How earnestly will they then knock and cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us;
but alas it will be all in vain! What Heart rending Grief will seize them
forever, when they think by what Indifference and Sloth they have lost their
Souls! yea, sold them to Destruction for a Thing of Naught!

WE must be zealous and diligent Sirs in this, or in Nothing, for there is
Nothing else that is comparatively worth one serious Thought; to be earnest and
laborious for perishing Vanities is the Disgrace of our Understandings, and
will soon be the Disappointment of our Hopes; the Shame and Ruin of our Souls!
But Zeal and Diligence will through Grace, recompense all thy Pains!

HAVE thou not been cold and indolent long enough already; how much Knowledge,
Grace, Comfort, and Usefulness has this deprived thee of, and will thou be
lukewarm and slothful still? O doleful Infatuation! O Lord Jesus rend the
Heavens and come down, and speak our stupid Souls into Light, and Life, and
Love!

HOW diligent is thy grand Enemy Satan, he goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour: And will thou be less diligent to resist him when
thy own Salvation is at Stake? Less diligent to save thy Soul than he to damn
it, O horrible!

WHAT an Example of Zeal and Diligence, has the ancient Christians left us,
whose Advantages and Obligations were not greater than ours, if so great; they
had the same Difficulties to grapple with as we have, and no greater Crown to
labor for; -- and shall this have no Influence on our stupid frozen Souls,
what then will affect us?

SEE the Lord Jesus weeping, sweating, bleeding, groaning, dying, to purchase
Salvation for thee; hear how he excites himself to Diligence in this Work, by
the Shortness of the Time he had to do it in; the Night comes, when no Man can
work: And can thou be careless and cold, about thy own Salvation? How
unaccountable, unbecoming, and ungrateful is this Stupidity? O shall the
Labors, the Tears, the Groans, and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, have no
Influence on us, to excite us to Zeal and Diligence! Are we colder than Ice,
and harder than Adamant?

REMEMBER how earnest thou have been in the Service of Sin and Satan, and will thou be now cold and carless in the Service of God, thy rightful Maker and
Proprietor, whose Service is real Liberty?

SEE how eager Worldings are in the Pursuit of Mamon, the Proud and Sensual in
Chase of Honor and Pleasure, and think what a shame it is to thee, to be more
remiss for God and Salvation!

WHAT have thou thy Health, thy Time, and all thy Talents for, but to secure
thy Salvation; do not all the Mercies of God toward thee, and all the Means of
Grace bind thee to be earnest and diligent, the Sun and Moon, the Air and
Earth, attend thee with their Help; and yet will thou be cold and careless, and
laboriously frustrate all these Means and Mercies to thy own Ruin? O lamentable!

SEE how an awaking Pang of Conscience, or a View of Death at Hand can alarm
the Wicked, to some serious Diligence for the present, and shall saving Grace
have less Influence on thee?

O CONSIDER! that a Spirit of slumber is a most dreadful Judgment; the Decay of
natural Heat is a sign of old Age, and is accompanied with the Decay of all the
Powers, and Sickness and Pains do attend all such Decays of Life: When the
Horse grows dull he is like to feel the Rod or Spur! --

IS NOT your Coldness and Sloth, a Sin against Knowledge, Covenants,
Profession, Promises, and therefore greatly aggravated; and will not Punishment
be proportioned thereto by a righteous holy God?

IF you would be zealous and diligent, drown not your Hearts in worldly
Business and Delights, for these create a Loathing and Weariness of holy
Things; they are so contrary to one another, that the Mind will not be eagerly
set on both: -- Cherish Faith, -- Beware of Sins against Light, -- Live in the
constant Expectation of Death, -- Associate with warm Christians, -- Pray for
divine Quickening. (Revive me and quicken me, O my God, that I may run the Way
of thy Commandments,) and attend the preached Word.

HEAR how the Lord Jesus thunders against the Indifferency of the Church of
Laodicea, and through them threatens us, who are alas for it, got into the same
detestable State in a great Degree! I know thy Works, that thou art neither
cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot; so because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold or hot, I will spue thee out of my Mouth. q. d. I observe thy
Behavior, thou art neither openly profane like Heathens, or such as make no
Profession of Religion at all, nor yet have thou true Zeal or Warmth, either
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, or love to God and Man, and the
Practice of Holiness; no sincere and suitable Zeal for the Glory of God, and
the good of Mankind; thou have a form of Godliness, but by thy Indifference,
practically denies the Power thereof; thou have a Name to live, but art dead;
for this Reason I will reject thee with Abhorrence: See how hateful
Lukewarmness in Religion is to the Lord Jesus Christ, it turns his Heart
against lazy worldy-wise Professors, as lukewarm Water does Men's Stomachs; if
Religion be real, it is noble, excellent, and absolutely necessary, and
consequently demerits our highest Esteem and most vigorous Pursuit; if it be
not true, it should be opposed with Vehemence, as a detestable Imposture, and
Imposition upon Mankind; if Religion be worth any Thing it is worth every
Thing, and therefore Indifference is inexcusable; an open Enemy is like to find
better Quarter than a perfidious Neuter, there is more Hope of a Heathen than
of such: -- We are not to imagine that Christ wishes any Person cold
absolutely, but only comparatively; hereby intimating, that the Condition of
one who makes no Profession of Religion at all, is in some respects more
hopeful than that of a formal lukewarm Hypocrite; no doubt both are offensive
to God, and are in the Road to ruin; but it is better not to have known the
Truth, than after the Knowledge of it to depart from the holy Commandment: As
Sins against greater Light are more heinous, so in general such Persons are
more puffed up with self-conceit than others, and having something to satisfy
their natural Conscience with, are harder to be convinced of their bad State,
which is nevertheless necessary to their Reformation; it may be therefore
justly concluded, that their Condition is in some respects more perilous, than
that of others; as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, when they wander from
me, or grow lukewarm in my Service: Be zealous therefore, if you would either
prevent the inflicting of Judgments, or have them removed in Love; esteem and
admire a regular well tempered Zeal in others, and cherish it in your own
Souls, for without this the Practice of religious Duty is but like a dead
Carcass without a Soul to animate it; let God's Glory and in Subordination
thereto, the Interest of his Kingdom be the grand Mark of all your Pursuits,
whither natural, civil, or religious, and set every Action in the whole circle
of Life, tend to this truly noble Center, with an honest and steady Simplicity;
and especially let love, ardent, supreme, and transcendent love to God, be the
Spring, the Soul, the Scope, from, to, and in which, all the Acts, the Lines,
the Streams of Life proceed, tend and terminate: O let this noble Godlike Grace
warm and inspire your Bosoms, enliven and animate all your Thoughts, Speeches
and Actions, for God and his Kingdon; that you may be inclined from sweet
Experience, from conscious Integrity, to speak in the seraphic, sublime, and
noble Language of the royal Prophet. Isaiah lxii. 1. For Zion's Sake I will not
hold my Peace, and for Jerusalem's Sake I will not rest, until the
Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
Lamp that burns!

AND now Sirs, what has been said concerning Zeal, should excite us to enquire,
whither we have any Zeal at all, and if any, of what Kind it is? if true Zeal
be the vigorous Exercise of Grace, then certainly those have it not who are
destitute of the Grace of God; it would be therefore absurd for me to excite
the ungodly, or such as are not born again, to Exercise what they have not;
instead of this, I would entreat those graceless Galeos, to begin at the
Foundation; to make the Tree good, and the Fruit will be good, (Matt. vii. 17,
and xii. 23.) To this End, plow up the fallow Ground of your Hearts; consider
seriously and speedily your SIN AND DANGER, lest the righteous God tear you in
Pieces, and there be none to deliver you! Awake thou that sleep, arise from
the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light: Why stand ye all the Day idle in
the Marketplace? Wherefore do ye spend your Money for that which is not Bread,
and your Labor for that which satisfies not? How long will thou sleep, O
Sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy Sleep? How long halt ye between two
Opinions, if the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal, then follow him: What
shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul, if he gain the whole World and loose
the same? What meanest thou, O Sleeper, arise, call upon thy God, if so be that
God will think upon us, that we perish not!

AND let such as have a false malignant Zeal, hear and consider the Words of
Christ to a persecuting Saul, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard
for thee to kick against the Pricks: On whomsoever the Stone which the Builders
rejected falls, it will grind him to Powder! --

You that have true Zeal, labor to cherish and preserve it, and be more and
more zealous for the glorious God, whatever blinded Sinners think, or say, or
do against you: Bewail your past Remissness; arise and shine, for your
Salvation is nearer than when ye believed; see that ye walk circumspectly, not
as Fools but as Wise, Redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil: Take Care
that your Zeal be qualified as before expressed, and thus be intrepid Heroes in
the Cause of God and Religion, and count not your lives dear, that ye may
finish your Course with Joy; O think often on the noble Zeal of Abraham, Moses,
Phinehas, Elijah, Nehemiah, Araunah, and above all; of the Prince of Prophets!
And now Brethren, seeing we also are compassed about, with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset
us; and let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us, looking unto
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the
right Hand of the Throne of God, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 5, the first Line in the Text; for threfore, read therefore. Page 9, Line
24; for Jonabab, read Jonadab. Page 15, Line 10; for Ezod. read Exodus Page 16,
Line 20; for blind-sold, read blindfold. Page 40, Line the last; for set, read
let.


