Dr. Mayhew's SERMON Occasioned by the Great Fire in BOSTON, Thursday MARCH 20.
1760.

GOD'S Hand and Providence to be religiously acknowledged in public Calamities.
A SERMON OCCASIONED BY The Great Fire IN BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, Thursday MARCH
20. 1760. AND PREACHED ON THE LORD'S DAY following.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the WEST-Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, in Newbury-Street, EDES and GILL, in
Queen Street, and THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, in Cornhill. 1760.

A SERMON occasioned by the Fire in BOSTON, MARCH 1760.
AMOS III. 6. -- SHALL there be evil in a city, and the LORD has not done it?
WHAT devastation have we lately seen made in a few hours! How many houses, and
other buildings, suddenly consumed! How much wealth destroyed! How many unhappy
families, rich and poor together, left destitute of any habitation, except
those which either private friendship, or public charity supplied! What
distress in every face; some mourning their own unhappy lot, others tenderly
sympathizing with them; and none knowing when, or where, the wide desolation
would terminate!

AFFLICTION comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground; to be sure, not such trouble and affliction as this; a calamity, so
great and extensive! This is a visitation of providence, which demands a
serious and religious consideration. And it is with a view to lead you into
some proper reflections on this melancholy occasion, that I have chosen the
words read, for the subject of my discourse at this time: Shall there be evil
in a city, says the prophet, and the LORD has not done it?

IT is to be observed, that although these words bear the form of a question, the
design of them is strongly to assert, that there is no evil in a city, which
the Lord has not done. Interrogatory forms of expression, are often to be thus
understood: I mean, as the most peremptory, and animated kind of affirmations.
Thus, for example, when it is demanded -- Can a man take fire in his bosom, and
his clothes not be burnt? Prove. VI. 27.
Every one understands this, as equivalent to asserting the impossibility
hereof in the strongest terms. So, when it is asked, Can a man be profitable
unto God? -- Or is it gain to him, that thou make thy ways perfect? Will he
reprove thee for fear of thee? Job XXII. 2, 3, 4.
A peremptory denial of these several things, is universally understood by
those questions. As if it had been said, Verily, a man cannot be profitatable
unto God! etc. And when, after a representation of the great wickedness and
depravity of the Jewish nation, it is immediately subjoined, Shall I not visit
for these things? says the Lord: Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this? Jer. V. 29.
It is equivalent to a positive denunciation of the divine vengeance against
that sinful people: and even more expressive, than if it had been said directly
-- I will visit for these things: My soul shall be avenged on such a nation as
this. This would have been comparatively a cold, unanimated way of speaking;
far less adapted to make an impression on the reader or hearer, than the other.

THE manner of expression in the text, is obviously the same with that, in the
passages quoted above; being more forcible than a simple affirmation would have
been, without some note of asseveration proceeding. It is as if it had been
said, Verily, or, surely, there is no evil in a city, and the Lord has not
done it.

HOWEVER, to prevent a dangerous error here, it must be particularly
remembered, that by "evil" in the text, is not meant moral evil, or sin; but
only natural, viz. pain, affliction and calamity. It cannot be supposed, that
the prophet intended to attribute any other evil to God, as the author of it,
besides the latter. Far be it from God, that he should do wickedly; and from
the Almighty, that he should pervert judgment! Nor can the sinful and evil
actions of men, properly be attributed to him; or to any overruling providence
of his, considered as their impulsive cause, or as making them become
necessary. Let no man say [therefore] when he is tempted, I am tempted of God:
for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin. James 1. 13* 14, 15.
This is the account which the apostle gives of the origin of sin, or moral
evil: beyond which, if we pretend to go, in the way of speculation and
refinement; we shall probably, at best, only amuse ourselves, and perhaps not
be innocent. If God is not properly said, even to "tempt" men to do evil; much
less can it be truly said, that he compels them to do it, by any secret energy,
or operation, of his. We are doubtless, therefore, to understand the prophet as
speaking here, only of natural evil, in contradistinction from moral: So that
it will amount to this, that God is the author of all those calamities and
sufferings, which at any time befall a city, or community. They are not to be
looked on as the effects of chance, or accident; which are but empty names; but
as proceeding ultimately from him, the supreme governor of the world; and this,
even though they are more immediately and visibly owing to the folly, or vice and
wickedness, of men.

To say, in this sense, that there is no evil in a city, which the Lord has
not done, is indeed no more, in effect, than to assert the universal government
and providence of God; which, I suppose, we all believe, whatever difficulties
may attend our speculations on the subject. If God is the supreme ruler of the
world, and exercises such a universal government over it, as the scriptures
every where suppose and teach, and as nothing but folly or impiety can deny; he
must, in some sense, either mediately or immediately, be the author of whatever
events come to pass in it. We cannot suppose that there are any evils, or
calamities, whether public or private, in the production whereof he has no
concern, and which he did not design, without a partial denial of his dominion
and providence. For if any events come to pass, contrary to, or beside his
design, or without, and independently of him; his dominion is not an universal
dominion, nor does his kingdom rule over all, as the scriptures assert. These
events, if any such there are, are plainly exceptions to the universality of
his government; being, according to the supposition itself, such as were
neither done, nor ordered by him. But surely no man but an athiest, or at least
one who disbelieves the holy scriptures, can think there are really any such
events. It is not less a dictate of reason, than it is a doctrine of scripture,
that as all things have one common Creator, they are all subject to one common
Lord, and under one supreme administration; so that nothing does, or can come
to pass, but in conformity to his will, either positive or permissive. The
denial of which must terminate, not merely in the denial of a universal
superintending providence, but of one or other of God's attributes; either his
omniscience, or his omnipotence, if not of both.

SOME public calamities are indeed, as was intimated above, more immediately
and visibly the Lord's doings than others. He is, however, to be acknowledged
as the author of them all in general; not excepting those which are brought
upon us by the instrumentality of subordinate agents. These are all subject to
his dominion and control, and dependent upon him in their various operations;
at least so far that they can do us no harm, but by his will and consent.

IT may be thought indeed by some, that God is more properly said only to
permit, than to be himself the author of those evils, whether public or
private, which are brought upon us immediately by inferior agents; or through the
wicked devices and practices of men. It is not worth while to dispute this
point, which is rather a question of words and names, than of things. For it
must be observed, that when the word permission is used in this case, it
implies in it a will and design, that the things permitted should actually come
to pass. When God is said to permit any thing, the meaning hereof is not merely
this, that he does not prevent it; for in this sense, we also might be said to
permit whatever happens throughout the universe, though it were not in our power
to prevent it: The impropriety of which way of speaking, would be obvious to
all. When we speak of God's permitting things, we mean that he does so,
knowingly and voluntarily, having at the same time power to prevent them, if he
pleased. He might doubtless, if he pleased, prevent them by an immedate
interposition; or he might have originally predisposed and ordered things
otherwise, and in such a manner, that these particular events should never have
come to pass. For which reason, God's permitting them, seems to amount to a
positive will, or determination, that they should come to pass; or at least,
not to differ very materially herefrom.

BUT not to enter into any niceties upon a subject, so intricate in its nature;
I shall content my self with observing here, that, in the language of
scripture, God is not said to permit, but to do, those things in general, which
come to pass under his government, evil as well as good. I am the Lord, says
he, and there is none else: I form the light, and create darkness: I make
peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these things. Isai. XLV. 6. 7.
The scriptures do not speak of God as an unconcerned, or inactive spectator,
of any events; but as the author of them; and particularly the author of all
the calamities which befall mankind. Only we are to take heed, that we do not so
conceive of his overruling providence, as to make him the author, or approver,
of men's sinful actions. We are to ascribe to him the most universal dominion
and agency, consistent with this necessary caution, or limitation. I say,
consistent with this; lest we should be chargeable with blaspheming God, under
the show and appearance of doing honor to him. And some there are, who could
not perhaps easily acquit themselves of this charge, in respect of the manner
in which they express themselves on the subject of God's providence and decrees.

BUT to wave every thing of a controversial nature, for which this is not, to
be sure, a proper occasion; let me here just mention a few of those many public
calamities, which God brings upon mankind from age to age. For the ways are
numerous, in which he manifests his righteous displeasure against sinful
nations; and many the evils which he brings on wicked cities and communities,
from one generation to another. He sits upon the circuit of the earth; and
all nations are before him less than nothing and vanity. All things are subject
to his control; and he makes use of them in various ways, to accomplish the
designs of his providence. Fire and hail, snow and vapor, and stormy winds,
fulfill his pleasure: and the stars in their courses, at his command, fight
against his enemies.

GOD sometimes lays cities desolate by the sword of their enemies. Numberless
instances hereof are particularly recorded in sacred story. And this is one of
the ways, in which God has often threatened to chastize a wicked and rebellious
people. This threatening was executed in a most terrible manner, even on his
chosen people Israel, after they had filled up the measure of their iniquities:
when Jerusalem was turned into an heap of ruins by the Romans, whom he armed
and sent against it.

AT other times God manifests his righteous displeasure against wicked cities
and countries, by famine. Thus he reminds his people Israel, for their warning,
of what he had formerly done against them in this way; and reproves them for
their stubbornness under his afflicting hand. I have given you cleanness of
teeth in all your cities, and want of bread -- I have withholden the rain from
you, when there were yet three months to the harvest: And I caused it to rain
on one city, and caused it not to rain on another city -- I have smitten you
with blasting and mildew. When your gardens and vineyards, and your fig trees,
and olive trees increased, the palmer-worm devoured them: yet ye have not
retarded unto me, says the Lord Amos Chap. IV.


THE pestilence is another of those terrible judgments, by which God sometimes
lays cities and countries desolate. The Israelites were often punished for
their sins in this way, as they had been before threatened. I have sent amongst
you the pestilence, says God to them, after the manner of Egypt -- and have
made the slink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not
returned unto me.

MANY cities have been destroyed by terrible earthquakes; some entirely; and
others so far, as to be lasting monuments of God's righteous displeasure.

OMITTING innumerable other calamities and judgments, by which God makes known
his wrath against wicked cities; I shall here only subjoin that of desolating
fire. Thus God threatened the king of Babylon of old* Behold, I am against thee,
O thou most proud, says the Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, and the
time that I will visit the -- And I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it
shall devour round about him. Jer. L. 31, 32.
How many cities have been thus laid in ruins? some by fire from heaven, or
mighty tempests of thunder and lighting, as Sodom and Gomorrha: Of which cities
it is said, that they are "set forth for an example, "suffering the vengeance
of eternal fire; called eternal, because those cities were never rebuilded, but
remained to all generations the monuments of God's wrath. But those fires by
which God destroys, or sorely chastizes, proud and wicked cities, are not
always thus kindled from heaven, as it were immediately by the breath of God.
They are more frequently lighted up by other means; either by treacherous
intestine enemies with design, or accidentally by other persons. But by
whatever means it comes to pass, it is not done but by the will and appointment
of God, who overrules all these events, and has, doubtless, important ends to
accomplish by them. ONE of the greatest and most terrible fires known, was that
of LONDON in the reign of Charles II. A. D. 1666. Of which the reader may
please to take the following account, extracted from Dr. Smollett's Complete
History of England.

"ABOUT this period, says he, London was exposed to a terrible disaster from a
conflagration which broke out on the third day of September, in the house of a
baker. The flames, augmented by a strongly easterly wind, raged with surprising
violence. They destroyed six hundred streets, including eighty-nine churches,
many hospitals and public edifices, and thirteen thousand two hundred private
houses. The ruins comprehended four hundred and thirty-six acres of ground. The
conflagration continued three days, notwithstanding all the endeavors that
could be used to stop its progress, the king and duke assisting personally on
horseback, from the first alarm to its total cessation. At length, when all
hope had vanished, and the wretched inhabitants were overwhelmed with
consternation and despair, it suddenly ceased, and was entirely extinguished*
after having reduced many thousand families from affluence to misery, and the
most flourishing city in Europe to a deplorable heap of rubbish. Nevertheless
the spirit of the people did not sink under this calamity. London soon rose
more beautiful from its ashes. The king -- regulated the plans of the new
streets, so as to render them more spacious and convenient than those which had
been burned. And he prohibited the use of lath and timber, as materials for the
construction of the houses. The narrowness of the streets had not only
subjected them to casualties of this nature, but also prevented a free
circulation of air, which being impregnated with animal vapors, was apt to
putrify, and produce infectious distempers, insomuch that London was scarce
ever free from a contagion; whereas no such distemper has appeared since the
city was rebuilt."




ALAS! We need not go to distant countries for examples of calamities of this
kind. This capital of the province has several times suffered severely by means
of fire: Particularly about fifty years ago, when a considerable part of the
town was reduced to ruins Upwards of an hundred buildings were then consumed.
Since which there have been diverse destructive fires in the town, though all of
them far less extensive and ruinous. All of them, I mean, excepting that of the
last week, which was doubtless by far the most terrible visitation of the kind,
that ever it experienced; whether we consider the number of the buildings, the
value of the effects consumed, or the multitude of people reduced to want and
misery hereby. Some persons of easy, comfortable fortunes, are brought at once
into a state of dependence but little better than that of beggary: Some, of
large and affluent ones, have lost the greater part of what they possessed:
Whilst others of the poorer sort have lost all; and are, for the present,
deprived of all means of getting a subsistence; so that they must either
perish, or become a public charge.

SOME circumstances preceding and attending this great disaster, are not
unworthy of our particular notice. Fires have been more frequent in the town of
late, than perhaps they have ever been in times past. It is but three or four
months since a considerable fire happened, whereby many persons were great
sufferers. At Oliver's dock; about 12 or 15 families being then burnt out.
A few weeks after this, another fire broke out; by which, though not so many
dwelling-houses were consumed, yet perhaps as much damage was sustained. At the
westerly part of the town; when two rope-walks, with their apparatus, were
destroyed; and other effects to the value of some thousands of pounds.
And for three days successively before this last, and most terrible
conflagration happened, the town was alarmed by fire. The first of these fires
broke out at a very small distance from this place; On Monday, March 17th.
it got to a great head, and threatened to lay waste this part of the town,
together with this house of prayer, the house of God, wherein we are now
assembled; on which the fire had actually taken hold. But, through the good
providence of God, this very dangerous flame was happily extinguished, without
the entire consumption of any one dwelling house: and we are again permitted,
contrary to the expectation of many, to assemble ourselves for the worship of
God, as usual, in this place. So that we have, in this respect, cause to sing
of mercy, while, in others, we sing of judgment.

THE alarm on the next day, viz. on tuesday, was very great, and not without
sufficient reason: When, by some means, the Laboratory of the royal train of
artillery here took fire, and was blown up; when the adjoining buildings took
the fire also, which was in imminent danger of being communicated to the king's
stores, in which, it is said, a large quantity of powder, charged shells, etc.
were reposited. The apprehension of the fire's making its way to these stores,
and of the fatal consequences that might thence ensue, put the town into a
general consternation. It was some time before people thought it prudent, or
advisable, to approach the fire, so as to use any methods to extinguish it.
But on further information, and a more exact knowledge of the situation and
circumstances of things, they applied themselves to the business with great
alertness and resolution. And thus this fire was extinguished, when it had done
only a small part of the damage that was apprehended from it; though in itself
that was not inconsiderable.

THE day following, Wednesday the 19th.
different parts of the town, at different times, were alarmed with the cry of
fire. It did not, however, then get to a considerable head any where, so as to
become dangerous: Only as there is always some danger from a fire, though but
small, in such a town as this; especially in such a dry and windy time as it
was then.

BY these fires was ushered in, that far greater, and more fatal one, which has
left so considerable a part of the town in desolation and ruin. It was
discovered between one and two o'clock on Thursday morning, the 20th.
And there is one thing that deserves to be particularly mentioned with
reference hereto; as it may tend to lead us into a proper consideration of the
providence of God in this affair. When this fire broke out, and for some time
before, it was almost calm. And had it continued so, the fire might probably
have been extinguished in a short time, before it had done much damage;
considering the remarkable resolution and dexterity of many people amongst us
on such occasions. But it seems that God, who had spared us before beyond our
hopes, was now determined to let loose his wrath upon us; to rebuke us in his
anger, and chasten us in his hot displeasure. In order to the accomplishing of
which design, soon after the fire broke out, he caused his wind to blow; and
suddenly raised it to such an height, that all endeavors to put a stop to the
raging flames, were ineffectual: Though there seems to have been no want, either
of any pains or prudence, which could be expected at such a time. The Lord had
purposed, and who should disannul it? His hand was stretched out, and who
should turn it back. Isai. XIV. 27.
"When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides his
face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a nation, or against
a man only." Job XXXIV. 29.
It had been a dry season for some time; unusually so for the time of year. The
houses, and other things, were as fuel prepared for the fire to feed on: And
the flames were suddenly spread, and propagated to distant places. So that, in
the space of a few hours, the fire swept all before it in the direction of the
wind; spreading wider and wider from the place where it began, till it reached
the water. Nor did it stop even there, without the destruction of the wharfs,
with several vessels lying at them, and the imminent danger of many others. One
large ship, and eight or nine other vessels were burnt: One of which was
loaded, or partly loaded, with the king's ordnance-stores, ready to sail. The
South-battery on the water's side was also destroyed; when some barrels of
powder taking fire, the explosion was heard, and even the shock felt, at many
miles distance.
We may now, with sufficient propriety, adopt the words of the Psalmist, and
apply them to our own calamitous circumstances, Come, behold the works of the
Lord, what desolation he has made in the earth. So melancholy a scene,
occasioned by fire, was, to be sure, never beheld before in America; at least
not in the British dominions. And when I add, God grant that the like may never
be beheld again, I am sure you will all say, Amen!

IN short, this must needs be considered, not only as a very great, but public
calamity. It will be many years before this town, long burdened with so great,
not to say, disproportionate, a share of the public expenses, will recover
itself from the terrible blow. Nor will this metropolis only be affected and
prejudiced hereby. The whole province will feel it. For such are the
dependencies and connexions in civil society, regularly constituted, that one
part of a community cannot be much hurt, without detriment to the rest: As in
the human body, if one member suffer, all the other members suffer with it.
Especially, if the HEAD be sick, or maimed, the whole body will soon feel the
effects hereof, and partake of its sufferings. And whatever some weak, or
envious persons may imagine, the good of the province in general, is very
closely connected with the welfare, and flourishing condition of this CAPITAL:
So that if it should fall into decay and ruin, the most remote parts of the
country would very soon feel the bad effects of it.

AT whatever time this disaster had befallen us, it would have been a very
great one: But it is particularly so at present, when both the town and country
are so much exhausted by public taxes, especially the former: When we have such
a load of debt lying upon us; a load still increasing, instead of lessening;
and when the season of the year is just coming on, for prosecuting our military
designs and operations. This calamity could not well have befallen us at any
time, or conjuncture, wherein we should have been less able to bear up under
it, and surmount the difficulties occasioned by it. But without any reference
to these peculiar circumstances, which enhance the misfortune, the loss or
damage, considered in itself, is so great* that it cannot be exactly computed
in so short a time as that since the calamity befell us. In a vote which passed
the Great and General Court on the saturday after the late fire, it is said to
appear on the best information that could in so short a time be obtained, that
there were consumed one hundred seventy-four dwelling-houses and tenements, and
one hundred seventy-five warehouses, shops and other buildings, with a great
part of the furniture, besides large quantities of merchandise, and the stock
and tools of many tradesmen; that the loss, upon a moderate computation, cannot
be less than one hundred thousand pounds sterling; and -- that the number of
families inhabiting the aforementioned houses, was at least two hundred and
twenty; three quarters of whom are by this misfortune rendered incapable of
subsisting themselves, and a great number of them reduced to extreme poverty,
and require immediate relief. For which charitable purpose three thousand
pounds currency, being about two thousand two hundred and fifty pounds
sterling, was voted to be drawn out of the public treasury; and his Excellency
the Governor desired to send briefs throughout the province, recommending a
general contribution for the unhappy sufferers.


IT highly concerns us rightly to improve this visititation of providence, and
to conduct ourselves properly under it. This will be, not only our wisdom, but
our greatest security against public calamities and disasters for the future,
whether of this, or any other kind. We should neither despise the chastening of
the Lord, nor faint when we are rebuked of him.

Now, this being truly a public, as well as great calamity, I shall, in the
FIRST place, make some reflections upon it, which concern us all in common*
SECONDLY, I shall direct my discourse particularly to those amongst us, who
have been more immediate sufferers therein. And THIRDLY, To those, whose
dwellings and substance have been preserved; and who are not directly involved
in this calamity.

FIRST, IT becomes us all in general, seriously to regard the hand and
providence of God in this evil that has befallen us. This evil, this great
evil, has not surely come upon us, but by his appointment, and according to his
sovereign pleasure. Various conjectures have been made, and rumors spread
abroad, concerning the particular means, by which this raging and destructive
fire was first kindled up. Which of them is right, or whether either of them be
so or not, I am not able to tell: Nor is this very material to my present
design. By whatever means this calamitous event has come to pass, we are to
look still higher; to the great Author and disposer of all things: For the Lord
himself has done it. We ought ultimately to regard him therein, if there be
any such thing as a providence superintending human affairs. Except the Lord
keep the city, the watchman waketh in vain: It is vain for us to rise up early,
or sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows. And the first thing requisite, in
order to a due improvement of this visitation, is a fixed, firm persuasion,
that God's hand and counsel determined it to be done; or that it is really a
visitation from him. We cannot proceed a step, in the way of religious
reflection upon it, unless we lay this down first as a certain principle.

WE ought, in the next place, to acknowledge the justice and righteousness of
God, in bringing this sore calamity upon us: For the Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works. Justice and judgment are the habitation of
his throne, not only when the light of his countenance is lifted up, and shines
upon us in our prosperity; but also when clouds and darkness are round about
him, and we are overwhelmed with adversity. God does not afflict willingly, or
grieve the children of men, even when they have incurred his just displeasure:
Much less does he wantonly punish the innocent. We may assure ourselves, it is
not without just and sufficient provocation, that he has appeared thus against
us. It becomes us therefore to be humble and submissive under his chastening
hand; under this great frown of his providence. For wherefore should a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins!

THIS is a season, wherein it doubtless becomes us all seriously to examine our
ways, in order to discover, as far as may be, what are the special grounds and
reasons of God's displeasure against us, and of his contending with us in so
terrible a manner* Indeed this general consideration, that we are sinful
creatures in common with the rest of mankind, were plainly sufficient to
justify God's dealings with us, even though this calamity had been far greater
than it is. However, the holy scriptures give us reason to think, that God
seldom, or never, brings very great and public calamities upon a community,
unless it is for sins of a very heinous and provoking nature. In which respect,
there seems to be a wide and material difference between the conduct of
providence toward nations, or communities, and toward particular persons. For
with regard to the latter, this certainly will not hold true; the best men
being often the greatest sufferers in this world. All things come alike to all;
and there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, if we speak with
reference to individuals, in this present state: So that no man knows either
love or hatred from all that is before him; either by the prosperity he enjoys,
or the adversity which he suffers. Which seems not applicable to communities;
at least, not easily reconcilable with the scripture account of God's conduct
toward them, to say nothing of what we are taught by experience.

I PRETEND not to penetrate so far into the views and designs of providence, as
to be able particularly and positively to determine, for what reasons it is
that God has thus sorely chastized us. "His judgments are a great deep." We
may, however, conclude in general, that whatever sins are most prevalent
amongst us, these are sins which have contributed most to bring this great
calamity upon us. In going thus far, there is no presumption. No particular
sins, or sinners, are indeed to be excluded, as not contributing to bring
calamities upon a people, whenever God sends them. However, I suppose we are to
look for the primary, or chief causes of common calamities, not in a
comparatively small number of particular persons, however impious or
profligate; but in the main body of a people. Common judgments must ordinarily
be supposed to to have some common cause.

AND are there not some sins, with which we are very generally chargeable? If
any one should assert, that we were generally profane swearers, whoremongers,
drunkards, adulterers, thieves or liars, he would doubtless himself deserve no
better a character than that of a false accuser, and shameless calumniator.
There, are indeed, many such sinners amongst us; but it is to be hoped their
number is small* in comparison of those who are guiltless of any of these
crimes. But suppose any one should say, that pride was a sin very generally
prevalent amongst us, would he merit the character of a false accuser? If
another were to assert, that we were generally addicted to luxury, would he be
a calumniator? If a third were to tax us with being generally selfish, and
greedy of gain, without a due and proportionate regard to the welfare of the
public, or of our neighbor; could we truly deny the charge? If a fourth were
to accuse us of formality in our religion, of laying too great stress on some
things of little or no importance, and comparatively neglecting the weightier
matters of the law and gospel, could we justly deny this to be our character? I
do not myself bring these general accusations; but it would not be amiss for us
seriously to consider, how far they might be just. If there be a real and
sufficient foundation for them, we need not be at any loss for such causes of
God's displeasure, as are common to us.

NOR would it be improper for us, on this occasion, to inquire, whether we have
been duly thankful to God for the signal mercies and deliverances which he has
vouchsafed to us in times past. He has shown great favor and kindness to us at
sundry times* and in diverse manners. Though he has often contended with us by
fire heretofore; yet how often have very threatening fires been seasonably
extinguished; and not permitted to prevail against us. Have we generally been
thankful, properly thankful, for these favorable appearances of providence for
us, in the times of danger and fear? If not, our ingratitude in this respect,
may be supposed one special reason of the late terrible calamity. God's design
may be, to make us more sensible of former mercies, by the greatness of the
evil he has now brought upon us.

GOD has repeatedly visited us with earthquakes, the most alarming in their
nature of any of his providential dispensations. However his goodness and
compassion have still spared us in these times of our distress, when we had
reason to apprehend the most awful and fatal effects of these visitations;
particularly of one of them, a few years since: Though about the same time, the
most amazing desolations were wrought by earthquakes in some other parts of the
world. Have we taken proper notice of his dealings with us in this respect? If
not, this may be another reason of the great calamity now brought upon us.

MOREOVER: Our enemies, during the late and present war, have been forming
dangerous designs against us, even against this metropolis. But God has
repeatedly blasted their designs; and has lately given us the most remarkable
success against them: So that our once just apprehensions from them, are
vanished away; and even turned into triumph over them. Have we been duly
thankful for these deliverances and mercies? If not, this may be one cause, why
he has now destroyed by fire, what he would not permit the enemy to destroy.

PERHAPS we have rejoiced with an unchristian, and inhuman joy, in the
distresses and calamities lately brought upon our enemies; when great part of
their country was ravaged, their villages burnt, their capital city besieged,
and partly consumed by fire. If we have rejoiced in their misery with an
unrelenting* savage temper of mind, God may have been hereby provoked to bring
this great evil upon us; which, in its kind, bears some resemblance to what
they have suffered. Or if we have not rejoiced in the misery of our enemies
with an unchristian, barbarous joy, perhaps we have triumphed over them with
unchristian pride; and been vainly elated with the successes God has given us,
instead of being humbly thankful to him therefore. And if this be the case, God
doubtless designed to check our pride by this visitation, and make us think
more soberly of ourselves.

BUT if there are no particular sins, with which we are chargeable in common;
yet are we not all in general chargeable with some? some of us with one vice,
or misdemeanour, and some with another? If so, this is a sufficient ground for
our being thus chastized by a common calamity. And we were doubtless ripe for
some signal punishment from the hand of providence, when this great evil came
upon us. Many atrocious sins, and flagrant abominations, are found in the midst
of us. To what an amazing pitch of wickedness and impudence, some persons
amongst us were arrived, is evident even from some transactions at the time of
the late terrible fire. For, instead of being affected with so melancholy a
providence, and charitably assisting people in saving their effects, some there
were, so hardened and shameless, as to take the opportunity of the general
confusion* to steal and rifle their neighbors goods! One would hardly have
thought it possible for people to be so wicked, impious and abandoned. I hope,
indeed, there were not many such; and that these were not born and educated
amongst us, though I am not certain. But wherever they were born and bred, they
are certainly a disgrace, not only to their own country, but to the world
itself, and to human nature.

IT does not become us, even the best of us, on such an occasion as this, to
justify* or excuse ourselves; or to attribute this public calamity wholly to
the sins of others. Probably none of us can entirely acquit ourselves of having
contributed to it, by our own particular miscarriages. And it highly concerns
us all, seriously to reflect upon our past conduct; and to humble ourselves
under the righteous hand of God.

WE may all learn some very useful and important lessons from this visitation,
if we duly attend to it. We are hereby more particularly reminded of the vanity
of worldly riches* and the folly of depending on, or placing our chief
happiness in them. How suddenly do they take to themselves wings, and fly away,
as an eagle toward heaven, leaving the possessors of them destitute, not only
of superfluous wealth, but even of those things which are needful for the body!
This is one of those dispensations of providence, which give a particular force
and energy to those words of the apostle -- Charge them that are rich, that
they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly
all things to enjoy: And also to that more general admonition of our Savior
himself -- Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
do corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves
treasure in heaven, etc.

To finish these general reflections: We are all in common admonished by this
visitation of providence, to consider and amend our ways. Doubtless the end of
our being thus visited and chastized, is our reformation. Whatever serious
reflections we may at present make upon this calamitous event; yet the great
design of it will not be answered upon us, if we continue unreformed. This is
often the case. Pharaoh and his people were in some measure humbled, at the
time when the plagues were upon them. But they soon forgot the judgments of
heaven; and became more hardened afterward. This was sometimes the case also
with the people of Israel. Thou have stricken them, says the prophet, but they
have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction. They have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to
return. If we are not reclaimed from our sins and vices by this calamity, we
have reason to apprehend greater and heavier ones: God's anger will not be
turned away; but his hand will still be stretched out against us. O let us not,
by our impenitence and hardness of heart under this correction* provoke God to
smite us with greater severity; lest, perhaps, we perish under his hand, while
there is none to deliver! But, on the other hand, if we duly lay to heart this
sore chastisement, and return to God, he will doubtless return to us in mercy.
Come then, and let us return unto the Lord: For he has torn, and he will heal
us* he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Though he has visited our
transgressions with a rod, and our iniquities with stripes; yet his loving
kindness will he not utterly take from us; nor suffer his faithfulness to fail.

BUT I was in the next place,

SECONDLY, To direct my discourse particularly to those amongst us, who have
been the more immediate sufferers in this common calamity. My brethren, I trust
we all in general heartily sympathize with you, and bear a part in your
affliction. But if it concerns us all in common, seriously to consider the hand
of God in this visitation, allow me to remind you, that it more especially
concerns you to do so, on whom this great calamity, by his appointment, has
more immediately fallen. To us, this providence more than whispers; to you it
speaks still louder, even in thunder. I would, however, be very far from
insinuating, that the unhappy persons who are the immediate subjects of this
calamity, are in general more guilty in the sight of God than others. This
would be at once uncharitable in itself, and a plain violation of a rule, or
maxim, which our Savior laid down on an occasion not altogether unlike to the
present. But still you must acknowledge* that although the call and admonition of
providence in this visitation, be to all of us in common; yet to you it is more
direct and immediate, as well as louder. You are especially admonished to
examine your ways, in this day of visitation and trial. And if you should
disregard this providence, you would doubtless be more inexcusable than others.

IT becomes you to bear your losses, however great, with patience, and humble
resignation to the will of God: For he it is, you will remember, that has
brought this evil upon you. Nor has he taken any thing from you* which he did
not first give to you. All that is in the heaven and in the earth, is his: both
riches and honor are of him 1 Chorn. XXIX. 11, 12.
. And you are sensible that all his worldly and temporal gifts, are gifts only
during his good pleasure: Not absolute, perpetual grants; but such as he has an
indisputable right to recall, at whatever time, and in whatever manner, he sees
fit. You have therefore no reasonable ground of complaint; but ought meekly to
acquiesce in what he has done. It were not amiss for you on this occasion, to
reflect on the much greater losses and sufferings of Job; and on the manner in
which he conducted himself under them. He fell down upon the ground, and
worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb; and naked shall I
return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the
name of the Lord. In all which Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. Chap.
I.


God has doubtless wise and holy, and even gracious ends, to answer by visiting
you in this manner. The visitation is particularly calculated to wean your
affections from this evil world; and excite you to seek, with greater
diligence, the true, spiritual riches. Perhaps your hearts have been heretofore
too much set upon the world; and those riches which will not "profit in the day
of wrath." If this be the case, God has shown you your error by this
visitation of his providence; and calls upon you hereby, for the future to set
your affections only on those things that are above, where Jesus Christ sits
at his right hand. It will be happy for you, if you make so reasonable and wise
improvement of your worldly losses; they will then be the greatest gain to you
in the end. Any accession to, or increase of your virtues, is of far more
benefit and importance to you, than thousands of silver or of gold would be, or
all worldly riches. These are corruptible and transitory: but that is a
treasure that fades not away, incorruptible and eternal. And a good man, in
the language of the apostle, equally bold and beautiful, having nothing,
possesses all things!

THOSE whose habitations and wealth have been consumed by this desolating fire,
have still great cause of thankfulness, that their lives have been preserved.
The life is more than meat, and the body than raiment. Considering the time
when this fire broke out* being the dead of the night, when people were in
their beds, and some of them on beds of sickness; considering the violence of
the wind, and the rapidity with which the flames spread, and caught from place
to place; the wide extent of them, and the general confusion and consternation
which they occasioned; considering these things, I say, it would not have been
strange, if many persons had perished together with their substance, and mixed
their own ashes with that of their dwellings. But no life was lost. In this
respect, God remembered mercy in the midst of judgment; which demands our
grateful acknowledgments; and particularly the thanks of those, who were in
danger of being consumed in their dwellings, as many of the unhappy sufferers
were.

BESIDES: I take it for granted, that few, or none of you, my brethren and
usual hearers, have lost all your worldly substance, as some others are said to
have done. Let me therefore exhort you to be thankful to God for what he has
left you still possessed of; especially if that be sufficient for you to
subsist comfortably upon, in the way of honest industry. Though you ought not to
despise the chastening of the Lord in the losses you have sustained; yet it
becomes you to acknowledge his goodness in what is left you. It is not a great
deal that is necessary to the ends of life: virtue, and moderate desires, are
satisfied with little; and having food and raiment, you ought to be therewith
content. We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out of it, how much soever we possess: Though if we could, it would be
of no advantage to us. In heaven we should not need, but despise and neglect
it; and in hell it would not alleviate our torments.

BUT if any of you should have lost all your worldly substance by this
calamity, you ought not, however, to despond under this trial, or to faint,
being thus rebuked of the Lord; but still to place your hope and trust in him,
who hears the young ravens when they cry. O fear the Lord, ye his faints* for
there is no want to them that fear him. The young lions do lack, and suffer
hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing Psalm XXXIV.
9, 10.
. I reminded you above of the sufferings and patience of Job* let me now remind
you of the "end of the Lord" with respect to him; that the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy James V. 11.
. That good man saw at length an happy issue of his troubles. For "the Lord
blessed the latter end of Job more than the beginning Chap. XLII. ver. 12.
"* You may from hence take some encouragement: God is able to make all things
abound to you. And it is a circumstance not unworthy to remind you of, for your
consolation* that you live in a country* at least in a town, wherein there is a
general disposition in the people to afford necessary relief to the poor and
afflicted: So that you have no reason to be under any anxiety of mind
respecting a livelihood; especially if you enjoy bodily health and strength,
with ability to exercise some lawful calling. But whatever be your condition in
this world, godliness with contentment will be, not only your duty, but your
greatest gain. You should endeavor to be prepared for whatever circumstances
God shall order for you; and to this end, beseech him to give you the temper of
the holy apostle, who said, I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith
to be content: I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every
where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and to suffer need Phil. IV. 11, 12.
. Even the Son of man had not where to lay his head, though the foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests. -- And if the same mind be in you, which
was in Christ Jesus* you will bear the extremest poverty without repining. Lest
therefore you should be weary or faint in your minds, consider him, who "though
he were rich, yet for your sake became poor": Learn of him to be truly "meek
and lowly in heart; and whatever be your outward condition, you will then "find
rest unto your souls"; such rest as the greatest worldly prosperity cannot give!

THIRDLY: Let me now turn my discourse to those, whose habitations and
substance have been preserved in this time of desolation; especially to those,
who have been in imminent danger of being sharers with others therein. As this
calamity is from God, so it is he who has directed it where to fall, and
prescribed its bounds and limits. You should therefore be sensible, that he has
been your preserver; and made this distinction between you and others. If
others ought to acknowledge his providence in the calamity which has befallen
them, certainly it is not less incumbent on us to acknowledge it in our own
preservation. Had God, who commands the wind when and where to blow, given a
different direction to it* our habitations might have been consumed, while
those of the present unhappy sufferers were preserved. I mention this
circumstance particularly, because it is familiar and obvious; plainly showing*
that it is God* and not man, who has made this difference; an important truth,
which might be evinced by other considerations also, were there time and
occasion for it.

NOR ought we to attribute our preservation to any supposed merit, or superior
goodness in ourselves; or the sufferings of our neighbors, to any greater
guilt or demerit in them. Our Savior seems to have designed a general caution
against such imaginations, in a passage which was alluded to above. When
certain persons told him of some Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with
their sacrifices, expecting* probably* that he would have attributed this to
the great wickedness of those Galileans in comparison with others, his reply
was -- Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay -- Or those eighteen, on
whom the tower of Siloam fell* and slew them; think ye that they were sinners
above all men that dwelt at Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: But except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish. Our Savior's meaning here is not, that those
Galileans, and those Jews, were not sinners; or that they did not justly suffer
such things on account of their sins. Neither of these things can be supposed.
But the obvious design of this remarkable passage is, to teach us that God, in
his providential government of the world, does not always single out the
greatest sinners, to make them the greatest sufferers in the sight of men; and,
consequently, that we ought not to conclude ourselves more righteous than
others, merely because we at present escape those judgments which befall others.
God will finally give to every man according to his deeds, in weight and
measure, and exact proportion. But at present he acts as a sovereign: I mean,
in the outward dispensations of his providence toward particular persons;
agreeably to the observations of Solomon, mentioned in the former part of this
Discourse, that "all things come alike to all; that there is one event to the
righteous and the wicked; and that no man knows either love or hatred from
all that is before him." A greater than Solomon has confirmed these remarks on
the conduct of divine providence. We should therefore take heed, that we do not
attribute to our own superior piety or virtue, what we ought to ascribe solely
to the sovereign pleasure of God, and his distinguishing favor toward us. For
to apply our Savior's language and reasoning above, to the melancholy
occasion before us: Suppose ye that those who have lately suffered such things*
were sinners above all that dwell in BOSTON? I tell you, Nay! At least* we have
no reason to think them so* on this account. Many who have escaped this
disaster, and perhaps we ourselves, are as great, or greater sinners; and
except we repent, some worse thing may come unto us.

WHAT shall we render unto the Lord for his distinguishing goodness to us in
this respect? It becomes us to render praise to him; for "whose offers
praise, says the Lord, glorifieth me." We should also show our gratitude to
God, by devoting ourselves* and all we have, to his honor and service. His
goodness and forbearance lead Us to repentance, while his righteous severity is
exercised toward others for the same general end. Us he draws with the cords
of love, while he scourges others, not more guilty, with the rod of
affliction. And shall we despise his goodness, forbearance and long-suffering!
If there be any peculiar audaciousness, or presumption, in despising the
chastening of the Lord; there is certainly a peculiar baseness and
disingenuity, in despising his goodness. We and our substance, have been as it
were plucked out of that fire, by which others have suffered so much. Let us
therefore take heed, lest we incur that heavy censure, Amos Chap. IV. I have
overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha; and YE were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet have ye not returned unto me, says
the Lord!

WILL it not particularly become us to show our gratitude to God for his
distinguishing mercy to us* by cheerfully imparting of our substance for the
relief of our indigent brethren? The government has already done something for
their present relief. But there being so many of these unhappy sufferers, they
will doubtless stand in need of farther succor and assistance, before they are
in any method of supporting themselves. And God forbid, that any of us who have
escaped this calamity, should be backward to distribute, or unwilling to
communicate, as there may be occasion, and we have ability! One reason, we may
well suppose, why God has spared our substance, is, that we might be in a
capacity to relieve and assist those, whom his holy providence has rendered
objects of our charity. It is partly for their sakes, not wholly for our own,
that our substance has been preserved. Nor can I indeed doubt, but that the
people of the town will be generally disposed to liberality on this occasion*
especially when I reflect, how largely and cheerfully they contributed a few
months since, on a similar occasion. About a thousand pounds lawful money was
collected in the several religious assemblies in the town, for the relief of
the sufferers by the late fire near Oliver's dock: A large sum, considering the
impoverished and declining state of the town, and the greatness of the public
taxes. And though the disposition of the people be still the same, and the
present occasion much greater, and more urgent than the former; yet it will
naturally be remembered* that our ability is now less than it was then. The
more the town then gave away, the less it now has to give: And many who* as we
suppose, contributed largely on that occasion* are so far from being able to do
the like now, that they need relief themselves.

It is to be hoped therefore, that our friends and brethren who live in the
country, where their situation secures them so effectually against calamities
of this nature, will seriously consider the present distressed condition of the
town* and show their christian benevolence on this occasion* agreeably to the
Brief which his Excellency the Governor has issued out. And we are the more
encouraged to expect this, by reflecting how cheerfully some of them made
collections for the poor amongst us, at the time of the last general small pox
in the town. -- "With such sacrifices God is well pleased."




BUT it is time to draw to a conclusion of this discourse. When God's judgments
are abroad in the earth, it is then more especially incumbent upon the
inhabitants thereof to learn righteousness. If we do not regard the past, or
present, there may probably be other, and heavier ones, in store for us. At
least it is certain, that the wicked shall not finally escape the righteous
judgment of God. For behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all
the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble; and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. Mal. IV. 1.
Such a fire as we have lately seen, especially in the night, diffuses general
terror and distress. What then will be the consternation, how great the
amazement, of a guilty world, when the Son of man shall be revealed from heaven
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
his gospel! The old world perished by water: But the heavens and the earth that
now are, are reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men. And even these lesser fires and conflagrations, which strike us
with so much awe, may naturally remind us of that general, and far more awful
one, which the prophets and apostles have foretold; when the earth itself, with
the works that are therein, shall be burnt up, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat. -- Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness?
looking for* and hasting unto, the coming of the day of God! -- To the wicked
this will be a day of unutterable woe; but to them that fear his name, and
serve him, a day of triumph and exultation. Happy are they who diligently
prepare for it. But, alas! there are many, who will not be persuaded, that
there is such a day approaching; scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were from the beginning And many of those who
profess to believe it, do not practically regard it, minding only earthly
things: and such as these will accordingly be overwhelmed with a sudden and
remediless destruction. For as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also
in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives,
they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark: and
the flood came, and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of
Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought* they sold, they planted, they
builded: But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven; and destroyed them all: Even thus shall it be in the day
when the Son of man is revealed! Luke XVII. 26 -- 30.


THE END.
Boston, April 1. 1760
In about a Fortnight will be Published, And Sold by R. Draper in
Newbury-Street, and Edes and Gill in Queen Street.

PRACTICAL DISCOURSES delivered on Occasion of the EARTHQUAKES in November,
1755. Wherein is particularly shown, by a Variety of Arguments,

THE great Importance of turning our Feet unto GOD's Testimonies, and of making
Haste to keep his Commandments;

Together with the Reasonableness, the Necessity, and great Advantage, of a
serious Consideration on our Ways.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the WEST-Church in BOSTON.


