A JOURNAL Of the CAPTIVITY of JEAN LOWRY AND HER CHILDREN, Giving an ACCOUNT
of her being taken by the INDIANS, the 1st of APRIL 1756, from WILLIAM Mc.
CORD'S, In ROC^Y-SPRING SETTLEMENT in PENNSYLVANIA, With an ACCOUNT of the
Hardships she Suffered, etc.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Corner of F^^^ and
Market-Streets, 1760.

A JOURNAL, etc.
THE Indians having made several Incursions upon Pennsylvania, and the
neighboring Provinces, all who lived in the frontier Parts, were dismayed and
mostly Assembled the adjacent Familys unto some House, they apprehended most
convenient, and raised a kind of Stockade about the House they Assembled unto:
Such a sort of Strength was, by a few Neighbors, raised about William M'Card's
House, in Rocky-Spring Settlement: And thither my Husband ( John Lowry) had
carried me and our Six Children, thinking it a place of greater Safty than our
own Cottage: But alas! we were soon convinced of the Contrary.

For on the 1st of April 1756, about One o'clock in the Afternoon, the Savage
Indians surrounded the House. My Husband being below and a good Marks-man, (as
I Have since been informed) killed one of the Indians, and was instantly killed
himself. And there being no other Man at that Time present, the Barbarians
rushed into the House, (the Women and Children were mostly up Stairs,)
plundered the House of what they pleased, and seized two of my Children that
were below. Then most rudely calling unto us that were above. the young Indians
shooting Arrows in at the upper Windows, which wounded some: Then suddenly they
set the House on fire, which was quickly all in a Blaze, while with my Three
small Children, I was still in the upper Room in the utmost Confussion of Mind
and Body. Oh! how my tortured Mind was hurried! Horrer of the Indians
Barbarities and Rudnesses made me think of pre^^ring Death unto such a
miserable Life: But here I had many Deaths to suffer in one: It Is impossible
for me to relate the thousandth Part of my Agony for my trembling Children: But
divine Providence determined me to deliver myself and Children up into their
cruel Hands, not knowing how the Lord might overruled them and dispose of us,
rather than instantly perish in the devouring flames: For now we were
suffocated with the Smoke, bursting through every where upon us, and terrified
with the Thundering noise of the ascending Flame. Another distressing thing to
my overwhelmed Mind at this Time was, my being big with Child, and knowing that
it was the usual Indian Manner, to kill every Woman they took in that
Condition; yet I adventured to open a Window and called out to the Barbarians
to receive my Children, while I put them ^ut by it, which they did, and
afterward came out myself, expecting present Death, but glory to God, I got
unlooked for Favors from them, or rather from glorious King Christ, according
to Psalm. cx. 2. they did indeed suspect me, and spoke somewhat concerning my
Condition. But what reply I made, cannot now recollect; I Am only sure that I
made conscience of Lying, but indeed its like enough there was an Endeavor to
deceive them in the Answer I made, by concealing as much as I could my
Pregnancy: Neither can I blame my Conduct in my Circumstances at that Time,
when I considered of the divine Direction unto the Prophet Sa^^el, "When God
appointed him to go to Bet^elbe^ and Anoint one of Jesse's Son's to be King
instead of Saul. 1 Samuel xvi. 2. etc. But leaving such disputes to such, as God
has qualified for them, I proceed in my Narration. I was now in the Hands of
the Savage Indians with my five Children, they immediately Commanded us
Prisoners to March right over the Blew Mountain; so many of them going before
us, and so many after us, as they thought proper. Oh what a distressing Journey
was this, to an oppares'd and overwhelmed Mind! my Husband was Slain, his
Sealp, with others carried before me by an Indian; his Gun, which I well knew,
they had and seemed to prize much, and my five dear Children; with much
Difficulty I got to the Top of the Mountain, where we were allowed to rest for
some Time, and then were hurried down the Backside of it, which was no less
Difficult than ascending its opposite Side, considering its Steepness and the
huge Rocks, low Brush and old Trees and no path: When we arrived at the Bottom,
it was equally distressing to poor me, being one continued Mire; where we loged
that Night, but was obliged again next Morning to ascend a Mountain no less
Difficult than the former, while my barbarous Masters suffered some young
Indians to whip and push us along. Thus, near three Days was I hurried over
Mountains and miry Vales.

But on the 5th of the Month, being the Lords Day, about 50 Men, many of them
my former Neighbors, came upon us, about Sun rise or sooner, and fired upon
the Indians: At the first Attack only one Indian was killed and another
wounded, upon which they all fled, and were soon ^id among the Laurel, (a great
deal of it growing it the Place) our People then came up and untied me, and
removed us to a rising Ground at a little distance: No expressions can
sufficiently show my Joy, when instead of Savage Indians I found myself in the
midst of Friends and Neighbors, who had Assembled so quickly and pursued so
diligently for our Rescue: But alas! my Joy was very short; for while our
People was busy in untying myself and Children, taking care of us, none of the
Prisoners being bound besides me that Night, as I can remember, just then did
our savage Enemy's return upon and surround our People; this gave them great
Advantage, although our People did the best they then could for two Hours. A
great many of our People were killed and wounded: One poor Man they caught
alive, and bound him to a small Tree, so soon as our People were fled; they
brought me about 200 Perches back to the fire Place, that I might behold the
poor Man tortured, here my trembling Soul was in hazard of quiting the Body:
Yet this I was forced by the cruel Savages to endure; and glory to God in the
highest, he enabled beyond all Expectation. For being seated before the Tree
unto which the poor Man was bound, I heard him say every thing he could think
of, to excite them to pity and be ^ava^^rable unto him; at which they only
Laughed, and immediately fell to their dreadful Barbarity, first they Scalp'd
him alive, and thus made the miserable Mortal suffer many Deaths in one. But
his mi^^y was far form being over. They heated their Daggers in the fire and
pushed them into the f^^shy parts of his Body, causing the poor Creature to
roar in the most pi^iful Manner, which with they seemed quite pleased. They
repeated this last torture about two Hours. He looked most (...) at me, (when
he saw his life was to be taken away) and beged me to pray unto God for him,
that he might (...) his Soul in Mercy, and deliver him from this world's
Misery. When I expected the poor creature had been dead; his Body appearing
half R^usted and one dismal Gore with Blood; they loosed him from the Tree, and
Cursed him, charging him to Run; which, to my great Surprise, he did, several
Perches: But they pursued and threw their Tommahawk's in him, which ended his
miserable Life. Its easier for any considering Person to imagine, than for me
to tell what Horror I felt at this inhuman Barbarity, which I was obliged to
behold, his Looks, his Groans, his Shrieks pierced my Heart, and I expected to
be immediately to used: But God had mercifully ordered otherwise.

About Twelve o'Clock this Day, the Indians removed from the distressing Place
both to me and many of my former Neighbors and Countrymen, who fell gallantly
Fighting there. I cannot help mentioning one Thing an Indian said unto me, at
this Time, viz. the Night after we were taken, before the last mentioned
Skirmish, standing up among all the Twenty-one Captives and his Savage Brethren
with a fierce Countenance, he said "Now God has delivered you all into our
Hands, and not one of us hurt. -- But we knew one was Shot dead at the first
Attack, -- howb it was fact, that for our many Sins, no doubt a just God
delivered us into their cruel Hands -- This I had oftentimes before this
thought of. -- I further Mind the cruel Savages, when calling me to behold the
Torturing of the poor Man, an Indian struck me with the Buttend of his Gun,
which occasioned my being in a Swoon for some Time; but hearing them call me
again, got up and when come to the Place where they were Torturing the Man, one
Indian gave me some Bread, while another threw the Scalps in my Face, snarching
away the Bread, bid me Eat these, if I was Hungary: One of the S^in they had
beheaded, and at the same Time this bloody Head was thrown in my Face; while my
Life was in great doubt, with the Fright and late barbarous Blow I had received.

About Twelve o'Clock, as before, was obliged to Travel again, and to add to my
affliction, I was commanded to carry my own youngest Child, near two Years old;
which I did: But with very great Difficulty in my Condition, and the Deserts we
went through; Mountains and miry Vales as before; near Sun setting we came to a
fierce running Creek, which the Indians who where before me, and most of the
other Prisoners passed over: Another party of the Indians being behind me; I
was so faint and weary, the Creek so fierce and deep, that I durst not
adventure to Wade it, and so sat down until the other Party should come up to
help me over. One of the Indians, called by the rest Captain, cried to me
instantly, to come over, which I did not comply with; he Shot at me, that I
heard the Ball go over me, then thinking it as good to perish in the Water, as
among their Hands, went into the Creek, still carrying my pleasent, but
oppressing Burden upon my Back, viz. the Child. the Lord enabled me to think of
the sweet Promise of preservation when passing through Fire and Water, which
mightly encouraged at that Time, and glory to God, I got safely over. Here two
other Indians, that had been left to Hunt, got some fresh Venison, and struck
up Fire and prepared Victuals, after their Manner, and rested here all Night.

Upon the 5th Traveled as before, until Night, they lodged by a little Run.
Nothing very remarkable occured that Day; we were not allowed to halt for
Drink, but behoved without stoping to lift a little in our Hands. One thing
often and deeply affected me, was the young Child crying for Bread, and I had
none to supply her.

The 6th repeated our oppresive Traveling, over Rocks, etc. This Day Snow'd
from Morning to Night, yet was obliged to go on all that Day, save once they
stopped, and cut a few Bushes to fit upon, and soon went along upon huge Stones,
the whole Day. the Cold and hardness of steping still upon Stones this Day,
caused the Nails to come off my great Toes, some Time after this.

The 7th we moved from a small Run, (nigh to a Creek, Spring or Run, these
Pagans always, I found encamped) and traveled with great Difficulty till
Afternoon, although my Savage Masters had taken the Child from me the Day before,
they seeing that I was not able to carry her; and indeed I had load enough to
bear my own weary Body and oppressed Mind, with the Child in my Belly.

I now found that while we are at ease and struggling with the common affairs of
Life, with the cares and concerns of a small Family, we are apt to think, we
could bear no more burdens, endure no more toils; But Oh! what burdens cares
and toils did I now undergo, by divine Assistance? And yet a new course of
them took place that Afternoon, for I think it was then, the Indians came unto
one of their Hunting places, consisting of a few sorry Hutts, and I being weak
and behind with an old Indian attending me, these in the Hutts being warned,
came out against me with the most hideous Shrieks, having each a Rod prepared
(I suppose) on purpose, being painted and their Hair dressed or rather
disfigured with Feathers; they used me most cruelly, by laying upon me with
these Rods, and I being so weak and spent with former fatigue, could not run
into the Hutt; so they had leisure to exercise their Barbarous custom upon my
feeble Body, this Barbarity left many wounds upon me. Yet Glory to God, I was
supported under it, and had more Sufferings of that sort to undergo, Here. I
stayed until the 9th being Friday, I had suffered much, the two Nights and Day
I stayed here, by lying and staying without, and eating Bears flesh, and my
Body being sore Mangled as before. At this place my Son, about eight Years old
was taken from me, which distressed me more than all my former beating; with
what piercing of heart did I part with my Child unto such Barbarians; Oh! how
it S^^'d me with confusion to think he should be brought up a Pagan, after
being dedicated to the Lord? But a midst all my distressing thoughts, we
behoved to part. Being now so wearied out, the Indians gave me a Horse to ride
upon; ordered two Youths to guard me, who for diversion beat me unmercifully,
with out any reason, that I could learn, and that with their Swords too. This
sort of Travel I had until the 12th, about Noon we came up to the Kittat^ining
Town; we were informed, that an awful beating would be given us here, viz.
myself and oldest Daughter, the other Prisoners being adopted by the Indians,
and so had a Turkey feather or two carrying in their Hand, and whoever had this
token were not to be beaten: But Providence ordered otherwise, the Warriors
were out and I got only one blow here. Here I stayed only one Night and
suffered what may better be imagined than told; even the loss of my second
Daugter about six Years old, next Morning they took from me my oldest Daughter
about ten Years old. Then they carried me over the Alegenty River. In this my
distressed condition, the Lord supported me wonderfully, like him of old, who
said, and if I am bereaved, I am bereaved.

On the 17th, continuing still at aforesaid place, I heard the Death hollow,
and apprehending it was more poor Prisoners like myself coming to a beating or
to Death, I retired into a Wigwam, and presently my Son came in to me, with his
Head bloody; Although he had been just then beaten, he rejoiced to see me, caught
me by the Hand, saying, "Dear Mother, I know it is for our Sins, that God has
delivered us into the Hands of the Indians; but he is able to deliver us out of
their Hands again. I will not do as they, although they should kill me; when they
bid me sing, I sing Hymns. Immediately he was called off, parting with the
following words farewell Mammy, may be I Will be back here in four Days. But saw
him no more since; he hung weeping about my Neck the Minute he stayed. Thus my
sorrow was renewed a fresh, my three oldest Children and fellow Captives were
taken away.

Sabbath day the 18th still in the same place by the River, they ordered me to
make out a Shirt I had been at the Day before; this I refused to do, which
occasioned contresting betwixt the Indian and me, he said I was no white Woman
now, but an Indian, and that there was no Sabbath among Indians etc. he
insisted I should do his Shirt for him or die, refusing he got a Rod and laid
upon me most Inhumanly; then took his Tommehawk and the Shirt, threatening
present Death unless I would presently work. But still refusing, he threw away
both and dragged me down into the River, and held me under the Water until near
choked, three several Times; then he dragged me almost lifeless ashore and so
left me. So soon as able to stand, I crawled up to the Wigwam, and thought upon
that Days sufferings, first beaten until I fainted away, and had Water thrown
on; than threatened with present Death, at last to be three Times held down
under Water. And yet the Lord sustained me; Glory to his Name. On the 20th, I
was taken away with my poor young Children, to go to another Indian Town, in
this Journey suffered as before, only were more pinched for Provisions, howbeit
got along, having my former little cruel guard of two young Indians who busied
themselves in beating me all the Journey. Where we arrived on the 23d, at
Night, and here as I understood afterward, some Men of that Town had been
killed; and after their manner the Squaws or Wives assembled about me, and with
their fists fell upon me in a most fearful sort, with hideous shouts; while I
had to run about 30 Perches or more, and seemed to endeavor to beat my Brains
out, once I fell over a Log amidst this beating, and know not how I recovered
my feet again, at last I got into a Wigwam, almost bereft of my senses.

On the Lords Day, 24th, they Commanded me to go and work, which I refused, as
I had done at the side of the River Alegemey, the former Lords Day. I then took
my two young Children, and went a little way into the Woods and sat down with
them; when suddenly the Indians came furiously up to me and beat me
unmercifully, taking my poor Babes from me, telling me, I should have nothing
to do with them any more, for they were theirs. What could be more distressing
to a tender hearted Mother? I had formerly three taken from me; and now the
Remaining two were likewise to be wholly under the Care, or rather Cruelty of
these Savages! the poor Children cried most bitterly when taken.

On the 3d, of May, was a violent Rain which put us all in Confusion, being
surrounded in an Island by the swelling of the River, the Indians then
Commanded me to take up my Bed, viz a Dear skin, and my youngest Child but one,
and go over the River (they had carried off my youngest Child, that Morning)
this was another distressing thing; the River was high, and I weakened with
hunger etc. But their was no reasoning with them; came therefore, not knowing
how the Lord might dispose of me, to the Rivers brink, expecting that both my
self and Child would perish: But my ever kind Lord, had other wise ordered in
his adorable Providence; for just when I was about to step into the River, a
great bodied Mingo Squaw came to me, and without speaking a Word took up the
Child and carried her over, while I came over close after her; and thus got
safe over. But when over, our condition was distressing still, had no Fire, no
Wigwam, no Vituals of any sort.

On the Lords Day the 4th, the Indians sent me to gather wild Onions to eat: I
went gladly off from them, and had an agreeable opportunity of essaying to Cry
unto God, and pour out my Complaints before him, and returned without gathering
any. But Providence ordered other Food that Afternoon, viz. two young Fawns,
and And then as at other occasions, I could perceive the Love and Sympathy of
the Savages among themselves; for all was divided, and what was first boiled,
was presently divided, to supply the present Necessity. In this place we stayed
another Sabbath, and I retired as before; but was followed by my Indian Master,
who threatened me much, as I apprehended by his signs and countenance, this was
a great Affliction to me; likewise on Monday the 12th, as the Indians had often
threatened to fell me to the French, and what cruel Usage I would meet with
from them; that I really feared it might be so^ But a Horse being provided for
me to Travel, what they called 50 Miles to Fort Marsh, or Venango, upon the
Alegeney River, we Traveled that Day; but on the following Day, the Horse was
taken from me, and an oppressive burden given me to carry. This, in my
Circumstances, drawing near the Time of my Delivery of a Child, was most cruel;
I refused to bear the Load, whereupon an Indian furiously Damned me, and struck
me, like a Savage Monster as he was. And here I cannot but observe, that there
poor Pagans cannot Swear nor Curse in their own Language; all the Profanation
of that sort, ever I heard among them, being in English which (I suppose) they
learned of our Traders, and the like. I cannot help here also repeating, what I
heard from a fellow Prisoner, that when we came to the aforesaid Indian Yo^^,
one of their Chiefs came to us ever we arrived at the Town, who spoke a long
Time to those who brought me, etc. Captive, all which Time, I saw them set
silent and Solemn, with many Tears flowing down; but understood not what he
said: But he spoke afterward to the other, who understood, and said she, "he
told that the white People were good, for they dealt with God; but the Indians
were not, for they dealt with the Devil, and he told them lies. Saying none of
them would be killed in that Expedition. the aforesaid burden, endeavored to
carry as well as I could; but was entirely (...) to one in my Condition. But
after some Time we were overtaken by another Indian, who took pity upon me, and
let me have a Horse all the way to the French Fort, called by them Marsh by our
People called Venango. This happened I think, upon the 15th of May, I have
oftentimes thought of the poor Savage, who carried the Scalps upon a Pole
before me into this Fort, whoping and hollowing. On Monday the 19th, this
Wretch went into the Woods, and gathered of a most poisonful Herb, whereof he
eat, and before next Morning he swelled in an awful Manner and died. At this
Fort I was made a Present of unto the Commanding Officer called L^^shm Vingrie,
and with him, I had as good Usage as the place and his Circumstances, could
afford. But there was not a Woman there besides my self, not had they any
Interpreter in the place; which was a great Affliction unto me. I was now
separated from all my Children, which was an inexpressible trouble unto me, for
the Indians detained them all among them, Oh! how distressing to think that the
fruit of my Body, and the delight of my Mind, as my Children were, that they
should be brought up in Paganism, who were dedicated unto God and to be brought
up in his fear and Service. Here I remained in a very peaceful and undisturbed
way as could be expected until the 4th of July, that I was taken in Child
labor; this was an awful affliction, as there was not another Woman in the
Place, nor could I understand a word they said, at that Time; but at length
they found a Woman and brought her to me, who indeed was of very little Service
any way; yet God in his adorable Providence, after 24 Hours labor, delivered
me of a Daugher, without the Ordinary assistance of Women; for which I desire
still to praise the Lord. But it pleased the Sovereign disposer of all things,
to call away by Death this Child, on the 4th Day after her Birth.
Notwithstanding the Kindness and Civility I met with here, whenever my Master
the Officer, and the rest understood that the Child was like to die, they would
have it Baptized, which I opposed, whereat the Officer stormed mightily: But
neither he nor I could understand one another. At last they commanded the old
Dutch Woman to take it from me by force, which she did, whereat I restified my
dissatisfaction, but they did with the Child what they would, and then returned
it to me in the Bed. After the Child's Death they made a Coffin, and buried in
it the Fort, setting a Cross of Wood at the Head, etc.

In this Place I continued from the 15th of May 1756 until the 27th of July,
the next Year, being all this while a Servant, I had sometimes the pleasure of
seeing and afterward of conversing with my three youngest Children; but had
the additional affliction unto their slavery of seeing them poorly, both for
Food and Clothing, etc.

On the 27th of July 1757, my Master the Commanding Officer, sent me to live in
Servitude with his Wife, we went in a Battoe from this place, and in four Days
arrived at Beef River, where was another Fort, a small Stockade with about 30
or 40 Men, here remained 10 Days; had very good usage.

On the 11th of August the commanding Officer of this Fort, ordered me a Horse
to ride 13 or 14 Miles to Fort Briskill, upon the Side of the La^^. Here also
tarried 10 Days, and had very good Usage.

On the 21st of August, went into a Battoe in order to cross the Lake for
Niagara. In our Passage were in great danger by a Storm, insomuch that our
Lives were dispared of; but by divine Providence, got safe to Land at a little
Fort of Stockades: Stayed here 4 Days and had good Usage. Here a Jesuit
attacked me about Religion, aledging the Church was founded on Peter, the Pope,
etc. and that the Priests were an infalliable Rule, all which I opposed, etc.
he concluded with telling me, I was in a damnable Condition.

On the 28th, I Rode in a Cart to the Carrying-place about 14 Miles: Stayed all
Night in a Storage, or Storehouse. Next Day, went in a Cannot to the great
Niagara Fort, built of Stone and Lime. Here I tarried 10 Days, and had good
Usage.

The 9th of September, by the Commanders orders, went aboard a Sloop, had good
Usage.

On the 14th Day, arrived at Fre^^^^^^, where we stayed all Night. Next Day, we
went into a Battoe to Fort Gallette which was a dangerous Passage on account of
the large Falls and dreadful whirles of Water fearful to behold, through which
we were to pass.

At Gallette, we arrived the 20th Day, where we tarried all Night, and next Day
we proceeded on our Journey to Montreal where arrived on the 25th. Now I was
almost overjoyed with Expectations of speedy Delivery; hearing that our
Prisoners of War were embarking for Quebec and England: But my Joy was soon
turned to Sorrow, for the Interpreter said I must continue a Servant until
Peace was obtained; because I was taken by the Indians Unto this I objected
many things, but had no other reply from him, except, that this was their
Custom. I then saw there was no way for me, but wait the Disposal of divine
Providence. Here I remained in quality of Servant to the aforesaid Lady for
some Time. My anxiety after Liberty, at length, put me upon consulting with
some others of my Sex, who were also in servitude, about Running-away from
them; when about 10 Men and 4 Women of us, provided ourselves as well as we
could, and set off on the 25th of October, But ever we had gone a Mile were
apprehended and I only was put in the Guard-House, where I was very well used;
on the Morrow, sent for the Interpreter who examined me, where I was going when
apprehended? I readily told him, home; and i insisted much upon going to
Prison, because I thought they would soon be weary of me and return me as a
Prisoner to England, if they could get no more service of me Howbeit, by the
good offers and per^^^ions of my former Mistress, I was prevailed upon to stay
with her till the Spring; for she told me, that I should certainly have my
Liberty in the Spring, if I would stay until then. Accordingly I did, and
served her faithfully until the first of May, I then demanded my Liberty from
her according to promise, which she obstinately refused, telling me she was my
Mistress until such Time as there should be Peace. I told her I was only
demanding the performance of her Promise; I soon saw my reasoning with her
availed nothing. But I was fully resolved to obtain my Liberty by some means or
other, if possible: Whereupon, took an opportunity and went to the General and
laid my case before him by the Interpreter. Yet it seemed to avail nothing, but
rather he appeared displeased; and told me to go home to my Mistress again. But
the Interpreter told the General, that he himself heard my Mistress promise me
my Liberty in the Spring, etc. And several other Gentlemen spoke much on my
behalf. At last, he was pleased to grant me freedom from my former Mistress,
which was very dissatisfying to her: But I was not at Liberty to go from the
Place. Here I continued till the 2d of September 1758. and had considerable
Encouragement for working with my N^edle, and every Body appeared to use me
with respect.

On the 2d of September the General Vanderay sent me along with Colonel
Schenyher etc. to Qu^bec, who was singularly kind unto and careful of me and
many others, for which I can never be sufficiently thankful. He provided me a
Room in Qu^bec, and every thing needful for me, and often sent me Victuals from
his own Table, this I think still quite singular for a Gentleman of his
distilction. Here I remained from the 5th of September to the 1st of October,
then by the Interposition of the forementioned Gentleman, got on board the
Cartel, where I was made very welcome, especially by a French Lady, who went
over Passenger. Colonel Schenyler ordered the Interpreter, who went to the Lord
Attendant, who ordered me to be in the Cabin. the 6th of Nov. we came ashore at
D^^tmoath in old England; where the formentioned Lady, peyed for my boarding
the Time she remained there, being 25 Days, Miss. Sparks, the Mayors Sister,
was very kind unto me, entertained me at her House gratis, during my stay
there, as also the Rev. Mr. Adams with Mr. Penny, Overseer and Agent for Squier
Holiswoth were exceeding kind and did me singular favors: the last mentioned
Gentleman being particularly Instrumental in obtaining me a Pastage in the
Packer-Boat to York Messirs. Sparks, New-comen and Wilcot, were likewise
singularly kind unto and sympathizing with me in my distressed condition, as
were also Mrs. Hughs and Daughters, Miss. Adam, and others discovered
surprising regard unto a poor disconsolate Stranger. May the Lord, who hears
the cries of the Poor etc. reward them according to his Gracious promise.

On the 15th of January 1759. went from Dart^^^^h to Falmouth, where Messirs
Grubbs and Waters, were singularly kind, got me a Passage in the General-Wall
Packet, which we went aboard on the 25th Day. the Capt. Lu^wytche and Lady were
singularly kind and bountiful unto me all the Time! was on board, viz until
the 16th of March, when we mercifully arrived at York City. Arrived at
Philadelphia, on the 7th of April, in order that I might wait, to see if God in
his adorable Providence, would favor me with any agreeable accounts from my
five poor Faterless Captives among the Savage Indians and was with like
kindness entertained by Messirs. Griff^tes and Alen etc.

Several Disputes between the said Mrs. LOWRY, and the French.
AFTER my being with them some Time, they insisted upon my attendance at their
Worship; but always I refused, they then campell'd me to dwell in the House
where they kept their Worship, I not being confined in the House, went out in
the Time of Worship (which was once on a Day) continuing after this manner for
almost a Year; they then got an Interpreter, who enquired what was the Reason
that I fled still from their Worship. the Officer to whom I belonged says you
are like the Devil, for if the Devil would appear, and we should Cross
ourselves and say our Prayers he would fly: and so do you, Sir says I, I know
not whether your Prayers are good or bad for I cannot understand them; and to
bow my Knees in an inpleasive faith is what I will never do, for said I if one
of my own Nation should Pray in an unknown Tongue, I would not bow with him,
why says he, other Prisoners that cannot understand more than you does, said I
they may use their Pleasure, and in such a case I will use mine, said he what
sort of a Creature are you who deny Baptism. Sir says I, I don't deny Baptism;
said he you would not have your Child Baptized Sir says I, I had all the rest
of my Children Baptized when I had a faithful Minister to Administer the
Ordinance, and I esteem them worse than a Savage who will neglect that Duty in
despite to the Ordinance, but when God in his all wise Providnece, deprives me
of an Opportunity, it will neither be imputed to me, nor the Child; for I do
not esteem Baptism so absolutely necessary to Salvation, that a Child connot be
saved without it. the Interpreter told the Officer that I denied Original Sin;
Sir said I you misconstrue my Words, for I maintain that all the fallen Race is
guilty of Orginal sin: Replies he, what washes it away, seeing Baptism does
not. Sir answered I, the Blood of Christ, But Sir says I do you maintain that a
Child dying without Baptism is enternally Damned, a Woman that was present
replies, it should not dye without it, if I should do it myself, Oh! Friend
says I there are some extraordinary Cases, such as Children dying in the Womb,
to whom it is impossible to Administer the Ordinance of Baptism, do you
maintain that these Children are eternally miserable, at this he paused, I
insisted for his answer. Replies he they will never see Light, Sir says I this
is more than you know, for by this your discourse you would make their eternal
Salvation or Damnation to depend upon the Administration or non Administration
of this Ordinance.

The told me my Praying or Reading availed nothing, seeing I neither Read nor
Prayed to the Virgin Mary, why says I the Virgin Mary has no Power to forgive
Sin, say they you speak Blasphemy, said I none has Power to forgive Sins but
God only, they then told me I was too scrupulous by not allowing myself to do
servile Work on the Sabbath Day, for said they our Priests allow thereof, said
I the Priests is no Example for me, I follow the Example of Jesus Chirst, for
Christ claims that Day as his Property and whosoever does Labor ( viz. servile
Labor) thereon, is guilty of sacraligiously Robbing God of his Property, they
told me I was a good Women, but had a bad Religion; for if I was a Roman
Catholic and would live so strict, I would go straight to Heaven as soon as I
died.

A Remark also of what passed at the River of Biff.

On the Sabbath the commanding Officer of the said Fort ordered me to Work, I
told him No, not on the Lords Day, he told me as we must Eat on the Sabbath so
we must Work. I told him such unnecessary superfluity in Cooking (which was the
Work then required) was not a Work of necessity, and therefore was to be
refrained, he told me that upon my non Compliance therewith, he would imprison
me, I told him if he would, I would not comply, for I had not done it for the
Indians neither would I for him; then he made a pause and looking me steadfastly
in the Face, said, poor Women, put the in Goal for not Working on the Sabbath
Day? No no, and so instantly enquired who I was, and whence I came, and so went
out. Then a little while after came an Officer and enquired who and what I was
as to my Religion. I readily told him. Oh! says he you are not acquaint with my
Religion or then you would soon embrace it and forsake your own. Oh! Sir says
I, I am not ignorant of your Principles, although I am unacqnainted with your
Nation. Says he there is but one true Religion. Sir says I, I own it there is
but one God, one Faith, and one Baptism. Aha says he, and is your Religion that
only true one, yes Sir said I it is, Ah then says he and what is ours, Sir says
I you may judge of that as you please but as for mine it is agreeable to the
Word of God which is to be the Rule and Standard that we are to be governed by,
and adhere to, Oh! says he, if you were in Montreal you would soon change your
Mind and alter your Religion, for said he I will bring it to a Reference,
suppose there was both white and black Bread served up at Table; would you not
rather choose the White than the Black, yes Sir says I, for I chused the White
when at home and I intend to use the same Freedom at Montreal, A Despute
between me and a Jesuit at Neara.


He enquired whether I was a Lutheran, a Calvinist or a Roman Catholic, I
answered, Sir, I am a Calvinist, said he, you Lutherans and Calvinists who
separate from the true Church on Pretense of Reformation, have fallen into
gross Errors, said I, I know the Roman Church was once a pure and true one, but
then I would enquire if it might not have fallen into Error and Defection so as
to require Reformation; he answered no it could not, and further asked me if I
denied the Scripture. I answered no, I do acknowledge the Scriptures an
infallible Rule of Faith. Then he repeated the Scripture from which they
allege their Church to be founded on Peter, and therefore was infallible etc.
I told him that Scripture did not nor could imply that the Church was builded
on Peter, and on this Rock, viz. the Faith of Peter will I build my Chuch etc.
thou art Peter, that is thou art that Peter who professes thy Faith in me as
the Savior and Redeemer of the World, and upon that Rock namely upon him whom
thou believe will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against it, Then said he, you will not take the Minister for your Rule, I said,
I had (...) sure Word to trust to; he asked if there was not many dark Passages
in the Scripture I did not understand, said I, the Ministers Place is to
explain them, said he, then you take the Priests Opinion for your Rule, I told
him, if the Priests Explanation of these mistical Scriptures was agreeable with
the other Parts more plain, I was bound to believe him, otherways not, then
said he, you are a Judge of the Ministers; I told him no, the Word of God was
their Judge, then I aded and asked him if he thought the Priest was perfect, he
answered no, well said I, you shall not be my Rule for I have a perfect one,
which is the Law and the Testimony; said he you must know, that as we speak in
the Ministerial Office we are perfect, but as we are Men we many be Damned for
our Sins notwithstanding. I aked him by what Rule I should jugde who was in the
Right but by the Word of God; said he, you must look back to the old Standard
which never erred from the Truth, said I we have no commad for that, and
relying on them would be very uncertain because Christ has told us, false
Prophets shall arise in the latter Days to deceive if possible even the very
Elect, said he, that was in Christ's Time not in this Period, and added that
Christ has promised to be with his Ministers even to the End of the World; said
I, he undoubtedly will be with his own Church wheresoever they may be
scattered, but not with any one set of Men in particular, said I, you know the
Jews are a damned People and forsaken of God, although they were once his peculiar
People, said he, as to the Jews it is true they have a conditional Promise, but
we have an absolute one, said I, the Jews only had the Promise that as long as
they were for God he would be for them, and certainly we have not other
promise. So you will not take the Priest for your Rule you say, but you both
contradict yourself in that as well as the Word of God. I begged him to tell me
wherein that did appear, he said in the Beginning of the Bible, I desired him to
repeat the Words; the Translation says he, informs you that this is a new
Translation, you accept what they did as right, and yet now deny the Authority
of the Priest to judge for you, Sir said I, only except of the Translation as
my Rule, not their Word. Suppose said I, there was a piece of Latin of divine
Inspiration which few understand, and you give a Translation of it into my
Tongue, pray would that make any alteration as to the Matter thereof or could
my Faith be said to be more Implicit for adhering to that as a Rule; besides is
it not expedient to Translate seeing many People are only possessed of common
and not a liberal Education; said he ignorant People ought not to read the Word,
and added that Christ's Commission to his Disciples, go teach all Nations,
implied that all Nations were only to be taught, not admitted to read. I told
him I could not see how that could be implied, since we are commanded to starch
the Scriptures, and besides the Apostles as inspired from on high, were
commanded to Teach and Preach the Word of God, and were not only admitted but
obliged by their Authority and command to read and believe the same, which
Authority no other Mortal has unless they confirm it by miraculous Works as
they did; said he, the People are commanded to have the Word at the Priests
mouth, said I, that does not forbid the Reading of it, also what need the
Priest be afraid that the People should read the Word if the Priest acted
according to that Word, and besides we are commanded not only to be hearers of
the Word but doers also, now what an Advantage is it to me to be admitted to
read that Word agreeable to which Precepts I am to form my Conversation. I
further asked him whether he did not think that some part of his true Church as
he called it, might at some Time be left destitute of a Teacher; he answered
no, for where there was People they would always have a Teacher, true said I,
the Lord always has and always will have a Church upon Earth, but the true
Church may be brought very low as it was when none appeared Public for it but
Elisha, yet added I, supposing it to be the Case that some part of your Land or
People were left destitute of a Priest by Death or some other Means that under
such Circumstances your Church must be dead also, but here is the Blessed
Excellency of ours, that Christ our glorious Head lives for evermore, and of
his Kingdom there shall be no end: At this he paused for some Time and then
said that yet it was some part of the Church, yes said I where two or three are
gethered togther in the Name of the Lord there is their Church. He after told
me that he could not talk English well, and desired that I might help him, I
told him we ought not then to talk together, said he, I only want to instruct
you as it is my Office, and should gladly go to your Country for that purpose,
could I be admitted as I am now going to convert the Indians and am willing to
convert all Nations, I answered to his going to my Country I knew of no
hindrance as yet, then he got up off the Chair and said I was in a damnable
Condition. Sir said I, I hope in God's Mercy, Mercy said he, who think you have
a right to Mercy, many talk of the Mercy of God, but who think you have a right
to it? I answered, all they that believe in God and turst in Jesus Christ and
accept of him alone for Salvation as he is offered in the Gospel, they, and
they only have a special right to the Mercy of God. Then he asked me of what
Country I was by right, I told him, what said he, you an Irishwoman and a
Calvinist, had I Time I would talk with you further, and he again sat down and
we had a Repitition of the former nearly.

After my arrivalat Montreal they enquired if I was a Catholic, I answered
yes, no further equiry was made for some Time, until the Interpreter came;
says a French Woman to the Interpreter this Woman is a Catholic, Ah says he
but not a Roman Catholic, Sir says I, I have not a Genealogy, to tell whether
I am come of Paul or of Appolas and says I Paul was a Roman and for ought I
know Appolas was a Gentile, and whether I proceeded from Paul or from Appolas I
cannot tell, but I maintain the same Doctrine Paul did; Sir said I what was Paul
and what was Appolas they were both the Servants of God says he, Sir says I why
do you make exception where God makes none, for God to not a Respecter of
Persons, true said he, Sir said I what do you mean by that word, Roman
Catholic, Oh says he I can readily resolve you that Question, for I myself was
taught to be a Priest, but would not the take Oath of Continuance, and
therefore was not admitted to the Charge, said he such as are Roman Catholics
own the Pope to be the Head of the Church, Sir says I, I absolutely deny it,
for there is none that is head of the Church but Christ, Sir says I, whether is
it from the old or the new Testament that you prove the bringing of Priests
under the Oath of Continuance, as for my part I know no precept either form old
or new for it, Sir, you can only instance that one case of Paul; and he
declares his Liberty saying, know ye not that I have Liberty to lead a Wife or
a Sister as well as any other Apostle; Oh says he, they have their Liberty to
choose when they are come to maturity, Sir said I, as Man is changeable and as
God has left Man his free choice, it is a sin for him to enter into a Yoke of
Bondage! He then gave me two of their Books. which was a Declaration of their
Principles, one tituled a Vindication of the Roman Catholic Religion, against
the Presbyterian proved out of Scripture, thus take and read. This was filled
with proofs, mentioning Book, Chapter and Verse, but not expressing the Words,
but after I perused it a little, and found the proofs to be quite contrary to
the thing to be proved I desired the Interpreter to spend a part of a Day to
look over it and observe the Cunningness of the Priests, in telling the Chapter
and Verse, but not rehearsing the Words nor allowing them the use of the Bible.
the next was an explanation of the Catechism giving only the Priests belief for
such and such things without any proofs.

In one particular place of which that I observed he says, I believe that
Christ went down to the torments of Hell and suffered there three Days, Sir says
I, that is a dowright falsehood, what says he, will you deny the Scriptures;
Sir said I, you can give me no Scripture for that, but says he do you deny the
Creed; Sir said I, look at the Explanation of our Creed, that, that only meant
the Grave, for as Hell is only a place of punishment so in various parts of
Scripture, punishment is made mention of as an Hell, do you be believe said I,
that Jonah was in Hell when in the Whales Belly; he expostulates and says, out
of the Belly of Hell have I cried unto thee. And that is a memorable
comparison, where it is said as Jonah was three Days and thee Nights in the
Whales Belly, so shall the Son of Man be three Days and three Nights in the
Heart of the Earth.

And according to that your Doctrine, the damned in Hell had three Days Heaven,
for where Christ is, there is a Heaven, and the Gospel preached; which is
horrid absurdity and contradictory to Scripture, for we have it plain in the
Evangilists, whosoever goes to Hell, cannot return back to Heaven, neither he
that goes to Heaven, cannot return to Hell, he added no more. Being assaulted by
another after much the same, only added how contradictory it is to Chirsts own
Words to the Thief on the Cross, who said to Day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.

They insisted hard that I should attend Mass Christmas Evening, as that is an
Evening in which they perform much of their superstious Worship, I refused to
go, they told me if I would attend I would see strange things such as I never
yet had seen; I told them I was not fond of seeing that which would be an
aggravation of my grief; why said they an aggravation to your grief, how can
that be, said I what is dishonouring ^o God is a grief to me, and such
surperstitious Idolatry cannot be but offensive to God; Oh! said another if Mr.
Picket could speak English, he would soon convert you to be a Catholic, Oh
said I, I am a Catholic already, but Oh said they, the English does not
confess unto the Priest, said I the Priest he has no power to forgive and
endeavored to convince them of their wresting, that Text Math. 16. said by our
Lord to Peter, and I will give thee the Keys of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
bindest on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsover thou loosed on Earth,
shall be looss'd in Heaven, Sir says I, this is the Church Militant, not
Tr^umphant, and the meaning of that Text is Church discipline which our
Ministers observe; for if any of our members are guilty of any public scandal
the Satisfaction must be as public as the Crime, and upon their obstinancy in
not complying with the Discipline used according to the Apostle Paul, they are
cast out of the Church by excommunication until such Times as they repent of
their Crimes, and make public Satisfaction, and then not claiming Gods
prerogative to forgive their Sins, but telling them if their Repentance be real
God will forgive them. Oh says the Interpreter your Religion is harder than
ours: For we maintain that feigned Repentance will do, but they, that nothing
but unfeigned.

On a certain Night a Company of them being together, the Subject of their
Discourse was concerning the Prisoners, Ah says my Landlady all the Rest of the
Prisoners has been at Mass, except my Jennet (for so she used to style me) and
I will have her along, indeed Madam says I you shall, shall I go there to
please you and mock God? Oh, no says she not to mock God but to serve him, said
I if it were a Place where I could serve God I would go, out of obedience to
his Command, and I am sorry that so many complies to go to your Mass. But as
for my part I shall endeavor to be steadfast, and what I professed as home to
adhere to, or stick by here, Another of the Company began to mock at the Manner
of our receiving the Lords Supper, you says she Eat a little Bread and Drink a
little Wine, but says she if I was dry I would Drink hearty. Madam says I, do
you Eat the real Body of Christ! Yes said she, you are a monstrous Person said
I to Eat human Flesh, Oh says she, I do not touch it with my Teeth, for I lay
it upon my Tongue and it melts away. Then said I, your Body contains the Body
of Christ and by your Opinion you will make Christ a monster, for how many
think you may partake at one Time, some Times there may be perhaps a Thousand
some Times more and some Times less, and by your Discourse Christ must have a
distinct Body for each of these, which is horrid Blasphemy. Do ye imagine say
I, that his Deciples eat his real Body and drunk his real Blood when he sat
with them at the Table, and says this is my Body which was broken for you and
my Blood which was shed for you the Night before his Crucifiction, this was
only done in remembrance as he says as often as you do eat this Bread and drink
this Cup, you do it in Remembrance of me, and so our Ministers according to the
example of Chirst (whose Ambassadors they are) after blessing the Bread, they
Break it and give it unto the People, and the Wine after the same Manner; and
that only as a Representation of Christ's Body being broken and his Blood shed
for the Remission of our Sins; but if we Eat by Faith we receive him
Experimentally; and whosoever do not receive him after this Manner, they Eat
and Drink Judgment to themselves. They were silent for some Time, said one I
never tho'^ there had been such People among the English, for I thought they
had been mere Bruits, but there will certainly be some of them saved as well as
us. They never any more insisted upon my Attendance.

After the Defeat of our Forces at Ticonderega. the Interpreter came on purpose
to upbraid me as their usual was when such like happened, said he I am come on
purpose to converse with you, said he don't you now see that our Religion is
good and yours is not; we look upon it said he as a miracle that such a small
Party as was of ours, should Defeat such an Army, Sir says I, think nothing the
less of my Principles for that, for it is Gods usual way, to correct his People
for their Sins, and I confess it is for Sin in Practice not walking agreeable
to our Principles that God is afflicting us now. But says he it is said in
Scripture one shall chase a Thousand, and ten shall put ten Thousand to flight;
true Sir, says I, when his People walks in Principle and Fractice agreeable to
his Rule, but he has said, whomsoever he loves he Chastises and those whom
he corrects not, they are Bastards and not Sons and so the Lord is correcting
us for our irregular walking. Sir says I, if you had a Son, and he should do a
sault, and you should take a Rod and correct him, is it for Love that you have
to him, or to the Rod; and so the Lord although he may take the French and
Savages to correct us, yet he may cast them, used as the Rod into the Fire. Oh
says he, we hear in Scripture that always the People of God overcame their
Enemies, Sir says I, it is not always the Case, or then Daniel and many other
of the People of God would not have been Captivated, Sir said I, if you had
been in the Day^ of Elab when his Sons fell, and the Ark of the Lord was taken,
would you not said that it was for the good Religion of the Philistines; but
Sir said I, it was for the Sins of the House of E^ah, for the Children of
Israel was then the only convenant People of God in those Days, and yet the
Lord permitted these Idolatrous Heathens to afflict his People, and not only so
but to take his Ark, Oh said he if they did take it, they had not much to boast
of for their taking it, for they did not keep it long, Oh! said I, you need not
brag for the Quarrel is not yet over with you, for although (as I own) you have
had the Victory mostly as yet, I am not afraid but the Lord will return and
Fight for his People, I am not taking it upon me to Prophecy, but I verily
believe that the Lords vengence will pursue your Nation. That the Cry of the
Widow and the Fatherless will ascend up before the Lord, although I do not pray
for Vengence upon you, but I rather desire that the Lord my Discover unto you,
your Sin in employing ing a cruel Heathen to separate the Husband from the
Wife, and the Child from the Mother and to embrue their Hands in their Blood;
for War it is not, but murder of the most henious Degree, and yet you plead
yourselves Guiltless, because, say you we are not actually at this murder, but
in verity ye are more guilty than they, for they are poor ignorant People,
deprived of the means of Grace which you have, and you employ them and pays
them: And are you not then, as you are the Masters and Employers more guilty
than they.

Then said he I should be glad if your People would come and take the Country.
Ah say I, and take your Liberties from you, as to your Religon, and that is a
Privilege that I would not give for the World. Sir said I, I think more pity
of you than all the French in Montreal. For why said he, because said I you
know better and yet Practice as they do, for you have had the Privilege of the
Scriptures, and has seeming been convinced of their Idolatry in some measure,
said he what would you have me to do, for I have not confessed to the Priest,
nor received their Sacrament for several Months, says I, do agreeable to the
Commandment of God come out from among them, my People: Touch not, taste not,
hand not. Said he there can be no harm in hearing them Preach, said I, it is a
countenancing of them and so you are a stumbling Block to others that are
ignorant, you ought to separate from them, testify against them. Oh said he if
it were Peace, I would go to your Country, and I never had another opportunity
of conversing with him until I left the Country.

I further remark whilst I was in Quebec, where a young Lady desired to
discourse with me, said she, I will bring it to a reference that will convince
you of necessity of praying to the Virgin Mary: For said she if there was a
great Prince, and you desired a great favor from him, and you a Person of mean
Qualities, and not fit to supplicate this Prince, and he having a Mother of
such a condescending disposition that she would hear the meanest Person that
made address to her, and the Son condescending to whatsoever favor the Mother
demanded of him, would it not then be more likely that you should have your
request by making your case known unto the Mother, and so she unto the Son,
seeing that he will not deny her of whatsoever she asks. Madam said I, allow me
to speak a little from your Reference for this great Prince, he gives out a
Proclamation that whoever desires a request to ask it of him and none other,
and the meanest, poorest and most despised of the Human Race, shall have their
Request if they ask it: I out of Rebellion against the Kings Command, will go
and ask of another, when he has Commanded that we shall ask of none else, will
this not incur his Wrath and not his Favor, so to disobey his Command. This is
the case with the Blessed King Jesus, who has Commanded to ask of him, who
gives liberally, and upbraideth none, and there is no other Mediator or
Daysman: Another who was present answered, she has you now, so they added no
more.

FINIS.

