Practical DISCOURSES DELIVERED ON OCCASION OF THE EARTHQUAKES IN NOVEMBER,
1755.

WHEREIN is particularly shown, by a Variety of Arguments,

THE great Importance of turning our Feet unto GOD's Testimonies, and of making
Haste to keep his Commandments;

TOGETHER with the Reasonableness, the Necessity, and great Advantage, of a
serious Consideration of our Ways.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the WEST-Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by RICHARD DRAPER, in Newbury-Street*
and EDES and GILL, in Queen Street. MDCCLX.

The AUTHOR To the Children and Youth of his Pastoral Charge.
DEARLY BELOVED,
TO you I had a particular regard in preaching these discourses. I now dedicate
them to you in testimony of my love, and concern for your eternal interest.
That they may contribute hereto, I would exhort you to read them with attention
and seriousness, commending both you and them to the blessing of God; and
desiring you to believe me

Your sincere and affectionate Friend, J. Mayhew.

The CONTENTS Of Thirteen SERMONS ON PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON I. THE great importance of sinners turning their feet unto God's
testimonies, shown by two considerations, viz. (1.) His power and universal
dominion. And, (2.) The positive denunciations of his wrath against the
impenitent transgressors of his laws. Page 1. SERMON II. THE great importance
hereof, shown by two other considerations, viz. (3.) The great and precious
promises of the gospel, made to penitent sinners. And (4.) The method which God
has projected for our redemption and salvation, by his own son. Page 32. SERMON
III. THE importance of making haste to keep God's commandments; shown from a
consideration of the shortness, and uncertain duration of human life. Page 64.
SERMON IV. THE great difficulty of reforming vicious habits long continued,
urged as a second argument for making haste. Page 102. SERMON V. THE third
argument; drawn from a consideration of the superior happiness attending a
religious and virtuous life. Page 129. SERMON VI. THE fourth argument; That
making haste tends to greater degrees of christian perfection, and future
glory. Page 164. SERMON VII. THE fifth argument: That religion and virtue are
peculiarly amiable in youth, and vice infamous in age; and that we do more
honor to God by an early, than by a late repentance. Page 195. SERMON VIII. THE
sixth argument: That delaying to keep God's commandments is the basest
ingratitude. Page 231. SERMON IX. THE seventh argument: That persevering in
sin, is such audacious impiety, that there is danger of God's entirely
withdrawing his Holy Spirit from those who continue long in their disobedience,
and giving them over to their own hearts lust, to fill up the measure of their
iniquities. Page 260. SERMON X. THE reasonableness of thinking seriously on our
ways; shown from a consideration of the faculty of reflection, and of those
other moral powers, by which the author of our nature has distinguished us
from mere animals. Page 293. SERMON XI. THAT thinking on our ways is absolutely
necessary in order to a thorough amendment of them. Page 316. SERMON XII. THAT
thinking on our ways has a natural tendency to lead us to repentance; and that
there is ground to hope, such as properly do so, will turn their feet unto
God's testimonies. Page 341. SERMON XIII. THE recapitulatory and concluding
discourse; wherein are some reflections on those alarming dispensations of
providence, which gave occasion to treat this subject with such extent. Page
358.
ERRORS of the Press are submitted to the Censure and Correction of the candid
Reader.

SERMON I. Of the great Importance of Sinners turning their Feet unto GOD's
Testimonies.
PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


IT being of no great consequence to us to know, SERMON I.
I shall not now spend time to inquire, whether the Psalmist here refers to his
thinking on his ways after falling into some particular great sin, or sins, as
good men are liable to fall; and his speedily turning his feet again unto God's
testimonies, in consequence of such reflection: Or whether he refers to some
period, possibly in his early youth, when he was not yet a true fearer and
servant of God; but being brought to a serious consideration of his ways, and
the fatal tendency of them, he then, without delay, altered the general course
of his life; turning from his former wickedness, to the way of righteousness;
and so, of a child of disobedience and wrath, becoming a son of God, and an
heir of salvation. I say, I do not conceive it to be of much importance to us
to inquire into this matter: For there is evidently a twofold repentance, or
turning to God, and to the keeping of his testimonies and commandments; to both
of which, sober reflection, or thinking on our ways, is requisite and
conducive; and both of which may, I suppose, properly come under consideration,
in a discourse upon the present subject. The first is that of wicked,
unrighteous men; of those who have lived unmindful of God, and of their duty to
him; those who have habitually violated his commandments in the preceding part
of their lives; till, by some means or other, being put upon serious thought
and reflection, they are induced to forsake their sins, and to enter upon a new
course of life, a life of piety, virtue and religion. And this is what, in the
language of scripture, is more generally intended by repentance, or turning to
God and his commandments. But there is a secondary repentance and reformation,
or turning to God's testimonies, which is proper to good and holy men, who have
in general kept the commandments. For even the righteous may, in times of great
temptation, or at any time, if they are not circumspect and watchful, fall into
considerable sins, and come very short of their duty in many respects. And such
men are generally, if not always, by the good providence and grace of God,
excited to think on their ways, and amend them; to remember from whence they
are fallen, to repent, and to do the first works. This, you perceive, is a
repentance, or turning to God's testimonies, different in some respects from
that beforementioned, the subjects of it being so different. It is indeed
common to the subjects of both, to have broken the commandments of God, and to
have gone contrary to his testimonies; this being implied in turning their feet
unto them. But then the subjects of the former repentance and reformation, are
customary, habitual sinners, whose whole course and institution of life is
hereby changed; whereas the subjects of the latter, are righteous, good men,
who having in some respects violated their duty, return to it, and keep the
commandments of God more circumspectly. It is but once that a man exercises
repentance toward God in the first sense, as it signifies the breaking off a
sinful, and entering upon a new, an holy, and divine, life: But repentance, or
turning to God, in the latter sense, may, and ought to be, and is, often
repeated in this imperfect state; even as often as a good man deviates from the
path of his duty, and returns to it with an humble and contrite heart.

Now, what the particular case of the Psalmist was, to which he refers in the
passage I have chosen for the subject of several discourses; whether he refers
to the time of his first conversion to God, from the ways of sin and folly, or
to that of his recovery from some criminal lapse after he had known the way of
righteousness; every one is left to his own opinion, as a thing that is very
immaterial in itself, or at least to my present design. Neither do I think it
of any great importance now to inquire, what was the special and more immediate
occasion of the Psalmist's being thus led to think on his ways, and to walk in
God's testimonies; whether it were sickness, or some other awakening visitation
of divine providence; whether it were affliction and adversity of any kind, or
that abounding goodness and mercy of God, the design of which is to lead men to
repentance; or lastly, whether there might not possibly be a concurrence of
several means, to the cooperation of which, under the influence and blessing of
God who works all in all, this happy effect was to be ascribed.

THE judgments of God are unsearchable; and none can find out either the
Almighty, or his ways, unto perfection. But we know in general, that there is a
great variety of means which God makes use of, to bring about the designs of
his providence and grace; and which, particularly, he uses for the awakening
and reformation of sinners; to reclaim them from the ways of folly and
destruction, to the wisdom of the just, and cause them to walk in his
testimonies. Though God is omnipotent, yet he seldom or never works wholly
without means. He did not even produce the world by a^ immediate exertion, or
act of his own power; but he "created all things by Jesus Christ." Ephesians. 3.9
comp. Col 1.16. Joh. 1.3. and Heb 1.2. and 10.
And as God originally created, so he still governs the world by his Son; and
by the means and instrumentality of other beings, and secondary causes. And
amongst those which he employs for the convincing and reclaiming of sinners,
and bringing many sons unto glory, some are stated and natural, others
extraordinary and miraculous. It is chiefly the former, viz. the natural and
stated means, and very seldom the latter, or miraculous ones, at least in this
age of the world, that God uses to this end. Saul, afterward Paul the Apostle,
and some few others of old, seem indeed to have been preternaturally stopped in
their wicked courses, and converted to God; that persecutor of the saints
having been at once struck blind, and struck to the earth, in his journey to
Damascus, while he heard a voice from heaven, saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Acts 9.3, etc.
There may possibly have been some examples, even in these last ages, of a
sudden and extraordinary conversion, not very dissimilar to this. However, such
things have neither been common and frequent in any age, even the age of
miracles, nor are they to be expected in this. God has favored us with a
plain, standing revelation of his will, long since sufficiently confirmed and
established by signs, and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Herein both his mercy and his wrath are clearly revealed from heaven;
the former, to those who think of their ways, and turn their (...) unto his
testimonies; the latter, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.
And to this revelation God justly expects, that we should diligently attend;
receiving the truth in the love of it, and governing our lives and actions by
the rules of it. For this grace of God which has appeared unto us, teaches us
that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in the present world. And this we are indispensably bound
to do, even though nothing very signal or remarkable should occur in the course
of God's providence, whether in the way of judgment or of mercy, to put us upon
thinking on our ways, and turning to him. However, there are often such
dispensations of providence as these; calculated in the nature and design of
them, to rouse and awaken the minds of men to that serious and religious sense
of things, which becomes them. And these events of providence, though perhaps
disregarded by many, will yet, by the blessing of God, have their designed good
effect upon others; causing them to think on their ways, to make haste, and not
delay to keep his commandments. To this it is to be added, that God is almost
continually striving with us by his holy Spirit, which co-operates with his
word and providence to awaken sinners, and lead them to repentance: Though,
alas! there are many besides the Israelites, who do always resist the Holy
Ghost; and grieve and quench the blessed Spirit of God, till they are given
over of him to a reprobate mind; and left to treasure up unto themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and the revelation of his righteous judgment; who
will finally render to every man according to his deeds.

BUT to return: Whatever might be the particular case of the Psalmist, to which
he refers in the text; and whatever were the dispensations of God's providence
toward him at that time; still we are certain of these three things; That he
though it on his ways; That, in consequence hereof, he turned his feet unto God's
testimonies; and, That he did this speedily; or, in his own more emphatical
language, That he made haste, and delayed not to keep his commandments. And as
every one understands well enough in general, what is intended by turning our
feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his commandments, I shall not
needlessly spend time in explaining it: But

MY design is, in the first place, to represent to you the great, yea, infinite
importance hereof, by several considerations.

I SHALL then show, by a variety of arguments, the vast importance of being
speedy in this business; and the extreme folly and danger of delaying it.

THE reasonableness of thinking on our ways, together with the necessity and
conduciveness hereof to a reformation of them, will be shown in the third
place. And

LASTLY, I shall make some application of this subject, in a serious,
recapitulatory address to you: Nor shall I omit to take a particular notice
therein of the late alarming visitations of divine providence, which are so
peculiarly adapted to awaken us all to consider our ways, and to amend them;
and which have, accordingly, led my thoughts to the present subject. And I
shall endeavor, by divine assistance, to handle the subject in such a manner
as to render it, in some measure, profitable both to wicked men and good; to
those who have hitherto lived in the habitual violation of God's commandments,
so as to need a total change of heart and manners; and to those who, although
they may have long been the true servants of the Most High, yet need to be
awakened to greater watchfulness and circumspection, and more diligence in
working the work of God.

FIRST, I am to represent to you the great, yea, infinite importance which it
is to sinners, to turn their feet unto God's testimonies, and to keep his
commandments. For this is so far from being a matter of indifference, of little
or no consequence to us, that there is hardly any thing else which claims our
care and attention; to be sure, nothing in comparison of it. Now the vast
importance hereof is apparent from many considerations; and more particularly
from the four following ones, which I shall enlarge upon in this, and in the
next ensuing discourse. It appears

1st. FROM a general consideration of God's power and greatness, his holiness
and universal dominion, and our absolute dependence upon him.

2dly. FROM the clear and positive denunciations of his wrath, in his word,
against all impenitent, irreclaimable transgressors.

3dly. FROM the great and precious promises of the gospel made to those who
turn at God's reproof, and keep his commandments.

4thly. FROM a consideration of that astonishing method which God has projected
for our salvation from the dominion of sin, and the punishment due to it.

THESE things which I have mentioned, being seriously and properly attended to,
no one can doubt but that it is of infinite importance to those who have
transgressed the laws of God, to turn their feet unto his testimonies, and to
walk in his commandments. And I must just remind you, that this is what all of
us have done, in a greater or less degree; it being certain, that both jews and
gentiles are "all under sin;" and the whole world become "guilty before God:"
Which could not be, except all had transgressed his laws; for sin is the
transgression of the law. We are therefore all concerned in the present
subject, either more or less; and should impartially apply it to ourselves,
according to truth and equity.

1st. The importance of turning our feet unto God's testimonies, appears from a
general consideration of his power and greatness, his holiness and universal
dominion, and our absolute dependence upon him. When we reflect upon these
things, it is at first view very evident, how greatly it concerns us to secure
to ourselves the good will and patronage of our Maker, by obeying his
commandments; and what a terrible hazard we run, by persisting in our rebellion
against him, and in opposition to his righteous government. It is certainly
wise in men, and must finally turn to their unspeakable advantage to please
that being, who is infinite in wisdom; to submit to his authority, whose
kingdom rules over all; to resemble, in their own tempers and manners, him who
is perfectly holy, just and good; to engage the friendship and protection of
him, who is all-powerful; and in fine, to adore, to love and obey him, in whom
all these adoreable qualities and perfections are united. And if it is wise and
prudent for men to do thus; then it certainly becomes them, whenever they have
done otherwise in any degree, and neglected their duty and truest interest, to
be heartily sorry for it; and to amend their ways. Now thus wise for
themselves, are all they, who, with the Psalmist, think of their ways, and
return to God, from whom they have gone astray. And if this is the most wise
and prudent course for sinners to take; if, doing thus, they best consult both
their present and future interest; how foolish and mad, on the contrary, is the
conduct of those, and how certainly are they destroying themselves, who
continue in their opposition to infinite wisdom; and their rebellion against
the great lord and sovereign of the universe? they who, by persevering in their
wicked ways, continue to be as unlike as they can to the most perfect and
amiable of beings? they who provoke that infinite power, which can either
deprive them of existence in a moment, or preserve them in it forever, to
punish their disobedience and temerity? they who daily abuse, affront and
blaspheme that most adoreable being, in whose hand their breath is, and whose
are all their ways? How foolish, imprudent, and even mad, I say, are such
persons? and how surely do they "seek death in the error of their life?" And
yet thus do all they, who having departed from God's testimonies, will not turn
their feet to them again; but persevere in violating his holy commandments; of
whom, alas! there are so many throughout the world; and even in that part of it
which is called christian.

THIS conduct of sinners must, one would think, proceed from great ignorance of
God and themselves; for if that light of divine truth which shines around them,
did actually shine into their hearts, so as to give them the knowledge of the
glory and majesty of God, it would be morally impossible for them to act such a
part toward him. No man who has a just conception of the greatness and glory
of that being, who created all things, and upholds them all by the word of his
power; who is both the righteous lawgiver, and impartial judge of the world,
equally able to save and to destroy; no man who has a just conception of
almighty God, I say, and who thinks soberly of himself as he ought to think,
being duly sensible of his own weakness, littleness and dependent condition,
can help seeing the infinite importance which it is to him to forsake his
sinful courses, and to work righteousness: No one can help seeing, that upon
doing so, his whole interest and being depend. It were certainly better for us
never to have been born, or even now to be reduced to nothing, by the breath
which gave us being, than, by continuing to rebel against the most high God, to
remain under his displeasure; not only excluded from a share in his
loving kindness, which is better than life; but also the objects of his wrath,
which is worse than death. Who can, on one hand, fully express the happiness of
those who love and serve God, and are beloved of him? Who, on the other hand,
knows the power of his anger; and the misery of those who continue liable to
the terrible effects and consequences of it? Reflect a little upon the
astonishing effects of God's power, visible in the material world; look unto
the heavens, and see, and behold the clouds which are higher than thou;
contemplate the great works of God in the earth beneath, the sea, and upon the
dry land: And when you have, by considering these works of God, attained to a
just conception of his greatness and majesty, then doubt, if you can, whether
it be a thing of the last importance to you to be at peace with him; to have
him for your friend and protector? whether his favor is not more to be desired
than life? and whether, to be the object of his wrath, is not worse than death?
And if this is a thing of any consequence to you, it is equally so, whether you
do, or do not turn to God, and keep his commandments: For upon this it depends,
whether God, the sovereign ruler and potentate, who does his will in the
armies of heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, shall be your
friend or your enemy. We may be certain from the mere light of nature, that
impious and unrighteous men must be the objects of God's displeasure; and that
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of him that lives forever, as the
victims of his anger: For how should a man's heart endure, or his hands be
strong, when God deals with him in righteous severity; and gives him the due
reward of his deeds! But

THIS brings me to the second thing mentioned, in order to show the importance
of turning our feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his commandments; viz.

2dly. THE clear and positive denunciations of his wrath, in his word, against
all impenitent, irreclaimable transgressors. Tho it is at least probable from
the light of nature, that we shall exist in a future state; and although it is a
dictate of reason and natural conscience, that if we actually exist thus
hereafter, vicious, ungodly men shall undergo some strange punishment, as
inflicted by the righteous Lord and Governor of the universe; yet men in
general being slow at reasoning, and so much attached to this world, that they
will scarce give themselves time to think seriously of another, or to consider
what must in all probability be the consequence, as it is the just demerit, of
a wicked life; God has therefore sent his prophets and apostles, and even his
own Son, to admonish and warn us; to call us to repentance, and to denounce his
wrath and righteous vengeance against bold, presumptuous sinners. By them his
wrath is now most clearly revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men; and it is denounced equally, both against them that
"hold the truth in unrighteousness," and them that do not hold the truth at
all, but hate and reject it, lest their deeds which are evil should be
reproved. And this wrath of God is revealed in such terms as no sinner that
hears them, can either easily mistake the sense of, or avoid trembling at;
unless he is more hardened and abandoned than even Felix was, when St. Paul
reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come.

I HAVE no fondness for using harsh, and very terrifying language in preaching;
and could heartily wish there was never any occasion for it. But it is manifest
from the holy scriptures, and indeed from our own experience and observation,
that some sinners are so in love with their lusts and vices, as to need such
language in order to their being reclaimed from them. Yea, experience shows,
that even all the terrible menaces in God's word are insufficient to produce a
reformation in some hardened, and bold transgressors; yea, I may add, they are
so far from working any thoro and lasting amendment in them, that they hardly
awaken them to any degree of serious tho'tfulness concerning their latter end.
This being the case, I imagine there is not only no impropriety, but an evident
expediency, and even necessity, in a discourse upon this subject, of plainly
laying before men the threatenings of God in his word, against those who
persevere in their wicked courses; which, by his blessing, may prove salvation
to their souls: But whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, the
ministers of religion are required, in order to the delivering their own souls,
and being clear from the blood of all men, to give them warning as from God:
that so their guilt may be all their own, and their destruction of themselves,
if they persist in their ungodly deeds. What God says to the prophet Ezekiel,
Chap. 3. ver. 17, 18, 19.
is applicable in some measure to every man, who is by office a preacher of
righteousness: Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of
Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.
When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die; and thou give him not
warning; nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his life,
the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at
thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wicked way,
he shall die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered thy soul. You must
therefore suffer me plainly to represent to you the threatenings, which God has
denounced against such as disregard his testimonies, and violate his
commandments. This I shall do in the very language of scripture: for I do not
think it proper to indulge to my own imagination, or even to use my own words,
upon so solemn and tremendous a subject.

IN the scriptures of the old testament we find such declarations and
threatenings as these. In the 27th chapter of the book of Deuteronomy, after a
curse has been particularly denounced against several sorts of sinners, there
is a general one denounced against all the transgressors of the law in common,
in the following terms: Cursed The apostle Paul gives us the sense of this
malediction, Gal. 3.10. in the following words, -- It is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to do them.
is he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them: and all the
people shall say, Amen. It is said Psalm 11th That the Lord is in his holy
temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven; his eyes behold, his eylids try the
children of men. The Lord tries the righteous; but the wicked, and him that
loves violence, his soul hates. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.
It is said in the book of Job, chap. 20th, That the triumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment. Though his excellency
mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he shall
perish forever, like his own dung -- God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon
him, and shall rain it upon him -- The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and
the earth shall rise up against him -- This is the portion of a wicked man from
God, and the heritage appointed to him by God. It is said in the 12th chapter
of the prophecy of Daniel, That many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting
contempt. It is said in the prophecy of Malachi, Then shall ye return, and
discern between the righteous and the wicked; between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not. For behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven,
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave
them neither root nor branch. And because wicked men are apt to flatter
themselves with the hopes of impunity, even while they hear the curse of God
denounced against them, therefore it is said, Deuteronomy 29th chap. -- Lest
there be among you a root that bears gall and wormwood; and it come to pass,
when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, tho I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst: the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the
Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that
are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under heaven: and the Lord shall separate him unto evil. Agreeably
hereto, it is said in the person of wisdom, Proverbs chap. 1st. How long, ye
simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in scorning, and
fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my repoof -- Because I have called, and ye
refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at
naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and
anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; for that they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Now when wisdom cries thus
without, and utters her voice in this manner, by way of warning to sinners, it
is, I suppose, the same thing in effect as if God himself had spoken to them in
the like language; which is, indeed, very solemn and terrifying.

BUT let us, from the old, proceed to the scriptures of the new testament, and
see what is said therein to the same purpose; I mean, by way of threatening
against the impenitent transgressors of God's commandments and testimonies. Our
blessed Savior in his explanation of the parable of the tares, Matthew 13th,
says, -- The harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.
As therefore the tares are gathered, and burnt in the fire; so shall it be in
the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they
shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth. In the 25th chapter of the same gospel of St. Matthew,
where the proceedings of the last day are more largely and particularly
represented to us than any where else, our Lord has declared, that when he is
seated upon the throne of his glory, and all nations are gathered before him,
he will say to the wicked on his left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: and that, in
consequence of this most awful but righteous sentence, these shall go away into
everlasting punishment. It is said in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 17. That
God now commands all men every where to repent; because he has appointed a
day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he
has ordained. And Romans 2d. it is said, that God will render to every man
according to his deeds: -- unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath; tribulation and anguish
upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Gentile -- For there is no respect of persons with God. It is declared in the
second epistle to the Thessalonians, chap. 1st, That the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power. And in the 14th chapter of the
revelation of St. John, it is said of the wicked, that the same shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup
of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the
presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the lamb: and the smoke of
their torment ascends up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor
night. -- Such are the express, positive declarations found in the new
testament respecting the future perdition of ungodly men; of all such as will
not think of their ways in time, and turn their feet unto God's testimonies.

AND it will be proper to remind you here, that lest the professors of
christianity should flatter themselves that these and suchlike threatenings in
the word of God, are denounced only against the unbelieving, heathen world;
against those who either never heard of the Gospel, or having heard of it,
openly and professedly reject it; our Lord has admonished us, that they belong
equally to wicked believers, with unbelievers, even tho they make high
pretensions to religion, and of love and respect to him, eating and drinking in
his presence. For he has assured us, that he will hereafter say to all such
hypocritical professors of his name and religion, Depart from me, I know you
not whence you are, all ye workers of iniquity. Yea farther, it is to be
observed, that tho the gospel is so emphatically a dispensation of grace and
mercy to sinners, yet it is plainly declared therein, that they who continue in
their sins and disobedience, while they know the truth, and their duty, shall
receive a far heavier doom hereafter, than either wicked pagans, or wicked men
under the legal dispensation. There is a passage full to the first of these
points in the gospel of St. Matthew: Chap. XI. ver. 20.
Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were
done, because they repented not. Woe unto thee, Chorazin, woe unto thee,
Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in
Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I
say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven,
shall be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in
you, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. But it shall
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for you.
The words of our Savior elsewhere, are much to the same purpose; only of more
general and universal extent: And that servant which knew his lord's will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes: For unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will
ask the more. Luke XII.47, 48.
And these words of our Savior suggest to us one, tho not the only, ground and
reason, why wicked and incorrigible men, living under the gospel dispensation,
shall incur a sorer punishment hereafter, than such men under the law of Moses;
the former being a clearer and more perfect discovery and revelation of God's
will, than the latter, as it was made by a far more glorious personage, the Son
of God in our nature. And to this purpose are the following passages of
scripture: If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins; but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation to devour the adversaries. He
that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: Of
how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God? -- For ye know him that has said, Vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord. Heb. X.26. --
And again: See that ye refuse not him that speaks: For if they escaped not,
who refused him that spoke on earth, [viz. Moses] much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven Chap. 12 ver. 25.
: i. e. Jesus Christ. For it is by his Son that, in these last days, God speaks
to the World Vid. Chapter I.1, 2.
. There is a passage much to this same effect, nearer the beginning of the same
epistle; and which might therefore have been mentioned before: If the word
spoken by angels [it being probable that angels ministered at the promulgation
of the law at Sinai] was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord; and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, etc.

CERTAINLY they who duly consider these, and suchlike passages of holy
scripture, cannot encourage and harden themselves in the transgression of, or
in disobedience to, the commandments of Christ, by reflecting upon the grace
revealed in the gospel; or from an imagination that any faith in Christ, or
dependence upon his righteousness, which is consistent with habitual sinning
against him, will skreen them from his just indignation, when the great day of
his wrath shall come. In that day none will be able to stand, excepting those
who, having believed in God through him, have turned their feet unto his
testimonies, and been careful to maintain good works. Without this, our faith
will not profit us in the day of wrath, any more than our riches: yea, it will
serve to aggravate our guilt and misery, far beyond that of vicious Jews and
Pagans.

I HAVE now done with the two former of the particulars mentioned under this
first general head of discourse; which was, to represent to you the infinite
importance of turning your feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his
commandments. This appears, you see, in some measure, only from a general
consideration of his greatness and majesty, his power, justice, and universal
dominion. But the importance hereof appears still more clearly and evidently,
from a consideration of the awful threatenings in his word, so plainly denounced
against all the impenitent workers of iniquity.

REFERRING the two other heads of argument mentioned above to my next
discourse, I shall conclude the present by beseeching all who hear me,
seriously and impartially to weigh what has now been offered to their
consideration; and then to act according to the dictates of their own reason
and consciences, and in such a manner as they are persuaded will, in the end,
conduce most to their own good. And if people would but do thus, I am morally
certain that not one soul would be lost, or finally perish. For no man, surely,
would then persist in his rebellion against God, and the known, wilful
violation of his holy and just commandments. Every man who thinks calmly, must
know that he cannot possibly find his account in acting contrary to the will of
the all-wise and powerful, just and good governor of the world, upon whose
pleasure he absolutely depends for happiness, for life, breath and all things,
both now and forever. Every sinner must be sensible, that it is of infinite
importance to him to escape the deserved wrath, and to obtain the favor, of
this thrice glorious Being; which can be done only by amending his ways, or
returning to him in the exercise of unfeigned repentance, and by a new life.
This, every man that thinks must be sensible, is a matter of the last
concernment to him, even tho the holy scriptures had not contained a single
word, expressly, concerning the future punishment, and final perdition of
ungodly men. But with how much greater clearness, and strength of evidence does
this appear, when we reflect upon those positive, repeated, and most solemn
declarations of God's word, respecting this point, some of which have been
produced above? -- Such threatenings as no one can hear, believing them really
to come from God, the great Creator and righteous Lord of all, without being
seized with inward horror and trembling; unless he is either quite abandoned,
and given over to a reprobate mind, or else is one of those good men, in whom
love, being made perfect, has "cast out fear," and inspired him with a holy
confidence in his Maker's friendship, through the great Redeemer of the world. For
it is only when we are justified by grace through the redemption that is in
Christ, that we are at peace with God; and only when we know this to be our
happy condition, by the witness and fruits of the Holy Spirit, one of the
principal of which is love, that we can reasonably "assure our hearts before
him."

SERMON II. Of the great Importance of Sinners turning their Feet unto GOD's
Testimonies.
PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON II.
THE first thing proposed in handling this subject, was, To represent to you the
great, yea, infinite importance which it is to sinners, to turn their feet unto
God's testimonies, and to keep his commandments. And this has already been done
in part;

1st. From a general consideration of God's power and greatness, his holiness
and universal dominion, and our absolute dependence upon him. And

2dly. From the clear and positive denunciations of his wrath, in his word,
against all impenitent, irreclaimable transgressors.

Two other heads of argument to show the importance hereof, were mentioned, but
not insisted on, in the foregoing discourse. These are, by God's leave and
assistance, to be dilated upon at this time. To proceed with the subject,
therefore, the vast importance of this appears,

3dly FROM the great and precious promises of the gospel, made to those who
turn at God's repoof, and keep his commandments.

IN estimating the importance of doing any particular thing to us, it is proper
we should, on one hand, consider what evil and mischief will attend the
neglect, and, on the other, what good will result from the performance of it.
And, what unspeakable, irreparable damage will accrue to us from neglecting to
turn our feet unto God's testimonies, or persevering in our rebellion against
him, has accordingly been shown already, from the clear and awful threatenings
of his word, which will most certainly be verified in the utter destruction of
the wicked. And, what great and unspeakable good will result to us by forsaking
our sins, and keeping God's commandments, is now to be shown from his most
gracious promises. It is, indeed, a dictate of natural reason, independent of
revelation, I will not say, that penitent and reformed transgressors shall
receive a full rem^ssion of sins, and eternal life and happiness; but that they
shall be more favorably dealt with by the equal, and all-righteous Sovereign
of the universe, than they who obstinately persevere in their wicked courses
till death. The light of nature, it must be confessed, leaves us very much in
the dark as to another state; and how it shall fare with those, who having been
vicious, are reclaimed to the path of virtue before they leave the present. And
although it may be probable, upon the footing of mere nature and reason, that God
will not be strict to mark iniquity against such persons; but that they shall
be in some degree happy hereafter, yet this is put beyond all reasonable ground
of doubt, only by the express declarations and promises of God in his word, or
by immediate revelation from him. The holy scriptures contai^^ the most ample
assurances of his grace and good will, and of his kind intentions to penitent
sinners; clearly showing us what great and unspeakable gainers we shall be, if
after we have foolishly departed from the living God, we turn our feet unto his
testimonies, and walk in his commandments.

THE benefits and blessed privileges which God, in his unutterable love, has
been pleased to promise to those who sincerely repent of their sins, and return
to him, are chiefly these: The free and entire remission of their sins: The
special care, guardianship and guidance of his providence in this world; and
eternal life and glory in the kingdom of heaven. These are the advantages which
we shall obtain, by turning our feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his
commandments; that we shall obtain, I mean, through the riches of his grace in
Jesus Christ, the great Mediator betwixt God and sinful men, not independently
of him. For it is only through him, and for his sake, that God dispences pardon
and eternal happiness to sinners. The wages, and proper demerit of sin is
death; but the forgiveness of sins, and eternal life is the free gift of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord Romans VI.23.
.

LET me refresh your memory, and excite you to your duty, by pointing out to
you more particularly, some of these gracious promises, of which I am speaking.

Now the holy scriptures abound with offers of pardon, or the forgiveness of
sins, to those who cease to do evil, and learn to do well. God has all along,
even very soon after the apostasy of our first parents, and under the legal
dispensation, revealed himself propitious to sinful men. The same mount Sinai,
from which his holy law had been proclaimed in such majesty and terror, saw him
soon after passing by, and proclaiming his name, The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin.
Exodus XXXIV.5, 6, 7.
-- His word assures us that he is more ready to pardon sinners who repent, and
return to him with their whole heart, than they are to ask forgiveness of him,
or than he is to punish those who have long deserved his displeasure. And hence
it is, that he so compassionately invites and persuades us to return to him;
for he gains nothing by our doing so, except it be an opportunity to show the
exceeding riches of his grace to those, whom the sword of his justice might
have cut off, and utterly destroyed.

LET me particularly remind you of a few of these his merciful offers of pardon
to those who repent, and turn their feet unto his testimonies. Thus in the
prophecy of Ezekiel, chap. XVIII. -- If the wicked will turn from all his sins
that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked
should die? says the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways and
live? And afterward in the same chapter, Because he considers, and turns
away from all his transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live,
he shall not die -- Repent, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions;
so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for
why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye! And
because those whose transgressions have been multiplied, of a very heinous,
aggravated nature, and long continued in, are sometimes apt to despond,
thinking that God's mercy cannot be extended to them; he has taken particular
care to assure us, that the greatness of our crimes, and of our guilt, shall be
no bar to our finding a gracious reception with him, provided we heartily turn
from our sins, and work righteousness. Thus, particularly in the first chapter
of Isaiah, having set forth the sins of his people Israel in the strongest
language, by comparing them to the people of Sodom; and admonished them to put
away the evil of their doings from before his eyes, he then encourages them to
do so, by giving them the strongest assurances of his mercy -- Come now, and
let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; tho they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

NOR is this pardoning mercy of God limited to any particular penitent
transgressors, to the exclusion of others who are alike penitent. It overflows
upon a whole guilty people, although in a manner ripe for vengeance and
destruction, whenever there is a thorough and universal reformation in it: and
this, although God had denounced speedy ruin to it. At what instant, says God by
the prophet, I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to
pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from the evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them. Jerem. XVIII.7, 8.
This declaration, and gracious promise of God relates, indeed, more
immediately to his providential dispensations in this world, than to his
dealings with people in another: And being considered in this light, it was
remarkably verified in his conduct toward the people of Nineveh, though pagans.
He had sent his prophet to denounce wrath and destruction against that great,
and very wicked city, even within forty days. But the people repented, and
proclaimed a fast; and the king said, Let man and beast put on sackcloth, and
cry mightily unto God; yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from
the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent,
and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Jomah III. 7, --
It follows, And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and he did it
not. Thus gracious and long-suffering; thus slow to anger and plenteous in
mercy; thus ready to forgive iniquity, transgression and sin, even the sins of
an whole people, upon their repentance, did God both proclaim and manifest
himself to be; and this, even long before the setting up of that dispensation
in the world, which is more properly called the dispensation of his grace. For
God's grace and pardoning mercy, considered with reference to futurity, and as
extending their influence to another state of existence, were not fully
revealed, and made manifest, but by the appearing of Jesus Christ in the
likeness of sinful flesh; to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself; and
thus by one offering, to perfect forever them that are sanctified. Heb. X. 14.


THE gospel is so eminently a revelation of pardon, and mercy, and grace, to
sinful men, that the apostle makes this its characteristick; calling it the
gospel of the grace of God; and sometimes "grace" in the abstract, as if there
were nothing in it but what was comprised in this term. At other times, it is
the word of reconciliation: -- All things are of God, who has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ; and has given to Us the ministry of reconciliation;
to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing
their trespasses unto them 2 Cor. V. 18, 19.
. -- And agreeably hereto, repentance, and the remission of sins in the name of
Jesus Christ, are spoken of as a summary of that gospel, which our Lord
commanded his apostles to preach throughout the world. After our Savior's
resurrection, and just before his ascension into heaven, he said to his chosen
apostles, whose understandings he then opened in some measure, that they might
understand the scriptures -- Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: And that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name, among all nations, beginning
at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things. Luke XXIV. 46 47, 48.


AGREEABLE to this general account of the evangelical dispensation, the new
testament abounds with declarations of God's mercy, and the pardon of sin, to
all truly humble, penitent, and reformed transgressors. These offers are so
numerous, and so universally known, that it seems needless to produce any
particular examples. However, to show you how exceeding ready and willing God
is to forgive those who return to him; I shall just remind you of our Savior's
well-known parable of the prodigal son Luke XV 11, --
which is indeed very moving and affecting, even considered without its
designed reference to the manner of God's dealing with penitent sinners. This
foolish youth is supposed to forsake his father's house, where he had bread
enough and to spare; and to go into a far distant country. Here he soon wastes
his substance in riotous living; is necessitated to betake himself to the
basest employments for a subsistence; and wishes in vain to satisfy himself
with the husks which the swine fed upon. He at length awakes, as it were, out
of a long and deep sleep; and "comes to himself." He thinks upon his ways, and
arises to go to his father with that humble and penetential confession, Father,
I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son. -- But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and
had compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. The son
then makes his confession and acknowledgment, according to his resolution while
he was yet in a far country. But the father, overjoyed at the unexpected return
of his son, instead of upbraiding him with his ungrateful conduct, is concerned
only to give him a kind welcome -- Bring forth the best robe, and put it on
him, and put a ring on his finger, and shoes on his feet. And bring hither the
fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat and be merry. For this my son was
dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. There cannot, I think, be
a stronger, or more affecting representation, than our Savior gives us in this
parable, of the great compassion of God toward sinful men, who at length
penitently return to him, how far soever they have gone astray from him; of his
willingness to meet them upon their return from their wanderings, with the
bowels and forgiveness of a father; of his rejoicing at an opportunity to
receive them, and to bestow upon them the tokens of his love: For such joy
shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents.

YOU see then, that if the pardon of our sins is of any value or importance to
us, how much it concerns us to turn our feet unto God's testimonies, and to
keep his commandments. For if we do the latter, we shall certainly obtain the
former. He, against whom, and whom only we have sinned, has been pleased, through
his dear son, to promise his pardoning mercy to all that are truly penitent.
And if, with broken and contrite hearts, we confess our sins, as the prodigal
did, we may securely rely on his word, that he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 John 1.9.
And, oh! how sweet is the voice of pardon to the guilty conscience, and
wounded spirit of an awakened sinner? How much more refreshing, than good news
from a far country, or cold water to the thirsty soul?

THERE are moreover many promises, or at least gracious encouragements given us
in the holy scriptures, that if we return to God by sincere repentance, and
keep his commandments, we shall reap great advantages by it even in this life.
In keeping his commandments there is [now] great reward. And godliness is said
to be profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, as
well as of that which is to come. God has given us leave to hope, and to
expect, that if we fear him and work righteousness, we shall be favored with
the special protection, guidance, and outward blessings of his providence,
during our pilgrimage in this world. The evils and perils, to which human life
is naturally exposed, and which we are unable to guard against, or to remove,
are very great and numerous: So that it highly concerns us to have a friend and
protector more wise and powerful than we are ourselves: One who can foresee and
avert the evils which are likely to befall us; or lead us, perhaps quite
imperceptibly to ourselves, into the proper methods of escaping them; or
mitigate them when they come upon us; or sanctify them to us for our real
benefit; and to cause all things, even those which are reckoned the most
calamitous, to work together for good to us. How desirable and happy is it, to
have such a guide, protector and friend? And such an one do we all obtain in
God most high, by turning our feet unto his testimonies, and keeping his
commandments. His salvation is ever nigh to them that fear him: He will be
their guardian and their God; their sun and shield. He will bestow upon them
outward, temporal blessings, as far as such things are best for them: He will
defend them from external, worldly evils and sorrows; such, I mean, as would be
really prejudicial to them upon the whole: He will enable them to bear such as
he permits to befall them, and render them salutary and useful, as the means of
making them wiser and better.

NOW these are some of the special privileges of good men, the sons of God;
privileges which belong to them, and only to them, who keep his commandments.
For there are no promises of this nature, made to the workers of iniquity: But,
there are many threatenings, that God will afflict them with sore temporal
calamities; that he will confound their devices, and frustrate their hopes;
that he will turn even their blessings into curses; and in all respects walk
contrary to those, who walk contrary to him, in their evil ways.

NOR are the privileges of the righteous which I have just now mentioned
inconsiderable ones, tho they are not the greatest. They do not consist merely
in outward blessings, or an exemption from many external evils and vexations
which others undergo. They comprise in them peace of mind, and a sense of
security, in times of the greatest trial and adversity. This is in some degree
the natural result of faith in God, and a conscience void of offense toward
him. For which reason it is spoken of in scripture, as the fruit and effect of
righteousness: The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.
Isaiah XXXII.17, 18.
Agreeably hereto it is said of wisdom, (which, in the writings of Solomon,
generally means the knowledge of God, and forming the heart and manners aright)
that length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and
honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a
tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that
retains her. Prove. III 16, 17, 18
The experience of all good men does, in some measure, verify these
observations concerning the superior happiness attending the ways of religion
and virtue. And now, if it be of any consequence to us to live peaceably and
happily in this world; if, of any, to have the all-powerful and gracious
protection of divine providence; and to enjoy serenity of mind in a
consciousness of our Maker's favor; then it is of equal importance to us to
turn our feet unto his testimonies, and to keep his commandments; this being
the only way to obtain those blessings. For there is no peace, says my God, to
the wicked. Evil continually pursues sinners, and very often overtaketh them
in the present life: So that with what they actually feel, and what they fear,
from a consciousness of their ill deserts, they are like the troubled sea when
it cannot rest, whose waters cast forth mire and dirt. We cannot therefore, if
we believe these things, but acknowledge that it is of great importance to us
to forsake our sins, and keep the commandments of our God, only from a
consideration of the present comfort and happiness attending a life devoted to
his service.

HOWEVER, this is but the beginning of joy with those, who return to God by
unfeigned repentance, and live in obedience to his commandments. Look beyond
this narrow span of human life; and you see pleasures infinitely superior to
any that are enjoyed here; a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory;
an happiness unallayed by any root of bitterness; unbounded in degree;
undecaying with time; unlimited in duration; and uncloying with possession. God
has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, not only that we
might be at peace with him, and blessed of him, while the world stands; but
more especially, that in the ages which are to come, and which never will
expire, he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness
toward us, through Jesus Christ: Ephesians. II.7.
i. e. toward all those who hearken to the admonitions of his word, and the
invitations of his mercy, so as to turn from their evil ways, and keep his holy
commandments. The souls of the righteous are always in the hand of the Lord;
and they are no sooner enlarged from these earthly tabernacles, than they are
carried by angels into Abraham's bosom, the paradise of God. Here they are at
peace, and in joy, even before their mortal and corruptible part is laid in the
grave, and the dust returns to the dust, as it was.

IN this unknown, but blissful region, we may conclude from the intimations
given us in scripture, the spirits of just men made perfect, remain in joyful
expectation of the redemption of their bodies; enjoying in the mean time, by
anticipation, and the full assurance of faith and hope* that complete and
perfect salvation which Christ has wrought out for them, and which, in the
judgment of the great day, he will bestow upon all them that look for him, and
love his appearing. At which time all the redeemed and ransomed of the Lord;
all who were so wise during their state of trial, as to accept the redemption
offered them, by performing the terms on which it was offered, shall be clothed
with glorious and immortal bodies: and standing on the right hand of their
enthroned Lord and great Redeemer, shall hear that sentence from him, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. Which sentence shall not only absolve them forever from all
guilt, and give them an eternal divorce from all pain and sorrow, the fruit of
sin, and the effect of the curse; but put them in the immediate possession of
that inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, which
is promised to the sons and heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ.
But I presume not to give any particular description of the glorious state, and
happiness of the righteous hereafter; knowing that eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart and imagination of mortal man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him. We are assured in
general, from the holy scriptures, that they shall be blessed, not only
infinitely beyond their deserts, but beyond their present conceptions and
wishes; and thus blessed forevermore.

NOW I hope I need not spend time to prove to any man in his senses, that it is
a thing of importance to him, whether he does, or does not obtain an happiness
unbounded and everlasting; and consequently, whether he does, or does not turn
his feet unto God's testimonies; since we are certain that they only who do the
latter, shall enjoy the former. We know that into that thrice glorious kingdom
which God has prepared for his friends and favorites, no unclean thing shall
enter; neither whatsoever works abomination, or that makes a lie: but the
holy, that do his commandments, the redeemed and ransomed of the Lord, shall
ascend, and live, and shine glorious there, with songs, and everlasting joy
upon their heads. And he that is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them,
and shall lead them to living fountains of water; and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes. If you think it of any importance to you to become
partakers of such an happiness as this, i. e. the greatest which God has to
bestow, certainly you cannot think it a matter of indifference to you, whether
you comply with the terms of it, by repenting of your sins, and turning your
feet unto God's testimonies; or finally cut yourselves off from it, by
persevering in your sinful courses. But,

LET us now proceed to the fourth and last thing mentioned for the illustration
of this first general head of discourse; which is,

4thly THE astonishing method which God has projected for our salvation from
the dominion of sin, and the punishment due to it: you know I mean the
incarnation and sufferings, the life and death, of his own dear Son here on
earth. This matter being attentively, tho but briefly considered, will set the
great importance of turning our feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his
commandments, in a stronger point of light; and give an additional degree of
weight and force to the arguments that have been already insisted on. You are
sensible that the particular means or method, by which God offers to deliver us
from any evil, whether natural or spiritual, is of distinct consideration from
that evil itself. So also, the particular means or method, by which he offers
to confer upon us any good, whether temporal or eternal, is of distinct
consideration from the good itself. It is moreover evident, that these means
and methods may be of such a nature, as greatly to enhance the favor, and add
to the blessing; or, at least, of such a nature, as to give us a more striking
and affecting idea of its worth and importance; and consequently of the
importance of our doing that which may be requisite, on our part, in order to
render effectual the gracious purposes of heaven toward us.

NOW this is the case with respect to the matter under consideration. It is
plainly a thing of great importance to us to turn our feet unto God's
testimonies, that we may receive the remission of sins, and obtain eternal life
and glory in the kingdom of heaven. But surely the importance hereof appears in
a still stronger light to us, when we reflect particularly upon what God has
done, in the way of means, in order to bring us to repentance, in order to our
obtaining forgiveness, and a title to future glory, honor and immortality. That
end must be of inconceivably great importance to us, for the accomplishing of
which, God spared not his only begotten Son, but delivered him up for us all;
that end, for which the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,
emptied himself of his glory in heaven, and became incarnate, dwelling amongst
men in the likeness of sinful flesh, and exchanging the form of God for the
form of a servant; that end, for the accomplishing of which he, according to
the will, and eternal purpose of God, thot it worth his while to become our
instructor and guide, our monitor and example, after God had raised up so many
holy men and prophets to preach righteousness to the world, and call sinners to
repentance; that end, for which so glorious a personage as he by whom God
created all things, condescended to undergo so many trials and sufferings for a
number of years, in our world and nature, not having where to lay his head, tho
the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: that end, for the
accomplishing of which, he not only became a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with the common griefs which are incident to humanity; but to very peculiar and
extraordinary ones, so that there were no griefs in all respects like to his,
whether we consider the contradiction of those sinners whom he came to redeem,
which he endured against himself, or those temptations and vexations of satan,
to which he was subjected, especially when his last sufferings approached; when
he was in an agony, and sweat as it were great drops of blood, falling from his
face to the ground: In fine, that end, for the accomplishing of which he poured
out his soul unto death, the accursed death of the cross, and was made a curse
for us. That end, for which God gave his Son to do and suffer these things, and
for which he actually did and suffered them, in consequence of God's
appointment, must certainly be an end of such importance to us, that it is not
fully conceivable by us. We know indeed, in general, what the end hereof
actually was, namely, that we might be redeemed from all iniquity, from the
power and practice of sin, from the miseries of our fallen and corrupt estate,
from the curse of the law, and become the sons and heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ, "the firstborn among many brethren," to an
incorruptible and heavenly inheritance. We know in general, not only that this
was the end of our Lord's incarnation, sufferings and death; but we can also
see in some measure, that it highly concerns us that this end should be finally
accomplished with respect to us, by our cordially falling in, and cooperating
with, this gracious design, and mavelous dispensation of providence. But
still there is, and must be, somewhat herein which is unfathomable by us: It is
a great deep, which we cannot go to the bottom of: It must be somewhat of so
momentous and interesting a nature to us, that we cannot have a full and
adequate conception of it at present; neither of the greatness of that misery
and destruction, to deliver us from which, the Son of God was made manifest in
the flesh, lived in sorrow, and died upon a cross; nor yet of the greatness of
that salvation which he came to purchase for us, and of that glory which is to
be revealed in his saints. It is a dispensation of divine love and grace, which
evidently bespeaks, or indicates, an end and design too big and august for our
narrow, limited capacities; and indeed the holy angels are represented as
prying into it with wonder and admiration.

WE can hardly conceive of an end great enough, a design really worthy of such
an extraordinary interposition of providence: We can hardly imagine ourselves,
or any thing which relates to us poor mortals, of such importance in the
creation of God, that it would be worth while (to speak after the manner of
men) for God to be at so great an expense for us, or for so dignified and
glorious a person as the Son of God, by whom all things were made and consist,
to come down from heaven, and to suffer death with malefactors upon a cross.
But yet we are sure that all this is in fact true: And what is the consequence
from it? I answer, it is plainly this, that we ourselves are of more
consequence, and our souls of more worth than we can well conceive of, or at
present imagine: That we do not fully know, either what a terrible destruction
is implied in that death, which is said to be the "wages of sin," or the glory
and happiness implied in that eternal life with God, which is his gift through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Both the ruin and misery of that state of sin and
corruption, from which Christ came to redeem us, and the bliss and glory of
that state to which he came to conduct us, are great beyond our present
comprehension. They shun our finite capacities, and are in a sort hidden from
us, even by means of their own greatness. And we may be certain beforehand, if
there be a due proportion and analogy amongst the works of God; betwixt the
dispensations of his providence toward us in this probationary state, and what
is to succeed them hereafter, in a state of retribution, that both the ruin of
those who persevere in their rebellion against God's righteous laws and
government, and the happiness of those who cooperate with the designs of his
grace, shall far surpass any thing of misery upon one hand, and of bliss and
glory upon the other, that we can now conceive of by the utmost stretch of
imagination. It was not, surely, to deliver us from some inconsiderable evil,
nor to procure for us an inconsiderable good, that the Son of God came into
this apostate world, and lived and died therein, in the manner represented to
us in the holy scriptures! Here it is that we see as far, perhaps, as it is
possible for us to see at present, the importance of turning our feet unto
God's testimonies, and keeping his commandments: We see the vast importance
hereof more fully and clearly by contemplating upon the mediation of Christ,
and trying to enlarge our thots to something future, that may correspond to so
great an interposition of divine providence and grace, than we can, even by
contemplating the express threatenings and promises of God in his word, tho so
wonderfully calculated to fill us with awful apprehensions on one hand, and
with glorious hopes on the other. Unless we cooperate with the design of
Christ's coming into the world, by exercising repentance toward God, and faith
toward him, and living in obedience to his commandments, we shall not only
have no lot or portion hereafter, with them that reap the glorious fruits of
his mediation; but suffer the full demerit of our sins, and amongst others,
that of treading under foot the Son of God. So that although we have now all of
us reason to rejoice, yet we may hereafter have occasion to lament, that ever
there was born to us in the city of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord!
For certainly it had been far better for us, if God had left us to perish
finally in the ruins of the common apostasy, than that He should have been so
good and gracious as to offer us, and we so evil and unthankful as to reject,
so great salvation!

AND thus we have done with the several heads of argument, by which it was
proposed to show, of what vast importance it is to sinful men to turn their
feet unto God's testimonies, and keep his commandments; tho it is impossible
fully and adequately to represent it, or even to conceive of it: For every
thing that relates to infinity and eternity, puzzle and confound us, so that we
can neither think nor speak with due justness and propriety of them, even when
religion is out of the question. But whether you consider the greatness,
majesty and holiness of God, and his power displayed through out the universe,
which power may be equally employed for our welfare or destruction: Whether you
consider the express and repeated declarations of his word, respecting the
final perdition of wicked and ungodly men, the truth of which cannot be doubted
of: Whether you consider the great and precious promises which he has made in
his holy word, to those who turn at his reproof, and do that which is lawful
and right: Or, lastly, whether you consider the astonishing method which his
wisdom and unutterable love have projected for our redemption from sin, and its
effects, and for bringing many sons unto glory, by Jesus Christ his Son, made
perfect through sufferings: Whether you consider one or the other of these
things properly, still the vast importance of forsaking your sins, and keeping
God's commandments, will appear in a very strong and convincing light; so that
every man who has any eyes to see, or ears to hear, must be sensible of it. And
if either of these things, separately considered, discovers the importance
hereof so clearly, and shows it to be the highest degree of imprudence and
folly, not to say of impiety, for men to go on in the allowed violation of
God's commandments; of how much greater importance does this appear, when we
lay all these considerations together? when the force of all these arguments,
either of which is really of infinite weight, is united, and brot into one
view, into one comprehensive argument for the reformation of our lives, and
devoting them to the service of God! When all these scattered rays of truth and
reason, are brought to a proper point, so as to strike the mind at once, it
might be supposed, that men's hearts would not only be convinced, but quite
overpowered, melted and dissolved, unless they were of such a nature and
temper, that neither reason nor revelation, which are both from the same great
Father of lights, could have any influence upon them. The God of this world
must have strangely blinded the eyes of such men, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of the invisible God, should shine
into them; and make them discern the things that belong unto their peace,
before these things are, in a still more awful sense, hidden from them!

THE time is too far elapsed to proceed to another head of discourse. I am not
willing to suspect, either the understandings or the hearts of any of you, my
beloved hearers, so far as to doubt, whether you do not plainly see, and even
feel, the force of these arguments, and the infinite importance of fearing God,
and keeping his commandments. No! I will not doubt but that you are deeply
sensible, your whole interest and well-being, depends upon it. Not only our
bible, but the whole visible creation, contains lectures of wisdom, of warning,
and admonition, to them that have eyes to see; it is a mighty volume,
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction and instruction in
righteousness, if we will but read, and meditate upon it. God speaks to us
daily, in all his providence; even in the most common of them, in order to
excite us to that reverence of, and obedience to him, which is our greatest
good. Wisdom is not only to be sought or found, in those books and places which
we usually term sacred: She cries without, she utters her voice [even] in
the Streets: She cries in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the
gates: in the city she utters her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones,
will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate
knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you,
I will make known my words unto you. Prove. I.20 -- 23.
This is the voice of wisdom to you all at present, which you may hear in every
place, unless you are like the deaf adder that stops her ear. O! attend to
it, lest this friendly monitor should turn a bitter accuser, saying, Because I
have called, and ye have refused, Ver. 24.
etc. Let me beseech you in the name of Him, whose I am, and whom I am
endeavoring to serve, tho in much weakness, to bear these important things in
your minds; and not merely to remember them, but to practice agreeably to them,
by turning your feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his commandments. You
cannot but know, that this is a reasonable and wise part for you to act; and
not only conducive in some degree, but absolutely necessary, to your future
well-being; to your escaping the wrath to come, and being immortally happy in
the kingdom and presence of God, when momentary ages are passed away and
forgotten. Be wise, then, for yourselves: and let not, I will not say, me, but,
the whole creation, preach to you in vain. Know, O man! woman! child! Know,
that it is not God, but thou, thyself, that will reap the advantage of thy
wisdom, thy repentance, thy obedience. For, can a man be profitable unto God,
as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure unto the
Almighty, that thou art righteous? or will it be gain to Him, if thou make
thy way perfect? Look unto the heavens, and see, and behold the clouds which
are higher than thou. If thou sinnest, what do thou against Him that made
both them and thee? Or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what harm do
thou unto Him? If thou art righteous, what give thou Him? or what receives
He of thine hand? Thy wickedness may indeed hurt a poor, weak, dependent
creature, as thou art; or thy righteousness may profit thee, the son or
daughter of man; but not Him, before whom all nations are as the small dust of
the balance, and are counted to Him as less than nothing and vanity. The result
of all, therefore, is this, -- If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thyself:
but if thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it! Prove. IX 12.


SERMON III. The Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The first Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the Shortness
of human Life, and the uncertain Duration of this probationary State.
PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON III.
THE great importance of turning our feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping
his commandments, has been shown in two preceding discourses; and more
especially from these considerations;

THE power and greatness of God, his holiness and universal dominion, and our
absolute dependence upon him:

THE clear and positive denunciations of his wrath, in his word, against all
impenitent, irreclaimable transgressors:

THE great and precious promises of the gospel, made to those who turn at God's
reproof, and keep his commandments:

And lastly,

THE astonishing method which God has projected for our salvation from the
dominion of sin, and the punishment due to it.

THESE considerations make it manifest, how greatly it concerns us to break off
our sins by repentance, and to walk before God in holiness and righteousness,
according to his commandments; which was the first general point proposed, in
handling the present subject. The second general head, to which we now proceed,
was,

SECONDLY, To show, by a variety of arguments, the vast importance of being
speedy in this business; of making haste to keep God's commandments; and the
extreme folly and danger of delaying it.

HOWEVER, it is only one argument that will be insisted upon at present, with
this view; which shall be drawn from a consideration of the shortness of human
life, and the uncertain duration of this probationary state. Diverse other
arguments will be left to succeeding discourses. For I shall choose to confine
myself to a single point in each discourse, rather than to run the hazard of
perplexing and distracting your minds by too great a variety. And besides, the
arguments which will, by God's leave and help, be insisted upon, seem to be so
weighty and momentous in themselves, that each of them may well claim a large
and distinct consideration, by itself.

IT may be reasonably presumed, that you are all in general convinced, that it
is both your duty and highest interest to turn your feet unto God's
testimonies, and to keep his commandments: but possibly you may not so clearly
perceive the necessity of being speedy herein, as the Psalmist was, who tells
us, that he made haste and delayed not. There are many persons who will not
pretend to deny, but that it is of the last importance to them to repent of
their sins, and reform their lives; who yet cannot be persuaded of the
reasonableness and importance of doing this immediately, without any delay; but
will be for deferring it to some future opportunity, which they imagine will be
more convenient for them, and answer the end as well in other respects. It is
indeed here, that one of the greatest dangers lies, of men's finally perishing
in their sins: So that when they are convinced of the necessity and importance
of a reformation in general, they are to be shown the necessity and importance
of beginning it without any delay; otherwise the time may perhaps never come,
which suits them in all respects; and so they will never be the better for that
general conviction, which they have of the importance of leading a better life.

Now tho there were no other arguments to enforce a speedy repentance and
amendment, besides that which was just mentioned above, the shortness of human
life, and the uncertain continuance of our state of trial; yet this alone would
be absolutely conclusive; so as to convict that person of the greatest
imprudence and madness, who should defer the thoughts of returning to God and
his duty, a single day or hour; since we know not what a day or hour may bring
forth, and the opportunity which is let slip, and is lost to day, may be lost
forever! Whenever there is any thing which is in itself of great importance and
concernment to us in this world; (if indeed there is any thing here below that
can be justly accounted so) and when, by neglecting it at present, we may
probably miss of some great temporal good, or incur some great temporal evil,
and render the damage irretrievable to us; whenever this is the case, as to our
worldly business and concernments, it is the plain dictate of reason and
prudence to embrace the present time, and not to let slip the opportunity which
we actually have, upon the distant and uncertain prospect of another
afterward. And this is the general rule and maxim, by which all men that are
tolerably wise and prudent in their temporal affairs, invariably conduct
themselves: for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than
the children of light; Luke XVI.8.
more wary and provident, and more careful to improve their several
opportunities to secure their worldly advantage, than they who are favored
with spiritual privileges, and a space for repentance, are to make their
calling and election sure; and entitle themselves to eternal life and
salvation. Our Savior takes occasion to teach us a lesson of prudence in our
spiritual and eternal concernments, from the conduct and example of such
children of this world, as neglect not to improve their present opportunities;
nor put off 'til tomorrow, that which should be done today. Consider,
therefore, their ways, and be wise.

THE careful husbandman observes the first opening of the spring, and the
advancing of the sun with his genial warmth: He considers the approaching
summer, the autumnal season, and subsequent winter. In the spring he manures,
sows and plants his fields; in the summer he dresses them, waiting for the
precious fruit of the earth; and in autumn he gathers his harvest into barns,
that he may have all manner of store, when the season is past for that kind of
labor, and winter confines him at home. Did you ever know a discrete
husbandman, who did not thus consider times, seasons and opportunities; and lay
hold upon them as they arrived, lest, letting them slip, he should be destitute
of the means of subsistence? Fools, and slothful men, may indeed be guilty of
such negligence, and only they: And such are accordingly sent to learn wisdom
even of the ant, or pismire: Go to the ant thou sluggard, consider her ways,
and be wise: which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in
the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest. Prove. VI 6, 7, 8.


IF you consider the discrete mariner, you will find in him the same care, and
attention to times and opportunities. Knowing that winds, and tides, and
weather, will not conform to his inclinations, or wait his pleasure, he
prudently conforms himself to them, as far as possible. When the weather is
fair, the gale from the proper point, and the tide serves, he weighs anchor,
spreads his sails, and takes the helm, lest he should miss his passage, and by
unnecessary delays, be kept from the country and port for which he is bound.

THE discrete merchant, the object of whose attention is worldly gain and
profit, acts in conformity to the same prudential maxim, of observing times and
opportunities; which, being once slipped, may never return. Does he not
carefully observe the rise and fall of stocks, and of interest? Does he not
diligently inquire into the state of foreign markets; and into an hundred other
things and circumstances, which are in their nature fluctuating and changeable,
that, by improving his opportunities, and the critical time, he may make sure
of something; and promote his interest to the utmost? Will he neglect a present
favorable opportunity, when he knows not but that delaying a day or two, may
not only put it out of his power to make great profit to himself, but prove
ruinous to his fortunes, and reduce him to bankruptcy? Certainly a cautious,
prudent merchant will not be guilty of such negligence; but improve every fair
opportunity that presents itself, while it is in his power.

DOES not every wise general, or prudent commander, act upon the same
principle? Will such an one neglect a present advantage against the enemy, such
a one as almost secures success and triumph to him; when he knows not but that
his omitting it, may soon give the enemy as great, or a greater advantage
against himself; not only snatch a victory from him, but prove the occasion of
his being spoiled and captivated?

IN short do not all men in general act upon this same prudential maxim in
their secular affairs and concernments, even from the ermin'd monarchs, the
great warriors and politicians of the earth, down to the cobbler upon his
stall? You may plainly see this principle of wariness and caution operating,
and exerting itself, through all the various ranks of human life, from the throne
to the footstool; there are no men who are not governed by it in their worldly
business, excepting those only, whom all the world agrees to call, either giddy
or stupid, slothful or mad. Every individual, that has any pretense to be
reckoned knowing in his own proper concerns, and wise for himself in this
world, is habitually influenced by it. It is the discernment of times, and the
improvement of opportunities, that makes wise men, and the not observing, or
neglecting them, that makes fools, in all secular and earthly affairs. Prudent
forethought is the parent of plenty and prosperity; delay is the mother of
want, shame and wretchedness.

APPLY this to yourselves in your higher capacity, and more important interest,
as you stand related to God, and to another world. Reflect how much more
irrational and foolish it is for men to procrastinate in things of a spiritual
nature, and eternal concernment, than to be dilatory in their worldly
concernments. This life is the season for planting and cultivating those seeds
of piety and virtue, which may yield us a harvest of the fruits of
righteousness; that we may reap immortal felicity, and make provision for
ourselves against the winter of death that is approaching. We are all mariners,
bound to another country to another world; and now is the time to weigh anchor,
to spread our sails, and shape our course, toward the haven of endless peace
and joy. There is a pearl of great price set before us, which, like wise
merchants, we should endeavor to make sure of, tho at the expense of every
thing else which we possess; and without using any delay, lest the opportunity
should be over for making ourselves rich toward God, before we are aware; and
we should be cast into that prison, from whence we shall not come out, 'til we
have paid the uttermost farthing. There is victory, and triumph, and an
unfading crown of glory in view; obtaining which, we shall be more than
conquerors through him that loved us; and missing of which, we shall be far more
wretched than captives; -- punished as rebels and traitors against the king of
heaven!

SO important is the interest which we have depending; and all depending upon
our making a wise and diligent improvement of this present life; the only
opportunity which we have, or may expect, in order to work out our salvation.
That this season cannot be very long, and that it may possibly be very short,
we are equally certain. The life of man, when protracted to its greatest
length, in this period of the world, is but an handbreadth; and it is, besides,
every moment uncertain. And whenever it is terminated, our time of trial, you
know, is over; so that nothing then remains for us, but to receive the things
done in the body, according to that we have done, whether it be good or evil.
Can there be any thing more reasonable for us then, than to make haste? any
thing more imprudent, than delaying to keep God's commandments? Can you think
of any negligence of men in their worldly concernments, but what is infinitely
less foolish and absurd, than this negligence and delay, which are so common
with respect to religion, and the concerns of eternity? If men are negligent
and imprudent in their worldly concernments, there is still a possibility of
retrieving: Seasons may return; another spring and seed-time to the husbandman,
another wind to the mariner, another lucky opportunity to the merchant, another
advantage to the warrior. But the accepted time, and the day of salvation,
being once over, never return to the probationer for another world. This life
being run out, the time of trial which God has allotted us, is past; we know of
no other; we are to expect no other. For as it is appointed unto men once to
die, so after that is the judgment; and God will then render to every man
according to his deeds.

AND what now is human life, upon which so much depends? Is it like the
constant sun, which burns and shines through a long succession of years, so that
there is no danger of its going out, and leaving us, tho we should neglect our
proper business for the present? Is it not rather like a little meteor, that
darts along the sky, and both appears, and is wholly extinguished, in a moment?
in the same breath? Or, to use a scripture-comparison, is it not like a vapor,
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, almost as soon as the
sun is risen? Is it not like the grass? In the morning it flourishes and
grows up; but at noon it is cut down and withers. Man knows not his time;
nor what shall be, even on the morrow. If therefore he is wise, he will make
haste, and not delay to keep God's commandments to day; lest, through such
negligence, he should suddenly fall into lasting and irretrievable ruin.

I WILL not now ask you, where your fathers are, or whether the prophets live
for ever? But let me ask you, Where are many of your cotemporaries? Where are
many of your friends and acquaintance, who made their appearance upon the stage
of this life, about the same time that you did yourselves? Are they all living?
Are none of them removed far from you, into darkness? If you go and examine the
tombs and monuments in our burial-places, will you not find the names of many
of them? some perhaps newly engraved, but others that begin to moulder with
time; intimating to you, how long your brother or sister, your wife, husband,
or dear friend, has been in eternity! Yea, I may ask you, Where are many that
are younger than you? that were born several years after you? Are they all
still alive? Are they all still probationers for their eternal state? Or is not
that state already fixed with respect to diverse of those, who entered upon
their state of trial some years after you? Yea, let me ask still farther, Where
are some of your own children? the offspring of your bodies? Are they all
alive, and flourishing like plants of renown? Alas! are not some of those, who
were brot into the world by you, under God the common parent, gone out of it
before you, leaving you to mourn their untimely exit! It may be further
enquired, Where are many that were not only much younger than you, but also,
once, more healthy, strong and vigorous? of firmer nerves and sinews? of more
robust constitutions? and who were therefore, according to human rules of
probability, likely to survive you, and to weep, or perhaps to rejoice, over
your graves? Are all such, whom you once knew, still living? Are not many of
them, years since, taken off the stage, and numbered with the dead, not to rise
again, 'til the heavens be no more!

LET me inquire a little farther concerning the manner and circumstances of
their death; I mean the death of those, whom you once knew, and who were at
least as likely, if not more so, to survive you, than you was to outlive them.
To proceed then; had they all some considerable warning given them of their
danger, and approaching dissolution? Did they all lie for several months, or
weeks, upon the bed of sickness? Did they all languish away by such slow
degrees, and die such a lingering death, as gave them, if I may so express it,
fair warning to prepare for it, by making their peace with God, and settling
their accounts with heaven? so that after they were unable to walk the earth,
they might turn their feet unto God's testimonies, and run the way of his
commandments? What! Were none of them suddenly snatched away, as in a moment,
by some violent, rapid disease, which had no sooner seized, than it destroyed
them? or, at least, took from them the exercise of their rational faculties, so
as to disqualify them for religious reflections, and amendment? Were none of
them taken away by what is called, tho perhaps not very piously, a fortuitous,
casual, or accidental death; so as to be in another world, even before they had
the least apprehensions of any danger; and were busily employed, either in
executing some old, or laying some new scheme of worldly wealth, grandeur, or
pleasure?

CAN you call to your remembrance no one example of either of these sorts? Or
rather, can you not call to mind several, yea, many such. And do thou know, O
man, whosoever thou art, that this will not be thy own case? that the Son of
man will not come at an hour when thou look not for him? Do thou assuredly
know, that thy life will not be required of thee before tomorrow morning?
before this day's sun is set? before another hour is expired? yea, before thou
have heard the end of this, and the beginning of another sentence? -- Thou
know not what a mighty change a single moment may produce with respect to
thee, now, or any other time. And will thou risque thy soul? thy eternal
interest? thy all, at such uncertainties? Will thou presume to go on in thy
trespasses against Him, in whose hand thy breath is, and who may suddenly
deprive thee of it, even before thou have drawed another; and call thee before
his dread tribunal, all unprepared as thou art? Will thou not make haste to
keep his commandments, lest a moment's delay should prove thy final ruin? Will thou, when thy life, and time of trial, are thus precarious, think it time
enough to turn thy feet unto God's testimonies, ten, twenty, thirty, or forty
years hence? Yea, will thou think it time enough to do this tomorrow, which, to
thee, may never arrive; or, if it arrives, find thee in that dismal region,
where the rich man lift up his eyes, being in torment? Will thou not even now
humble thy soul before the great God, whom thou have hitherto been offending by
thy crimes? and whose patience may be in a manner at an end with thee? Will thou not now awake out of sleep, and haste, and fly, to lay hold upon the hope
set before sinners in the gospel? Will thou still tread under foot the Son of
God, whom thou have so long been wounding, and piercing, and putting to open
shame, by thy sins? Will thou not even now come to him, that thou may have
eternal life, and escape the perdition that hangs over thee? come to him, I
mean, in the exercise of faith toward him, and of repentance toward God; and
with humble resolutions, that, through his grace assisting, thou will be his
faithful and obedient servant? Alas! thou art worse than mad, if thou delayest
this another day.

IF you knew, my friends and brethren, if you certainly knew, that you had one
month longer to live, and only one, in which to work out your salvation; at the
expiration of which short term, you must appear before the judge of all the
earth to receive your sentence from him; this would doubtless alarm you. You
would be ready to cry out, What shall I do to be saved! and immediately betake
yourselves to your prayers, and the amendment of your lives. You would not
commit another wilful sin; but make haste, under the apprehensions of so short
a space for repentance, and of a speedy reckoning, to keep God's commandments.
This may be presumed concerning almost any man, however hardened and abandoned,
from what is generally seen in criminals under sentence of death; and in other
wicked men, when they are told by their physicians, or their own fears suggest
to them, that they are but a little while for this world. What distress are
they in? how sorry for their past sins? how anxious about futurity? how
resolved do they seem to be, that they will use these short remains of life to
the best advantage; and not trifle away another moment?

Now if you consider the matter attentively, you will plainly see, that you
have more reason to make haste, and not delay to keep God's commandments, than
if you were sure you had one month, and no longer to live. For, as the case now
stands with you, you are not certain of another month; nor even of another
hour. You may indeed think it probable that you may live several years; but
since it is possible you may be disappointed, and that this day is your last;
since it is possible your probationary state may end before the evening; and if
it should, your opportunity is entirely over, as much as it would be, if you
now saw the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, or sitting upon the
throne of his glory, to judge the world; since your lives are so uncertain, and
these things are thus, I say, it is evident that you have a louder call to make
haste in your preparation for death; and that it is more unreasonable and
hazardous for you to delay it another day, than if you was certain you had one
month, and no longer to live. Why then, I beseech you, will you live as
carelessly, as negligently of your eternal interest, as if you was sure of many
years to come; and that future opportunites would not be wanting, wherein to do
that necessary and most important work, which you leave undone at present? You
are sensible that you are undone, and your souls lost forever, if you do not
turn your feet unto God's testimonies, and learn to keep his commandments,
before your lives, and this state of trial, are ended. And since you have only
a distant, and very uncertain prospect of any future opportunity, whether it be
many years hence, or only one, or but a single month; how desperate is the
hazard which you run by your present delay? Or what is there in this world that
should tempt you thus to put off, and defer from time to time, the one thing
needful!

WE may reasonably suppose, that by far the greater part of those who die in
their sins under the light, and in a speculative belief of the gospel, had some
sense of the great importance of religion; that they had at times some checks
and remorse of conscience; some desire to escape the condemnation of the
wicked, and to obtain eternal life; and accordingly, that they frequently
resolved with themselves, that they would, some time or other, break off their
wicked lives, and turn their feet unto God's testimonies. Yea, it is probable
there is hardly one of these sinners, amongst that wretched multitude, who are
now lamenting their wickedness and impenitence in the regions of woe, but what
had often resolved thus with himself, upon occasion of some alarming
providence, some pathetic discourses, or reading or hearing the promises and
threatenings of God in his holy word, which is so quick, and powerful, and
piercing, at times, even to the hearts of very wicked men. But, alas! death
overtook them before the time actually came, which suited them to set about
this business of reformation in earnest. They determined, perhaps, that they
would do it five, ten, or twenty years hence; but to be sure, before their time
of trial was elapsed. Their sins and lusts were so dear to them, and their
presumption upon many years to come, was so strong, that it seemed, not only
very hard and mortifying, but in some measure unnecessary also, to break off
from them at present, and make haste to keep God's commandments. This seemed to
them like separating choice friends, the friends of their bosom; tho, in
reality, only the poisonous asps therein, which were unperceived stinging and
wounding them to death. Thus it is that wicked and foolish men go on, hugging
and cherishing their lusts; and violating the known, plain commandments of God,
from ontime to another: and yet, with a strange mixture of faith and
infidelity, of conscience and no conscience, of piety and impiety, of love to
this world and regard to another, of concern for their souls and negligence of
them, hypocritically resolving that they will not be wicked always, tho fully
determined to be so at present. They imagine they have time enough before them;
and God forbid that they should always live that wicked life, and die in their
sins at last! They have some favorite folly or vanity, to which, having
sacrificed a little longer, they will piously consecrate the remainder of their
days to the service of God, and secure the salvation of their souls. They have
either bought a piece of ground, or a yoke of oxen, or married a wife, or are
building, or taking their swing at youthful pleasures; so that they beg to be
excused just now; but will be sure not to let death overtake them unprepared,
the thought of which they cannot endure. And what is the consequence of these
delays and procrastinations? of presuming thus upon seeing many days, and
having time enough in store to do that, which ought to be done immediately,
while it is called today? I will tell you plainly what it is, because it may,
by the blessing of God, prove a salutary warning to you, and the means of
exciting you to improve your present opportunity. The consequence is, that
these foolish, presuming sinners are damned, before they really conceived
themselves to be in any great danger of damnation. I do not mean that this is
always, and universally, but very often the consequence, of such dilatory
presumption. Some men doubtless live to repent, according to their hopes and
expectations, through God's goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering toward
them. But many are snatched away in the midst of their fond presumption, and
vain imaginations; having no other opportunity for repentance, besides that
season which they thought too soon, and therefore neglected. And this is so
frequently the fatal consequence of letting slip the time actually present,
that the consideration hereof may well alarm every sinner; and excite him to
make haste to keep God's commandments, lest he himself should be another sad
example, how dangerous it is to delay it!

A MAN who is thoroly and properly sensible of the hazard he runs by delaying
to turn his feet unto God's testimonies; of the danger he is really in, every
moment of his delay, of being undone forever; cannot use any delay in this
matter, consistently with the known principles of human nature, and the motives
by which men are influenced to action: Which makes it proper and necessary
particularly to inculcate a just sense of this their danger upon them. If men
either disbelieve the great and fundamental doctrines of religion, respecting
future rewards and punishments, and the necessity of a pious and holy life; or,
if believing these things, they confidently depend upon living long, and having
time enough to repent and amend hereafter; upon either of these suppositions it
is easy to conceive it possible for them to persevere in their wicked courses;
and indeed it is improbable that they should do otherwise. For as the first of
these errors destroys the grand motives to religion in general, by wholly
taking away both the hope of a reward, and the fear of punishment; the latter
greatly weakens them, by removing these things at a distance; and making it
appear safe for a man to indulge his lusts for the present, of which he may
repent some years hence, and be saved at last. It is not altogether
unnaccountable, but rather to be supposed as a thing of course, that in either
of these cases a man will go on in his transgressions. But it is hardly to be
conceived possible for a man, who firmly believes the great doctrines of
religion, particularly those respecting a future state, the happiness of
heaven, and the miseries of hell; and who has, at the same time, a just sense
of his frailty and mortality, how precarious his life is, how soon his state of
trial may be ended, and he called to receive the due reward of his deeds; that
this may be on the morrow* or today, the next hour, or the next minute; it is
hardly to be conceived possible, I say, for a man who both believes the great
doctrines of religion, and has such a due, thorough sense of the uncertainty of
his life, and state of probation, and the danger he is in of damnation while he
continues in his sins, to delay to keep God's commandments. No! he will of
course make haste to do it, lest death and destruction should suddenly overtake
him: he will run, he will fly as upon the wings of the wind, or on the winged
lightning, that he may escape the danger which hangs over his guilty head, and
make his calling and election sure. The man who sees but an hand's or
hair's-breadth, as it were, betwixt himself and eternal perdition, (as all
wicked men who believe the scriptures would do, if they had a just sense of the
uncertainty of their lives) will surely never reason thus absurdly in his
heart: When I am some months or years older; when I have finished the worldly
schemes I am now so deeply engaged in; when I have taken my fill of sensual
delights; when I have disobeyed, affronted and dishonored God, by indulging my
lusts a while longer, then will I make all up with him by turning my feet unto
his testimonies, and keeping his commandments; so that I shall secure my
salvation effectually, without foregoing my present sinful pleasures. I can sin
with safety to myself for a while; and be wise, and pious, and virtuous, some
time hence, when my life is drawing near to a period. How absurd and senseless
would such reasoning be, if it could be called reasoning? how unnatural in the
mouth or heart of a sinner, who had any proper sense of human frailty, the
precariousness of his life, and the consequence of death to those, whom it
finds unprepared! Can you suppose it even possible for a man, duly sensible
what his state is, to have such thoughts, and idle notions of future amendment,
passing in his mind? No, surely: The language of a sinner's heart, awakened
into a just sense of the shortness and uncertainty of human life, and the
consequences of death, will be of a quite contrary strain: I have far too often
transgressed God's commandments already; I have risqued my soul far too long.
How foolish and brutish have I been! O my God! what have I been doing! How have
I been provoking thy just displeasure! I am a monument of thy mercy,
forbearance and long-suffering. I will no longer tempt thy vengeance, and
hazard the loss of my soul: I have done iniquity; I will do so no more. I will
now, even while it is called to day, turn at thy reproof: I will make haste,
and not delay to keep thy commandments; lest death surprise me unprepared to
appear before thee! O my God, help me to put these my present resolutions into
practice; and preserve me from that great and most dangerous folly of deferring
my repentance to another day!

THIS, or the like, will ever be the language of that man's heart, who truly
believes the great doctrines of religion, who duly considers how much depends
upon turning his feet unto God's testimonies, and how short, how very uncertain
the time is, which is allotted him for that end. It is not supposeable that such
a man should think of delaying a single day to make his peace with God; to seek
an interest in his favor, through him that came to seek and save that which was
lost; and to secure himself against the terrible effects of his righteous
displeasure. You might as well suppose that a man would, with his eyes open,
precipitate himself into the sea, or leap headlong into the fire, as that such
a person would persevere in the indulgence of those lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition; or in perpetrating those crimes, for which he knows
he may suddenly be cast into hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire is
not quenched!

AND hence it plainly follows, that whatever those men may pretend, who go on
from year to year in the gratification of their sinful lusts and passions, they
do not give a full and firm assent to the important doctrines of religion, more
especially those respecting a future state of rewards and punishments, or else
they have not a just sense of their frailty, the uncertainty of their lives,
and the time of their probation. Either they have some doubts remaining upon
their minds, respecting the truth of what religion teaches concerning the
perfections and moral government of God, and the consequences of death to the
righteous and wicked respectively; or, if they really and fully believe these
things, they are not duly apprehensive how short and precarious their time here
is, but most fondly and foolishly presume upon that as certain, than which
nothing is less so, viz. that they shall have an opportunity to repent and
reform hereafter. One or the other of these must needs be the case: There is no
possibility of accounting for their conduct, in delaying to turn their feet
unto God's testimonies, in any other way, without contradicting the known
principles of human nature, and the motives upon which men constantly act in
all other matters of importance to them. The former supposition may probably be
the truth as to some wicked men, even amongst the professors of religion; and
the latter as to others. Some, perhaps, may not really believe those great and
fundamental articles of religion, which they profess; but profess them only for
form and fashion sake, to avoid the appearance of singularity. It is easy to
account for the conduct of such. But there may be others who really believe
these doctrines, and are persuaded in their own minds, that their eternal
well-being depends upon turning to God, and keeping his commandments, during
the present life; who have yet never once thought seriously and justly of the
uncertainty of life; who have never learnt, with their other arithmetic, to
number their days aright; nor duly considered the hazard of delaying, on a
presumption that the period of their lives is far distant.

NOW whatever may be the reason why other persons neglect to return to God, the
more immediate cause why these latter defer their repentance, is, because they
thus put far away the time of their death, and thus flatter themselves with
future opportunities of amendment. And you are sensible that my subject, and
the main argument and design of this discourse, lead me more particularly to
guard you against this error, so natural, and almost necessary a cause, of
security in sin. It is probable that this is a very common, if not the most
general and fatal delusion, which people who believe the gospel, fall into; and
which keeps sinners from turning their feet unto God's testimonies without
delay. The devil is too knowing to tempt men to go on in their sins with their
eyes wide open, and while they clearly discern the danger of it; he knows this
would be to little purpose. The great adversary of our souls, of whose devices
we should not be ignorant, therefore deludes people into this notion, that
their lives are not so very precarious as is pretended; that they may, and
probably will, live long; that they need not be in haste; that there is no
great danger of delaying a little longer, and enjoying the pleasures of sin:
And that after they have indulged their lusts a few years more, then they may
repent, and work out their salvation, and do it with double diligence.

I CALL this a delusion of the devil, not only because all vain and false
imaginations in general, which tend to make men quiet in their sins, are
ascribed to him in scripture; but also because it is in itself hardly possible
that men should be deluded in this manner, and run into such a gross mistake,
unless they were under some strange infatuation; unless, in short, they were in
fact blinded and bewitched by that evil spirit, that works in the children of
disobedience. For what sinner could presume thus upon future opportunities, and
on that foolish presumption make himself easy, and think his condition safe,
were he not under the influence of some spirit even worse than his own, that
deprived him of his reason and senses? Is there any foundation in nature, or
experience, for such presumption? Is it not even contrary to common sense;
considering what our lives are, their natural frailty, the numerous diseases,
and the many casualties, if I may call them so, to which we are daily exposed?

LET me therefore endeavor to rescue miserable, mortal sinners, out of the
snare of the evil one, by impressing this plain, but useful sentiment upon
their hearts, that it may be written there as with a pen of iron and the point
of a diamond, as their sins are written in the book of God's remembrance; this
sentiment, I mean, that their lives are every moment uncertain. You can have no
dependence upon any future season, if you neglect the present, for turning to
God, and securing that great salvation which is revealed in the gospel. In the
language of scripture, NOW is the accepted time, and NOW is the day of
salvation. It is unreasonable to allot upon that time which may never be yours,
even in things of little moment: but to allot and rely upon it in a matter of
infinite and eternal concernment, and when, if you should happen to be
disappointed, you will be undone forever, this is such sottishness and
infatuation as cannot be expressed in Words: Nor could any thing give an idea
of it, sufficiently strong and affecting, unless perhaps it were, the groans,
and fruitless lamentations of the damned, who have been already thus deluded to
their perdition! One would think that the word of God himself, wherein we are
so frequently reminded of the uncertainty of our lives, and admonished not to
"boast ourselves of tomorrow," might be sufficient to reclaim us from this
folly; and to make us constantly look upon ourselves as dying men, even tho
there were no other argument to convince us. But if, like Thomas, you must
needs see before you will believe, and cry out, My Lord and my God! if you must
needs see, in order to your being convinced, how frail and precarious human
life is; come with me, let us look round the world; and then tell me what you
see therein. I know you see that the old die: But tell me, do you not see that
the young die also? Do you not see one dying there, who was just setting out in
business in the world, with a fair prospect of making a figure in it? Do you
not here see even children falling an early sacrifice to death? And must you
not from hence necessarily infer, that youth is no security at all against
death, how much soever you may rely upon it? Do you not see, in the next place,
that men of the greatest capacity and learning die, as well as the foolish and
brutish person? and consequently, that great parts, and acquired
accomplishments, are no security to you, tho possessed of them, and glorying in
them? In the next place, do you not see, that the rich die, as well as the poor
and necessitous? and consequently, that great worldly possessions are no
security, how apt soever you may be to think and say, you have much goods laid
up for many years? Do you not also see, that the princes and potentates of the
earth die, as well as men of low degree? and consequently, that worldly power
and dominion are no security to the possessors of them? that tho they are gods,
they are only mortal ones, and must die like common men? Do you not see, that
the strong and robust die, as well as the weak and infirm? and consequently,
that that which men are of all other things the most apt to rely upon, health
and vigor of body, are no security? In fine, do you not plainly see, that
persons of all these different ranks and conditions of life, often die
suddenly, without any considerable warning, unless it be that which they had
not the wisdom to take; I mean the common, visible mortality of the species,
and the deaths of others, of age, rank and circumstances parallel to their own?
You cannot deny, but that you plainly see all these things. And will thou then,
O vain man, boast thyself of tomorrow? Will thou, contrary to the evidence of
thy senses, presume upon the stability, and long continuance of thy life? Will thou, on this unreasonable presumption, excuse thyself from making haste to
keep God's commandments? Will thou wage heaven, with all its unfading joys,
that thy death is at a great distance? And will thou consent to incur the pains
and torments of the damned, if thou should be mistaken, and it should be
nigh, even at the door! For this is really the language of thy delay, if thou
delayest upon the presumption I am now speaking of; you do as it were bet your
immortal souls, that tho you neglect to turn your feet unto God's testimonies
at present, yet you shall not want an opportunity to do it hereafter. And what
can be more irrational than to risque so much upon so slender a probability?
especially considering, that tho you should not be mistaken and disappointed,
yet you really gain nothing by this delay, but lose the comforts and blessed
hopes of a life devoted to God?

WHAT do your reason and consciences answer to these plain, but very serious
and important questions? But indeed I need not ask you what answer they make:
for I know what it must of necessity be, if you understand the questions, and
the ground of them. It must needs be, that it is the height of imprudence and
madness to defer your repentance a day, or hour longer; that you will forfeit
all just pretentions to discrete and wise conduct, if you do not make haste to
keep God's commandments; since you have so great an interest that depends upon
your doing it before this life, which is so very precarious, is brought to a
conclusion. It is impossible but that your understandings should be convinced
of these things; and God grant that your hearts may be disposed to follow their
dictates!

THE argument which has been insisted upon in this discourse, you are sensible,
is drawn wholly from a consideration of the shortness and uncertainty of that
space which God allows us for repentance, and working out our salvation. If I
should live to preach, and you to hear, any more discourses upon this subject,
you may expect to hear some other arguments, tending to show you the importance
of acting the same part which the Psalmist did, who tells us that he made
haste, and delayed not to keep the commandments of God.

TO conclude for the present; Let me beseech you, as you value your souls,
seriously to consider, and keep in your remembrance, that argument which has
now been improved to quicken you to your duty. Fix it in your thoughts, that
this world is not your home; that you are strangers and pilgrims in the earth,
as all your fathers were; that you are hastening to an eternal state, a state
of righteous retribution; that you can have no dependence upon tomorrow; that
you may be in another world before you hear another sermon, yea before you get
to your own houses from the house of God, where the precariousness of life has
been represented to you. However you may triumph in the thoughts of your youth,
health or strength, you have, believe it, all a mortal distemper now upon you;
you are in a consumption; the seeds and the sentence of death is within you; it
cannot be long before, and it may be very soon that, you will go to the house
appointed for all the living. Watch therefore, and endeavor to be prepared for
your great change; for you know neither the day nor the hour wherein it will
come upon you. Whenever it comes, you will be sensible, that as but one thing
is needful, so that claims the first and last attention of man; and that all
other cares, besides that of the soul, are foreign from his true interest, and
therefore little better than mere trifling. One might be confident, that a man
who believes the scriptures, and has a due sense of life's uncertainty, cannot
go on from year to year, in the known, wilful violation of God's commandments,
or delay to turn his feet unto his testimonies. A man must almost forget that
he is mortal, to be sure forget that he is every hour liable to death and its
consequences, before he can be easy in his sins. While he keeps death and
eternal judgment in view, and considers how soon and suddenly he may be called
out of the world to receive his recompense, he will of course be constrained to
live to God, who gives unto all, life and breath and all things; and upon whom
all entirely depend. So that there can hardly be a prayer more proper for
mortal man to put up to the immortal, invisible and eternal God, than that of
the Psalmist, with which I conclude; and which each one of us should make with
sincerity and fervor, as he did, while we are musing, and the fire burns; --
Lord! make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I
may know how frail I am. Behold, thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and
mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity -- Surely every man walks in a vain show: surely they are
disquieted in vain! Psalm XXXIX.3, -- 6,


SERMON IV. The Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The second Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the greater
Difficulty attending a Reformation, if deferred 'til the Habits of Sin are
confirmed and strengthened.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON IV.
THE reasonableness and importance of making haste to keep God's commandments,
was shown in the last discourse upon this subject, from a consideration of the
shortness of human life, and the uncertain duration of this probationary state.
It was then intimated to you, that some other arguments would, by God's leave
and assistance, be insisted upon, in order to quicken you in your return to
him, and to show you the unreasonableness of delay in this matter. Accordingly
I intend, in this discourse, to handle another argument with the same general
design of exciting you to a speedy repentance, and reformation of your lives;
tho the argument will be quite different in kind from the former.

THE present argument, then, shall be drawn from a consideration of the greater
ease of reforming now, without delay, than there will be hereafter, if we put
off this necessary and important work to another season, tho we were sure of
^aving another, as we are not. Taking it for granted that you have as many
years certainly to come, as you may perhaps presume upon, tho nothing is less
certain; yet if by delaying your return to God, you will render still more
difficult, what seems so difficult and irksome to you at present, it is plainly
the dictate of wisdom and prudence to make haste, and not to defer it to
another time.

WHEN any thing, be it what it will, is of great importance and necessity to be
done by us some time or other, which will be attended with difficulty, and
require much pains and labor, whenever it is done; and when delaying it will
certainly, or only probably, increase the difficulty, this is a plain reason
why we should immediately apply ourselves to the doing of it, without the loss
of any time. There would be some plausible excuse, yea, in many cases a
sufficient reason for delay, provided the particular business before us would
grow easier and easier upon our hands, the longer it was deferred; provided
that which at present requires great pains and self-denial, care and
watchfulness, would require little or none some years hence. In many affairs of
a worldly nature, tho not in all universally, this would fully justify a delay,
and even make it the part of wisdom. But where the reverse of this is true;
where the difficulty will be made greater by procrastination, it is evidently
most reasonable for us immediately to apply ourselves to the work before us;
that so we may save ourselves that additional degree of toil, trouble and
vexation, which will be the certain, or at least probable consequence of delay.

THE general rule or maxim here laid down, is indisputably true, and
universally acknowledged by men in their secular concernments. All men,
excepting only the foolish, slothful and improvident, both acknowledge it true
in speculation, and act according to it, in their worldly affairs. Does not
every man, who is but tolerably wise and prudent in the management of his
affairs, study and contrive, and exert himself, to dispatch them with all
speed, when it is either certain, or highly probable, that delays will create
new difficulties and obstructions to the accomplishing his designs? when he
knows that what is hard to be executed at present, will, in all likelihood,
become still the harder, the longer it is deferred? Do not all men of all
ranks, professions and stations in life, reason thus, and act upon this
principle; except only the foolish, negligent and slothful, as was intimated
before? Show me, if you can, any of those children of this world, who can be
called wise in their generation, or discrete in the conduct of their temporal
affairs, who do not govern themselves by this rule. You can show me none, who
do not. And should not we, who are called to the kingdom and glory of God, be
as careful, prudent and provident in the concerns of our souls, and eternal
interest, as the men of the world generally are in their temporal concerns? Or
rather, should we not be more wary, more circumspect, more diligent, more
studious to embrace the fittest opportunity for working out our salvation, than
they are to compass their worldly designs and projects? Certainly we should be
so, by how more important and necessary this business is to us, than the former
is to them. We should take heed lest, by any delay, we render this most
necessary work of amending our hearts and manners, more difficult and irksome
than it would be, if we engaged in it immediately, as we shall doubtless do, if
we delay it at all.

BUT let me be a little more particular in stating and urging this argument for
making haste to keep the commandments of God. And here, allowing all that could
be desired, and indeed much more than is true, viz, that wicked men might
depend upon many years to come, and be certain of a future season for
repentance, tho they neglect the present; yet even upon this supposition, I
say, it would be their wisdom immediately to apply themselves to the necessary
work of reformation, because deferring it will render it the more irksome and
difficult, and cost them the more pains in accomplishing it at last. This
argument consists of the several parts following, which, for the sake of
clearness, it will be proper to consider distinctly: viz.

THAT for wicked men to reform their hearts and ways, and turn their feet unto
God's testimonies, is a work of absolute necessity to them:

THAT it will be attended with difficulty and self-denial, how soon soever it
is engaged in:

THAT it will become still more difficult by being delayed: And, therefore,

THAT it highly concerns them to engage in it immediately; to make haste, and
not delay to keep God's commandments. -- Of each of these particulars in its
order, as the time will allow.

IT was observed then, as the groundwork of the present argument, and what is
to be taken along with us throout, That for wicked men to reform their hearts
and ways, and turn their feet unto God's testimonies, is a work of absolute
necessity to them. By which is meant, that they are entirely undone and lost,
if they do it not, and happy forever if they do it. There are many things,
which a man may either do or forbear, without any considerable advantage to him
upon one hand, or disadvantage upon the other. But here, the gain and the loss
are both of them beyond comparison or computation, being both infinite. This is
a work which, if we perform it in the day of our visitation, will gain us the
favor of almighty God, will insure the salvation of our souls, and a glorious,
incorruptible inheritance in the kingdom of heaven; so that whatever else we
may neglect, yet if we do this, we shall be happy forever, happy beyond all our
present ideas and conceptions. On the other hand, if we leave this undone, and
die in our sins, we shall incur the wrath of God, we shall lose our souls, and
have our portion with the devil and his angels in outer darkness; so that
whatever else we may do, yet if we neglect this, we shall be wretched forever,
wretched beyond all that we can conceive of wretchedness at present. How
necessary a work then, must that be, upon the performance or neglect of which,
so much depends! In our worldly affairs, we frequently think and speak of this
and the other thing as necessary, which are by no means so, the consequences of
doing or omitting them, not being very material to us one way or the other. But
this is truly necessary; because our great and eternal interest is inseparably
connected with, and depends upon it. And indeed all that was said in the two
first discourses upon this subject, concerning the importance of turning our
feet unto God's testimonies, is a proof of the great and absolute necessity of
this work, in the sense of the term necessity, as here used: So that there is
no occasion for enlarging any farther here, upon this point.

IT was observed in the next place, That this work will be attended with
difficulty and self-denial, how soon soever it is engaged in. To correct the
temper and manners, to break off a vicious course of life, and enter the paths
of righteousness, will at any time require great resolution, and cost t^
penitent much pains. Even before the flesh, the world and the devil, have
established their empire over a man in its full strength and power, it is no
easy thing to conquer them, and throw off their oppressive yoke. There will be
many a struggle betwixt the flesh and the spirit; there must be many a conflict
for the dominion over us, betwixt the world in which we live, and that world
which faith discovers to us; there will be many a strife and contest betwixt
conscience and the evil spirit that works in the children of disobedience,
before you will fully recover and establish your moral liberty, and get into a
fixed habit of piety, and obedience to God's commandments. I would not
therefore by any means flatter you with the thought, that you will not meet
with difficulties, with many discouragements, with much hard labor, and have
occasion to exercise great self-denial, 'ere you accomplish a thorough
reformation in yourselves, and become indeed the servants of God and
righteousness. This would be to speak wickedly for God, and to deceive you to
your hurt; whereas it is my duty to forewarn you truly of what you are to
expect, that you may sit down and count the cost, and be the better prepared to
encounter the difficulties that may arise in your way. These will probably be
so many and great, that you will often be ready to despond, thinking them
unsurmountable; and that tho you should struggle for a while, yet you must
finally be overcome, and fall by the hands of your spiritual enemies. This is
what you are to expect, in turning your feet unto God's testimonies, how much
haste soever you may make to do it, and how resolutely soever you may begin.
You will find numerous temptations to overcome, which will require all your
fortitude and strength, and without them, will prove too hard for you. You will
have snares laid in your way, so that you will sometimes be surprised into sin,
and caught by the wiles of the destroyer, before you was aware of the
particular danger you was in. And it will cost you many a groan in spirit, many
a tear, before you can recover yourselves out of the snare, and from under the
power of the devil. Even the young, although they may never have been remarkably
vicious, will be no strangers to these discouragements and difficulties, when
they set themselves in earnest to seek and serve their Creator. Nor is it
proper that they should be fed up, and deluded, with the contrary notions, that
all will be easy and pleasant to them at their first setting out in a life of
religion, and obedience to God's commandments; which might be of very hurtful,
if not fatal consequence to them.

ALTHOUGH the ways of wisdom are truly ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
peace, yet they are so only to those who have fairly entered into them, and for
some short time at least, been walking therein; who have gotten the mastery of
their lusts, and brot their passions into subjection to the laws of God and
reason. In doing this, the difficulty lies; in getting into the right way; in
thus subduing your lusts, and regulating your passions: And herein there ever
was, and always will be, great difficulty, how much ease and pleasure soever
there may be in the exercises of piety and virtue, after the habit of them is
in some good measure gained. The severing of your hearts from the world, from
all the lusts and vanities of it, and devoting it to God, in such a manner as
the gospel makes indispensably necessary to salvation, will ordinarily cause
pain and anguish, equal to that of cutting off a right hand, or plucking out a
right eye; yea, it will be like rending the heart itself asunder; which may be
one reason why repentance is expressed in scripture, by the metaphor of "a
broken heart." It may be added, that it would not be only difficult, but
altogether impracticable, for sinners to subdue their lusts, to change their
carnal minds, and serve God acceptably, were it not for the grace and
assistances of his holy Spirit, through which all things are possible. Without him
they can do nothing effectual to their salvation. But his word gives them
reason to hope, and firmly to expect, that if they are not wanting to
themselves, he will not suffer them to be tempted above that they are able; but
will with the temptation make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear
it; and not labor in vain, or spend their strength for naught.

BUT however unable you are to convert yourselves from the love of your lusts
to the love of God; and although his power is exerted in the change of every
sinner's heart, that is effectually changed; yet you are not to imagine that
his Spirit operates herein in such a manner, as to supersede the necessity of
the sinner's labor and endeavors, or to exempt him from all pain and toil and
trouble, in turning to God. We may indeed suppose it possible for God to turn a
sinner to himself, without any pain, or difficulty, or labor to the sinner. But
it is certain that this is not the way, in which he actually works upon the
hearts of wicked men in their conversion. His almighty power is not exerted in
such a manner as leaves them no work to do, no temptations and difficulties to
struggle with, no self-denial to practice. For all who have ever been truly
converted from their sins to God, have actually found these difficulties in
their way, and found by their own experience the necessity of exerting
themselves to the utmost, in order to surmount them. And all theories and
speculations, schemes and notions, whether respecting things natural or things
spiritual, must certainly give way to what is plain matter of fact and
experience, if there is any disagreement betwixt them.

LET every sinner therefore, whether old or young, remember these two things,
of great importance to be kept in mind by him; That without grace and help from
above, he cannot effectually change his own heart, so as to be made fit for the
kingdom of heaven: And, That he must cooperate with the good Spirit of God in
turning to him. He must not imagine that God will give him his Spirit in such
manner and measure, as will leave him no work to do, no trials and conflicts to
go through, no temptations and difficulties to vanquish. He must learn to endure
toil and hardship, if he hopes to become a good soldier of Jesus Christ; he
must exert himself with diligence, prayer and watchfulness. This is as certain
upon one hand, as it is upon the other, that all his pains and labor would be
ineffectual, without the blessing of God upon them. Wicked men are required in
the holy scriptures, not only to "strive to enter in at the strait gate," which
our Savior says was found but of few, at least in that age and country wherein
he lived; but they are even required to make them a new heart, and a new
spirit. Ezekiel. XVIII.31
Which admonitions evidently suppose, that they have somewhat to do, which is
their own proper work, in their conversion to God and his righteous ways. And
indeed, were not this true, as well as that the grace and assistance of God's
Spirit are necessary to that end, a great part of the scriptures must either
have no meaning at all, or else naturally convey a sense which is repugnant to
truth: To suppose either of which, would be highly derogatory to them, and
blasphemy against the Spirit that inspired them.

BUT not to digress any farther from the particular point before us. It is most
certain that all sinners, even the young not excepted, will find many trials
and difficulties, whenever they apply themselves to the working out their
salvation; much labor and pains will be requisite, and great self-denial, till
such time as they have made some considerable seize in religion. However,
this should by no means discourage or deter any from attempting a reformation
of themselves, with God's assistance, which will not be denied to them that
seek it aright. Whatever difficulties may attend this work, yet, as was
observed to you above, it is a work of absolute, indispensible necessity to
you: You must either turn your feet unto God's testimonies and keep his
commandments, or else be condemned as the transgressors of them, in the
judgment of the great day. There is no medium betwixt turning and dying,
according to the expression in the Prophet, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye
die, O house of Israel! It may be hard and irksome to you to forsake your sins;
but will it not be much harder, and more irksome, to undergo the penalty or
punishment of them in hell! Now as this work of reformation is absolutely
necessary in order to your salvation, so the sooner you engage heartily in it,
the better it will be for your selves. For, as it was observed above,

IT will become still more difficult by being delayed. The longer it is put
off, the more grief, pain and trouble it will cost the sinner, whenever he
turns his feet unto God's testimonies. This assertion is grounded chiefly, though
not entirely, upon the common, well-known maxim, that vicious habits in general
are strengthened by time, 'til they are rooted out and destroyed by the efficacy
of religion, and the grace of God: A maxim, as certainly true, agreeable to
experience, and to the doctrine of scripture, as it is common in the mouths of
men. The longer any have been sinning against God, the more hardened they are
of course against the fear of him, and the farther do they go astray from him
in the bypath of folly and wickedness; and the harder it will consequently be
for them to correct their tempers, to reform their lives, to turn their feet
unto his testimonies, and walk in his righteous ways. Wicked men grossly deceive
themselves, or are deluded by the devil, if they imagine, on the contrary, that
the power of sin and corruption in them will decay merely by length of time,
without their opposing it; and that if they delay to keep God's commandments
for a season, they shall find repentance and reformation an easier work, than
it would be at present. The reverse of this is most certainly the truth. And
yet it is highly probable, that many wicked men, unwilling to part with their
sins at present, for the love they bear to them, secretly flatter themselves
that this will be the case; and upon such a groundless supposition, and fond
presumption, indulge their lusts year after year, 'til they are grown old in
iniquity. They seem to imagine, if I may so express it, that they can sin away
their sins, if they take time for it; and that the corrupt fountain in their
hearts may run it self dry, and be quite exhausted, by the plentiful streams
flowing from it in a succession of years! But alas! that impure fountain within
them, from whence proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, deceits, and
other immoralities, is not thus to be exhausted. It is plentifully supplied,
and will be kept full, how great rivers and floods of iniquity soever are
constantly pouring from it. Yea, if pains be not seasonably taken to cut off
its latent, secret sources, it will rise higher and higher, 'til it exceeds all
banks and bounds; so that it will be next to impossible to reduce and confine
it, or prevent its drowning the sinner in destruction and perdition. If it
would be difficult for you to bridle and restrain your lusts now, how will you
conquer them when they are grown far more violent and headstrong? The words of
the prophet, tho perhaps spoken with another view, may yet be accommodated to
the point in hand: If thou have run with footmen, and they have wearied thee,
then how can thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace wherein
thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how will thou do in the swelling of
Jordan Jer. XII.5.
?

SIN is not only a cruel and destructive, but a false and treacherous enemy:
and through this deceitfulness, the heart is insensibly more and more hardened.
This mortal foe comes to men under the engaging, siren form of pleasure,
binding them without resistance in her soft and silken bands, which they
imagine they can break and cast off whenever they please. But, alas! they soon
become stronger than all Delilah's green withs and cords, so that a Sampson
could not break them in sunder, without the assistance of One, greater than the
"strong man armed." We do not only read in scripture, that wicked men shall wax
worse and worse; (which is equally true of seducers, and the seduced, led away
with diverse lusts) but we are frequently warned concerning the danger of
strong, inveterate habits of sin, contracted by use and custom; and the great
difficulty of overcoming them. Yea, it is sometimes represented as being almost
naturally impossible, as well as morally so, for men who have long indulged
their lusts, to get the victory over them. Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil. Jer. XI.23.
? These words of the prophet, to say the least, plainly imply, that the longer
men sin, and give the reins to their ungodly lusts and passions, the less
inclination, and the less moral power, (if there be any real difference betwixt
these things) they will ordinarily have to forsake their evil ways, and to keep
God's commandments. Their love to sin, and their aversion to holiness, will
generally be strong in proportion to the length of time they have been
alienated from God, and the degree to which they have indulged their lusts:
Which being the case, renders their reformation, humanly speaking, so much the
more difficult and improbable.

IT is not indeed to be denied, that a person's inclination to some particular
sins may be naturally lessened by time, age and experience; I mean, lessened of
course, without any efforts or endeavors of the person himself to amend his
ways. But then his inclination to other particular sins will naturally and of
course be strengthened, in the same, if not in a greater proportion. Man is not
alike disposed to the same sins at all periods of his life; but has, like the
year, various seasons, which produce a variety of fruits. You see in the
natural world, I mean upon this earth, now under the malediction of heaven,
that there are certain poisonous weeds, and evil fruits, proper, and almost
peculiar, to every month, from the first opening of the spring to the approach
of winter. There is a succession of them, even upon the same soil; one dies, in
appearance, still leaving its root alive in the earth, and another springs up
and flourishes in its stead. Thus it is with mankind and their vices: The
carnal heart of man is a soil, fruitful of evil; so that even in the early
spring of life, you will often see many corrupt fruits produced from it. For,
in the language of scripture, the wicked are estranged from the womb: they go
astray as soon as they are born speaking lies. And although some of these evil
weeds, these follies and vices of childhood, seem to die away of themselves,
yet the root of bitterness is still alive: And unless religion, a virtuous
education, and the grace of God prevent, these vices will be followed by
others, proper to youth; these by others, proper to manly, mature life; and
these still by others, more natural to old age. So that in every season of
life, even from its early bloom to the winter of age, you will see a large crop
of vices, but too naturally growing and flourishing upon this bad ground. Tho
the leaves fall off, and the branches wither away, at certain times, the
poisonous root of all is still green, strong and vigorous in the heart* It
remains like the root of the emblematic tree, which Nebuchadnezzar Dan. IV.
saw in his vision, with a band of iron and brass in the earth, even after the
leaves are shaken off, the branches lopped, and the tree itself hewed down: An
intimation that his kingdom remained sure to him; and that after his seeming
ruin, he should rise to greater glory and majesty than ever. Thus does sin
still live and reign in the hearts of the wicked, 'til the axe is laid to the
root of the tree; tho some particular vices may appear to die away with time.
Others, and more enormous ones, will probably succeed to these, whose tops will
reach to the very heavens: And the empire of sin is not only sure and certain,
but enlarged continually; and, if I may so express it, a more excellent majesty
is given to it.

IT is indubitably certain, that 'til a man sets about reforming his heart and
ways in earnest, he will really grow worse and worse, whether he is sensible of
it or not himself; and tho it may seem to himself and others, that he has
forsaken diverse of his youthful follies and vices; yea, tho it may be true, he
does not actually live in the outward practice of them. He may perhaps flatter
himself that he shall drop all the rest by degrees, without taking any pains to
get rid of them, as the adder drops his skin. However, the serpent still
remains a serpent in nature; he is daily growing an older and more venomous
one; and a new skin will as naturally succeed, as the other fell off. And in
like manner, 'til the sinner actually returns to God by unfeigned repentance,
he grows more and more a sinner: He does at best, only exchange his old vices
for new ones, and those probably greater. The poison of asps is still under his
tongue, and in his heart, which will vent itself in some way or other: And all
the time, while the deluded wretch fancies his vices are leaving him, he is
growing into a nearer resemblance of that old serpent, called the devil and
satan, which deceives the whole world. The natural principle of conscience
will be insensibly weakened in him; his heart will grow more callous and
unfeeling; his power of self-government will gradually be lost; and the empire
of sin in general will be the more firmly established in his soul, the longer
it is submitted to, and indulged: So that a reformation will become much more
difficult than it would otherwise have been. According to the established order
of things, and the method of God's dealing with us, in our spiritual
concernments, it is past doubt, that we may much easier turn our feet unto his
testimonies, soon after deviating from them, and before we have gone far in the
ways of error and vice, than when long, customary sinning, has rendered vice
our second nature. For, as has been intimated before, it is absurd in this case
to talk of what God can do by his almighty power, and how easily he can convert
the most obdurate sinner to himself, even without giving the sinner any pain,
trouble or difficulty. However possible this may be, yet surely there is not
the least ground to hope, that he will in fact do thus. No, verily: They who
enter into life at all, must strive and labor to do it; exerting themselves
with all diligence to work out their own salvation, while God by his
providence, word and Spirit, is drawing them, and working in them to will and
to do of his good pleasure. And the sooner they set about this necessary work,
the less sorrow will they give themselves.

HAVING therefore established these premises, the conclusion cannot be denied.
It stands thus: Since repentance and reformation are absolutely necessary to
our salvation; since this work is painful and difficult whenever it is engaged
in; and since it will certainly become more so by being delayed; the most wise
and prudent course is, to make haste, and immediately to apply ourselves to it.
It is folly to put it off another day or hour. You should even now resolve to
amend your ways; your hearts should even now be lifted up to God in the
heavens, in the exercise of humble repentance for what is already past; in
prayer for the pardon of it, and that he would grant you those assistances of
his blessed Spirit, which are needful in order to your forsaking your sins, and
keeping his holy commandments for the future.

SOME may perhaps say in their hearts, that this is hard doctrine. May I not
indulge my favorite lust a little longer? Must I now, tho in the bloom and
vigor of life, mortify my members which are upon the earth? Must I now take my
heart from the world, on which I have bestowed it, and give it to God? How can
I endure the thought of so sudden and speedy a change! Let me walk in the way
of my heart, and in the sight of my eyes, but a few years longer; and then will
I, without reluctance, turn at God's reproof, and devote myself to his service!
But, O child of disobedience, guilt and folly! I tell thee, and know thou it
for thy good, that tho thou should live a few years longer, as thou
presumest, yet by persisting thus in thy evil courses for the present, thou art
making hard and bitter work for thyself. Thou art making that which thou now
think so irksome and difficult, far more so. For every wilful sin thou
committest after this time, thou will pay an additional groan, whenever thou
repentest of thy sins in general: For every commandment thou breakest after
this, one of thy heart strings will be broken, whenever thou come seriously
to think on thy ways, and to reform them: For every criminal indulgence, tho
attended with present pleasure, thou will undergo pangs of distress and
anguish, another day: And whenever thou buryest thy ^ollies and vices, thou will weep over them as it were tears of blood; not that they are dead, but that
they lived so long; and that thou wast so foolish as to nourish them up from
dwarfs, 'til they became as giants, that warred against heaven, and thy own
soul, so long. Thou art at least treasuring up unto thyself sorrow in this
world, against the day of sorrow, I mean, of repentance; if not wrath, against
the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Will thou not then be persuaded to make haste? Will thou still delay to keep God's
commandments? Will thou be willing to pay in tears and groans another day, for
thy present criminal indulgences? Will thou make that which now seems so
difficult to thee, abundantly more difficult, by procrastination? Will thou now
deliberately choose and act that part, which thou must so bitterly repent of
hereafter? Or can thou think it consistent with wisdom and prudence, to do
that now, for which thou will, some time or other, condemn thyself as a fool?
yea, for which thou may perhaps be condemned of God, when sighs, and groans,
and wailings, will be of no service to thee!

TO draw to a conclusion; let me earnestly beseech every impenitent sinner
present, seriously to consider what has been said, respecting the greater
difficulty he will find hereafter in reforming his ways, if God peradventure
should give him an opportunity for it, than he would find at present. It is
certain from scripture, and both reason and experience confirm it, that vice
and wickedness long indulged, become more hard to be subdued; that tho the
external exertions and manifestations thereof in the lives and actions of men,
should not be multiplied, or become more signal and observable, yet the habit
and dominion of sin in the heart will be strengthened; and the moral features
of the soul, becoming more distorted and monstrous, be the harder to be
reclaimed to the image and likeness of God. This argument for making haste, is
of great weight; and shows, of itself, the great folly and imprudence of
delaying your repentance. And as this is the only argument which I proposed to
insist upon at this time, I will not now urge the shortness and uncertainty of
human life; nor any other Considerations to quicken you; though there are many
such, and some, which are naturally suggested by the late dispensations, and
the present aspects, of divine providence. All these I wave for the present;
only requesting you to consult your own ease; and by making haste to keep God's
commandments, prevent that additional sorrow and trouble to yourselves, which
delay will certainly bring with it, even though it should not prove fatal and
remediless!

SERMON V. THE Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The third Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the superior
Happiness attending a religious and virtuous Life.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


THE reasonableness and importance of making haste to keep God's commandments,
SERMON V.
was the subject of the two last discourses, and is likewise to be the subject
of the present. Two arguments have been already insisted on, for the
illustration and proof of this point. The former of them was drawn from a
consideration of the shortness of human life, and the uncertain duration of
this probationary state: The latter of them, from a consideration of the
greater difficulty attending a reformation, if deferred till the habits of sin
are confirmed and strengthened. I propose, in this discourse, to urge another
argument with the same general design of exciting those who have gone astray
from God, and his holy commandments, to be speedy in their return to him, and
living soberly, righteously and godly in the world.

THIS third argument shall be drawn from a consideration of the superior
happiness attending a religious and virtuous life, compared with a life of sin,
and alienation from God, the fountain of living waters. It is certainly a
thing, very reasonable in itself, and of great importance to men, to make haste
to be happy: I mean, to obtain the greatest and noblest happiness, of which
they are capable in this world. No one, it is presumed, will deny the
reasonableness of this, or its importance to us: For the desire of happiness is
both a natural and rational one; no ways criminal in itself, however criminal
most of the ways are, in which mankind seek felicity; but perfectly conformable
to the will of God, and the great end of our being. Now if it be reasonable,
and a thing of importance to us, to make haste to be happy, it is equally
reasonable, and of equal importance to us, to make haste in turning our feet
unto God's testimonies: Or if it be irrational and foolish to delay the
prosecution of that happiness, for which we were made, and which is within our
reach, it is equally irrational and foolish for us to delay our return to God,
and keeping his commandments. For there is no peace, no felicity, no joy in
this world, comparable to that, which attends a life devoted to God, spent in
his service, and in communion with him: And whoever hopes for any happiness
here, worthy the pursuit of a reasonable and immortal creature, while he is
wandering from his God, and violating his laws, is as certainly deceived, and
will as surely be disappointed, as God and his word are true.

DOUBTLESS a very common, and one of the most fatal offenses, which wicked men
take at practical religion, and which makes them so backward to reform their
lives, has its rise in an ill-grounded imagination, that religion is a gloomy,
melancholy business, a foe to human felicity; that it multiplies our pains,
and abridges our pleasures, by its ^^sterity, and various mortifications; so
^^at it is supposed men must, as it were, bid a final adieu to all joy and
comfort in this world, when, by turning their feet unto God's testimonies, they
endeavor to secure his favor, and provide for their eternal well-being in
another. Nor indeed can it be denied, that some injudicious, though perhaps very
good men, have expressed themselves so incautiously concerning the self-denial,
and mortifications of a religious life, as very much to strengthen this vulgar,
and too natural prejudice of vicious men, against the right ways of the Lord.
And it must be confessed, that were religion so great an enemy to men's
happiness in this world, as is often supposed, it would not be altogether
strange, that sinners are so apt to delay their reformation, as they are. This,
if true, must needs be looked upon as a very great, though by no means a
sufficient objection, against a man's altering the course of his life, and
making haste to keep God's commandments: For who is forward to do that, which
he knows will render his life more unhappy upon the whole, than it would
otherwise be? My design therefore, by divine assistance, is, to show how
groundless a prejudice this is; to make it evident to you, by reason and
scripture, that a life conducted by the principles of religion, is the happiest
you can possibly live on earth: And so, from hence to argue the reasonableness
and importance of making haste to keep God's commandments, and live this
blessed life.

HOWEVER, it must just be premised, that when I speak of the happiness, and
superior pleasures attending a life of piety and virtue; I do not mean, that it
is thus happy when a man first enters upon it. The beginning of a reformation
is always attended with a degree of self-denial, pain and uneasiness; so that a
wicked man will not, perhaps, immediately find that he is any gainer by
changing his course and manner of life. But time and experience will convince
every true convert, that in turning his feet unto God's testimonies, he
provided the most effectually for his own peace and comfort in this world, as
well as for his happiness in another: Nor will he want any other conviction,
than what arises from his own perception, and daily experience, that the ways
of wisdom are, indeed, ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.

THE main argument of the present discourse, may be handled under the following
observations, viz.

THAT religion being a reasonable service, enjoined upon us by our wise and
good Creator, it must therefore of necessity be supposed conducive to human
happiness, even in this present state; the contrary supposition implying in it
a gross absurdity:

THAT a life of irreligion and vice is naturally productive of many evils and
disquietudes, from which the contrary course of life is free:

THAT religion is so far from abridging us of the natural pleasures of life,
which are worthy of our pursuit, that it refines and exalts them all:

THAT it affords the best relief, and most rational support, under those
afflictions and trials which are common to men, in this present evil world: And,

THAT the practice and hopes of religion are attended with noble and divine
pleasures, which good men only enjoy, and a stranger intermeddleth not with.

FROM which reflections laid together, it will plainly appear in the
conclusion, of how great importance it is to wicked men to make haste, and what
injury they do themselves by delaying, to keep God's commandments. -- Of each
of these particulars in its order.

IT was observed then, in the first place, That religion being a reasonable
service, enjoined upon us by our wise and good Creator, it must therefore of
necessity be supposed conducive to human happiness, even in this present state;
the contrary supposition implying in it a gross absurdity. I am not now
disputing with professed unbelievers; either with those who say in their
hearts, there is no God, or with those who deny the truth and divine authority
of the holy scriptures. It is taken for granted that you believe in God; and
are persuaded that, having at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoken to
the fathers by the prophets, he has in these last days spoken to us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things; that the christian religion is a
reasonable one, and comes from God; and requires of men nothing but what is fit
for men to do. Ask yourselves seriously then, whether it is possible that the
practice of this reasonable religion, enjoined upon you by God all-wise and
good, should tend to make you unhappy, even in this world? and whether you can
expect to find more felicity in violating the laws of it, than in carefully
observing them? Can there be such a contradiction in nature, as this would
suppose? Can reason and happiness be thus at variance? Or can folly and
unreasonable conduct, promote the well-being of reasonable creatures in any
state, or period of their existence? Can you suppose that God, our merciful
Father, would require that of us, which naturally tends to d^^^roy the peace
and comfort of our lives? Can it enter into your hearts to imagine, that he
enjoins you to love him, and keep his commandments lest you should enjoy more
happiness in walking contrary to him, than in doing so? What wise and good
prince gives any laws to his subjects, besides those which are conducive to
their well-being? And if God's commandments were such, that men might be
happier in disobeying, than yielding obedience to them, would this be
reconcilable with that character of wisdom and benevolence which we ascribe to
him? Would it not from hence follow, that he was an unreasonable and envious
being, who aimed rather at vexing and grieving his creatures by arbitrary
impositions, than at their prosperity, by giving them wholesome laws? And would
it not follow as the plain consequence of these premises, that the world,
instead of being under the government of such an all-wise and gracious
sovereign as is commonly supposed, is really governed by a tyrannical master,
regardless of its welfare, or rather an enemy to it?

I KNOW not exactly in what light these reflections may appear to others,
whether just or not. But to me it appears with all the certainty of a
self-evident proposition, that a life of reason must needs be a life of
happiness; and that as far as men walk contrary to reason, they run into
misery: So that if the laws of God are reasonable laws, we must needs be
gainers, even at present, by observing them. It is plain to a demonstration,
that if the world is under the government of a perfectly wise and good being,
as we all suppose, the course of life which he has pointed out for us, partly
by that internal sense and consciousness of moral obligations which he has
given us, and more fully by an external revelation, must needs be the most
happy course of life that man can lead; suitable to his nature, and in all
respects best for him. From which consideration alone, it is evident to all
that will attend to it, that to persevere in disobeying God's commandments, is,
in effect, persevering to be miserable; or depriving ourselves of that felicity
which was designed for us, and is within our reach. If we imagine that God's
precepts, and our own reason and consciences, concur in leading us aside from
our true happiness, we must suppose, there is a grand, fundamental error in the
very nature, and original constitution of things; that we are a contradiction
to ourselves; that reason requires us to make ourselves miserable; that there
is no wise and good moral government established in the universe; but only a
cruel tyranny. On the other hand, all will be harmonious, consistent and
beautiful, if we suppose, that that religious and virtuous course of life,
which God has prescribed to us, and which corresponds to the law written in our
hearts, is the way of happiness and peace; that whenever we deviace therefrom,
we wander in the same degree, from that felicity which we were made for, like
foolish prodigals, forsaking their father's house, where they have bread
enough, and to spare, and perishing with hunger in a strange land: And that
'til we arise, and go to our Father, we are strangers to true happiness; we
are, in effect, only endeavoring to satisfy ourselves with the husks which the
swine do eat.

BUT leaving these general reflections, which surely are not without their
weight, let us descend to fact and experience. And it will appear, as it was
observed above, that a life of irreligion and vice is naturally productive of
many evils and disquietudes, from which the contrary course of life is free. It
is undeniable, that a disturbed mind and uneasy conscience, are the common, and
natural effects of a wicked life. Some men are indeed hardened to a great
degree in vice; but, probably, never to so great a degree, that they are kept
in perfect peace in their own breasts. Generally it is far otherwise with
wicked men. The consciousness of their crimes, and ill desert, joined with an
apprehension of God's righteous displeasure, gives them great uneasiness,
however they may try to drown the voice of conscience. They are far from being
satisfied with themselves, in their evil courses, whatever they may pretend. A
reasonable creature cannot be at quiet in his own mind, while he knows he is
acting an unreasonable part; that his Maker is displeased with him, and that he
is continually exposed to the fatal consequences of that displeasure. A sense
of guilt, and secret apprehension of danger, will ordinarily lie as a heavy
weight and burden upon his mind; and, even in the midst of laughter, make his
heart sorrowful. The mind of man is the chief, and, philosophically speaking,
perhaps the only seat, both of pleasure and pain: And if that is disquieted
within him, by any means, especially by a consciousness of his daily violating
his duty to God and his neighbor, and abusing his intellectual powers, it is
impossible he should be happy in the possession of any external goods, though he
has more than heart could wish. This internal source of disquietude will
remain, while a man remains wicked and impenitent, though all things without
should conspire to make him happy. In this respect therefore it is evident,
that a pious, good man, has greatly the advantage of the sinner and profligate;
the former being free from that remorse, and those guilty fears, which always
attend the latter in some degree, and generally make life uncomfortable to him.

BUT there are also many external evils which are the natural fruit of an
irreligious, profligate life, from which evils good men are exempted. What a
numerous train of woes does a libertine course of behavior lead after it, in
addition to th^^e which are common to men? Who has woes? Who has sorrow? Who
has contentions? Who has wounds without cause? Is it they who are sober and
temperate in all things? Or they who "tarry long at the wine; they that go to
seek mixed wine?" Who are the most subject to bodily pains and diseases? They
who keep under their body, and bring it into subjection to the laws of reason
and religion? Or they, whose passions and appetites are without restraint and
control? Do not the libertine part of the world generally pay dearly for their
excesses and debaucheries, in those pains and bodily disorders, which are the
natural consequence of them? Yea, do not many bring a premature old age upon
themselves, and die before their time, by being thus "wicked overmuch?" Whether
we consider the history of times past, or look round the world at present, or
consider the nature of the thing itself, we cannot be insensible that vicious
men do, and must, bring many external, bodily evils on themselves, which they
might avoid by a contrary behavior, and which good men are actually free from.

IT may be added here, that as human laws are not made for a righteous man, but
for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the
unholy and profane, for murderers, -- for whoremongers, -- for perjured
persons, 1 Timothy 1.9.
etc.; so such lawless men, and not the righteous, suffer by them, in the
ordinary course of things. Civil society will not permit men to go on with
impunity, in violating the laws of virtue and righteousness; but is obliged,
for its own security and support, to punish them in a variety of ways. And how
frequent are the examples of this sort, even in times and places wherein
religion and virtue are at a low ebb in general? Such is the nature of society,
and the laws by which it subsists throughout the world, that abandoned
wickedness and vice must needs be subjected to many inconveniences, and even
heavy penalties, from which virtue is ordinarily free. For who is he that will
harm you, says the apostle, if ye be followers of that which is good?

FROM these considerations it appears, that the present constitution and course
of things, is moral in a high degree, notwithstanding the general depravity of
the world. Such is human nature, such the natural effects of vice, and such the
nature of society, that vice is evidently the parent of misery and evil,
mental, bodily, and penal. Men are usually, though not universally, made to
suffer evil even now, in some proportion to the nature and degree of their
crimes. No one can habitually act contrary to the fundamental laws of religion,
righteousness and sobriety, without hurting himself, and making his life much
more uncomfortable than it would be, if directed by the principles of piety and
virtue. And this being the case, surely wicked men should, for their own sakes,
make haste, and not delay to keep God's commandments. By this means they would
deliver themselves from many distressing fears, and positive evils, which are
incident to a vicious life: So that the calm consideration of their own present
interest, could not but induce them, when they think of their ways, to imitate
the example of the Psalmist in this respect.

BUT for the farther illustration of this point, it was observed above, that
notwithstanding the prejudices which men often entertain against religion; it
is so far from abridging us of the natural pleasures of life, which are worthy
of our pursuit, that it refines and exalts them all. You cannot think of any
sort of worldly happiness or enjoyment, forbidden you by the laws of God, to
which you would not be ashamed to own before a wise man, that you had any
inclination; or that your own reason would not condemn you for coveting and
pursuing, even though God had explicitly laid you under no prohibition respecting
it. For example; would you not be ashamed to acknowledge before a wise man,
that you took a pleasure in intoxicating, or making beasts of yourselves, by
drunkenness? Or that any part of your happiness was placed in gluttony? Would
you be willing it should be even suspected, that you had any pleasure in these
things, or in them that do them, though revealed religion was out of the case?
Would you not be ashamed to own, that you desired to enrich yourselves by
injuring your neighbor? by stealing, cozening, or any of the various kinds of
dishonesty? Would you not think it a disgrace, even though it were no sin, to be
though it capable of taking delight in practices so unreasonable, and unworthy of a
man? Would you not be ashamed to be thought persons of unbridled lust, and
given to lawless leudness? such as could not be happy without breaking through
those rules and ties, on the observation of which the well-being of society so
much depends; and which being disregarded, no one could have the satisfaction
of knowing, either his own father, or his own offspring? Would you not be
ashamed to own, though you were under no apprehension of future punishment, that
you took pleasure in a practice so irrational, as that of blaspheming the holy
name of God, or profanely cursing, either your neighbor or yourselves? You
cannot, in short, think of any species of pleasure or enjoyment, forbidden by
religion, which your own reason could justify, or which yourselves could think
worthy of your pursuit, though religion laid you under no restraints with respect
to it. The world is all before you, given by our bountiful Creator to the
children of men, with the things of it, for their use and enjoyment. You are
laid under no restrictions or limitations, excepting such as you must
acknowledge to be fit and reasonable, and even necessary, in order to the
well-being of society; and which being transgressed by a man, he must
acknowledge, he acts below the dignity of his rational nature.

THIS being evident, I may ask, Where is that hard and intolerable yoke of
religion, at which many are so scandalized? It is purely an imaginary one.
Where is that command of God, which you yourselves can pronounce grievous? In
what chapter of the bible is that law, respecting the government of your
passions, which you would choose to have blotted out or repealed, for the
common, or even for your own particular good, in order to have the road to
pleasure, any pleasure worth desiring, left more open than it is at present?
Though I frequently read the bible, I can, for my own part, find no one command
or prohibition therein, which abridges the happiness, or real enjoyments,
either of mankind in general, or of individuals, so that they would upon the
whole live more delightfully in the world if it were abolished, than they may
under the restraints of it. And I may almost venture to tell you, that whenever
you shall think in your consciences, after serious, calm and deliberate
reflection, that you have found such a grievous commandment, you are at liberty
to erase it. For whatever you may imagine in the heat of passion, and for want
of attending to the nature and consequences of things, I may be confident that,
on due and thorough reflection, you would be convinced, that all God's
commandments are not only holy and just, but even good; good for the world, and
for yourselves. For, as was intimated above, religion does not only, not
abridge the pleasures and enjoyments of men in this world, but heightens and
improves them all.

No libertine enjoys that happiness which is proper to man, considered merely
as an inhabitant of this world, in so great a degree, or in such perfection, as
a christian, who keeps under his body, and brings it into subjection. This may
perhaps seem a paradox at best, if not a contradiction. However, it is
certainly true; and will be in some measure apparent only from the following
consideration. Those impious and vicious men who have, shall I say, the
modesty, or the impudence, to profess a total disregard to the laws of
religion, yet find the necessity of prescribing many similar laws and
restrictions to themselves, merely with a view at attaining their great and
avowed end, pleasure. They perceive the necessity of observing these same
rules, many of them at least, in order to their enjoying animal pleasures and
gratifications in their greatest height and perfection. And this, possibly, may
be the true drift and scope of the Epicurean philosophy; which is certainly
mistaken by those, who exclude all morals from their idea of it. So that
whether men believe in God and his providence, or not; whether they will love,
reverence and obey him, or the contrary; still they are obliged, if they would
live in the most refined and elegant luxury they are capable of, to impose on
themselves much the same laws of temperance and moderation, and a certain
economy in their pleasures, which religion herself obliges them to observe.
The connoissieurs in voluptuousness, while they have no more sense of religious
obligations, than the flocks and herds on which they riot, are yet, in one
sense, though against their will, really under the prohibitions, and
mortifications, and self-denials, which religion imposes; being forced, if I
may so express it, to exercise the reason of men, in order to enjoy the
pleasures of bruits in their greatest perfection. Which being the case, it is a
clear proof and demostration, that keeping the commandments of God, respecting
the government of our animal passions, is so far from diminishing the happiness
of man, considered in his animal and worldly capacity, that it is the greatest
improvement of them. All vicious, irregular, passions, as intimated above, are
productive of pain and misery. This is especially true of envy, wrath and
resentment. Bitter and malevolent tempers punish themselves: They are not
always gratified; never so thoroughly as they wish, and therefore become fuel
to their own malice. A spiteful man is an unhappy man, as well as an odious
character: If he would preserve esteem, or hope for it, he must hide his heart
-- It is the goodness and justice of providence, to make malevolent hearts
their own tormentors, and bad men actually hurt themselves by wishing hurt to
others. They earn and pre-occupy the pain and misery, which they study to
inflict, and make retribution to the innocent and deserving, for hating and
reviling them. -- Who would choose to possess the bane of a rancorous spirit?
Who would feel the torture of envy? Who would burn with raging rancour? Whoever
hates any man, pays dear for his hate: Whoever is cursed with a revengeful
heart, needs no other curse. The vicious man, whose passions are always either
rampant, or palled to a nausea, has certainly a less share of real enjoyment,
than he who strictly observes the commandments of God, following him, and
reason. The former is always, either like a barque tossed in a tempestuous sea,
or one stuck fast in a miry, motionless lake of stagnated water: The latter is
like one wafted on a smooth sea by gentle, propititious gales, under a serene
sky. -- And this is he, who, steering his course by the sure compass of
religion, shall sail into the harbor of bliss, if there is any such port on
the coast of human life, before we arrive at the haven of endless joy. Who then
that is truly wise for himself, would not make haste to keep God's
commandments, were it only for the sake of that greater degree of temporal and
worldly happiness, which will thereby accrue to him, than can be obtained
according to the established order of nature and providence, in the way of
irregular and sinful indulgence?

BUT it must not be omitted here, that besides the advantages already
mentioned, religion affords the best relief, and most solid supports, under
those afflictions, trials and perils, which are common to men in this present
evil world. This life is at best a wearisome journey through a wilderness beset
with numerous ills and dangers, which no human precaution or power can either
effectually guard against, or remove. But they may best be borne by him, who
has that hope and confidence in God, which the sincere practice of religion
naturally inspires; and they are the most intolerable to those, who are
destitute hereof. Reflect soberly on human life; think of the outward
calamities which come alike to all, and the various evils to which we are
exposed; sickness and pains of numberless kinds; the ill will, and ill offices
of our enemies; the loss of our friends; the uncertainty of riches, honors and
all earthly goods: Consider the disordered state of the world in general; the
fraud, deceit and violence that are found therein from age to age; the
revolutions and mighty changes that are frequently brought about in the
kingdoms and civil affairs of it; -- changes, as often for the worse as for the
better: Consider seriously of these things, I say; and you cannot be wholly
insensible, either of the happiness of good men, who have faith, hope and
confidence in God, or of the forlorn, disconsolate condition of the wicked, who
are destitute of this relief. How great is the support? how unspeakable the
consolation, when a man is suffering adversity, or foresees it coming upon him;
when he finds himself encompassed with infirmities, ills and dangers; and sees
himself, as it were, just dropping into the grave, his flesh and his heart
failing him; how unspeakable is the consolation, I say, resulting to a good man
in these circumstances, from the reflection, that there is a God above,
all-wise, good and powerful; that this God is his God forever and ever; his
friend, and guardian, and portion; that the very hairs of his head are numbered
by him; that he will cause "all things to work together for good to him"; that
he will guide him by his counsel during life, and at death receive him to
glory, and joys forevermore? Surely this is the best support, that any man can
have in such a world of confusion, danger and death, as this; than which the
heart of man cannot conceive a greater, a more solid or rational. But it may be
further illustrated by way of contrast. Consider a man laboring under
adversity, or at least apprehensive of it; consider him reflecting with himself
on the vicissitudes and miseries of this present state; a weak, helpless,
mortal creature, drawing every day nearer to the grave; and one, to whom time
it self would soon prove fatal: How miserable an object does this man appear,
while, being an enemy to God, he can draw no relief from a consideration of his
perfections, providence or friendship, or from the hopes of a blessed
immortality? He is left without refuge, without any adequate support; he feels
many evils, perhaps; and has reason to apprehend more and greater; life is
burdensome to him, and death terrible; and that judgment which is after it, the
most terrible of all! -- You cannot conceive a more miserable object than this,
unless your imagination carries you to the regions of darkness, torment and
despair. Nor can you conceive of a happier one, than a good man, whose "hopes
are full of immortality," unless your tho'ts ascend to that glorious region,
where mortality is swallowed up of life, and hope is turned into fruition. You
see then, how solid a support under afflictions and perils, and how great a
felicity you deprive your selves of, even in this world, so long as you delay
to keep God's commandments.

THERE are peculiar and exalted pleasures attending the practice and hopes of
religion; such as a "stranger intermeddleth not with;" such as a wicked man can
form no adequate idea of; scarce more than a blind man can of colors, or a deaf
one of sounds: It is only experience that can fully make them known. However,
all men may form some general conception of that peace, that sense of security,
and inward satisfaction, which must needs attend a well-grounded hope toward
God, through him "that has abolished death." Very wicked men may have some
confused, general notion hereof, even by means of the experience which they
have had, at times, of the contrary; I mean of that deep distress, and anxiety,
and terror, which they are at certain seasons thrown into, by a sense of their
guilt, and an apprehension of God's righteous displeasure. Is there a wicked
man present, who does not know what is here intended? Can you not call to mind
one The then late terrible Earthquake is here alluded to.
time, at least, when you experienced such guilty fears and apprehensions? --
such distress as words cannot utter? -- To such persons then, surely I need not
labor to prove, how great the happiness is, of being at peace with God, and
having confidence toward him. Their want of this hope, at such a season, their
feeling the misery of an awakened consciousness of guilt, and apprehensions of
divine wrath, may serve in some measure, at least, to convince them, that good
men, whose hope is in God, enjoy a very different sort of happiness, and
infinitely superior to that of the workers of iniquity. Verily, it is not said
in vain, Great peace have they that love thy law, and nothing shall offend
them. It is not said in vain, that the work of righteousness shall be peace,
and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance forever. It is not
said in vain of wisdom, that "all her paths are peace;" that she is a tree of
life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that retains her.

BUT the happiness of good men, who are at peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, is not merely that, which naturally results from a rational,
well-grounded confidence in God's favor: They have, sometimes at least, a more
direct and immediate intercourse with God, and a still more exalted happiness
arising from such intercourse, than any which results from the deductions of
reason, in the way of argumentation. I would not willingly be an enthusiast.
But when the scripture says, "Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ": When it says, that the kingdom of God is "joy in
the Holy Ghost," as well as righteousness and peace: When the scriptures speak
of God, as the God of all grace and consolation, who "comfort his saints in
all their tribulations", so that they greatly rejoice: When they speak of
christians as "walking in the comforts of the Holy Ghost": When they say,
"Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts" Gal. 4.6.
: In fine, when they say, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father: The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God: And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Jesus Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together Romans 8.15, -- 17.
: When the holy scriptures, I say, speak such language as this, I cannot easily
persuade myself to believe, that they intend nothing further, than that good
men have peace and joy within, arising from a rational conviction, by means of
the miraculous works of the Spirit, and his operations in purifying their
hearts, or any other objective evidence, that they are in a state of favor
with God, and entitled to the inheritance of children. There are some, I may
presume to say, who have the best grounds to think, that by the comforts and
joys of the Holy Ghost, and the witness of the Spirit, something further, and
more immediate is intended, and I may add, more noble and divine, than a
comfortable persuasion of a man's good estate, arising from any merely
objective evidence thereof; though I do not say, wholly and absolutely
independent of it. In short, God does sometimes, though not always, by the
immediate influences of his blessed Spirit, cause his saints to rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory," filling them "with all his fullness;" with a
big, ineffable and divine joy* that swallows up all the soul; a joy, as much
surpassing, not only the pleasures of sin, but I had almost said, even the
merely rational pleasures of piety, as heaven surpasses earth, or eternity is
more lasting than time! I am aware that some will probably look on this, as
nothing better than enthusiastic rant: To whom, God grant the only full,
adequate and satisfactory evidence of its reality, the experience of the thing
itself! There may, indeed, be some sincere christians, to whom God may never
have thus "manifested himself," in a way so different from that, in which he
"manifests himself unto the world;" and who may express themselves otherwise on
this point. But it may be justly apprehended, that the more general and common
reason, why these things are called folly and enthusiasm, is, that men are
really strangers to the spirit and power of religion in their hearts. And there
is doubtless some good meaning of those words, so often abused and perverted by
censorious visionaries -- The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned 1 Cor. 2.14.
But let us not imagine that our Savior mocked his disciples with vain,
visionary hopes, or spoke to his apostles exclusively of other believers, when
he said, a little before his passion, If ye love me, keep my commandments: And
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him -- Peace I leave with
you, my peace I give unto you: Not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. John 14.15, 16, 17, and
27.
These are gracious promises of the support, and consolations of the Holy
Spirit, spoken of above; in some measure distinct from, though not wholly
independent of, that peace and joy, which naturally arise from a rational and
scriptural persuasion of a man's being in a state of favor with God. And the
most probable reason, why christians do not more generally experience these
divine consolations, and in a greater degree, is, that they do not aspire after
greater degrees of holiness, and christian perfection; but content themselves
with little more than "a name to live." For you will observe, that they are
promised above, by our Savior, not absolutely, but conditionally: -- If ye
love me, keep my commandments: And I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter, etc. But I must not enlarge; it being time to draw
toward a conclusion.

IT has been shown in this discourse, That religion, being a reasonable
service, enjoined upon us by our wise and good Creator, must needs be supposed
in general conducive to the happiness of mankind, even in their present state.
And if we come to fact and experience, it has been shown, That a life of
irreligion and vice is naturally productive of many evils and disquietudes,
from which the contrary course of life is free: That religion is so far from
abridging us of any of the natural pleasures of life, which are worthy our
pursuit, that it improves and exalts them all: That it affords the best relief,
the most solid and rational supports, under those numerous trials and
afflictions which are common to men in this evil world: And lastly, That the
practice and hopes of religion are attended with other, with noble, divine
pleasures, and heavenly joys, to which wicked men are not only strangers, but
of which they cannot even have any proper or adequate conception. From all
which considerations laid together, it appears that a religious and truly
christian life is, beyond all comparison, the happiest that a man can live in
this world; and that the pleasures of the wicked are mean, low, and
contemptible, when compared with those which good men enjoy. And from hence the
main conclusion designed to be drawn, appears in a clear and strong light; viz.
That it is of great importance to wicked men to make haste, and not delay to
keep the commandments of God, even with regard to their present, temporal
welfare. For if these things are as they have been represented, as they
certainly are, unless reason, scripture and experience all conspire to deceive
us, (which is impossible) it is the greatest imprudence and folly for men to
persevere in their sins; and of the utmost consequence to them, immediately,
and in earnest, to devote themselves to the service of God.

SOME other arguments, if God permit, will be insisted upon hereafter. Let me
conclude for the present, by beseeching wicked men, if there are any such in
this assembly, duly to consider that which has now been handled. -- Whatever
objections you may have in other respects, against a speedy return to God and
your duty, through Jesus Christ the redeemer and savior of sinners; I am almost
confident you can have none, (after seriously weighing what has now been
offered) on account of any supposed happiness which this would oblige you to
forego: I mean, any which is not absolutely unworthy the pursuit of reasonable
creatures; and the loss of which, would not be infinitely more than
compensated, by the pleasures of piety and virtue. This common objection is
doubtless suggested by the evil One, that he may destroy the souls of sinners,
by infusing into them a senseless, irrational fear, that they will make
themselves miserable by saving them! There is a great degree of infatuation in
all suchlike apprehensions; there being, not only no visible foundation for
them in nature; but they being utterly repugnant to the plainest dictates of
reason, revelation and experience, all united. Be assured that you will be
strangers to true happiness, to the proper, and almost only happiness of man,
so long as you continue strangers to true religion, and "alienated from the
life of God." So long as you expect to drink of pleasure, while at a distance
from the "fountain of living waters," you will be continually disappointed, and
still thirsty: All the cisterns you can hew out to yourselves, will be broken,
leaky ones, which will "hold no water;" none that is pure and wholesome; none
but what will, in the end, rather give you a vomit, and bring sickness and
death, a terrible death, than cheer, refresh, and immortalize you. But you know
who has said, and his words are true, Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life. John 4.14.
And you know also, how free, gracious and universal the invitation is, Ho!
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money:
come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without
price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor
for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, -- and let your soul
delight itself in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your
soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David. Isai. 55.1, -- 3.


SERMON VI. THE Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The fourth Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the greater
Progress we shall make in true Wisdom and Holiness, and of the greater
Happiness, to which we shall attain hereafter, if we devote ourselves early to
the Service of God.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON VI.
IN the three last preceding discourses, the reasonableness and importance of
making haste to keep God's commandments, was shown by as many different
arguments: viz. From a consideration of the shortness of human life, and the
uncertain duration of our probationary state: The greater ease of reforming
without delay, than if it be deferred till the habits of sin and vice gain more
power over us: And lastly, From a consideration of the superior happiness,
peace and joy, attending a religious and virtuous life, compared with a life of
impiety and vice.

A FOURTH argument, by God's permission and assistance, is now to be added to
the preceding, to show still more plainly the reasonableness and importance of
making haste to keep his commandments, in opposition to delaying it to another
season.

AND the argument of the present discourse shall be drawn from this
consideration, That the sooner we heartily engage in the service of God, the
greater degree of christian perfection we shall probably arrive at in this
world; and accordingly shall receive so much a brighter crown of glory and joy
in the kingdom of heaven. Let us, for the present, wave all other
considerations, and confine our attention to this alone, that by God's
blessing, it may have it is proper and full effect upon our hearts and conduct.

IT was not said above, positively, without reserve, that the sooner we begin
to keep the commandments of God, the greater degree of christian perfection,
and future felicity, we shall attain to; but that this will "probably" be the
consequence. For it may be thought, that this is not universally certain,
without any exceptions. If we judge according to appearance, it will perhaps be
said, that some persons who, as there is reason to think, have been truly
religious and virtuous from their youth, have yet been so immersed in the cares
of this life, and so slothful in their spiritual concerns, even while they
served the Lord, that they have at last, when full of days, been christians but
of a dwarfish size; mere babes in Christ, with respect to their spiritual
growth and stature, though men with respect to the length of time since their
spiritual birth. To preserve a due distinction of characters in our savior's
parable of the Matthew. 13.
sower, it may seem requisite to understand such very imperfect, though sincere
christians, as these, where it is said, that some fell among thorns; and the
thorns sprung up and choked them Ver. 7.
. Our Lord explains himself thus, "He also that received the seed among thorns,
is he that hears the word: and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness
of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful Ver. 22.
": Or, as it is explained, perhaps with greater exactness and precision, in the
parallel place, they "bring no fruit to perfection Luke 7.14.
". But whatever may be the true, precise meaning of these words, there is no
reasonable ground to doubt, but that the character alluded to above, is a real
character in the christian world. And though the labor, even of such imperfect
and slothful christians, shall not be wholly in vain; yet, as they have not "
abounded always in the work of the Lord," there is no ground to think, that "an
entrance will be ministered to them abundantly, into his everlasting kingdom."
If they gain an admittance into that blessed state, as they doubtless will,
they may well be content with an inferior mansion.

ON the other hand it will be said, That there have been examples of persons
who, after long delays, have at length turned their feet unto God's
testimonies; and who have, by redeeming the time with uncommon diligence, under
a peculiar blessing of heaven, arrived to high seize in religion, to an
eminent degree of sanctity, and christian perfection: And such persons will
doubtless receive a glorious recompense of reward, in proportion to their
actual seize in wisdom and holiness; not in proportion to the length of
time since they ceased to serve diverse lusts and pleasures, and began to "serve
the Lord Christ." Such reflections as these may seem to be verified, or in some
measure confirmed, by our daily experience and observation of what comes to
pass in the common affairs and business of human life. For a man may be at his
proper work, the business of his particular calling, all the day, even from
morning till night; and yet pursue it with so much indifference and sloth, that
he shall accomplish but little at last. Though he is beforehand with the sun in
his rising, when he goes forth to his labor, and after it in his reclining to
rest, he finds but little fruit of his labor which he has taken under it. On
the contrary, do we not sometimes see a man indulging to sloth the former part
of the day, on the bed of ease, saying, A little more sleep, a little more
slumber, roused up in the afternoon; and applying himself to his business with
so much address and industry, that the setting sun beholds much greater effects
of his labor, than of the other's; and his profit proportionably greater? And
all this, it will be said, may be applied to men's religious concerns and
labors, to the time when they respectively begin, and the rewards they shall
finally receive.

Now the truth of these representations and facts is not to be absolutely
denied; though such instances as those alluded to, are comparatively rare. And
the general truth of the proposition, which is the argument of this discourse,
is not materially infringed by a few singular examples that may be found of the
contrary; which is the utmost that can be pretended. But if we look a little
more carefully into the natural import of the assertion above, it may at least
be doubted, whether such examples as these, are really any exceptions at all to
the truth of it. For, please to observe, that when it is said, The sooner we
heartily engage in the service of God, the greater degree of christian
perfection we shall arrive at, etc, the comparison implied, does not lie
between us and other persons, but is confined to ourselves; and lies wholly
between our beginning earlier or later in life, to keep God's commands, and the
greater or less degree of perfection and happiness we ourselves shall attain
to, according as we do one or the other; it being still supposed that we engage
heartily in the service of God, whenever we engage in it, and persevere therein
with diligence. Which being considered, the proposition, I suppose, is not only
probably, but certainly true; however true it may be, at the same time, that
some persons who begin to serve God at a late season of life, may, by uncommon
diligence, and a peculiar blessing on their endeavors, make greater advances
in piety and virtue than some others, who did not delay so long.

AND now, avoiding all useless subtleties as much as possible, let me more
particularly explain and urge the present argument, under the following
propositions; viz.

THAT religion is progressive in the hearts and lives of good men:

THAT, by natural consequence, the sooner any one begins to be sincerely
religious, the greater improvement he will make at last in holiness and virtue:

THAT the greater degree of christian perfection we attain to, the greater will
be our happiness in the world to come: And lastly, which is the practical
conclusion from the whole,

THAT it is highly reasonable, and of great importance to us, to make haste, or
that we do not delay, to turn our feet unto God's testimonies.

THE former of these propositions, now to be enlarged upon in their order, is,
That religion is progressive in the hearts and lives of good men. When a sinner
is converted from the error of his way, to the wisdom of the just, he is not at
once made perfect in holiness, or in any christian virtue: So far from it, that
no man attains to perfection, strictly speaking, in this life; there is always
room for improvement both in knowledge and in virtue, how long soever a man has
been engaged in the service of God. And there is, generally at least, most room
and occasion for such improvement, in those who are newly entered upon a
religious course of life. However possible and easy it might be supposed to be,
for God, by his grace and Spirit, at once to produce a complete and perfect
change in the heart of a wicked man, as complete and perfect as is ever
effected in this world; yet we know it is not agreeable to the established
method of divine grace to effect at once such a thorough change. God is
pleased, after our regeneration, to leave our improvement in goodness and
holiness, in some measure, to our selves; I do not mean independently of him,
without whom we can do nothing; but under his gracious influence, or by his
assistance. And thus it is, that from very imperfect degrees of goodness, the
new man advances to higher, to a nearer resemblance of God, after whose image
he was "created in righteousness, and true holiness Ephesians. 4.24.
" That the saints thus make progress in piety and virtue, is plainly agreeable
to the doctrine and representations of scripture, as well as to experience. Our
Savior says, that the kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed,
the least of all seeds, which yet grows till it "becomes a tree." This is
applicable, not only to the external, visible kingdom of God in this world,
under Christ, who is to reign till every knee shall bow to him; but also to
that kingdom of God which is "within us," and which "comes not with
observation;" or that kingdom of heaven which, the apostle says, "is not meat
and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." This
kingdom, as well as the external, is at first so small and imperfect, that it
may be fitly compared to a grain of mustard seed, though, by the blessing of God,
it will in its progress become great and flourishing, even like the cedars of
Lebanon. Agreeably hereto, christians are exhorted to "grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." It is said* that "the path
of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the
perfect day." St. Paul tells those, to whom he wrote one of his epistles, he
was "persuaded that He, who had begun a good work in them, would perform it
unto the day of Christ." The same apostle having observed, in his epistle to
the Ephesians, that when Christ ascended, he gave to his church, apostles,
pastors, teachers, etc. immediately subjoins, as the end and design of their
institution, -- "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity
of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we henceforth be no
more children; -- but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all
things." This may be understood, both with reference to the church in general,
and to particular persons. In conformity whereto, St. Paul, even after he had
been many years a faithful minister of Christ, and not behind the very chief of
the apostles, says of himself, under an humble sense of his infirmities and
imperfections -- "Not as though I had already attained, either were already
perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended;
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus."

Now all these, and innumerable other passages of holy scripture, plainly
suppose religion to be progressive in the hearts and lives of men; to be weak
in it is beginning, or rise, and gradually advancing toward perfection, by the
care and industry of good men, under the smiles and influences of heaven, or
the gracious operations of God's spirit. And this representation, as was
intimated before, is verifyed by the experience of good men in all ages and
generations. As wicked men and seducers often, not always, "wax worse and
worse"; so good men, generally at least, wax better and better; "perfecting
holiness in the fear of God"; and obtaining, by degrees, a more complete
victory over their lusts, till they are finally made even "more than
conquerors, through him that loved them". Those who are born of the Spirit, though
they are at first truly children and h^^s of God, and are in one sense perfect,
viz. as no entire member is wanting in them; yet they are spoken of as being
but "babes in Christ"; who accordingly need to be "fed with milk", that they
may "grow thereby"; not with "strong meat", which belongs to them that are of
full age, even those who, by reason of use, have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil. It is needless, I imagine, to enlarge any farther
in the proof of this point. Reason, scripture and experience, all concur in
establishing its truth, beyond the possibility of a rational doubt concerning
it. Let us therefore proceed to the next remark mentioned above; which is
indeed a plain consequence from this; viz.

THAT the sooner any one begins to be sincerely religious, the greater
improvement he will make at last in true wisdom, virtue and holiness; the
greater degree of christian perfection he will attain to at the close of life.
Whatever is progressive in its nature, requires time, and is improved, advanced
and perfected thereby. There is no making progress in any thing, but by time.
And if religion in men's hearts and lives is progressive, according to the
established course of nature, and the methods of God's grace, agreeably to what
has been said above, it follows by plain consequence, that the sooner we turn
our feet unto God's testimonies, the greater progress we shall have made in
christian piety, when our days are numbered and finished. The nearer our lives
are to a period, when we begin to fear and serve God, the less opportunity we
have for improvement, and the lower will be our seize at last.
Notwithstanding what was said in the beginning of this discourse, any man who
begins his worldly labor with the day, and is diligent therein, will do more
than if he delayed till it was far spent, and the night was at hand, "wherein
no man can work". Accordingly all men who are wise in the management of their
temporal affairs, and hope to thrive by their industry, under the blessing of
God, are early at their business. And you would think that man talked very
irrationally, who should tell his poor neighbor, that he might stand almost
all the day idle, and then make up for it, by doubling his diligence when the
sun was just setting. This is contrary to experience, and the common sense of
mankind. All which is, in general, applicable to the higher concerns and
business of religion. Youth is the morning of human life; death the evening or
night: And certainly if we begin to be wise and good, and to work out our
salvation, in the former, and persevere diligently in doing so, we shall at
last be wiser and better, and more effectually secure our salvation, than if we
delay till we are past the meridian of our days, and death is at hand. This is
as certain as it is, that if a man travel diligently all the day, beginning his
journey with the sun, he will get farther on his road at evening, than if he
delayed till the afternoon.

BUT if we come to fact and experience, the surest guides in all cases wherein
recourse may be had to them, it is plain, that those persons who have known and
served God from their youth, have been much oftener eminent for their knowledge
and great improvements in christianity, in their old age, than they who have
lived as without God in the world, till gray hairs were upon them. Though we
should allow that there are some exceptions here, they are but few. And as to
those very persons who may be looked upon as exceptions, I mean those who have
made a great progress in a little time, toward the close of life; doubtless
they would have been still far more eminent for their sanctity and christian
perfection, had they not delayed so long to keep God's commandments. If this is
allowed, it is sufficient to my present purpose, as it shows that the degree of
our seize in true wisdom and holiness, depends in a great measure, under
God, on the time that we begin to know and serve him. The earlier in life we do
this, the more perfect we shall be, when the time of our departure out of this
world is at hand, and we are going to "receive the things done in the body."
This point, I imagine, need not be further insisted on, it being so clear from
what was said above, concerning the progressive nature of religion.

THE next thing to be considered is, That the greater degree of christian
perfection we attain to in this life, the greater will be our glory and
happiness in the world to come. The recompense of reward which the saints shall
receive hereafter, is not, indeed, a reward of merit, strictly speaking, but of
grace; "the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord." However, the holy
scriptures themselves often call it by the name of a reward: And our Lord Jesus
Christ says expressly, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me to give
to every man, etc. Now if the righteous are to be rewarded, it is most
agreeable to reason and scripture to suppose, that they shall be rewarded in
proportion to the degree of their goodness and holiness respectively, however
undeserving all may be; the perfecter here, the happier hereafter. This
supposition best accords to our conceptions of God, as the all-wise, good and
perfect governor of the world; with whom there is no respect of persons in
judgment; who is neither influenced by any blind, groundless prejudice against,
nor by weak partiality in favor of, any of those souls which he has made, and
which are all equally his, the souls of the parents, and the souls of the
children. It is natural for us to expect, that the common Father of spirits,
the Father of all, will dispense his favors to his children, in a state of
retribution, not at random, or with the capriciousness of a lawless,
unregulated sovereignty; but according to some wise, proper, and fixed rule of
distribution. And if it is reasonable to expect, that the righteous judge of
the earth, how sovereign soever he may be, will do thus; what method of
distribution is so likely to be observed by him, as that of conferring greater
degrees of happiness on his servants, in exact proportion to the degrees of
their perfection respectively, or their diligence and fidelity in his service?
Can we think of any other rule or method to be observed, in this matter, which
so easily and naturally falls in with our ideas of God, as the wise, just and
good governor of the world? or indeed, which it would not be very difficult, at
least, to reconcile with such a character? In this way, there will still be
encouragement left for all, even the most perfect, as well as most imperfect
christians, to exert themselves, and to abound always in the work of the Lord,
in hopes of attaining to greater glory and felicity in the regions of
immortality: And the belief hereof has an apparent tendency to promote piety
and virtue amongst men. On any other supposition, there is far less
encouragement to virtue; any other would have a manifest tendency to damp our
endeavors after perfection, and be very prejudicial to the interest of virtue
in the world. For it is rather folly and impiety, than true wisdom, for us to
pretend to a more disinterested and refined virtue, than that of the captain of
our salvation, who has set us an example, that we should follow his steps; of
whom it is said, in his humble and afflicted state in this world, that for the
joy that was set before him, he endured the cross, despising the shame, etc.

IT is, moreover, to be considered here, that the happiness of reasonable,
moral and religious creatures, must almost necessarily be in proportion to the
degree of their wisdom and moral perfection, in whatever state or world they
are. We find it so, even in this world, almost invariably, amidst the
confusions, and apparent disorders of the present state; and notwithstanding
the many seeming hindrances and obstacles that are in the way of virtue, or
obstructions to the natural and genuine effects thereof. In the future state,
we are assured these obstacles or obstructions shall be removed out of the way.
It is therefore at least probable, if not certain, from the nature of the
thing, that in that other state, virtue shall in variably, and without
exception, have it is full effect; that it shall actually produce those
consequences, which it partly produces now, in a greater degree, much more
uniformly and immutably; so that the saints shall of course be the happier, as
they are wiser, and more holy, or more like God, "blessed forever." In that
state, where bodily pains and sickness are no more; where the "wicked cease
from troubling"; where the society shall consist only of such as are good and
worthy, it must needs be, that the measure of each one's happiness and glory,
will be the degree of his capacity for rational happiness; i. e. his moral
perfection, or likeness to God.

WHAT has been observed above, could not be denied, or called in question, on
any principles of reason, even though the holy scriptures had been entirely
silent as to this point. Had they only informed us in general, that good men
were to be rewarded hereafter, without saying any thing particularly concerning
the rule that was to be observed in conferring this reward; we might rationally
infer from the divine perfections, and from the nature of the thing, that the
good would be rewarded respectively, in proportion to their virtue and
perfection: especially considering, what is seen and experienced even in this
world of confusion, that men are now generally, if not universally, happy in
the like proportion; for there are very few, if any exceptions.

HOWEVER, the scriptures are far from being silent as to this point: They
plainly teach this doctrine, so encouraging to men, so apparently calculated to
promote piety and holiness in the world. Our Savior has not only told us, that
in his Father's house there are "many mansions," intimating that they were
prepared and made suitable for the guests, they were respectively to receive;
but he speaks of some persons, whose reward shall be "great in heaven;"
emphatically great; they having distinguished themselves by their eminent
virtue and faithfulness, under some peculiar circumstances of difficulty and
discouragement. The apostle Paul does not only tell us in general, that
whatsoever a man sows, that he shall also reap; but, that "he that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and that he that sows bountifully, shall
reap also bountifully:" Which language is not the less intelligible, because it
is metaphorical; but is as fully expressive of the thing here intended, as if
it had been said, that he shall receive an abundant reward, who abounds in
piety and good works. It is said of some, in the parabolical way, that they had
dominion given them over "ten cities," because they had gained "ten pounds;"
others, over "five cities," who had gained "five," etc. The true moral of
which, agreeable to the point before us, cannot easily be mistaken by any one,
who is not willingly ignorant and deceived. And, indeed, that common expression
in the new testament, that men shall be rewarded "according to their works,"
plainly implies the same thing. For the righteous will not, properly speaking,
be rewarded "according to their works," merely by having a reward bestowed on
them, unless that reward be also in some suitable proportion to their works,
respectively; and so, greater or less in degree, according to the degree of
their goodness, and moral seize. To this I may subjoin, without a
comment, which is unnecessary, the words of the apostle: There is one glory of
the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one
star differs from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead.

THERE is, however, one objection which may perhaps arise here, grounded on a
misconstruction of our Lord's parable of the laborers in the vineyard Matthew.
Chapter 20.
, which it will be proper briefly to obviate, before we proceed any farther. It
is said of these laborers, some of whom came to work in the vineyard in the
morning, and others, not till the eleventh hour, that at night they all
received an equal reward, "every man a penny". Ver. 9.
At which the former "murmured"; to one of whom the Lord of the vineyard
answered, "Friend, I do thee no wrong: -- Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good Ver. 13.15.
? It may possibly, at first view, seem the design of this parable to intimate,
not only that God might without injustice, but that he finally will, bestow an
equal reward on all good men, whether they have served him from their youth, or
only toward the close of life; or, without making any distinction between
them, in respect of the different degrees of their piety and goodness. This,
however, is by no mean the intent of the parable.

THE known partiality and pride of the Jews, who had long been God's peculiar
people; their contempt of the Gentiles; their disdaining the thoughts of their
ever being put on a footing with themselves in the kingdom or church of God, so
as to be equally heirs of eternal life; these things, I say, give us the true
clue for interpreting this parable. The church, or kingdom of God in this
world, is here represented under the similitude of a vineyard. God's calling
different people or nations into his church, in different periods of the world,
the Jews first, and afterward the Gentiles, is represented by the Lord of the
vineyard's hiring laborers at different times of the day, some in the morning,
and some at the eleventh hour. Under the similitude of his giving every man a
penny at night, without any regard to the time when they came into the
vineyard, is represented to us God's design, in the day of judgment, to bestow
on the faithful Gentiles as great a reward, as on the faithful Jews, though not
called into his church and kingdom till long after them. This is the true
intent of the parable: Not that individuals, particular persons, whether Jews
or Gentiles, should not be variously rewarded hereafter, according to the
degree of their goodness (which would be repugnant both to reason, and to many
clear testimonies of scripture); but that no difference should be made between
Jews and Gentiles, as such; though the former were God's people so long before
the latter; and therefore expected, in all other things to have the
pre-eminence, as what of right belonged to them. It was to humble this vain
confidence, and arrogance, of the Jews, that our Lord more especially spoke
this parable. And, indeed, he plainly intimates, both in the verse immediately
preceding, and in the close of it, that some of the Gentiles, who were last in
the church of God on earth, might be first in the kingdom of heaven above. In
short, the words of the apostle, Gal. 3.28, 29.
are a good comment on this parable, though they do not take in all the parts of
it: There is neither Jew nor Greek, says he, there is neither bond nor free --
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: And if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. And the main design of it
may be further illustrated by our Lord's own words to the Jews Luke 13.29, 30.
; And they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, and
from the south; and shall set down in the kingdom of God. And behold, there are
last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last. And there
is the more reason for interpreting this parable agreeably hereto, because it
is both introduced and closed with almost the same words; But many that are
first, shall be last; and the last shall be first, etc.

WE may therefore, notwithstanding this parable, be very certain from the
reflections above, especially from the passages of scripture before referred
to, that God will hereafter bestow a distinguished reward in heaven, on those
who have early devoted themselves to his service, and been eminently faithful
therein: A doctrine very important in its consequences, as it affords the
greatest encouragement to virtue; which would be apt to flag and languish, even
in the best of men, were it not animated from time to time, by suchlike
reflections.

BUT I come now more particularly to draw the practical conclusion from the
premises, thus established; which is, that sinners should not delay, but make
haste to keep God's commandments: An inference, which all must needs see, is
justly deduced. For if religion be progressive in the heart and life; if the
sooner we begin to be wise and virtuous, the more likely we are to attain to
high degrees of christian perfection; and, finally, if the more perfect we are
in this world, the more happy we shall be in the other; if these things are so,
surely it is highly reasonable, and of great importance to us all, to be speedy
in our return to God through Jesus Christ, instead of delaying to keep his
testimonies. Our own interest is far more essentially concerned herein, than in
any thing else, which we can possibly conceive of; and doubtless, what makes
any thing to be of importance to us, is its connection with our own well-being.

AND, for what is it worth while to exert ourselves, to rise up early, and sit
up late, and eat the bread of carefulness? For what does it concern us to make
haste, rather than that we may obtain a distinguished crown of glory in heaven!
If to be, in an eminent degree, like to God; if to be high in his savor and
esteem; if to be greatly blessed among the blessed; if to have, as it were, a
double portion among the sons of God; if to have an abode in one of the most
glorious mansions in his house; and, perhaps, caught up even to the third
heaven, where the apostle was; I say, if it is not worth our while to be in
haste for these things, it may be presumed, no one can tell, what is so; or
what is worthy even the least, or latest concern of man.

YOU are probably, most, or all of you, my brethren, sometimes very eager in
certain pursuits; in so much haste, that you can scarce allow your selves time
to take your needful rest, and refreshment. Be so kind, at least to yourselves,
as to pause a little here; and reflect, What the aims and pursuits are, on
which you are so intent, in so great a hurry, and which will admit of no delay.
Have you some end in view, which is truly worthy and noble? which being
attained, will make you a full compensation? Possibly it may be so. But, if you
will not censure me, as being too prying, and inquisitive, into what is
particularly your own concern, I would beg leave just to ask further, whether
the object of all this haste and care, is beyond death and the grave, in the
world to come, or in this world? If the former, you are then in haste, and
intent on "seeking the kingdom of God and his righteousness"; that you may
obtain an exceeding great reward in heaven; and be, in a distinguished sense "
His, in the day when he makes up his jewels". Nothing can be more reasonable
than this: Angels applaud this pursuit, this haste, this eagerness: angels
hover over, and protect you; and may angels still minister to you, as to the
"heirs of salvation". But you must excuse me; methinks I hear one and other,
saying, This is not what we are seeking after, what we are so intent upon. Well
then, you are thus eager and intent, in so much haste, about something in this
world. If it is not, that you may be distinguished in the kingdom of heaven,
hereafter, it is, that you may attain to distinguishing honors, or riches,
here; or, that you may gratify to the full, your sensual appetites. But
possibly you may be as unsuccessful in these pursuits as the most are. But if
not; and you should become in power a Caesar, in riches a Craesus, in pleasure
a Luccullus or Sardanapalus, how long are you to continue thus great, wealthy,
and voluptuous? Always? But if you were, what is this in comparison of what you
would gain, by making haste to keep God's commandments, and having him your
friend and portion forever? Alas! your hearts are set on vanity and bubbles:
you catch greedily at straws and trifles; and even at shadows, as is said in
the fable, while you lose the substance; the heavenly crown, the true riches,
the pearl of great price, the pleasures which are at God's right hand. Be wiser
for your selves; love your selves better; and without further delay, turn your
feet unto God's testimonies, in keeping which "there is great reward" to all;
especially to those who do it early, and attain to high degrees of perfection.
Amongst the children of God, there are some as much more his children than
others, by their eminent piety and virtue, as some are more the children of the
devil than others, by their greater wickedness and degeneracy. Their portion
respectively will, as has been shown, be accordingly. Let it be your endeavor,
that you may be as highly exalted in heaven, as others will be low in the place
of torment, when all the wicked are "thrust down to hell:" As there is reason
to fear, very many of those will be, wh^ are now the children of God's visible
church and kingdom, and, in that respect, "lifted up to heaven."

LET me therefore conclude this discourse, by beseeching those who name the
name of Christ, and are now going to receive the memorials of his body broken,
and his blood shed, for the remission of sins, N. B. This discourse was
delivered on a communion day.
not only to depart from all iniquity; but, by God's grace and assistance, to
excel in all christian virtues. All the rituals of religion, all the external
ordinances of the gospel, were designed to answer moral ends: Not, as many
would flatter themselves, that the observers of them might have a dispensation
from observing moral obligations, the most fundamental and indispensable of all
others. It is naturally and reasonably expected, that those who make such a
profession of religion, should abound in those fruits of righteousness, which
are, by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God. "What do ye more than
others?" Let us now, and always, eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord, whereby we show forth his death till he come, in such a humble, pious and
grateful commemoration of his passion; with such a just sense of the ultimate
design of this institution, as will now be acceptable to God our Savior, and
have a good influence on our future lives; that we may be made really, and
internally, the better by it; and live more devoted to Him, who died for us,
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God. The ceremonial
institutions of the gospel, were, like the ministers of it, given "for the
perfecting of the saints; -- that we may grow up into him in all things, who is
the Head, even Christ. If our minds are sufficiently enlarged to receive the
great ideas here expressed; if God, who caused the "light to shine out of
darkness, has so shined into our hearts, as to give us the light of the
knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ"; we shall be in no danger
of perverting the design of this sacred ordinance, or abusing it to
licentiousness. We shall thereby, grow in grace, in goodness, in the love of
God and man, and every christian virtue. Thus, when he who is our life shall
appear, we also shall appear with him in glory. And since it is to be, in the
resurrection of the dead, as it is now, one star differing from another in
glory, it will be a noble ambition in us to endeavor to excel in virtue here,
that we may appear with a distinguishing luster in that blessed day, when all
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that
turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever Dan. 12.3.
.

SERMON VII. THE Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The fifth Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the peculiar
Amiableness of Virtue and Religion in Youth; the peculiar Infamy of Vice in
Age; and the greater Honor we do to God and our Redeemer, by devoting the
Morning of Life to Religion, than by delaying the Service of God till old, or
middle Age.
PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


FOUR arguments have already been insisted on, SERMON VII.
in order to show the reasonableness and importance of making haste to keep
God's commandments. These arguments were, The shortness, and uncertain duration
of our probationary state: The greater ease of reforming now, than of doing it
hereafter: The superior happiness attending a religious and virtuous life: And
the greater perfection and glory, to which we shall attain, by devoting
ourselves early to the service of God. It is proposed, by divine assistance, to
state and urge another argument in this discourse, with the same general view,
of showing you the importance of making haste in this matter.

THE argument here intended, shall be drawn from a consideration of the
peculiar amiableness of religion and virtue in the young, the peculiar infamy
of vice in mature life, and the greater honor we do to God and our Redeemer, by
making haste to keep the commandments, than if this is delayed to the decline,
or even the meridian of our days. This argument, you perceive, is calculated to
operate upon that sense of honor, that desire of applause, that dread shame,
that quick and delicate sense of things, which are natural to ingenuous minds,
before persons are gone far in the paths of vice; rather than it is to work on
persons of a dull, a rough, crabbed, or sour nature, made still worse by
customary sinning; especially, than it is to work on quite hardened, veteran
transgressors; to whose impious rebellion and war against heaven, nothing but
the terrors of damnation, and perhaps not even they, can put a period.

SOME, yea, many, will probably look on the argument mentioned above, as being
of very little weight or force; and especially after those more substantial,
or, if I may so express it, more gross and palpable ones, which have been
handled in some preceding discourses. For I am not insensible, that there are
many persons of such a saturnine, lumpish and indelicate make, both among the
old and the young, that they can scarce apprehend the force of any motives or
arguments, besides those that either promise them some happiness, or menace
them with some evil, of a grosser kind. Accordingly, the holy scriptures abound
with threatenings and promises, motives and arguments of the latter sort; such
as set before men blessing and cursing, great and sensible evils, and great and
sensible good, resembled to those things which are commonly the most dreaded,
and the most valued in this world. And arguments of this kind are probably of
the most general use and benefit to men, considering what their frame is; how
gross their senses and apprehensions of things commonly are. However there are
other considerations, which ought not to be wholly neglected, as they may give
an additional weight to these; and, indeed, may possibly have a greater
influence on persons of an ingenuous temper, than those more substantial ones,
alluded to above. And it is to be hoped, there are not wanting some amongst us,
who can apprehend, and even feel the force of that, which is to be illustrated
in this discourse. I have called it but one argument: However, it must be
resolved into, and considered under, the following particulars, which are the
constituent parts thereof: viz.

THAT religion is peculiarly amiable and honorable in youth:

THAT vice is peculiarly odious and infamous in age:

THAT by an early devoting ourselves to God, we do the most honor to Him, and
our Redeemer:

AND therefore, That it becomes the young, as they regard either their own
honor, or God's glory, to make haste, and not delay, to keep his commandments;
this being the obvious conclusion from the premises, and the great point in
view. You perceive by the very nature of the present argument, that it is
addressed chiefly to the young; and not equally to all such; but principally to
those of them, who are of a more ingenuous disposition: For there is little
ground to hope that it will have much influence on those, who have no sense of
honor or disgrace; but are wholly devoted to low and brutal pleasures.

TO return then: RELIGION and virtue are peculiarly amiable and laudable in the
young. Religion, or the service of God, being in itself a reasonable service,
is, indeed, becoming and honorable at all ages, at all seasons of life, in all
persons without exception, whether old or young, great or small. But that which
is so fitting and decent, both in the decline, and in the dawn of human life,
has still a peculiar grace and beauty, and the most attractive charms, in the
latter. God himself is pleased to express a special complacency in those that
fear him in their youth. And all wise and good men are more particularly
delighted with the appearances of a pious and virtuous disposition, in those
that are just coming into the world, as it were, than in those that are just
going off the stage. This is a known fact, which does not need any formal proof
to establish the truth of it. I appeal to the high commendations of early piety
in the holy scriptures; to the writings of good men, and the common sense and
apprehensions of mankind; I mean, of the wise and virtuous. But however certain
and acknowledged this fact may be, it will be neither an impertinent curiosity,
nor a mis-spence of time, to inquire a little into the grounds hereof; or
whence it comes to pass, that virtuous youth is thus more amiable and honorable
in the eyes of men, though perhaps less venerable, than virtuous age.

NOW youth, according to prevailing custom, and indeed, according to a too
prevalent opinion in the world, is a season for levity, in which the passions
are to be indulged; and wherein it is comparatively rare to find a person with
a serious brow, or of a sober mind. This is far less the case in more advanced
years. Age is, almost of course, grave and solid, at least in appearance; so
that the appearance of religion therein, being more usual and common, becomes
the less striking and engaging, the less worthy of notice; to be sure, of
admiration.

CAN you tell why the first flowers of the spring, or the earliest-ripe fruit,
has a peculiar charm, and delights both the eye and fancy, more than those of
midsummer, or autumn, though perhaps of the same sort, and even more perfect in
their kind? If you can resolve this question, which is no very difficult one,
you will, at least in part, discover the true reason, why religion and virtue
in youth, have a more engaging form and appearance, than in age. This is an
indication of a promptness, and true greatness of mind, beyond the years of the
subject, according to custom; and to corrupt maxims, which give too great
allowance to the indiscretions, the follies, and vices of youth. It is an
indication of an early-ripe judgment, of a premature wisdom; and, if I may so
express it, proves the superior excellency of the soil, or the greater care and
pains taken in cultivating it, whereby it yields so early a crop of virtue. It
is not therefore strange that those, who have a just sense of the worth and
importance of virtue in every age, should be more especially delighted with it
in an age, wherein it is so unusual. It charms, not only by it is intrinsic
value, but by the singularity of it in that age, and in such persons; as a rich
diamond, or wedge of gold, found in a cottage, would be a much more engaging
curiosity, than one of equal value, seen in a palace. But, to return to the
former similitude: Should we behold a lilly of the field, arrayed in more
beauty than Solomon in all his glory, before others showed their heads, and
while their roots, perhaps, lay covered with frost and snow, it would naturally
attract our admiration in that season, though we might little regard it a month
or two later. It Is thus we admire the virtue of youth, while we comparatively
disregard that of mature age. Or should a fruit-tree of a particular kind,
which used commonly to bear, not till the fifth or sixth year after planting
(when some of its branches, perhaps, already began to wither) bud, and blossom,
and bear fruit plentifully, the first or second year, while all its boughs were
green and flourishing, every spectator would be pleased with such a rarity.
Well, therefore, may we be struck, and particularly pleased, with so rare a
phenomenon, as a very young person bringing forth much of that fruit, by which
our Father in heaven is glorified: Well may we look on such a one, as a
distinguished plant of renown in the garden of God, while older ones, though
equally, or more fruitful, are little regarded.

IT is naturally expected, that the hoary head should be found in the way of
wisdom and righteousness: And though it is truly "a crown of glory Prove. 16.31.
" to him that wears it, being found in this way; yet we cannot, even then, look
upon it as a crown of glory, equal to that of wisdom and piety on the head of
youth, where there is commonly nothing found but folly and extravagance, but
vain and wicked imaginations.

ANOTHER reason, why early wisdom and virtue are particularly pleasing to the
wise and good, is, that they promise an eminent degree of perfection in more
advanced life. They delight, not only by their present appearance, but by the
prospect which they afford; a prospect, that he who is, even in youth a saint,
will in age be in the foremost rank of such, and a distinguished blessing in
his day; agreeably to what was said in the last preceding discourse,
concerning the progressive nature of virtue and religion. All good men have the
interest of the commonwealth, and of the church of Christ, nearly at heart: To
both which, such examples of early virtue bode good; especially if found in
those, who, by their birth, fortune and quality, are likely to act in some
public sphere, where their influence will be extensive. The tree which is
remarkably flourishing in its youth, promises in due time, if not cut down, to
spread its boughs far and wide; to afford, at once, an abundance of fruit, an
ample shade from the scorching sun, and a covert from the storm. In like manner
does a youth of eminent virtue and accomplishments, especially in any of the
higher ranks of life, bid fair to become at length, a great and distinguished
blessing, either to the church or the state, or perhaps to both. It would
therefore be a wonder, if wisdom and virtue in this early season, did not
afford a peculiar pleasure to all good men; being at the same time, both a rare
phenomenon, and the earnest of so much good to the world.

AND now, if the young have any sense of true honor, any ambition to be
esteemed highly by the wise and good; the path of glory is plain and open
before them: Let them avoid the snares of vice, and resist all her deceitful
charms; let them consecrate the beginning, by which they will, as it were, make
all the remaining part of life, sacred to God and virtue. Hereby they will
acquire the truest fame; that of doing good. They will begin life with honor:
As it advances, they will still grow in favor with God and man: They will also
end life with glory; and even after death, their memory will still be blessed,
when all other fame would forsake them, or perhaps be turned into the foulest
and justest reproaches. For the very best that the wicked and impious can
expect, is, that their name and memory shall rot!

YOU should now be ashamed of that, which is in itself so shameful; and which
will bring reproach in the latter end. You should now be in love with that,
which is in its own nature so lovely and honorable; and which will procure you
the highest renown at last. And here it will not be amiss to remind you, that
all vice in general, and some vices more particularly, are represented in
scripture by the metaphors of impurity, defilement, filthiness, uncleanness,
etc. while, on the other hand, virtue and piety are expressed by the terms
purity, cleanness of heart and hands, and the like: And "fine linen, clean and
white," is the scripture-emblem of the "righteousness of the saints." The
design of these metaphors and emblems is, to make us abhor vice, as being foul,
loathsome, and disgraceful to us; and to inspire us with the love of true
virtue, as being in its own nature most amiable, ornamental, and glorious. The
young, especially those who are any ways distinguished by their birth or
fortune, are generally fond of appearing neat and clean, and well-dress'd; and
indeed, of being so in private, as well as appearing so in public: They would
be quite ashamed and disconcerted, to be found in a dirty, slovenly dress. But
how much more ambitious ought the young to be of that moral purity, which is
the beauty and ornament of the soul? how much more ashamed of that moral
defilement, which makes it deformed and odious? I do not mean, ambitious of the
one, or ashamed of the other, only in company, or when the world beholds them;
but in secret, even when no eyes are upon them, except those, which are said to
be "as a flame of fire"; which run to and fro in the earth, beholding the evil
and the good; equally beholding those who, to use the language of scripture,
have "defiled their garments," and "spotted them by the flesh;" and those,
whose robes are washed, and made white in the blood of the Lamb. The apostle
hints at some things that are done in secret, so foul, that it is a shame even
to speak of them. How much more shameful is it then to practice them, though it
be in secret? Nor, indeed, is there any thing now hid, which shall not be made
manifest; yea, which is not already so to Him, with whom we have to do.

TO finish the first part of the present argument; though virtue is truly amiable
and ornamental in all, it is most so in the young, in diverse respects. Some of
these have been spoken of already; and there is another which I shall just
mention here: The passions, some of them more especially, are naturally
stronger in youth than in age; which consideration doubtless makes the
conquest, or due regulation of them, in that season of life, the most honorable
and glorious; far more so, than any other victory or triumph: For he that is
"slow to anger," or restrains his other passions within due bounds, is better
than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a city.
Remember therefore, the counsel which David gave to Solomon, while young, though
it seems the latter unhappily disregarded it, till he was advanced in years. I
was my father's son, says he, tender and only beloved in the sight of my
mother. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words --
Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and with all thy getting,
get understanding. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee
to honor when thou do embrace her: She shall give to thine head an ornament
of grace; a crown of gold shall she deliver to thee Prove. 4.3, --
.

BUT, in order the more effectually to dissuade the young from delaying to
serve God, or from continuing to serve diverse lusts and pleasures, till they
are far advanced in years, and got, as it were, within the confines of death; I
was, in the next place, more particularly to remind them of the great
odiousness and infamy of vice in maturer life. Whoever, being now young,
determines not to be virtuous and pious, till he is advanced to middle, or old
age, does, in effect, resolve to be vicious and impious at that period of life;
if not through it, yet, at least, till he has entered upon it: A season of life
wherein, as was intimated, vice is much more odious and disgraceful, because
more inexcuseable, than it is in childhood and youth. By how much more amiable
and praiseworthy virtue is in youth, than in old age, by so much more hateful
and shameful is vice in old age, than in youth. And people of reflection are
almost as much struck with horror in the latter case, as they are with
pleasure, and agreeable surprise, in the former. There is a real and just, though
not an equal foundation in nature, for these different emotions of the mind,
occasioned by such different objects as a young saint, and a veteran sinner. I
say, not an equal foundation; because folly and vice are not so singular in
mature life, or even in old age, as wisdom and virtue are in youth; and the
peculiar amiableness of the latter arises, in part, from the rarity of the
thing, or its being so uncommon, as was observed above. However, after allowing
all that is proper, in respect of this disparity in one circumstance, I suppose
all will readily grant in general, that an aged fool, blasphemer, knave, or
debauchee, is a much more contemptible and odious character, than a young one,
although, in this evil world, it is not so singular as a young man of wisdom and
virtue.

ALTHOUGH vice in age is not so singular as virtue in youth, and therefore is not
altogether so striking; there is still sufficient reason why it should be, as
it is in the common apprehension of men, at least of the wise and good, more
disgraceful in mature, than in early life. For it is, in that age or season of
life, precluded from availing itself of those pleas, apologies and excuses,
which are generally made, and too generally allowed, in favor of vicious
youth; such as, want of time for reflection, the strength of passion,
inexperience, and the like. These excuses, though quite insufficient, ought,
doubtless, to have some weight, so as to extenuate the crimes and guilt of
youth, in a degree: And they are often, though unjustly, urged, as if they, in a
manner, exempted youth from blame, whatever is done in that age. How often is
the excess of riot and licentiousness, and even of profaneness and impiety,
justified, as it were, by these few words, or the like? -- He is an
inexperienced, thoughtless, young man. -- And though candor is highly
commendable, so far as there is room for it in reason; yet, surely, those who
make these, or suchlike reflections, on the follies and vices of youth, ought
to reflect also, that vice is still vice; that even the young have capacity
sufficient, and ought to know what it is, and to abstain from it; and
therefore, that they are not to be justified by such observations, which, I
think, are never made in the holy scriptures, with the like view or design. The
language of scripture is, Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: But know thou, that for all these things, God will
bring thee into judgment. Therefore remove sorrow from thine heart, and put
away evil from thy flesh; for childhood and youth are vanity Eccl. 12.13, 14.
.

BUT to return from what may, perhaps, seem a digression; the greater the
allowance is, which ought in reason to be made for vicious youth, as such, the
less ought in reason to be made for vicious age, as such. And without fixing
precisely, bounds, limits and degrees, in this case (which is impossible, and
therefore absurd to attempt,) we are much more naturally led to expect gravity,
and sobriety of mind and manners, in persons come to mature life, than in the
young. And therefore our surprise and horror are proportionably heightened,
whenever we see the gray hairs of age, and all the folly, madness and
licentiousness of youth, united in the same persons. -- Their reason is
presumed to be long since come to maturity; they have had time ^or reflection
and consideration; they have had much experience, in the ordinary progress of
things; many of their natural passions are of course subsided, in a degree; and
temptation is lessened. All which things, not only make vicious age appear, but
actually renders it much more odious and contemptible, than vicious youth.
Whatever apologies we make for the young, in the respects abovementioned, to
extenuate their faults and vices; we can make none of them in behalf of the
aged; or those who are, long since, arrived at the years of discretion and
reflection: Especially if they were favored with a religious education in
their youth; if they have always lived under the light of the gospel, and been
frequently admonished, both by the word and providence of God, to forsake
their sins, and keep his commandments. Such men, to be sure, are left wholly
without excuse; yea, without any reasonable apology, for their sins. They have
a double, a treble, yea, a tenfold share of infamy and guilt, lying upon them:
and are like that ground which the apostle James speaks of, which, after long
cultivation, bearing nothing but briars, and thorns, and weeds, is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned.

LET the young think soberly of this: For youth and sobriety are not
universally enemies, or strangers to each other, how seldom soever they may
meet, and embrace as friends. Consider the great shame and infamy that justly
belong to impious and vicious persons, even in middle, but especially in old
age. Consider that man, (for doubtless many such are to be found) who, though he
has enjoyed many advantages of a religious nature, and is now past the meridian
of his life, has never yet though it soberly of his latter end, or of his duty to
God, who gave, and preserves his being. Reflect on such a one as, almost daily,
perhaps, transforms himself into a brute, by his intemperance: On another,
whose mouth is still filled with oaths and profanity: On a third, who,
regardless of a treasure in heaven, is set on getting earthly riches, not by
right, but by fraud, and oppression: On another, who is so estranged from the
God of truth, that lying and falsehood are his delight: On another, who is still
intent on gratifying his fleshly lusts, even after his flesh, his body and,
perhaps, his estate, are almost consumed, by his debaucheries; so that he is
become, not only the scorn of the good, but even the ridicule and contempt of
his former companions in vice and guilt. Reflect on these, and suchlike
characters, I say, which are common, and tell me whether there is not a
peculiarly infamy justly belonging to them; I mean, in the old, or even middle
age? If you are persons of such an ingenuous turn of mind, as this discourse
was more particularly designed for, I am sure you think, nothing can well be
more odious or contemptible than such men, however distinguished by their
station and circumstances in life. For even an old, and foolish, and wicked
king, is spoken of by Solomon, as a most despicable character; while that of a
wise child is highly commended by him. Well: If such persons are justly the
objects of great contempt; if they are despised by all wise men, and the
all-wise God; are you willing to be like them, and so become objects of the
same contempt and abhorrence yourselves? as you will certainly be, if you
should delay to keep God's commandments, and persevere in the practice of sin
and vice, in the manner they have done. For, surely, you cannot flatter
yourselves, that though you should act like them, tread in their steps, and
imitate their bad example, yet you shall avoid that just ignominy, which they
have incurred. What can you reasonably expect, if you retain your vices and
follies, till you are as far advanced in years as they, and under the enjoyment
of like advantages, but to become as despicable and odious hereafter, as they
are at present; and as you acknowledge, they ought to be accounted? You cannot
be so partial to yourselves, and your own fame, as to entertain the least hope,
that the wise and good will honor you, if you should grow old in those vices
and impieties, on account of which they despise others, become so already.

To close this part of the argument, therefore: If you have any ingenuous dread
of the justest infamy; if you would not incur the contempt of all wise and
virtuous men; yea, if you would not be despised of God himself; do not
entertain a thought of continuing to indulge your lusts, till you are more
advanced in years. Turn your feet, even while you are young, into that good
path, from which you will have no desire to depart, when you are old: That
path, in which you will have all the wise and good for your fellow-travellers,
from whom you will ever receive that honor which is infinitely more than a
balance for the contempt, or ridicule, of ten million vicious fools; that path
of the just, which will shine more and more unto the perfect day: in fine, the
path which will conduct you to that eternal kingdom and glory, to which you are
called by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.10.


BUT it is time to proceed to the third branch of the present argument which
is, That greater honor will redound, not only to yourselves, but to God and
your Redeemer, by making haste to keep the divine commandments, than by
delaying this till you are farther advanced in life. It is one indication of an
ingenuous mind, to be ready to give honor, to whom honor is due, as well as to
merit it by worthy actions. God is pleased to account himself honored, by our
love and obedience: our Savior is also honored thereby. Nor om I willing to
believe, there are many such children of disobedience here present, as have no
sense of any obligation lying upon them, to honor their Father who is in
heaven; the God that made, that preserves them, and who offers them the
inheritance of children: this would suppose them to be "bastards and not sons."
Nor will I suppose it possible for you to entertain a doubt, whether you ought
to honor so glorious a person, so great a benefactor as Jesus Christ; who being
rich, yet for your sakes became poor; enduring the cross, and despising the
shame; and whom, being now, by the right hand of God exalted, we are all
required to honor, to the glory of God the Father. To imagine that you can call
in question your obligation to glorify God, and his Son Jesus Christ, would be
to suppose you base and degenerate to a great degree; quite contrary to the
principle I set out upon. It is therefore now taken for granted, that you own
yourselves under obligation, to give all the honor you possibly can, to those
who are so worthy of it.

AND if you acknowledge this, let me ask you, whether you know any other way,
in which you can so truly and effectually honor God and your Redeemer, as by
keeping the commandments? by living and acting as God and Jesus Christ require
you to do? Our Savior says, Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
fruit; so shall ye be my disciples. And again: If ye love me, keep my
commandments. You see then, that you will, by doing thus, the most effectually
glorify God, and show your regard to Jesus Christ. Is it not therefore
incumbent upon you, even now, however young you may be, to turn your feet unto
God's testimonies; to make haste, and not delay, to keep his commandments?
Would you not do more honor to him that made, and him that redeemed you by his
blood, by entering on a life of religion now, than by doing it hereafter when
you are old, if perhaps, you should live to become so? If God is at all honored
by the obedience of his creatures, certainly they who keep his commandments
through the whole course of their lives, honor him more than they, who neglect to
do so, till their lives are almost come to a period.

THAT you may be the more fully convinced of this, and plainly see, how much
more God and our Savior are glorified, by an early, than by a late conversion
to the ways of wisdom, I shall here briefly set them in contrast; first
representing to you the case and character of One, who even in the morning of
life remembers his creator* and serves him faithfully through life; and then, of
One, who delays his return to God, till age has almost put a period to his
days. There will be nothing very peculiar, or singular, in these characters;
either with respect to the outward condition and circumstances to the persons
supposed, or with respect to the manner and means of their being reclaimed from
the error of their ways, to the wisdom of the just; which would not so well
answer the proposed end, of general use.

FIRST then, Here is One, who, even in early youth, by a christian education,
has deep impressions of religion made on his heart: And though he has not been
more vicious than children commonly are, yet his conscience is awakened and
troubled, so that he is inquisitive what he shall do to be saved? He soon
recollects that passage in the gospel -- Come unto me, all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: Take my yoke upon you, and learn of
me, etc. He is further affected, and encouraged, by the conduct and words of
Him, who took even children up in his arms and blessed ^h^m, saying, Suffer the
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the
kingdom of heaven. He resolves, that if he has done iniquity, he will do so no
more; but from henceforward, by God's assistance, devote himself to his
service, and keep the commandments of his Redeemer. He not only resolves; but
puts his good resolutions in practice. He immediately renounces all the
vanities of childhood and youth: And has so firm a belief of things invisible
and eternal, as enables him to vanquish all temptations. He is a conqueror,
while but a child: And being come to years, would, like Moses, rather suffer
affliction with the people of God, than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, and be called the son of Pharoah's daughter. He persists in this course
of piety and virtue, so early begun, through the several stages of life,
notwithstanding every opposition and discouragement. He worships God in
sincerity and truth, according to his word and institutions, without
enthusiasm, or ostentation. He adorns the doctrine of God his Savior in all
things: He is a useful member of society; and in every relation of life, from
youth to age, acts a part becoming a christian; living the life which he lives
in the flesh, by the faith of the Son of God, who, he know^ will at length come
to "be glorified i^ his saints." His wisdom and piety are still improved by
years: The longer he lives, the more perfect he becomes; and, at length, in a
good old age, dies in the Lord, having his hope full of immortality; and
gloriously anticipating, hereby, his final triumph over the grave.

REFLECT a little on this character, wherein there is nothing romantic; nothing
over-done, or carried beyond real life; though, it is confessed, it is far from
being so common as were to be desired. The proposed contrast thereto, follows.

HERE then, is another person, born and educated, like the former, in a
christian country, and in a christian manner; if you please, his co-temporary,
and neighbor: But how unlike him in other respects! For though "from a child he
has known the holy scriptures, which were able to make him wise unto
salvation," he practically disregarded them till he became a man, yea, old and
grey-headed. His childhood and youth were wholly given to vanity. He was never
a speculative unbeliever; but yet, while young, entirely addicted himself to
those "fleshly lusts, which war against the soul." When past the meridian of
his days, schemes of worldly ambition, and worldly wealth, took possession of
his heart; and chiefly employed his thoughts. In prosecuting these, he stuck at
none of the usual methods of intrigue, falsehood and calumny, of craft,
oppression and fraud: Though still, to prevent the loss of his reputation in a
christian country, he used often to attend the public worship; and was heard,
more than once, to express himself with seeming warmth, not only against our
modern infidels; but against others, whom popular censure calls innovators in
religion, or men of unsound and dangerous principles. However, by a series of
follies, vices and crimes, whereby he did much mischief in the world; and in
which he grew still more hardened and audacious with years, he made it evident
to all who knew his practices, how little he feared God, or regarded man; or
rather, how much he contemned both. But being now far advanced in life; having
been disappointed in most of his worldly projects; finding the infirmities of
age come fast upon him; being apprehensive that, according to the course of
nature, death was at hand; reflecting on the greatness of his guilt, and
fearing the wrath to come; being also alarmed by some awakening dispensations
of providence, he determines at length to reform his ways; and to do whatever
he can, in the close of life, to save his soul. God, who is long-suffering, and
rich in mercy to them that call upon him, regards his prayers. He is born
again, and becomes a new man in his old age. He lives a little while after;
just long enough to make charitable people believe, he is a true penitent; and
so he dies; not, indeed, in the full assurance of faith; nor yet without a
degree of hope, that he shall not be "condemned with the world."

THIS is the man, or character, which you are desired to compare with the
former; a common character, excepting the latter part of it: For I own, it is
unusual for those, who have so long lived the life of the wicked, at last to
die the death of the righteous.

YOU cannot reasonably make it a doubt, by which of these two persons God was
most glorified. The former glorified him, and was a credit to religion, from
childhood to youth, from youth to middle age, from middle age to old; and
finally in death; still making it manifest how great a regard he had for God
and his laws. The latter, on the contrary, was a disgrace to the christian
profession; and through him, the name of God was blasphemed Romans 2.24.
by many. How many altars did he raise to lust, ambition, and mammon, the only
deities to which he sacrificed, before ever he seriously though it of giving glory
to God? He plainly preferred the service of Satan, to that of God most high,
till he was almost past serving the former any longer, by reason of nature's
decay, and the near approach of death. He could not, even at last, be so
properly said to have voluntarily forsaken his sins, and returned to God, as
compelled to do it, by the extremity of his condition. And if he glorified God
at all, it was chiefly by being an example of his long-suffering, and grace, in
his forgiveness and conversion, after having dishonored and affronted him so
many years, by such a life.

A MORE particular comparison was intended between these two characters; in
order to show, how much more honor accrues to God and our Redeemer by the
former, than by the latter of them. But as there is hardly time for it, so it
is hoped, it is not necessary. After laying the characters before you, your own
reason, your own just sense of things, will save me this labor; for, in your
judgment, I am sure, you cannot hesitate a moment, however you may be disposed
in point of inclination.

BUT I must not close this discourse, without briefly summing up the argument
of it; without drawing, and urging, the practical conclusion from the whole.

YOU will remember then, that I am not now speaking to persons of a flagitious
and abandoned character; nor even to those who are naturally of a dull and
sordid disposition, almost all body, without soul or spirit: but to ingenuous
youth, who have a lively sense of honor, of propriety and decorum, with their
contraries; and who would be ashamed to act a part, evidently base and unworthy
in their own apprehensions. Now you have seen, by what has been said above,
that religion, being a reasonable service, is in itself becoming and honorable
in all persons, at all times. You have seen that it is, in diverse respects,
peculiarly amiable and reputable in youth. You have seen what particular infamy
attends, and justly belongs to vicious age. And, lastly, you have seen, how
much more honor is done to God and our Redeemer, whom we are all bound to
honor, by those who early devote themselves to the service of God, than by
those who serve the devil and their lusts, till age overtakes them. What, now,
is the plain consequence from these premises? Doubtless, That you ought to make
haste, and not delay, to turn your feet unto God's testimonies, and keep his
commandments. If you would acquire the most substantial glory; if you would
avoid the justest and greatest infamy; if you would, as much as in you lies, do
honor to God that made, and to Christ that redeemed you; if you would do all,
or any of these things, you are immediately to forsake your foolish and vicious
practices, and to live henceforward, in the faith and fear of God, in obedience
to his holy will.

AND what more forcible argument, or motive than this, could be used to
persuade persons of your ingenuous and generous temper, to be speedy in turning
your feet unto God's testimonies? What others need I urge? What others need I
so much as mention? Need I remind you, how precarious life is; and that you may
very soon and unexpectedly be called out of this world, to give an account of
yourselves to God? Need I tell you, that it will be far more irksome and
difficult to reform your evil ways hereafter, than to do it now, even "while it
is called today?" Need I tell you, that you will be far more happy in this
world, in the practice of religion, than you can possibly be, in the indulgence
of your lusts? Need I assure you, that there is a peculiar and great reward,
laid up in heaven for those, who faithfully serve God from the morning to the
eye of life? Need I suggest to you, what bold and presumptuous impiety it is,
to persist in disobeying God's commandments, while his wrath is so clearly
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men? Need I
mention any thing of the terrors of the Lord? Any thing, of that "rod of iron,"
with which hardened, irreclaimable sinners, are to be ruled, or rather, dashed
to pieces like a potter's vessel? Any thing, of that fire prepared for the
devil and his angels, into which the workers of iniquity are to be cast? Any
thing of that outer darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth?

IS there any need to insist on, or even to mention, such topics and motives as
these, in order to persuade persons of your taste and temper, to make haste,
and not delay? No, surely! they are calculated for persons of a very different
make; naturally void of ingenuity, or deeply immersed already in vice and
impiety. With you, the argument of this discourse will supply the place of all
others: You covet true, substantial glory: You dread deserved infamy: You
would, to the utmost of your power, do honor to your great and good Creator, to
your merciful Redeemer. And being now convinced, that in order to these ends,
you must forsake your sins, and keep God's commandments, you will doubtless
make haste, and not delay. You are now resolved, that you will not offend any
more; that you will no longer violate the sacred laws of right reason, honor
and gratitude, by withholding your hearts, your love and obedience, from Him,
to whom they are so justly due. You are now resolved, that before your eyes are
closed with sleep, they shall overflow with tears of ingenuous penitence, and
godly sorrow, while you implore forgiveness through Him, who was "once offered to
bear the sins of many;" and beseech God, without whom you can, effectually, do
nothing, to give you "a new heart;" to guide, and keep you, in the paths of
righteousness and peace. It can hardly be doubted, but these are your present
intentions and resolutions; do not, I beseech you, forget, but put them, in
practice; that so, through the abundant goodness of God, that same sun, which
today arose on you, evil and unthankful, may tomorrow arise on you, just and
justified; and such as shall themselves, at length, shine forth as the sun in
the kingdom of their Father!

YOUR youth, and your turn of mind, leave some room for candor to hope, that
your neglecting hitherto, what would be so reputable to yourselves, and
contribute so much to the honor of Religion, to the glory of God and your
Redeemer, is rather owing to want of consideration and reflection, than to any
thing worse; though that, indeed, is itself highly blameable. Surely, you did not
well consider in what true glory consists; you did not duly reflect, Whose
commandments you violated! Whose Son you "trod under foot"! Whose blood you
"accounted an unholy thing!" Whose good Spirit you "grieved"! Had you
thoroughly thought of these things, doubtless you would, before this time, have
turned your feet unto God's testimonies. Wherefore, being now so particularly
reminded of them, let them have their proper influence on your hearts; and
depart not from the holy commandment delivered to you. Finally, brethren (for
as such, even the elders of old entreated the younger men; 1 Timothy 5.1.
) Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have both
learned and received, and heard and seen, -- do: And the God of peace shall be
with you. Phil. 4.8, 9.


SERMON VIII. THE Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The Sixth Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the base
Ingratitude of delaying it, while God mercifully allows us a Space for
Repentance, and manifests such great Love and Condescension toward us, as
appear in the Gospel.
PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


WHETHER we consider the uncertainty of our lives, SERMON VIII.
or the pecuculiar difficulty attending a reformation of bad habits, long
continued in: Whether we consider the great and noble pleasures of a religious
life, or the distinguishing reward laid up in heaven, for those who attain to
an high degree of christian perfection: Whether we consider the peculiar
amiableness of virtue in youth, the peculiar infamy of vice in age, or the
great honor that is done to God and our Redeemer, by consecrating the morning
of our lives to religion: Whether we consider all, or any of these things, I
say, still the practical conclusion will be the same; viz. That it becomes us
to make haste to keep God's commandments; and that all delay herein is utterly
inexcusable. These several topics, or heads of argument, having been dilated
upon in some of the last preceding discourses, are now passed over with a bare
mention.

ANOTHER argument is, by divine assistance to be handled in this discourse,
with the same general view: And this shall be taken from a consideration of the
baseness, the black ingratitude, of persevering in our sins, while God allows
us a space for repentance, and shows so much grace, pity and condescension
toward us, as appear in the gospel of his Son.

THIS argument has some affinity with that of the foregoing discourse, and is
adapted to operate on the same tempers, or persons of a like disposition and
character, with the former: I mean on persons who have some ingenuity of mind;
some sense of honor and decorum; and who, though of a vicious character, are not
yet abandoned -- Not on those, who are of a servile and sordid disposition, or
who are already hardened to a great degree in vice and impiety. These latter,
equally regardless of God's honor, and of their own, would perhaps only smile
at our simplicity, if we should attempt to work upon them by such airy notions,
and empty speculations, as these are in their gross apprehensions. But there
are many, at least some, of a more ingenuous temper, who will feel a divine
power and energy even in arguments of this kind; airy and unsubstantial, only
in the conceptions of those, who are either naturally of a fordid make, or who
are plunged deep in vice and sensuality, That any particular action, or course
of life, is ungrateful, that it is base and disingenuous, will be a
consideration of great weight, even with many who are not of a virtuous
character. And, certainly, there is no ingratitude so base and infamous, as
that of persevering in disobedience to God's commandments, considering his
goodness, forbearance, and long-suffer^ing toward us, and his grace revealed
in the gospel of our salvation.

THE present argument may be explained and enforced under the following
observations; viz.

THAT God allows those who have gone astray from his commandments, a space for
repentance, that they may be reconciled to him, and happy in his favor:

THAT he has given his own dear son to suffer and die for us:

THAT he condescends to invite, and, as it were, to entreat and beseech
sinners, to be reconciled to him:

THAT this is the most astonishing goodness and condescension in him:

THAT it is, therefore, the basest ingratitude in us to persevere in our sins
from time to time: And consequently,

THAT if we have any ingenuity of temper, or any sense of honor, it becomes us
to make haste, and not delay, to keep the commandments of our God: Which is the
great point in view.

I must of necessity be short upon these particulars, since the compass of one
discourse will not admit of any great enlargement on them.

To return therefore: GOD allows those who have gone astray from his
commandments, a space for repentance, that they may return to him, and be happy
in his favor. We are all of us the witnesses and monuments of this his lenity,
mercy and forbearance. We doubtless began early to depart from the living God,
and to break his commandments; for "childhood and youth are vanity". And some
of us have, perhaps, been walking in vicious courses, even till old age has
overtaken us therein: All which time, God has been waiting to be gracious. So
that he not only allows a space for repentance to sinners in general, that they
may make their peace with him, by turning their feet unto his testimonies; but
to some of them, he allows a long time for this purpose; if, indeed, human life
can ever be called long. And to be sure, half this term may well be looked upon
as long, for the great and holy God to wait on his sinful, rebellious
creatures, while he beholds them trampling on his laws; that they may see, and
repent of their wicked deeds. For this is the end and design of his forbearing
thus with them. Were he not pitiful and gracious he would speedily execute his
righteous sentence against the evil works of men, instead of delaying it in the
manner he does. In the language of the apostle Peter, He is "long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish; but that all should come to
repentance".

GOD might, indeed, be said to be gracious and long-suffering, though he allowed
sinners only the space of two or three years to think on their ways, and turn
their feet unto his testimonies. Are there many earthly monarchs, who exercise
such forbearance toward their unreasonable and rebellious subjects, having all
the time full power to make them feel the due desert of their crimes? To be
sure, we do not often see such examples of lenity and forbearance in the
potentates of this world. God's conduct toward us in this respect, fully
verifies his own words: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your
ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so
are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. Isai.
55.8, 9.
This is said with particular reference to the patience and mercy of God
toward sinners; which so far exceeds that of men one toward another, who are
commonly hasty, and almost insatiable, in avenging themselves on their enemies.
God might make his power known, and glorify his justice, in punishing our sins
as soon as committed. But he had rather that we would turn and live; having no
pleasure in the death of the wicked. He had rather make his mercy appear
illustrious and glorious, by forbearing with us in our sins for a time, and
then pardoning them upon our repentance, than show his righteous severity, by
cutting us off in our trespasses, without allowing us a season to reflect on
our ways, and reform them. How backward he is to destroy the wicked, and his
great compassion toward them, we may further learn from what he said to
Ephraim and Israel of old, [Hos. xi.] "My people are bent to backsliding from
me -- How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how
shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the
fierceness of mine anger; I will not return to destroy Ephraim: For I am God
and not man; the holy One in the midst of thee." Impenitent sinners in general
may here see the reason, why they are not yet cut off and destroyed: It is not,
because they have not deserved to be thus dealt with; but because they have to
do with that God whose mercy is infinite; and his forbearance unexampled
amongst men.

BUT it will give us a still more exalted idea of God's goodness and grace, if,
in the next place, we reflect, That he has given his own dear Son to suffer and
die for us. So greatly has God loved this sinful world! So unwilling is he,
that we should perish! So desirous, to speak after the manner of men, that we
should obtain eternal life! In the language of the apostle Paul, "God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them" -- "For he has made him to be sin [a sin-offering] for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." And again: "God
commends his love toward us, says he, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us." So the apostle John: "In this was manifested the love of
God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world;
that we might live through him. Herein is love; not that we loved God, but that
he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins."

AND now, adhering to the Scripture Phrase, could the love of God have been so
manifested to a guilty world, in any other way, as it is in this? He loved us,
indeed, anticedendy to Christ's coming into the world, and even antecedently to
his designation to the mediatorial office. For this appointment itself took its
rise from the love, and free grace of God; being the effect, not the cause
thereof. And it was herein, that God's eternal love was made manifest, visible,
or evident to mankind; viz. in his actually sending his Son into the world, in
the fullness of time; a person of such excellence and dignity, and so beloved by
him, here to live a life of sorrow, and die a shameful and accursed death, in
order to reconcile us unto himself, and "bring many sons unto glory." Taking it
for granted, that God had a most sincere and tender love for us, and concern
for our eternal happiness; taking this for granted, I say, ask yourselves,
whether you can conceive of any other method, in which he could so effectually
have shown, and demonstrated this to the world, as that which he has actually
taken to this end? Abraham manifested his great piety, in being ready to part*
with his only son Isaac, at the call of God, when he was pleased to make that
trial of his sincerity: "Now know I that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy son, thine only son, from me." Genesis 22.12.
This was the strongest testimony, the highest evidence, he could possibly give
of his sincenty, considering the great love which he had for his son. In
allusion to which story, we may justly say, Now know we that God loves us
indeed, seeing he has not withheld his Son, his only Son from us. And he that
spared not his own Son, in whom he so much delighted, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also, freely give us all things? How strong
is that love? How great is that mercy? How rich is that grace, which has, in
this way, been manifested toward us? Doubtless this is the strongest evidence,
the highest proof, which God could give, of his compassion and mercy to the
sinful children of men. I am sure, you cannot conceive of any greater, more
convincing, affecting, or astonishing.

AND you know that the Son of God was manifested to take away our sins, not
only by bearing them in his own body on the tree, but by delivering us from the
power and dominion thereof; that we might be purified unto him, a peculiar
people, zealous of good works; and serve God in holiness and in righteousness
all the days of our lives. Can we then make too much haste? or, rather, can we
possibly make haste enough, to cooperate with the designs of God's love in
Christ Jesus, by turning our feet unto his testimonies? How ungrateful are we
to him, as well as unkind to ourselves, if we make any delay to keep his
commandments?

BUT it is farther to be observed, That God condescends most earnestly to
invite, I had almost said, to entreat and beseech us, to be reconciled to him,
as though his own happiness depended upon our's. "We then, as ambassadors for
Christ, says the apostle, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God." What astonishing language is this!
-- "Look unto the heavens, and see, and behold the clouds which are higher than
thou. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? Or if thy transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous what give thou him?
or what receives he of thine hand?" Job 35.5, -- 8.
And yet the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, condescends, as it
were, to entreat and beseech us; saying, "Turn ye, turn ye; for why will ye
die?" As if it were not enough for the great God, whom we have offended by our
sins, to give us a space and opportunity to make our peace with him; as if it
were not enough for him, to have delivered up his own Son for us all; as if it
were not enough for him, by his prophets and apostles, to proclaim to us his
willingness to receive us into his favor, on our return to him: As if all this
were not enough, I say, the great Lord of all does, as it were, condescend to
become Himself a petitioner, and supplicant, to his sinful creatures: He
invites, hc persuades, he urges us, to return to him, and be happy, with more
apparent tenderness and solicitude, than any earthly parent would invite a
rebellious and prodigal son to return, and receive the inheritance designed for
him.

WHY does God use so many persuasions and entreaties, in order to effect a
reconciliation, and to establish peace, between himself and us? Is this,
because he was the aggressor, the offending party, to whom it of right
belongs to be first in an overture to this end, and to make supplication? No:
He had done us no wrong, but great good; which we requited with evil. Did he
fear any harm would accrue to him, from our continued opposition to him, and
enmity against him? No: He is far exalted above the reach of our impotent
madness; and could utterly destroy us with one breath of his mouth. Did he
expect to receive any benefit to himself, as the effect of this reconciliation?
any augmentation of his perfections, or happiness? No: We are as unable to do
him good, as harm; and are absolutely dependent upon his pleasure, both for
happiness, and our very being. Does he think he should be left destitute of
subjects to reign over, if he should actually destroy, instead of reclaiming us
to our allegiance? No: Though mankind were destroyed from the earth, there are
millions of glorious angels in heaven, that delight in doing his will; and he
could easily re-people this earth with other inhabitants: There is more dust,
out of which to form them; and the same breath that animated us, whereby "man
became a living soul Genesis 2.7.
," is not yet exhausted! What then is the reason of God's dealing thus with us?
Why does he use entreaties? Why is he so desirous of reconciling this wicked
and apostate world unto himself? Why exercise so much forbearance toward us?
The only reason hereof is, that he is infinitely good, merciful and
condescending; and is not willing we should perish, how much soever we have
deserved it.

UPON the whole then, the goodness and condescension of God toward his sinful
creatures, are, as was said above, the greatest and most astonishing, that we
can possibly conceive of. If we duly consider the greatness and majesty of God,
our own littleness and vileness; and what it is for such worms of the dust to
transgress his laws; we may well be surprised, that he does not immdiately
tread upon us, and crush us into the dust again, out of which we were taken; I
mean, upon our first rising up in opposition to his will. Is it not strange,
that he should allow us any space at all for repentance? If it is not; yet,
surely, it is surprising, that his mercy and grace should be protracted toward
us from year to year, to such long-suffering. We see no grace, no lenity, no
forbearance amongst men, which, all circumstances being duly considered, will
bear any comparison with this: Especially when we reflect, that God still
offers us, not only the forgiveness of our past offenses, but eternal life and
glory. But our admiration of his goodness and mercy, must needs be still
heightened, by reflecting on that particular method, in which he has manifested
this his mercy and grare to us; the method which he has chosen for our
redemption from sin, and misery, and to bring us to glory. Did ever any earthly
sovereign, from mere pity and compassion to his rebellious, ill-deserving
subjects, deliver up an only begotten, and well-beloved son, to suffer and die
in their room, as a ransom for them, that they might live, and yet the honor of
his laws and government be maintained? There is no example of such
condescension and grace, but in almighty God, the Father of mercies, toward
us, when we were dead in trespasses and sins.

HOWEVER; allowing for the present, that we could call to mind something
similar hereto, in the conduct of certain earthly potentates toward their
rebellious subjects; yet can we recollect an instance of any king's continuing
to issue out acts of grace, from year to year, in favor of his rebel-subjects,
after having once given them such a proof of his lenity and goodness; still
inviting them to return to their duty and allegiance, and to accept his mercy?
Can we think of any examples of those, who in such a case have become, as it
were, supplicants to their disloyal and traitorous subjects, praying and
beseeching them for a long course of time, to lay aside their unreasonable
opposition, and to submit themselves? Though it must be still supposed, that this
was not for the injured monarch's, but for their own advantage; and that, all
this time, he had sufficient power, and might with the greatest ease, as well
as justice, have avenged himself on them: For otherwise the cases will not be
parallel. I am sure you cannot call to remembrance any such examples of
goodness and condescension, in the kings and potentates of this world.

BUT although you could do so, still you will allow that there is some difference
between them, and the king eternal, immortal and invisible, the only wise God;
some difference between men's rebelling against those, who are weak and mortal
creatures as well as themselves, and rebelling against the King of heaven; some
difference between the former's stooping to entreat their unreasonable subjects
to be reconciled to them, and God's beseeching us to be reconciled to Him: So
that, after all, there is, and must be, a very wide and essential difference
between the two cases. There neither are, not can in nature be, any examples of
grace or condescension among men, in their conduct toward each other, however
great in appearance, which will, on due consideration, come up in any measure
to that which God exercises toward his sinful creatures. All such examples
must, of necessity, fall infinitely short; infinitely below the divine pattern
and original; because God is infinitelv greater than man. We cannot, therefore,
as I said before, even conceive of any other goodness, grace and condescension,
so great and astonishing, as that which God has manifested toward us, in
allowing us a season for repentance; in giving his Son to die for us; in
waiting so long with us; and in thus entreating us to be at peace with him. As
the heavens are high above the earth, so does the grace of Him, whom the heaven
of heavens cannot contain, exceed all other grace and goodness: "There is none
good but One: that is God."

FROM whence it clearly follows, as was said before, that it is the basest, the
blackest ingratitude in us, to persevere in our sins against him from time to
time, that can be conceived of. For if we evilly and urworthily treat any one,
who has dealt well and kindly by us, our baseness and ingratitude are always in
proportion to the degree of his goodness to us, and the obligations which he
has laid us under. So that if there is none so good and gracious to us as God,
we cannot be guilty of so great and soul ingratitude toward any other, as we
are guilty of toward him, in continuing to displease and affront him with our
unrighteous deeds, instead of being led to repentance by his goodness. This is
such a conduct as is, to the last degree, sordid and shameful. It is making the
most unsuitable return to the most astonishing kindness, to the greatest
obligations which the best and greatest of all beings could lay us under. Has
the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity; he, whose word gave being to
all worlds, and whose breath could, in a moment, reduce both us and them to
nothing; has he shown so much goodness, and condescension toward us? has he
given us an opportunity to make our peace with him? has he delivered up his own
Son for us all? has he given us the offer of eternal life and salvation? does
he condescend to become a petitioner, as it were, to the dust of his footstool,
even to us sinful dust and ashes? -- And do we refuse to hearken to him? do we
hesitate and delay? do we practically say to him, "Wait our leisure; continue
to invite and entreat us to be reconciled to thee: perhaps we may hear and
grant thy request hereafter, when by thy importunity thou have wearied us, or
we are weary of our sins!" Be astonished, O heavens! at such ingratitude as
this! that the children which God has nourished, and brought up with so much
care and tenderness, should rebel against him; and not only rebel against him,
but persevere in doing so, even while he entreats them to return to him, and be
eternally happy! Was there ever, on one hand, such goodne^s, such grace and
condescension! Was there ever, on the other hand, such ingratitude, such
disingenuity, such baseness as this!

WHAT would you think of children who should act such a part as this, toward
an earthly parent; I mean, as far as the case admits of a parallel? What would
you think of men who should act thus toward an earthly sovereign? of those
who, instead of being won over to their duty and allegiance by his grace and
forbearance, and the greatest possible testimonies of his kind regards, should
continue to abuse his patience; and rather increase in their enmity against him
and his government, than be, in any measure, reconciled to either? would not
you, would not all think, that they who thus despised the goodness,
forbearance, and long-suffering of their lawful sovereign, were in nature
monsters, rather than men? Would you not think, that they were so far from
having the grateful, ingenuous tempers, becoming reasonable creatures, that
they were debased below humanity? yea, even below the dull ox, and the still
more stupid ass? For the former is said to "know his owner," and the latter,
"his masters crib:" these animals are not wholly insensible, who it is that
uses them with kindness; and they obey his commands, making him the returns of
their service. -- Now might I not say to him, who perseveres in his
disobedience to God's commandments, notwithstanding his great goodness and
grace, as represented above, "Thou art the man"? or rather, Thou art that
no-man, that base and sordid creature in human shape, to which thou art a
disgrace? For the man, if we may call him by so respectable a name, who acts
such a part toward his Maker, his God, his Father, his all gracious Sovereign,
acts a part infinitely more ungrateful, more disengenuous and vile, than it is
possible for any one to act tow^^ds the best earthly parent, or sovereign:
because God is infinitely greater, and better; he has shown infinitely more
kindness and condescension to us, and is infinitely more worthy to be loved and
obeyed. Our vileness and ingratitude, if we persist in our disobedience to him,
must bear exactly the same proportion to their's, who persist in their
disobedience to a good parent or king, that God's greatness, power, and
goodness, bear to the greatness, power and goodness of our earthly fathers or
sovereigns: i. e. it must be infinitely greater; and so can, strictly speaking,
bear no comparison at all therewith. This, as far as I am able to see, is a
true and just state of the case, destitute of all false coloring and glossing.
If God is infinitely greater in himself, and infinitely better to us, than any
other being is, or can be; our ingratitude to him, in continuing to rebel
against him, must of consequence be infinitely more sordid and base, than any
we can possibly be guilty of, toward any other benefactor, whether friend,
parent or king; whether man, or ministering angel. The latter is as certain as
the former; its truth being plainly and necessarily connected therewith. So
that we must either deny God to be infinitely greater and better that any other
being, or else acknowledge, that to disobey hin, and abuse his goodness and
grace, is infinitely the blackest and vilest ingratitude, that can be
conceived. And as I am persuaded, none of you deny, or in the least doubt, the
former; so, I hope, you will readily own the latter.

THE practical conclusion from the whole, therefore, and the sum of the present
argument, is this; That if we have any ingenuity of mind, or any sense of
honor, it becomes us to make haste, and not delay to keep the commandments of
our God. It is now taken for granted, that you, for whom this discourse is more
especially designed, would not willingly be thought base and sordid in your
nature and disposition; that you would not lie under the reproach and infamy,
of having treated a benefactor ill, and requited him evil for good, even though
you were never to incur any other harm thereby, than to be justly accounted
disingenuous and base. It is taken for granted, that you have at least some
degree of native generosity; some sense of honor; so that you would be ashamed
to requite your parents, or best earthly friends, after such a manner, that all
the world might justly think and speak of you, as persons of a sordid and
brutish temper, or, in one word, ungrateful. If you would not be ashamed of
this, you are not the persons to whom the present discourse is chiefly
directed. It is, moreover, now taken for granted, that you believe God is your
greatest benefactor, your best friend; that he waits to be gracious to you;
that he has given his own Son to die for your redemption from sin and death;
that he invites you to accept of eternal life; and that he condescends even to
entreat you to be reconciled unto him. If I did not take it for granted, that
you believe all these things, I must suppose you to be disbelievers of the
christian revelation in general; which I would by no means do, without having
some strong and positive proof of your infidelity: because as you have had a
christian education, and opportunity to know its truth and evidences, your
disbelief of it would infer something very wrong, either in your heads or
hearts, if not in both. Now if you believe the gospel; if you believe the
several things mentioned above; and are really persons of such a turn and
temper as I have supposed; certainly you cannot persist in acting such a
disingenuous and ungrateful part toward your all-good and gracious benefactor;
toward him who, though he might have justly frowned you into perdition, when you
first began to sin against him, has preserved your lives; has been accumulating
his favors and blessings upon you, both temporal and spiritual; and who still
invites you to be reconciled to him through Jesus Christ, with the tenderness and
bowels of a father. -- Your delay hitherto, has is perhaps been owing to your
inattention, and want of considering these things: at least I had rather
attribute it to this, than to any thing worse. But now you are put in mind of
them, and thus admonished to attend to them, surely you will delay no longer;
and will be heartily ashamed and grieved, that you have not, before now,
returned unto God through Jesus Christ. For can any person of an ingenuous and
grateful mind, and who regards his own honor, help being ashamed, "yea, even
confounded," when he seriously reflects that he has often, and long, been (...)
against such a great and good God, who has shown such grace and condescension
to him? Can he resolutely persist in his evil courses? or be so unreasonable,
as to desire, that his Maker should still wait upon, and entreat him several
years longer? Can you conceive of any thing so unbecoming a reasonable
creature, as such a conduct toward his Creator? any thing so base and sordid?
any thing which could justly bring so great reproach and infamy upon him?

WHAT pains will not persons of a grateful and ingenuous turn of mind take, to
please and gratify those, who have shown them great favor and kindness? who
appeared their friends in a time of affliction and trouble? who, when they were
fallen into adversity, lent them assistance, and exerted themselves in their
service? People of an ingenuous disposition, never think they can do too much
by way of return to those, who have laid them under peculiar obligations; or be
too ready and forward to oblige them. And I doubt not but that you have,
sometimes, taken much pains, to gratify those, who had done kind offices for
you, though not very considerable in themselves; and even been sorry that you
could not do more for them. How strange is it then, if you are not sollicitous
to make a proper return to your Father in heaven, for his manifold mercies;
saying, "What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits?" Should you not
be infinitely more desirous to please him, by doing his will, than you are to
requite the kindnesses of your fellow-mortals, whose favors are, comparatively
speaking, so small and inconsiderable?

YOU, perhaps, frequently hear persons blamed for their ungratitude, and
censured for using their benefactors ill: Yea, perhaps you often blame others
for their unworthy treatment of yourselves; for not making suitable returns to
your kindness, and the obligations which you have laid them under. All this may
be very just; for I am not insensible that this is indeed a very evil and
ungrateful world, that we live in: And not only you, but others in general,
look upon persons of an ungrateful temper, with a mixture of contempt and
indignation, as some of the basest, vilest, and most brutish of men. Now, though
I am no romeish priest, I might venture to absolve you from all your sins,
past, present, and to come, even without auricular confession, if you can
produce any instance or example of ingratitude amongst men, in their conduct
toward one another, half so foul, and infamous, or which discovers half so
much baseness, as there is in delaying to keep God's commandments, and
continuing to rebel against him; considering his infinite goodness and kindness
to us. What you condemn, and condemn justly, as sordid ingratitude in your
fellow-mortals toward yourselves, or toward others, is generosity, greatness
of soul, and true honor, in comparison of your own conduct toward almighty
God, your Father who is in heaven, while you go in your trespasses against him;
while you despise the riches of his goodness, forbearance and long-suffering;
while you disregard his gracious calls and entreaties in the gospel, and tread
under foot his Son, who died for your salvation. What good offices have you
done to others? What obligations have you laid them under? What favor or
friendship has any man shown to another, equally great with the favor and
kindness which God has manifested toward us all in common, and the obligations
he has laid us under, to keep his commandments? What is there that can deserve
so foul a name as that of ingratitude, in our most unworthy treatment of each
other, in comparison of that which we are justly chargeable with toward God,
if we persevere long in abusing his goodness, and affronting his government, by
our unrighteous deeds? Surely, then, it becomes you to make haste, and not
delay to keep his commandments; or else to renounce all pretenses to ingenuity,
and a sense of honor; confessing that you are as vile and sordid in your
temper, as it is possible for men to be; and even far more so in your behavior
toward God, than it is possible for the worst to be, in their conduct toward
their fellow creatures.

TO conclude, therefore, let me beseech you, as you would avoid so justly
deserved, and so great infamy, without delay to turn your feet unto God's
testimonies, to be reconciled unto him, and live. -- No -- Upon recollecting
myself, I will not do this; but leave the matter to your own reflection, and
conscience: For if any are so base and ungrateful as to disregard the
entreaties of God himself, when he condescends, as it were, to beseech them to
be reconciled to him; certainly I have no reason to expect, that they will
regard mine, who am their fellow-mortal, and their "servant for Jesus' sake" --
I shall therefore close this discourse, only with asking those, who are still
going on in their sins, notwithstanding God's goodness and grace, his kind
persuasions and entreaties, How long they propose their Maker shall thus wait
to be gracious? How long their Redeemer shall stand at the door and knock,
before they will give him admission into their hearts? How long both the
"Spirit and the bride shall say, Come," before "he that hears shall also say,
Come"; and they themselves, being thirsty, shall come, and "take the, water of
life freely!" Rev. 22.17.


SERMON IX. THE Reasonableness and Importance of making Haste to keep God's
Commandments. The seventh Argument; drawn from a Consideration of the audacious
Impiety of hardening our Hearts from Time to Time, against the Fear of God,
while he admonishes us to break off our Sins by Repentance; together with the
Danger there is, that such impious Contemners of his Displeasure, will be
utterly forsaken of him, and left to fill up the Measure of their Iniquities.
PSALM CXIX. 59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON IX.
THE reasonableness and importance of making haste to keep God's commandments,
has already been argued from the several considerations following, in as many
different discourses; viz. That our lives are short and uncertain: That the
difficulty of a reformation is increased by del^y: That a truly religious, is
far the most happy life: That the sooner we begin to serve God, and the greater
perfection we attain to, the greater will be our reward in heaven: That virtue
is peculiarly amiable in youth; and that we do the most honor to God and our
Redeemer, by consecrating the morning of life to religion: And, lastly, That to
delay our repentance, and return to God, is the basest ingratitude. Each of
these considerations in particular, but more especially all of them in
conjunction, show the importance of making haste to keep the commandments of
God. But they are now only mentioned, having before been handled, and urged
with some extent.

IT is proposed, by God's leave and assistance, to urge one argument more, with
the same general design, or to the same end, in the ensuing discourse. And this
shall be drawn from a consideratio of the bold impiety of persevering in our
sinful courses, while God admonishes us to break them off by repentance;
together with the hazard there is, that such audacious contemners of his
displeasure, will be utterly forsaken of him, and left to fill up the dreadful
measure their iniquities; being quite hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
long continued in against light; and having their "consciences seared as with a
hot iron". Some hints to this purpose have, I believe, been occasionally
dropped, in some of the preceding discourses on the present subject: But the
argument seems to deserve a more distinct consideration, and to be treated with
greater extent, being very important in it is nature.

SOME of the last arguments were calculated, and designed, to operate upon the
minds of persons who are naturally of an ingenuous temper, and who are not yet
gone far in the paths of sin, rather than upon persons of a crabbed, sour, and
sordid disposition, or such as have greatly corrupted themselves, by a long
habit of sinning. And it is hoped that such arguments may, by the blessing of
God, have their intended effect on that sort of persons, for whom they were
designed. The present argument is of a somewhat different kind; as it is
primarily, and principally, intended for persons of a different character;
namely, for those, if there are any such here present before God, who are
little or nothing affected with a sense of their maker's goodness, forbearance
and long-suffering; being destitute of all ingenuity, and generosity of temper;
or who are already vicious and corrupt to a great degree. There is scarce any
other way of coming at persons of this latter character, but by alarming their
fears, and showing them the great danger they are in, of being soon rejected of
God, and finally incurring an aggravated condemnation.

IT is necessary that presumptuous transgressors, who have no sense of shame or
honor, and no fear of God before their eyes, should be admonished to consider,
how terrible the majesty of that God is, whom they dare thus to affront and
provoke; what danger there is, that they will be given over by him to a
reprobate mind; and at length be cast into hellfire; where such insolent
defiers of their maker's displeasure will, except they repent, be punished with
a severity proportionable to their daring impieties. However, I would not be
misunderstood here: Though I design to speak with all possible freedom and
plainness upon this head, I am far from intending to debase preaching by
scolding, or "bringing a railing accusation," even against wicked and ungodly
men. Nor will I forget the apostle's admonition to Timothy, "Rebuke not an
elder [or aged person] but entreat him as a father": As, I hope, I have not
forgotten what he immediately subjoins -- "and the younger men as brethren". We
had scolding and railing preaching enough in the town and country, but a few
years since, to suffice for a long time; when it seemed to be fashionable to
violate all the rules of decorum and modesty in the pulpit; and he was commonly
thought to have the most zeal for God, who had least regard to decency in
addressing himself to men.

NOW, for the illustration of the present argument, it will be proper briefly
to remind you, both of the greatness and majesty of God, and of the littleness
and weakness of man, From whence will best appear the bold impiety, and
audaciousness, of men's persevering in the breach of his known commandments,
while he admonishes them to repent, and amend their ways. Something will then
be added concerning the danger of God's being provoked wholly to withdraw his
Holy Spirit from such, and to give them up entirely to their own hearts lusts;
as also, concerning the aggravated perdition of those, who have spent a long
life in sinning against God, without repenting at last, to give him glory.
Which things being considered, it will appear, how highly it concerns all
sinners, especially the aged, who have delayed long already, immediately to
turn their feet unto God's testimonies, lest iniquity should be their ruin.

TO return then: Let me briefly remind you of the greatness and majesty of God;
which appear, both by his mighty works which men behold, and from his sacred
oracles. How wise, powerful and great, must that Being be, who created the
heavens and the earth, with all that they contain? this mighty universe, which,
to our senses, appears boundless and infinite? And you know, that he who made,
upholds and governs all things, can, if he pleases, destroy them with equal
ease. What power can be compared with his, who is omnipotent? What wisdom may
be likened to that of the only wise God? What greatness is commensurate with
his, whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain? What dominion, and majesty, and
glory, may be resembled to that of almighty God, whose dominion is everlasting,
whose kingdom rules over all, and who has set his glory above the heavens?
Reflect soberly upon the works of God, and the sublime representations which
the holy scriptures give us of his perfections, and the "glorious majesty of
his kingdom;" and then, although you may possibly be at a loss, which proclaims
his power and greatness the most, yet you will be filled with astonishment at
both; and be sensible that all nations are, indeed, as nothing before him; yea,
"less than nothing and vanity."

FOR, what a little, inconsiderable creature man is, in comparison of his
Maker, I was, in the next place, to remind you. When I consider the heavens,
says the Psalmist, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou
have ordained; what is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man
that thou visitest him? This is a very natural reflection: For nothing can give
us so just a sense of our own littleness, and insignificance, as considering
the power and greatness of God. -- "What is man!" -- A reptile of a day; a
child of dust, bro't forth in sorrow and tears; altogether helpless in his
infancy; crushed before the moth, even in youth; in old age, burdened by the
grass-hopper; and in his best estate, altogether vanity! He pretends to be
wise, but is ever lost in error; his knowledge is but ignorance; his strength
weakness; his health and disease almost the same; his pains tormenting; his
very pleasures vexatious; his birth and death but an hand-breadth asunder;
today, boasting himself of tomorrow; and tomorrow the food of vermin, the
worm feeding sweetly on him! -- Such is man; wholly mean and vile; excepting
that he is animated by the breath of God; and that his Maker has been so
mindful of him, as to give his own Son to redeem him. Which latter
consideration, while it seems to give us some degree of significance and
importance in the creation, may, at the same time, serve for our humiliation:
since it was the sinfulness and wretchedness of our condition, that were the
ground or occasion of God's manifesting such a regard to us. And, indeed, we
are not to estimate ourselves, or our real worth, by what God has, in his grace
and condescension done for us (according to which rule of judging, we should be
creatures of great dignity and importance;) but by what we are in ourselves
naturally, and independently thereof; according to which, we must needs account
ourselves little, vile and contemptible creatures, how prone soever we may be
to think highly of ourselves. For such we are in God's account, notwithstanding
he has so graciously visited us; at least we are so in comparison of him.
Behold even to the moon, and it shines not, yea, the stars are not clean in
his sight: how much less man that is a worm; and the son of man which is a
worm. Job 35.5, 6.


THE more we know of God and of ourselves, the greater distance shall we
perceive between him and us; and the more readily shall we acquiesce in the
justice of those sentiments, which ascribe to him, all glory, majesty, might,
and dominion; and to ourselves, weakness, vileness and unworthiness.

NOW, having thus briefly reminded you of the greatness and glory of God, and
the littleness and vileness of man; you may from hence, in some measure,
conceive what presumption, what madness it is, for sinners to persevere in
affronting him, by a continued violation of his commandments, notwithstanding
his repeated threatenings. The boldness and presumption of any one's conduct
toward a superior, is to be estimated by the distance which there is between
them; by the relative greatness and power, or littleness and weakness, of the
one to the other. According to which rule judging, though we may in some measure
conceive, yet it will be impossible to express, the amazing presumption of
man's wilfully continuing to offend his Creator; the distance between them
being infinite. For such an inferior and weak creature as man, to rise up in
rebellion against the almighty Lord of the universe; and not only once to
rebel, but to repeat his acts of rebellion from year to year; to trample upon
the authority of Him, without whose sustaining hand, he would instantly drop
into nothing, from whence he is so little removed; to despise his awful
threatenings; and, in the language of scripture, to run even upon "the thick
bosses of his buckler," as though he "had an arm like God, or could thunder with
a voice like him;" for weak, mortal man thus to contemn, thus to provoke Him,
before whom Cherubim and Seraphim bow with veiled faces; and from whose frown
apostate angels would, were it possible, hide themselves even in the lowest
depths of hell; -- surely, it is not possible, I say, for words fully to set
forth the impious madness of such a conduct!

TO what shall we resemble this behavior of sinners? What comparison can we
think of, which will not rather tend to lessen the presumption thereof, than to
place it in a just and proper light? Shall we say, this is as if a servant, who
had disobeyed his masters command, and who, being threatened that he should be
beaten with many stripes, unless he returned to his duty, should entirely
disregard these threatenings, and even grow more idle and insolent? No: this
comparison would not answer; but tend to diminish, rather than to illustrate,
the guilt and horror of such presumptuous sinners conduct. Because the supposed
master in the comparison, as weil as the servant, is but a frail, mortal man;
whereas the sinner perseveres in his disobedience to the commands of him, who
"only has immortality," and to whom all power belongs. Shall we say, then,
that this is as it one of the lowest menial servants of the greatest potentate
of the earth, should not only contemn his sovereign's orders, but make it his
practice from time to time to spit in his face, whenever he approached him? No:
neither will this similitude answer, for the same general reason. There is
realy more insolence in the conduct of presumptuous sinners toward God, than
there would be in any, the meanest domestic of a mighty king, treating him in
that manner. -- Shall we then say, that this is as if a worm of the dust,
supposing it endowed with a degree of intelligence, should insult Gabriel, or
some other archangel, and array himself to the battle against him? Neither
will similitude serve the purpose; because there is still an infinitely greater
distance between God and man, than there is between the highest archangel, and
the least reptile of the earth. All that is fabled of the giants of old, making
war against heaven, is more than realized in the mad presumption of wicked men:
for those were supposed to be creatures of far greater power than ordinary men,
while the gods of the heathen, against whom they were supposed to wage war,
were not to be compared to our God, though "among the sons of the mighty." It
must therefore, after all, be left to your own imagination to paint out the
audaciousness, and horrid impiety of those men, who go on from year to year,
perhaps till old age, in affronting almighty God, by contemning his. authority,
and breaking his known commandments, notwithstanding his repeated threatenings.
For as was intimated before, I can think of no comparisons, but what will
rather lessen the presumption, than set it in a full and proper light.

NOW when we consider the great presumption, and daring impiety, of men's
continuing from time to time, to trample upon God's commandments; does there
not seem to be danger, that he may be provoked to withdraw his holy Spirit
entirely from such, and to leave them wholly to themselves; the certain
consequence of which, will be the destruction of their souls? It is here taken
for granted, that God's Spirit strives with sinners in general, in conjunction
with his word and providence, and their own reason, in order to reclaim them
from their wicked ways. But are we sure that he will continue always thus to
strive with them by his Spirit, while they live in this world? Are we sure that
he will not forsake, and give them over, before they are taken hence to be here
no more? Has he promised, that he will not do so? Certainly he has not; so that
they can have no assurance, that he will not: And this is what presumptuous
sinners have great reason to fear may be the sad consequence of their daring
impiety. I say, the sad consequence of it; because should this be the case,
they will never after repent and reform; but their perdition will be in some
sense inevitable, although they should live many years after being thus forsaken
of God.

THERE are, if I mistake not, some plain intimations in scripture, that God
does actually, sometimes, thus forsake the presumptuous transgressors of his
laws; and warnings and admonitions given us to this purpose, lest we should too
far abuse his goodness and patience. What do you think of those words? -- My
people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none of me: So I gave
them up to their own hearts lust; and they walked in their own counsels Psalm.
81.1^, 12.
. What do you think of this other passage? -- And even as they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do
those things which are not convenient; being filled with all unrighteousness,
Romans 1.28, 29.
-- etc. What is plainly supposed, or implied in those words of David, after he
had greatly provoked God? -- Cast me not way from thy presence; and take not
thy Holy Spirit from me Psalm. 51.11.
. Has not God said, That his Spirit shall not always strive with man? Is it not
said of some, that because they receive not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved; for this cause God shall [even] send them strong delusion that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned? Yea, is not God
spoken of in scripture as hardening the hearts of sinners, already obdurate?
Which, at least, must imply that he does nothing to soften them; but suffers
them, by their presumptuous perseverance, to wax worse and worse; leaving them
to their evil heart of unbelief in departing from him, and to the natural
consequences thereof. Do not these, and other passages of scripture similar to
them, plainly suppose, that God is sometimes so provoked by the repeated and
presumptuous sins of men, against the light of their own consciences, the
admonitions of his word and providence, and the strivings of his Spirit, as
wholly to withdraw his Spirit from them, leaving them to work iniquity with
greediness, to walk in the way of their heart, and in the sight of their eyes,
and so to fill up the measure of their sins? And in conformity hereto, when we
are admonished not to "grieve," and not to "quench the Spirit," must we not
suppose some sort of threatening implied, to this purpose, that God will take
his Holy Spirit from us, if ye persist in provoking him to do so, by our wilful
sins? This will not admit of any reasonable doubt. And these in general, I
suppose, are the sentiments designed to be expressed in the Wisdom of Solomon
-- Froward thoughts separate from God -- For into a malicious soul wisdom will
not enter; nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. For the holy Spirit
of discipline flee deceit, and remove from thoughts that are without
understanding; and will not abide when unrighteousness comes in Chap. 1.3, 4,
5.
.

Now, if this be the case; if God sometimes wholly and finally withdraws his
Spirit from presumptuous sinners, without which they will neither have the
power, nor any inclination, to repent, and return to him; what is the
consequence hereof? It is both plain and awful; viz. That those persons, from
whom God thus takes his Spirit, after having borne and striven long with them,
are in some sense past their probationary state, or day of grace, as soon as
ever they are thus given over to their own hearts lust, how long soever they
live in this world afterward. Upon the foregoing suppositions, if true, as
they doubtless are, being grounded on scripture, the final state of such
persons is already fixed, as much as the state of those, who are already taken
out of this world in their sins: Though we usually speak in general of sinners
being in a state of probation, during the whole term of their life here on
earth. Which can be just and proper only in this sense, that a truly penitent
and reformed sinner shall obtain mercy through Jesus Christ, whenever he becomes
so, though it be on a deathbed, and in his last moments. In this sense our state
of trial, or season of grace, is doubtless commensurate with the present life.
But nevertheless it may in reality be over, before our lives are run out; and
is in effect so, whenever our repentance and conversion to God, are rendered
morally and naturally impossible, by the total and final withdrawing of his
Spirit from us. And how long soever persons may live after being thus given
over of God, they are left only to fill up their sins, and sit themselves
thereby for a more aggravated condemnation hereafter: As good men, who are
already passed from death unto life, are left here that they may perfect
holiness in the fear of God, and thereby become entitled to a greater reward in
heaven. The former are not, properly speaking, in a state of probation for
happiness and misery in another world; because, by the very supposition, they
have already sinned away their season of grace; God having wholly and finally
withdrawn his Spirit from them, so that it is now both morally and naturally
impossible, that they should ever truly repent, or turn their feet unto his
testimonies. Though it will by no means follow from hence, that they are not,
even in this state of dereliction, accountable for their conduct; or that they
may not be justly punished for the sins which they commit, after being thus
given over to their own hearts lust. They are still in a capacity to incur
guilt, though not in a capacity of obtaining eternal life, or the salvation of
the gospel. Although by the suppositions gone upon, they have already "sinned
unto death," they may still go on sinning; and "treasuring up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath:" And if we certainly knew of any particular
persons in this state, "I say not that we should pray for them John 5*16.
," any more than for the wicked actually dead, and gone to "their own place."

Now, not to use many exclamations on the point, these are most awful
considerations, and highly deserve the serious awakened attention of all those,
who sin presumptuously against God; especially of such as have already long
abused his mercy and patience, grieving that good Spirit, by which others are
"sealed to the day of redemption." For though their death may possibly be at a
great distance; yet how nigh may that time be, when God, whom they have
forsaken, shall wholly forsake them; when he shall cast them off forever,
"swearing in his wrath, that they shall never enter into his rest;" as he once
swear concerning some of the rebellious Israelites in the wilderness!

BUT, as was observed above, this deserves the serious consideration of all
presumptuous sinners without exception: For though such as have long gone on in
their evil ways, seem to be more especially concerned in it; yet it is to be
remembered, that God has fixed, and made known to us, no certain space, or
measure of time, wherein his Spirit shall strive with sinners respectively, any
more than he has made known to us, how long we are respectively to live. We are
as ignorant of the former, as we are of the latter; and there may possibly be
as great a variety in his dealings with sinners, with reference to one of these
things, as there certainly is with reference to the other; I mean the
respective duration of their lives. There are some persons who, even in youth,
make a sad, a surprising progress in vice and impiety; and who are apparently
hardened to a great degree, through the deceitfulness of sin. And some, even of
these, may possibly be near the time wherein God shall finally give them over,
except they repent. Yea, for any thing we can tell to the contrary, there may
be some among these, as well as among more aged and veteran sinners* whom God
has already actually thus given up to their own hearts lusts; with whom his
Spirit shall no more strive. -- God forbid, there should be any such abandoned,
such lost and undone, such irreparably lost and undone sinners, amongst us,
whether young or old! But whether there are or not, God only knows. -- All have
at least some reason to fear that this may be their own wretched case, who have
long been sinning against God with an high hand, and yet have now no
considerable remorse of conscience; no concern about their salvation; no desire
to reform their ways. This ease and security in sin, is a proof that God's
Spirit is, in a great measure, actually withdrawn from them already; and gives,
at least, some ground to fear, that it may 'ere long totally and finally
forsake them: And then, "good were it for such, if they had never been born!"

LET none therefore, whether old or young, presume to harden their hearts
against God another day, another hour, or moment; lest the divine patience
should have a period put to it, before a period is put to their audacious
offenses against the high and holy God. Woe be to that man, whoever, or wherever
he be, who is thus finally forsaken of God. Though he may perhaps live long, and
be quiet from any fear of evil; enjoying both outward prosperity, and carnal
peace within, his heart being waxed gross, and his conscience seared, he is
only as an ox in the stall, unconsciously and stupidly nourishing himself for
the day of slaughter!

THIS brings me, in the next place, to remind you of the aggravated
condemnation which awaits those, who have spent a long life in disobedience to
God's commandments; I mean those, who have provoked God by their repeated and
presumptuous sins, to withdraw his Holy Spirit from them, and who die at last,
laden both with iniquity and years. It doubtless becomes us to respect the
hoary head, especially when found in the way of righteousness. But the Ancient
of days pays no reverence to age as such, any more than to youth; and you know
what he has said concerning the "sinner of an hundred years old," so that it
need not be here repeated. It is in general very evident, that they who live
long without thinking on their ways, so as to turn their feet unto God's
testimonies, and who at last die in their sins, must needs have a much greater
weight of guilt lying upon them, than they who die in youth, although the lives
of the latter have also been "among the unclean." And by how much more guilt
any have incurred during this probationary state, by so much sorer a
punishment, we may be sure, they will be thought worthy in the day of
retribution, when every man shall be judged according to his works. And thus,
although a man may now think himself, both the more happy and honorable for
living long; yet the time may at length come, when he shall have reason to wish
that he died, like many others, in youth; yea, when he shall have much more
cause than ever Job had, to say, Let the day perish wherein I was born; and the
night in which it was said, There is a man-child conceived -- Let that day be
darkness -- let darkness, and the shadow of death stain it! -- This may
possibly be the sad case of any particular person, who now goes on
presumptuously in his transgressions. And there is great reason to fear, it
will actually be the case of those, who have already lived to old age, and have
not yet remembered their Creator, whom they ought to have remembered even in the
days of their youth, before these evil days came, wherein the most may truly
say, that they "have no pleasure in them"; especially those who, in the decline
of life, are destitute of the hopes and comforts of religion. It is probable
there are but few persons, comparatively speaking, who live in the known
violation of God's commandments till old age, then turn their feet unto his
testimonies. So that though the state of such is not absolutely desperate, yet it
is extremely hazardous and melancholy.

BUT I now proceed, in the last place, more particularly to draw and enforce
the practical inference from what has been said in this discourse. It is this:
These things being considered, it highly concerns all, especially the aged, who
have delayed so long already, now to think on their ways, and make haste to
keep God's commandments. Reason allows of no delays in religion. Reason shows
all, of every age, the importance of devoting themselves immediately to the
service of God. If God is always the same almighty, all-wise, holy, just and
good Being; and if we are always dependent upon him, certainly he is always to
be reverenced and obeyed by all his creatures. There is no time, or moment of
life, whether early or late, wherein we can excuse ourselves in the neglect of
him, or in breaking any one of his commandments, though it were the least; to do
which presumptuously, were practically to renounce his authority, or to deny
that he is God. And when, in conformity to what has been said above, you
seriously consider his greatness and majesty; and your own weakness and
littleness in comparison of him; when you consider the audaciousness, or rather
the madness, of persevering in trampling on his laws, while he admonishes, and
threatens, and, as it were, shows you his hand full of thunder and vengeance;
when you duly consider the great danger there is, that he will be provoked by
your continuing to grieve and affront his good Spirit, entirely to take it from
you, with the dreadful consequences hereof; when you consider the aggravated
guilt which you will incur, by spending a long life, if such an one should be
allowed you, in sinning against God; together with the real danger there is,
according to what has been found true in all ages, that being grown old in
impiety and vice, you will not then effectually reform your evil ways, though
there is a possibility of it; but only fill up the measure of your iniquities,
and so be finally wretched in proportion to the duration of the space allowed
you for repentance: When you seriously consider these things, I say, it is
impossible but that you must acknowledge the justness of the conclusion
beforementioned; viz. that you should lose no more time; that you should make
no longer delay; that you should not harden your hearts against God another
moment; but make haste to keep his holy commandments. Will any presume to say,
or even to think, that there is no occasion for making speed, when God warns,
threatens, and admonishes us to fly for refuge? Can any think themselves
prudent, or safe, in once more grieving that "holy Spirit of discipline," which
may then be utterly withdrawn from them; whereby their condition, already so
dangerous, will become absolutely desperate? Is it reasonable to procrastinate,
because, if you are not old already, you may possibly live to become so?
especially considering that though you should, it is most probable you will, by
age, become more hardened in sin, and so incur at last a more aggravated guilt
and condemnation?

THESE things being duly considered, what can be said in excuse, even for the
young, if they delay their repentance, and their return to God through Jesus
Christ? I know of nothing, unless perhaps it be, that they are beside
themselves, and "know not what they do." They who are already arrived at middle
age, are still less excusable than youth, upon any principles of reason; or,
unless they would avail themselves of the apology just now mentioned, viz. that
they are mad, which is the best, or rather the only tolerable one that I can
think of. But what is the most astonishing of all, is, that there should be
many aged persons in the christian world, people already bowed down with years
and infirmities, and on the very consines of another world, who seem to think,
that even They have no need to make haste, but may still delay to keep God's
commandments; as though they had not, by so many years continuance in sin,
sufficiently exercised the divine patience, or made it manifest enough, how
much they contemn God, and how little they value the salvation of their souls!

I WOULD willingly hope, that there are no such persons as these last
mentioned, now present in this assembly. But there is One, who certainly
knows! -- And I imagine I may, without any uncharitableness, or the least
indecorum, entreat the aged, with all due respect to their years, seriously to
examine their own hearts, and their past lives. Ask yourselves* I beseech you,
whether you have indeed turned your feet unto God's testimonies? whether you
now live in a conscientious obedience to all his known commandments? whether
you walk as the disciples of Jesus Christ ought to walk, having your
conversation in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior? In fine, can you
reflect, with inward satisfaction, upon the manner in which you have spent so
many years; or at least some of the last of them? and can you look forward into
that world, to which you are so near, with comfort, with holy hope, and a
joyful expectation of a crown of righteousness, to be given you by the
righteous Judge and Lord at his appearing? These are such questions, my
honored fathers, as you will doubtless think proper to put to yourselves; and
happy is he that can resolve them to his own satisfaction, taking the holy
scriptures for his guide and rule in these inquiries. But if there should
happen to be any aged persons present, whose consciences give an answer,
contrary to that which all would choose, (a supposition which I make with
reluctance) there is scarce any need of my reminding them again, that this,
with them, is certainly no season of life to delay; that they must now, of
necessity, either make haste to keep God's commandments, or never do it at all;
the sad consequence whereof has, I suppose, been sufficiently represented! --

I HAVE now done with the particular argument proposed to be handled in this
discourse; and, with it, close all the arguments, by which I intended to show
the reasonableness and importance of making haste to keep the commandments of
God: Which was the second general head of discourse propounded, when we entered
on the ^resent subject.

THE considerations which have been offered to the mentioned end, are, it is
humbly conceived, very weighty in themselves, how imperfectly soever they may
have been urged. And being various in their kind, as well as numerous, it is
hoped that some or other of them will, by the blessing of God, have a good
effect upon all who have heard them, how different soever people may be in
their natural tempers and dispositions. However, when the salvation of our
souls is the thing in question, it is not for men to consult their own
particular humors, or taste; or to delay to keep God's commandments, because
the arguments used to enforce a present and immediate observance of them, do
not happen to please their fancy! Whatever their taste may be, and whatever
becomes of the particular arguments, by which the preachers of righteousness
would urge speed in the great concerns of religion; yea, although these should
have really no weight or conclusiveness in them, still it is to be remembered,
that to make haste, or to repent and reform immediately, is a certain and
indispensible duty. No man, who really believes there is a God, and a future
state of rewards and punishments, can make any doubt of this.

HOWEVER, as was intimated above, I hope the arguments insisted largely upon,
in so many discourses, may serve, in some measure, to set this matter in a just
and proper light; because they all appear to me to be scriptural, or plainly
founded in the oracles of God. And if He, who alone "gives the increase",
follows them with his blessing, they shall not prove as seed sown either by the
way side, or on stony places; but as good seed sown on good ground, which will
produce the blessed fruits of righteousness, some thirty, some sixty, and some
an hundred fold.

CONSIDERED as a natural means of awakening and convincing sinful men, some
good effect may be hoped from these scriptural arguments. If you reflect on the
shortness and uncertainty of human life; or consider the greater difficulty of
reforming hereafter; if you consider the superior and exalted pleasures of a
religious life; if you reflect, that the earlier you turn your feet unto God's
testimonies, the greater your glory and happiness will be hereafter; if you
consider the peculiar amiableness of virtue in youth, or the infamy of vice in
age; if you consider how much more honor is done to God and our Redeemer, by an
early, than by a late repentance; if you consider the baseness and ingratitude
of persevering in sin, while God mercifully allows us a space for repentance,
and entreats us to be reconciled to him through his own dear Son; if you consider
the audaciousness, the mad impiety, of men's going on to affront and provoke
the high and holy God from time to time; and the danger there is, that he will
wholly take his blessed Spirit from us, if we do so; together with the
aggravated guilt and condemnation of those, who spend a long life in
disobedience to him, and die at last in their sins, which is generally the sad
case of those who do not repent and amend their ways before they are far
advanced in years: If you seriously consider these things, I say, surely you
will judge it to be of the last importance to make haste, and the most
unreasonable thing in the world to delay to keep the commandments of God. I can
think of no better or stronger arguments than these; none more likely to answer
the great end proposed by them. For which reason, I thank God that he has given
me an opportunity to lay these before you so (...) and fully, though in much
weakness and imperfection.

AND now having according to that measure of knowledge and ability which God
has given me, proposed these arguments to your serious consideration, you are
sensible the efficacy of them depends not on me. I have, with all plainness and
sincerity, been preaching the doctrine of reconciliation, and eternal life, to
you, by Jesus Christ, who was manifested to take away the sins of the world; to
which end however, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, are indispensably necessary on our part; so that without them, we
cannot finally be made partakers of this great salvation. And if any of you
should die in your sins, and be miserable hereafter, which God forbid! I humbly
hope in Him, that your blood will not be required at my hand. It would be a
great, an unspeakable happiness to me, to have been in any degree instrumental
of converting sinners from the error of their way to the wisdom of the just,
that their souls might be saved from death, and the multitude of their sins
hidden, in the day of the Lord Jesus. But however that may eventually be, I
shall close this discourse with the words of the apostle in his second epistle
to the Corinthans. -- Thanks be unto God, who always causes us to triumph in
Christ. -- For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved,
and in them that perish. To the one we are the savor of death unto death; and
to the other, the savor of life unto life; and who is sufficient for these
things!

SERMON X. THE Reasonableness of thinking seriously on our Ways, shown from a
Consideration of the Faculty of Reflection, and th^se other moral Powers, by
which the Author of our Nature has distinguished us from mere Animals.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


IN the two first discourses on the present subject, the great, SERMON X.
yea infinite importance, of turning our feet unto God's testimonies, and
keeping his commandments, was particularly represented to you; and shown by
diverse considerations, which will not now be mentioned. This was what was
proposed under the first of the three general divisions of the subject, spoken
of when we entered upon it.

I HAVE, in seven other discourses, shown at large, and by a considerable
variety of arguments, the vast importance of making haste to keep God's
commandments, and the extreme folly and danger of delaying. This is what was
proposed under the second general head of discourse. But instead of repeating
any of these arguments here, I shall now proceed to the third general division
of the subject, formerly mentioned: which was,

THIRDLY, to show the reasonableness of thinking on our ways, together with the
necessity, and the conduciveness hereof, to a reformation of them. "I thought
on my ways," says the psalmist, "and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: I
made haste," etc. plainly intimating, that sober reflection on our conduct, or
behavior, is the first, and a necessary step, in order to a thorough
reformation thereof; and living a life of obedience to God's commandments.
Considering of our ways undoubtedly becomes us as we are reasonable creatures,
under the moral government of God, and probationers for happiness in a future
state: Principles which are here taken for granted, as at least generally, if
not universally believed amongst us. And such consideration, or reflection, is
not only reasonable in itself, but, as was intimated above, seems to be
absolutely necessary in order to our turning our feet unto God's testimonies,
after we have unhappily gone astray from them. For how can we reform what is
amiss in our tempers, or practices, without first reflecting, what it is that
is so, or wherein our ways need reforming? And as this is a necessary step in
order to amendment, so it is also naturally and plainly conducive thereto.
There is just ground to hope, that when people are brought to a serious
consideration of their ways, they will, by God's grace and assistance, actually
reform them; or, in the language of the text, turn their feet unto his
testimonies: yea, there is reason to hope, that they will make haste, and not
delay to do it. Delay in this matter seems to be chiefly owing to
inconsideration. We can hardly suppose it possible for a wicked man, who
considers his ways, and the consequences of them as he ought to do, to continue
any longer in his vicious courses.

FROM what has now been suggested, you may perceive that this third general
head of discourse, comprises in it the following particulars, under which it
will accordingly be considered: viz.

THE reasonableness of thinking on our ways, as we are rational and moral
creatures:

THE indispensable necessity hereof, in order to a thorough reformation of them:

AND lastly,

THE natural conduciveness hereof to such amendment; or the ground there is to
hope, that those who duly reflect on their ways, will, in consequence hereof,
make haste to keep God's commandments.

IT is proposed, by the will of God, to handle these three particulars in the
same number of discourses, as distinctly as may well be. I say, as distinctly
as may well be; because they will in the discussion, almost unavoidably run
into each other in some respects. There is a natural and close connection
between them, so that it will be hardly possible to preserve them entirely
distinct throughout; nor will this be studiously endeavored. However, it is
hoped, there will not be many needless repetitions of the same thing.

To return then: The business of this discourse, is to show the reasonableness
of thinking on our ways, as we are reasonable and moral creatures, in a state
of probation. For I will not suspect any of my auditors to be so degenerate, or
infatuated to such a degree, as to doubt whether man has, or has not, in this
respect, any "pre-eminence above a beast," though it seems some of our pretended
sages, both ancient and modern, have made this a question, or rather
confidently assumed and defended the negative; and even gloried in degrading
themselves into the rank of brutes. It is doubtless a sottish impiety to change
the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man;
and much more so, to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. It is a
degree of the same impious folly, for men to degrade themselves, even in
speculation, into brutes; for in the image of God made he man: And it is at
least probable, that none ever did this in speculation, till they had first
done it in practice, and for that reason.

YOU are sensible that the author of our being has made us rational, moral
creatures; not "like the horse and mule which have no understanding"; and
therefore, that we ought not to make ourselves like them, by banishing thought
and reflection, and sinking into a state of brutal insensibility. Though
consideration, or reflection, is not the chief, ultimate business of man; yet it
ought plainly to be one principal part of his employment; and it is the first
in order, as it is by this that we are to regulate all our conduct in other
respects. Surely the faculty of reason, comprehending memory, reflection and
forecast, or the ability of discerning beforehand certain effects in their
causes, was given us for some end by our creator. It was not given us to lie
dormant, and unemployed; but to be constantly exercised in some way or other.

NOR indeed is it possible for the human mind to remain quite idle and
inactive, for any considerable time together. It is in its nature active and
stirring: It will unavoidably be employed, almost incessantly, in thinking on
one thing or another. For although it has, in a great measure, the choice of the
objects, or the subjects, on which it will employ itself, wherein its freedom
partly consists; yet it seems not to be at liberty, whether it will think and
reflect at all or not. -- While a man is awake, he will always employ his
thoughts on some subject or other; yea, he does this sometimes even in sleep;
as in dreams. So thoughtful, so contemplative a creature is man by nature, if
not against, yet without his will! All men do not think and reflect upon the
same matters; and many, alas! do not think soberly and properly, either upon
themselves, or any thing else, as they ought to think. But you observe none,
whose thoughts are not, some way or other, actually employed. Even the fool,
who in the language of a wit, "whistles for want of thought," still thinks upon
his whistling at least; and upon some of the objects around him; though, to be
sure, not wisely. The fool thinks, though it be only foolishly; and the madman,
though it be only madly. It is probable that all men think and reflect nearly
with the same constancy, though upon different objects, with different degrees of
intenseness; some more properly, others less; some wisely, and others
foolishly. The grand difference between wise men and fools, or madmen, seems
not to lie in this, that the former think and reflect more constantly and
uninterruptedly than the latter, but only more justly, or to better purpose.
For "vain thoughts will still lodge within us," if wise ones do not: the very
nature of man, and his condition in this world, being such, that he cannot
ordinarily but employ his thoughts on some thing or other. He must needs think,
consider, and reflect, though it be only upon trifles, on things of no importance
to himself or others, and even upon them in a foolish, absurd manner.

BEING therefore endowed with this distinguishing faculty, certainly we ought
to exercise and employ it upon things worthy of it, and in the best manner
possible. We should think chiefly on things that are of importance to us. Though
we speak of mankind in general as reasonable creatures; yet surely, all men do
not exercise their rational faculties in a way equally reasonable, equally
becoming such creatures. It is an abuse and prostitution of our reason, to
employ it only, or chiefly, upon trifles; especially while there are so many
things, worthy to employ it, and take up our attention. It is our indispensible
duty, as creatures who have received so noble a faculty from God, to exercise
it chiefly upon things of weight and moment; things wherein his honor, and our
own good are concerned. If we do not thus employ it, we had as good, perhaps
better, been wholly destitute of reason. It is rather a disgrace to us, than
any honor, while we employ it in an unworthy manner; and not only shame, but
guilt and misery, must be the consequence of such an abuse.

IT is evident then, that we are not only made for thought and consideration in
general; but also that we ought to choose fit and worthy objects on which to
employ our rational faculties; since otherwise we can hardly deserve a better
title than that of fools, or madmen. And what is there, on which it more
concerns us to think, than on our own ways, as we are moral and accountable
creatures? I say, as we are moral and accountable creatures: For to think on
our ways in the scriptural and theological sense, is not merely to reflect on
the actions which we have heretofore done, or to consider the course of life
which we lead at present. This does not, of itself, come up to the full sense
of the Psalmist in the text. To think on our ways in the religious sense, is to
consider them with relation to God and his will, to the rule of our duty, and
to a future state; or as we are the subjects of God's moral government, who are
hereafter to be rewarded or punished by him, according to the "things done in
the body." To think seriously on our behavior, and review it in this point of
light, in order to know how the case stands between God and our souls; whether
we are in the way that leads to life, or in the broader path that leads to
death and destruction; this, I say, is to think on our ways in the sense of
scripture. And this being explained, certainly no man who believes the holy
scriptures; yea, no man who believes the moral character and government of God,
and a future state of retribution, can doubt but that he ought thus to think on
his ways.

HAS God made us capable of virtue and religion, and of rendering him a
reasonable service; and shall we never consider, whether our conduct is such as
becomes creatures thus distinguished? Has he written his law upon our hearts,
and our consciences; and shall we never inquire, whether we have conformed
ourselves thereto, or deviated from it in our behavior? Has he given us a
revelation of his will from heaven, by prophets and apostles, and his own Son;
and shall we not consider, whether we have yielded obedience thereto, or
trampled on his authority? Has he graciously promised eternal life and
happiness to us on certain conditions; and shall we never think it worth while
to inquire, whether we have complied with them or not? Has he also threatened to
punish with an everlasting ^^struction, those that obey not the (...) but obey
unrighteousness; and shall we not be inquisitive, whether we are liable to this
curse or not? Are these such trivial matters, as not to claim our thoughts and
attention? And are the common business and amusements of life, of so much
importance to us, as to justify our giving our minds wholly, or chiefly, to
them? No man can hesitate, or be at any loss, for the true and proper answer to
these several demands; his conscience will speak, though his lips are silent. You
cannot but know, that if you neglect to think on your ways, whatever else you
may employ your thoughts on, you are chargeable with a great and fundamental
omission; and act a part wholly unworthy of creatures, who claim the title of
rational.

THE grand concern of mankind is, to act with propriety as the subjects of
God's moral government. Upon this our present and future interest depends. And
whether we act such a part or not, cannot be known by us with out thinking on
our ways; and examining them by the rule which God has given us to walk by.
Without this we cannot tell, whether we keep the commandments of God, or live
in disobedience to them; whether we are the objects of his favor, or of his
wrath; whether we are heirs of the kingdom of heaven, or of death and
perdition. And can we content ourselves in such an ignorance of our state and
condition? What inquiry is there that so nearly concerns us as this, whether we
have hearkened to the voice of the Son of God, so as to comply with the terms
of the gospel; and consequently, whether we are such persons as he will approve
in the day of judgment? Or whether we are such workers of iniquity, to whom he
will say, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his angels? If we think at all, we must acknowledge it to be both our
duty and interest, thus to examine ourselves and our conduct.

IT is the duty and interest of all men in general, both good and bad, thus to
think on their ways: And indeed, as was just now intimated, no one can tell,
which of these characters belongs to him, without first making the inquiry, by
comparing his ways and practices with the rule of his duty, the word of God. So
that this examination is not of less importance to us, than it is to know,
whether we are the sons of God, and heirs of eternal life, or children of
wrath, exposed to eternal destruction; to one or other of which classes of men,
we all belong, whether we consider it or not.

IF we are good men, there will probably be at least two happy effects of
maturely thinking on our ways: One is, the satisfying ourselves upon solid and
rational grounds, that we are indeed the servants of God and righteousness, and
heirs of the promises; which will not only minister great peace and comfort to
our minds, but also excite us to run, with more diligence and delight, the race
set before us. The other is, that we shall discover our past defects, and
errors, and so be naturally led to correct them. So that, however good we are,
we shall doubtless be both the happier and the better, for carefully reviewing
our past lives. But it is, if possible, of still more importance for wicked men
to think on their ways; because this is one necessary and probable means, under
the influence of the Spirit of God, of convincing them of their sin and danger;
without which, they neither will, nor can, fly for refuge to lay hold of the
hope set before them, and so escape the wrath to come.

IT must not be omitted here, that in this examination of ourselves, we should
use the utmost caution and impartiality. A slight, superficial and partial one,
may possibly be of more fatal consequence than none at all, by leading us to
form a wrong judgment concerning ourselves, or confirming us therein. There is
a certain pride, and self-partiality, too natural to mankind, which makes them
reluct at seeing the worst of themselves; which prejudices them in their own
savor; and often makes them think much better of themselves than they can do
with reason. Of this we should be aware, and carefully guard against it. We
should not endeavor to lessen the number of our sins, or to extenuate our
faults. We should consider how "exceeding broad the commandment" is; how
numerous its branches, both negative and positive. We should reflect, not only
on our sins of commission, but of omission; both what we have done, that ought
not to have been done; and what we have left undone, that ought to have been
done, and how often. We should reflect, as much as may be, upon all the
aggravating circumstances of our sins; what light we have sinned against; what
grace and goodness we have abused; what resolutions and vows we have broken
through. All these things are requisite, if we would think aright on our ways,
and avoid self-deception. They are indeed all naturally implied in thinking on
our ways, in the sense of scripture: Which is not reflecting on them in a
cursory, superficial manner, with a foolish self-fondness and partiality; but
carefully scanning, and examining them to the bottom; that we may truly see
what we are, and know our moral and religious state. Unless we are thus
thorough and impartial in the examination of ourselves, it can be but of little
benefit to us: Yea, as was intimated above, it may perhaps be a prejudice to
us, by leading us to a wrong conclusion. For it were better for us to remain
entirely unresolved in our own minds, than to flatter ourselves that we are
righteous, while we are workers of iniquity. And even publicans and harlots are
said to go into the kingdom of heaven, before hypocritical professors of
religion, who have a strong and groundless opinion of their own goodness.

I SUPPOSE it sufficiently appears from what has been said, that men are made
for thought and reflection; that our minds are, and must be, almost continually
employed on something or other; and consequently, that if they are not employed
worthily, they must be employed improperly and unworthily. If then, you assume
the character of reasonable creatures, and boast of faculties superior to those
of beasts, on what will you employ these distinguishing faculties? Upon what
can you employ them more worthily than on God, your relation to him, his laws,
your obligation to obey them, and your past behavior? Should you not seriously
consider, whether the ways you are walking in, lead to eternal life and joy, or
to misery and destruction? For they certainly lead either to one or the other.
Can you think of any other matters, that are more worthy your attention? Any
that are more interesting and important? Any, on which it would better become
intelligent and accountable creatures, in such a state as you are, to exercise
their thoughts? If you can, you will indeed do wisely to think on these things;
on these more worthy and important matters: But if not, I beseech you, imitate
the psalmist, and think on your ways, in this day of your visitation, before
the things that belong to your peace are hidden from your eyes.

IF there are any other things which are more worthy to take up your thoughts
and attention, than those which belong to your eternal peace; they must
doubtless be the things of this present visible world; its pleasures, honors,
riches or amusements. These are the important things, on which your thoughts
will of course be employed, unless they should be employed on God, your duty,
your ways, and the future consequences of them. But can you possibly imagine,
that th^se are more deserving of your attention and care; and that, by thinking
on them, you will act more up to your character as reasonable creatures, than
by examining your hearts and ways, as you are the subjects of God's moral
government, and to be happy or miserable hereafter according to your present
behavior? Is he a more reasonable, and wiser man, the objects of whose
thoughts are, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, (which are not of the Father, but of the world,) than he who daily
contemplates the sovereign Lord of the universe; and reflects seriously on his
own ways? There are indeed many persons, who live, and employ their thoughts
through life, as if they actually imagined, these worldly objects were more
deserving of their attention, than any others, even those which are heavenly
and eternal. But, what folly and madness this is, will sufficiently appear, if
I give a brief description, or draw the character of such a man. Nothing more
than this will be necessary, in order to show you how absurd, not to say, how
guilty and impious, such a man is. And the character I am about to draw, will
have nothing very singular in it; but in the main strokes of it, will be
applicable to all those in general, who, neglecting to think on their ways,
employ their care and attention on the things of this world.

HERE, then, is a man, who looks with contempt on the brutes, and boasts in the
title of rational; in his intellectual and moral powers, and the dignity of his
nature. Though his body is mortal, and short-lived, his soul is immortal. God has
plainly revealed his will to him; and he knows that he is either to live and
triumph forever with saints and angels in the kingdom of heaven, or else to be
doomed, with the devil and his angels, to that place of torment, "where the
worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched:" And, which of these shall be his
portion, he knows depends upon his conduct in this world, and the improvement
he makes of the time and advantages given him to work out his salvation. All
this he knows, or at least professes to believe: But how does he act in the
mean time. Does he not, in consequence hereof, consider this world, and the
things of it, as trifles, hardly worth a thought? Does he not give his whole
attention, in a manner, to religion, his duty, and his behavior, with a view
to secure the favor of God, and eternal happiness? No: Quite the reverse. This
reasonable, this dignified creature, still looks upon this world as all in all
to him; and upon God, his immortal soul, heaven and hell, as nothing, or next
to nothing! He begins his life with sin and folly, going astray almost "as soon
as he is born speaking lies." His childhood is all vanity; his youth is
employed in thinking on, and enjoying, his sinful pleasures. The attaining of
worldly honors chiefly employ his riper years. As old age comes, though he knows
he has but a little while to live, his other passions give way to that of
avarice; so that he hardly thinks of any thing but dying rich. So that in every
successive stage of his life, his thoughts, desires and affections, are
engrossed by the "things which are seen, and are but temporal." He never thinks
seriously of his ways, or the salvation of his soul. Though he had a christian
education, and lived from first to last, under the light of the gospel; though
often reminded of his duty, and admonished by the word and providence of God,
to consider his ways, and do works meet for repentance; though warned not to
neglect the great salvation; he sets at naught all these counsels and
admonitions. Something else still engrossed his thoughts and cares; and so he
dies at last, full of days and guilt: "And in hell he lifts up his eyes being
in torment!"

WHAT, my brethren, do you think of this character? Did this reasonable
creature act wisely? Were his superior faculties properly employed? I am sure
you cannot but censure him, as having acted a most absurd and inconsistent, as
well as imprudent and wicked part. And perhaps this is a more common character,
than you may think at first view. Yea, while you are censuring this man, you
may possibly be passing sentence upon yourselves, as David once did, without
knowing it. For if you have not yet thought of your own ways, so as to turn
your feet unto God's testimonies, you are in the same condemnation, excepting
that your mortal course is not yet finished. What did he, which you have not
done? What did he neglect to do, which you have not hitherto neglected? Did he
postpone the great concerns of religion, to the trivial ones of this present
life? And do not you likewise? Were his thoughts employed upon bubbles, and
fading vanities? So are thine. Did he refuse to hearken to the admonitions of
God's word and providence? You have done the same. Did he disregard the great
and precious promises of the gospel? And have not you disregarded them? Did he
make light of God's threatenings? But you have not effectually laid them to
heart. It is plain therefore, that you have, in effect, hitherto acted the same
absurd and foolish part with the person just now described; and whose conduct
you could not but condemn: So that you are really self-condemned; I mean, if
you have not yet thought seriously on your ways, and turned your feet unto
God's testimonies. And although through the goodness, forbearance and
long-suffering of God, your own days are not yet numbered and finished, as that
unhappy person's are supposed to be; yet are not you wiser than he was. You are
guilty of the same folly and madness: And if you persist in treading in his
steps, your end will be also the same. For doubtless the same road will lead
all who travel in it, to the same stage at last. Or can you imagine, that those
ways of sin and folly, which bring others to destruction, will bring you to
glory, honor and immortality?

LET me therefore close this discourse, by beseeching you, as you judge your
selves reasonable creatures, and justly boast faculties far superior to those
of brutes, to think maturely on your ways, while you have an opportunity for
it, and it may be of advantage to you. Without this, to be sure, you will not
"show your selves men", whatever faculties you lay claim to; but be
self-degraded from the honorable rank, in which God has placed you^ For man
that is in honor, says the psalmist, and understands not, is like the beasts
that perish. Begin the business of serious reflection even now, if you have not
entered upon it before. -- What do you think of your past lives? What have you
been hitherto doing? What road are you now traveling in; and whither is it
likely to conduct you? Can you reflect with satisfaction upon your ways; and
approve your own conduct, as being suitable to your character as reasonable
creatures, and professed believers of the gospel, allowing for such faults and
imperfections as are common to good men? Pursue this important inquiquiry, as
in the presence of God, when you depart from his house; beseeching him to
search and try you; to see if there be any wicked way in you, and to discover
it to you. If you find a reluctance at looking into yourselves, and the state
of you souls; yea, if you are not desirous to know the worst of your case, it
is at least highly probable that your ways are evil. Good and upright men are
not generally afraid to see themselves in their own proper colors; but readily
come to that light of God's word, which those of a contrary character avoid;
agreeably to the observation of our Savior, with which I conclude this
discourse: Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may he made manifest* that they are wrought in God.

SERMON XI. THE Necessity of Thinking on our Ways, in order to a Reformation of
them, and turning our Feet unto GOD's Testimonies.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON XI.
IN the last preceding discourse, the reasonableness of thinking on our ways,
was shown from a consideraration of those intellectual and moral powers, with
which the author of our nature has endowed us; and whereby we are distinguished
from the brutal part of the creation; "the horse and mule, which have no
understanding."

THE proposed business of the ensuing discourse, is, To show the indispensible
necessity of thinking on our ways, in order to a thorough reformation of them;
and as what is, in the nature of things previous to the turning our feet (...)
God's testimonies. This is as necessary as it is for the mariner, whom winds,
storms and currents have long driven, he knows not whither, to take an
observation, in order to his finding his port: He must know whereabouts he is
in the ocean, before he can steer his course aright, unless he does it by
chance. In like manner it is necessary, that men should see whither they have
wandered out of the path of life, in order to their returning to it again: Nor
is there even a possibility of their going right by chance, in the latter case,
as there is in the former.

BUT, for the further illustration of the point before us, it is to be
observed, that as true religion is founded in reason, it must needs be the
result of thought, reflection, and deliberate choice; it can never be the effect
of a blind, undirected sally of the will. You are sensible, it is by means of
our reason, or the faculties of understanding and reflection, that we become
capable subjects of virtue and religion. For were we destitute of these, it is
manifest we should be no more capable of religion than the brute creatures.
Without them, we could know nothing of God, of his will, or of duty; nothing of
what we are to believe as truth, or to practice as moral beings; we could
neither hope nor fear any thing hereafter. And upon this supposition, it would
be altogether as proper to preach the gospel of the kingdom to beasts, birds
and fish, as some of the eminent Romish saints are said to have done in their
catholic zeal, as to preach it to mankind. It will readily be allowed then,
that these intellectual faculties are absolutely necessary in order to our
being in any degree religious; and that no creature, being destitute of them,
can, in the nature of the thing, be a subject of piety and virtue.

BUT it is not merely the possessing of these faculties, that is requisite in
order to the practice of religion; the exercise, or use of them, is equally
necessary* If it were possible for us to be religious, pious and virtuous,
without actually employing and exerting these faculties, I see not why we might
not be so, even though we were not possessed of them at all. They are necessary,
no further than the use of them is necessary; and only because it is. Whatever
we are capable of, without the actual use of any particular powers or
faculties, we are equally capable of, without those powers themselves: for not
being exercised, or so long as they lie dormant, they are as nothing; and can
have no effect. That man who never thinks of God* and of his ways, of his duty,
and of the obligations which he is under, is doubtless as void of religion,
while thus thoughtless, as the beasts of the field. All the difference is, that
he has a remote capacity for religion and virtue, whereas the brutes are
supposed to have none: But at present, he is not more pious or virtuous than
they.

IT is indeed very evident, that religion consists in the proper exercise, or
due application, of those faculties and powers, whereby we are originally
rendered the capable subjects thereof. For in what does religion consist? What
is it that denominates a man to be truly pious and virtuous? Doubtless religion
consists in knowing God and Jesus Christ; in understanding his word and will;
in believing what God has revealed; in loving him above all things; and an
habitual care to keep his commandments, in hope of eternal life; not as of
merit in us, but as the "gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord." This is a
summary account of the nature of religion. From whence it plainly appears, as
was said before, that it consists in the actual exercise, and right
application, of our intellectual and moral powers. For what are knowledge,
faith, reflection, choice, hope, and obedience, but the exercise of those
various powers? And hence it is evident, that without thinking on God and our
ways, it is impossible for us to turn our feet unto his testimonies, or to keep
his commandments.

BUT, from these general remarks, let us proceed to some more particular ones.
And here it is to be observed, that without thinking on our ways, it is
impossible we should know, in what respects they are evil, and need reforming.
The expression in the text, of turning our feet unto God's testimonies,
presupposes that we have in some degree at least, and in certain instances,
gone astray from them. It implies, that we have, in some particulars, walked
contrary to God's commandments, and violated our duty. This, I say, is plainly
implied, or presupposed, in that manner of expression. Now it may be asked, how
it is possible for a man, who does not reflect seriously on his ways, to know
which of them are evil; what duties he has neglected, and what sins he is
chargeable with? And if he is ignorant as to these points, is it not impossible
that he should forsake his sins, and practice his duty for the time to come?
Doubtless this is impossible. Though a man were sensible in general, that his
ways had been evil, and were desirous to reform them; yet it is obvious, that
without particularly reflecting upon them, and comparing them with the rule of
duty, so as to see in what respects they have been evil, and wherein they ought
to be amended, he cannot reform them, or turn his feet unto God's testimonies.
You see then, from this consideration only, the necessity of thinking on our
ways; and that without it, no man can possibly forsake his former sins, become
a true servant of God, and a disciple of Jesus Christ.

MOREOVER: Thinking on our ways, so as to be deeply sensible of the evil of
them, is necessary in order to beget in us that humility, and godly sorrow,
which are essential ingredients of true repentance; that repentance, which is
the principle, and the beginning of a new and spiritual life. You know that
evangelical repentance implies in it, self-condemnation, shame, grief, and
humiliation before God; hearty sorrow for our sins, that we have acted so
foolishly and ungratefully; and thereby rendered ourselves the objects of God's
righteous displeasure. Without this, there is no true repentance; nor can there
be any thorough reformation. But is it not impossible in the nature of the
thing, that without seriously thinking on our ways, we should thus condemn
ourselves for them, be thus ashamed, grieved and humbled before God? What
foundation is there for self-condemnation, grief or shame, antecedently to our
reflecting, wherein we have done amiss? Can those things, or actions, which are
not even though it of by us, or if at all though it of, yet not reflected on as evil,
and contrary to the law of God, be to us the ground of humiliation and godly
sorrow? Certainly they cannot. You cannot be grieved, and sorry for your sins,
without thinking of them; without remembering that you have committed them, and
seeing your past errors. You cannot be ashamed of the part you have acted, till
you are convinced, by reflection, that it is a base and unworthy one. You
cannot bewail your sins before God, till you are deeply sensible of them. This
is obvious: So that if self-condemnation, shame, and godly sorrow, be essential
to true repentance, and necessary in order to our turning our feet unto God's
testimonies; thinking on our ways is plainly necessary also to the same end:
For without thinking on them, a man cannot thus condemn himself, be ashamed and
grieved, on account of what he has done.

WE know not what we ought to be sorry for, or what rejoiced at, with reference
to our past behavior, without maturely reflecting upon it. Why should we
bewail one part of our conduct, rather than any other, till, by seriously
scanning and examining it, we have learned wherein it has been wrong, or
criminal? If we would exercise that humility which becomes us; if we would
condemn ourselves to the degree we ought to do; if we would abase our selves
before God, in a manner becoming such sinful creatures; to reflect in general,
that we are sinners, is not sufficient. We should consider, how numerous and
great our offenses have been; how frequently we have broken God's commandments;
and with what aggravating circumstances our sins have been attended. Slight and
superficial reflection, will produce only a slight, superficial, and
ineffectual repentance. It is necessary that we should think particularly and
intensely on our ways, in order to beget in us a deep sorrow on account of
them; and that, our hearts being truly broken and contrite, we may be excited
in earnest, and without delay, to fly for refuge, and lay hold on the hope set
before us.

NO one will suppose my meaning to be, that we cannot be truly penitent for our
sins, and turn our feet unto God's testimonies, unless we so think of our ways,
as actually to recollect every particular instance, wherein we have deviated
from the rule of duty, together with every minute circumstance, by which our
guilt has been enhanced, through the course of our lives. Were this indispensably
necessary, there would be no thoroughly penitent, and reformed sinner in the
world. For who can, in this sense, "understand his errors?" No man can remember
all his sinful deeds without exception, however desirous to call them to mind,
for his humiliation. But it is both practicable and necessary, to be much more
particular and circumstantial in reviewing our past lives, and recollecting our
miscarriages, than many persons seem to imagine. To be sensible in general,
that we have done amiss, to be sure, is not all that is possible, or all that
is requisite. We shall never abhor ourselves, or "repent in dust and ashes,"
till we have a more particular view of our past sins, and see ourselves in our
proper colors. It is necessary that we should see our sins, in some sense, as
God sees them, or in the same odious light, in order to hating them as he hates
them; and "breaking them off by righteousness."

THINKING on our ways, is plainly necessary in order to our having the proper
motives and inducements to amend our ways, present to our minds, so as
effectually to influence our practice. It is, in the nature of things,
impossible for us to turn our feet unto God's testimonies, and to keep his
commandments for the future, without seeing, or perceiving, the motives, proper
to induce us thereto. Arguments, or motives, that are not perceived by us, are
to us, as nothing; and can have no effect upon us. The principal motives, by
which sinners are wrought upon, and induced to forsake their evil ways,
whenever they do so, are these which follow: -- The apparent unreasonableness
and baseness of their past behavior; an apprehension of God's displeasure; a
fear of future punishment; together with the hopes of pardon and eternal life
through Jesus Christ, in consequence of forsaking their evil ways. These are the
principal, and most usual, if not the only motives, by which wicked men are
induced to turn from their sins to God. None of which can have any influence
upon us, or even be perceived as motives, inciting us to such a change of life
and behavior, unless we seriously think on our ways.

FOR, as to the former of them: It is impossible the unreasonableness and
baseness of sinning against God, should be any inducement to us to cease from
evil, unless that unreasonableness and baseness is perceived by us; and it
cannot be perceived, till we think on our ways. However base or disingenuous a
man's behavior has been, yet without reflecting upon it, he cannot perceive
it; and, consequently, this will be no motive with him to alter his course and
manner of life.

AGAIN: However obnoxious a man may be to God's righteous displeasure, on
account of his past sins; yet he can have no sense, no apprehension of that
displeasure, till he considers his ways: And consequently, he cannot be induced
hereby to reform his ways. This will, as to him, be no motive at all, in these
circumstances, how efficacious an one soever it might be, if by means of
reflecting on his sins, he had a proper sense of their demerit.

NOR can the terrible punishment, which God has threatened to inflict on the
impenitent workers of iniquity, have any influence, by way of motive, upon the
mind and practice of that man, who does not view himself in the light of a
transgressor, and see, that without repentance and reformation, he must finally
incur this punishment. He cannot fear future evil, at least, not reasonably,
but in proportion to the sense which he has of his evil deserts, on account of
his past transgressions.

LASTLY here, How can the hopes of obtaining pardon and eternal life, through
Jesus Christ, induce that man to forsake his sins, and to work righteousness,
who is so far from being burdened, and heavy laden with a sense of his guilt,
that he does not even think of his past sins, or his need of a pardon? To those
who are sensible of their demerits, and their need of forgiveness, the hopes
thereof will be a powerful motive; but to others it will be none at all. The
whole need not the physician, but they that are sick.

FROM these hints it is evident, that none of the great motives to repent, and
to live a new life, can have any influence upon a man, who does not think on
his ways; they cannot be felt and perceived by careless, thoughtless sinners.
It is absolutely necessary, in order to their having any weight or influence as
motives, that the mind be duly awakened; or that a man has a just sense of the
evil of his ways, which, certainly, he cannot have without thinking seriously
on them.

NOW is it possible, in the nature of things, that sinners should truly repent,
and turn their feet unto God's testimonies, without any motives thereto; or
which is the same thing in effect, without perceiving those which there are?
This is plainly impossible; an absurd supposition. No man does, or can, forsake
his sins, and work righteousness, without knowing why, or wherefore he does so;
without having certain inducements thereto in his own mind; and such as are
proper to influence it in this manner. And it is only by means of serious
reflection, that these motives come to be perceived, so as to operate, and
produce their proper effect.

I HAVE now almost finished what was proposed as the main business of this
discourse; which was, to show the absolute necessity of thinking on our ways,
in order to reforming them, and keeping God's commandments for the time to
come. To this end it has been shown in general, that without exercising our
intellectual and moral powers, in thinking on God, our duty and our ways, we
cannot be the subjects of religion and virtue: That without reviewing our past
lives, we cannot even know, wherein our ways need reforming, or whether they at
all need it, or not: That reflecting on our ways, is necessary to beget in us
that humility, and godly sorrow, which are essential ingredients in true
repentance: And lastly, it has been shown, That the great motives to reform and
amend our ways, can have no influence upon our minds, nor even be perceived by
us, unless we first think on our ways, and are duly sensible of our guilt and
danger, while we continue to break God's commandments. From all which
considerations laid together, I suppose it sufficiently appears to be an
impossibility for any sinner to turn his feet unto God's testimonies, without
seriously reflecting on his ways in the manner before explained.

BUT there is one objection, which may be thought to lie against this manner of
reasoning, concerning the necessity of thinking on our ways: And this must be
obviated before we dismiss this branch of the subject.

WE all suppose, at least it is now taken for granted, that it is the work of
the Spirit of God effectually to renew and convert sinners, or to turn them
from the error of their ways to the wisdom of the just. And may not God, by the
influences of his Spirit, thus change the hearts of men immediately, whether
they think on their ways or not? Cannot God work without means? Or can it be
supposed, that man's cooperation is necessary in order to his being created
anew unto good works, in Christ Jesus, any more than to his first creation? How
can thinking on our ways be said to be necessary to this end, if it either
must, or may be, supposed possible for God to change a man's heart, and convert
him, without thinking on them.

NOW there are several things to be observed with reverence to this objection.

ALTHOUGH the influences of the blessed Spirit of God, are undoubtedly necessary
in order to the effectual conversion of sinners; and although God can do all
things, which do not involve a contradiction; yet he may have established, and
revealed to us, such a method of operating, even in the kingdom of grace, that
we may modestly say, in a qualified sense, that such or such a thing is
impossible; meaning thereby, that it would be inconsistent with, or contrary
to, what he has been pleased to reveal as the rule or method of his dealings
with the sinful children of men; and not, that the thing itself exceeds the
power of God, or involves a contradiction in its own nature. Many things are
naturally possible, which yet are apparently inconsistent with what God has
revealed, and what we know concerning the manner of his acting; and therefore
no one scruples to say of such things, that they are impossible; that they
cannot be done, or come to pass. Now in this qualified sense at least, we may,
I suppose, say without offense, or presumption, that it is impossible for a man
to be converted from sin to righteousness, without first thinking on his ways.
For throughout the holy scriptures, sinners thinking on their ways, is supposed
to be previous to their conversion from the error of them. God treats with
sinful men therein, as rational creatures: He condescends to reason with them
himself, concerning the evil of their ways, admonishing them to reflect on
them, and to forsake them, lest iniquity should be their ruin. This is often
the manner of his address to them. -- Come now, and let us reason together,
says the Lord. -- Are not my ways equal; are not your ways unequal? -- What
more could have been done in my vineyard, that I have not done in it? -- Cast
away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make
you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die? Such a kind of address
and expostulation, is frequently met with, both in the old and new testament.
And I appeal to every unprejudiced man, whether such a manner of address, does
not plainly suppose the necessity of serious reflection on our ways, as one
means of our conversion; and whether this can be reconciled with the other
supposition, viz. that sinners are converted by an immediate exertion of the
divine power on their hearts, before they are persuaded to think on their ways,
and the consequences of them? All the expostulations, the admonitions, the
promises and threatenings, of God's word, seem plainly designed to awaken
sinners to serious consideration, and reflection on their ways, as preparatory
to their conversion, and necessary to that end; though this, to be sure, will not
be effectual without the blessing of God concurring; without whom we can do
nothing.

AT first view, there may, perhaps, seem to be some instances, or examples in
scripture, of sinners being immediately and instantaneously converted by the
power of God, antecedently to their thinking on their ways, and being awakened
to a just sense of their guilt: But, upon mature consideration, I believe, we
shall find no such examples. The thief upon the cross may, by some, be thought
one; but there in no sufficient ground for it. It is rather to be supposed,
that his condemnation and sufferings were instrumental of awakening in him a
sense of his sins, which, by the blessing of God issued in his conversion. That
he thought on his ways, judged and condemned himself, is very evident from his
answer to the guilty and hardened companion of his sufferings, who railed on
our blessed Savior. For he rebuked him, saying, Do thou not fear God? seeing
thou art in the same condemnation; and we indeed justly; but this man has done
nothing amiss. To say the least, the history gives us no reason to think, that
the penitent thief became a penitent, without being first led, by the
providence and Spirit of God, to a serious consideration of his ways; how short
soever the time may be supposed to have been, between that and his conversion.
Though, by the way, it is by no means certain, that he had been hardened and
thoughtless till he was actually brought to the cross, though this seems to be
generally taken for granted.

AS to the apostle Paul; though there was something very singular, and even
miraculous, in the manner and circumstances of his conversion; yet we have no
reason to think that he was instantaneously converted, when he was struck down
in his journey to Damascus; I mean, antecedently to his thinking on his ways.
There is, on the contrary, great reason to suppose, that what happened to him
at that time, was a means of awakening him, and convincing him of his sin; and
this in order to his conversion. It is, indeed, evident from his story in the
new testament, that his turning his feet unto God's testimonies, was subsequent
to, and in consequence of, his being thus admonished to think on his ways; though
the precise time of his conversion, or being born again, cannot be ascertained.

BUT what shall we say of the three thousand, that were added to the church so
suddenly on the day of pentecost? We may say, in the first place, that there is
no certainty of their having been then converted, in the sense wherein we now
use that term, though they were convinced that Jesus was the Christ, the anointed
of God. And, in the second place, that upon supposition they were thus
converted, yet this does not militate in the least degree, against any thing
that has been said concerning the necessity of thinking on our ways. For the
apostle Peter had been preaching the gospel to them, in a most awakening and
affecting manner; whereby they were brought to serious reflection. And it is
expressly said in the story, that when they heard him, they were pricked in the
heart, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Had they not thought on
their ways, they would not have been thus "pricked in the heart," which implies
a deep sense of their sins: So that nothing can be argued from hence, against
what has been said in this discourse, concerning the necessity of serious
consideration and reflection.

I BELIEVE there are no instances of a quick and sudden conversion, recorded in
scripture, which bid fairer than those mentioned above, to be examples of the
conversion of sinners, without thinking on their ways. However, neither that of
the thief, that of Saul, nor that of the three thousand, comes up to the point.
It seems plain from the several accounts of them, that all these persons did
actually think on their ways, as well as David, before they turned their feet
unto God's testimonies; though, perhaps, not so long before. And if any should
think it may be inferred from these examples, that persons, in this age of the
world, may possibly be converted almost instantaneously, or in a very short
time from their being first awakened to a sense of their sins; I will not deny
the inference. There may possibly be such a concurrence of alarming
circumstances, as, by the blessing of God, shall in a moment, as it were,
produce a thorough and saving change in the heart of a sinner, even without a
miracle. This may be allowed without inconvenience. But there was plainly
something preternatural and miraculous in the circumstances of the conversion
of the thief, of Saul, and of the three thousand. That was the age of miracles:
And to say the least, there is no reason to think, that such quick and sudden
conversions have been common, since miracles have ceased in the church* This
work is usually, if not always, effected, in these latter times, in a more
gradual way. And it is to reason falsely and absurdly, to argue from those
extraordinary and preternatural conversions, as some have done; as if we were
to conceive, that other persons who are converted from age to age, are usually
converted in as sudden and extemporaneous a manner. For this there is no
foundation; and it may be of bad consequence for people to entertain such an
opinion. But it would be still more absurd and pernicious, to argue from those
examples, that whether sinners think on their ways at all, or not, they may be
converted by some sudden impulse, or secret energy, of the Spirit of God.

THIS, if I am not extremely mistaken, is not only a moral, but a natural
impossibility, implying a plain contradiction. For conversion, or a turning
from sin to God, in the nature of it presupposes repentance, an awakened sense
of, and sorrow for sin. And, as was particularly shown above, it is, in the
nature of things, impossible for a man to repent of his sins, or to be sorry
for them, without thinking on his ways. That which is not even the subject of
our thoughts, cannot, surely, be any ground of shame and sorrow to us, or be
repented of by us. And if it be a contradiction to say, that a man repents of
his sins without thinking on them; it is also a contradiction to say, that a
man may be converted without thinking on his ways; since, as was observed
before, conversion presupposes repentance. And if this involves a
contradiction, there is no presumption in saying, that it is impossible, even
with God himself; though I am by no means fond of making a frequent use of such
expressions; and would never do it at all, but with reverence and awe. It is,
on all hands allowed, that even the power of God does not extend to the doing
of things impossible in their own nature, as all those are, which involve a
contradiction. How much soever we ascribe to the Spirit of God, in the
conversion of sinners; still it may, and must be asserted, that no man is or
can be converted, without thinking on his ways, either for a longer or shorter
time. Nor does God give us his holy Spirit to supersede the necessity of this,
or to render it needless for us to think on, and repent of our sins: But on the
contrary, to awaken and excite us thereto; to convince us of sin, to humble us
for it, to make us see it in its proper colors, to inspire us with an hatred of
it, and the love of virtue and holiness. Thus it is, that he converteth sinners
from the error of their ways, to the wisdom of the just, by his providence and
good Spirit; sometimes, indeed in a less, and sometimes in a more gradual way;
but never without awakening us to serious thought and reflection; which is a
manifest impossibility and contradiction, as before observed. And this is
sufficient to my present purpose; since from hence appears, the absolute
necessity of thinking on our ways, in order to a thorough reformation thereof,
and turning our feet unto God's testimonies.

LET me therefore conclude this discourse, by beseeching you as you are men, to
show yourselves such by reflecting seriously on your ways and doings; still
comparing them with God's commandments, the rule of your duty. I know of no
more forcible argument to excite you hereto, than this, That it is
indispensably necessary to do so, in order to your turning your feet unto God's
testimonies; and so, in order to your escaping* the wrath to come, and
inheriting eternal life. It is hoped, there are none present, to whom it is a
matter of indifference, whether their souls are saved, or lost: whether they
are happy or miserable, in the world to come. And if you are not indifferent
about these matters, surely you will not continue tho'tless of God and your
ways. If wicked men now refuse to consider their ways, and the things which
belong to their peace, there is a day approaching, which will not only awaken,
but fill them with terror and amazement; and they will think on their ways when
it will be too late to amend them. God will laugh at their calamity, and mock
when their fear comes -- For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord -- therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and
be filled with their own devices. O that we were all wise, and understood this;
that we duly considered, and amended our ways, while a space is allowed us for
repentance: That so that, which will, to irreclaimable transgressors, be a day
of inexpressible terror, and utter perdition, might, to us, be the time of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord. God, of his infinite mercy, grant it
may be so. AMEN!

SERMON XII. THINKING on our Ways naturally conducive to the Amendment of them;
with the Ground there is to hope, that those who are brought to sober
Reflection, will, in Consequence hereof, make Haste to keep GOD's commandments.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


IN my last discourse, SERMON XII.
the necessity of thinking on our ways, in order to a reformation of them, and
turning our feet unto God's testimonies, was shown from several considerations.
And it is herein implied, that thinking of them is, in some way or other,
conducive to that end. For had thinking on our ways no kind of tendency to
reform them, it could not be truly and properly said, to be necessary in order
thereto; this manner of expression supposing it to be a mean to the mentioned
end. But it will not be amiss to speak more particularly upon this point, as
was proposed under the third and last general division of the subject.
Accordingly, the main business of this discourse will be, to show,

THAT thinking on our ways has a natural tendency to reform them, or lead us to
the keeping of God's commandments: So that there is great reason to hope, that
th^se who do so, in the sense of the text, will, like the Psalmist, actually
turn their feet unto God's testimonies, and walk before him in newness of life.

THERE seems to be a kind of inconsistency between serious reflection, and
allowed, habitual disobedience to God's commandments. For it is very difficult
to conceive, how a man who duly thinks on his ways, and sees the evil and
danger of them, can possibly persevere, notwithstanding, in the violation of
God's laws. And the holy scriptures, you are sensible* sometimes represent it
as owing to inconsideration, or a want of due attention, that men go on in
their sins. "My people does not consider," Isa. Chapter ^.
was the complaint exhibited against Israel of old; and this is spoken of as
the reason, or cause, of all their sins and miscarriages in general. To this it
is attributed, that they were such a "sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity." In which passage it is implied, that had they properly considered of
God and their ways, they could not have been such a sinful people.
Consideration will either prevent men from falling into a course and habit of
sin; or, after they are fallen into such a course, be a means of reforming
them. And hence it is, that we are so frequently admonished in scripture, to
think on our ways, what we are about, and to what our doings tend. And in many
passages of scripture, a connection is plainly implied, between consideration
and amendment; as if the latter of course followed the former. Thus the
Psalmist in the text, "I thought on my ways, and turned, etc. So it is said
(Ezekiel. chap. 18.) concerning the wicked man, That "because he considers, and
turns away from all his transgressions -- he shall surely live." It is here
implied, not only that consideration is, in the natural order of things,
antecedent to repentance and amendment, but that it is conducive thereto, as a
means: So that when a sinner becomes thoughtful and considerate, he is in a
fair and hopeful way to be reformed. It may naturally be expected, that having
thought on his ways, he will now cease to do evil, and learn to do well. This
is the manifest scope of many passages of scripture, which it will not be
necessary particularly to refer to.

BUT it will be proper to be a little more distinct in explaining and proving
this supposed connection between thinking on our ways, and turning our feet unto
God's testimonies. And a little attention to the point, will, I suppose, make
it sufficiently evident, that there is indeed such a connection between these
things.

THE chief, governing principles in human nature, (exclusive of worldly lusts
and passions) are reason, conscience, gratitude, fear, and hope. Now serious
consideration, or thinking on our ways, as this was explained in a preceding
discourse, has a direct tendency to awaken all these principles into act, and
make them operate together to the production of such an effect in us, I mean
our reformation. While we are thoughtless, they lie dormant in us, or at least
they are not properly directed. But consideration awakens and regulates them,
in such a manner, that our amendment can hardly fail to be the consequence
thereof.

TO begin with the former of these principles, REASON. All vice and irreligion
are doubtless contrary to reason; piety and virtue agreeable thereto. And if
so, when a reasonable creature considers, and this faculty is awakened, it is
naturally conducive to pious and virtuous practice. Those who are thoughtless
and inconsiderate, do not really know how unreasonable their practices are; and
therefore rush blindly on in sin, without check or bridle. But he that thinks
on his ways, sees the folly and madness of vice; and knows how it becomes him
to act. His reason, which was before inoperative, and asleep, being now roused
up, will perform its proper function. And one would think it impossible for a
man to act unreasonably in the actual exercise of reason, as every one is,
while he thinks on his ways in the manner supposed.

CONSCIENCE and reason are so near akin to each other, that they can hardly be
separated, though they do not signify exactly the same thing. Conscience implies
in it a certain moral sense, or internal feeling, of right and wrong, virtue
and vice, in some sense distinct from mere reason. This, however, is not always
awake; or rather it is generally asleep in vicious men; and sometimes "seared
as with an hot iron;" so that very profligate and abandoned sinners, are said
to be "past feeling." Whenever it is awake, or in exercise, it is a powerful
principle of action; and will not suffer a man to do amiss, without the most
bitter reproaches. Now it is by means of reflection, and consideration, that the
conscencies of sinners are alarmed, and put upon exerting their proper
authority. And whenever they do so, they are productive of a reformation, at
least in some degree. A sinner, whose conscience is duly awakened by thinking
on the evil and danger of his ways, cannot at the same time, commit iniquity
with greadiness; but will of course be desirous to reform his ways; which
desire is itself the beginning of a reformation in him. Nor will such a person
turn again to folly, unless his conscience is, by some means or other lulled to
sleep again.

MOREOVER: Serious consideration has a natural tendency to awaken our GRATITUDE
to God for his goodness, forbearance and long-suffering, and so to lead us to
repentance. Thoughtless sinners have no proper conception of the goodness and
mercy of God, daily extended toward them; nor know how base and disingenuous
their conduct is with regard to him. But when a man thinks seriously on his
ways, he will be ashamed, yea even confounded, that he has so abused the
goodness of God, and made so ill a return to him for his mercies. He will be
almost astonished, that God has been so patient and kind to one, who has
deserved so ill at his hands; and not consumed him in his hot displeasure. And
when a person is, by reflection, brought to such a just and ingenuous sense of
things, it will naturally lead him to amend his ways. He will be powerful
incited to make some returns to God, answerable to the obligations he has been
laid under; and to devote his future life to the honor and service of his
divine benefactor. If the last spark of ingenuity is not quite extinguished in
us, serious consideration will not fail to awaken it, and being awakened, it
will certainly have some good effect upon our behavior.

AGAIN: Serious consideration has a natural tendency to awaken our FEARS, to
excite in sinners a just apprehension of the wrath to come, and, thereby, to
reform them. Those who do not think, do not fear God's displeasure, how much
reason so ever they may have for it. But when sinners reflect seriously on
their ways, they cannot but see that they are exposed to the wrath of God, and
know that they must finally experience the dreadful effects of it, except they
repent, and turn their feet unto his testimonies. Now when a man has a just
sense of the misery of his condition, in being an object of God's displeasure,
and sees the danger he is in of being condemned in the judgment of the great
day; this will make him anxious to fly from the wrath to come. A just fear
being thus excited in him, it will be morally impossible for him to persevere
in his vicious courses. All men dread misery; and not only dread, but endeavor
to avoid it, when they plainly see they are in danger. And this principle of
fear, will operate at least as powerfully in the concernments of religion, when
a man really sees, or believes his danger, as it does in those of a temporal
and worldly nature. So that if a man be a speculative believer of the holy
scriptures, which is here all along taken for granted, he must needs be afraid,
when he thinks of his sins; and be sollicitous to escape the perdition
threatened.

MOREOVER: Consideration will serve to awaken the HOPES, as well as the fears
of wicked men. A tho'tless sinner is unaffected with the blessed promises of
the gospel; and no more desires the salvation of it, than he fears the
destruction which it threatens. But consideration, at the same time that
excites fear in wicked men, also awakens in them a desire of obtaining an
interest in God's favor, that they may be happy hereafter. And the hope hereof
will operate in conjunction with the fear of the contrary; both tending to lead
the sinner to repentance.

THUS it appears, that thinking on our ways is naturally conducive to
repentance and reformation, as it tends to awaken and rouse the chief,
governing principles in human nature; and make them operate conjunctly to that
end. Reason, conscience, gratitude, fear and hope, are, by means of serious
reflection, properly directed, and put into action in such a manner, that it may
be naturally expected, a reformation will be the consequence: Whereas, while
sinners remain thoughtless, these principles can have no such effect.

THERE are indeed, other principles in human nature, which will in some measure
counteract these, tending to obstruct them in their operation, and to prevent
that good effect which has been spoken of; I mean our sensual and worldly
passions. For "the spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the
spirit; and these two are contrary one to the other." We all of us "see a law
in our members, warring against the law of our minds," and too often "bringing
us into captivity to the law of sin." Yea, this law of sin that is in our
members, is so powerful, that it will finally prevail over reason and
conscience, hope and fear, and every good natural principle, if we are left
entirely to ourselves. And, therefore, nothing which has been said above,
concerning the natural tendency of thinking on our ways, to reform us, must be
understood to mean, that it will ever actually produce this effect, without the
Spirit and grace of God concurring,

IT is an undoubted truth, and doctrine of scripture, that sinners, how much
soever they may think on their ways, do not obtain a victory over their lusts,
merely by their own power, but only through God, working in and with them; or
through "sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience." In conformity to, and
consistence with, which important doctrine, whatever has been said above, is to
be understood. Nor are these things inconsistent with each other. Although we are
not able, as of ourselves, to do any thing to purpose in religion; yet it may
be true, that thinking on our ways is a necessary step to reformation, and a
natural means thereof. It may be a real means hereof, and conducive to this
end, although it be not such a one, as will take effect, or be effectual to that
end, without the blessing of God. And we have great reason from scripture, to
hope that, when ever wicked men are led seriously to reflect on their ways, and
are heartily desirous of amending them, God will graciously afford them all the
assistance necessary hereto, so that the event shall be, their saving
conversion to him. Being thus awakened to a just sense of their sin and danger,
and being sensible of their own depravity and weakness, they will of course,
implore the grace and assistance of God's Spirit, in order to the mortifying of
their earthly members, and the renovation of their hearts. And our blessed
Savior has declared, that God will "give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him." So that there is a plain probability, that those who think seriously on
their ways, will eventually turn their feet unto God's testimonies; and that He
who has begun a good work in them, will perfect it unto the day of Christ.

THOSE who have been awakened into a sense of their sins, and who now think
seriously on their ways, may reasonably take some encouragement from what has
been discoursed above. They have great cause of thankfulness to God, that they
have been rouzed from a state of thoughtless security, by whatever means this
has been done; and that they have at length some concern about their eternal
salvation. This is a hopeful symptom; it is a token for good to them; and may
probably be followed by a throrough conversion from sin to God.

BUT whatever probability there may be hereof, it must be allowed, there is no
certainty. Though such persons seem not to be far from the kingdom of heaven,
they may yet never enter into it. Sinners are not, by being thus brought to
think on their ways, or even by reforming them in some degree, put beyond the
possibility and danger of a relapse, and so of finally miscarrying. They have
ground for hope, but none for confidence or presumption. It is supposed, or
rather plainly asserted, in the holy scriptures, that some who are awakened to
a great concern about their sins, and spiritual state, who begin hopefully, and
do many things gladly, become careless and inconsiderate again after a time;
and return to their former sinful courses. It is said of some, that their
goodness is as the morning cloud, and early dew, that soon passes away. Some
of those, who are said to have escaped the corruptions that are in the world,
through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are supposed to be
again entangled, and overcome by them: Who are compared to the "dog returning
to his vomit"; and "the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire." It
is supposed, that those may fall away, who have once been enlightened, and have
tasted the heavenly gift, and the powers of the world to come; yea, those that
have in some measure and manner, been "made partakers of the holy Ghost". Our
Savior, in his parable of the sower, speaks of some, who receive the word with
joy; but yet endure only for a time, being by and by offended, when temptations
and trials come. And such apostates as these, often, if not always, become more
hardened and profligate than ever they were. So that the apostle says, it had
been better for them not to have known the way of life, than thus to depart
from the holy commandment delivered to them. And it is of such persons, that
those remarkable words of our Savior are commonly interpreted, (Luke XII)
"When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest: And finding none, he says, I will return unto my house, whence I
came out. And when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished. -- Then goes
he and takes with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself: And they
enter in, and dwell there. And the latter state of that man is worse than the
first."

I WOULD qualify what has been said in the former part of this discourse, by
reminding you of these representations in the holy scriptures; which show the
possibility and danger of awakened sinners, yea, of partially reformed ones,
returning, after a time, to their vicious courses; and dying at last in their
iniquities. I do not, however, say these things with a design to throw any
needless discouragements in the way of those, who are become thoughtful, and
are seriously concerned about their salvation: God forbid! By suggesting their
danger to them, I mean to keep them from presumption; to excite them to great
watchfulness, and diligence in working out their salvation: Lest becoming
secure by degrees, they should fall away, through the temptations of this evil
world, and the devices of Satan; becoming more hardened and abandoned than
ever, instead of being eventually the better for their present concern about
their spiritual state.

BUT, beloved, we would hope "better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation, though we thus speak." There is ground of hope concerning those of
you, who now think seriously on your ways, though you are not out of danger. It
becomes you both to watch and to pray, that you enter not into temptation.
Depend not too much on your own strength; but look up to God for his grace and
assistance, in an humble sense of your weakness. It is He only, that is able to
keep you from falling, and finally to present you before his glorious presence
with exceeding joy. If you seek him with your whole heart, he will be found of
you: He will afford you all needed measures of his grace and Spirit, for your
sanctification, and preservation in the way of life and salvation. But if you
forsake him, and become careless and thoughtless of the things that belong to
your peace, he will also forsake you, and give you up to your own hearts lust.
Take heed, that you do not lose those serious impressions, which you are now,
any of you, under. How sad would be your state and condition, if you should
return to sin and folly, after being in such a hopeful way to obtain the
salvation of your souls! You doubtless now look with some degree of pity on all
those, who appear to have no concern about their sins, and their eternal
interest, if there are any such amongst us at this time. They are indeed
objects of pity. But if you yourselves, after being thus awakened to a sense of
your sin and danger, should grow secure, and give yourselves up to work
iniquity, your case would be then more sad and desperate than their's is at
present. There would then be hardly any hopes of your "being renewed again unto
repentance." Good impressions lost, usually leave the heart more callous and
hardened than it was at first, before those impressions were made on it. Work
out your salvation, therefore, with fear and trembling: And may God, of his
infinite mercy, work in you, and in all of us, that which is well pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom be glory for ever and ever.
AMEN.

I HAVE now done with the third general head of discourse, proposed to be
spoken to: Having shown the reasonableness and necessity of thinking on our
ways, together with the tendency hereof to reform them. A recapitulation of the
whole, with some reflections on the subject, and on the late alarming
visitations of Divine Providence, was proposed as the conclusion. But these
things must be the business of another discourse; there being hardly time for
them at present.

SERMON XIII. THE recapitulatory and concluding Discourse: Wherein are some
Reflections on those alarming Dispensations of Providence, which gave Occasion
to treat this Subject with such Extent.
PSALM CXIX.59, 60. I THOUGHT on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies:

I MADE haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


SERMON XIII.
WHEN I first entered on this subject, I intimated to you, that I intended, by
the will of God, to handle it pretty largely: because I thought it particularly
seasonable, and might probably be useful at this time. I have now almost
finished what I proposed. It still remains, however, to apply the subject more
particularly than has been hitherto done, to the occasion of these discourses;
I mean, the late alarming dispensations of providence. But as it is some
considerable time since I entered on the subject; I shall beg leave first to
refresh your memories by recapitulating the principal matters which have been
so largely handled; that so, by the blessing of God, when I am dismissing the
subject, I may leave the substance of the whole impressed on your minds and
consciences.

YOU will please to remember then, that the subject has been handled under
three general heads, each of which has been branched into several particulars.

THE FIRST of these general heads was, To show the great, yea infinite
importance, of turning our feet unto God's testimonies, and keeping his
commandments. And this appears evident from the several arguments that were
insisted on in the two first discourses: From a general consideration of God's
power and greatness, his holiness and universal dominion, and our absolute
dependence upon him: From the clear and positive denunciations of his wrath, in
his word, against all impenitent, irreclaimable transgressors: From the great
and precious promises of the gospel, made to those who turn at God's reproof:
And lastly, From a consideration of that astonishing method which God has
projected for our salvation from sin and death. It is certainly a matter of
infinite importance to us, to reverence and obey the great Lord of heaven and
earth, in whose hand our breath is, and whose are all our ways. It infinitely
concerns sinners to fly from the wrath to come, that wrath of God, which is
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, and
revealed in language so full of terror. Is it not of infinite importance to us,
to obtain an interest in the blessed promises of the gospel, the promises of
pardon and eternal life? And it must needs give us a deeper sense of this
importance, if we consider the Son of God as coming down from heaven, and
suffering and dying for our salvation. The first point is, I suppose,
sufficiently confirmed and illustrated by these considerations, which were
distinctly enlarged on in their order.

THE SECOND general head of discourse was, To show the vast importance of
making haste to keep God's commandments, and the extreme folly and danger of
delaying it. Human life is short and uncertain: so that we cannot depend upon
any future opportunity to make our peace with God, if we neglect the present.
But if we were certain of another, yet delay will render the work of
reformation more difficult and painful. The pleasures attending a religious and
virtuous life, are far superior to those of sin and folly; and the sooner we
begin to fear and serve God, the sooner shall we begin to be truly happy. The
greater also will be our progress toward christain perfection, and the greater
our reward in heaven. Piety and virtue are peculiarly amiable in youth; and we
shall do much more honor to God and our Redeemer by an early, than by a late
repentance. To delay, is the basest ingratitude. It is also such daring
impiety, that we may well fear, God will utterly withdraw his holy Spirit from
those, who continue long in their sins; giving them up to their own hearts
lust, and leaving them to, treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of
wrath. These arguments were enlarged upon in seven discourses; and all who duly
consider them, must needs acknowledge the importance of making haste to keep
the commandments of God.

THE THIRD general head of discourse was, To show the reasonableness of
thinking on our ways, together with the necessity and conduciveness hereof, to
a reformation of them. We cannot better employ those rational faculties which
God has given us, than by thinking seriously of our own ways; by reflecting,
what manner of life we have lived; what our religious state is; what we have to
hope, or what to fear, in the way and course we are in at present. Certainly
such thoughts and inquiries become us, as we are reasonable creatures, made for
virtue and religion, and are to be happy or miserable in another world,
according to our behavior in this. Unless we think on these things, we shall
think only of such as are vain and trifling in comparison of them. 'Till we
thus think on our ways, it will be impossible for us to a mend them, how much
soever they may need reforming. And, on the other hand, when we properly
reflect on our ways, there is ground to hope, that we shall actually turn our
feet unto God's testimonies; the former naturally leading to the latter. These
things were particularly considered in the three last discourses.

THUS I have given you a brief, summary view of the manner, in which this
subject has been handled: And shall now close it with some general reflections
and exhortations; not omitting to take notice of those dispensations of divine
providence, which were the occasion of my treating the subject so largely at
this time.

IT is strange that any should be tho'tless about their spiritual state, and
their eternal interest, considering how many things daily occur to rouse us to
serious reflection on them. We do not live a single day, without having
admonitions of one kind or other, to this end. The whole visible creation,
which proclaims the perfections and glory of God, and reminds us of our
dependence on him, is an incessant, unwearied monitor to us. The sun, moon and
stars preach to us, night and day: And the most common events of providence,
are instructive and monitory. In which respect, Wisdom cries without, she
utters her voice in the streets: She cries in the chief place of concourse,
in the opening of the gates; in the city she utters her words, saying, How
long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in
their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?

WE are still more explicitly admonished of our duty by the holy scriptures,
which we have in our hands. These sacred oracles, to be sure, are profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and instruction in righteousness. So
that while we have the written word of God, yea, while the world stands, and
the course of nature is maintained, we can never want admonitions to think of
God, and of our ways, and to keep his commandments. How inexcusable are we, if
we disregard them, and let them admonish us in vain!

BUT besides these constant monitors; besides this word, and these works of
God, which preach uninterruptedly and uniformly to the world, from age to age;
besides these, I say, there are many particular dispensations of providence
toward ourselves, which ought in reason to awaken us to a serious sense of
religion, and which, being disregarded, leave us the more inexcusable. All the
signal mercies and blessings which God bestows upon us, are admonitions to
remember, to love him, and to keep his commandments. And all the afflictions,
with which he exercises us in the course of his providence, are also monitory
in th^^r nature and design. Indeed the holy scriptures more frequently
represent afflictions and calamities, as designed to awaken and reform us, than
they do the outward blessings and smiles of providence. In this light we ought
to look upon sickness, pains, losses and disappointments, and all kinds of
worldly adversity in general. They are the corrections and chastisements of
divine providence; designed to bring us to a sense of our sins; to wean our
affections from this world, and to make us seek our happiness in God, and his
service.

WE are all in common admonished, in these several ways, to think on God and
our duty, and to turn our feet unto his testimonies; by his works which we
daily behold; by his word; by his mercies, and by his chastening hand. But
there are some other visitations of providence of a mixed nature, so that we
can hardly tell whether they ought to be called mercies or afflictions; which
are yet plainly monitory in their design; loud calls to think on, and to amend
our ways. I have here more particularly in view, the late earthquakes, which
were the more immediate occasion of these discourses.

WHEN we consider the terror and amazement that earthquakes naturally bring
with them, even though the harm done by them may be inconsiderable, we can hardly
help looking on them as the judgments of heaven, at least as intimations of
God's righteous displeasure, and warnings from him. The earthquakes which
lately shook this part of the continent, were not productive of any great
catastrophe, as sometimes happens; but they occasioned a general terror; and
indeed, we had, in the time of them, great reason to apprehend fatal
consequences from them. God hereby threatened us, and put us in fear: his hand
was apparently lifted up, though he did not strike the awful blow, which seemed
coming upon us. And when we reflect, that our lives were preserved in this time
of visible danger; that we were only alarmed, not destroyed, but delivered from
threatened ruin; the visitations, in this respect, seem kind, favorable and
merciful: And the more so, when we consider the great desolations lately
wrought by earthquakes in some other places. Lisbon, and some parts of Africa.
When we lay all circumstances together, some people may possibly be in doubt,
whether we ought to consider these visitations as judgments, or as mercies;
whether we have more reason to humble ourselves, as being under the frowns of
divine providence, or to rejoice and be thankful, on account of our
preservation, when we were in such apparent danger.

WHICH of these would be the juster sentiment of the two, I will not be very
positive; nor is it necessary to determine that point. We have plainly, on one
hand, great reason to humble ourselves under these alarming visitations; and to
look on them as warnings and threatenings from God, justly provoked at our sins.
On the other hand, we have abundant cause for praise and gratitude to him, that
he has mercifully spared us; and not brought upon us the destruction, we had so
much reason to fear. There is, in suchlike visitations, a mixture of divine
displeasure and kindness? so that we may sing, both of judgment and mercy, on
account of them. However, I cannot but think, upon the whole, that they are
much more properly called judgments, or manifestations of God's righteous
displeasure, than mercies, or tokens of his favor and kindness. No man looks
upon pain and sickness* whereby his life is endangered* as blessings,
considered in themselves* though, if his life is preserved notwithstanding, that
is doubtless a mercy, which demands his thanks and praises to God. The mariner
does not consider the storm and tempest, whereby he is put at his wit's end, as
blessings, or tokens of God's favor; though, if he is saved from shipwreck, he
looks on this as a mercy, and gives God thanks. The child, the servant, the
subject, look on the rod, the scourge, and ax, shaken at them, as shown to them
in displeasure, not as marks of favor in the parent, master and sovereign;
though the laying of them aside, may be considered as a token of kindness and
mercy. The application of these similitudes to the point in hand, is obvious
and easy. In this light, I suppose, we ought to look on these late visitations
of providence; I mean, as minatory, or as intimations of God's displeasure
against us: But their passing over, and leaving us in the possession of our
lives, and the blessings of life, as before, must needs be acknowledged as a
token of God's fatherly goodness and compassion. But, view them in what light
we please, we must, unless we are mere atheists, suppose the general design of
them is, to excite us to a serious consideration, and an amendment of our ways;
as loud providential calls to fear God, and keep his commandments.

MANY persons amongst us have doubtless been put upon very serious reflection,
as well as terrified, by these visitations of providence. It would indeed be
strange and unaccountable, if they had not had this effect; especially
considering the repeated advices we have lately had from abroad, of the
terrible and fatal effects of earthquakes, attended with prodigious agitations
and inundations of the sea, to say nothing of some unusual meteors and
appearances in the heavens. These things naturally bring to mind, a passage in
the new testament: There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the
stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the
waves roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear, and looking after those
things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
Luke 21*^5, 26.
I will not presume to say, that these now present, are the times and events
which our Savior predicted in this passage. It has generally been supposed,
that this prediction was fulfilled in the things which came to pass just before
the destruction of Jerusalem. However, to me it seems evident, that the
prediction had a reference to times and events subsequent to those, by what
follows. It immediately follows, And then shall they see the son of man coming
in a cloud, with power and great glory. And when these things begin to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draws nigh.
There has probably been no age or period of the world, wherein events have more
nearly corresponded to this prophetic description, than the present; though as
was intimated before, I do not presume to say, that these are the very times
foretold.

BUT however that matter may be, I am almost confident, that these great and
unusual events, which have lately come to pass here, and in other places, will
soon be followed with some very remarkable changes in the political and
religious state of the world. If we may judge by analogy, or reason from what
has heretofore been, to what shall be hereafter, we may probably conclude, that
these great commotions in the natural world, will usher in some great
revolutions in the moral world, and in the state of those nations and
countries, where they have happened. There usually has been, and probably will
be, a kind of agreement, or some correspondence, between the natural, the civil
and moral world: So that these events in the former, may it is humbly
conceived, without any tincture of superstition or enthusiasm, be considered as
the prognostications and forerunners of some commotions, equally uncommon and
surprising in the latter; and as designed to give us warning of them. But
whether these will, tous, be prosperous or adverse, God only knows. IT is now
(March, 1760) upwards of four years since this discourse was delivered: And
when the Author reflects on what has since come to pass, particularly in
Portugal, in the kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, and in North America; he sees no
cause for changing his sentiments, or making any alteration in what he then
delivered, as in the above paragraph.
And it is hard to conceive what will put men upon serious consideration, if
such alarming visitations of providence fail to do it.

IF there are any persons amongst us, who are not roused and awakened by these
things, it is a proof that they are sunk into gross impiety, but little short
of atheism. A man can hardly be suppposed to believe the being and providence
of God, who does not regard these operations of his hand; and who is not
excited hereby to think on his ways. What will put those upon sober reflection,
on whom an earthquake, threatening instant and wide destruction, has no effect!
Will they not be persuaded to think of their state, and latter end, till they
actually "see the sign of the son of man, coming in the clouds of heaven"!

LET us all, in season, even in this day of our visitation, consider the things
that belong to our peace, lest they should be hidden from our eyes. What has
been our manner of life? What is our state toward God? Are we at peace with
him through our Lord Jesus Christ, or the objects of his righteous displeasure?
Are we entitled to eternal life and salvation, or the heirs of death and
destruction? These matters are not to be postponed to the concerns of this
short and uncertain life. "One thing is needful:" They who properly attend to
that, are truly wise, wise unto salvation; and they who neglect it, are
chargeable with folly and madness. We ought not to be careful and troubled
about many things: we ought not to be sollicitous, what we shall eat, or what
we shall drink, or wherewithal we shall be clothed: we ought not to take
thought for the morrow. But, having immortal souls to be saved or lost, we
should take thought for them above all things; "seeking first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness."

I DOUBT not but that most, or all of you, my brethren, are convinced, that it
is of infinite importance to you to fear God and keep his commandments, and to
make your peace with him. This you must do sooner or later, or else perish in
your sins at last. And can you think of any season, fitter for it than the
present? Are you sure you shall have another opportunity, the present time
being neglected? No: You know not what a day, an hour, a moment, may bring
forth! But taking it for granted, that you have many years to live, is this a
good reason for delay? Will the necessary work of reformation be easier to you,
ten or twenty years hence, than it would be at present? No: far more difficult.
You will not only have the more sins to repent of, but your lusts will gain
strength by being so long indulged. Do you expect to find more pleasure in the
ways of sin and folly, than you would find in the service of God, should you
now enter upon it? And will you delay for that reason? Alas! this is an absurd
imagination. The way of transgressors is hard, perplexed, full of trouble and
disquietude: and the paths of piety and virtue only, are paths of peace. Are
you most likely to make great proficiency in the school of wisdom and virtue,
by entering into it early or late? Doubtless, the sooner you begin to acquaint
your selves with God, the better you will know him, and his righteous ways; the
greater perfection in virtue and holiness you will attain to here, and the
greater happiness and glory in the kingdom of heaven hereafter. Those who
remember their Creator in the days of their youth, most honor God, their
Redeemer, and themselves. It is to the last degree, base, ungenerous and
sordid, to spend that time, which God mercifully allows us for working out our
salvation, in sinning against him. This is also such impious presumption, as
may justly provoke him utterly to forsake us; and to "swear in his wrath, that
we shall never enter into his rest." Consider seriously of these things; and
make haste to keep God's commandments. To delay this, is always foolish, always
dangerous, and often fatal. Trust not to that Tomorrow, which you may never
see; or which may find you in the regions of darkness and despair, fruitlesly
bewailing your dependence upon it!

I HAVE reason to think, that many of you were lately impressed with a a deep
sense of religion; that you then thought seriously on your ways, and resolved,
without delay, to turn your feet unto God's testimonies. This you doubtless
did, when God "looked on the earth, and it trembled;" when you were under
apprehensions of sudden destruction. But do not some of you find, since those
apprehensions are over, that your concern about your salvation is abated? Are
none of you become already, almost indifferent about those things, which you
then looked on as being of infinite importance? Do you retain that awakened
sense of religion, which you had in the time of your apparent danger? If you
do, it is well; and it may be hoped, that you will no more return to folly. But
if those good impressions are already grown faint, it may be justly feared,
they will e're long, be quite worn out, and even leave your consciences more
hardened than ever. As you value your immortal souls, keep alive, and cherish,
the convictions of your consciences. If you draw back, you will probably draw
back unto perdition. God will have no pleasure in you; nor shall you have any
pleasure or comfort in yourselves; but you will mourn at the last, when sorrow
will be unavailable. "He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy."

IN fine: LET us all in common think seriously of our ways, and amend them
without delay. Let the wicked alter the general course and tenor of their
lives; returning to God with their whole heart; and doing works meet for
repentance. And let good men carefully examine themselves, reforming their ways
in those particular instances and respects, wherein they are blameable. Let us
all be admonished, by the dispensations of providence toward us, to attend to
the great concerns of religion, and another world, with more care and
diligence, with more constancy, and intenseness of application, than ever:
Knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep; for now is
our salvation nearer than when we belielieved. The night is far spent, the day
is at hand: Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light. Being followers of God as dear children, we shall in due time
inherit the promises, which in Jesus Christ are Yea and Amen. He will at length
appear for the complete and eternal salvation of those, who believe on, and
obey him; and render to his enemies according to their deeds. -- Unto him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood; and has made us kings
and priests unto God and his Father; to him b^ glory and dominion, forever and
ever* Amen. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him: And all the kingdoms of the earth shall wail
because of him; Even so. AMEN. (...) 5, 6, 7.


The End.
ADVERTISEMENT.
DIVERSE things have concurred to retard the publication of these discourses:
But this delay has been chiefly occasioned by the Author's ill state of health.

MARCH, 1760.
TO BE SOLD by R. DRAPER in Newbury-Street, and EDES and GILL in Cornhill,
BOSTON.
Dr. MAYHEW's

TWO Discourses delivered the Lord's Day after the Earthquakes in November
1755. And a Lecture-Sermon on the same Occasion.

ALSO, A Volumn of SERMONS upon the following Subjects, viz.

On hearing the Word: On receiving it with Meekness: On renouncing gross
Immoralities: On the necessity of obeying the Gospel: On being found in CHRIST:
On Justification by Faith: On the nature, principle and extent, of Ev^ngelical
Obedience. On the deceitfulness of the Heart, and GOD's knowledge thereof. On
the shortness and varity of Human Life: And, On the true value, use and end of
Life; together with the conduciveness of Religion, to prolong, and make it
happy. There are but few of them to sell.


