Dr. Mayhew's DISCOURSE Occasioned by the DEATH of Judge SEWALL.

A DISCOURSE Occasioned by the DEATH of THE HONORABLE STEPHEN SEWALL, Esquire
CHIEF JUSTICE of the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and
General-Goal-Delivery; as also A Member of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL for the
Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY in NEW ENGLAND: WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE On
Wednesday-Night, SEPTEMBER 10. 1760.

Aetatis 58.

DELIVERED the LORD'S DAY after his Decease.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the West-Church in BOSTON.

The sweet remembrance of the JUST
Shall flourish when he sleeps in dust.
PSALM CXII.6. BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, in Newbury-Street: EDES and
GILL, in Queen Street: And THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, in Cornhill.

MDCCLX.

A Funeral Discourse.
1 SAMUEL XXV.1. AND SAMUEL died, and all the Israelites were gathered
together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah --
WOULD to God (if I may so express myself without seeming to blame the
sovereign will and wisdom) Would to God, I had not so melancholy an occasion as
I have, to desist at present from the prosecution of that important subject, on
which I have for some time been discoursing! But God, who does his will in the
armies of heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, has, in his holy
and inscrutable providence, given me this occasion, by the death of an
honorable person lately belonging to this society. And although I have ever had,
rather an aversion to, than any fondness for, the common practice of making
long encomiums on the dead, considering how often they are prostituted, so as
to pass with many people, even when they happen to be just, for little or
nothing more than words of course; yet I thought you would hardly excuse me,
and, indeed, I could not easily excuse myself, if I neglected to take a
particular notice of the life and death of so distinguished a person as Judge
SEWALL; or did not endeavor to lead you into some proper reflections on this
dispensation of divine providence. But in truth, though I know not well how to be
silent on this occasion; yet, on the other hand, I am so deeply touched, so
penetrated hereby, that I hardly know how to speak -- For alas! one, indeed the
far better part of my heart, seems torn away from me, while the other is left
wounded, panting and bleeding. So that if my discourse should appear broken and
unconnected, your candor will, I hope, suggest some apology for me. Whatever I
shall say of this excellent person's character, will be the genuine dictate of
my heart, not the fruit of study or invention; for sorrow, you know, does not
aim much at being correct, or methodical.

I had indeed reason to love and honor him as my father; though, so great was the
humility and condescension of that good man, that had I even called him my
friend, or brother, I believe he would scarcely have been offended at it. And
it would be a just and great reproach to me, if I did not now sincerely love
and honor his memory; and show some public respect to it; especially since the
doing this, by recollecting some of his many good qualities, may be a means of
exciting us all to imitate his virtues. And since the mouth speaks out of,
and according to, "the abundance that is in the heart;" I must, in justice,
forewarn you that my discourse on this occasion, unless my spirits and strength
should quite fail me, will be considerably longer than it is usual for me to
be. But amidst all my sorrow, and great heaviness of heart, I shall have at
least one consolation; that of assuring myself, as I go along, that whatever,
almost, I may say in honor of this excellent man, none of my auditors will
think me excessive in his eulogium; but heartily join with me in paying this
public regard to his memory; which will be some alleviation of my grief.

And, as an introduction to the design which has been mentioned, of making some
reflections on the life, character and death of the worthy person lately
deceased; it seems not amiss to make a few observations on the life, character
and death of SAMUEL, many years the chief judge and magistrate of Israel; one
of the most excellent characters which we meet with amongst those of the
ancient worthies; and therefore, as it is conceived, the more suitable to
introduce what is proposed as the main business of this discourse.

It is not designed, however, either to give a large, and very particular
account of SAMUEL, or to labor a parallel between these two judges: but only
to select such parts of the conduct and character of the former of them, as
seem directly pertinent to the present occasion; or at least, such as may
easily be accommodated thereto.

We have, in effect, a very honorable testimony to the worthiness of SAMUEL's
character, in that passage of sacred history, on which my discourse is
grounded; although nothing is said therein, directly, or particularly concerning
it. When he died, " all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented
him"; attending his funeral rites with the greatest demonstrations of grief.
The unfeigned tears of an whole people, collected together to solemnize the
burial of a person of his rank and station, are a strong evidence of his
superior merit. Eulogiums falling thus from the eyes of a whole people, (if I
may so express it) falling in unbidden tears; or bursting from the heart in
involuntary sighs; are louder, and more authentic testimonies of real worth in
the person, who is the occasion of them, than the labored praises of a
thousand tongues, however eloquent. Such tears, such sighs, on such an
occasion, reveal the real sentiments of the soul; while a great pomp of words
often serves to no other purpose, than to contradict, or disguise, them. Thus
it was that SAMUEL was praised when he died; these were the panegyrics which
all Israel bestowed on him; or rather, which the remembrance of his virtues, in
conjunction with the sad spectacle of his venerable remains before their eyes,
extorted from them.

But we need not be implicit believers in groans and tears, even in those of an
whole nation. For if we look into the history of SAMUEL, we shall easily
discover the grounds of them; and see how naturally and justly, as well as
copiously, they burst forth on that occasion.

We have a particular account of SAMUEL's birth, and some extraordinary
circumstances which both preceeded and followed it, in the first chapter of the
first book, which goes under the name of that eminent person. But those things
are here passed over in silence, as not material, or indeed pertinent, all of
them, to the present occasion. It is intimated to us in the second chapter of
that book, how early SAMUEL distinguished himself, or rather, was distinguished
by God; and pointed out as a person, from whom great things were to be expected
in due time. For it is said, the child SAMUEL grew on, and was in favor both
with the Lord, and also with men. Ver. 26.
And in the beginning of the third chapter, we read of the child SAMUEL's
ministering unto the Lord before Eli the priest. So that, even in his tender
age, he was a servant and minister of the Lord; who soon after called him to,
and honored him with, the sacred office of a prophet. And it is observed of
him, toward the latter end of the last-mentioned chapter, that he grew, and
the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground. Ver.
19.


It will not be impertinent to observe here, that in the time of SAMUEL, there
were in Israel certain academies, or colleges, usually called the schools of
the sons of the prophets; because under the immediate direction and government
of the prophets. In these, youth were instructed in useful learning, especially
in the knowledge of God's law; and from amongst them, God usually raised up,
and chose the prophets, which he sent to his people Israel. Nor is there any
reason to doubt, but that SAMUEL had his education in one of these schools. For
one of them, named Naioth, was in the city of Ramah, Vid. 1 Samuel XIX.19, 22,
and 23.
the place of SAMUEL's birth, where his father lived, where he himself was
brought up from a child, where his own house was afterward, where he commonly
lived, and where he was buried. And we are particularly informed, [1 Samuel XIX
chap.] that during the troubles, and public commotions, occasioned by Readiness
persecuting David, Readiness messengers being sent in pursuit of David to Naioth,
saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and SAMUEL standing as appointed
over them; Ver. 20.
he being at this time advanced in years. Now, considering the custom of those
days, and that Naioth, that truly illustrious school, was in Ramah, where
SAMUEL was born and brought up; and that he was afterward himself appointed an
instructor and governor therein; there seems to be no room to doubt, but that
he had his education in it in his youth; though I do not remember, indeed, that
this is any where particularly asserted.

But to return: After SAMUEL had been some time clothed with the sacred
character of a prophet, when he was about thirty or forty years of age, he was
invested with an high civil office; that of judge, or the chief magistrate in
Israel. For in those days, before the introduction of monarchical government,
the supreme civil ruler in Israel was styled a judge, or the judge. In the
execution of which office, SAMUEL used to travel from one part of the country
to another, holding his courts, and distributing justice to the people, in the
most convenient places; and then returning to Ramah: which, even in those days,
was called going in "circuit". Of these facts we are informed 1 Samuel chap. VII.
Viz. that SAMUEL went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and
Mizpeh; and judged Israel in all those places. And his return was to Ramah; for
there was his house: and there he built an al^^^ unto the Lord. Ver. 16, 17.
And we are informed in the same chapter, that he thus judged "Israel all the
days of his life. Ver. 15.
" From which latter circumstance, as well as from other things, we learn, that
SAMUEL held the office of a judge in Israel, when he was no longer the chief
ruler therein, under king Saul, when the form of government was changed. For
SAMUEL was the person chiefly concerned, and employed under God, in raising
Saul to the throne of Israel; as appears from the particular account of these
matters in sacred writ. At present I pass them over with a bare mention. I also
pass over, even without a mention, many signal services which SAMUEL did to the
people of Israel; and many blessings which he was instrumental of procuring for
them from heaven.

This renowned man appears to have been an excellent patriot; one of the
greatest and best that the world has known. He entirely loved his country; and
was ever properly jealous for its laws and liberties. He not only exerted
himself successfully in their defense against foreign enemies; but did whatever
lay in his power to secure them against the equally, or more dangerous efforts
of ambition, intrigue, and tyranny within. His great zeal for the laws, rights
and liberties of the people, appears not only from his steady and upright
conduct in the capacity of a judge, of which more particularly hereafter; but
from his behavior upon some very signal occasions, which should not be
entirely omitted here.

When the people were disgusted, not without sufficient reason, at the conduct
of two of SAMUEL's sons, and doubtless had their passions blown up by some
evil-minded persons, desirous of novelty and change; they manifested themselves
weary of the free and excellent form of government, which God himself had
instituted amongst them; they required a change therein, and requested SAMUEL
to set a king, or absolute monarch, over them, like all the nations Vid. 1 Samuel
VIII. at large.
about them. SAMUEL earnestly expostulated with them on the subject of this mad
proposal; not for his own sake, lest his power should be diminished, but
because he foresaw the evils, the oppressions, and the grievous slavery, they
would bring upon themselves by such a change of government. But having
protested solemnly unto them, and showed them the manner of the king; and when
nothing else would appease them, he gave way to their importunate clamours; he
"hearkened to their voice," and anointed Saul to be their king, according to
the divine direction. For it seems that God himself would not preserve them a
free people, against their own will; and therefore "gave them a king in his
anger;" to scourge them for their folly, and for their rebellion against
himself. However, at length, when SAMUEL's prediction had, doubtless, been
sufficiently verified, and Readiness reign was grown insupportable, SAMUEL was a
principal instrument of setting him aside; and he anointed David the son of
Jesse, a man after God's own heart, to sit upon the throne of Israel in his
stead. Now amidst all this madness of the people, these turns and revolutions
of government, SAMUEL still discovered himself to be a true patriot, zealous
for the liberties and interests of his country: Equally so, in
discountenancing, and entering his protestation against, their first demand of
a king; in complying therewith when nothing else would satisfy them; in setting
aside their king, when his behavior became intolerable; and anointing a far
better man to reign in his stead. All which, it must be remembered, SAMUEL did,
not without the particular permission and direction of heaven; as appears at
large from the remarkable history of these transactions.

It may not be amiss to observe farther here, that while Saul sat upon the
throne, SAMUEL did not only continue in the executive office of a judge in
Israel; but was, at least for a time, one of his chief counselors. We read of
his giving him advice from time to time; and freely reproving him for his
faults: Though he adhered to him, till God signified his intention to destroy him
for his bad behavior. After which, SAMUEL renounced him, anointed David,
adhered to him and his cause; and was his chief adviser and counselor, as long
as he [SAMUEL] lived.

But having just observed these things, it is now time to speak more
particularly of SAMUEL's integrity in the capacity of a judge: For this is the
character under which he is more commonly considered. And to his fidelity in
this important trust, we have one very authentic, indeed a very singular,
testimony, in sacred history; one, which is so full, that it will supersede the
occasion, at least the necessity, for any others. It is in the 12th chapter of
that book which has been so often mentioned already, at the beginning. It
appears from the last verse of the foregoing chapter, that all the people were
gathered together at Gilgal, to confirm the kingdom to Saul, and to establish
him in the throne of Israel; he having been before anointed king by SAMUEL. And
they being thus gathered together, SAMUEL, already grown old in their service,
took this most public, and solemn occasion, to appeal to their own consciences
for the uprightness of all his conduct toward them; when he also challenged
all, or any of them, to bear witness against him before the Lord, and before
Saul his anointed, who had now power to punish him, if they could allege any
thing against him.

There is at once such a noble boldness, such a simplicity, and such a dignity,
in this appeal and challenge of SAMUEL, that I question whether the repetition
of it at large, will seem tedious on this occasion, to any who have a true
taste and judgment: I rather think it will be agreeable and entertaining. It is
as follows: Behold, I have hearkened to your voice in all that ye have said unto
me, and have made a king over you. And now behold the king walks before you:
and I am old, and gray headed; and behold, my sons are with you; and I have
walked before you from my childhood to this day. Behold, here I am, witness
against me before the Lord, and before his anointed. Whose ox have I taken? or
whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of
whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will
restore it to you 1 Samuel XII.1, 2, 3.
We may see, in this challenge, that inimitable kind of boldness which a good
conscience inspires; such a boldness, as surpasses all the power of art, and
the deepest hypocrisy, to counterfeit so exactly, but that some difference
might be discovered by a penetrating eye. And you will be pleased to observe,
that this appeal and demand are general. Though SAMUEL here speaks with
particular reference to his conduct in the capacity of a judge; yet he refers
the people to his manner of life in general, even from his childhood to that
day. His demand extends to his whole conduct toward them. He does not only
acquit himself of corruption, or receiving bribes; but, Whom have I defrauded?
says he; Whom have I oppressed? i. e. in any respect whatever, from my youth to
old age, notwithstanding my opportunity and power to oppress, in the high
station which I have filled? Let my accuser now stand forth; and freely bear
witness against me before God and the king. This is the evident purport of his
words.

Alas! how few judges, or other persons in high stations, wherein they have
opportunity to oppress, and to do iniquity, are there in most countries, who
would dare to make the like demand in the face of a whole people? Or, if they
presumed to do so, how many mouths would, probably, be at once opened against
them, to testify their iniquity to their faces, before God and the king? -- I
say, "in most countries;" for I would, by no means, be supposed to speak thus
of all without exception; which might be a very injurious reflection; and, at
best, a great indecency. -- But was there a tongue in the whole congregation of
Israel, though there were doubtless many false and unruly ones therein -- Was
there a tongue, so intemperate and slanderous, as to lisp a word against
SAMUEL, or his integrity? No! All the people answered as one man, Thou have not
defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's
hand. And he said unto them, The Lord is witness against you, and his anointed
is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they
answered, He is witness. Ver. 4, 5.
-- O happy! O venerable man! so long the chief judge and magistrate in Israel,
with so much opportunity and power to do iniquity; yet steady in the practice
of all righteousness, till thy reverend head was covered with the snow of age;
and then approved by the united voice of thy own conscience, thy country, and
thy God! -- Happy, venerable SAMUEL! --

It might naturally have been expected, that at the death and burial of such a
judge, such a patriot in Ramah, there would be a voice heard, lamentation and
weeping, and great mourning, [like that of] Rachel weeping for her children,
when she would not be comforted Matt. II.16.17.18. Rama and Ramah were the same
city.
: Or like that, when the bloody tyrant, Herod, commanded the children to be
slain. It would have been indeed strange, if all Israel had not lamented when
SAMUEL died; when they were assembled to bury him, and his venerable remains
were before their eyes, to be reposited in the silent tomb, not to awake till
the last day; though then to arise all glorious, mortality being swallowed up of
victory!

Their lamenting him thus, was but the natural consequence of that high and
just veneration which they had for him while living; which was so great, that
on a certain occasion we find it expressed in the very remarkable manner
following: All the people greatly feared the LORD and SAMUEL. Sam. XII.18.
And let me here just remind you of two or three other passages, wherein he is
mentioned with the highest honor, in company with the most renowned persons of
antiquity. So in Psalm XCIX. Moses and Aaron among the priests, and SAMUEL
among them that call upon his name. And in Jeremiah XV, at the beginning, God
seems to express his anger against his people for their iniquities in the
strongest manner possible, almost, by saying, that though Moses and SAMUEL
stood before him, [as intercessors for them] yet his mind could not be toward
this people: Cast them out of my sight, and let them go --! Thus also SAMUEL is
mentioned, Hebrews XI, amongst those, "of whom the world was not worthy." --
The time would ^ail me, says the apostle, to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and
of Sampson, and of Jepthae, of David also and of SAMUEL; -- who through faith
subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, etc. These a^^ obtained a good report
through faith; and died therein; even in the hope of "obtaining a better
resurrection."

BUT it is time for us to make a transition (indeed a very easy one) from
SAMUEL, the renowned judge of Israel, to that most worthy judge, whom the last
evening we attended to "the house appointed for all the living"; at least,
whatever was mortal of him. -- And since, upon similar occasions, people
usually expect some short historical account of the deceased, especially if a
person of such eminence; rather than disappoint any, I will begin with a few
words concerning the birth and parentage of this excellent person; though these
are matters of much less importance than most others which I have to say of
him; and which, in the mean time, are pressing, as it were, to be the foremost.

The late chief justice SEWALL was honorably descended; to use a common phrase,
though one hardly applicable, in strictness, to any of the degenerate race of
mankind. He was of a family of distinction in New England. Nor was he the first
of the name of SEWALL, who sustained the same titles and offices. The honorable
SAMUEL SEWALL, Esquire his uncle, had before for many years, been chief justice of
the province, and a member of his majesty's council; a gentleman, eminent in
his day for his learning, piety, and great probity. Since delivering this
discourse, the author has been informed, that the late Rev. Mr. Prince chose
the character of Samuel to be the ground of his funeral sermon on that
venerable gentleman; which discourse was published; but which the author of
this, has not, so far as he remembers, had the pleasure of reading.
The father of the late judge SEWALL, was STEPHEN SEWALL, Esquire of Salem; on all
accounts a very worthy, respectable gentleman; and universally so esteemed in
his time He was the county-register, a very noted justice of the peace, a major
in the militia, and captain of the fort at Salem: all which posts he sustained
with great reputation and honor.
. His mother was a daughter of the Rev'd and celebrated Mr. JONATHAN MITCHEL,
pastor of the church in Cambridge; a gentlewoman of great virtues, and uncommon
accomplishments. His parents were blessed with seventeen children; diverse of
whom, besides the late judge, were persons of distinction, and of great worth
in public life. Particularly the late Major Samuel Sewall, Esquire of Boston, and
Mitchel Sewall, Esquire late of Salem.
He was the youngest, except one, of many brethren; and was born in December
1702. Being duly prepared, he was admitted into Harvard-College in Cambridge,
in the year 1717, when he was in the 15th year of his age.

He was a "plant of renown" in that seminary of learning, even from the time of
his being transplanted into it from an inferior school. He was early
distinguished by the sprightliness and brillancy of his genius, and by the
rapid progress which he made in academical learning: which, in conjunction with
an agreeable person, a cheerful, affable disposition, and singular delicacy of
manners, rendered him at once the delight, and the admiration, of that society.
And although he was, of the two, rather of a gay than of a grave turn, yet this
was never indulged to excess; but always restrained within the rules of virtue,
and a strict decorum. His morals were still unblemished; and his life, not only
inoffensive, but exemplary. This is not said at random, or as a thing of
course; but upon the authority of those who were cotemporary with him in that
society. So that there is reason to think, he truly feared God from his youth.

On his leaving that school of the sons of the prophets, soon after receiving
the first public honors of it at the usual time, anno 1721, when he was
considered as one of the brightest scholars it had ever produced, he took up
his residence in one of our seaport towns M^^^^ead.
. Here his fine talents were for some time very usefully, though humbly employed,
in keeping a school. For, besides that his patrimony could not be great, as may
easily be supposed, he never thought himself above doing any thing, by which he
might be serviceable in the world. And he was in high esteem amongst the
gentlemen of that town; who, as all wise and good men have ever done,
considered rather the person and his accomplishments, than the sphere in which
he acted.

However, at the expiration of about three or four years (for I do not exactly
know the time) he returned to Cambridge, and betook himself to a collegiate
life; where he pursued his studies with great success, and a growing fame: For
while he was thus a student at the college, he was esteemed one principal
ornament and honor to it.

After residing therein a suitable time; and when, besides other very valuable
acquirements in the literary way, he had made great proficiency in sacred
learning, and the study of theology, he became a preacher of the gospel,
ministering before the Lord and his people; though not while "a child," as SAMUEL
did, and as some others since, without SAMUEL's extraordinary call, or
qualifications, have presumed to do. -- It were almost needless to observe,
that his public performances as a preacher of the gospel, were truly excellent:
For such a genius, so cultivated and matur'd, joined with a good, devout and
warm heart, like his, could, certainly, produce nothing but what was so. He
was, without doubt, one of the most accomplished preachers of his time; and was
acknowledged as such by all competent and unprejudiced judges, especially by
the best. It was indeed his felicity in every station and capacity, a felicity
almost peculiar to him, to be most esteemed and honored by the wisest and
worthiest men, while all others, even the common people, could not but see and
acknowledge his superior merit.

He was at length, upon a vacancy, in the year 1728, chosen a tutor of the
college, where he was still a resident: A station, for which his talents were
uncommonly adaped; and which he continued to fill several years, without laying
aside that sacred employment wherein he had before been engaged. However, after
some time, he laid that wholly aside; devoting himself to the discharge of his
trust as a tutor of the college. And, as may easily be concluded, he, who was
so bright an ornament of that learned society, even during the time of his own
pupillage, and before his years of puberty were past, shone with a very
distinguished luster in the capacity of one of the governors and instructors of
it; when he had attained to such a maturity of age; when he had been all along
adding to his great stock of learning and knowledge, and had also gained
considerable experience. Aetat 26.


His genius and talents, as before observed, were wonderfully adapted to this
employment. And it was in this capacity, that some of his excellent endowments,
both natural and acquired, appeared to more advantage than they had ever done,
or could, in any other, wherein he had acted before. It was in this station,
that his learning, before indeed well known, became still more conspicuous; and
not only his learning, but his great happiness and facility in teaching, and
communicating knowledge: Both, now displayed themselves to the full, there
being proper scope for them; while he took a pleasure, not in an ostentatious
discovery of his own superior talents, but in making them useful to others. It
was in this capacity, that his admirable spirit of government became manifest
to all. It was in this capacity, that his exquisite prudence and discretion
became more apparent, by his manner of conducting toward the youth of that
society, in the happiest medium between too much austerity and rigor on one
hand, and remissness, or familiarity on the other. In this station he, at least
continued to discover a great, inviolable regard, to religion and virtue. I
say, "at least continued" to do so; because it was, perhaps, hardly possible to
discover that particular quality in this station, more plainly than he had done
before. However, he now made it one principal part of his care, to guard his
pupils against the snares of vice; and to form their minds, as far as this was
in the power of man, to the love of piety and virtue. In doing which, he
neglected neither the most kind, serious and pathetic counsels on one hand, nor
the exercise of his authority on the other, whenever there was a proper
occasion and call to employ it. In this station he showed, in a way almost
peculiar to himself, how consistent the most resolute and vigorous exertion of
authority is with the most courteous, condescending temper of mind, and the
most gentle, complacent manners. For I believe he had hardly a pupil so
abandoned, as not at once to love him as his best friend, and to revere him as
a father; I had almost said, as his guardian angel! Vice turned pale, trembled,
and fled at his frown; or even at the cast of his countenance without one.
Virtue approached, exulted, and was improved at his smile: while learning and
arts flourished under his eye in that seminary, like the goodly flowers in Eden
under the warm, all-enlivening beam of heaven. And there are now amongst us
many persons, great blessings both in the church and state, as well as in more
common life, who had the happiness to receive their education immediately under
him. In one word, I believe there is no person, however worthy, who would think
his own merit impaired, or his honor touched, if it should be added, that
considering his station in the college, and the time he continued therein, that
learned society never enjoyed a greater blessing and ornament in any one man,
than in Mr. SEWALL. And I can hardly think of him in this station, without
having my thoughts carried back to SAMUEL at Naioth, amongst the sons of the
prophets, as one "appointed over them." The author of this discourse did not
indeed enter into the college, till the year after Mr. Sewall left it: But
nothing is said above, but upon good authority.


While Mr. SEWALL was a resident at the college, more especially toward the
latter part of the time, he applied himself to the study of the law, as much as
he well could without neglecting the proper duties of his station; in the
discharge whereof he was ever diligent and faithful. This he did with a view to
changing his manner of life, and betaking himself to the bar. And only to have
mentioned his applying his mind in any measure to this study, is equivalent to
saying, that he soon acquired a very considerable knowledge in the law. For his
genius was so piercing, and his natural penetration at once so deep and quick,
that no science, however crabbed, intricate or involved, could long make
opposition thereto In whatever he engaged, he became a considerable proficient
therein, as it were at once: so surprisingly quick was his apprehension of
things; so clear his head; so acute and deep his discernment.

Being thus qualified, he was, in the year 1739, called from his collegiate,
into an higher sphere of life; viz. to take a seat on the bench of the
superior court of judicature for the province. This was done without his
making any interest for it. -- And it was well for his country that many
persons, and amongst them, gentlemen of authority and influence in the
government, were acquainted with his great abilities and merit; to which he
himself ever appeared more a stranger than any other person, who had any
knowledge of him. And SAMUEL's being clothed with a civil character, after
being some time in other employments, is here brought to mind --

In this new station he became more generally known, and therefore more
generally esteemed; as well as, perhaps, more extensively useful. His wisdom
and integrity were so conspicuous herein, and gave him such an acknowledged
preeminence, that on the death of the honorable and learned chief justice
DUDLEY, he was, in 175^, appointed to succeed him in that important office, to
the general satisfaction, and even joy of the province; although he was not the
senior of the then worthy surviving judges.

This promotion, which was not only unsollicited, but even opposed by himself,
without altering his mind or manners in the least, still enlarged the sphere of
his influence; that influence, which was ever useful just so far as it
extended; being never employed, but in doing good, or preventing evil; which is
in effect the same thing. He sustained this high office with the reputation of
great wisdom, and of strict fidelity. He also supported the dignity of it, by
his conduct in it. For, though he was truly a most humble and modest man; yet he
well knew what was due to his station. Nor did he, by any means, want the
resolution to maintain, and to vindicate the honor of it, as occasion required.
He had indeed the quickest, as well as the exactest sense, of true honor: And
he discovered in this capicity, from first to last, that admirable spirit of
government which was mentioned before on another occasion. He preserved a great
decorum in the court: He moderated the debates with a becoming calmness and
dignity, in conjunction with a strict impartiality: Showing himself at once the
man of honor and spirit, the knowing lawyer, and the upright judge.

Although his reputation was great, even at his first coming upon the bench, it
was daily growing till the time when heaven was pleased to take him from it. He
was both "a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that did well," in the
administration of justice; in which he went from one part of the country to
another, like a second SAMUEL. And, where "his return was," we all know. Nor is
there the least reason to doubt, but that he might to the very last, have
appealed to the whole province, as SAMUEL did to all Israel, boldly challenging
them to witness any wrong, or unrighteousness in him, in the very language of
that good judge: -- Whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose
hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? mdash; And had he
done so, this whole people in general, unless they had been less grateful and
just than the Israelites (who were not, however, very remarkable for those
virtues) would doubtless have answered as they did -- Thou have not defrauded
us, nor oppressed us; neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand. Yea, it
may be questioned, whether ever any person amongst us, was so impudent as to
make an attempt upon his honor, by the offer of a bribe. For his heart was not
only incapable of admitting the least venality, or corruption of this sort; but
universally known to be so; and more immutably fixed to the love of justice,
than the needle to the pole: For even that varies and deviates; and may, at any
time, be shaken from its proper point to a contrary direction: While his
justice appeared as unmovable as the "everlasting hills;" or rather, pursued
its appointed course in his circuit, like the undeviating sun in the firmament
of heaven. -- Justice must, however, be here understood, only in
contradistinction to wrong, injury, or positive injustice; and not, as it is
some times, in opposition to mercy and compassion. For in criminal matters, I
believe he always inclined to the side of clemency and mercy, where there was
legal room for the exercise of them; and whenever severity was not apparently
necessary for the common good, which he still kept in view: Herein imitating
the supreme governor of the world, who does not "willingly," much less
wantonly, afflict and grieve the children of men; but, either for their own
profit, or for the preservation of order, and public good; that others may see
and fear, and not do so wickedly.

It must not be forgotten here, that soon after he was promoted to the
important trust of chief justice, he was elected a member of his Majesty's
council for the province; and continued to be so elected every year
successively to the last. He had indeed been in nomination for a seat at that
honorable board several years before; and many worthy persons were very
pressing and urgent in the affair. But he himself made opposition to it; and
this, partly at least, because he doubted the expediency of his being at once a
judge of the court, and at the council table; thinking that, hereby, he might
be brought "into temptation and a snare;" or, in plain words, subject himself
to some undue influence. This may be depended on as a certain fact. So
extremely tender, so delicate was his conscience; so nice his sense of honor;
and so great his diffidence of himself! He therefore utterly declined all
proposals of this sort, and persisted therein, that he might keep himself as
independent as possible. However, his friends, who knew him incapable of being
unduly biased by any means or circumstances whatever; and were satisfied, he
would be very serviceable at the board, would not desist: And he was
accordingly elected a member of the council, against all the opposition he
could well make. Nor was it without considerable difficulty, that he was
finally prevailed upon to drop his objections, and to accept, after he was
chosen.

Thus, like SAMUEL of old, after having been many years a judge, he became one
of the king's council. And at that honorable board, as in every other capacity,
he showed himself the wise and upright man: And not only so; for he was one of
eminent distinction amongst others of the same character. This was more
especially the sphere in which his patriotism discovered itself. For while he
was strictly loyal, and attached to the present royal family on
revolution-principles (which were also the principles of SAMUEL;) while he was
steady, on one hand, in asserting the rights of the crown, and of his Majesty's
governor; he was, on the other hand, a most zealous friend to his country, its
laws and liberties. If at any time things were in agitation, as they sometimes
were, which he apprehended inconsistent with, or hazardous to, the just rights
and liberties of the people, or prejudicial to them in any other respect; he
had always the integrity and magnanimity to oppose such measures, whoever
appeared as the first promoters, or compliant fautors, of them. Nor did he fear
to give his negative to the nominations to civil offices, whenever he conceived
the persons nominated, to be wholly unsuitable for, or unworthy of them. In one
word, he used, to the best of his judgment at all times, freely to give his
advice to the governor, for the good management of the public affairs of this
government. The words of the oath taken by the members of his Majesty's council
for this province.
This he ever gave in the integrity of his heart, without fear, favor, or
criminal prejudice. And though it might be too much to say of any man, that he
was never, in any respect, mistaken in his judgment; yet there have probably
been but few men in the world, less incident to such mistakes, than the
honorable person of whom I am speaking.

It should be remembered here, that, as a member of his Majesty's council, he
was one of the overseers of the college: At which board he was eminently
serviceable, by his superior knowledge in literary matters; and by what
experience had taught him concerning the best methods of instructing and
governing that society, while he was a tutor in it.

But, if you please, we will for the present take our leave of the excellent
scholar, the accomplished, upright judge, the wise and faithful counselor, the
loyal subject, and zealous patriot; provided we can, for a moment, separate
these ideas and characters from this extraordinary person; and consider him
only in his private capacity. And here we have presented to our view, the most
agreeable companion, the accomplished gentleman, the warm, discrete and
faithful friend, a good master and neighbor, a person of uncommon candor, and
an exemplary christian.

He was the most agreeable companion, and an accomplished gentleman. He was the
most remote from all appearances of vanity and affectation. He was of a very
social and courteous make; and his manner of address was particularly engaging.
His conversation was often instructive, always sprightly and entertaining; and
indeed never failed to charm. He "honored all men;" treated every one with due
respect, and never gave cause of offense or uneasiness to any, whether present
or absent, by words or actions: of which he was very singularly cautious. His
behavior was polished, his manners refined; and had in them that peculiar
delicacy, which all can see and admire, but none can exactly describe. His
countenance, his whole air and mien, struck at once, if I may so express it;
and attracted the esteem and regard of the spectator, by telling even his eyes,
what kind of soul informed the body which he saw before him: While he conversed
with people, both of the lowest and highest ranks, without the least tincture
of haughtiness on one hand, or of meanness on the other.

He was a warm, discrete and faithful friend. He could never be prevailed on to
discard, or even to neglect, any one, for whom he had professed a regard, on
mere suspicion, or rumors; or without examining things to the bottom. Nor was
he backward to advise on occasion, especially when his advice was asked; for
otherwise he was far from being forward or officious. Nor indeed do I doubt,
but that he was as willing to hear, as to give advice, though no man less needed
it; he being a kind of oracle to himself, though less so than he was to others.
He was extremely kind and obliging in his temper; and, in short, discharged all
the offices of friendship in general with the utmost punctuality, and the most
nice precision. -- It were needless, after saying thus much of him in the
capacity of a friend, to say any thing of him as a relation; only, that if any
should imagine he was not the very best and kindest, it would be a proof that
they knew but little of him --

He was a good master; no ways morose or austere; but as kind and indulgent as
was consistent even with the good of his servants; not to say, with the duty
and service which they owed to him; which were superfluous in speaking of so
reasonable and just a man. He treated all his domestics in a proper manner* who
must indeed have been very bad ones, had they not thought themselves happy in
such a master, as they doubtless did.

He was the best of neighbors; ever courteous and obliging. None of those who
lived near him, could help looking on it as a part of their felicity, that they
were i^ the neighborhood of such a person, even though they had no particular
knowledge of him: While those who knew him better, had proportionably an higher
sense of their happiness in this respect.

He was a person of uncommon candor. He did not only, not allow himself to
detract from the merit of any persons of real worth; but would not speak
contemptuously, or reproachfully, of the capacity, the accomplishments, or the
behavior of others, however just a foundation there might be for it. He
apparently took a pleasure in thinking and speaking well of all worthy persons;
and often found something to commend even in those, in whom others could find
nothing deserving commendation. But if there were any, the subject of
conversation, in whom he could find nothing praiseworthy, he would at least be
their apologist; striving to extenuate their faults by some means or other,
while others could hardly think of any thing but what seemed to be an
aggravation of them. This was really his temper and disposition.

And this brings me to what all truly wise and good men will acknowledge to be
the best part of his character: -- He was an exemplary CHRISTIAN. This, indeed,
is implied in what was said before, concerning the great regard which he all
along manifested to religion and virtue, while a student, and tutor at the
college; while a preacher of the gospel; and by his strict fidelity both as a
judge, and as a counselor. But it seemed proper to speak more particular of
his religion here, where we are considering him in his private capacity. -- He
appeared to have an habitual and deep reverence of almighty GOD upon his mind.
And I have more than once heard him speak with great pleasure of that
circumstance in the character of Sir MATTHEW HALE, chief justice of the king's
bench; That he was never known to mention the holy and venerable name of GOD --
without making a pause at it in his discourse. The same is said of Sir I.
Newton.
He was a firm believer in JESUS CHRIST, the son of GOD; and in that religion
which bears his name, as contained in the holy scriptures.

He was none of those who are too wise to be taught of God; too great to
worship and bow down before him, or too good and gracious to need the means of
grace. He constantly attended (as you, my brethren of this society, are
witnesses) He constantly attended the worship of God, and the ordinances of the
gospel, with great reverence, gravity and devotion: Which, though he was an enemy
to ostentation in every thing, and especially in religion, were sometimes so
apparent in his countenance, that one could not observe it without having his
own devotion raised and improved, if he had any: and hardly, if he had none
before, without catching thereby something of the same spirit from him. And as
he was exemplary in his attendance upon the public worship of God, I have some
particular reasons to assure myself, that he also worshipped God in his family;
having as it were, like SAMUEL, an altar at his own house, See as above 1 Samuel
VII.17.
on which to offer up spiritual sacrifices to the Lord: Though I have indeed
never made it my business to "creep into houses;" or to pry curiously into
peoples domestic concerns, like the heathen priests of old. Scire volunt
secreta domus, atque inde timeri. Pers.


He was a firm and zealous friend to the principles of religious liberty, and
the sacred rights of conscience. No man was more free from all superstition, or
from the sordid, illiberal spirit of party. No man was more catholic toward
christians of different denominations; or farther from a spirit of bigotry,
contention and censoriousness. It was before observed, that he was a firm
believer of the christian religion in general; and he was so in particular, of
the atonement made by the death of CHRIST for the sins of the world; and of
that life and immortality, brought to light by him through the gospel; in which
he expressed an humble hope, in my hearing, a few hours before he expired.

He appeared to have a great concern for the interest of christianity in the
world. And, by repeated conversations with him on the subject, I know he had
very much at heart the coming into some scheme, or method, for propagating the
gospel amongst the natives of these northern parts of America: Often expressing
his great sorrow that a certain SOCIETY beyond sea, had done nothing, or but
very little, to this important end; important, not only in a religious view of
things, but secondarily, in a civil and political.

But not to digress: His whole life in general was apparently conducted under
the influence, and according to the precepts, of our holy religion: Which is
the most authentic evidence, at least to others, of a person's being a thorough
christian. For men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles; and by
their fruits we are to know them. But if there was any one virtue more
conspicuous in this good man, than another, it seems to have been the charity
and bountifulness of his heart. And, by this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, says our Lord, if ye have love one to another. A more soft and
tender, a more sympathizing, or more bountiful heart, no man, perhaps, ever
had. He appeared, in reality, to "love his neighbor as himself." His heart
seemed, not only always open, but expanded wide; even wider than the earth, and
"broader than the sea." And had his fortune been of the same dimensions with
his soul, he would have been the common, public almoner, even without being
appointed by any, under God, to the discharge of that office; distributing, not
only to the necessities of the saints, but to every proper object of charity,
far and near. Great riches in his hands would indeed have been a common
blessing; and, by being thus dispersed abroad, and "given to the poor," like
incense continually ascending to heaven: And we know, that with such sacrifices
God is well pleased.

That this would have been his manner of employing riches, is sufficiently
evident by the use he made of what he had. F^r though his income was very
moderate, or, to speak more properly, quite scanty; and such as almost any
other person in his station, would have thought insufficient for his own
support in a manner suitable to it, even with the best economy; yet it is well
known, that of that small income he spent a large proportion in deeds of
charity and beneficence, from time to time. Often did the blessing of the poor,
and of him that was ready to perish, come upon him. Even in his narrow
circumstances, he was like Job in the days of his prosperity, "eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame." And how often has he caused the "widow's heart to
sing for joy!"

Let me here just mention one thing more, which amongst innumerable others,
plainly showed the goodness of his heart. In the exercise of his office as
chief justice, he had repeated occasions to pronounce sentence of death upon
malefactors. In doing which, though he did not forget, or lose, the firmness
becoming a judge; yet he always did it with such a visible concern for the
unhappy criminal, joined with such moving, pathetic counsels and admonitions,
as hardly ever failed to force sighs, and draw tears, from almost every person
present.

But there is not time to be more particular on the character of this excellent
and amiable man. These are the outlines of it, truly, though very imperfectly
drawn. To sum up all in a few words: Although I have known some very savage and
brutal persons; some very ignorant and stupid, and some very wicked and
abandoned ones; yet I never knew one so savage and brutal, as not to be
charmed, as it were, with the polished manners of judge SEWALL; so ignorant and
stupid, as not to see and acknowledge him to have been a wise man; or so wicked
and abandoned, as not to revere him as a good one; for I know a bad man cannot
really love a good one, as such. And the better title any had themselves, to
these characters of polished, wise and good, the more ready, proportionably,
they always were to give him the praise of them. Some other persons of great
abilities and merit, in different parts of the world, have not been generally
esteemed and beloved, because people did not know their true characters; and
had conceived some unreasonable prejudices against them. But it was his
felicity, or rather his country's, that he was known, and therefore esteemed
from the first, and still more at the last; so that the public had the benefit
of his superior talents. Many others in such eminent stations as his, have had
some to envy, and speak evil of them, to the lessening of their usefulness. But
it was his, and his country's felicity, that his abilities and virtues were at
least as conspicuous as his station: So as to exempt him from envy and
detraction, and to make the sphere of his influence very extensive.

Some, however, will perhaps curiously inquire, "Whether this man had no
faults?" -- If he had any, habitual to him, they were very uncommon ones for
this age of the world; for they consisted in the excess of these two virtues,
liberality and self-diffidence! And if, by the former, he seemed to injure
himself; yet at the same time he resembled the poor widow in the gospel, who of
her penury cast in unto the offerings of God, all the living which she had:
being commended by HIM who taught, that it is more blessed to give than to
receive; and who, although he were rich, yet for our sakes became poor. -- By the
latter of them, he may indeed have done a negative injury to others. For had he
had this quality of self-diffidence in a less degree, he might, possibly, have
been more of a leader than he seems to have been, in the affairs of the public;
from which, some additional advantages would probably have accrued to it. --
But how many persons, at least in other governments, have done almost
irreparable damage to the public, on the other hand, by their excess of
rashness, self-conceit and officiousness; by their presumption, and driving, as
it were, all before them? -- If that may be called a fault in him, which yet
admits of some doubt; this is, without any doubt, a crime in them; and will not
so readily be excused. But amongst all the various woes denounced against
different persons in scripture, there seems to be none which so much concerned
him, as that pointed against those, of whom every one speaks well. Luke VI.26.


It appears, I suppose, not to have been wholly without reason, that SAMUEL's
conduct and character were pitched on by way of introduction to the character
and conduct of that distinguished and eminent person, of whom I have been
speaking. For, was the former a fearer and servant of God even from his early
youth? We have reason to think the latter was so likewise. Was the former
brought up in the school of the sons of the prophets? So, in effect, was the
latter. Did the former, even in his youth, bid fair in due time to become a
signal blessing to his country? So did the latter. Did the former minister
before the Lord and his people in the sacred offices of religion? So did the
latter. Did the former become in time, an instructor and governor in that
college wherein he had received his education, and prove a great blessing to
it? So did the latter. Was the former at length clothed with the important
office of a judge? So was the latter. Did the former travel from place to place
in the discharge of this laborious trust? So did the latter. Did the former
worship the Lord in his own house, as well as in public? So did the latter. Did
the people "fear the LORD and Samuel?" But many of those who did not fear the
Lord, yet feared the latter, who was a terror to their evil works. Was the
former eminently faithful and upright, in the exercise of his authority? So was
the latter. Was the former at length one of the king's council? So was the
latter. Was the former a true patriot; a lover of his country, its laws and
liberties; and an enemy to all tyranny and tyrants? So was the latter. Was the
former in all respects a worthy, good and amiable person? So was the latter.
Were the great merits, and public services of the former, acknowledged by all
the people in general? So were those of the latter. Did the former continue all
the days of his life in the faithful discharge of his important trust? So did
the latter. Was the former justly and universally lamented at his death? So is
the latter --

Thus far the parallel seems to hold in general, without using any unnatural
violence; though it will not do so in some other respects. SAMUEL, for example,
had children, who gave him trouble by their ill behavior; but the other had
none. And yet how many persons have in him lost a father! while he has obtained
a "name better than that of sons or of daughters"; far better indeed, than that
of such as some of SAMUEL's Judge SEWALL died a Bachelor.
.

SAMUEL was, moreover, a prophet of the Lord, being immediately inspired by
him. Such was not the latter. But yet he saw, heard and believed those things,
of which many prophets and righteous men, and kings in those remote ages,
understood but little at most. And indeed the father of spirits gave him such a
genius as, I had almost said, might supply the place of inspiration! But this
would be extravagant. -- However, his great knowledge can hardly be said to
have been acquired by little and little, in the ordinary way, and by much
pains: It was rather a kind of immediate intuition; such as we may suppose in
some beings of an higher order. It was so quick, clear and piercing, that, like
the lightning, it extended in a moment to all parts under heaven, the origin
and source of both.

But there is another thing, wherein the parallel fails: For SAMUEL lived till
he was far advanced in years; and died in old age, when, as we may naturally
suppose, the common infirmities of it had rendered him almost incapable of
serving the public any longer -- But the other, alas! died at an age, Aetat. 58.
when he might probably have been a great public blessing for many years
longer, had heaven spared him to us -- However, in what does honorable old age
consist? Does it stand in length of time? or is it only measured by number of
years? Does it not rather consist in piety, virtue, and doing many and great
public services? In short, is not wisdom the gray hair unto men; and an
unspotted life, old age? If we measure the life of that excellent man, whose
death we now mourn, by this standard (which we find in the Wisdom of Solomon;)
though we cannot say, perhaps, that he lived so long as SAMUEL, yet we may justly
say, that but few persons have lived so long in the world as he, at least in
this country; or died in such a good old age.

However, we justly lament him dead; because, had his life been preserved, he
might have probably continued a great public blessing many years longer. And
the manner in which his funeral rites were attended the last evening, is a
sufficient proof that what has been said of him, is, in general, the sense of
the public -- But the will of heaven is done; and shall not the JUDGE OF ALL
THE EARTH do right!

If he who has been faithful over a few things, is to be made ruler over many
things, how highly must we suppose this eminently faithful servant of God, will
be exalted, entering into the joy of his Lord at the last day? Yea rather, how
happy? how highly exalted, may we suppose him to be already? All that was
mortal of him (an inconsiderable part) is indeed reposited in the tomb, not to
arise till the heavens shall be no more. But his righteousness shall endure,
when they are "folded up and changed!" Methinks I saw him, when the law of
death was once satisfied in him, convoyed by those "ministering spirits, who are
sent forth to minister to the heirs of salvation", to the paradise of God;
himself no more a frail man, but an angel; a bright, glorious and immortal
spirit, even "as a flame of fire"! And this, without any great change IN HIM.
There was little more needed, than to set SUCH a soul at liberty from it is
encumbrance and prison, the body.

Hail then, Immortal Spirit! (whether man or angel, the difference is not
great) Immortal Spirit, hail! No longer encumbered with mortality, or confined
to earth and darkness: But introduced among the spirits of just men made
perfect; to the innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly, and
church of the firstborn in heaven; to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant,
and to God the judge of all! In his light to see light, and to drink joy and
immortality, not at the shallow streams, but at the fathomless fountain
thereof! -- And thou, Precious dust! or lifeless body, soon to become dust,
rest thou in hope! For even thou shall in due time hear the voice of the Son of
God, and live; fashioned like unto his own glorious body: When, at furthest,
ALL they that have died in the Lord, shall also be equal unto the angels; and
shall be the children of God, being the children of the RESURRECTION! Luke
XX.36.
.

They who had no very particular knowledge of judge SEWALL, may perhaps suspect
that I have spoken of him in a style extravagantly hyperbolical. But I am in no
pain lest others, who had the happiness of a thorough acquaintance with him,
should think me chargeable with this. The memory of such eminently wise, just
and good men, ought indeed to be blessed; not in the frigid language of
indifference, but in all that ardor of expression, which naturally flows from
an heart truly sensible of their worth, and deeply touched by their loss. And
it seems but equitable and congruous, that HE, who never spoke evil of any one,
but honored all men, and delighted in giving all their due share of praise;
should, at least when he is dead and gone, be praised by all in his turn; and
so much the rather, because he would not willingly suffer any one to commend
him while living; which was the truth as to this excellent person.

THe assembly has been detained so long already, that I must be much more brief
than I intended in those reflections, with which this discourse is now to be
closed.

We may justly consider the death of this truly worthy person, as a common,
public loss; and a great frown of divine providence upon the whole province.
The loss of such a person in such a station, is doubtless a public calamity;
and great, in proportion to the extensiveness of the blessing once enjoyed in
him; who was such a friend to learning and religion; such a lover of his
country, it is liberties and laws; who scattered the wicked with his eye; who
stopped the mouth of iniquity; and, under God, caused judgment to flow down as
a river. In short, in what one person among us, could the republic of letters,
the law, the courts of justice, the commonwealth, the church of God, have
sustained a greater loss Persons of a superior rank ought always to be supposed
excepted, when this manner of expression is used.
? Nor are we, I hope, so degenerate as the people of Israel were, at the time
when it was said, -- The righteous dies, and no man lays it to heart. No! we
all in general lay to heart the death of this one righteous man, at least. And
it may be questioned, whether ever a person died among us, before him, at once
more universally, and more sincerely, lamented. There is not, I believe, an
heart but what feels this loss in some degree: For, indeed, that man who is
wholly insensible of it, if there be such an one, cannot be said to have any
heart at all; at least not an "heart of flesh", but only an "heart of stone",
or of iron; an heart insensible to every thing worthy, great and good.

But we ought not only to consider the loss it self; we should, as was
intimated before, consider the holy hand and providence of God therein. God, by
the prophet Isaiah, amongst some other sore calamities which he brought, or
threatened to bring, on his people of old for their sins, speaks of taking away
such eminent persons; and leaving their places to be filled up by those who are
wholly unequal to them: Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils: for
wherein is he to be accounted of? For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does
take away from Jerusalem and from Judah -- the judge, and the prophet, and the
prudent -- the honorable man, and the counselor -- and the eloquent orator.
And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them
Isai. II. 22.
. We have now before us a very striking example of the judgment expressed in
the former part of this passage. God, of his great goodness, grant that the
latter part thereof may never be verified in Us! May He in mercy return to us,
and heal the breach which his hand has made: For with him is "the residue of
the spirit;" the spirit of wisdom and prudence, of justice and judgment, and of
a sound mind. Our suitably considering his holy providence in this grievous
visitation of it, may be a means of conciliating his favor. And if gracious
heaven shall please hereafter to give us such judges and counselors as the
last deceased, I think we need not pray for such as were at the first: Which is
said, however, without the least intention to reflect on the memory of any of
the worthy fathers of this country.

There are, to be sure, but very few persons, equally qualified in all respects
to fill that important station, which is now left vacant by the death of judge
SEWALL. Nor will saying this, I am persuaded, give the least offense to any;
particularly, not to the honorable, and very worthy SURVIVING judges of that
bench, who have all along manifested the greatest regard for their dear brother
deceased; who are amongst the sincerest mourners for him; and who are now
paying a public honor to his memory, by their presence here, on this occasion.
THEY will doubtless be excited, by this dispensation of providence, to great
fidelity in the discharge of their important trust; pursuing the steps of their
departed brother with zeal and vigor: Being thus reminded of their own
mortality, and of an HIGHER TRIBUNAL, to which all who are judged here below,
have a right of appeal; and the judgment of which will be DECISIVE!

The college, as well as the general assembly, and the superior court of
judicature for the province, is particularly concerned in this visitation of
divine providence; considering how long the Deceased was a great blessing and
ornament to it, while he resided therein; the great concern which he always
manifested since, for the interest of learning and religion there; and his
great abilities, and equal zeal to serve it, in the capacity of one of its
overseers.

The relatives of the Deceased, those of them that are present, will allow me
to exhort them while they sorrow, not to "sorrow as those that have no hope:"
-- And also, while they mourn the Dead, to live as he lived; in expectation of
a joyful meeting with him another day; when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. In which
thrice glorious day, that will be in a measure applicable to each one of
Christ's faithful followers, which he once spoke of himself, and indeed still
speaks to us all from heaven: -- I am HE that lives, and was dead; and
behold I am ALIVE FOREVERMORE, Amen! Rev. I.18.


We, my brethren of this assembly, have some particular reasons to lay the
death of this excellent man to heart; and to attend to the voice of providence
therein. He, for many years, came up to this house of the Lord in company with
us, to worship at his footstool. We have in him lost, not only an hearty friend
to this society; but a wise and prudent adviser on all occasions, a principal
ornament and pillar of it. But you will remember that a "pillar," and the
"foundation," the head of the corner, or "chief cornerstone," are not the same
thing, or of equal importance to a building; whether a material or spiritual
house. The former mentioned, though indeed a noble "pillar," while it stood
erect, was yet a decaying one: It is now, alas! fallen quite down, soon to
moulder away, and be reduced to powder and dust; so as never to afford us any
farther support! But the "foundation," the "head of the corner," still remains
unshaken, unimpaired, an ever "living stone," able to bear up the whole
building. For WE, I trust, were not built, neither did, or do we depend, for
our main support, on any mortal man. We were built on a broad and firm
foundation; even on the foundation of the prophets and apostles, JESUS CHRIST
HIMSELF being the chief cornerstone: To whom coming as unto a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, we also as lively
stones shall be built up in HIM, a spiritual house, an holy temple in the Lord,
for an habitation of God through the spirit; that we may offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And, I trust, the gates of hell
shall never prevail against us: For other foundation [or better] can no man lay!

Let us therefore, my beloved brethren, take encouragement to ourselves under
this bereaving stroke of divine providence; and "stand fast in the Lord." Let
us neither despise this chastening of the Lord, nor yet faint, being thus
rebuked of him. Let us not despond; let us not be weary or faint in our minds,
while we look unto Jesus, the AUTHOR and FINISHER of OUR FAITH; whom God has
made head over all things to the church. And let us live in the observance of
all his commandments: For, as you well know, he compares those that hear his
sayings, and do them not, to a foolish man that "builds his house upon the
sand;" which will fall at last, and great will be its fall! But those that hear
and do them, he likens, on the contrary, to a wise man that "builds his house
upon a rock;" which defies all rains, and winds, and storms, and floods, from
whatever quarter they come, and shall never fall; for it is founded upon a
rock: And, to apply the words of the apostle, spoken with particular reference
to another point -- "That rock is CHRIST."

To conclude: While I was speaking so particularly above, of the character and
virtues of that good man, whose loss we all deplore, I considered myself, not
merely as paying a small part of that tribute and honor which are justly due to
his memory; but as reminding you, my brethren, and this whole assembly, of your
duty; thinking you would, of course, be excited to imitate the virtues which
were so conspicuous in him. For you will remember, that although we are not all
judges, or counselors, and do not act in the same spheres of life that he did;
yet we are all bound, in our own, to practice the very same virtues, which he
did in his; the same piety toward God, by a due regard to his house and
worship, and in other respects; the same justice, beneficence and charity
toward man; the same humility and courtesy; the same condescension and
goodness to all. For though our blessed Lord is our primary, and great, and
most perfect example; yet we are admonished to follow others also, wherein they
followed him; and to be followers of all them, who through faith and patience
inherit the promises. This good man is taken away; possibly from the evil to
come on us who survive: We know not. But certainly the warning voice of this
providence to us all, is, "Be ye also ready:" -- Boast not yourselves of
tomorrow; for ye know not what a day may bring forth. -- If we truly fear God,
and serve him in holiness and righteousness, as this good man did, his late
departure from us will not prove a final adieu! We shall see him again; not
indeed in this state of darkness, affliction and trial; but we shall be
presented together with him before the presence of God with exceeding joy, and
with crowns of glory from his hand. But as there is one glory of the sun,
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; and as even one star
differs from another star in glory: So also is the resurrection of the dead.
-- When therefore God himself, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness
at all, shall shine on all the blessed in heaven, we may well suppose that his
servant lately deceased, will appear with a distinguished luster and glory;
even though all the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father.

Now unto HIM, the GOD, the JUDGE, the FATHER OF ALL, who only has
immortality; dwelling in light that mortal men cannot approach unto, whom no
man has seen, or can see, and live; of whom, and through whom, and to whom are
all things: -- Even unto HIM be given all glory and honor, dominion, and
blessing, and praise, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord, AMEN!
