RULES RELATING TO SUCCESS IN TRADE, etc.

By RICHARD LUCAS, D. D. [Taken from his Enquiry after HAPPINESS.]



BOSTON, N. E. Printed and Sold by B. Mecom, at the New Printing-Office, near
the Townhouse.

RULES of Success in TRADE.
MY latter years have been spent mostly among the trading part of mankind; and
I have received many obligations from them: and I think myself bound to do them
this right, to let the world know, that I have found more honor and gratitude,
more clearness and integrity amongst this sort of men, than I ever could
amongst others, whose quality and education raised my expectations higher: it
will be therefore no small satisfaction to me, if any endeavors of mine can
render them any considerable service.

There is no condition of life free from temptations and difficulties, apt to
embroil our happiness, and infect our innocence, and therefore neither this of
traders; the evils they are subject to, may be reduced to two heads; their
miscarrying in trade, or in religion. I will therefore begin with such rules as
may serve to prevent the former, and then proceed to such as concern the latter.

If we trace the ruin of such as fail or break, back to its original, we shall
find it generally to be either idleness or pride. Idleness, the parent of all
sottish vices; pride, the parent of expensive follies and ruinous projects. I
will therefore lay down these two rules as the foundations of the trader's
secular prosperity. First, That he must be diligent and industrious. Secondly,
That he must not be above his profession.

1. He must be diligent and industrious. You seem born for industry; and though
some pretend to be sent into the world only to enjoy a fortune, it is plain you
are first to raise one* and though there may be some fortunate men in the world,
that seem to thrive rather by chance than virtue, and owe more to the care of
others than their own; yet, I am sure, in the ordinary methods of providence,
diligence and industry are the highway to wealth and plenty; virtue and
sobriety to wise and secure enjoyments. And I know not with what confidence men
can promise themselves the blessing and favor of God on any other terms. He
has made nothing on purpose to be idle and useless: the heavenly bodies never
cease to yield their light and influence, nor the terrestrial ones their fruit.
We ourselves do subsist by a continual motion; and should our blood and spirits
grow dull and sluggish, our life must needs expire with their activity. Man is
born to labor as the sparks fly upward; our capacities and endowments destine
and urge us to it, the necessities and wants of this needy beggarly state (in
which nature, how kind soever it was to the golden age, does not furnish us
with any thing, without art and industry) exact and demand it, and the laws of
human society oblige us to it: for it is but fit that every one should
contribute his shot for the entertainment of the public; and that he should
not, like a drone, be feasted and maintained by the labor and travail of
others. And so far, lastly, is Christianity from abrogating this law of nature,
that it earnestly enforces it. Let ours learn to maintain good works for
necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful; that is, that they be not a shame
and burden to themselves and families, to the commonwealth, or Christian
profession. Propose not then (I address myself here to apprentices and
beginners) propose not to exempt yourselves from that universal law of labor
and travail to which the whole creation is subject; you especially who lie
under more immediate and particular obligations to it. It is an unaccountable
folly for one, who is to make his fortune in the world, to apply himself to
trade, rather as a diversion than a business, and to design it only as a
support and fund for sloth and luxury. It is madness and frenzy in any one to
propose to be Master of his time before he is Master of his trade; and to
indulge his pleasures, before he has made provision to defray the expense of
them; and yet this, I doubt, is too, too general a practice. Whereas, would
young men consider the matter aright, they would find that they do but prevent
their pleasures, by gathering them before they are ripe; and do but make their
troubles and vexations endless, by indulging their ease and laziness too soon.
Contradictious projects! to propose at once to live idly, and yet to thrive! to
live pleasurably, and grow rich! it is true, there are many traders, who live
in much ease and plenty, and make a very handsome figure in the world, and it
is but fit there should be such. Trade is the support and ornament of kingdoms;
and no man of sense will any more envy the man of trade his wealth, than the
man of the sword his honor, or the man of letters and abilities his places and
preferments. But, if I could, I would have men grow up to all these by labor
and industry, by an apprenticeship of sobriety and virtue. I would have
enjoyment be the reward of merit. I would not have ease and pleasure be
ravished by the loose and unworthy; but regularly possessed by such as have
taken pains to purchase both, and have sense, experience, and virtue enough to
enjoy them.

Secondly, The trader must not be above his calling. Pride and vanity are
generally sworn enemies, both to the content and prosperity of traders; but
then it must be remembered, some are but lightly tinged, others more thoroughly
and deeply dyed with these vices. In some they produce only little comical
affectations and almost innocent excursions; but in others, very fatal
disorders and irregularities. There is no gracefulness in any motion that is
not natural. A man of low stature may add something to his height, but nothing
to his comeliness, by strutting upon stilts. Nor is there only an
ungracefulness, but an uneasiness in all affected motions. We are all a little
purblind and dim-sighted in this world; and therefore walk more securely in the
ways we are acquainted with. But, for my part, when an error is only comical,
and exposes men no further than to a little raillery and censure, it is scarce
worth my while to prescribe to it; and I cannot tell whether it be worth every
man's while to be at the charge of correcting a humor, which if it do a little
expose him, does yet please him too. The pride and ambition which I would
extirpate, is such a one as I have observed fatal to the tradesman's fortune
and repose; such as tempts him to despise and neglect his trade, or puts him
upon expenses which it cannot maintain, or engages him in bold or hazardous
projects. This is an error which I would fain reform; and methinks a few sober
reflections should here prevail. What, can it be sense to make a show abroad,
at the expense of your content and peace at home? what, is it not much better
to be modest and safe, to be humble and at ease, than to suffer daily anxieties
and perplexities, and to have your mind always upon the rack, how to answer and
satisfy the importunities of pride and vanity? It is worse yet when a short
piece of pageantry ends in perpetual infamy; when this importunant humor is
nourished by robbery and injustice, by fraud and cheat, committed upon widows
and orphans, acquaintance and friends, and the nearest relations. I must
confess, I am amazed to think, that any one's pride should be tickled by a
false and fatal grandeur, upheld only by wrong and injustice, and resolving in
a moment into indelible shame and unretrievable ruin. For my part, I should in
this case look upon bravery, not as the marks of greatness, but ornaments of a
sacrifice; not as the pomp of a triumph, but a funeral; and my luscious
morsels, how pleasing soever to my palate, would be ready to rise and recoil in
my stomach. As to those who seem to scorn their profession, I have but this to
say. Let them find out a more thriving one before they leave the old one,
before they desert the profession they were bred to, for its meanness. Let them
make sure of a more honorable employment; or else the scorn they load their
trade with, will be want of sense, not greatness of spirit; a lazy pride, not a
generous ambition. And, if so, I am sure there is no profession so mean as that
of sloth and looseness.

Sect. 2. The second sort of rules are such as concern the religion of the
trader or artisan: for it is to little purpose that he thrive in his secular,
if he run out in his Christian calling; for this is to be fortunate, and yet
miserable. Therefore, First, He must be sure that his calling be lawful.
Secondly, That it be carried on with truth, justice, and charity. Thirdly, That
his attendance on the business of this world, do not extinguish his concern for
a better; and his trade devour his religion, as Pharaoh's lean kine did the fat
ones. Fourthly, That he propose to himself proper and rational ends of trading.


First, He must be sure that his calling be lawful; that is, such as is neither
forbidden by any law of God, or the magistrate, nor does, in its own nature,
minister to vice. But that I may not perplex men's minds with unnecessary
scruples, and tempt them to doubt of the lawfulness of all trades, that are any
way made the instruments of sin and folly* you must know, some things minister
to sin directly and necessarily; others only accidentally, and not by the
immediate intention of the artist or trader, but the abuse of others. The
former sort of trades are unlawful in themselves, and no pretense can sanctify
the use of them: he that directly and immediately ministers to a sin,
communicates in the guilt of it; as he that purveys for the lust of others,
partakes of the sin of the adulterer and fornicator: but those which minister
not purposely and immediately, but accidentally, are yet in themselves lawful.
Nor shall the trader communicate in those abuses to which the lusts and
vanities of others prostitute them. Thus taverns are not unlawful, because
abused by intemperance; nor are all shops of clothing to be shut, because
thence people furnish themselves with such things as inflame their immodesty
and pride: the reason is plainly this, because the sin may be separated from
the trade; that wine, whose full draughts are by some made use of to the
defacing reason and enkindling lust, may as well refresh the weary and delight
the moderate; those garments which adorn the proud and wanton, may be made use
of to add a luster to greatness. The inconvenience would be insufferable, if
every profession which did but indirectly and casually administer to vice, were
therefore sinful: the courts of justice must be laid aside, because oftentimes
the bar and bench have contributed to oppress, injure, and rob in form of law.
The pulpit must be forever silenced, because men have sometimes sown the seeds
of sedition and slavery from hence. ^^il the arts, either of war or peace, have
sometimes served the cruelty of the one, and luxury of the other, and by
consequence would be banished out of all commonwealths. Yet here it must be
confessed, that the more or less tendency any trade has to the promoting vice,
it is in the same proportion the more or less comfortable. And that it imports
men, who love their peace and happiness more than gain, not to debauch their
callings themselves, by prostituting them to extravagancies and exorbitances:
and projecting profit from the intemperances and sins, that is, the ruin of
others: for it is not sufficient to the peace and comfort of a good man's mind,
that his calling be innocent, if his conduct of it be not so too.

Secondly, Trade ought to be managed with truth, justice and charity: for
without these it is only a more cleanly art of cheating or oppression; sins,
which I doubt, can receive but little excuse or mitigation from the custom and
practice of them: without these, trade cannot be regular and easy, nor gain
comfortable and delightful; since no man can have any confidence in the
protection of God, when the methods of his thriving are such as merit
vengeance, not a blessing. Nor can I see any thing that can betray men into
lying and knavery, but the want of true sense, as well as true faith; since
though many by under ways have more suddenly enriched themselves; yet it is
evident, that the wealth which is more regularly purchased, is more pleasant,
durable, and lasting; and that honest and equitable dealing is the surest, if
not the speediest way to wealth. Nor are there, I believe, many instances of
men, who, if they understood their business, have ever suffered much by their
uprightness and integrity in dealing; it being very hard to imagine, that a
trader should be a loser by those virtues which advance credit and reputation.
But however this be, I am not now enquiring after wealth, but happiness; to the
obtainment of which I am very positive, that the observation of these measures
is indispensible, since the contrary must needs pervert the mind, and entangle
life: and as they extinguish in the soul all sparks of honor and greatness; so
must they its courage and confidence, tranquillity and peace, which can result
from nothing, but the due moderation of our affections, and the conscience of
our integrity.

Thirdly, The trader's attendance on his calling must not discharge him from
his attendance on religion. It is true, it is commonly said, and generally
admited that the duty of every one's secular calling is a part of religion; but
this ought to be well understood, that so neither a veneration for religion
breed a neglect of your callings, nor an over fond opinion of the merit of
industry in your calling (as if all virtue were comprised in it) breed a
contempt of religion: it is fit therefore to put you in mind, that arts and
trades have not in themselves any direct or immediate tendency, either to the
improvement of reason, or the production of virtue; they minister to the
necessities of this world, not the glories of another; nor are they so much the
works of a rational and spiritual, as of a mortal and indigent being: from
whence it follows, that though they are necessary to the present state of things,
yet can they deserve to employ you no longer than either the public benefit or
private convenience require it; and that you are then only wisely taken up
about these, when neither your endowments nor fortunes capacitate you for a
relief more immediately and directly serviceable to the purposes of reason and
revalation: and finally, that the works of a secular profession are only
acceptable sacrifices to God, when consecrated by wise principles and virtues
cleaving to and mingling with them. Do not therefore think, that a pretense of
business can cancel your obligations to the duties of Christianity. If a man
could fancy, which I never can, business and religion incompatible; it is
evident which were to be preferred; since if God's will were so, it is much
better to be starved than to be damned. But without carrying the matter so far,
it is plain that virtue and religion, with a competency, render men abundantly
more happy than wealth can do, if attended with the neglect or contempt of
either: it is the riches of the mind make men great and happy; the ignorant and
irreligious can never be either. Let no man therefore think that he suffers any
damage, if he must maintain his virtue and religion by the diminution of his
trade; though I cannot comprehend that there can be a necessity of this: for I
have never yet observed any man so oppressed and overcharged with business, as
not to find time for pleasure, when he has pretended he could find none for
religion. In a word, the neglect of religion is capable of no excuse; not only
because your future, but present happiness, depends upon it. Modesty or
moderation, to curb a vain and ambitious thirst of wealth; faith or confidence
in the providence of God, to restrain you from mean, base and unlawful courses;
self-resignation to prevent anxiety, and those fears to which the
uncertainties, changes and revolutions of times and trade make men subject,
seem to me as necessary to the peace and happiness of a trader, as a competent
stock, industry or skill, can be to his worldly success or prosperity: and though
men who allow themselves no time, either for attendance upon public religion,
or private meditation, may talk finely of these virtues by way of notion and
speculation, it is impossible they should be really possessed of them. How can
he get wisdom that holds the plough, and that glories in the good, that
drives oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and whose talk is of bullocks?
which the author of Ecclesiasticus, by a parity of reason, extends further to
all traders and artisans, who are in like manner wholly taken up in their art.
I could therefore wish that those words of our Savior, What shall it profit a
man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, were writ in
capital letters in the most conspicuous place of the counting house, and the
shop, that you might ever and anon be put in mind, that there is one thing more
necessary, even than the diligent and prosperous management of the trade,
namely, religion. For to what purpose is it, that your books are well kept,
that there is order and regularity in the whole conduct of your trades, if at
the same time your neglected hearts lie, like the field of the sluggard waste,
and open, and overgrown with briers, and thorns, and weeds; or like the
confused stock of a careless or unskiful trader, which wastes and decays each
day? to what purpose is it that you be punctual dealers toward men, if you be
bankrupts toward God? to what purpose is it that you have credit and honor
upon the Change, if you be poor and beggarly, shameful and sneaking in
yourselves within, having your souls destitue of any true peace, wealth or
courage; and shift the accusations and importunities of conscience, as much as
a wretched debtor would a severe and inexorable creditor? ah! while you pursue
the world, forget not that there is a heaven; and while you make provision for
time, make some too for eternity: let your stating your accounts with men* put
you in mind of clearing your accounts with God; and let these two things never
be out of your thoughts; first, that it is God who gives man power to get
wealth; and next, that it is not a clear estate, but a clear soul that makes
man happy; I mean, a soul freed from silly and vile affections, and enriched
with a knowledge and love of God and goodness.

Fourthly, The trader must propose to himself proper and rational ends of
trading: for whoever proposes to himself vain and false ones, will entangle his
life in manifold troubles and temptations, and lose his reason religion and
tranquillity, in the windings and mazes of wretched fancies and unaccountable
projects. The ends of trading I take to be these: First, a competent and honest
support of yourselves and families. Secondly, a charitable succor and relief
of others. Thirdly, a timely retreat from a secular calling, to a contemplative
life.

First, A competent and honest support of yourselves and families. This end is
pointed out by the Apostle, Tit. 3.14. and called necessary uses, i.e. we must
design in trade the support of the necessities, not lusts of nature. And were
not all trades over-stocked, and consequently the observation superfluous, I
should tell you, that public as well as private necessities, were here to be
understood. Nor is your care here limited to your own necessities only, but
those also for your children and posterity demand their share in it; but then,
lest under this pretense you extend your desires beyond all bounds, you are to
remember, that in resolving the measures of this provision, you are not to take
counsel of your own ambition, or the wanton expectations of your children; that
provision for them is wisest, which lays a sufficient foundation for their
industry to build on, and leaves them under an obligation to business and
employment. And is not this enough? to what purpose should men toil, cark, and
pinch, to make their families rich and great, that is, lazy and wanton, to
leave them an estate which their own example proves more than necessary; for
most of those that do so, have made little use of it themselves: mistake me
not; I do not think it unlawful to be rich, or to leave one's family so; but I
think it foolish and sinful too, to sacrifice the peace of one's mind, and the
ease of one's life, to the lust of riches: I think it silly and vicious to
raise a family by meanness and sordidness, or to lay the foundation of
children's greatness in one's infamy. In short it is not wealth but an
inordinate passion for it, which I condemn: prosperity is the gift of God, a
common reward of Christian virtues: for Christianity is said to have the
promises of this life and that which is to come. Wealth then may be received,
but it must not be designed as your first and chief end. Thus fame, honor, and
power, are great blessings and favors of heaven; but whoever immoderately
thirsts after the one or the other is ambitious and vain glorious. You may
receive temporal good things with gratitude, and enjoy them with moderation;
but if you dote upon them, you violate the vow of your baptism, and virtually
renounce your faith: for would not this be to forget that heaven were your
kingdom and country, and earth the place of your exile, or, at best,
pilgrimage? This is that lesson which cannot be too often inculcated: not only
on the account of that violent opposition it is almost every where encountered
with* but also the vast importance it is of, to the quiet and contentment of a
trading life: this one thing is the philosophy the trader should be ever
studying, the wisdom he should be daily pursuing; that is, a true and just
moderation of his desires of wealth. Did man know how to bound his desires by
the necessities or conveniences of human life; could he regulate his appetites
by the modesty and moderation of Christianity, not by custom and fancy; I am
confident, this one thing alone would rescue him from the far greater part of
evil encumbrances which infest human life: vanity and ambition, envy and
emulation wantonness and fancy, create most of those difficulties and
necessities which stain the beauty, disturb the peace and order, and destroy
the pleasure of life. When men's desires and aims are too big for their
callings, they are unavoidably plunged into discontent and doubtful projects;
and if they sink not finally into ruin, they cannot be held up but by such an
anxious and restless persecution of the world, as looks rather like hurry or
distraction, than trade or employment. I can therefore never think a tradesman
happy, till he has modesty enough to find content in the revenue of a moderate
and easy trade; till he understands what are the bounds his nature and his
station sets him; though he know how to enjoy a great fortune, does never want
one; has sense enough to use it, and virtue enough not to let his happiness
depend upon it.

Secondly, A charitable succor and relief of others. It is confessed by all,
that men are born, not for themselves only, but for others too; and God, the
dispenser of temporal wealth, commands such as are rich in this world, to be
rich in good works too: but it is always to be provided, that justice do first
take place, and then charity. This direction therefore supposes the trader's
accounts to stand fair; it supposes him to have discharged the duties which he
owes to his relatives and dependents, or else to have none. I will not insist
on the obligation or pleasure of charity; I will not press you to it by the
interest of your present, and future happiness: for the truth is, to do right
to the trading world, there is no rank or order of men in the kingdom, that is
more sensible of the duty of charity, or more inclined and disposed to it; none
that give more eminent proofs of it while living, or leave more glorious
monuments of it behind them. One thing only I will take upon me to recommend to
you; that is, the advice of Solomon; (...) the (...) finds to do, do it with
thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the
grave whither thou go: that is, whatever good you design to do, do it
speedily as much as in you lies, be your own executors. How often are excellent
purposes strangled in the birth by an unexpected death! how frequently are they
perverted by the corruption and negligence of those to whose inspection they
are committed! besides, this way you shall reap the fruit of your own
plantations you will enjoy the pleasure and satisfaction resulting from the
perfection, beauty, and good contrivance of the foundation you have laid; or
you will be able to supply the defects, or correct the errors of your model,
and prevent those future miscarriages which such designs are liable to. Though
all this be very much, yet it is but the least part of what you will reap from
being yourselves the executors of your own bounty; you will be sure that you
dedicate it to charity, not vanity; that you are building almshouses for the
living, not tombs and pyramids for the dead; you will escape the common cheat
and imposture the rich put upon themselves while they entangle themselves in
covetousness all their lives, under pretense of designing mighty things after
death.

Thirdly, The tradesman ought to propose to himself a timely retreat, i. e. if
the necessities of this indigent state will give way to it; which seems to me
natural, to finish business before we finish life; to lay down our burden
before we tire and fall under the weight of it; and quit troublesome
employments, before our bungling discharge of them proclaim the decay of our
parts and strength, and the increase of our avarice and ambition: nay, the very
continuance of the same cares for the world, which looked before like prudence,
will, in old age, be reckoned sin and folly. To trade, is but to make provision
for life; and therefore since common sense will tell us, that we must not be
always providing for life, and never live; it is plain men ought, if they can,
at length break off their trade, or at least so contract it, that it may be
rather diversion than labor. As Solomon sends us to the ants to learn
industry, so might he to learn wisdom too; the enjoyment of their treasure in
winter being no less an instance of the one, than their labor of laying it up
in the summer, of the other. Besides, in ripe years, the advice of the prophet
seems to be addressed to every man: Set thy house in order, for thou shall die,
and not live. State your accounts, settle your fortune, compose the differences
of your family, and fix your children, so that you may be able to discern what
course they will steer when you are gone, and to correct any error they are apt
to fall into, while you live, which may otherwise, when you are dead, prove
incorrigible and destructive. If these motives, taken from decency, prudence
and morality, seem too light, there is another of more weight and moment
behind; that is, the consideration of your eternal interest. It is highly
necessary to leave the world before you be torn from it, and to acquaint
yourselves more familiarly with another world, before you pass into it, to make
your abode in it for ever. Certainly it requires some time to prepare the soul
for death and judgment; and that man will be very unfit for either, who is
carried from the counter to the grave, and from the intanglements of secular
cares to the tribunal of God. But besides the benefits which you will find in
retirement, the prospect and proposal of it has many in it; the hopes of a
sabbatic year in life, will ease the weight and travail of those that precede
it; and a design of retreating from trade and business, will be apt to induce
men to pass their first years with more moderation and abstinence, that they
may the sooner provide the means of an easy or honorable retirement.

These rules well observed, would free the negotiating life from all the great
evils and inconveniences it is subject to. Business, as it was in the time of
innocence, would be, not the curse, but the blessing of mankind; and trade
would be as easy and innocent, if not as pleasant, as Adam's Husbandry in his
garden: for thus industry would be without drudgery, and care without anxiety;
commerce would be carried on without any mean or ill artifice, without
impatient and tormenting designs, of tiresome and vexatious disappointments.
What need would there be of shifts and equivocaitions, of fraud and
circumvention, if a man had says enough to believe, that God's blessing upon
his industry were the only way to grow truly rich; I mean, to get, if not so
much as he would, yet as much as would be good for him? what temptation would
men lie under to bondage and drudgery, or to perplexity and anxiety, if he
could contain his desires within those narrow bounds which nature and his
station have prescribed him? what fears could disquiet the mind, which were
formed into an entire resignation to, and dependence upon God? or, how could
the world ensnare that soul, which allots a proper time for public religion,
and private meditation? in a word, these rules being followed, men would not
only avoid the common rocks on which the happiness and fortune of the trader
generally dashes, but also attain the end of this sort of active life* they
would get estates in their younger years, and enjoy them in their riper: nay,
no portion of life would want its proper and seasonable enjoyments; they would
in the midst of business preserve their innocence, and when they did retire
from it, they would perfect that religion which they could before but begin;
and enrich, and adorn, and entertain the soul, which they could but guard and
defend before, and scarcely maintain in life; I mean, spiritual life*

FINIS.

