Mr. Langdon's SERMON ON THE Long Life of a good KING AND THE Conquest of
QUEBEC.

Joy and Gratitude to GOD FOR THE LONG LIFE of a GOOD KING, AND THE Conquest of
QUEBEC.

A SERMON Preached in the First Parish of PORTSMOUTH, in New Hampshire,
Saturday, November 10th. 1759. Being the Anniversary Birth Day of His present
Majesty King GEORGE II. And appointed by His Excellency BENNING WENTWORTH, Esquire
GOVERNOR of said PROVINCE, A Day of general THANKSGIVING and public REJOICING
for the Success of His MAJESTY'S ARMS, especially against CANADA.

By Samuel Langdon, A. M.

PORTSMOUTH: Printed and Sold by Daniel Foul. 1760.

PSALM. XXI. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 11, 12, 13. The King shall joy in thy strength, O
Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice. Thou have given him
his heart's desire, and have not withholden the request of his lips. For thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness; thou set a crown of pure
gold upon his head. He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length
of days for ever and ever. -- Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy
right hand shall find out those that hate thee. -- For they intended evil
against thee: they imagined a mischievous device, which they were not able to
perform. Therefore shall thou make them turn their back, when thou shall make
ready thine arrows upon thy strings, against the face of them. Be thou exalted,
Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.


IT is probable David wrote this divine ode soon after he had received that
promise of the establishment of his kingdom in an uninterrupted line of
succession through his son Solomon, which we find, 1 Chronicles, 17th Chapter.

On this promise David there dwells with admiration and rapture: it is plainly
the subject of several psalms; and he doubtless understood it as of the same
tenor with the promises made to Abraham and the Patriarchs, ultimately
referring to the kingdom of the Messiah. This he seems principally to keep in
view in this psalm; in a prophetic manner he descants upon it, and rejoices not
only in the highest assurance of his own continued victories, and the greater
glory of his son Solomon, but of the irresistible power of that future royal
son against whom no policy should prevail, no weapon prosper.

But as far as this psalm relates to himself, he devoutly expresses his entire
dependence upon God, ascribes all his strength, safety, honor, and prosperity
to him, acknowleges them as answers to his continual prayers, and thankfully
reflects upon divine goodness in prolonging his reign, and granting him the
hope of an endless life: by the great things which God had already done for
him, and a believing prospect of the Messiah's kingdom, he rises to the most
joyful confidence that God would still continue his favors to Israel
considered as his church, and disappoint and confound all their enemies; and so
he concludes with this exulting prayer of faith, which he puts into the mouths
of the whole body of saints -- Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so
will we sing and praise thy power. q. d. Lord manifest thy divine perfections
more and more, make thy power conspicuous in thy wonderful providence for the
safety and prosperity of thy church; let all nations behold thy majesty and
universal dominion: so will thy people sing of thy goodness, and celebrate thy
praise. Let us on the present joyful occasion subjoin our hearty AMEN.

I have not time to mention many profitable instructions contained in these
verses; but shall confine myself to these three remarks, viz. I. The strength,
safety, grandeur, and prosperity of kings, especially when in connection with
the security and welfare of the church, must be ascribed to God. II. The long
life and prosperous reign of good kings is a great blessing, and an
encouragement to the people of God to depend upon his continued care of the
church, and the further accomplishment of his promises. III. When God in his
providence remarkably defeats and subdues the enemies of his kingdom, good men
will take peculiar notice of his power, and give glory to his name.


I. The strength, safety, grandeur, and prosperity of kings, especially when in
connection with the security and welfare of the church, must be ascribed to God.

All things are of God: the existence, order, beauty of universal nature,
sprung from his almighty word, according to that perfect plan of eternal
wisdom, by which all things appeared distinctly in their most minute
circumstances to an infinite mind, when yet they were not: the constant laws of
material systems were fixed from the beginning, and continue by his will: and
all intellectual and rational beings are equally under the most exact
regulation, by that supreme moral government which he more immediately
exercises as God over all, and by the constitutions which he has settled
agreeable to their various ranks and circumstances.

All government originates from him who is the Creator and Lord of the
universe; who has plainly pointed out, by the different genius and capacities
of men, various services, and different degrees of honor and power; who has
made society necessary for our welfare and comfort; who led the first families
and tribes of mankind, by a certain instinct of nature, to acknowledge and obey
their respective heads, and consent to that authority which each found
necessary for their common safety.

Government began in patriarchal authority, and was gradually improved into
more ample power, and extensive dominion, established upon new claims,
according to the rising exigencies of those little communities, and the
opportunities which artful ambitious men seized upon from time to time to
aggrandize themselves, and subject cities and kingdoms to their will. There is
something in the very constitution of man, and the general condition of the
inhabitants of the earth, which tends to divide the world into distinct
nations, and produce the various forms and degrees of dominion which have
appeared in all ages. Thus the civil powers are ordained of God, designed
originally for the benefit of mankind, erected in various forms by his special
providence.

We no where find any certain model of government, prescribed by express
revelation, except that given to Israel under Moses; which was peculiar to
their circumstances as a national church, a proper theocracy under the conduct
of a peculiar providence. The divine right of kings, as it has been preached up
in times past in order to support tyranny, and persuade people to bear the
heaviest yoke with tame submission, is a whimsy without any foundation in
scripture or reason: passive obedience is a doctrine which none can swallow who
understand the natural rights of mankind; which protestants especially must
abhor; which England has always rejected as inconsistent with all her
liberties: had this maxim prevailed, the great revolution by which
Great Britain was happily secured from popish kings and pretenders had never
been effected, and long before this time we might have been reduced under
subjection to Rome.

But though we deny an indefeasible divine right, we acknowledge kings are set up
by the providence of God. The famous ancient monarchies of the world were
erected according to his purpose, and rose to the height of their grandeur by
his permission. Even tyrants who abuse their power, are exalted by the hand of
God, to be instruments of chastising the nations for their sins; he raises them
up, or casts them down, lets loose their rage or restrains them, at his
pleasure. The Assyrian monarch Isai. x. 5 -- 15.
was but the rod of divine anger; the indignation of God put the staff in his
hand; he was sent by heaven against an hypocritical nation, to take the spoil,
to take the prey; though the tyrant never imagined any such thing, but only aimed
to destroy and cut off nations not a few. So the Most High gave Nebuchadnezzar
his kingdom and majesty and glory and honor, and bro't all people into
subjection to him, to answer his own wise and and holy purposes. Dan. v. 18, 19.


But when such an equitable constitution of government is formed and settled as
is plainly agreeable to the laws of nature, in the best manner serving the ends
of society; when the plain design and tendency of it is to secure life, liberty
and property, and promote virtue and peace; especially when it not only guards
and enforces the religion of nature, but gives protection and encouragement to
the church of God, built upon the more immediate revelation of his will; such a
government may be said with peculiar emphasis to be of God: such a kingdom is
conformable to the perfect pattern of his supreme dominion, and the King of
Heaven must be pleased with it in the same manner as he takes complacency in
the virtues of individuals, and every thing copied from his own perfections.

By the church we are not to understand some one distinct form and
establishment of religious society; but collectively the whole body of
christians, united, though in many distinct societies, under various particular
denominations, in the worship of the one true God according to the express
revelation of his will. Nor is the church so connected in its own nature with
the power and prosperity of any particular government, that it cannot stand
upon its own proper basis without the support of civil authority: for we know
the christian church flourished and spread, in its greatest purity and power,
long before it had the countenance of emperors and kings. Civil and religious
societies are entirely distinct in their nature; the order and proper authority
of the one cannot be blended with the order and proper authority of the other,
without the greatest hazard of corrupting and weakening both.

Yet the church receives great advantage from a well constituted civil
government, and the prosperity of the state. Under such a happy government it
is guarded against the rage of persecution; appears openly in the worship and
order of religious assemblies; enjoys the benefit of public instruction, free
inquiry, and undissembled profession; is permitted to employ all the artillery
of the word of God against the devil's kingdom, and use the best means for its
own enlargement and perfection. The church thus built on its proper foundation,
must very much depend on the safety and prosperity of the kingdom, for it is own
security and welfare: if the nation is weakened by wars, or overrun by
invasions, the enemies of the one will probably be enemies to the other, and
the church must have a great share in the public calamities; but when the
nation grows stronger, and not only maintains its ground but multiplies its
conquests, and becomes great and formidable, religion stands more secure, and
spreads knowledge and liberty farther and farther.

A kingdom established upon such equitable principles, where civil liberty and
evangelical religion are encouraged and supported, stands fair for the peculiar
guardianship of Heaven. As the hand of God may be seen in erecting, his
providence will be observable in defending and aggrandizing it: he will make
its kings great and honorable by his special favor, and grant them his strength
and salvation.

When good kings are raised up, who by their example and authority encourage
piety and virtue, and rule in the fear of God, they are like David and Solomon,
dignified and protected by a peculiar providence, and given as blessings to
their people and the church of God: and he will make them great on the throne,
and successful in war; they will reign in the hearts of their subjects, and be
feared and honored by neighboring nations. The goodness and power of God will
be as plainly visible in their advancement, and the prosperity which attends
their reign, as if they had been chosen and appointed by him in the most
immediate extraordinary manner, and gained their glory and magnificence in
consequence of the most express personal promises: and the people ought to have
a just sense of this divine goodness, and esteem it a great blessing to have
the life and reign of such kings prolonged.

This naturally brings on the next remark,

II. The long life and prosperous reign of a good king is a great blessing, and
an encouragement to the people of God to depend upon his continued care of the
church, and the farther accomplishment of his promises.

Foolish, irreligious, an vicious princes are often sent in wrath to a people,
as a just punishment of their sins: when they have forsaken God and corrupted
themselves, he suffers them to be corrupted more and more by the example of
their kings, permits their vices according to their natural tendency to infect
and weaken the government, distract their councils, impoverish and lay them
open to the power of their enemies; and sends his curse upon them in all their
interests and undertakings. By a succession of wicked kings Israel was soon
ripened for utter ruin; and the favor or displeasure of God toward Judah was
apparent according to the character of the kings which from time to time
reigned over them: nor should we be mistaken perhaps in making the same remarks
upon the history of our English monarchs.

Not that irreligious princes are never used by providence as instruments of
doing some real good to a nation: to assert this would be to limit the wisdom
and power of God, in contradiction to scripture and experience. He can make
advantage even of the vices of the great, their pride, ambition, revenge,
avarice, or lust, to accomplish his designs for the good of a favorite nation,
and the welfare of his church. Saul was a self-willed, jealous, revengeful
prince; yet he introduced order among a people who had lived for centuries too
much at loose from government; he performed several worthy actions, and laid a
good foundation for a prosperous kingdom. Jehu's zeal was fired chiefly by
ambition; yet he did the work which God commanded, in cutting off the house of
Ahab, and destroying the worshippers of Baal. The grand charter of England's
liberties was obtained of kings far from the best of characters. And a monarch
whose chief aim was to gratify his lust, became the instrument of our
deliverance from the pope's tyranny, and the introduction of the most valuable
blessings of the reformation.

But wise and virtuous kings, whose breasts glow with all social affections;
who are equally ennobled by great and generous actions as by royal blood; who
value their high authority only as a power of doing the greatest good; merit
the warmest love of their subjects, and will be honored as fathers and
benefactors, blessings which Heaven gives and continues. Such amiable princes
have appeared even among the heathen, the delight of their people, the strength
and glory of their kingdoms. Such was Cyrus, the founder of the Persian
monarchy, Judah's great deliverer from the captivity of Babylon, whose name
stood honorably registered in one of the most remarkable prophecies of Isaiah
near two hundred years before the event Isai. xlv.
. Such among the Roman emperors was Augustus, whose reign was gloriously
distinguished by the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ within the
limits of his empire: and after him, Vespasian, Antoninus, Pius and some others.

But especially when kings are men of true religion, fearing and giving glory
to God; it is a manifest token of the divine presence with them, -- a plain
intimation that God designs the greatest favors to such a nation. The best of
Kings will be employed in the most eminent services, and distinguished by
providence with the greatest honors. If ever we may depend upon remarkable
public prosperity, it is under such princes who acknowledge their dependence
upon the supreme Majesty of Heaven, and ask counsel of God, in all affairs of
government, peace and war; who make him their strength and confidence, honor
his laws, observe his providence, and give him the glory of their victories.
What is too great to be expected under such a reign? What can give greater joy
to a happy nation than to behold their king governing with wisdom, prudence and
justice; aiming, in every thing, at the honor of God and their interest,
protected by divine goodness, and reigning prosperously even to old age.

Long life may be considered as a great blessing to the King himself: for
though the life to come is infinitely preferable to the happiest state on
earth; and the honors of an heavenly kingdom, the neverfading crown of glory,
the true and everlasting riches, beyond all comparison above earthly crowns and
sceptres, and the utmost splendour of the kingdoms of this world; so that
christians, in the vigorous exercise of faith, would desire rather to be absent
from the body and present with the Lord, even though they had the highest
enjoyments and noblest prospects which earth can afford: yet when our
continuance here may give us a farther opportunity of exercising and improving
the noblest virtues; when we feel ourselves capable of doing yet greater
service, and our hearts more and more enlarged with generous passions; when it
seems necessary we should continue here for the advantage of our fellow men,
especially of the church; a christian, even in the best frame, would ask life,
though with submission, and entertain with pleasure the hope of doing greater
good. This is the language of an apostle, anxious for the church's welfare
Phil. i. 23 -- 25.
-- I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better: nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you, and having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and
continue with you all, for your furtherence and joy of faith. In such a case,
life is a blessing, and the greater as we move in a sphere of the most
extensive usefulness.

A good king enjoys the greater happiness in life in proportion to his exalted
dignity: He considers himself as a god to his subjects; and when he reflects
upon his benevolent schemes yet but imperfect; when he views the important
services which lie before him; when he sees the nation yet in an unsettled
state, and many farther regulations necessary which he has scarcely had
opportunity to attempt, religion and virtue demanding his patronage, and the
future peace and prosperity of his subjects greatly depending upon the
continuance of his life; he will ask it of God, and value it as a special
favor.

But to his happy people the long life of a good king is more especially a
blessing. They consider him as their guardian, their father, the minister of
God. They see the wisdom and equity of his government; they experience the
salutary effects: religion and virtue prevails; their liberties are guarded;
every thing is brought into order, and it is put more and more out of the power
of future princes to oppress them; so that, for their own advantage, they
cannot but wish to have his life and reign prolonged.

Besides; there are some peculiar circumstances, which may add greater
importance to the life of a good king: as, when there is no certain successor:
or none but a minor, under tutors and governors, so that the administration may
fall into the hands of ambitious designing men, contending among themselves for
superiority, and aiming more at their own private interest, and the advancement
of their families, than to discharge their duty to their king and country: --
when the situation of affairs is critical; -- when there are intestine broils,
or foreign wars: -- when successful plans of operation are but just ripening to
afford a comfortable prospect of approaching tranquillity: -- at such times to
have a good king, though advanced in years, taken away, may disconcert all
measures, reverse events, and throw all things into confusion.

On the contrary: when, at such a juncture, his life is continued; when we see
him surprizingly extricated from the greatest difficulties, and successful in
his wars beyond our utmost expectations; when God by him is apparently
performing great things for his church, disappointing the designs, and breaking
the power of the adversaries of religion and liberty; it gives great
encouragement to look upon these things as a prelude to farther favors, the
beginnings of those greater events, by which the church is to be brought into a
more complete and flourishing state, and the kingdom of Christ established
through the world. By these things our faith is confirmed, that God will
preserve and defend the truth of the gospel in such a nation, engage himself on
their side, and support his own cause, till he has silenced and confounded all
who oppose his kingdom, and blessed all nations with light, liberty, and peace,
under the glorious king of righteousness. If the ancient people of God were
encouraged, by the favors granted to the church in David's prosperity, to
depend upon the full accomplishment of the promises, that the church should be
secured notwithstanding the most threatening appearances, and raised at length
to greater glory under the Messiah; we also may be assured by all which God has
done in times past for Protestants, and by the wonderful things which he has
lately been doing for Great Britain and her allies against a grand confederacy
of the antichristian powers, that he will continue his care of the reformed
churches, till all the prophecies of the new testament against mystical Babylon
are accomplished, and the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Our fathers have told us what God did for them in
their day: and now we ourselves are witnesses of his goodness and power, and
are at this time rejoicing in the life of one of the best of Kings, and the
astonishing success with which, in his old age, his arms have been blessed: the
hand of God is visible in these great events, and it is our duty to observe it,
with admiration and gratitude. This is agreeable to the last remark upon our
text; which I shall briefly illustrate, to make way for a more particular
consideration of those extraordinary circumstances which this day fill our
hearts with joy, and demand our grateful praises to God.

REM. III. When God in his providence remarkably defeats and subdues the
enemies of his kingdom, good men will take peculiar notice of his power, and
give glory to his name.

The generality of persons overlook the hand of providence even in the greatest
events; they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operations of his hands.
As they lightly glance over the stupendous works of creation, and behold the
starry skies without observing the incomparable wisdom and unrivaled
magnificence of that universal King, who has spread such a pavement under his
throne; as they behold the sun, restoring and brightening the day, without
considering the power and glory of that Being who kindled its blaze, and
continues its revolutions; so they are equally inattentive to the works of
providence: they think of common events as things of course; of events whose
causes are more secret, whose appearances are more inconstant and irregular, as
mere casualties; of evils or benefits as coming merely from men or nature. If
they are involved in war, and things go against them; it is far from their
thoughts that the enemy may be a scourge in the hand of God; they reflect only
upon a weak or wicked ministry, bad officers, and the like: if they have
success, they extol the generals and the troops, commend the wisdom of the
administration, and give all the glory to men; regardless of a superior Power,
and those acknowlegements which are due to God.

But wise observers will see the majesty and power, the justice, displeasure,
or favor of the great Lord of the universe, in all these things; in the moral,
as well as the material system; in common, as well as extraordinary
appearances; in all occurrents, relating to persons, families, or nations.
Especially in the great affairs of government, or war, they see some of the
plainest instances of that supreme dominion which God exercises over all
mankind: how he regulates the kingdoms of this world, like so many provinces of
one general empire, under his own immediate care; marks their bounds; limits
their privileges; balances their power; and retains them in subjection. They
behold him judging among the nations; correcting them by one another, and by
their own vices; punishing them for the abuse of distinguishing mercies, by the
most signal judgments; defending his church when surrounded with enemies; and
by his arm strengthening the hands of kings who engage in his cause.

Such an acknowlegement of Divine Providence necessarily arises from a proper
belief of the Being and Perfections of God: the light of nature teaches it; all
religion requires it. If He has no concern either with material or rational
beings, after giving them laws of action agreeable to their natures; but,
without any farther exertions of Will or Power, leaves them to go on entirely
of themselves; what do we make of God more than an idle spectator? In such a
system, He seems to be introduced only to save the absurdity of an infinity of
causes; or the eternity of the world: and when we have made use of his name to
give the first birth to things, we lay it aside again, as if he were no more of
any importance.

How widely different is this from the religion taught in the sacred
Scriptures! The Great God reveals himself in his word, not only as the Creator,
but the Governor and Disposer of all things. In this majestic language He
speaks of his perpetual universal providence -- Isai. xlv. 7.
I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil. -- Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 39.
I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal. -- Isai xlvi. 10.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. There we find the
saints, in all ages, confessing a continual Divine agency; looking to God for
direction and prosperity in all their ways; observing his providencial
government; adoring his wisdom and justice; and praising him for his mighty
acts, and unbounded goodness.

As there are, in nature, some rare and surprising phenomina, to awaken the
attention of mankind, and fix upon their minds a deeper conviction of the Being
and Perfections of God: so, in the course of providence, there are great and
remarkable events, designed as more striking evidences of the Divine
government, to continue and increase in the world a reverencial regard to his
supreme Majesty and authority. It is most reasonable to suppose that this is
the principal point in which they center, to promote religion and moral virtue:
and it is observable in fact, that by many extraordinary and miraculous
providence; by plagues, and famines; by wars, and desolations; by the rise and
fall of empires; and by continual changes in the affairs of nations; God has
been carrying on one uniform design from age to age, to purify, enlarge and
perfect his church, till all things shall be prepared for the dissolution of
this present system, and the introduction of a more glorious happy state.

Therefore Good Men, when they are rejoicing in any public prosperity,
particularly in the successes of war, will give honor to men, as instruments by
whom such great things are done for them; but they will give glory to God above
all, whose instruments they are. They will observe how he glorifies himself and
carries on his designs in favor of truth and righteousness; how wonderfully he
appears at one time and another for the support and defense of true religion;
how remarkably he disappoints it is adversaries, even when they grow most
confident of success, and takes them in their own craftiness. They will take
notice, by what surprising turns of providence the designs formed against truth
and liberty, and to introduce and propagate ignorance, superstition and
slavery, are blasted and overthrown, and that very mischief brought upon the
wicked projectors which they meditated against others. They behold the King of
Heaven, in these things, accomplishing his own purposes, notwithstanding the
opposition and rage of Earth and Hell; fulfilling his promises; magnifying his
power and wrath against his enemies; and distinguishing, by his wonderful
goodness, those who place their trust in him. When such things as these are
visible in our successes, it is justly expected we should take notice of them,
and give glory to God, as exalting himself in his own strength.

Christians may triumph in the victories of war; but not as the heathen, who
shout and give honor to their idols with frantic noise, and brutish
sensuality: the joy of christians ought to be more rational, temperate, and
noble, springing from a proper sense of the benefits received, and exciting
religious sentiments and affections. They ought to rejoice and give glory to
God; to ascribe to him all the advantages they have gained; and praise him for
such public blessings, and the prosperity of Sion. By this joy they will find
their knowledge, love, and reverence of God increasing, and their faith and
confidence in him more and more strengthened.

But it is high time to pass from generals to a more particular application of
the subject.

Therefore to bring these things home to ourselves

In the first place. We have reason to acknowledge the glory of our British
Monarchs as a peculiar favor of God. He has placed Great Britain among the most
considerable powers in Europe, and made her kings rich and honorable, so that
they may vie with the greatest absolute monarchs. Tyrants have the command of
their people's purses, yet they often find themselves poor; they are despotic,
but hated: but the kings of England have the affections of a free people; they
are rich in the national wealth, which is freely granted whenever it is
necessary; and their authority is obeyed with pleasure, with the firmest
loyalty, while they adhere to the constitution, and love their subjects. Never
did any nation more heartily abhor tyrants, or oppose with greater resolution
such stretches of authority as are inconsistent with the natural rights of
mankind: but no where can be found a more loyal people while their princes
observe the proper bounds of power, and aim to be benefactors. Every good king,
crowned according to the settled laws of the realm, we revere as God's
representative, equally as if he could plead a divine right, in a succession
established by Heaven.

The liberties of Great Britain, and her prosperity, have been remarkably
favorable to the church of Christ: for true christianity, the religion of
Protestants, is inseparably connected with free inquiry, conviction, and
profession. Where these are obstructed, though it may support itself under
discouragements and persecutions, among a happy few, whose minds, by divine
grace, are taught to reverence the truth, and obey God rather than men; yet the
church of Christ can have no firm footing in such a nation; it will be like a
stranger, discountenanced, oppressed, and denied any settled residence among
them. As Tyranny, once established, commonly extends it is insolence to blind
and curtail men's understandings, and determine what they shall believe, and
how they shall worship; it must either be taken away first, in order to the
introduction of true christianity; or else if protestant principles should
gradually enter and gain ground, by some remarkable conduct of providence, they
will effectually counterwork, weaken, and destroy such tyranny, and restore
both civil and religious liberty. Thus that spirit of liberty which has
appeared from the first foundation of the British empire, and so often exerted
itself, notwithstanding the enchantments and chains of popery, proved very
friendly to the reformation; and the establishment of the protestant religion
has, on the other hand, greatly secured and enlarged our liberties.

Divine Providence has seemed to point out Britain, from the beginning, as a
favorite nation, to make it a pattern to other kingdoms of the most rational
and equitable government; to show how wealth, and power are connected with
freedom, and to prepare the way for her enjoying a remarkable share in the
blessings of knowledge and true religion. The Great Lord of the world commonly
performs the designs of his providence, not by immediate exertions of almighty
power, but by means suited to the general constitution and course of things.
Therefore as Antichrist had engaged on his side the policy and arms of the
greatest empires in Europe to crush the Reformation; it was necessary that some
earthly powers should be raised up to encourage and defend it. For this end,
from small and confused beginnings, by wonderful steps, through many strange
revolutions, God strengthened and aggrandized the English nation, increased
knowledge and liberty among them, and made them the envy and terror of their
neighbors, so that they became the strength and glory of the reformed churches.

The Roman-catholic powers considered England as the grand support of the
northern heresy, as they termed the Reformation: therefore they tried their
utmost efforts, either to conquer, or reduce it under the Papal yoke. But He
that sits in the Heavens derided them, and defeated all their attempts: in vain
they formed strong confederacies; in vain they fitted out the most formidable
Armadas The Spaniards in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
; in vain did Hell suggest and carry on a scheme to burst its fire from
beneath, and destroy at one blow all the Princes and Senators of the nation The
Gun powder Plot in the Reign of James I.
: neither policy nor arms availed to subdue Great Britain, or root out the
protestant religion.

The most refined policy of Rome, was to debauch and infatuate our Kings
themselves In the succeeding reigns.
, to purchase of them the religion and liberties of their subjects, and so make
us again a province of the papacy: but this was wonderfully overruled, by Him
who confounds the wisdom of the wise, and takes them in their own craftiness,
for the more effectual security of the nation from all future attempts of that
nature: it occasioned that glorious Revolution under King WILLIAM, and those
parliamentary acts, by which all Papists were forever barred from the British
throne, and the succession was settled in the protestant line of the present
illustrious house of Hanover.

Thus the nation has been guarded from time to time by the peculiar care of
Heaven, defended by almost miraculous providence, and religion and liberty,
arts and sciences, husbandry, trade and manufactures have been increasing and
flourishing together. We have been growing greater and more respectable among
the powers of Europe; we have been able to claim the sovereignty of the seas,
and hold the balance on the continent.

Who, that attentively considers such a series of remarkable events, relating
to a nation where liberty and truth have found the greatest encouragement and
support, can overlook the Divine hand so manifest in them? The wonderful works
of God ought to be remembered from generation to generation as often as we read
of the great things which he has done for our Fathers; especially when we
behold his acts of power and goodness repeated in our own day; our souls should
be filled with fresh admiration, and renew their songs of praise and gratitude.

Let us therefore now more particularly observe the wonderful goodness of God
to us, in prolonging the Life and Reign of our most gracious Sovereign, his
sacred Majesty KING GEORGE II. to complete this day the seventy-sixth year of
his age, and in crowning his arms of late with the most glorious success, by
sea and land, in all quarters of the world, especially in America.

It is difficult to speak very particularly of the religious character of
Kings; and the more so, at such a distance; their piety must exceed that of
common christians in proportion to their greater temptations, and more
illustrious and extensive sphere of action, or it cannot be conspicuous.
Flattery often covers the greatest deformities, compliments even the vices of
Princes, and paints them in those ornaments of grace which they never wore; the
greatest monsters of wickedness have some times been sainted, and even deify'd.
It is rare to see a David or a Solomon shining on the throne in all the
excellencies of the greatest Kings and real Saints. But we never had more
reason to speak well of any King of Great Britain, than of his present Majesty.
He has always acted as under a proper sense of his dependence upon God;
concerned to approve himself to his Master in Heaven; aiming to promote justice
and virtue, love and peace, in the nation, and secure to his subjects their
civil rights, and the most valuable liberty of conscience. He has never
attempted to deprive his people of any of their privileges; the spirit of his
reign has been the most opposite to every degree of tyranny and oppression; and
it is no inconsiderable part of the glory of it, that he never would suffer any
of the several denominations of christians, in his dominions, to be compelled
to worship God contrary to the real free persuasion of their own minds.
Whatever misconduct may have been chargeable upon any of his Ministers; if it
should be supposed that they have ever carried on schemes tending to undermine
the liberties of the nation; for the best of Kings may be deceived in the
persons whom they entrust with power, and servants, we know, are often more
haughty and imperious than their masters; our benevolent Sovereign never gave
his people the least cause of complaint on this score. He has always contented
himself with that authority which belongs to him by the constitution and laws
of the nation; he has acted as the Guardian and Father of his people; He has
reigned in their affections; and his reign will forever be distinguished as one
of the longest and happiest in the British Annals. The Baron de Pollnitz in his
Memoirs published above twenty years ago, has a remarkable paragraph, which I
cannot forbear transcribing, not only because it contains the character, of his
present Majesty finely drawn by a foreign Nobleman, but is almost prophetic
with respect to the continuance of his reign. --

"The present King is not tall, but very well shaped; has a stately port, a
very grave countenance, and speaks little, but with great propriety. The
French, English, and the Italian languages are as familiar to him as the German
He reads a vast deal, and knows more than most do who wear the Royal Diadem.
Being not puffed up with pageantry and vain grandeur, he does not give into
superfluous magnificence, but is an oeconomist without avarice; liberal without
being profuse; an enemy to vice, and a friend to virtue; sober and regular in
his ways and manners; of a lively temper, full of spirit and ambition, but
submitting both the one and the other to reason. He is active and laborious*
understands affairs, has a quick apprehension, and a wonderful memory. -- His
people are happy under his reign. In England, his only study is to maintain the
peace and balance of Europe, to make commerce flourish, and to render the
nation one of the most powerful in the world. At Hanover, he endeavors, by
good offices to his subjects there, to alleviate their sorrow for his absence.
He has not made any miserable since he begun his reign; and if the blessings of
the people help to prolong the days of their Kings, his Britannic Majesty may
hope for one of the longest of Reigns.

Polin. Mem. Vol 2d. P. 445.


If we consider the late situation of our public affairs, we must be convinced
that the continuance of our good King's life was of the greatest importance,
and ought to be esteemed a peculiar favor of divine providence. But a little
while ago, the nation appeared in a most critical dangerous state. We were
unavoidably involved in a difficult expensive war. Besides the daily bold
encroachments of the French upon these American Colonies, France and Austria
had entered into a deep conspiracy against Hanover and Prussia, and aimed at
nothing less in the end than an entire extirpation of the protestant religion.
It was plainly necessary for us to form some alliance on the continent of
Europe; and we were naturally led to unite with his Prussian Majesty in a
defensive and offensive treaty. But against Prussia the greatest powers in
Europe were confederate: France and Austria, the Empire, the King of Poland as
Elector of Saxony, Russia and Sweden, were collecting their forces to surround
and assault him on all sides with mighty armies: confident that they should
make short work with him, they had already, in imagination, made a division of
his dominions among themselves. And though by his unparalled military genius,
and timely resolution, he very much disconcerted their measures, and early
gained great advantages; yet there was the utmost danger of his being
overpowered with numbers, and ruined in the end. On our part, the success of
the war, for some time after it began, was far from answering our sanguine
expectations. England was bullied with a threatened invasion, and thought
herself obliged to send over to Germany for several thousand troops for her own
defense; while France was preparing to strike the first blow upon Minorca. Our
Navy was inactive, or employed to little purpose. The French gained fast upon
us in captures by sea, and distressed our trade, in the channel, in the
West Indies, and along the coast of Africa: their Fleets escaped our vigilance
before their ports, and prevented our designs abroad, by seasonable aids where
they were most in danger. Our army of observation in Germany, under the Duke of
Cumberland, was reduced to the necessity of capitulating with the French
General, and delivering Hanover into his hands. Our expensive armaments at Home
effected nothing. In North America we met with almost continual
disappointments: notwithstanding the large supplies granted by parliament for
prosecuting the war here with vigor, the numbers of troops sent over to our
assistance, and the cheerfulness with which the provincial forces were raised,
and forwarded, the enemy gained ground from year to year, and our colonies were
in danger of being brought into the utmost distress, if not entirely wrested
from us.

All these things together raised loud clamors in the nation; who looked upon
themselves as on the brink of ruin; and complained of corruptions in the state,
and public vices, as the real causes of all their disappointments, more
threatening than the whole power of the enemy. Discontent and faction prevailed;
remonstrances were daily presented to his Majesty; who plainly found his wisest
counsels embarrass'd, and every thing appearing either to be mismanaged, or
unfortunately to go wrong. He felt the most tender paternal concern for his
subjects; he heard their complaints; and was desirous of gratifying them, as
far as might be consistent with the honor and true welfare of his government:
but it was a work of no small difficulty to find out the true source, and apply
a proper remedy to these evils; for if the complaints of the people were upon
just grounds, such an entire reformation as they desired could not be effected
without danger of greater convulsons. --

Now at such a juncture, had God, in righteous anger, taken from us our wise
and good Sovereign, how unhappy and even fatal might have been the
consequences! The present illustrious Prince of Wales was not ripe to manage
the national affairs by his own judgment: his youth might have laid him open to
the artful designs of corrupt politicians; who to gratify their own ambition,
and satiate their avarice, would have sacrificed all the interests of the
nation. As things were circumstanced, many resolute steps were necessary, which
none but a steady experienced King could easily have ventured upon. Great
opposition might be expected; fierce contentions would naturally arise; and
while the jarring parties were disputing, and counterworking each other, our
enemies might have made great advantage of such an unsettled state, our
strength might soon have been exhausted, the colonies lost, and the kingdom
seized upon and made a province of France.

But how remarkably has the kind providence of God prevented all such fears, by
prolonging the life of our gracious Sovereign; who in his old age retains the
wisdom, spirit, and resolution of a King, and the most earnest solicitude for
the happiness of his subjects. With the most condescending goodness He has
listened from the throne to their petitions, and raised to the most honorable
and important trust the very Minister whom they requested; -- A Minister whose
wisdom, honesty, and courage are equal to the exalted, but difficult place,
which he fills. The desired reformation has already proceeded very far; the
whole face of affairs now appears happily changed; and things are brought into
the most promising situation. The excellent Mr. PIT has conducted every thing
relating to the war with consummate prudence, unexceptionable fidelity, and
incessant application, and has been honored of GOD with astonishing success.
May he more and more recommend himself to the esteem of his Royal Master, the
affections of the Heir apparent, and the whole nation, by his faithful
services; and be empowered and encouraged, together with all those honorable
persons who are with him in the work, to accomplish his generous schemes, for
the dignity of the Crown, and the prosperity of Britain.

It is a happy circumstance, which ought not to be overlooked, that his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales has had the advantage of observing the past and
present conduct of affairs, in so critical a season. He has seen the
consequents of public vices, and that policy whose basis is self-interest. --
He has seen the nation ready to sink under these evils; but recovered before he
is called to ascend the throne. -- He has seen the advantage of Royal
condescension; the wonderful change effected by a faithful Minister and honest
politics; with what prudence, peace, and order, all things are managed; how
successfully our fleets and armies are employed; and with what union,
cheerfulness, and zeal the nation bears the heaviest expenses of war. He is now
arrived at maturity, and is ripened for government, whenever providence may
call him to take the Scepter in his hand. He has had the best advantages of
education; is well accomplished with princely virtues, and, if we may depend
upon credible information, breathes already something of that genuine spirit of
christianity which appeared in his late excellent Father, and still adorns his
illustrious Mother; which will more effectually guard him against the
temptations of youth, and inspire him with the noblest sentiments and views.

On all the foregoing considerations we ought to esteem it a great blessing,
that his Majesty's most valuable life has been continued. -- He is happy in
that he has lived so long to enjoy the satisfaction of doing good to his
people, according to the desires of his large and generous heart. -- He is
happy in the constant love of his subjects: -- Happy in the continued
prosperity of his kingdom: -- Happy in beholding the numerous spreading
Branches of his Royal Family, and an amiable worthy Grandson ready to fill his
place, whenever he shall exchange his earthly honors for an unfading eternal
Crown of Glory: -- Happy that he has lived to see the administration so well
settled, and universal satisfaction and joy expressed in every countenance;
that he has lived one year more to rejoice with the nation in the surprising
progress of his victorious arms, while old and young are repeating their
triumphs, giving glory to God, and blessing their King. Doubtless he is ready
to assume David's language and sing in concert with him, and all who love the
prosperity of Zion, The King shall joy in thy Strength, etc.

But we, in these American Colonies, are more especially interested in these
late signal smiles of Providence. We have seen a most happy change in the face
of our affairs here: and we shall be guilty of the most inexcusable
ingratitude, if we are not sensible of God's hand in the great things which
have been done for us. We have peculiar reason to apply the words of our text,
and say -- They intended evil against thee, O Lord! against thy Churches here;
they imagined a mischievous device which they were not able to perform: thou
have made them to turn their backs; thou have made ready thine arrows upon thy
strings, and discharged them in their faces.

Though lust of dominion, doubtless, has been one cause of the constant enmity
of France against England, and against us; yet the old enmity of the Beast and
false Prophet against Christ and his faithful Spouse, the malice of the Romish
Clergy against Protestants, English Protestants more especially, has inflamed
their rage higher, given a greater spring to their motions, and led them to aim
not only to subdue us, but entirely to root out the Heretics from these
Provinces. The Scheme which they laid many years ago, and which they have been
endeavoring gradually to ripen and accomplish, is now well known: they have
been stretching their settlements along behind us; building forts at every
advantageous Pass; increasing their trade and shipping at home, that they might
be a match for Britain by sea; sending over soldiers to America; and using all
possible methods to gain over all the Indians on this continent to their
interest. By the success of the forces of New England against Louisbourg In the
year 1745.
, under the late honorable Sir WILLIAM PEPPERRELL, in the last war, and the
settling of Halifax, the French were alarmed with apprehensions of our growing
strength, and thought it high time to check our spreading settlements, and
confine us to the limits which they had marked out for us, 'till they were
prepared to dispute the whole. They made Peace principally with this view, that
they might recruit their strength, and perfect these designs: and though the
settlement of the limits in North America, by Commissioners from both nations,
was one main article of the Peace, they managed the matter so artfully, as to
avoid coming to any agreement, and prolonged the time 'till they had made
preparations to drive us back by force as far as they pleased. But by hastening
on their schemes too fast, they brought upon themselves the present war, and
the mischief designed against us, is come upon their own Heads.

Now, that God's hand might appear more evidently in the events of this war, it
is worthy our notice, -- That while we presumed upon our own strength, and were
not sufficiently sensible of our dependence upon Divine Providence, we were
from year to year disappointed. At first we boasted of the numbers the colonies
could raise; looked upon ourselves as much more than a match for Canada; and
desired no other assistance from home but money to pay our provincial troops.
And when His Majesty, more sensible of our danger, out of his paternal concern
for us, sent over both money and regular troops, this gave us still more
sanguine hopes; we then grew confident that every mountain would easily be
levelled, and that we had nothing to do, but march and take possession. But how
did we find ourselves mistaken! Great difficulties soon appeared in the
prosecution of a war in a new country; especially as it was to be carried far
back beyond our settlements, through almost impenetrable forests, through
mountains, rivers, and lakes, against well constructed forts, and every
advantage on the enemy's side. And besides all this, our rashness, or on the
contrary, our slow and irresolute motions, the frequent changes of our
Generals, and the delays of our Fleets, disconcerted and frustrated our most
promising plans of operation.

We were flushed with our early success in Nova Scotia By taking Fort (...),
and removing several thousands of French Neutrals, who had been guilty of the
most perfideous behavior, and were upon the point of joining the Canadians
openly against us; the consequence of which must have been our loss of
Annapolis Royal, Halifax, and all Nova Scotia. June 17, 1755.
, which was indeed of great consequence, as it most seasonably defeated the
designs of the French in that part of the Continent. But how were we astonished
and confounded, soon after, by the news of the inglorious bloody defeat of the
army on which we had built our chief hopes, under the brave but unfortunate
General Braddock July 9. 1755, on his march with 4000 regular troops to Fort du
Quesne, now Pitsburg, on the Ohio. When he was advanced within a few miles of
that fort, he was met by about seven or eight hundred Canadians and Salvages,
who by the advantage of the woods and rocks entirely broke his army, and drove
them back with the greatest precipitation and confusion, having killed and
wounded above a thousand of our troops; among the slain was the General
himself, with a great number of officers; the military chest, and the
secretary's papers fell into the enemy's hands; and the slaughtered bodies were
left unburied on the field of battle.
. Our motions toward Lake Ontario, the same year, against Niagara and
Frontenac, were but a feint. Our provincial forces under General Johnson indeed
repulsed the French at Lake George, and took prisoner their General Baron
Dieskaw; but this might be considered as an happy escape on our side, rather
than a victory, and was an instance of the spirit and resolution of the enemy,
in venturing to meet us at our own posts With 2500 Canadians and Salvages they
unexpectedly came over to attack our Army at Fort Edward. But finding the main
Body was advanced to the Lake, they resolved immediately to follow and engage
us. One of our Regiments, sent out upon the first news of the Enemy, for the
relief of Fort Edward, narrowly escaped being entirely cut off by an Ambuscade,
and were chased back to the camp with considerable loss. The camp had no
defense, but a few logs or trunks of trees lying loosely on the ground for a
breast-work, and one or two cannon hastily mounted, which were of little
service; and our numbers were but about two thousand. Had the Enemy pressed on
without halting, they had the fairest prospect of success; but by fighting at a
distance, they missed their advantage, and were obliged to retreat with loss.
One of the most remarkable circumstances of this affair, was a second action
the same day, immediately after the enemy's retreat. At their place of
rendezvous, they were met by a small scout of a hundred and forty of the New
Hampshire and New York Regiments under the Captains Folsome and McGennis, who,
hastening from Fort Edward toward the Lake at the report of the cannon,
discovered and engaged the enemy, as they were reassembling where they had left
their Baggage, from 4 P. M. till night, killed about an hundred, dispersed the
body, and then proceeded to the Camp with the loss of only six of their number
killed. This was on Sept. 8. 1755.
.

The next year was remarkable only for our continued fruitless parade against
Niagara, and Crown-Point, and the loss of Oswego. The Earl of Londoun arrived
at New York to take the general command of all the Forces in North America July
23. 1756; and Oswego was surrendered to 3000 French and Indians, the Garrison
consisting of 1600 men being made prisoners of war, August 14.


The following summer was spent to as little purpose. Great preparations were
made for the siege of Louisbourg; our expectations were raised; our troops
waited at New York and Halifax for the arrival of the Fleet: but it came too
late; the French were beforehand of us, and guarded their harbor with an equal
naval force. The design was laid aside; our ships in cruizing on the coast
suffered greatly by a storm, and hardly escaped a general destruction: and in
the mean time General Montcalm suddenly passed Lake George with an army of ten
or twelve thousand men, and wrested Fort William-Henry out of our hands, and
demolished it. The Garrison consisted of 3000 men, and after holding out a
week, having no prospect of assistance, obtained an honorable capitulation: but
were afterward perfidiously given up to be plundered and slaughtered by the
Salvages. This was August 9. 1757.


Thus we were disappointed and humbled from year to year; almost every thing
went against us; the enemy gained ground, fortified and secured every pass into
their own country, grew more and more animated, and were meditating and
preparing to drive us farther and farther, and follow us down to Albany, or
even to the city of New York. In the mean time thousands of salvages were
enticed over to their interest, and employed to harrass our armies, cut off our
convoys, and execute the most horrid barbarities all along on our western
frontiers: and even those Indians who had ever been our fast friends, began to
despise and desert us, and waited only for a fair opportunity to join our
enemies. So that the Colonies were very much disheartened, and apprehended
great danger of being overrun.

But when God had thus proved and humbled, and convinced us that the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, and that our dependence must be
placed entirely on him: when every one trembled for the event of these things,
and we began to cry to Heaven more earnestly for Divine aid, with humble
confession of our sins, and submission to God; He that hears the prayers of his
people, and pities them under all their afflictions, regarded our cries, and
gave us help from trouble. His Providence bro't about a change of measures at
Home, the happy effects of which soon reached America. More powerful and
seasonable aids were sent over, under brave, faithful, and virtuous officers.
Our armies were active; our fleets terrified and shut up the enemy on every
side. Last year Louisbourg, the key of Canada, was surrendered into our hands:
Frontenac was demolished, and Fort du Quesne reduced, by a peculiar turn of
Providence in our favor, by which even that melancholy defeat and slaughter of
our troops at Ticonderoga July 8. 1758. Our army, consisting of about 14000
men, attacked the French in their entrenchments at Ticonderoga, but were
repulsed, and obliged to return, about 1500 of our soldiers being killed or
wounded. Upon this a resolution was immediately taken, to send Colonel
Bradstreet with a number of troops against Frontenac, in which expedition he
succeeded, and so prepared the way for the reduction of Fort du Quesne.
, was overruled for our advantage. These were the beginnings of our triumphs.

But this year what Wonders have been wrought for us! -- Besides reducing
Gaudaloupe, one of the finest Islands in the West Indies, and recovering the
ground which we had lost at Oswego; we have gained the command of the passages
through the Lakes, by the important conquest of Niagara; where we had a double
triumph, in defeating, with great slaughter, a considerable body of troops sent
for the relief of that garrison. From Ticonderoga and Crown-Point the enemy
fled, and left to our forces the forts which guarded the entrance into the
heart of their country, and which had been the principal objects of our former
expeditions. And now, to crown all, QUEBEC is TAKEN: Quebec, the Metropolis of
Canada, the strength and dependence of our enemies; Quebec, to which our most
earnest attention was turned, is taken, by a brave General, the indefatigable
resolute WOLF; who, in the service of his King, for the welfare of this
Country, in the faithful discharge of his duty, willingly exposed and
sacrificed his own life, and triumphed in the agonies of death.

With his little army he cheerfully pushed on through the greatest fatigues;
tried every generous, every forcible method, to accomplish his design; till at
last he found it necessary to trust all to a battle: and accordingly, with all
the art and firmness of a skilful and heroic General, he drew the enemy from
their entrenchments, met them in the field, though their numbers were more than
double to his own, and gained a surprising victory with the loss of very few of
his troops. -- Alas! among the slain He himself fell! by his zeal and activity
He was soon distinguished, and marked out for death! -- But he died in the
midst of the shouts of victory, with the satisfaction of having finished,
faithfully, and successfully, the work which had been committed to him by God
and his King: and if true religion was the basis of his courage and fidelity,
He is still, and shall be forever triumphant. His name will be remembered, in
these Colonies more especially, with the greatest honor and gratitude, to the
latest posterity.

This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: we must say, not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the glory, for that thy name
is near thy wondrous works declare. We must not glory merely in man. While we
give deserved honors to the worthy Commanders of our armies and fleets, we must
remember that the victory is the Lord's, and that they are but instruments in
his hands by which he performs all these things for us. Amherst, Wolf,
Boscawen, Saunders, are names which God has highly honored; they have been his
officers to execute his purposes of goodness toward us, by chastening and
subduing a proud, perfidious, and restless enemy: by them God has magnified his
own power, exalted himself in his own strength, and discharged his arrows in
the faces of the adversaries of his Church.

That which we have so long been wishing for, which has been projected again
and again, and attempted in vain, is now accomplished. Canada must be subdued,
has been the cry of New England, ever since we have felt the effects of their
barbarous practices against us. Without any regard to the most solemn
ratifications of peace, they have continually irritated the Salvages against
these northern Provinces more especially, and hired them to destroy our towns,
murder and captivate the inhabitants, and do us all the mischief in their
power. We therefore had sufficient reason to look upon Canada as worse than a
Carthage to us, and make it our grand aim to destroy or reduce it. But former
Expeditions miscarried and came to nothing: corruption, treachery, or
cowardice, and the vices of our armies, which were filled with the most
horrible profaness, and enfeebled with luxury, drunkeness, and debauchery,
rendered all our schemes abortive. The time was not come for our conquest of
that Country: their iniquities were not full; and we were not sufficiently
chastised and humbled. But now we have seen that joyful day which our Fathers
so earnestly wished for. We may consider all Canada as reduced, unless there
should be some farther remarkable interposition of Providence. The passages of
the Lakes are ours; we have possession of their Capital, and only Seaport; they
must surrender, or live another year without supplies of provision, and fight
without ammunition. The Indians are forsaking their interest; our frontiers are
quiet, and will be from henceforth secure, if we are permitted to enjoy, at the
conclusion of the war, this important conquest.

But, as Christians, we should rejoice in these things chiefly as they relate
to the Church and Kingdom of Jesus Christ. We are, by profession, the people of
God. Great Britain has been one of the first among the reformed nations, and on
her security and prosperity the Protestant interest very much depends: and
New England has been highly favored with the light and liberty of the Gospel;
the doctrines of Christ have been taught, and the worship and discipline of his
Church maintained with equal purity here, as in any other part of the world.
And therefore for his own name's sake, for the honor and advancement of true
religion, God has granted us all this prosperity. Zeal for pure religion
brought over the Fathers of New England from their native soil, to plant
churches, on these distant desolate shores, upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone: and God smiled upon
their design, and performed for them Wonders of Providence, almost parallel
with what he did for Israel when he bro't them out of Egypt; so that we can
with great propriety apply the words of the Psalmist, and say -- We have heard
with our ears, etc Psalm. xliv. 1, 2, 3.
. We now enjoy the word and ordinances of God in their original purity and
simplicity, with that liberty which is the glory of christianity; a blessing
from time to time has accompanied the means of grace; our Churches are greatly
multiplied* well supplied with able and faithful Ministers of the
New Testament, and spreading farther and farther into the wilderness; and
notwithstanding our great declensions, there are multitudes not only of honest,
sober, virtuous professors, but humble, obedient, exemplary christians in our
numerous Parishes, by whom the name of our Lord Jesus Christ is and will be
glorified.

We may therefore behold the goodness of God to us, to the nation, to all the
protestant Churches, in the late wonderful success of our arms, and the arms of
our Allies. Thus God is strengthening and giving weight to the protestant
interest, manifesting his wrath against the antichristian powers, and preparing
the way for the final ruin of that spiritual tyranny and mystery of iniquity.
For these ends He has raised up and supported his Prussian Majesty; that like a
second Cyrus, he may execute the Divine purposes against mystical Babylon. God
has given him the most extraordinary military Genius, inspired him with wisdom
and courage, upheld and strengthened him, and subdued mighty armies before his
sword, not merely that he might be famous, as the Hero of the present age, but,
as we have better reason to suppose, to accomplish some important designs of
Providence in favor of the Church. Providence has joined us in alliance with
him; we have shared in his prosperity; the Lord of Hosts has been with our
armies; through God we have done valiantly, for He has subdued our enemies
before us. Twice the French have been disappointed and totally defeated in
their attempts upon Hanover: the former victory obtained over them by his
Prussian Majesty, in person; and the late fatal blow which they have received
from Prince Ferdinand, are equally surprising, and happy in their consequents.

When we review the repeated victories which have been obtained on the
continent of Europe since the present war; -- when we consider how our Fleets
have alarmed and distressed the enemy on their seacoasts, destroyed their
Navy, and ruined their Trade; -- when we recollect all our conquests in Africa,
the West Indies, and these northern parts of America; -- when we consider how
greatly this war has embarrassed and weakened France and Austria, the two main
Pillars of the Papacy; -- we may see very evident tokens of God's favor to his
Church, for the encouragement of all his faithful people to look and wait for
the accomplishment of his promises. The time will shortly come, and it may be
much nearer than we imagine, when it will be proclaimed with a shout of general
joy -- Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen! rejoice over her thou heaven,
and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her. They have
shed the blood of saints and prophets, and God has given them blood to drink,
for they are worthy.

As to America, the immediate design of Providence may be to secure this part
of Christ's visible Church, and make way for its greater enlargement and
prosperity; that the knowledge of the truth may spread and fill the Continent;
that Churches may rise up and shine every where, through the wide countries which
now lie waste; that the Gospel may be propagated in its purity, simplicity, and
power, among the many thousands of indian tribes, which now live a ranging
salvage life round the vast Lakes, and through the boundless forests. Perhaps a
door is now opening for protestant missions, where the Emissaries of Rome have
been establishing falsehood and idolatry; that salvation by Jesus Christ, the
only Mediator, may be preached among them, and that they may be taught a
virtuous civil life. This will make way for the proper improvement of our
largest charitable funds, to convert heathen nations, and those who have been
deluded with popish superstitions, and bring them to the knowledge of God, and
conformity to the doctrines of Christ.

God has been stretching out his hand in favor of the Protestant cause,
disappointing the mischievous designs of the French, and requiting the perfidy
and barbarity which they have so long been practicing against these Colonies.
He has at length bro't us into the strong city, the Capital of a Country which
to us has been like Edom to Israel. Shall we not sing, and praise his power?
Let us behold and admire these remarkable displays of his goodness* and ascribe
to him all the glory of those great things which have been done for us. If we
have a proper sense of his hand in all this, it will fill our hearts with
unfeigned love and gratitude; -- it will strike our minds with deeper
impressions of religion; -- it will lead us to serve God, with greater zeal and
cheerfulness, in all the duties of devotion, in the practice of universal
holiness, in our Churches and families, in our private and public conduct,
according to all his laws and ordinances: -- it will fill us with the highest
esteem of the glorious Gospel, which he has committed into our hands; we shall
live as christians, as true protestants, agreeable to our high and holy
profession, according to the purity and power of that excellent religion which
is our glory.

We have already sufficiently testified our Joy, in a civil way; we have given
a decent public demonstration of our loyalty and love of our country, upon the
news of our conquests; we have proclaimed the success of his Majesty's arms to
distant towns by thundering cannon, and indulged our joy by a splendid evening
show About three weeks before this sermon was delivered; a few days after the
news of the surrender of Quebec arrived here.
. It will now be most proper, and most acceptable to God, that our joy be of a
more composed and religious kind, exercised in the most serious consideration
of the wonderful mercies granted us from Heaven. Though we could have wished for
more religious solemnity on such an extraordinary occasion, and even to have
devoted a whole day to offer our grateful acknowlegements to the God of the
armies of Israel, and meditate on his mercies; this would have been attended
with some inconveniency this last day of the week. -- We are called upon by
authority "to perform divine service in the morning only. The words of the
Proclamation for a general Thanksgiving are, "the Ministers of the Gospel are
hereby directed to perform Divine Service in their respective congregations in
the morning only, the afternoon being devoted to public rejoicings, and lawful
diversions."
Let us therefore, while we are in the House of God, labor to offer our
thanksgivings to him with sincere hearts, and pure devotion. -- But certainly
if it would be inconvenient to spend this whole day in religious exercises; it
must not only be inconvenient, but highly improper and sinful, to spend the
rest of it in the noisy, disorderly, sensual mirth, and diversions of the Mob,
in revelling and drunkeness, in any of those things which either are vicious in
themselves, or tend to discompose the mind, and unfit men for approaching holy
time. -- This evening is the preparation, and the sabbath is at hand. -- Noise
and show, Guns and Fireworks this evening, can never be pleasing to our King,
as testimonies of loyalty; but to the King of Heaven they must be highly
provoking, as the plainest indications that we have no becoming grateful sense
of his Benefits.

We are ready to honor the King by the utmost testimonies of due respect and
allegiance: but whilst we render to Caesar the things which are Cesars, we must
also be careful to render unto God the things which are God's. We must not
break in upon that part of time which God, by an express command, has reserved
for himself and the benefit of our souls; nor put ourselves into an unsuitable
frame for the religious exercises of it.

I tremble for our Sabbaths. -- If We, who have been a people hitherto
remarkable for keeping up the solemnity of the Lord's day, now grow careless,
and foolishly affect and endeavor gradually to introduce an indifference and
laxness in the observation of it; a general corruption of morals will
immediately succeed, vice will break in upon us like a flood, and the
Government will soon very sensibly feel the sad effects. -- But, which is much
more to be dreaded, this will bring down the anger of Heaven upon us: though we
may be secure from enemies for many years to come, God has a variety of
judgments with which he can punish a backsliding profane people. He can and
will send upon us other plagues, as distressing, more destructive, than foreign
arms, or Salvage cruelties.

But I need not enter any farther cautions against disorderly ill-timed
rejoicings: you will doubtless pay so much regard to that melancholy
providence, by which the joy of his Excellency our Governor His only Son JOHN
WENTWORTH, Esquire died suddenly on the thursday before the delivery of this
discourse.
is suddenly turned into mourning, as to mourn with him in decent silence,
omitting the intended parade and diversions of the day.

And now I cannot conclude without one hint at the most proper application of
the whole to the Kingdom and Victories of Christ, that promised Son of David,
whose throne is established forever. God the Father has set this glorious King
upon his holy hill of Sion; He has raised him up to the throne of universal
Empire; and he must reign till all enemies are subdued under his feet. His hand
shall find out all his enemies, his right hand shall find out those that hate
him. In vain do the powers of earth and hell combine against him, and his
Church; he will disappoint and confound them; his wrath will be like a flaming
furnace to devour them. In righteousness he does judge and make war: by his
word and providence he rides forth against his enemies, gloriously terrible in
Majesty and Strength; either to conquer and bring them to submission, that they
may become his willing subjects: or finally to subdue and deliver them up to
complete everlasting Destruction. He will fulfill the prophecies of his Word,
and pour out the vials of his wrath to the utmost upon antichristian nations.
-- But there is a greater and more dreadful Day of Wrath to come, when all the
mysteries of providence and grace will be finished; when all the kingdoms of
this world, and this whole visible creation shall be dissolved; when the wicked
shall be as stubble to the flame, and all who know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of Christ, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from his
presence and the glory of his power. -- Let Sinners fear his wrath, and now
make peace with him, while he offers to grant them not only the privileges of
subjects, but the dignity and inheritance of children of the Most High. -- Let
us acknowledge and obey him as our King and Savior, and we shall rejoice that he
lives, that he reigns and prospers; we shall now triumph in all his victories,
and shall finally triumph forever with his saints, enjoy all the blessings of
his glorious Kingdom, and reign with him in Life eternal.

Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto the King that sits on
the heavenly throne, and to the Lamb forever and ever. AMEN.

^. 14, l. 3, dele comma a^ Antoni^^s. P. 16, l. 4, r. prevail. l. 7. r.
advantage.


