THE LIFE OF General JAMES WOLF, THE CONQUEROR of Canada: OR, THE ELOGIUM of
that Renowned HERO, Attempted according to the RULES of ELOQUENCE.

WITH A MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTION, LATIN and ENGLISH, To perpetuate his MEMORY.

By J*** P******, A.M.

Avida est periculi virtus, et quo tendat, non quid passura sit cogitat:
quoniam et quod passura est, gloriae pars est.

SENECA. LONDON. Printed 1760.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Reprinted, and Sold by FOUL and DRAPER in
Marlborough-street, and by GREEN and RUSSELL in Queen Street.

M.DCC.LX.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO THE MEN OF KENT.
GENTLEMEN,
I TAKE the Liberty of recommending to your Patronage the following Discourse,
the Design of which is to record the Military Fame and Character of the late
illustrious General WOLF.

I WILLINGLY undertook the Task, unbiassed and unasked; presuming, though my
Abilities were far unequal to it, (for an ACHILLES should be described by an
HOMER, and an ALEXANDER painted by an APELLES) that it would meet with a
favorable Reception, both from the Novelty of the Composition, rarely
attempted among us, and the Excellence of the Object it celebrates.

AN Address to none but you, Gentlemen, seemed proper on this Occasion;
because, as it is your Country that gave Birth to, and nursed the Hero, it was
but just you should, on that Account, share in the Elogiums, which are due to
his Merit; and even pride yourselves, that, with the general Applause of the
Nation, you can again add to your List of Kentish Worthies, in Church and
State, in the Army and Navy, the Name of a Man of Kent, who is the Glory of the
present Age, and will be the Admiration of the future.

Go on, Gentlemen, and prosper. May you never want a Race of Heroes; and may
every Man among you, in the Support and Defense of his Country, prove himself a
TRUE MAN OF KENT, which is the hearty Wish of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most humble, and respectful Servant, J*** P******.

THE LIFE OF General James Wolf, etc.
HE Psalm. xviii. 14.
sent out his Arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out Lightning, and
discomfited them. These are the Words of David, acknowledging, in the
Jubilation of a Heart full of Gratitude, the Power of God; when He, the Lord,
his Strength and Buckler, the Horn of his Salvation, and high Tower, delivered
him from the Hand of all his Enemies, and from the Hand of Saul.

THE same great and mighty God, glorious Exodus xv. 7.
in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders, has lately manifested his
Power and stretched-out Arm, in Defense of this Nation; his Munificence has
showered down upon us all the Blessings of Peace, whilst his Justice makes
other Nations feel all the Calamities of War; he has crowned our Arms with
signal Successes both by Sea and Land; the Haughtiness of our inveterate Foes
has been covered by him with Shame and Confusion; and if, regardless of his
Chastisements, they persist in wicked Designs, in perfidious Dealings, in
violent Measures, he will surely level all their aspiring Thoughts with the
Dust, and crush into Abortion their destructive Machinations.

WE have always, and now more especially, just Reason to let Praises and
Thanksgivings dwell on our Lips, and in our Minds, for the singular Mercies it
has pleased God to show us. Let us therefore raise the Voice of Exultation, let
us sound the Trumpet of Praise, let us pay the Tribute of Thanks to the Most
High. This our Felicity, next to, and under the Direction of his all-gracious
providential Care, we are indebted for to his Majesty's wise Councils, which
the Event has proved to have been planned with a judicious Forecast, and
executed with a no less noble than vigorous Spirit. It was these wise Councils
that made Choice of General JAMES WOLF for the Conquest of Quebec, the Capital
of the French Empire in North America. He did not hesitate to obey his Orders,
or cavil with his Instructions; his Country called him forth; he went, fought
the Enemy, and died crowned with Victory.

HERE, what a Scene, mingled with Glory and Pity, Joy and Sorrow, Triumph and
Mourning, presents itself to View!

How glorious was it for a small Body of Troops, amidst a Multiplicity of
Obstacles, almost unsurmountable, to defeat so numerous an Enemy; and yet we
pity that Bravery, that Ardour, that Incentive to Honor, that Sense of Duty,
that Love of the Country in the noble Commander; because, as the moving Spring
to animate others with Motion, as the powerful Example begun and shown in
himself to lead on to Conquest, he was thereby prompted to hazard and lose a
Life so precious to his Country!

HARK! what Shouts of Joy rend the Sky whilst Britons cry VICTORY! The
neighboring Mountains send back the Sound! Quebec hears it, chilled with
Horrors; the Indian Nations stand astonished: But alas! this Joy, so full of
Confusion for the Enemy; so sweet a Source of Pleasure for Britons, is soon
marred with Bitterness. Britons see, with Sorrow painted on their down-cast
Faces, their General breathing his last; they count over, with Regret, his
honorable Wounds; and while they bathe them with their Tears, they cannot help
thinking, that, that Victory must be inestimable, which required for its
Purchase the Blood of so great and so good a General.

Lo! Triumphs were not wanting, to declare the Importance of our Conquest. They
were not, indeed, those Triumphs that dazzle the Sight, by the Splendour of an
external solemn Pomp; but they were Triumphs in the Heart of every true Briton,
and every sincere Wisher to the Welfare of his Country. Our North-American
Colonies had long experienced all the Inconveniences of a more than troublesome
Neighborhood; they were delivered up, by an encroaching and rapacious Enemy,
to the Incursions and Depredations of the most barbarous Savages: Let us draw a
Veil over the Treatment they received, over the uncommon Cruelties exercised
upon them; Humanity cannot stand the Shock of a bare Representation! What must
be their Thoughts when the welcome News came to them of the Conquest of Quebec?
All their Fears were dissipated; the certain Hopes of future Peace and Security
smiled upon them; every Breast glowed with Triumph. Britain, a fond Parent,
felt the warm Emotions of the dear Children she had nurtured and educated with
so much Care. How deeply was she, some Time ago, afflicted to learn their
Distress? She rode on the rapid Wings of Tenderness to their Relief; her potent
Arm raised them up; it bade them follow to the Revenge of Battle; and now she
exults with them in Triumph. O great and glorious Triumph, how magnificent
would thou have been, were the Triumphs of mortal Man, pure, unsullied, and
unmixed! Thy Brightness is obscured, thy Beauties fade, they Gaiety grows
sullen, when the Reflection starts upon us, dismal and doleful Reflection!
proclaiming aloud, that WOLF is dead; WOLF! that valiant Captain, whose
auspicious Conduct is the Cause of all our Triumph. Then, O then, the Eye is
seen to mourn; the Countenance in vain recals its Sprightliness; nay, the whole
Body, to show it sympathizes with the sincere Regret of the Mind, would
willingly clothe itself with a Garb expressive of Sorrow!

BUT cease, ye unavailing Tears! Cease to flow! Ye flow without Reason! WOLF
is not dead. He now enjoys a Life of Immortality. His Memory will be for ever
dear to Britons. Heaven, summing up his heroic Virtues, judged them to be ripe
for the Fruition of eternal Happiness. Yes, O Divine Being, Author of all good
Gifts! He Psalm. xxi. ver. 4, 5.
asked Life of thee, and thou gave it him, even Length of Days for ever and
ever: His Glory is great in thy Salvation, Honor and Majesty have thou laid
upon him.

SUCH are the ineffable Rewards that await Virtue; such General JAMES WOLF is
now in the quiet and undisturbed Possession of; he now sits exalted above the
Reach of impotent Envy, which cannot detract from his Merit; and this his Merit
will appear in the most conspicuous and amiable Light, after passing in Review
the principal Actions of his Life.

JAMES WOLF has a just Claim to very honorable Progenitors. He was the Son of
Colonel EDWARD WOLF, and was born at Westerham, in the County of Kent, where
he was baptized January the 11th, 1726. It is said of him, that, even in his
earliest Youth, he had by Words and Actions exhibited several Specimens of what
he was one Day likely to be: So true it is, that the natural Disposition will
work its Way, and show itself in the Display of ingenious Contrivances, when
the Application of Art and Precepts, where it is wanting, will have little or
no Effect. His illustrious Parents, who could easily discern in him the Dawn of
great Hopes, were assiduous to improve it into the Maturity of strong, bright,
and vivid Rays. Every Thing in young WOLF contributed to second their
Intentions; he not only performed whatever he was enjoined with all the
Alacrity of Inclination, but even his Performance was admirable; and the more
so, as it far exceeded his Years. Happy Genius! destined by such evident Marks
to be the Support and Ornament of your Country.

THESE were only the Rudiments and Essays of tender Childhood: The Flower was
still in the Bud; it only glistened bedecked with the Pearls of Morning Dew.
But, when once its native genial Warmth began to transmit the generous Sap, it
opened, it blowed, into all the Charms of Adolescency. Now we behold young
WOLF, not insensibly, but, by a brisk and lively Progress, learning and
practicing all the Duties, and all the Virtues, that spread their Luster on a
well-instituted Life. His Apprehension was exceeding quick and clear,
penetrating almost in a Moment into the deepest Recesses of whatever was
necessary for him to know: His Judgment, acute and solid, readily determined
him in the Choice of what was best; and his Memory, easy and retentive, laid up
for his Use, as in a faithful Repository, all his precious Acquisitions.
Society, as in a Mirror, could contemplate in him all the Perfections that
tend to inhance its Benefit. His Friendships were the more sincere and
constant, as being cemented on the Groundwork of Reason; yet not so restrained
to the Sweets of particular Attachments, as ever to exclude a more extensive
Spirit of Benevolence, which glowed in him, to promote the universal Good of
Mankind. Hence he was polite, affable, gentle, free, and unreserved in his
Conversation; no stiff, sullen, forbidding, haughty, boisterous Airs ruffled
the Serenity of his Countenance; and, as his Graces were truly engaging,
actuated by Honor, replete with Candor, devoid of Affectation, so none ever
refused him the kindest Wishes of their Hearts.

BESIDES these social Virtues, and many others which might be enumerated, he
possessed, even in those Years, that Purity and Integrity of Mind, which made
him on all Occasions adhere strictly to the Dictates of Justice, and withal
inspired him with such a deep Sense of Religion, that the good Christian did
not seem so much added to, as to crown and complete the Uniformity of his
Conduct. And, indeed, it was this Sense of Religion that imparted Spirit and
Motion; nay, I may say, covered with the Shield of Intrepidity, and fitted the
Wings of Impetuosity to, the Courage which afterward appeared in his military
Character. He was thoroughly convinced within himself, that he who is
regardless of his Duty to God, will be but a superficial Observer of his Duty
to his Country and Prince. The Officer whose Vigor of Mind and Body is
emasculated by Voluptuousness, whose Appetites relish nothing but Immoralities,
cannot look at an Enemy in the Face: He either flies, betraying the dastardly
Spirit of a Coward; or, overwhelmed by all the Horrors of conscious Guilt,
kneels, deprecating the Vengeance of the uplifted Arm ready to strike the fatal
Blow: Whereas the Christian Soldier, who complies with his Duty, not by
Necessity, but by Choice; not through the servile Fear of Reproach, but for the
Welfare and Glory of his Country, is not abashed to meet his Foe; he is seized
with no Horrors of Conscience to make him grovel in Timidity; his Mind is
erect, steady, and active; no Difficulties can obstruct his victorious Sword,
nor no Dangers deter him from executing the Purpose of his Soul.

ALL the Actions of WOLF expressed this Pourtrait of the Christian Soldier,
from the very Time he embraced the Profession of Arms, which was so early as
when he was but just able to bear them. Eager to receive Instruction, punctual
to obey Command, assiduous to form himself and others to all the Exactness of
military Discipline, he soon merited the Esteem of his Equals, and was honored
with the Commendations of his Superiors. How wonderfully does Praise operate on
an ingenuous Mind! It is its Sting, its Spur, its Fire; it rouses, it pushes
on, it inflames the whole Man to atchieve the most gallant Exploits: Yet WOLF,
though sensible of it, was far from being puffed up with vain Pride: Praise may
flatter others with the Thoughts of Self-sufficiency, with an over Confidence
in their Abilities; but in him its Effects were only predominant to the
Out-doing of himself in still greater and more spirited Acts.

DURING the last War he was present at almost every Engagement, in which he
bore no inconsiderable Part, signalising his Courage by vigorous Attacks upon
the Enemy, and frequently his Conduct, in a very masterly Manner, amidst
Dangers and Difficulties. No Wonder, then, if his military Genius was singled
out, as one that promised to appear eminently distinguished in the first Rank.
But, whilst it was thus rising apace, admired and applauded by all, Peace
lulled to Rest the Horrors of War, and cut short his fond Hopes of gathering
fresh Laurels.

IT happens but too often, upon the Declaration of a Peace, that both the
Officer and Soldier, to wear down the disagreeable Impression of the many
Fatigues and Hardships they underwent in the Service of the War, greedily catch
at the Amusement of every Relaxation, or rather the Bait of every Pleasure that
presents itself. This Enchantment, so sweet and ravishing in the Taste it
affords, is fraught with a sure though slow Poison. The Desires are stimulated
to a further Indulgence, and at length Habit so rivets the Chains of soft
Dalliance, that the martial Hero, encompassed by them, is surprised, when
called upon to exert his former Valor, that he cannot possibly find himself.
Not so with WOLF. Recreation and Pleasure never so prevailed over him as to
make him forget what he owed to himself and to his Country. All the Nerves of
his warlike Disposition were kept firmly braced; and, studious to improve the
important Lessons he had already learned into a lasting Advantage, he wisely
made the Ease and Leisure of Peace instrumental to the cultivating of the Arts
of War.

AND who but he could so properly make War his Study? Who but he discovered the
mighty Genius for it? The more we take a View of this Genius, the more we shall
be enamoured of it: No Quality was wanting to it, which seemed requisite to
form and magnify the Hero. Ancient and modern Discipline were equally known to
him: He united the most shining Talents of the best Masters in the Science of
War in his own Person; fully persuaded, that it is not Speculation, which may
be vain and idle, but Contrivance, Industry, and Application that complete the
Warrior.

OF this I call you to be the Witnesses, ye six Battalions, that fought so
gloriously in the Plains of Minden! All the French Cavalry felt your Shock,
striking down and ravaging like a Thunderbolt. It was not a wild Force,
rushing forth with precipitate Rashness, and often spending itself in the
Impetuosity of its Efforts, that broke and routed the Enemy's Squadrons; it was
the Regularity and Exactness of Discipline WOLF himself infused into one of
these Battalions, when he governed it as Lieutenant Colonel. By the Instinct of
his Capacity it leads the Way in that Field of Fame; the rest speed after the
great Example: Inclination calls them to it, and Death is dealt from every Blow
of the invincible Legion!

THIS is thy Victory, here are thy Trophies, O WOLF! I say again it was the
Instinct of thy Capacity that conquered in the Plains of Minden: Thy Spirit,
thy Elevation, Presence of Mind, and Judgment were present at the Battle: They
guided the Work thy Hands had fashioned; and this Work overthrew the Enemy,
with great Slaughter. All Europe heard of it and was amazed! Britain knew thee,
her Son, to be the Author of it, and therefore she now records the Glory of
this Day in her Annals to thy immortal Honor!

WHEN, at the Breaking-out of the present War, the great Minister, who now sits
at the Helm of Affairs, was making strenuous Efforts to cut off the Hydra-Head
of Faction, and to awake the national Spirit from the ungrateful Slumbers it
was laid in, WOLF, fresh with manly Life, appeared upon the Stage of Action,
to put in Practice, for his Country's Service, the profound Study we have seen
him make in Peace of the Arts of War. The Minister's discerning Eye pointed him
out to be a powerful Aid to those, who, in Right of Seniority, claimed the
Command, for executing his Designs against Rochfort; though the ill Success of
that Affair gave us afterward Reason to wish the Claim had been founded on the
Right of undisputed Merit, influenced and biassed by the unfeigned Love of the
Country. However pure and upright the Patriot Minister's Intentions were, it
may be said, that, his Administration being then in its Infancy, and not so
thoroughly established, Feuds, Animosities, and Jealousies had not yet
subsided; and that there remained a Deal of the old Leaven, to corrupt the Mass
of the new, yet true System of Policy, if it was not purged off by due
Circumspection. Time alone, and a true Estimate of our real Interest, can
produce these desirable Effects; and it is therefore we shall leave the
well-projected Attack of Rochfort in the Obscurity it has been involved in,
observing only, to the What is here asserted may be seen authenticated by our
best Accounts.
Honor of our young Hero, who was Quarter-Master-General upon this Expedition,
that he, with other Officers, whilst our Fleet remained in the Bay of Basque,
the Weather being at the same Time very favorable for a Descent, went on Shore
one Night, and walked two Miles up the Country without Interruption. Every Part
of the Beach was found by him and his Company to be firm and dry; no
Encampment, no Troops, no Batteries upon it. All, upon their Return to the
Fleet, pressed the landing of the Troops with great Warmth; and, to the very
last, there did not appear to be any great Body of Men near the Shore, though
something looked like an Encampment.

As it was practicable to land; as no sufficient Body of the Enemy's Troops or
Batteries were discovered to prevent it; as there was no Difference in the
Situation of Rochfort, contrary to the Intelligence given at Court; the Failure
of the Expedition seemed to be chiefly grounded on not taking or attacking Fort
Fouras. This was certified by the brave WOLF; who took the Liberty, as he says
himself, of suggesting his Opinion to Sir Edward Hawke, and Sir John Mordaunt,
That he did not doubt but a Ship of War might batter Fort Fouras, and that a
Body of Troops might be landed at the same Time, and attack it with Success: He
took the Liberty also to mention, as he only had seen the Fort, that, if Sir
Edward Hawke thought proper to make a Diversion near Rochelle at the same Time,
it might engage the Attention of the French, and give an Opportunity of making
a Descent between: He further hinted his Opinion, as to sending the
Bomb-Ketches out, not knowing but Bombs might be thrown into Rochelle; and he
mentioned another Circumstance, in regard to sending for the Pilot of the
Magnanime, who would inform Sir Edward if there was Depth of Water sufficient
to carry a Ship up to Fouras; adding, from the indifferent Opinion he had of
the Fort, a forty or fifty Gun Ship might at least annoy the Fort, so as to
give an Opportunity of landing.

HERE were Dispositions worthy the most experienced General; Dispositions which
in all Prowould have been attended with Success in the Execution, if they had
been hearkened unto with a real Intention of doing effectual Service. The
generous Heart of WOLF could not help testifying its Regret for such a
Stagnation in Resolution, which appeared but too sensibly: And, as he sincerely
wished well to his Country, what indignant Emotions must have filled his
Breast, to see an expensive and formidable Armament serve only the Purposes of
a vain Parade! Well may Complaints and Murmurings be heard from most Quarters;
not against the Minister nor the Admiral; for their Glory, far from being
eclipsed, rose superior to all Envy: The Minister had still a WOLF who was
willing and able to wipe away the Nation's Disgrace; and this he did, when the
brave Amherst suffered him, uncontrouled, to exert his Talents for the Taking
of Louisbourg.

ON See the London Gazette of August 18, 1758.
the 2d of June, 1758, when our Fleet, with about a Third of their Complement
of Troops, anchored in Gabarus Bay, the gallant WOLF, then a
Brigadier-General, in Conjunction with General Amherst, the Commander in Chief,
and Brigadier-General Lawrence, reconnoitred the Shore as near as they could;
and made a Disposition for landing in three Places the next Morning, in Case
the rest of the Troops arrived. The Weather continuing very bad, and the Swell
of the Sea high, the Landing could not possibly take Place till the 8th; at
which Time Brigadier-General WOLF was the first that rowed into the Shore with
his Detachment. The Enemy did not throw away a Shot, till his Boats were near
in Shore, and then directed the whole Fire of their Cannon and Musquetry upon
them. Notwithstanding their Fire, and the Violence of the Surf, which made it
almost impracticable to find a Place for getting a Boat on Shore, Brigadier
WOLF pursued his Point; and, landing just at the Left of the Cove, took Post,
attacked the Enemy, and forced them to retreat. Several Boats overset, several
were shattered to Pieces, and all the Men jumped into the Water, to follow
their intrepid Leader.

MANY were the Services whereby he afterward signalised himself during this
Siege; and particularly, when, on Intelligence received that the Enemy had
destroyed the grand Battery, and called in their Out-posts, he was detached
with 1200 Men, four Companies of Grenadiers, three Companies of Rangers, and
some light Infantry, round the north-east Harbor to the Light-House Point, to
silence the Island Battery, and at the same Time to attempt to destroy the
Ships in the Harbor. He took Possession of the Light-House Point, with all the
Posts on that Side the Harbor, which the Enemy had abandoned, with several
Cannon; and, when a large Party of them had crept out one Morning, to get some
old Palisades and Wood, he pushed them in with a brisk Fire; and, taking Posts
on the Hills, from whence it was intended to try to demolish the Shipping, he
marched forward on the Right, and forced the Enemy back to Cape Noire, with a
smart Fire. After this, a great Cannonading continuing from the Town and
Shipping on our Batteries, he was making an advanced Work on the Right, thrown
up at 650 Yards from the Covered-Way, with an Intention of erecting a Battery
to destroy the Defenses of the Place. The next Thing he did, was to push on a
Corpse, and take Possession of the Hills in the Front of the Barasoy, where he
made a Lodgment: And, lastly, a few Days before the Town capitulated, his
Batteries contributed greatly to burn three of the Enemy's Ships. In short, it
is incredible what extraordinary Feats he performed in this Siege; and all of
them the genuine Effects of his distinguished Abilities, his Conduct and
Intrepidity; which rendered him a Terror to the Enemy, and not without just
Reason the Safeguard and Ornament of his Country.

ON his Return home, what Encomiums were passed upon him by all Degrees of Men!
But he, modest and discreet, ascribed all the Glory to the prudent Management
of him under whom he fought. It was a sufficient Satisfaction to himself that
his Country had been faithfully served, and that he had done what he thought
only his Duty. Unparalleled Moderation in the Manner of accepting the Tribute
of Praise! Yet it is by these and the like humble Sentiments that exalted Merit
appears in the Bloom of never-fading Beauty. Pride, and Arrogance, and
Self-conceit will make but a Contemptible Figure; and, notwithstanding all
Endeavors to impose by a glaring Outside, cannot help showing the ridiculous
Deformity.

WOLF then deserved, as the Restorer of the Reputation of the British Arms; as
the Conqueror of Cape Breton with the noble Amherst; to ride with him in the
triumphal Car of Fame. Amherst does not refuse to acknowledge him the Partner
of his Glory: Even without Jealousy he felicitates him that others think as
well of him as of himself; and, to declare how eminently he stands in his
Esteem, he generously recommends him to his Country, as worthy of the highest
military Command. This Recommendation, though powerful, and highly valued by the
grateful WOLF, did not however carry that Force and Energy with it as his own
Actions. They spoke aloud what he was and what he would be; and, though silent
himself, uninfluenced by Ambition, which he was never known to court through
the Mediation of the Great; entirely passive in the Disposal that might be made
of his Abilities, he was called upon, as the useful Man in the Exigencies of
the State, to command the important Expedition against Quebec.

THERE is something secret in Nature, not to be defined or expressed by Words,
which, on considering certain Objects, rouses the Passions from the Indolency
of Indifference, to make them imbibe the Delicacies of Refinement, and elates
the Soul with a full Prospect of Grandeur, Magnificence, Excellence, and
Delight. Such is the Cosideration of WOLFE's Spirit in the conducting of this
Enterprise; it is an Object that quickens the dull Lethargy of the Passions
into the liveliest Transports; we cannot withold our Admiration of it; the Soul
sometimes quietly and joyfully rests in its Contemplation; sometimes she is
winged into Ecstasies; for she finds in it both Grandeur and Delight: Not
Grandeur and Delight contracted within a narrow Compass, as in a Meadow
variegated with Flowers, and receiving an additional Beauty from a purling
Brook, taught to water the tender Grass; but Grandeur and Delight, vast and
extensive, as in the unbounded Prospect of Hills and Vales, inumbrated with
tall Cedars, and watered by an expanded River.

FEW or none ever before rose to WOLFE's great Reputation in War, till they had
first obtained and firmly established it by repeated Victories and Commands.
He, in some Measure, as an unprecedented Example, building upon the Foundation
of scarce any other Advantages than the Expectation he had raised of himself,
at once gained such an Ascendant in the Love of his Fellow Subjects, the
Confidence of the Soldiery, the Esteem of the Officers, the Respect of the
Government, the Favor of the Court, that all, with undisguised unanimous
Suffrages, placed him in the Summit of this Command. We shall now see how he
behaved himself in it, how he proved himself worthy of it; as otherwise a
General must have little Reason to value himself upon the most shining Success.

WHEN See the Gazette of October 16, 1759.
General WOLF appeared before Quebec, in the River of St. Lawrence, with his
Troops, he found the Obstacles to his intended Operations much greater than he
had Reason to expect, or could foresee, and chiefly from the natural Strength
of the Country, which the Enemy seemed wisely to depend upon. To complete their
Security, Succors of all Kinds had been thrown into Quebec, and a numerous
Body of regular Troops, joined to the Troops of the Colony, filled up with
every Canadian that was able to bear Arms, besides several Nations of Savages,
had taken the Field in a very advantageous Situation.

WHAT was the Prospect of reducing a Place which was every Way so well prepared
for a vigorous Defense? General WOLF could not flatter himself that he was
able to effect it; yet, with his little Army, whose Courage and Resolution he
could depend upon, he hoped, if an Opportunity offered of attacking that of the
Enemy, however superior and formidable, he should disconcert their Measures by
dispersing them, and so as to facilitate with Success an Attack upon the Town.

THE Enemy were encamped along the Shore, and entrenched in every accessible
Part. On his Landing upon the Isle of Orleans, he found it absolutely necessary
both to possess himself of, and to fortify, the Point of Levi, and the
Westermost Point of the Isle; because, from either the one or the other, the
Enemy might make it impossible for any Ship to lie in the Basin of Quebec, or
even within two Miles of it. This Service being performed with little Loss, he
ordered Batteries of Cannon and Mortars to be erected with great Dispatch on
the Point of Levi, to bombard the Town and Magazines, and to injure the Works
and Batteries. The Enemy, perceiving these Works in great Forwardness, passed
the River to attack and destroy them; but, falling into Confusion, they fired
upon one another, and went back; and the Effect of this Artillery was so great
though across the River, that the Upper Town was considerably damaged, and the
Lower entirely destroyed.

THE Variety of his other Dispositions, Stratagems, and masterly Strokes of
Generalship, are still so recent in every one's Memory, that a Detail of them
is unnecessary; and it will be sufficient to say, that, to draw the Enemy from
their Situation, and bring them to an Action, he at last formed and executed
that great Plan of conveying his Troops above the Town, after leaving the
Points of Levi and Orleans in a proper State of Defense. He was but just then
recovered from a dangerous Fit of Illness, yet his bodily Strength, as if not
in the least impaired, was so refreshed by the Vigor of his Mind, that he was
present in Person, active, diligent, and indefatigable, wherever any Thing was
to be done or ordered for taking an Advantage of the Enemy. Thus fulfilling, in
his whole Manner, the Character of Caesar;

Nil actum reputans si quid supresset agendum.

AND now the Enemy being obliged to quit their Post, collected the whole of
their Forces, and advanced to give Battle, which they could not avoid. General
WOLF, in the mean Time, put his little Army in extreme good Order, and
displayed his Ranks so as to strike a Terror into the Enemy by the Appearance
of a far greater Number than he really had. Cool, provident, and prepared in
this Manner for all Events, his Troops showing, at the same Time, a Countenance
mixed with Alacrity and Steadiness, he received the Enemy's first Shcok, which,
as it is customary with them, was very brisk and animated. But this their
Vivacity, from a little Check, is soon relaxed into the Debility of unresisting
Languor; the Man degenerates into Woman, and can only exert a like impotent
Struggle. WOLF prudently reserved his Fire till he was within forty Yards, and
then it was so well continued, and with so good Effect, that the Enemy every
where gave Way. In this Onset, a Musquet-Ball pierced through, and shattered
the Bone of his Wrist; but, regardless of such a painful and desperate Wound,
he immediately wrapped it up, and, quite unconcerned, followed the impetuous
Blow he had just struck, giving the Enemy no Time to recover from the
Consternation and Confusion he had thrown them into. Then it was, in the Midst
of the Havoc he was making, thinning and mowing down their Ranks, that, a
second Ball passing through his Body, he fell at the Head of his brave
Grenadiers, as they were darting, like Lightning, to assail with their Bayonets.

OH! WOLF; what a melancholy Fall was this for thy Country, yet, glorious and
honorable to thee, and still more glorious and honorable by the Circumstances
that attended it! When faint and breathless, through the Effusion of thy Blood,
thou wast, by the Mournful Ministry of a few Soldiers, carried off from that
Scene of Victory, ready to proclaim thee the Conqueror of Canada, thou did,
still intent upon the Event, raise thy drooping Head, and check the mighty
Conflicts of thy Soul, hastening to sever herself from thy Body: This thou
did with new Life and Motion, when the Shout of, They run, sounded in thy
Ears. Thou did ask, with all the Eagerness of strong Perturbation, Who run?
and receiving the joyous Answer, that the Enemy were routed, with a complete
and decisive Overthrow, thou did reply, in tender Emotions for thy Country's
Success, Then, I thank God, I die contented. Peace and Composure, with these
Words, sealed thy Eyelids, and thy Head gently reclining, willingly resigned
thy mortal Life.

IF we search the Records of History for a Death like that of WOLF, shall we
find one, in all Respects, so Noble? Many have fought for their Country, and
died in its Defense, perhaps with Sentiments of Magnanimity equal to his, and
with as undaunted a Resolution to submit to the Laws of Fatality; but how few,
under his Circumstances, have graced Death with such attractive Charms, that
what commonly is abhorred as an Evil, seems pleasing, welcome, and desirable?
We praise then, we magnify such a Death; we exult within ourselves, that we can
produce such an Example to awake Imitation upon a like Occasion; and we even
say, that so to die, is not to die in Effect, is not to be extinct and
forgotten, but to live in the Memory of future Ages, till that Duration comes
when Time shall be no more.

WOLF has acquired that Life of lasting Memory; none envy it him; He
flourishes like the Balm-tree, and shall be exalted as the Cedar of Lebanon;
every grateful Briton has already raised a Monument to him in his Breast; and
Marble shall be taught, under the Hands of the Artist, to pay him its Homage,
by all the emblematical Illustrations of Heroism it is capable of expressing:
But what shall we further say, and what shall we feel, whilst, with admiring
Eyes, we survey the Apparatus of this condign Pomp, whilst the magnificent
Objects convey to us an Idea of the Excellence they represent? We shall say, It
is WOLF that has deserved all this: We can say no more; we feel the rest; we
feel the bright Effigies of his Glory making our Bosoms to pant, but its
Beauties are not to be told; neither can we describe its Height and Depth; the
Imagination wanders in a Maze, and cannot figure out the exact Measurement.

IF we place this Death of WOLF in another Point of View, looking back to the
Cause for which he died, a Cause no other than the Love of serving his Country;
we shall have Reason to lament that Ardour which exposed him so much to the
Perils of War, and set open against him the greedy Jaws of Mortality before his
Time; we shall imbibe a little Tincture of Jealousy against the Monuments and
Trophies, destined as if too soon to perpetuate his Memory; we shall accuse as
a little too hasty the putting him in Possession of such an Accumulation of
Glory. Just Regret! just Jealousy; just Complaint! His Country has suffered by
his Loss; she now is thoroughly sensible of it; she wishes his Life had been
protracted into a full Length of Days; and she sighs, apprehensive of not
finding a Man like him to fight her Battles.

HENCE is the Source of Tears for WOLFE's Death, which refuses to be entirely
dried up; and hence the plaintive Voice of Grief, which has been beard from all
Parts of the British Realms. It will still be renewed with the deepest Concern,
whenever we approach that hallowed Ground where his precious Remains are
deposited, or visit the Monuments consecrated to his Memory. Thither we shall
come inspired with a reverential Awe for the Place! for the Virtues that guard
its Precincts, with Frowns and stern Looks, bid the Profane stand aloof. The
pure in Heart and Well-wishers to their Country will come, and mourning in the
Silence of their Hearts, will sometimes start with Surprise, and speak within
themselves; "Then WOLF is dead? -- Surely he is gone too soon! -- Propitious
Heaven lent him only for a Day! -- Death found him too fine a Victim! -- And is
he then dead? He who was the Author of so much Happiness to us! He who was the
Son of Honor, truly brave, truly noble, friendly and candid, gentle and
beneficent, great and glorious!"

BEHOLD, the Soldier comes! He whose Hands WOLF had taught and fitted to
battle, and whose Soul he had filled with Courage and Perseverance: He mourns
his Loss in him, the best of Officers, because with him his chief Happiness is
vanished. WOLF had always a Fellow-feeling for him; his Treatment of him was
always humane; and he never let his Services pass unrewarded. What Affection,
what Gratitude, what Willingness, what Confidence, what Ardour, must not
Manners so conciliating in the General, excite and cherish in the Soldier!

AND thou, lovely Miss L -- th -- r.
Maid! will come: Thou, to whom Choice, guided by Reason pointed out WOLF as
the deserving Object of thy Affections. The innate Worth of his manly Soul
kindled in thee the tenderest Sentiments. He gave and thou did catch the
Flame: Conscious Love cannot sinother its Fires; the Glow bursts out, and each
Heart burns alike, and each Heart collects its Heat into the warmest Wishes for
completing a lasting Union. The Decorum of Life and Virgin-Modesty postpone the
happy Day. In the mean Time, his Country's Cause calls WOLF away. Love may bid
him decline its Support; may paint with Horrors to him the Aspect of War; but
he, mindful of the Dictates of Honor, and, above all, of the Duty he owes to
his Country, removes, without Reluctance, from his Sight the Blandishments of
Love, and all the alluring Sweets of domestic Ease and Felicity; and, though he
fondly may desire to embrace and enjoy them, for the Sake of her, and with her,
who generously makes a Tender of them; yet they ought not, in his Opinion, to
take Place of the Pleasure that will arise from the Consciousness of having
done well in the Service and for the Love of our Country. The Way to these
Pleasures is beset with Hardships, Difficulties, and Dangers; to the other
smooth, easy, and secure: Yet it seemed not so eligible to WOLF, who knew the
inestimable Value of the pure Satisfaction of the Mind, and, at the same Time,
did not slight the Gratification of Sense, if it was in his Circumstances
immediately consistent with his Honor. Thou also, illustrious Maid, Mirror of
thy Sex! thou could not delight in the Man in whose Honor thy discerning
Eye did perceive the least Stain. Thou wast as tender of WOLFE's Honor as he
could be himself: He flew with thy Approbation and good Wishes to the Field of
Glory, and fancied himself sufficiently happy, if he could at his Return lay at
thy Feet his Harvest of Laurels. Alas! thou art too sensible how he was
prevented; thy Sorrows need not be renewed; for the dear Image of his Virtues
is so often present to thy Mind, that every Time thou would gladly drop a
Tear into his Urn.

EVEN so, as Britons now their WOLF, the Jews formerly lamented their Judas
Maccabeus. They 1 Maccab. c. ix. ver. 20, 21.
bewailed him, and all Israel made great Lamentations for him, and mourned many
Days, saying, how is the valiant Man fallen that delivered Israel! Just was the
Cause of their Lamentation; for the fought Ibid. c. iii. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6.
with Cheerfulness the Battle of Israel. He got his People great Honor, and
put on a Breast Plate as a Giant, and girt his war like Harness about him, and
he made Battles, protecting the Host with his Sword. In his Acts he was like a
Lion, and like a Lion's Whelp roaring for his Prey: For he pursued the Wicked,
and burnt up those that vexed his People. Wherefore the Wicked shrunk for Fear
of him, and all the Workers of Iniquity were troubled, because Salvation
prospered in his Hand. His Memorial is blessed for ever. Cannot we say, after a
close Examination of the Features of this Pourtrait, but that WOLF exhibits a
very striking Resemblance of them? His moral Character showed the Judas
Maccabeus in him; his military Character is only clouded by the Number of
Judas's signal Victories; but his Exit was as glorious.

EPAMINONDAS, the great Theban Captain, (whom WOLF also resembles, as dying,
like him, victorious over his Enemy) being asked, which of his Friends he loved
best; answered, that they must all die before he could be positive in deciding
the Degree they held in his Esteem. The same Thought has been adopted and
improved by others, but by all with the Intention of inculcating, that none can
be deemed truly good and happy before they die, Death alone being the Test of
their Actions, so far as it points out, by a just Measure, the Depravity and
Rectitude discoverable in them. If Britons were now asked the Question, which
of their Generals they love best; they would answer, without Hesitation, WOLF;
because the Conduct of his whole Life was invariably the same, great and good,
and Death authenticated and ratified this Greatness and Goodness, by affixing
her Seal to it with an indelible Impression. Other Generals, renowned in
History for being great Masters in the Art of War, appear in a very
contemptible Light, when divested of the external Pageantry that obscures the
Deformity of their Actions in private Life: They are then the mere Man, and not
the Hero. The Success of their Enterprises, however obtrusive of the Ideas of
Pomp and Grandeur on weak Minds, cannot extenuate the pernicious Effects of
their Ambition, or Avarice, or Lust, or Cruelties, or Oppression. To gratify
these inordinate Passions, they waded through a Sea of Blood; they led Armies
into a Field of Slaughter; they taught them the Way and Manner of butchering
one another; and, in the End, instead of fighting the Battles of their Country
in Support of its own Independency, or the Rights and Liberties of Mankind,
they proved the merciless Destroyers of God's Creatures, and the Violaters of
the most sacred Laws of human Society. Death often seized upon them in the
Midst of their Havoc and Outrages, and transmitted them, as they deserved,
deeply branded with the Ignominy of their enormous Guilt, to the Horror and
Detestation of Posterity. Not so with WOLF: Without Ambition, Avarice, or any
other Vice, his Talents were employed in Defense of the Independence of his
Country, with which the Rights and Liberties of Europe are intimately
connected: As another Judas Maccabeus, be fought with Cheerfulness its Battle;
his People by it got great Honor; be burnt up those that vexed his People;
Salvation prospered in his Hand, and his Memorial is blessed for ever.

GREAT GOD! just and terrible in thy Judgments, with what an humbling Blow to
Humanity have thou struck us, by the Death of our beloved General JAMES WOLF!
But, Lord, if thou do unsheath thy Sword, it is not to destroy, but to mend;
it is not to blast our Hopes, but to make them spring with a fuller Bloom; it
is not to crush us under the Weight of thy Vengeance, but to teach us to rise
superior to all Disasters. Thou have in JAMES WOLF set an Example to our
Generals and Officers, that, by faithfully copying after it, they may learn to
relinquish voluptuous Ease, despise Dangers and Difficulties, and, when
necessary, fall gloriously, like him, for their Country. Stung and quickened by
noble Emulation, behold they make ready to run for the Prize in the same Course
of Glory. It is PIT, who, with thy divine Providence, was appointed the tutely
Genius of this Nation, that leads the Way with Precept. Thy Wisdom has
replenished him with the good Gifts of deliberating maturely, judging soundly,
counselling securely, ordaining exactly, and executing effectually. He has
introduced the Blessings of Harmony and good Understanding between our
Commanders both by Sea and Land; they now no longer obstruct the Nation's
Welfare by Contradictions, Dissensions, and Disobedience. Oh! may the Blessing
continue! And may we never want a PIT, under the auspicious Influence of his
Majesty, to find for us another WOLF; whose Loss, though we are sincerely
afflicted for it, thy all-gracious Care, O God, has abundantly compensated, by
preserving to us his Like in Amherst, Monckton, Townshend, Hawke, and Saunders!

A Monumental INSCRIPTION, LATIN and ENGLISH. To perpetuate the Memory of
General WOLF.
LATIN.
Siste Viator, Et hic contemplare, Quicquid nobile excelsumque concipi potest,
Consentire in elogium JACOBI WOLF.

Excultus omni virtute heroica,
Tum verbo, tum exemplo, sub tutela patris ejus
EDWARDI WOLF, Tribuni Militum;
Jam vix adulta aetate, indolis in obsequium pronus,
Militaris vitae munia amplexus est.
Bellatorem fumma diligentia effingens
Se, inter praelia cum hostibus commissa, animosum,
Inter pericula interritum, inter angustias providum,
Praestitit.
Ob praeclarum ad res bellicas ingenium,
Faventibus celeberrimis Ducibus,
Sub quibus stipendia fecit;
Ad amplissimos in exercitu honorum gradus,
Continuata serie, evectus est.
Nativus ejus vigor, cum disciplina
Quam ipse fecundum leges praefinitas observandam instituit,
Maxima laud in Cohorte, quam art bellica erudiit,
Enituerunt:
Quum in Campis juxta MINDAM,
Suo exemplo quinque aliarum studia accendens,
Impetu una facto, sulminis instar,
Ab eis, Gallicus Equitatus fusus, fugatusque fuit.
Credit, Posteri!
Totius Europae Annals rem factam declarant.
Martius ejus ardor et solertia apud ROCHFORDAM,
Abnuente Profectionis militaris Praeposito, coercita;
Clare in subversione LUDOVICI-BURGI,
Emicuerunt.
Plane illum dixeris cum AMHERSTIO
Expugnatorem PROMONTORII-BRITANNICI:
Fortes non invident Fortibus;
Generoso animi sui instituto eum obsequi passus est.
Nunc dignus habitus summo imperio praeesse;
QUEBECUM,
Urbs primaria imperii Gallici in AMERICA Septentrionali,
Designatur tanquam optabilis victoria,
Quam eximiae illius dotes promittunt.
Ars cum Natura conjurarat
Castellum inexpugnabile efficere;
Sed ille inter tot res arduas, et discrimina impavidus,
Scandit rupes, et praecipitia;
Urbem inferiorem in cineres redigit;
Contra se ingentes CANADAE copias educit;
Lasque parva manu, (miritum vix quinque millibus)
At strenua, vegeta, et in pugnam alacri,
Profligat, fugat, magnaque cum strage prosternit.
Victoria, proh dolor!
Vix ei triumphantibus lucis radiis illuxit;
Jam jam eum CANADAE Debellatorem denunciatura,
Quum oppletus vulneribus adverso pectore receptis
Gloriofe ante aciem dimicans cecidit.
Gaudete, et lugete, Britanni!
Gaudete ob faelicitatem rerum vestrarum,
Sub tanti Ducis auspiciis:
Ast mortem lugete tam boni viri
Cujus mores Evangelicae puritatis exemplar
Eum mortem oppetere aequo animo paratoque pro patria
Edocuerunt.
In perpetuam ejus Memoriam,
Hocce Monumentum speciali jussu
SENATUS, POPULIQUE BRITANNICI
Positum suit
Anno reparatae Salutis
Milesimo, Septingentesimo, Sexagesimo, etc.
Natus suit, etc.
ENGLISH.
Stop, Passenger! And here view whatever is Grand and Noble, Summed up in the
Character of JAMES WOLF.

His Mind being adorned with all heroic Virtues,
Both by the Precept and Example of his illustrious Father,
Colonel EDWARD WOLF;
He, early in Life, as the Choice of his natural Disposition,
Embraced the Prosession of Arms.
With indefatigable Industry forming the Military Man,
He showed himself
Gallant in Action, intrepid in Danger, circumspect in Difficulties;
And being soon singled out as a true Genius for the Art of War,
With the Approbation and Applause
Of the great Officers he served under,
Was honored, in a constant Succession,
With the most distinguished Posts in the Army.
His innate Courage, his Regularity and Exactness of Discipline,
Shone conspicuous in the Corpse he had himself trained up,
When animating five others by its Example in the Plains of Minden,
The French Cavalry, by the Impetuosity of their Efforts,
Were broken, routed, and discomfited.
Posterity! believe it:
the Annals of all Europe attest the Fact.
His martial Ardour and Capacity,
Restrained by superior Command at Rochfort,
Were signal in the Overthrow of Louisbourg.
You may style him, with Amherst, the CONQUEROR of Cape-Breton
The Brave do not envy the Brave;
He let him act according to the generous Purpose of his Soul.
Now thought worthy of a Command in Chief;
QUEBEC,
The Capital of the French Empire in North-Amercia,
Is made the Object of the important Conquest,
Expected from his great Abilities.
Art had conspired with Nature
To render the Place impregnable:
But he, undaunted amidst such a Scene of Difficulties,
Climbs over Rocks and Precipices,
Lays the Lower Town in Ashes,
Draws out the numerous Force of CANADA against him,
And with less than five thousand Men
But stout, vigorous, and ardent for Battle,
Routs and defeats them with great Slaughter.
VICTORY, alas!
Had scarce dawned upon him with triumphant Rays of Light,
Ready to salute him,
The CONQUEROR of Canada,
When he fell gloriously,
Covered with honorable Wounds.
Britons! rejoice and mourn:
Rejoice that your Arms have prospered
Under the Conduct of so great a General;
But mourn for the Loss
Of so good a Man,
Whose Morals, a Copy of Gospel-Purity,
Taught him to die contented for his Country.
To perpetuate his Memory,
This Monument was erected by the special Command
Of the British SENATE and PEOPLE.
In the Year of our Lord,
One Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Sixty.

