A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Reasonableness, Usefulness, AND GREAT DUTY OF PRAYER.

In Pride, in reasoning Pride their Error lies,
Who quit their Sphere and rush into the Skies.
POPE. Pietate adversus Deos sublata, Fides etiam, and Societas
Humani Generis, and excellentissima Vertus Justitia tollitur,
TULL. Credendum est neminem virorum honorum talem fuisse, nise adjuvante Deo.
Idem. Deum roga bonam mentem, bonam valetudinem Animi, deinde Corporis.
SENECA. The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom.
SOL. Thou castest off Fear, and restrainest Prayer before God.
JOB. Watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation.
MAT. 26. By SAMUEL JOHNSON, D.D. President of King's College, and Lecturer of
Trinity Church, in NEW YORK.

NEW YORK: Printed by W. Weyman, in Broad-street, not far from the Exchange.
1760.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Discourse was written some Time past, at the earnest Request of
a Person of Note, who put into my Hands a Manuscript, wherein it was undertaken
to prove by Reason, That Prayer, as it implies a Petition to GOD, to supply any
Wants of ours, is in effect, an utterly impertinent and insignificant Thing,
and but a mere "useless Ceremony." -- Who the Author of that Paper was, I know
not, nor do I desire to know: But as the Doctrine contained in it, is of most
fatal Tendency, I was willing to do my utmost to confute it. -- And as I have
too much Reason now, to fear there may be some others among us, that may have
unhappily imbibed the like unaccountable way of Reasoning, (if it may be called
Reasoning) when I had taken the Trouble of writing it, I was willing, upon the
Advice of Friends, to make it more extensively useful, by committing it to the
Press, and I pray GOD it may be attended with his Blessing.

TO His EXCELLENCY JEFFERY AMHERST, Esquire Major General, and Commander in Chief,
of all His Majesty's Forces in NORTH AMERICA.
May it please your EXCELLENCY,
AS Your Excellency's Conduct with Regard to Religion, as well as in all other
Respects, has been truly exemplary; I humbly beg Leave to inscribe the
following DISCOURSE, in the Cause of Religion, to Your Excellency's Name, and
wish it was more worthy of Your Acceptance.

PERMIT me, SIR, on this Occasion, to join with the whole Nation, and
especially, all the English AMERICA, in congratulating Your Excellency, most
affectionately, on the glorious Success of His Majesty's Arms, under Your
Conduct, in the Reduction of all CANADA, which is an Event of immortal Renown,
and a signal Reward of Your Piety and Virtue; and I beg Leave to subscribe
myself, with great Esteem,

May it please Your Excellency, Your Excellency's, Most humble, and Most
obedient Servant, SAMUEL JOHNSON.
King's College, New York, October 8, 1760.
A Demonstration of the great Duty, and Usefulness of PRAYER.
WHAT is here attempted, is, a Demonstration of the Reasonableness, Usefulness,
and great Duty of PRAYER, as including, not only a most grateful
Acknowledgement of all the Instances of GOD's Goodness toward us, but also a
humble and resigned Address to him for the Supply of our Wants, under a deep
Sense of our entire Dependence upon him.

IN both these Senses I maintain, that Prayer is an indispensible Duty, founded
in the Reason and Nature of Things; in the Nature of GOD and of Man, and the
Relation, in which, by the Necessity of our Nature, we stand in to him. In
order to be convinced of this, we need only consider fully, What we mean by the
Word Duty? -- What GOD is? -- And what we are? -- and the Nature of that
Relation we stand in to him. These I must therefore define; and

1. By the Word Duty, I mean, that Obligation we are immediately under from the
inward Sense of our own Reason and Consciences, to consider and treat, or
conduct, toward every Being, Person, and Thing, as being what in Truth it is,
in order to our true Happiness. But that which gives it the full Force of
Obligation, and so constitutes the complete Notion of Duty, is, the
Consideration of it, not only as being a Dictate of our own Reason and
Consciences, arising from our Conception of the Truth and Nature of Things; but
moreover, and chiefly, as being the Will of God, our great Creator and moral
Governor concerning us, relating to what he requires us to do or forbear, in
order to our true Happiness. -- Now,

2. By God, I mean, That great and glorious Being who is infinitely intelligent
and active, infinitely wise and powerful, Holy, Just, and Good, from whom we
and all Things derive, and on whom we do entirely depend for every Moment we
live, and every Breath we breathe, and all we enjoy and hope for, both in Time
and to all Eternity; to whom we are accountable for all that we think, speak,
and do; and from whose Goodness and Justice, we have all Reason to expect we
shall be rewarded, or punished, according as our Behavior is good or bad,
virtuous or vicious. Whether every one that pretends to think in earnest, has
this Notion of GOD, I know not; but to me it evidently appears, from the
Consideration of Nature and Providence, that this is the Notion we ought to
have of him. And I would wish any one that hesitates, exactly to read and
consider Dr. CLARK 's Demonstration of the Existence and Attributes of GOD; and
Mr. WALLASTON 's Religion of Nature; not to mention the Archbishop of CAMBRAY,
and many others. And,

3. By Man, I mean, what every one that duly considers, and truly knows
himself, must be intuitively sensible he really is; a mere dependent Being,
that came into Being, and subsists by the mere Will and Power of GOD, having no
Sufficiency in himself to continue himself in Being, Life, or Health, so much
as one Moment, nor so much as to think any Thing of himself, but all his
Sufficiency is of GOD, both with regard to his Being, and Well-being. He is
indeed furnished with intelligent and free, active, self exerting Powers; but
at the same Time, (as he is in Fact now) he is a very frail and sickly, a very
weak and mortal Creature, and which is worse, he is a very sinful and untoward
Creature, and is daily violating the inward Sense of his own Reason and
Conscience, and acting contrary to the moral Perfections, and consequently the
Will of his Maker, Preserver, and Governor. -- And yet, from the divine
Attributes, compared with his present State, and the Powers and Faculties he is
endowed with, from whence the true End of his Being must be judged of, there
seems all imaginable Reason to conclude, that this Life is not his All, but
that he is now only in a State of Probation for another State after this Life;
that, as to his better Part, he is really an immortal Being, and accountable
for his Behavior here. -- Now therefore,

4thly. THE Relation we stand in to God, is evidently that of Creatures to
their Creator; that of mere Dependents to their Benefactor; that of Subjects to
their King and Governor; and moreover, that of Sinners and Criminals with
regard to their Judge; and unable, without his Instruction and Assistance, to
qualify themselves for, or to regain, his Favor. -- If then it be our Duty,
considering ourselves as being what we are, to conduct ourselves toward God as
being what he is, it demonstratively follows,

5thly. THAT it must be our Duty, not only as Creatures, Children, Dependents,
and Subjects, to give all possible Expression and Proof of our Love, Gratitude,
and Obedience to God, as our Creator and Father, and our great Benefactor and
Supreme King and Governor; but moreover, as we are frail Creatures, and liable
to innumerable Casualties and Calamities, and depend on him every Moment for
our Preservation and Well-being, it must be evidently fit, right, and our
bounden Duty, every Day to implore his Protection and Blessing, and humbly
address our selves to him for the Supply of our Wants.

And lastly, as we are Sinners, and have in fact, in innumerable Instances,
violated our Duty to him as our King and our Judge, to whom we are accountable
for our Behavior; and at the same Time, if we do at all know our selves, we
must be conscious, not only of our Guilt, but also of our great Weakness, and
of the little Command we have of our Appetites and Passions, especially (as the
Case generally is) if we have contracted any vicious Habits, which are
extremely difficult to conquer; I say, the Fact being thus, it must be no less
evidently fit, right, and our bounden Duty, most humbly to confess and bewail
our Sins, and beg God's Pardon for whatsoever we have done amiss, and to
implore his Help and Assistance to enable us to conduct better for the future,
and to bear with Patience whatsoever he calls us to suffer in the Course of his
Providence, and to do with Cheerfulness and Fidelity what he requires of us, in
order to answer the End of our Being, which is our true Perfection and
Happiness.

Thus it appears to me, that this Duty of Prayer, is demonstratively
established from the Reason and Nature of Things; and this Reasoning is
confirmed to be Right from Fact and Experience correspondent to it, it being
always found, that, by such a constant Course of Prayer, joined with Vigilance,
and a due Care of their Conduct, good Men have been enabled to gain and
maintain a good Mastery of their vicious Tempers and Habits, and to make
Proficiency in every Virtue, agreeable to an ancient Maxim or Observation,
"That as persisting in a Course of sinning will make a Man leave praying, so a
steadfast Perseverance in a Course of Prayer, will eventually make a Man leave
sinning, and return to his Duty."

Now against all this, it has been objected by some, who I doubt do not
rightly know God, or themselves, "That it reflects hard on the Wisdom,
Benevolence, and Justice of God, to suppose, that he has not given Mankind
sufficient Capacities to distinguish Right from Wrong, Virtue from Vice, etc
and sufficient Abilities to answer the End of their Being: And if he has done
this, Prayer must be a useless Ceremony." This is illustrated, by comparing Man
to a Machine, which if it is not so made as to answer it is End without a
continual Interposition, it must give but a poor Notion of the Wisdom or Power
of its Author, etc.

To this I answer: -- If Man were indeed but a Machine, this Reasoning would be
right enough, even him supposing a conscious Machine. But it can be nothing to
the Purpose if he be, as in fact he is, not only an intelligent, but also a
free, active, self-exerting Creature, and therefore of a Nature to be led to
answer the End of his Being, not by Mechanism, but in the Way of moral
Government, being designed to be influenced by Considerations and Motives
suggested to his Understanding, under the Sense of which he is freely to exert
his own Activity, in order to answer the End of his Being.

In this Case, he may be (as in fact, I allow he is) endowed with sufficient
Powers, Faculties, and Means to answer the End of his Being, so that it shall
be his own Fault if he does not; and yet, as he is a free Agent, it must be in
his Power to abuse his Liberty, and other Faculties, so as to fall short of it,
without the Divine Interposition. But this, from the Nature of moral
Government, he may always be secure of, if he will in earnest apply himself to
God by Prayer, and diligently make use of the Means which he has put within
his Power, and pointed out to him.

But for the full clearing up of this Objection, and the further Demonstration
of the Duty of Prayer, I will next proceed, and go upon the Principle the
Objector allows, viz. "That the Duty of any Creature must be determined, (or
judged of) by the End for which it was created." -- Let us then consider, what
must be supposed to be the End for which Man was created? And as to this, no
doubt but it must be allowed, that the End for which it must be supposed an
infinitely wise and good God brought Man into Being, was, that he might do
Honor to his Maker, and enjoy himself, and be, in some good Degree, happy in
the Participation and Enjoyment of his Goodness. And he that willed this End,
must have willed the Means necessary to it. Consequently it is allowed, that
Man is furnished with sufficient Powers, Abilities, and Means for his true
Happiness. He is an intelligent Creature, and consequently capable of knowing
wherein his true Happiness consists, and the Means of attaining it. And he is a
free, active, self-exerting Creature, and therefore is capable of an active
Application of himself to the Pursuit of his Happiness, in the Use of the Means
conducive to it. But then, he is of himself an ignorant Creature, and therefore
needs to be instructed both in the End and Means; and he is a weak dependent
Being, and therefore needs to be assisted, as well as instructed; for both
which he must necessarily depend upon God.

And indeed I am apt to think, that if the Nature of a Creature, as such, be
duly considered, it will be found that no Creature is, or ever was, or can be
made self-sufficient to its own Happiness; nor is it fit it should, if it were
possible. On the Contrary, as every Creature is in it self, a mere dependent
Being, it is most fit that every conscious, intelligent Creature, should
habitually live under a deep Sense of it is Dependence, as a necessary Means to
it is true Happiness, and account it its greatest Glory, it is true Perfection,
and highest Satisfaction, to hold a perpetual Intercourse with the great Parent
Mind, the eternal Father of Spirits, in and by whom it lives and moves, and
has it is Being; and in doing this, to make it it is own intelligent free Act,
and Deed to exert and express it is Sense of it is Dependence, and its earnest
Aspirations alter, and Struggles toward an entire free active Union of it is
Will with the Will of it is great and Almighty Parent, in Conformity to the
moral Perfections of his Nature, wherein it is highest Perfection and Happiness
consists. And this, in Effect, is all that is implied in Prayer, which
therefore must in the Nature of the Thing, be a necessary Means toward
answering the End of our Being. Now therefore let us lay these Propositions
together.

1. The End of our Being is our true and endless Happiness. I say endless,
because it is plain we cannot be truly Happy, without having a Prospect of
being endlessly so; and it is no less plain that we cannot attain to the entire
End of our Being, so as to be truly Happy, in this very mixed imperfect State;
our Existence therefore must reach forward and extend to an endless State of
further Proficiency after this Life.

2. It is impossible we should be Happy; nay impossible in the Nature of the
Thing, but that we must be miserable under the Power and Guilt of Sin, or in a
Course of Deviation from moral Rectitude, both from the mischeivous Nature of
Sin in it self, and from the inward Reproaches of our own Reason and
Consciences, as well as the Displeasure of our Maker. On the Contrary,

3. Our true Happiness, as free, intelligent and active Beings, or moral
Agents, must consist in the vast Satisfaction arising from the Consciousness of
our sincere and faithful Practice of, and Proficiency in, all moral Virtues,
and a Sense of the Divine Favor and Approbation, which will not fail to attend
it.

4. Our Practice and Proficiency in all moral Virtues, implies, our Conformity
to the moral Perfections of God, the Author of our Being, and on whom we
depend; at least, our constant Care and Endeavor, as far as we are able, to be
Holy as He is Holy, Pure as He is Pure, Righteous as He is Righteous, true and
faithful, kind and merciful, as He is: All which are, in the Nature of them,
conducive and necessary to our Happiness, and therefore must be his Will and
Law concerning us, because he would have us happy. Now,

5thly, and lastly, The natural and necessary Means, in the Nature of Things,
toward these Seize, is to have Recourse to GOD, and converse frequently
with that great Pattern of all moral Perfection; lamenting our many and great
Deficiencies, in falling short of these Things, and our great Untowardness in
acting so much the Reverse of them, so contrary to his blessed Will; imploring
his Pardon and Mercy for our past Miscarriages, and expressing our earnest
Aspirations after Amendment, and better Proficiency for the future; and
finally, from a due Sense of the great Weakness of our Reason and Resolution,
and the Strength of our Appetites and Passions, and ill Habits, and the many
Temptations that surround us, earnestly soliciting the secret Influences and
Assistances of that great Parent Spirit on whom we depend, to enable us to gain
and maintain the Mastery of our selves, and to make all possible Proficiency in
all those Virtues and moral Seize, wherein our true Perfection and
Happiness consists.

Now all these are the proper Exercises of Prayer! and sure I am, He cannot see
either deep or far into the present Condition of human Nature, who is not fully
sensible that such a Practice is evidently, in the Nature of Things, conducive
and necessary to all moral Proficiency; and consequently, that it is so far
from being "a useless Ceremony," that it is of the greatest Use, and therefore
an indispensible Duty, as being a necessary Means toward answering the End of
our Being.

If, indeed, our Objector is fully sure and conscious to himself, that he never
has, nor ever does, in the least vary, in Thought, Word, or Deed, from the
great Rules of Virtue, and moral Rectitude, it will be allowed that he has no
Occasion to ask GOD's Pardon; and if he perfectly knows that he has always in
himself that Strength and Presence of Mind, as to have and maintain an entire
Mastery of his Lusts and Passions, and that he can steadily withstand all
Temptations, and that by dint of his own Strength, he always actually does his
whole Duty, all that is Right and Good, both toward GOD and Man, I own he has
no Occasion to ask GOD's Help, but has infinite Reason to be thankful, and this
is all he has to do. -- But I very much question, whether he can or will
venture to say all this: Nay I question, whether this last was ever the Case of
any Creature, no not even of the highest Angel in Heaven, without a divine
Influence, much less of such a frail Creature as Man evidently is. --

For my own Part, I must be free to confess, that it is far from being the Case
with me, and I believe there are very few considerate Persons but such as will
readily join with me. I am conscious that I am so untoward and deficient, and
so weak and infirm, that I need to ask God's Pardon and Mercy, and his Help and
Assistance every Day that I live; and this I find to be the only Course I can
take, in Conjunction with due Care and Vigilence, to get the better of my
Infirmities, and to make any tolerable Proficiency in Virtue. And it is to me
the greatest Satisfaction in the World, to hold such a frequent Intercourse
with the great Father of my Spirit, and thereby to impress my Mind with a due
Sense of his perpetual Presence with me, and Inspection over me, and in View
thereof, to commit myself to his Protection, Guidance and Blessing in all my
Ways.

This Sense of God's universal Presence and All-seeing Eye, which is vastly
improved and cultivated by the daily Exercise of Prayer, is of the utmost
Importance to make us watchful and circumspect in all our Behavior before him,
nay, in the Tempers of our Hearts, as well as the Conduct of our Lives; and the
more so, as it has moreover the greatest Tendencey to make and keep us humble,
for, Humility is the Basis of all other Virtues, as on the other Hand, Pride,
Self-Conceit, and Self-sufficiency, are Tempers extremely misbecoming a mere
dependent, weak, and sinful Being, and utter Enemies to all Proficiency in
Knowledge, or Virtue. It is therefore very fit that our Creator should keep us
in a perpetual State of Dependence, and that we should, by the frequent
Practice of Prayer, keep up and cultivate in our Minds, a most humble Sense of
our Weakness, Dependence and Untowardness, as a necessary Means in order to our
Amendment and Proficiency in Virtue and Happiness.

Since therefore it is thus manifest, that Prayer is in the Nature of the
Thing, such an effectual Means to promote our Proficiency in all moral Virtue,
in order to our true Happiness, which is the End of our Being, it is evident,
That inasmuch as God wills this End, he must most certainly also will this
Means, and consequently, that it must be his Will and Law concerning us, that
we should live in the daily Performance of this Duty. It must therefore be a
direct Rebellion against him, and the Constitution which he has made, to live
in the Neglect of it.

And since we are placed in Society, and have common Sins to confess and
reform, and common Wants, both Temporal and Spiritual, that we must depend upon
God, the common Father and Lord of all, for the Supply of, and inasmuch as
every thing that Concerns our common Weal, is best promoted by social
Combinations, it is evident that a common social and public Worship, in Prayer
as well as Praise, must be our indispensible Duty, as well as Personal:
Especially, if we moreover consider, that such a common social Worship in
jointly paying our common Duty, to our common heavenly Father, Lord, and
Governor, is most amiable in itself, and has, in the Nature of the Thing, a
direct Tendency to promote universal Benevolence, Brotherly Love, the Love of
public Weal, and all social Virtues toward one another, as well as Piety
toward God. So that, in order to any one's being a true Patriot or Friend to
the public Weal of Mankind, and his Country, it is indispensibly necessary that
he should set a good Example of a frequent and religious Attendance on the
public Worship: Nay he must be an Enemy to Mankind if he does not. -- And it is
a Thing of most melancholy Consideration in this degenerate Age, that since
Prayer, both personal and social, has been so much decryed and despised, and
the public Worship, as well as private, so much neglected, and especially by
many great Examples in our Nation, there has been a vast Increase of all Sorts
of Immoralities, and such a Deluge of Vice prevailing, as threatens the utter
Ruin both of our Nation and its Colonies.

But to proceed. It is further objected against this great Duty of Prayer,
That, in the Nature of the Thing, Prayer can attain no End, and therefore must
be impertinent, because there is a certain established Course of Providence,
which cannot be altered without a Miracle, which we have no right to expect or
desire. -- To this I answer, --

1. A Miracle implies a very sensible and manifest Variation from the known
established Laws of Nature, whereas, he that has studied Nature, can easily
conceive of a thousand Cases wherein God may secretly interpose to prevent, or
bring about various Events in the Course of Providence, without any sensible
Variation from the general known established Laws of Nature; as, in varying the
Course of Winds and Weather, preventing or healing Sicknesses, and the like. --
Nor can it reasonably be denied, or doubted, but God can secretly influence the
Thoughts, Purposes and Resolutions of Men, in a Manner, (in the Time of it)
insensible to themselves, and without at all interrupting their Freedom, which
may be attended with Events, either on the one Hand very fatal, Quos Jupiter
vult perdere prius dementat. Dict. ap. Ethu.
or greatly beneficial to them on the other, that would not otherwise have
occurred, and which in many Cases, may have great and lasting influence, even
on the public Affairs of Mankind, as well as those of particular Persons. The
Heart of Kings is in the Hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water, he turns
it whethersoever he will. Sol. pr. 21.1.
-- And I believe there are not many that have duly observed the State of their
own Minds, and the Course of Providence in the various Events that have
occurred to them, but who (without the least Tincture of Enthusiasm) will find
Reason to be convinced, that they have, in several, and sometimes very
remarkable Instances, been under such an Influence and Conduct, and many Events
have occurred, of which no other Account could be given. -- This being
supposed, it will follow, that it is a most reasonable Duty, not only to thank
God for his kind and watchful Providence over us, but also to pray to him for
his gracious Protection, Guidance and Blessing. But,

2. I would further observe, that as this Objection proceeds upon the
Supposition of only a general Providence, or a Kind of Fate, and implies in it
the Denial of any particular providential free Interposition, in Behalf of
either particular Nations or Individuals, it betrays a very low, and most
unworthy Conception of the infinite Being; for it imports as though he either
cannot or will not, so conduct the general Course of his Providence, as at the
same Time to attend to, provide for, and influence the Affairs of particular
Nations, and Communities of Men (as is fit upon some special Emergencies,
either for Correction, or Retribution) and even of every individual Person, in
Proportion to their several bad or good moral Qualifications. Whereas it is
certain, that his infinite Wisdom and Power must enable him, and his infinite
Benevolence and Justice must, in all Reason, be conceived to dispose him at
once, equally to give Attention to what concerns the whole of Things, and at
the same Time to what relates to the Case of every Individual.

But lastly, supposing Prayer should not procure any Alteration in the Course
of Providence, (as for wise and good Reasons, in many Instances the Case may
be) it does not follow but that several excellent Ends may be accomplished by
it, particularly, as it cultivates and improves in our Minds a great Sense of
God and our Dependence upon him, and disciplines us to the Exercise of an
implicit Faith in him, and a humble Resignation to his all disposing Will, and
a greater Concern to please him in all our moral Conduct, that we may be the
better qualified for future Favors. But for further Satisfaction on this Head,
I would wish the Objector to read and consider well what Mr. Wollaston answers
to this Objection.

And lastly, it is objected, "That Prayer implies a low and unworthy Notion of
the Deity, either as not knowing or not willing what is best for us of himself:
Whereas it is impossible but that God must know what we Want infinitely better
than we do ourselves, and must be disposed to do what is fit and best for us,
without any Information or Importunity of ours."

To this I answer. -- It is very true, God knows what we want, and is disposed
to do what is best for us; but as we are reasonable, free, self-exerting
Creatures, and our true Perfection and Happiness is, in the Nature of it, to be
accomplished by our own Activity, under the Influence of the divine Aid, in the
Use of proper Means, it is not fit that he should prostitute his Favors upon
us, without our own Activity in endeavoring to qualify ourselves for them.
Since then, Prayer, as I have shown, has a direct and natural Tendency to
promote and improve in us all those moral Qualifications that render it fit he
should bestow his Favors upon us, it is therefore fit in itself, and must
accordingly be his Will, that we should use this Exercise as a Means for our
Proficiency, and as a Condition of his Bestowments; Just as it is fit that a
kind Parent who knows what is best for his Child, and is sufficiently disposed
to bestow it, should yet require him in a dutiful Manner to ask it as a Favor,
as being a proper Means to cultivate and improve in him all those dutiful and
filial Tempers, and that decent and obedient Behavior which, as it contributes
to his own Happiness, does at the same Time qualify him to receive his Parent's
Favors.

It is therefore an utterly wrong Notion of Prayer, to imagine that the Intent
of it is to inform God of what he is ignorant of, or incline him to do what is
best for us, as though he were not otherwise so disposed. No: The Intent of it
is, to keep up in our Minds a lively and habitual Sense of our Dependence, and
to qualify us to receive the Blessings we pray for, by cultivating and
improving in our Souls, all those dutiful Tempers and Dispositions of Faith,
Hope, Trust in Him, and Submission to Him, and a Concern above all Things, to
conform ourselves to his Will, and the moral Perfections of his Nature, wherein
our real Perfection and Happiness consists; and which are, in the Nature of the
Things themselves, Qualifications necessary to fit us to receive the Favors we
ask for, and without which we should never answer the End of our Being.

Thus I think I have answered, or obviated every Objection that has been
offered against the Duty of Prayer* arguing only from the Reason and Nature of
Things, to which I was confined by the Argumentations of the Objector, who, by
one Expression he has, seems to think we have no other Way of coming to the
Knowledge of our Duty but by Reasoning. -- But, alas! What a very little would
Mankind ever have known about the Reason and Nature of Things, especially
Divine Things, without Divine Instruction? -- When indeed, we are instructed in
the first Rudiments of the Knowledge of God and ourselves, and our Relation and
Duty to Him and one another, the Connections that obtain in the Nature of
Things between those Truths and Duties, will, to a thinking Person, be
demonstratively obvious; as Solomon observes, Wisdom is easy to him that
understands, i. e. having learned it by teaching. -- And this, I apprehend,
is the Reason that we have now so many fine Demonstrations of Religion and
Morality, which have so blown us up with a Conceit of the Sufficiency of our
own Reason, that we are apt to imagine we could have discovered all these
Truths and Duties of ourselves without any Divine teaching; whereas the Truth
is, without having first had the Data in Scripture given us, we should scarce
ever have had a Thought of them, much less been able to demonstrate them by the
Dint of our weak Reason.

What a miserable Hand, Mankind would have made of Reasoning from the Nature of
Things, without Divine Teaching or Revelation, is abundantly evident from Fact,
to whoever looks into the real State of those Millions of People, where the
Ancient Original Instructions have in a great Measure, been gradually lost, and
for Want of which they are, in Fact, sunk into such an abject Condition of
Ignorance and Depravity, as is hardly to be conceived by us, who have had the
inestimable Advantage of Divine Teaching. -- It is true, there were some
extraordinary Men in the Heathen World, that did attain to the Knowledge of
many sublime Truths and Duties: But from Facts which there is no disputing,
there is the greatest Reason to conclude that they would scarce ever have
thought of them, if it had not been for some Remains of the Original divine
Instructions handed down to them from the Beginning, by Tradition. For it is to
Tradition that they frequently ascribe their best Notions, which they picked up
in their Travels, far and wide among the Wisest and most Ancient Nations the
Chaldeans, Egyptians and Phenicins, whose Notions were still so much the better
by how much the older, and the nearer they approached to the Fountain Head, and
by how much the nearer Connections they had with that Nation, among whom those
Original divine Instructions were handed down by Writing, together with the
ancient sacred Heiroglyphics. See Shuckford's Connection, and Hutchinson's
Works.

We have in particular some fine Passages in Plato, Tully, Seneca, and others,
relating to the Subjects before us, our Dependence on the divine Aids, and the
Duty of Prayer. Plato in Menone says, Virtue does not derive from Nature, nor
Teaching, but from a divine Influence. -- Tully in Not. Deor. says, We must
believe that no Good Man was ever such, but by the Assistance of God, and that
no one was ever a great Man without a divine Inspiration or Influence. -- And
Seneca, Ep. 41. says, No one is a good Man without God, and that there is no
good Mind or Disposition without him. Ep. 71. -- And accordingly he directs
with regard to Prayer, Ep. 10. That we should first beg of God a good
Understanding, and good Health of the Soul, and then that of the Body. -- Plato
wrote an excellent Dialogue, his 2d Alcihiades, merely upon the Subject of
Prayer, wherein he introduces Socrates (who was the Oracle of Wisdom in those
Days) as highly commending that Prayer of an ancient Poet, That God would give
us those Things that are really good for us, whether we ask them or not; and
that he would by no means grant us those Things that are bad for us, however so
earnestly we should desire them. -- In short it does not appear that any of the
wisest and greatest Men, even in the Heathen World (none but a few Atheists)
ever doubted but that Prayer is an indispensible Duty: All their Difficulty was
to know what they ought to pray for, and how they should pray acceptably. Here
indeed Socrates laments the Darkness they were under, and judges it a Thing of
so much Importance, that he is persuaded God will send some great Person to
instruct Mankind how to perform this Duty.

Now I would ask our Objector; Did these great Men discover these Things by
their own reasoning and the mere Light of Nature? -- If so, it is plain that
Prayer must be a Duty not only evidently founded in Nature, but discoverable by
mere Reason, and consequently be a most reasonable Duty, so that it must be
flying in the Face of Reason to doubt of it, or neglect it. -- On the other
Hand, if, (as I rather think) they had these Things by Tradition derived down
originally from divine Instruction, (though when taught they appeared entirely
agreeable to Reason) this proves that such an original divine Instruction and
Injunction there was; and if so, it must be a direct Rebellion against Heaven,
as well as Reason, to hesitate about it, and not live in the due Performance of
it.

Whatever therefore some Men may think, it yet remains a most certain Truth,
that God has from the Beginning, and through all Ages since, at sundry Times and
in diverse Manners, instructed Mankind in these Affairs, and expressly declared
his Will and our Duty relating to them. It is indeed a Thing of most
melancholy Consideration, that this should become a Matter of doubt, as it is,
with many in this degenerate Age, which, as it has sadly forsaken God, seems to
be abandoned by him! -- Nay, some have peremptorily concluded against it, while
others most ungratefully make a mere Joke of it, and treat it with the utmost
Contempt. -- However, I cannot but earnestly wish that Gentlemen would once
again seriously return to the Consideration of this Matter, and be persuaded to
think it, at least possible, that they may be misled: -- That it is a most
fatal Thing for them, if they be: -- And that it is, therefore, infinitely
worth the While for them, again to enquire with Candor, and without Prejudice
or Partiality, into this important Affair. -- Particularly I would wish them to
read and consider with the utmost Exactness, some Things that have been written
of late Years, and particularly Bishop Butler's Analogy, Bishop Berkeley's
Minute Philosopher, and President Forbes's Works, Doctor Ellis of the Knowledge
of Divine Things, and a late Piece called Deism revealed, and Clayton, etc.
against Bolingbroke, not to mention West, Leland, Leland has lately, by the
Piety and Charity of the good young Prince of Wales, been sent in great Numbers
into America, to prevent our Apostasy.
Brown, and several others, all which have written long since it seems by many
to have been, inconsiderately taken for granted, that all Pretenses to revealed
Religion are mere Impostures.

And before I take my Leave of this Subject, I will venture to offer a short
Sketch of Argumentation a priori, from the Divine Attributes, and the Nature of
Things, to prove, that there must have been, and consequently that in Fact
there most certainly was, from the Beginning, a Divine Revelation or
Instruction given to Mankind. And,

1. I presume I may take it for granted, That Mankind were at first brought
into Being by an infinitely Wise and Good God.

2. They must therefore have been made for a wise and good End. -- Now, as I
have observed above,

3. This End must have been, that they might be Happy, or in some good Degree
enjoy themselves. And,

4. It is a maxim of eternal Truth, That he that wills an End, if he be Wise
and Good, must, of Course, will the Means necessary for the Accomplishment of
that End. Now,

5. Look into the Nature of Man, and consider what must be the necessary Means
of his Well-being, and you will find, he must as a social Creature have some
Language, and as an Animal he must know what is proper Food and other Means for
his Subsistence, and consequently know something of the Nature of the Things
about him. -- Nor can he be Happy without knowing from thence something of the
Author of Nature, his Maker, and Benefactor, his Preserver, and Governor, who
must be his Chief Good, and consequently, how to conduct himself so as to be
secure of his Favor in Conformity to all those moral Laws, which, both with
regard to his Maker, himself, and his Species, are in the Nature of Things,
necessary to his Happiness: Nor must he be ignorant of their Sanctions, the
Happiness that will attend his Obedience to them, and the Misery that must
result from his Disobedience. -- But,

6. However so necessary these Things and the Knowledge of them are, as Means
to Man's Well-being and Happiness, and however so perfect you may suppose his
Powers and Faculties to have been, it is plain that when he first came into
Being he must have been totally ignorant of them. -- Now

7. It cannot, I think, be doubted, but that it was possible for God Almighty,
either by himself or some other Agent, to appear to the first of our Species,
and converse with them, and instruct them in the Knowledge of all these Things,
so necessary to their Well-being.

8. If therefore our Maker infinitely wise and good, designed our Well-being
and Happiness as his End, it is Demonstration that he must have immediately
appeared, or some how instructed the first of our Species, in the Knowledge of
all these necessary Means in order thereunto, and put them within the reach of
their Power, and it must have been his Will that they should make use of them
for that End. --

Can it then be imagined, That the infinitely wise and good Father of Mankind,
would bring them into Being and then desert them? -- Would he leave them to
grope out the Means of their Well-being themselves, in pursuit of which they
could not fail, without Instruction, of making 10,000 fatal Blunders? -- At
best, if they could have at all subsisted, it must have been several Ages
before they could have beat out any thing of a tolerable Scheme of Life. -- It
cannot therefore be, but they must have been immediately instructed and put
into a State of moral Government, according to the Tenor of which they should
be happy or miserable, according as they should behave themselves well or ill:
-- Be obedient or disobedient to his Instructions and Injunctions, under the
Sanctions of Life or Death.

And when they had been surprised by a Temptation into an Act of Disobedience,
and so forfeited that Immortality and Happiness they were designed for, and
brought themselves into a State of Mortality, Sin and Misery, such as we do in
Fact find ourselves in, is there not in this Case, all imaginable Reasons from
the Consideration of the same Divine Attributes, his Wisdom and Goodness, to
conclude, that he would still consider them with Compassion as his own
Offspring, though in a State of Rebellion, and at the same Time that he passed
upon them the Sentence of his Justice, open a Way for Mercy to take Place
consistent with it, and discover to them the Method and Means for their
Recovery and Restoration to that Immortality and Happiness which they had lost
by Sin?

In order to this, which was the original End of these Being, this new State
into which they were reduced by Sin, must, in the Nature of it, necessarily
require new Truths to be discovered, which they could no otherwise come to the
Knowledge of, and thence new Means to be prescribed, and new Duties enjoined.
-- And as God must be infinitely the best Judge what is best for us, what could
be more fit than that we should wholly refer ourselves to him? And what better,
or other Method could be devised, than that he should treat with as Sinners by
a Mediator, and that we should be required by Faith to look for Pardon, Mercy,
and Acceptance, through the Merits and Intercession of that all-sufficient
Mediator, upon Condition of our sincere Repentance, and return to our Duty; and
to depend on the Aids of the Divine Spirit, to enable us to repent and reform,
and to return to such a Faithful and preserving Obedience as our present frail
Condition will admit of, and such as is, in the Nature of it, necessary to
qualify us for his Favor? And in such a State of the Case, can it be, but that
a constant Course of Prayer, for Pardon and Assistance, and Watchfulness
against all Temptations, must be prescribed, as the most apposite Means for
gaining the Victory of Sin, and a Habit of new Obedience, in order to that
blessed End?

All these Things do thus evidently appear a priori to be most fit and
reasonable in themselves, from the Consideration of the Divine Attributes, and
the Nature of Things: But then they also appear, a Posteriori, to have been
Fact, from the Account which the Holy Scriptures gives us of the Origin of
Mankind, and the subsequent Conduct of God toward them. -- Indeed the first
Account of these Things is very short, and not so particular as I have
represented them, especially in our present Translation, though they appear much
more so, to one that understands the Hieroglyphical Nature of the most ancient
original Language and Institutions, and Manner of Instruction, and interprets
them as he ought, by the subsequent Facts correspondent to them, both sacred
and profane; the due Consideration of all which, cannot fail of giving us the
highest moral Certainty, that the Nature of the Things (supposing them) are
capable of: But doubtless, they were then much more particularly explained than
is accounted for, in the very short History we have of them.

Upon the whole; I cannot but think that whoever shall meekly and heartily
consider the whole of Things; the real Condition of Mankind, and the intrinsic
Excellency of the Things themselves, discovered and taught in the Holy
Scriptures; their real Fitness to all our Needs, and to all the Purposes of
Virtue and Happiness, which are the End of our Being; and at the same Time, the
whole Series of Revelation from the Beginning, through all the ancient Ages,
supported by a Series of Miracles and Prophesies, and the exact Correspondence
of Facts and Events, must be convinced, that there has been one Uniform
consistent Scheme of Religion and Providence worthy of God, and fitted to the
present Condition of Mankind, carrying on from the Beginning of the World to
this Day, and to continue to the Consummation of all Things, when Mortality
shall be swallowed up of Life, in complete, unmixed, and endless Happiness.

Now supposing the Holy Scriptures to be an express Declaration of the Will of
God and our Duty, it would be endless to take notice of all the Passages
wherein this Duty of Prayer is therein enjoined, and spoken of as practiced by
all good Men, and the many great and precious Promises which are made to the
sincere and faithful Performance of it. -- I shall only take notice of that
Passage of the Prophet, where God declares his Readiness and Purpose, to do
what was requisite for the Weal of his People, I have spoke it, and will do it,
says he. But adds, I will yet for this be enquired of, (or sought to) by the
House of Israel, to do it for them, (Ezekiel. 36.37.) Which plainly intimates that
which was always the great Maxim of the Divine Conduct toward the Children of
Men, viz. That however ready he is to do us good, yet it is his Will that we
should exert ourselves, and pray to him to cooperate with us, and to grant us
what we want, as the Condition of his Bestowments. Not that he wants our Homage
for his own Sake, but for our Sakes, he requires it, because he knows it is
highly beneficial to us, and the best Means we can use, to render ourselves
qualified for his Favors. -- And this you have seen was accordingly the
Practice of all the great, wise, and good Men of all Ages, not only of the
Patriarchs, Jews and Christians, but even of the Heathens themselves.

Ought we not then severely to suspect ourselves, when we are tempted to go
into Conclusions so singular, whether we are not under some great Delusion, and
be very jealous, whether it may not be occasioned by too much Affectation of
Singularity, or too much Self-sufficiency, or Sensuality, or some other wrong
Temper, which may have strangely warped and biassed our Minds? -- Let us rather
with all the Wise and Good, be content, and rejoice to be directed by God, who
knows what are the best Means to our best Good, infinitely better than we do,
and diligently make use of all the Means that he has appointed for that End:
And let us be solicitously upon our guard, least there be in any of us an evil
Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God, our chief and only Good,
and least we justly fall under that Censure which was unjustly thrown upon Job;
Thou castest off Fear, and restrains Prayer before God. -- Chapter 15.4.

And if by any Means we have been so unhappily misled, as to have our Hearts,
in any Degree alieniated from him, let us immediately and seriously bethink
ourselves, and take the Advice given him by one of his Friends (22. 21.)
Acquaint now thyself with God, (which is to be done by reading his Holy Word,
and conversing frequently with him in Prayer) and be at Peace with him, (by the
diligent Exercise of Prayer and Vigilence in all well-doing) so shall good come
unto thee; all that is really Good, all that is best for thee here, and endless
Happiness hereafter. -- I conclude all with the excellent Advice which King
David gave his Son, when he was going off the Stage, 1 Cor. 28.9. And thou
Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect
Heart and a willing Mind; for if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but
if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

FINIS.
A LETTER to a FRIEND, relating to the same Subject. West-Chester, January 15,
1758.
Dear Sir,
I thank you for yours of the 2d. and am very glad that you took in so good
part, the friendly and well-meant Freedom I used, in expostulating with you, on
Account of your not frequenting the public Worship so much as you ought, and
used to do. -- Had you varied only in some merely speculative and doubtful, or
indifferent Point, the Matter were not so much: -- But what I wrote about was a
practical Affair, and such an one, as I think must evidently appear, to any one
that thinks seriously, of the greatest Importance of (...) Thing in the World
beside. -- It was a Matter indeed both of Truth and Right, resulting even from
strict Demonstration; for so I must think the Duty of publicly worshipping the
Deity, as well as in private, evidently is. -- It is a Matter of strict
Justice, from which no moral Agent can be at Liberty to vary. For all
Moralist's must and do allow, that Gratitude is strictly due from Dependents to
a Benefactor, and the Worship of GOD is in effect nothing else but our
Expression of Gratitude, and of our due Sense of our Dependence on him, and
Submission to him, as our Supreme Father, Lord and Governor, and most kind
Friend and Benefactor. See Walleston, R. N. p. 124, 5, 6, or 124 -- to 126.

And methinks he must have a very depraved Mind who does not see, that our
constant holding this Intercourse with the Father of our Spirits, who is the
Light and Life of our Souls, and the great Source and Pattern of all moral
Perfection, is, in the Nature of the Thing, directly connected with every good
Temper, and virtuous Disposition, wherein the true Perfection and Happiness of
every reasonable and immortal Nature consists: -- And moreover, That to do this
first, and most reasonable Act of Justice and Duty, openly and jointly, in
Society with our Friends and Neighbors, as Brethren and Children of the same
common heavenly Parent, does, in the Nature of it, happily tend to conciliate
Benevolence, and promote every social, as well as personal Virtue, wherein the
public Weal and Happiness of Mankind consists; and consequently that the
Example of a contrary Conduct, in neglecting so important a Duty, must be
really Criminal; (vastly more Criminal than open Ingratitude to a human
Benefactor, as base and injurious as that is accounted) especially in Persons
of Education and public Influence in the Society: It must be Criminal, not only
against their own Souls, but even against the Society itself, as well as the
common Parent and Lord of the whole social System, the great Father of whom the
whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named. --

But you say, I am not satisfied in this, or that, or any particular System,
etc. Dear Sir, I beg in the Name of Truth, Candor, and Benevolence; is it fit
you should neglect the plainest and most important Duty, both to your Maker and
great Benefactor* and to the Society whereof you are a Member, as well as to
your own Soul, till you can do it in Company where every thing is entirely
perfect, according to your Notion of Things? Can you make no Allowances for the
Mistakes and Differences among Christians which yet perhaps, in many Instances,
may be chiefly, if not only, in Sounds? -- Would not Candor dispose you to put
the best and most favorable Construction, especially on such Things as have
the Sanction of the public Sense and Authority? And would not a Sense of Duty
dispose you, if possible to conform to it? -- Is there not something extremely
indecorous in an Affectation of Singularity:mdash;And what I beseech you, do
you think would in a little Time become of all public Virtue and Order, and
indeed of every thing that is amiable among Mankind, if every one should
renounce the open Worship of the Deity, which one may do as well as another,
and the lesser People will soon be apt to learn to do, from the Greater? -- How
can you endure so much as the Appearance of having a Hand in such public
Havoc? It is shocking and deplorable to see the Churches already so much
deserted. And then, what a hideous Thing must it be, for a Family of young
Children to be bred up under the Example of a Parent that shows no open Regard
to the God that made them, and the Savior that redeemed them? -- What can be
expected, if they have any regard for their Parent, but that they will learn
from his Example, to have no Fear of God before their Eyes For you know, non
existentis, and non apparentis, eadem est Ratio. If it does not appear by
outward Expression and Behavior, it will not be thought to exist at all.
; the Consequence of which will be, that they will of Course run into all
manner of Vices, that will destroy them in the midst of their Days! -- As the
Fact has sadly been in innumerable Instances in this miserable Age, in
Consequence of those licentious Principles that now obtain and issue in the
neglect and contempt of all public Religion, as well as private. -- On which
Account methinks (supposing nothing evidently sinful imposed upon me, in which
I must be active) I would be zealous and steady in worshipping God, almost any
how, rather than not at all, and according to any System rather than none. Nay
I protest, if it were possible for me to believe Christianity and it is
Sacraments to be but a mere human Contrivance, yet it is Moral is so excellent,
and it is Doctrines and Rites do so evidently tend to purify the Heart, and to
promote Devotion, and universal Justice and Benevolence, and all kinds of
Virtue, that I would steadily attend upon all it is public Offices, and by my
Example and Influence, do all the Honor I could to it, for the sake of the
public good of Mankind. --

I am verily persuaded that Popery itself, as bad as it is, does nothing near
the Mischief toward destroying the Virtue and morals of Mankind, as
Skepticism, and the loose Notions that are so much in vogue in our unhappy
Nation, and in these degenerate and apostatizing Days. How inexcusable then
must it be to neglect so excellent a Method of Worship, as that in the Church
of England, especially in one that does not doubt, as you profess* that the
Christian System is a divine Revelation? -- If so, how can you hesitate a
Moment, to worship God according to a Liturgy that is very little else but a
judicious Collection out of that very System, the Holy Scriptures, which you
profess to believe? -- If there be some few Passages in it that you are not
well satisfied in, or that imply Doctrines about which you doubt, yet so long
as you are not obliged to assent to those Particulars, they ought by no Means
to tempt you to neglect a plain and most necessary Duty: And even those
Passages, if you would consider them with Candor, and a Disposition to
understand them in such a Sense, as, putting the most favorable Construction
upon them, they would well admit of, you might at least bear with them. You
ought surely to consider them, (having the Sanction of Authority) at least with
the like Candor, as Horace says he would have for any Author, in that fine
Passage of his, -- ubi plura ni^ent, non ego paucis, Offendar Maculis, quas aut
incuria fudit, aut humana parum cavit natura. -- "I will not, says he, be
offended at a few Faults, which are owing to Inattention, or the unavoidable
Frailty of human Nature." -- Sine crimine nemo, optimus ille qui minimis
urgetur. -- "None he adds are without some fault, he is the best who has
fewest," -- It is moreover even demonstrably the Result of all true Philosophy
and exact Thinking, as well as Christianity, to lead us directly to God, and to
the deepest and most serious Sense of our entire Dependence upon him, and our
vast Obligations to his infinite Goodness: It must therefore be a most mad and
vain Philosophy indeed, and Science falsely so called, that tends to alienate
our Minds from him, or tempt us to neglect the constant Adoration of him, both
severally and socially. So that I hope you will join, with Horace in another
fine Passage, Par^us Deorum Cul^^^ infrequens, Insipientis dum Sapientiae,
Consultus erro, nunc re^res^m, vela dare, atque interare Cursus cog^r relictos,
etc. The purport of which is, "I have but seldom been a Worshipper of the
Deity, since I have been wandering after the mad Philosophy, i. e. of the
Epicureans and Skeptics, but now in view of His Almighty Power and tremendous
Authority, I am obliged to retreat and alter my Course, and return to my Duty."

There is one thing more in your Letter I beg Leave to remark upon, and I have
done; and that is, your Notion, That no Man shall be accountable, or punishable
for believing, or disbelieving etc. as being out of his Power, etc. -- I agree
with you that no Man is accountable for what is out of his Power, under such
Means and Assistances as God allows him; and also, that in many Cases it is out
of our Power to yield or withhold our Assent: But this is only in Matters of
pure Science, either Intuitive or Demonstrative, where our Minds are passive to
the clear Light of Truth: However even here, we may abuse our Liberty, by
neglecting to give our Attention, or take Time to consider, etc. -- But there
are many Cases short of Intuition or Demonstration, and those of very great
Importance, in which we are obliged either to act or forbear, and in which it
may require much Thought and Care, in order to make up a just Judgment among
Probabilities and Reasons of Credibility, which ought to preponderate and
determine a wise and considerate Man; in doing which he must be active. And he
must be a great Stranger to human Nature, who does not know that Men do many
Times criminally bring themselves to be persuaded of some of the absurdest and
most mischeivous Things in the World. -- Quod volumus facile credimus, "What we
strongly desire, we are easily induced to believe. Where Men's Pride, Lusts,
Prejudices, Interests, Conversations, etc. are in one Scale, they will often
strongly weigh down against the highest Probabilities, and even moral Certainty
in the other; nay many Times induce them to believe, as well as to act wrong,
in spite of Demonstrati^^ itself. -- A very wise Man tells us, There is a Way
that seems Right to a Man, when the End thereof is the Ways of Death; and St.
Paul tells us of some, who, because they received not the Love of the Truth,
but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness, were left to strong Delusions to believe a
Lie, to their final Destruction. We should therefore take Care how we give into
that fashionable Doctrine of the Innocence of Error, and be very diffident of
ourselves, and very jealous least some wrong Temper, or Disposition should
prevail in us to bias our Judgments, and make us see Things otherwise than
they really are, as it were through a colored Glass, or a distempered Eye, and
remember that Things are inflexible: We cannot alter them by our Imaginations:
They will be just what they are, let us think of them how we please. Our best
Way therefore is, with great Humility, Candor and Docility, to bend our Minds
to them, and endeavor to think of them exactly as they are, and guard against
a (...) of Self-sufficiency, and leaning too much to our own Understanding,
particularly, when we find ourselves tempted to vary (and especially in
Practice) from the public Sense and Practice of the Community and of many of
the wisest, the greatest and best of the human Kind. -- And where Things yet
remain somewhat doubtful, the safest Side may however be very evident: And
surely he must be beside himself, who does not, in such Cases, religiously and
steadily adhere to the safest Side; and who can doubt in the Case before us
which that is?

In a Word, let us thoroughly know ourselves, and be deeply sensible that the
Mind of Man is, at best, but a poor frail Creature of itself, and stands in the
greatest Need of the Divine Instruction, Conduct and Assistance: There is
therefore no better Course we can take, than that suggested by the wise King*
In all our ways to acknowledge God, and then we may confide in him to direct
our Paths; and that of a Wiser than he, who tells us, If a Man will do his
Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God. -- I am grieved to
hear you complain of endless Doubts and Perplexities in Matters of Religion,
for it is indeed a miserable State to be worried with a Spirit of Skepticism,
and dark Suspicions and Surmizes about this, and that, and the other. -- Nubila
me^^ est haet ubi regnant. -- "It is a cloudy doleful State of Mind where these
prevail." -- Pray sit down then, and carefully distinguish and separate Things
certain from Things doubtful, and abide by them, and give the Doubts to the
Winds; but never doubt whether you ought diligently to attend on the public
Service of God. -- Attend, I say, in the first Place, and above all Things, to
plain evident practical Matters, and especially live in the constant regular
practice of true Devotion toward God in Christ, who is our only supreme Good;
and trouble not your Head with curious Disputes and Speculations, and
perplexing Doubts and Intricacies, many of which, are only Strifes about Words,
and others, about Things we have no concern with, and Things quite beyond our
Faculties.

I will only add, that I am fully persuaded when you come to leave this World,
it will be the greatest Satisfaction to you, to be able to say with the Royal
Psalmist, Lord I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the Place where
thy Honor dwells. -- I hope therefore you will this once excuse this long
Letter from a faithful Friend, who is solicitously concerned for your best
Good, and I commend you to God's gracious Protection, Conduct and Blessing, and
remain, Dear Sir,

Your very affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, S. JOHNSON.
P.S. I subjoin an excellent Passage of Dr. (...) the present most worthy
Archbishop of Canterbury, in Sermon. 9. P. 149.

"There must be public Virtue, or Government cannot stand: -- There must be
private Virtue, or there cannot be Public: -- There must be Religion, or there
can be neither: -- There must be true Religion, or there will be false: --
There must be Attendance on God's Worship, or there will be no Religion at all."




