A LETTER FROM A Meeting of the Brethren called QUAKERS, To the Authors of the
Pamphlet called Considerations on the German War, AND Of the several Pamphlets
in Answer to it.

LONDON Printed, BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted and Sold by B. Mecom, at the New
Printing-Office, near the Townhouse. 1761.

A Letter from the Brethren called Quakers.
FRIENDS,
WE are concerned to find, that on both sides, instead of keeping to this short
question, Whether the present manner of carrying on the war in Germany is for
the advantage, or disadvantage, of Great Britain? you make digressions which
have nothing to do with the question.

There is much solid reasoning in the Considerations: But why does the author
show so much spleen against the king of Prussia? Does it affect the question,
whether his majesty was formerly an enemy, or a friend, to the Elector of
Hanover? Whether he be a religious man, or void of religion? Or whether he had
in his view the defense of the protestant religion, or not, etc? These things,
and many more, are only thrown out to amuse the reader, or to move the
passions: At the same time we own, that the author seems to be a lover of his
country; whereas, in most of what we have seen wrote against him, there seems
to be marks of venality, and a time-serving spirit.

It must be owned, by every impartial, sensible man, that there never was a
time when the British arms made so great and glorious an appearance as at
present: And however we don't approve of particular persons using carnal
weapons, in private quarrels, yet we think every nation has a right to defend
their country, and we rejoice to see the good success of his majesty's arms,
during the three last years, against France; the only nation that we, and all
Europe, have reason to guard against.

We have now got possession of all North America, which alone is worth much
more than the war has yet cost us; as it secures to us, by the fisheries there,
a perpetual nursery of sailors, and deprives France of having it in their power
to man a fleet; and furnishes us with an opportunity of supplying Europe with
fish, a branch of trade that must produce some millions of specie yearly. In
short, by our successes in America and the West Indies, our trade is so greatly
increased, that it is believed our import of specie is by more than a million
greater than it was before the war began.

As to the war we now carry on in Germany, it is plain, to support it, we
export upwards of five millions yearly, including the subsidy paid to the king
of Prussia; which, we are afraid, is more than we can bear, for any length of
time. The computation of the quantity of specie in the nation before the war
began, was between twelve and fifteen millions; and supposing it to be much
more, by such an export in a few years, we should be rendered incapable of
carrying on our trade, and defending ourselves. The question then comes to
this: Are we so much interested in the quarrel between the queen of Hungary,
and the king of Prussia, or in the defense of Hanover, as to render ourselves
unable to take care of ourselves? We admire the king of Prussia's personal
great qualities; we know the house of Austria to be the most persecuting house
in Europe, of those who are protestants; we know what they have done to their
protestant subjects in Hungary, Bohemia, Transylvania, Moravia, and in Silesia,
when it was theirs; and therefore, as lovers of mankind, and haters of popish
persecuting principles, we should think it the duty of this nation to join
their proportion with other protestant powers, to prevent the house of Austria
from having it in their power, by crushing the king of Prussia, to treat his
protestant subjects as they have done their own. But if other protestant powers
will not join with us, and, on the contrary, will throw their weight in the
opposite scale; our attempting this singly, would be endeavoring to do a thing
on the continent so much beyond our strength, that it would deserve the name of
madness.

The same way of reasoning will hold, as to our carrying on war against France
on the continent. Had we, in the beginning of this war, not meddled with the
quarrel between the queen of Hungary, and the king of Prussia, nor detached him
from France, by engaging him to defend Hanover, we should have been free of
this intolerable expense of maintaining the army under prince Ferdinand; but it
is needless now to reflect on what is past. We have brought the king of Prussia
into our quarrel; the question is, how to extricate ourselves most for the
interest and honor of the nation; and though it may appear to be a difficult
task to undertake to do this, we don't think it impracticable, if we lay aside
the thoughts of bringing about a peace, by treating with France. If we treat
with them, it is next to impossible, because what they will have in view, is
singly to recover back from us what we have taken from them, or part of it, as
a price for that peace; and no lover of his country can ever approve of giving
them back one inch in North America. Their desire is to continue the
devastations in Germany, and to make Germans cut one another throats.

On the other hand by endeavoring to bring about a peace between the queen of
Hungary and the king of Prussia, we shall treat with powers, whose interest it
is that we keep our conquest, and who must wish to stop the effusion of German
blood; as there never can be any danger of our endeavoring to make conquests
on the continent, were we ever so rich; whereas the riches and power of France
must always be dangerous to its neighbors.

It Is true, the queen of Hungary deserves no favors from us; but if by serving
her, we serve ourselves, we should not let resentment get the better of the
public good, and therefore our business is to make up matters between the king
of Prussia and queen of Hungary. This scheme of reconciling the contending
powers in Germany, or bringing Russia into our interests, seems to be the only
rational part for Great Britain to act on the continent.

The armies at present belonging to Prussia, and the queen of Hungary, joined
to that under prince Ferdinand, could in one campaign, by going into the heart
of France, and by our fleets ravaging their coasts, and raising contributions,
force it into any terms of peace that should be proposed. By this scheme, we
should extricate ourselves from a war we are unable to support in the way it is
carried on, and at the same time effectually reduce the power of France, and
disable her for the future from disturbing the peace of Europe.

For hereafter it ought to be a rule with us, not to engage France on the
continent; they are equally our superiors there, as we are theirs at sea; and
by keeping an army on board our fleets, we are able to assist our allies on the
continent more effectually, by attacking the islands belonging to France and
their coast, than by sending troops on the continent; and we should, at the
same time, save the export of our money, and the lives of our people.

It is really shameful to see how this nation has of late years suffered itself
to be the dupe of German princes. In king William's time, we assisted them to
preserve themselves from the power of France, and they thought themselves much
indebted to us, and exerted their utmost strength to second our endeavors. But
the language of German princes of late to us has been this: If you don't pay
and maintain our troops, and likewise send your own troops to defend us against
the French, who want to cut our throats, we will join with them, and allow them
to take Hanover; and surely, if they can keep us in the humor to pay them for
defending their own liberties, and put their own revenues in their pockets,
they act wisely, though not generously; but don't we give them cause to laugh
at us at the same time?

Pray what does Great Britain get by keeping Hessians, Brunswickers, etc. in
pay in peace? Nothing; for, in case of a war, they are unable to defend Hanover
against France, which is the only use we have for them; and if they were able,
does there ever a shilling come from that country to Great Britain? It must
always be our interest to assist Germany against France, by keeping an army on
board our fleets ready to attack them, which must oblige them to keep a large
army at home to defend their coasts; but sending great sums of money and troops
to the continent, to carry on a war against France, is like a weak man's
attacking a strong man, and giving him the choice of the ground to fight on.

Surely we cannot imagine that German princes wish to be conquered by France;
and therefore, if we will appear as their friends, not as their dupes, we will
always find them ready to defend themselves, and thankful for our assistance.
But if they find that our regard to Hanover is such, that we will rather take
the whole burden of a war on the continent against France, than suffer them to
invade it, they will continue to exhaust this nation of men and money, make us
slaves to their interest, and pick our pockets, as long as we have a shilling.

If his majesty shall think it proper to give H -- r to a younger branch of the
royal family, that would in our opinion, be greatly for the interest both of
Great Britain and H -- r, by taking away a pretense from France for invading
it, when at war with us. But as long as the same person is king of Great
Britain and elector of H -- r, we have but one method to take, in case of a war
with France, viz. to let them take it, instead of maintaining an army for its
defense; and to make reprisals by our superiority at sea.

There never was a prince since Titus Vespasian, who began his reign with
greater marks of love to his subjects, love to justice, and every aimiable
quality, than our present sovereign has done. He seems resolved to be sovereign
of the hearts of all his subjects, and not the king of a faction. It is
believed that he has declared he will not allow his servants to meddle in
elections, either by making use of his name, or the public money, to procure
votes; by which he will have a true representation of his people in parliament,
instead of a packt meeting, the child of corruption and venality. This must
make him adored by his subjects, and prevent any wicked man about his person
from having it in his power to make his sovereign his dupe, by making him
believe that he only meant to employ the public money, and his sovereign's
name, to serve him; whereas his real intention is, to get his own creatures and
dependents chosen, in order to make himself the director of his masters
actions; by which piece of management we have often seen a dirty slave of a
minister carry an election against men of worth and family; and the sovereign
made believe that the man of worth was his enemy, because his love to his
country made him refuse being a slave to the base, corrupt intentions of that
minister.

To conclude, what obligations is the nation under to her royal highness, and
those employed by her, about the person of his majesty, in his tender years,
for instilling such principles into his mind, which, in all probability, will
enable him to make it not only the happiest, but the greatest nation in Europe,
by the destruction of corruption, and encouraging public virtue!

FINIS.

