MINUTES OF CONFERENCES, HELD AT EASTON, In AUGUST, 1761.

With the Chief SASCHEMS and WARRIORS of the ONONDAGOES, ONEIDAS, MOHICKONS,
TUTELOES, CAYUGAS, NANTICOKES, DELAWARES, CONOYS.


PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. MDCCLXI.

Minutes of Conferences, etc.
At a CONFERENCE with the Indians at Easton, on Monday the Third of August,
1761.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR; RICHARD
PETER'S, and BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires, of the Council of the Province; JOSEPH
FOX, Esquire one of the Provincial Commissioners, and several other Gentlemen from
Philadelphia and other Parts of the Province; The Deputies of the ONONDAGOES,
CAYUGAS, ONEIDAS, MOHICKONS, NANTICOKES, DELAWARES, TUTELOES, CONOYS;
(...) about Four Hundred (...), which increased afterward (...) Five Hundred.
SENECA GEORGE, Speaker. SAMUEL WEISER, Interpreter. JAMES SHERLOCK,
Interpreter. JOSEPH PEFY, Interpreter.


THE Governor opened the Conference with the usual Ceremonies of giving them a
String, to bid them heartily welcome, and another to wipe the Sweat from their
Bodies, to take the Thorns and Briars out of their Legs and Feet, to clear
their Throats, and to open their Hearts; after which he acquainted them, that
be then was, or would at any Time be ready, upon their giving him Notice, to
attend to any Thing they had to say to him.

Then Seneca George stood up, and spoke as follows, viz.

Brother Onas,

I am very glad to meet you here at this Time, and to find that the Sky is
clear, and that the Road is open and safe to travel in: I speak this in Behalf
of Seven Nations, and all their Cousins, Captains and Warriors, and thank the
Almighty that he has once more brought us all together, to shake Hands.

A String.

Brother Onas,

We suppose, that during the late Troubles, you may have lost many of your
People, either by Sickness or War, since we were last together; by this String,
therefore, we wipe away the Tears from your Eyes, clear your Throats, wash away
the Blood from your Bodies, sweep the Council Chamber, and throw the Dirt out
of Doors, that you may see and speak to us clearly at the present Conference.

A String.

Brother Onas,

We the Seven Nations 1761.
, and all our Cousins, are sorry, from the Bottom of our Hearts, for the Death
of your Men, Women and Children; and by this Belt we collect all their Bones
together, bury them in one Grave, and cover them up.

A black Belt of eight Rows, streaked with White.

Brother Onas,

We the Seven Nations, and our Cousins, are at a great Loss, and sit in
Darkness, as well as you, by the Death of Conrad Weiser, as since his Death we
cannot so well understand one another: By this Belt we cover his Body with Bark.

A white Belt of seven Rows, with four black Streaks.

Brother Onas,

By the last Belt I mentioned to you that we both sat in Darkness, now by this
Belt I remove the Clouds from before the Sun, that we may see it rise and set,
and that your Hearts may be eased from Sorrow, on Account of what I mentioned
before.

A white Belt of five Rows, with three black Bars.

After the Delivery of the Belt, he added (having forgot it before) We pray the
Great God above, who can enlighten our Hearts, that we may live in Love and
Peace until Death.

Brother Onas,

Having taken Notice of the Death of Conrad Weiser, and the Darkness it has
occasioned amongst us, I now, by this Belt (taking Hold of the Belt in the
Middle) raise up another Interpreter, by whose Assistance we may understand one
another clearly.

Brother Onas,

(Speaking with the other Part of the Belt) You know that in former Times, when
great Men grew (...) and died, we used to put others in their Places; now as
Conrad Weiser (who was a (...) Man, and one Half a Seven Nation Indian, and one
Half an Englishman) is dead, we recommend it to the Governor to appoint his Son
(pointing to Samuel Weiser, then present) to succeed him as an Interpreter, and
to take Care of the Seven Nations and their Cousins. We take Hold of this Belt,
and clasp our Hands together in Friendship, and desire you will not neglect our
Request.

A black and white Belt of eight Rows.

Brother Onas,

Jenochiaada, the (...) of the (...) sends this String by Ashenoch, to his
Brother the Governor, saying,

Brother,

When I receive a Letter from you, I cannot understand it, which I think very
hard, and we ought to have some body living among us, who can understand and
interpret your Messages, and the Letters you send to us; wherefore I take my
Child, James Sherlock, by the Hand, and present him to you, that with your
Leave he may live amongst us, and serve us as an Interpreter on all Occasions.

Three Strings.

Brother Onas,

Having by the last String recommended James Sherlock to you, as an
Interpreter, we have no more to say to you at present, but to inform you that
we have sufficiently rested ourselves, after the Fatigue of our Journey, eased
our Hearts of all Sorrow, and are ready to hear any Thing you have to say to us.

Three Strings.

The Governor then informed them, that he thanked them for what they had said,
and would return them an Answer at another Time, and in a more convenient
Place, of which he would give them timely Notice.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, on Wednesday the 5th of August, 1761.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor; RICHARD
PETER'S, BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires, of the Council of the Province, etc. etc. etc.
as before; SAMUEL WEISER, ISAAC STILLE; DAVID SEISBERGER, Interpreters.


Tokahaio, the Cayuga Chief, stood up and spoke.

Brother Onas,

BY this Belt, three Years ago, at a Treaty held here at Easton, the Governor
invited us to come down in greater Numbers, as we were not all then present;
and now that we do all appear, we return you the Belt, that had been given us
at the making the Peace, and are glad to see you here Face to Face.

A very large white Belt of eighteen Rows.

Brother Onas,

You told us by this Belt, three Years ago, that you removed this, which is but
a little Fire, to Philadelphia, where our Ancestors formerly kindled their
great Fire, and made all their Alliances and Treaties.

Brother Onas,

By this other Belt, you at the same Time cleared the Road to the Great Council
Fire, at Philadelphia, and removed all Obstructions out of it, that it might be
open for us to pass in Safety.

Two Belts joined together.

Brother Onas,

By this Belt, you at the same Time told us, that you cleared our Ears, that
all the Nations might hear what you had to say to us.

A white Belt of seven Rows, striped.

Brother Onas,

At the same Time you told us, that our Eyes were bad, and that by this String
you cleared them, that we might be able to see a great Ways, and every Thing
that passed.

Six white Strings.

Brother Onas,

You also gave us this String, and told us we seemed a little shy; but desired
we would lay aside all such Thoughts, for you had no ill Intentions against us.

Three white Strings.

Brother Onas,

This String was sent to us, the Six Nations, by Seven Nations of Indians over
the Lakes, who have formerly been in the French Interest, but have lately
entered into an Alliance with us, desiring that they might lay Hold, with us,
of one End of the Chain of Friendship, that subsists between us and the
English; and we desire the Governor, that they may be accepted as Friends.

The Names of the Seven Nations, abovementioned, are as follow, viz.

Warontas, Scheiquoucchrona. Schesova, (...) Cochnawagechrona (...) Neoquechta.
Ten white Strings.

Brother Onas,

When we came as far as Fort-Allen, you sent us this String by Mr. Horsefield,
inviting us to come down to Easton; and now that we are come, we return it you
again.

Four white Strings.

Brother Onas,

By this String you told us, on Monday last, that you were very glad to see us
all well here; we are likewise glad to see you, and return it you again.

Three white Strings.

Brother Onas,

By this String you wiped the Sweat from our Bodies, took the Thorns from our
Legs and Feet, cleared our Throats, and opened our Hearts; we thank you, and
return it you again.

Four Strings, chequered.

Brother Onas,

These three Belts were brought to us, the Onondagoes, by the Oneidas, but they
brought no Speeches with them; we therefore return them to you again, for, as
they are your own Belts, you may know their Meaning; -- we do not.

One Belt of eleven, one of eight, and one of seven Rows, black and white.

Being asked whether they were brought all together, or at different Times,
they answered, that they were all brought by one Messenger, about a Year ago,
which Messenger was an Oneida, but that they do not know his Name. -- Being
asked how the Oneida came by them, and what he said, they answered, that he
said no more, but that they were about the Governor's Business.

Papounan, by one of his Indians, called Tougachena, living at Wighalousin,
then spoke to the Governor as follows.

Agreeable to your Request, when I was at Philadelphia last Summer, I carried
your Message to Achoan, the Chief of the Minisinks, respecting his sending the
English Prisoners, and I now deliver to you Achoan's Answer.

Brother Onas,

You desired me last Year that I should clear myself, as your Brothers that
live at Wighalousin did, by which you would have a Proof of my Friendship.
After I received your Message, I took it away to my Uncles, the Senecas, and
delivered to them what you had said to me, upon which they advised me to
deliver up all the Captives: Now Brother, I would have you not be impatient,
and I will come as soon as possible. I will hunt up all the Captives that are
amongst us, and will not leave one, but will bring them all; -- but I have not
found them all. I expect to come when the Corn is ripe; but if I should fail
then, I will certainly come by the Spring.

(...) white Strings.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, the same Day, in the Afternoon.
PRESENT, as before.

Teedyuscung, the Chief of the Delawares, stood up and spoke.

Brother, and all the rest of my Brethren and Uncles, attend.

I INTEND to take no other Method, than what I have already agreed with the
Governor. Brother, now I take the soft Feather to clear your Ears, which our
Grandfathers used for the same Purpose, that you may hear distinctly whatever I
may say.

Four chequered Strings.

Brother,

I desire you would now hear me; I beg you would frame that good Heart God has
given you in a right Way, that you may sensibly feel, and have a right
Understanding, of what I am going to say to you.

Four chequered Strings.

Brother,

I am come here to this Place, where we met about three Years ago. I then told
you, I would take that Medicine which our Maker has ordered for us, to apply to
any Wounds we may have. I likewise told you, that I do not apply it any where
but where the Wound is -- I have now come to see whether the Wound is healed,
or no.

A Belt of eight Rows.

Brother,

You then told me, when you looked on the Road our Grandfathers laid out, that
you observed many Bushes and much Grass grown there, so that you could not see
me. You then took me by the Hand.

Brother,

All my young Men, as far as the Tweteeway Nations, have let me know, that they
intend firmly to join in and stand to whatever you and I have agreed on; and
also those young Men I have with me, Mohickons, Opies, and Delawares, say they
will not take Notice of what few drops of Blood have stained our Road, but will
look steady to our Agreement.

A black Belt of seven Rows, and five chequered Strings.

Brother,

Observe what I am going to say, and I will let you know we have cleared
ourselves, as far as Makahelousink, Papounan's House. I will assure you, that I
want to make a Peace between us as lasting as the World. I call the Almighty to
witness, that I have no Captives in my Possession, as far as Makahelousink.

Seven chequered Strings.

Brother,

I have one Thing more to say: I would not have you look to me any more for any
Thing, for I believe nothing will ever make us differ again, except it is your
Fault, for I am sure nothing on my Part shall cause it; therefore, if any Thing
should fall out, examine your own Hearts, for it must spring from you, because
all our young Men have put it into the Care of their Chiefs to manage Affairs.

Three chequered Strings.

Brother,

Our Grandfathers used to hold great Treaties of Peace and good Friendship, now
we that succeed them will do the same; they used to agree that we should have
one Ear and one Eye, now you sit at Philadelphia, and I am away in the Country,
and whatever one hears or sees, the other should hear it and see it also,
because we are Brothers.

Thirteen chequered Strings.

Brother,

As I told you just now that we have one Ear, I desire you would hear me: My
Uncles, the Seven Nations, that sit here now, desire me to leave Wyoming, for
Fear; I answered, I will not leave it so suddenly; but, if I should see any
Danger, I will endeavor to jump out of the Way of that Danger.

A black and white Belt of six Rows.

Brother,

My Uncles have now put some Tobacco in my Pouch; they tell me, I must steadily
look toward the Mountains, and if you see English Brethren coming over the
Mountains, you must light your Pipe, and come to us (the Mingoes) and we will
receive you.

A white Belt of six Rows, striped.

Brother,

It is about three Years ago that I desired my Uncles would give me a Deed for
the Lands at Wyoming, but as they have not done it, I believe I shall get up
and leave it; for you know, according to your Custom, you hold all Lands by
Deeds, and if our Uncles had given us a Deed, our Children would enjoy them
after us: If they had given me a Deed, my Children and Grandchildren would live
there as long as the World lasts; but as that is not done, I believe I shall
leave it.

A white Belt of twelve Rows.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians at Easton, on Friday the Seventh of August,
1761.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania; RICHARD PETER'S, and BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires, of the
Council of the Province; JOSEPH FOX, Esquire one of the Provincial Commissioners,
and several other Gentlemen from Philadelphia and other Parts of the Province;
The Deputies of the ONONDAGOES, CAYUGAS, ONEIDAS, NANTICOKES, MOHICKONS,
DELAWARES, TUTELOES, CONOYS;
Men, Women and Children, about Four Hundred in Number.


The Governor, addressing himself to the Indians present, spoke as follows, viz.

Brethren of the Six Nations, and of all the other Indian Nations now present,

HEARKEN to me, while I return an Answer to your Speeches of Monday and
Wednesday last.

Brethren,

It gives me Pleasure to hear that you have found the Sky clear, and the Road
to this Council Fire open and safe, and I join with you in returning Thanks to
the Almighty, that he has once more brought us all together, to speak to one
another, as Brethren and Friends, Face to Face.

A String.

Brethren,

We thank you for remembering those whom we have lost, during the late
Troubles, either by Sickness or War, and for wiping away the Tears from our
Eyes, clearing our Throats, washing away the Blood from our Bodies, and
sweeping clean the Council Chamber; in return, we most heartily condole with
you, the Seven Nations, and all your Cousins and Warriors, for the Death of all
our Indian Brethren, who have died or been killed since we last met in Council,
and with this String we wipe away the Tears from your Eyes, clean your Throats,
wash away the Blood from your Bodies, sweep the Council Chamber, and throw the
Dirt out of Doors, that there may be nothing to interrupt our present friendly
Conference.

A String.

Brethren,

With this Belt we collect together the Bones of all your Men, Women and
Children, and most affectionately bury them in one Grave, that they may rest in
Peace for ever.

A Belt.

Brethren,

We are very sensible, with you, that both of us have sustained a very heavy
Loss, by the Death of our old and good Friend Conrad Weiser, who was an able,
experienced and faithful Interpreter, and one of the Council of the Seven
Nations, and that since his Death we, as well as you, have sat in Darkness, and
are at a great Loss for Want of well understanding what we say to one another:
We mourn, with you, for his Death, and heartily join in covering his Body with
Bark.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this belt we dispel the dark Clouds, which you have justly observed the
Death of our good Friend has occasioned, and make the Sky perfectly clear
again, that we may behold the Light all the Day long: We ease your Hearts from
the Grief you were under, on this mournful Account, and we pray God that we may
for ever live together in Peace and Love.

A Belt.

Brethren,

Having thus paid our Regards to our deceased Friend, we cannot but observe,
with you, that there is a Necessity of appointing some other Person to succeed
him, by whose Assistance we may be enabled to find the true Sense and Meaning
of what there may be Occasion to say to one another, either in Council, or by
Letters, or Messages.

Brethren,

In Conformity to the ancient Custom of taking from among the Relations of any
great Man who dies, some fit Person to supply his Place (as Mr. Weiser was by
Adoption one of the Six Nations, though by birth one of us) we think you did
well to cast your Eyes upon one of his Children, and, inasmuch as Samuel Weiser
is the only one amongst them who has any Knowledge of the Indian Language, and
has lived among you, we shall be glad to make Trial of him for the present, and
if we find him capable of serving in the Office of an Interpreter, and in the
Management of Indian Affairs (in both which Capacities his Father so well
acquitted himself) we shall appoint him to that Service. We look upon this
Choice of yours as a Mark of your grateful Affection for Conrad Weiser, who was
always your sincere Friend; and we join this Belt to yours, as Token of our
Concurrence, so far as to make Trial of him.

Their Belt, and another.

Brethren,

I have now answered every Thing that you, of the Seven United Nations, said to
me at our last Meeting. I now address myself to Jenochryada, the Onondagoe
Chief, to answer the Message he sent to me by Ashenoch.

Brother Jenochryada.

You tell me that James Sherlock has for some Time past lived with you. I am
glad to hear he has behaved in such a Manner as to obtain your good Opinion of
him, and I hope he will continue to prove himself worthy of your Confidence: I
have no Objection to his living among you, or to your employing him in any
Business you may have to transact with us, which you think him capable of
executing; but as he is a young Man, and quite a Stranger to me. I cannot
consent to employ him as an Interpreter for this Government until I have as
full an Experience of his Abilities and good Disposition as you have had. In
the mean Time, if I should have any Occasion of sending Messages or Letters to
your Nation, I shall commit the Care of them to Messengers of my own; and
desire you will observe the same Method, as the likeliest Means to our right
understanding of one another, and preventing Mistakes, which might otherwise
happen.

A String.

Brethren of the Seven United Nations,

You told me, that three Years ago, at a Treaty held here. I invited you, by
this Belt, to come down in great Numbers as you were not then all present, and
that, as you all were now here, you returned me this Belt, and were glad to see
as here Face to Face.

Brethren,

My Counselors well remember, that this Belt was given you by the late
Governor of this Province, at the last Treaty, but you seem to have mistaken
the End and Purpose for which it was given: I must therefore inform you, that
it was given to you as a Peace Belt, by which we then renewed our old Treaties,
brightened the Chain of Friendship, confirmed our former Union, and put fresh
Earth to the Roots of the Tree of Peace, that it might bear up against every
Storm, and live and flourish to the End of Time, whilst the Sun should shine,
and the Rivers run; and we then further desired you would publish this good
News among your own and all other Indian Nations, who were your Friends and
Allies, and engage them to join with you in a firm Peace with our great King,
and all his People. All this appears by the Minutes of that Treaty, taken down
to Writing at that Time; you ought therefore to preserve this Belt, as a Blood
or Earnest of the Engagements are then made to one another, and keep it safe in
your Bosoms, and I now return it year for that Purpose

The Peace Belt returned.

Brethren,

You informed us that this String was sent from Seven Nations of Indians over
the Lakes, who have formerly been in the French Interest, but have lately
entered into your Alliance, desiring they might lay Hold with you, of one End
of the Chain of Friendship, that susists between you and the English.

Brethren,

It gaves me great Pleasure to hear that you have strengthened your Interest by
entering into to an Alliance with these Seven Nations of Indians, who have been
formerly in the Interest of the French. You and I are one Flesh and Blood, and
I shall love and esteem all Indians whatsoever, who are in your Friendship; I
will take this String, and send it to the Kings Commander in Chief, and Sir
William Johnson, and let them know the Desire those Indians have of entering
into Friendship and Alliance with the English, and I make to Doubt but they
with receive them with open Arms. To confirm my Words, I give you this String.

A String.

Brethren,

I am very much surprised to hear from you, that these three Belt were brought
to the Onondagoe Council by an Oneida Indian, about a Year ago, without any
Speeches or Messages to attend them. I can assure you, I did not send these
Belts to the Onondagoe Council, and therefore I am at a loss to know the
Meaning of them, or from whom they came. I have frequently sent Messages into
the Indian Country, to put them in Mind of their Promise to return to us our
Flesh and Blood, who are prisoners among them, and to press them to fulfill that
Promise; and it is possible, that the Belt sent with the Messengers for that
Purpose may have been forwarded to the Six Nation Council by mistake; I
therefore now return you the Belt, that you may make further Enquiry of the
Oneidas about them.

The Belts returned.

Brethren,

You acquainted me, by these three Belts, first, that you were coming to see
me, and were got as far as Wyoming; by the second, you desired me to meet you
at Easton; by the third, you desired me to stop strong Drink, and send you
Wagons, Provisions, and Paint. As I have complied with these several Request,
I now return you the Belts.

The three Belts returned.

The several other Belts and Strings which you received from us at the last
Treaty, and were returned by you to me the Day before Yesterday, I have
accepted, and put into the Council Bag.

Brethren,

Whatever may be the Occasion of your coming down at this Time, I can truly
say, I am glad to see my old Friends and Brethren once more, and take them by
the Hand, and will make you as welcome and easy, while you stay among us, as I
possibly can. I have only further to say to you at present, that as we are now
Face to Face, we should open our Hearts to one another, and let nothing remain
upon our Minds; if you, on your Part, have any Thing to offer or communicate to
me, that relates to the private Interest or Concerns of this Province, or that
can tend to promote and confirm our Friendship, and prevent all future Causes
of Jealousy and Discontent, I shall be glad to hear it.

A Belt.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, on Saturday the Eighth of August, 1761.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire etc. as before.

Joseph Pepy stand up, and speak as follows: viz.

Brother Onas,

I AM to speak a few Words to you. We had a great Council Fire at Albany, when
a Friendship was first made with our Grandfathers; after which, about seven
Years ago, our Brother General Johnson moved the Council Fire from Albany to
his own House, where he said to us. I am one Half Indian, and one Half English:
What I say to my dear Brethren, the Seven Nations, shall be true. -- The Seven
Nations were accordingly all assembled to the Place where he had kindled the
Fire, at which Time he took up a Tomahawk, gave it them, and told them, he was
going to War against the French, and desired them to join with him, and
promised them, that after the French were all conquered and removed, Trade
should be made open and free to them, and all Kinds of Goods should become more
cheap, and that their Furs and Skins should bear a good Price. --

Last Year General Johnson appointed his Brethren, the Seven Nations, to meet
him at Oswego, upon which they did assemble there; at which Time General
Johnson observing that their Chiefs and Warriors were not all come, he sent a
second Message, desiring them all to attend him there, and when they did come
he said,

Brethren,

I am very glad to see you here. I see many of your Chiefs are dead. I am now
going against the French, and out of the Prisoners that I shall take from them,
I will put as many in their Room. -- Now, Brother Onas, as General Johnson has
not performed his Promise to us, we see Death coming upon us, and the God above
knows he has wronged us.

Brother Onas,

We give no Belt or String upon this Occasion, and only relate it as Matter of
Information to you.

Brother Onas,

Listen to what your Brethren of the Seven Nations say, in Answer to what you
told us Yesterday.

You desired us to open our Hearts, that nothing unknown might lay hid there,
but that every Thing may come out: We desire, by this Belt, that you may do the
same.

A white Belt of eight Rows, with three black Bars.

Brother Onas,

We see, Brethren, on each Side of us: On the one Side, the Governor of
Virginia, who does not speak or do right to us; on the other Side, General
Johnson, who does the same. We have often heard you speak, and you always do
and speak right and justly to us; every Time you speak it does our Hearts good.
When we look toward you, General Johnson and the Governor of Virginia, we
esteem you all as One; how comes it then that you do not all speak alike. We,
your Brethren of the Seven Nations, are penned up like Hogs. There are Forts
all around us, and therefore we are apprehensive that Death is coming upon us.
We want nothing but Friendship with you, so long as the Sun shall shine, and
the Waters run.

A white Belt of nine Rows, and four black Bars.

Brother Onas,

Hearken to what your Brethren, the Seven Nations, are going to say to you.
When our Grandfathers first made a Friendship together, God saw it: Now we, and
all the Nations, would stand to the Agreement they made, and when any Nations
smile upon us, we will join with them. Now, dear Brother, may God Almighty give
us Strength and Knowledge, to continue our Friendship. We look at no other, but
to you, to hold fast the Chain of Friendship. We are crushed on all Sides, so
that we cannot stir ourselves, nor look any Way but to you. -- Now, dear
Brother, that we see you Face to Face, we desire that you would not slack your
Friendship, but hold it fast.

A black and white Belt of seven Rows.

Brother Onas,

I would only let you know, in a few Words, how our Brother General Johnson
served us. -- When we come to him for Ammunition, and bring our Skins, he does
not give us the Worth of our Skins, but only a Handful of Powder; and for that
Reason we think there is certain Death coming upon us. --

He shuts up his Powder from us, and will not give us more than will serve us
two or three Days. We only mention this to you, but if you will continue to
smile on us, we will look to you.

A white Belt of six Rows, and three black Bars.

Brother Onas,

We are now sensible, that we were under a Mistake with Respect to the Meaning
of this Belt (holding up the large Peace Belt) We should not have brought it
back to you again, if we had known what it meant: We are very glad that you
have explained it to us: We look upon it as the Belt of Peace, and will show it
to all the Nations over the Lake, and will lodge it in the Onondagoe Council,
where the only General Council Fire is kept, and where it ought to remain.

Brother Onas,

This is all your Brethren of the Seven Nations have to say.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, on Monday the Tenth of August, 1761.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire etc, etc, as before.

Tokahaio stood up and spoke as follows, viz.

Brother Onas,

YOU will please to hear what the Six Nations are going to say to you. Some of
the English have settled upon our Lands, but we don't know from whence they
came. We hope that as you are strong, you will assist us in preventing them
from settling upon our Lands, that we may not be wronged out of them.

A Belt of seven Rows, with six Diamonds and a Bar.

Brother Onas,

We have heard that this Land has been sold, but we do not know for certain by
whom. The Six Nations have not sold it, and never intended it as yet. Whoever
has sold the Land, stole it from us, and only did it to fill their Pockets with
Money; but we have heard that two Tuscaroras, one Oneida, and one Mohawk, have
sold it, unknown to the Six Nations.

A String of four Rows.

Brother Onas,

Hear what we are going to say to you. -- You know there is a Line made between
you and us, and we desire that none of the English would settle on the other
Side of that Line. [Being asked what they meant by that Line, they answered,
the Line of the Purchase last made by this Province from the Six Nations.] Some
People have already settled over that Line, which People we do not like, and
hope you will be strong, and assist us in having them removed.

A Belt of seven Rows, with three black Diamonds.

Brother Onas,

We are very poorly off, as we have no Trade stirring among us, and as we have
mentioned to you that the Things we buy from General Johnson are very dear, we
hope you will have Pity on us, and erect a Trading-house at Diahoga, that we
may be to buy our Goods cheaper. We are in great Want of all Kinds of Goods,
but especially of Powder and Lead, and hope you will supply us plentifully with
them. We desire you would not allow any strong Liquor to be sent among us, as
we shall fetch that ourselves, whenever we shall want it. As soon as we see
your People come with Goods, we will acquaint all our young Men with it, both
far and near, and if your Goods are sold reasonable, we suppose that General
Johnson will also sell his Goods cheaper than he now does. -- We desire that
you would send a good and honest Man to trade with us.

A Belt of seven Rows and four black Bars.

Brother Onas,

You have frequently sent us Messages by straggling Indians, Delawares, and
others, upon whom there is no Dependence: They sometimes lose the Belts and
Messages, and sometimes drink them away; but if they do happen to reach as,
they are nothing but Nonsense. We desire you, therefore, that whenever you have
Messages to send, you will send them by trusty Persons to our Great Council
Fire at Onondagoe, that we may be able to understand them rightly; and as we
have chosen Samuel Weiser for that Purpose, you can always send your Messages
by him.

A chequered String of four Rows.

Brother Onas,

You have often made Mention of your Flesh and Blood, who are Prisoners among
us. It Is true, Brother, there was some of your Blood among us; there were Ten
among the Cayugas, but our Brother General Johnson has also often spoke of them
to us, and we have delivered them all up to him; there is none amongst us at
present -- You must now look for then amongst the Delawares, our Cousins.

A Belt of four Rows, with three black Bars.

Brother Onas,

We have nothing further to say, and as we have been here a great While, we
desire the Governor to make Haste to dismiss us.

(James Sherlock reports, that he had a Belt from the Onondagoes to the
Delawares, at Chugnot, above Diahoga, demanding the English Prisoners they had;
that he received one Woman from them, and was coming off with her in a Canoe,
but that Mechtochraway, the Delaware King, followed him, and took her from him,
telling him that the Delawares would not deliver up their Prisoners, till they
heard what their Brother, the English should say.)

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, on Tuesday the Eleventh of August.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire etc. as before.

The Governor, addressing himself to the Seven United Nations, spoke as
follows, viz.

Brethren of the Seven United Nations, and all our Indian Brethren now present,

YOU desire me to open my Heart, and conceal nothing from you. I give you this
String, to assure you that I will always communicate to you every Thing that
comes to my Knowledge, or that rises up in my Mind, which concerns our common
Interest, and keep nothing secret, but will agree that you and I shall have but
one Eye, one Ear, and one Heart.

A String.

Brethren,

I am very sorry to hear that you apprehend General Johnson has been unkind to
you. I am afraid the Evil Spirit is again endeavoring to blind your Eyes, and
mislead you. You well know that General Johnson has, for a great Number of
Years past, manifested his Love and Friendship for the Indians, on many
Occasions, and you have as often given Proofs of your Esteem and good Opinion
of him. You should not therefore suffer the Confidence and Trust you have
reposed in him, to be interrupted by any Jealousies or Suspicions; but you
should open your Hearts to him, and tell him your Minds freely. I am persuaded
he is a very worthy Gentleman, and your good Friend, and if you will lay your
Grievances before him, I am sure be will do you Justice, if you have been
injured, and remove all your Uneasiness.

A Belt.

Brethren,

You say that you are afraid Death is coming upon you, and seem to apprehend
yourselves to be in great Danger; I am much surprised to hear this, nor can I
find out what has given Rise to your Fears, as there is now a perfect Peace and
Friendship betwixt you and all your Brethren the English: you must not
therefore make yourselves uneasy without any just Grounds or Foundation. I
speak to you from the (...) of my Heart, and do assure you that I never heard,
nor do I believe that there are any ill Designs forming against you.

A Belt.

Brethren,

I thank you for the particular Affection you express for the People of this
Province. We have always made it a Rule to speak to you plainly, and from the
Bottom of our Hearts, and to treat you not only justly, but with Brotherly
Love, and Kindness. And it now gives us great Satisfaction to hear that you
think so well of us. I assure you we desire nothing more, than to live in
perfect Peace and Friendship with you, as long as the Sun and Moon endures. We
will always hold the Chain of Friendship in our Hands, and keep it Bright and
Free from Rust, and in all our future Conduct to, and Dealings with you,
continue to use you well, and give you every Proof of our Affection and Regard
for you.

A Belt.

Brethren,

I have carefully considered that Part of the Speech you made Yesterday,
wherein you say that some Lands have been stole from you, and sold by some
Indians, who have no Right to them, to the English, who have settled upon them.
I know of no Lands lying within this Province, which have not been purchased of
you, that have been settled by the English, except a Tract lying on or near the
River Delaware, about Fifty Miles above the Blue Mountains. Brethren, I am glad
to have this Opportunity of speaking to you on this Head: It is a Matter of
great Consequence, and has given me much Concern; listen attentively,
therefore, to what I shall say to you about this Matter. -- You know that an
Agreement was made, a great While ago, between your Ancestors and your Brother
Onas (which has been often renewed and confirmed by many of your Chiefs now
living) that your Brother Onas would never settle any Lands in this Province,
till he had fairly purchased them of the Indians, who engaged that they would
never sell any Lands in this Province to any other Person than their Brother
Onas. That you may refresh your Memories, and call to Mind this Agreement. I
give you this Belt.

A Belt.

Brethren,

A great Number of People who lived in Connecticut Government, came about a
Year ago and settled near this River, beyond the Line of the Lands purchased of
you, at a Place called Cushietunck and claimed all the Lands from thence quite
up to Wyoming. As soon as heard of it I sent Messengers to them, informing them
these Lands had never been purchased of the Indians, and desiring them to
remove away. They sent me back, for Answer, that they had purchased all those
Lands of you, and under that Pretense had a Right to them, and would hold them.
Now, Brethren, as you have told me you will hide nothing from me, I desire you
will tell me truly, whether you have sold these Lands to these Strangers, who
have settled them, against my Will and Consent? -- (To which Question the Six
Nations made Answer, That those were the Lands which they mentioned Yesterday
to have been sold by four straggling Indians, without the Knowledge or Consent
of their General Council, and that they understood Thomas King, an Oneida
Indian, was one of those who had sold those Lands.)

Upon which Answer the Governor said,

Brethren,

You know all such private Sales are of no Force. I therefore join this String
to the Belt, and desire you will send for those Indians into the Great Council
at Onondagoe, and reprove them for their Conduct, and cancel their Deeds.

A Belt and a large String.

Brethren,

I have already, by the Consent of my Wise Men, set up two great Stores, or
Trading-houses, to furnish the Indians with all Sorts of Goods, at a cheap
Rate, one at Pittsburgh, and the other at Shamokin; at the last of which Places
you may easily supply yourselves with whatever you want. The Expenses, Losses,
and many Difficulties which attend our sending Goods to these two Places, are
so great, that I cannot set up another Storehouse at so great a Distance as
Diahoga, according to your Desire. -- I am sorry to refuse you any Thing; but
if I should agree with you, to do more than I can perform, you would have just
Reason to charge me with deceiving you. You must not therefore take it amiss,
that I always speak plainly to you, and tell you my Mind.

A Belt.

Brethren,

I told you before, that if I should have Occasion to send you any Messages, I
would commit the care of them to Messengers of my own; and as Samuel Weiser is
a Person recommended by you for that Purpose, I will use him for the future.

A String.

Brethren,

I am pleased to hear you sent to General Johnson our Flesh and Blood, who were
Prisoners among the Cayugas. We esteem it as the strongest Proof of your
Friendship that you can possibly give us. -- You all agreed, at the Treaty held
here three Years ago, that you would search all the Towns and Places in the
Indian Countries for them, and deliver them up to us, without leaving one
behind; and that if they had gone down your Throats, you would heave them up
again. I am sorry that but very few have yet been brought back, though I know
there are a great many scattered up and down among the Indians. We cannot help
thinking that you speak only from your Lips, and not from your Hearts, whatever
Professions of Regard you make for us, till this Promise is performed, and we
see our Fathers, Mothers and Children, who have been carried into Captivity,
restored to us, this Promise was the Condition on which the Peace Belt was
exchanged between us. -- Some among you have been faithful, and sent back all
the Prisoners they had; I do not therefore address this Part of my Speech to
them, but take them to my Heart; it is intended only for such of the Indians as
have deceived us, and still detain our Flesh and Blood. I sincerely wish to be
Friends with you all, and therefore once more put you in Mind of your
Engagements, and insist on your immediately complying with them, by restoring
the Prisoners, that nothing may remain to make any Difference between us to the
End of Time.

A Belt.

The Governor, addressing himself to Teedyuscung, spoke as follows, viz.

Brother,

Agreeable to your Request, I have taken into serious Consideration what you
said to me on Wednesday last, and shall answer you with the same good Will and
Sincerity that true Friends always use to one another.

A String.

Brother,

I readily acknowledge that you have been a great Instrument in bringing about
the great Work of Peace; and, according to the Promises you made us at this
Place three Years ago, the Peace Belt has been sent to several Nations of
Indians, who have since joined their Hands to it; so that, by the Blessing of
the Most High, the Wound, by the Means of the Medicine you have applied, is
entirely healed. And it shall be my Endeavor, as you say it shall be yours, to
keep the Wound from ever opening again.

A Belt.

Brother,

You tell me that all your young Men as far as the Twightwees, and those now
with you, Mohickons, Opies and Delawares, intend to join in, and stand to,
whatever you and I have agreed to; and that they will not take Notice of
whatever Drops of Blood may have stained the Road, but will look steadily to
our Agreement.

Brother,

I very much commend this Resolution; -- it is a Mark of Prudence and real Love
for Peace; considering how many wicked Men there are in the World, it must be
expected that private Mischiefs, and even Murders, will now and then be
committed: When this happens, we shall do well to let one another know of it,
and join in taking all proper Measures to detect and punish the evil Doers.
This being done, the public Peace can never be affected or heart. -- By this
Belt I assure you that this is my Disposition and Resolution, as well as it is
yours.

A Belt and String.

Brother,

I take special Notice of your declaring that you have cleared yourself as far
as (...), Papounan's Town, as far as that Place, you say you have no Prisoners,
but they are all delivered up, and you want to make a Peace as lasting as the
World; Brother, I take this public Declaration of yours very kindly; I believe
you say true; if all like you would do the same Thing, -- and they are engaged,
and have often promised, to do it, -- the Peace would last for ever. On the
Part of this Government all Engagements shall be punctually observed* this
String confirms my Words.

A String.

Brother,

You say you would not have me look to you for any Thing further, for nothing
will ever make a Difference betwixt you and me, and therefore if any Thing
happens, it must spring from me, as your young Men have put all their Affairs
into the Hands of their Chief. Brother, assure yourself that my Heart is good
toward you, and that I shall take all the Pains in my Power to prevent any
Breach of the Peace; keep but your young Men sober, and in Order, and let them
do no Mischief to the Inhabitants, and I am well assured we shall always remain
on good Terms, and enjoy all the Benefits of Peace.

A String.

Brother,

I agree with you that friendly Conferences between us are of great Use, as
they give us an Opportunity of setting Matters that may arise from time to
time, which might otherwise breed Misunderstandings between us. -- I shall be
your Ear, and inform you constantly of any Thing that may concern you.

A String.

Brother,

I thank you for your Information respecting what you told me was said to you
by the Seven Nations. You are (...) all together; speak your Minds to one
another freely and affectionately, as Friends and Relations should do, and
agree now on all Points. If you really mean to continue at Wyoming, let your
Uncles know it, and they will, I doubt not, content to it. They seem to
apprehend that Danger is nigh to you as well as themselves, but I hope what I
have said to them of the good Disposition of General Johnson, will quiet both
their and your Fears. By this Belt I assure you that I will give you the
earliest Notice in my Power if any Harm should ever be intended against you. At
present I know of none; I am assured that there is none.

A Belt.

Brother,

I shall be very sorry if you remove from Wyoming; this Province has
cheerfully, and at a considerable Expense, assisted you to build House, and
make your Settlement there commodious to you as long as you live; there you
will always find us disposed to assist you, if you go away, if will not be so
much in our Power. Consider this well; your Uncles, who now hear me speak to
you, will not, I hope, after placing you there, and after the Expense that has
been laid out by us in building Houses for you, desire you to go to live at
another Place, without your giving them some Cause of Complaint; and that I
hope you never with do. In Confirmation of the Truth of what I now say to you,
I give you this Belt.

A Belt.

The Governor then addressing himself to the Papounan, spoke as follows.

Brother Papounan,

I thank you for your Care in sending my Message to Achoan, and for delivering
his Answer. I shall give you no more Trouble in this Matter, nor send him any
more Messages; but expect his Uncles, the Seven Nations, will acquaint him with
what I have so strongly urged upon them, during these Conferences, with Respect
to the Delivery of the Prisoners.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, the same Day, in the Afternoon.
PRESENT, as before.

IN Consequence of the Governor's pressing Demand for the Indians to deliver up
all the English Prisoners they had now with them, they produced one Girl, and
delivered her up to the Governor in Form.

The Governor then spoke to the Indians.

Brethren,

I am now to inform you, that since our last Meeting at this Place, three Years
ago, the Road has been stained with a few Drops of Blood. The first Thing of
this Kind happened over Susquehanna, where one Indian Man, his Wife, and two
Children were found dead, having been either murdered or drowned in the River
Conedogwainet. It no sooner came to my Knowledge, but I issued a Proclamation,
offering Two Hundred and Sixty-six Dollars, as a Reward for detecting and
apprehending all such as should be concerned in this Murder: but,
notwithstanding all my Endeavors, nothing certain has yet been discovered.

About two Months ago, our very good Friend Thomas Hickman was found shot in
the Tuscarora Path Valley. One Person is now in Goal, on Suspicion; two others
were put into Prison, but set at Liberty again, at the Instance of the Indians,
it appearing to them that they were innocent. All possible Endeavors are now
(...) to find out who did this wicked Act; a Reward has been offered, by
public Proclamation, for their Apprehension, and I hope we shall find them.

There may have been some few more of such Instances, which I may not have been
particularly informed of; but these are all that have reached my Ears.

Brethren,

These are Accidents, which ought not to affect the Peace made between us; It
is as grievous to me as to you to hear of these wicked Acts, and let them be
who they will that have been guilty of these Murders, they shall die
themselves, as soon as convicted thereof, by a lawful Trial. With this Belt I
collect their Bones, and put them all into one Grave.

A Belt.

I fill up their Graves, and cover their Bodies with these Strouds.

Strouds.

With these Handkerchiefs I wash off the Blood from your Bodies, and wipe away
the Tears from your Eyes.

Handkerchiefs.

With this Belt I take all Sorrow out of your Hearts, I clear your Throats,
Eyes, and Ears, and desire you will no more mourn for them.

A Belt.

Teedyuscung then informed the Governor, that he desired to speak a few Words
to him, and to his Uncles the Six Nations; whereupon the Governor desired him
to begin, and he spoke as follows.

Uncles,

I beg you will hearken to what I am going to say. You may remember, some Years
ago, at our Council Fire, you took me by the Hairs of my Head, and shook me,
and told me to go and live at Wyoming, for you gave me the Land there, where I
might raise my Bread, and get my Living; now again you desire me to move off
from thence, and would place me somewhere else. The (...) why I complied with
your first Request was, because I thought you would give (...) Lands at
Wyoming, in the Room of some of our Lands you had sold the English (...) you
now, that if I move from thence, some English will come and settle (...) Midst
of our Road, so that we cannot pass from thence to this Province; and we (...)
the Land, so that neither you nor me will have any Benefit from it.

Address (...) to the Governor, he said,

Brother,

I am really very glad to hear (...) the Wound is healed up; we are all pleased
at it since this is the Case we expect (...) pay us for the Lands we have been
complaining about. It was left to King GEORGE. You told me as soon as ever you
heard from the King, you would let me know of it; but I have not heard you say
any thing about it since: Now, Brother, as there are some here present, who
have never been paid for some of their Lands, we desire you would pay them now:
but as for the Munsies, and some others at Allegheny, who also claim Lands near
this Place, they will agree with you when they see you.

The Governor replied, that he would take into Consideration what he had said,
and would answer him in the Morning.

Being asked what Lands he desired to be paid for; he answered, that the Lands
are where we now stand, betwixt the Mountains and Tohicon Creek, but
acknowledged that some Lands about Durbam, four Miles square, were paid for.

Tokahaio then stood up and spoke.

Brother Onas,

We the Seven Nations, especially the Nanticokes and Conoys, speak to you. --
About seven Years ago we went down to Maryland, with a Belt of Wampum, to fetch
our Flesh and Blood, which we showed to some Englishmen there, who told us they
did not understand Belts, but if we had brought any Order in Writing from the
Governor of Pennsylvania, they would let our Flesh and Blood then come away
with us; but as this was not done, they would not let them come: -- Now we
desire you would give us an Order for that Purpose.

A white Spring of five Rows.

Brother Onas,

We would have you make some Satisfaction to our Cousins here, the Delawares,
for their Lands, as we suppose they desire it. -- Some of them are now present,
who claim some Lands here, and are often thinking of it, particularly one
(pointing to Joseph Pepy)

At a private CONFERENCE, on Wednesday the Twelfth of August, 1761.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor, etc. etc.
RICHARD PETER'S, Esquire; LEWIS GORDON, Esquire; The Chief of the Onondagoes,
ASHENOCH, Speaker. JAMES SHERLOCK, Interpreter.


Brother Onas,

IT is a long Time since we last met together, and we are now glad to see you.
Brother, we request it of you that you would give us a Duplicate of this Deed
(showing a Deed of Release from Richard Peter's, and Conrad Weiser. Esquires,
Proprietary Attorneys to them at the last Treaty), because it is the Desire of
Jenochryada, and in Order that the Mohawks may have the Original, and we keep
the Copy.

A chequered String of three Rows.

To which Request the Governor assented, and desired Lewis Gordon, Esquire to
prepare an exemplified Copy of the abovementioned Release for them.

Jeoquanta then Spoke to the Governor.

Brother Onas,

My old Mother and Children, who are here at present, are not able to walk, I
desire therefore that my Brother would help me to a Horse, as I have a great
Way to go Home, and cannot make a Canoe at this Time of the Year.

A black Belt of seven Rows.

Brother Onas,

I have come a great Way, and have brought with me a Pack of Beaver. Our
Brother General Johnson, and those who live near him, sell their Goods very
dear, and give us nothing for our Skins, but as I heard our Brothers of this
Province gave better Prices for our Skins, I have brought them here, and hope
my Brother will see Justice done me in the Sale of them. And if my Brother
thinks I can get a better Price for them by carrying them to Philadelphia, I
should be obliged to him for his Information.

A chequered String of three Rows.

At a public CONFERENCE on the same Day.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire etc. etc. as at the former public
Conferences.

The Governor, addressing himself to Teedyuscung, spoke as follows.

Brother,

AS to the Lands lying between the Kittochtinny Hills and Touhickon Creek,
which you say you have never been paid for, you know the Proprietaries of this
Province have always insisted that they were fairly purchased of the Delawares,
before you were born, who received the Consideration Money for them; you know
also that the Dispute between you and the Proprietaries about these Lands was,
by your own particular Desire, referred to our Great King over the Water, who,
from his Love of Justice, and Regard to you, has taken upon himself to settle
it, and has ordered General Johnson to hear your Complaint, and enquire into
the Truth of it, and make Report to him, that he may direct what is right to be
done; of this General Johnson gave you Notice, by a Letter, above a Year and an
Half ago, and desired you to appoint a proper Time and Place to meet him on
this Occasion, that the Affair might be speedily settled. I have waited ever
since in Expectation that you would comply with General Johnson's Request; and
I now inform you that I am, and at all Times shall be, ready, on my Part, to
send the Proprietary Commissioners to support their Claim, whenever you shall
appoint the Time and Place of Meeting; it is therefore your own Fault if the
Matter is delayed any longer.

Addressing himself to the Seven Nations, be said,

Brothren of the Seven United Nations,

I have considered what you said to me on Behalf of the Conoys and the
Nanticokes, who have some of their Brethren still remaining in the Province of
Maryland: As I am not Governor of that Province, I have no Power to order the
People there to suffer their Relations to come away; I will, however, afford
them all the Assistance I can, and will not only give the Messenger they send
to Maryland a Passport, or safe Conduct, but will write to the Governor, and
request him to permit their Brethren to come away, without Interruption.

Brethren,

You desire me to make Satisfaction to your Cousins the Delawares for these
Lands which they claim, as they often think of it; had you known, as well as I
do, how groundless and unjust this Claim of theirs was, I am sure you would not
have taken any Notice of it. Your old Men must remember, that at a full Council
held with the Six Nations, at Philadelphia, in the Year 1742, the Claim the
Delawares now make for these very Lands was laid before them, and the Deeds
from them to the Proprietaries perused and considered by the Six Nations; who,
upon a full Hearing of the Matter, then were convinced that the Proprietaries
had fairly purchased them of the Delawares, and paid for them. Whereupon the
Six Nations ordered the Delawares to remove off from them, and go to Wyoming,
which they accordingly did. Teedyuscung, some Time ago, referred his Complaint
about these Lands to our Great King, who has ordered General Johnson to enquire
into the whole Matter, and let him know how it is circumstanced, that Justice
may be done as well to the Delawares as to us; and I am ready to send my
Commissioners to General Johnson, to lay before him the Proprietaries Deeds
for, and Right to, these Lands, whenever Teedyuscung will appoint a Time and
Place for this Purpose.

Tokahaio addressed the Governor, in Behalf of the Tuteloes, as follows.

Brother Onas,

We desire our Brother will be so good as to furnish us with three Wagons, to
carry home our Sick, who are not able to walk, as we intend to go home as soon
as we can; -- which Request the Governor granted, and left the Number of
Wagons to be provided for them, to the Direction of Joseph Fox, Esquire

Tokahaio then added,

Brother Onas,

We have been here at this Council Fire, and heard what good Word you have
spoke to We have no more to say at present, and we see likewise that you have
nothing more to say to us; we are therefore going to part. When we return home,
we will acquaint all our People with what we have heard. We heartily thank you
for the good Usage we have received from you.

The Governor informed them that he had brought up with him a Present from the
Government to them, which Mr. Fox would distribute amongst them Tomorrow; and
then concluded the Treaty, by shaking Hands with the Chiefs of the Indians.

In the Afternoon the Governor and his Company set out for Philadelphia.

THE END

