Mr. INGERSOLL's Election-SERMON. MAY 24, 1761.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE General Assembly Of the COLONY of CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE Anniversary Election MAY 14 th, 1761.

By Jonathan Ingersoll, A.M. Pastor of a Church in Ridgfield.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, M DCC.LXI.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the GOVERNOR and COMPANY of the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, holden at HARTFORD, in said Colony, on the 2d Thursday of May,
Anno Dom. 1761.
ORDERED, That ANDREW BURR, Esquire and Mr. SAMUEL OLMSTED, Return the Thanks of
this Assembly, to the Rev. Mr. JONATHAN INGERSOLL, for his SERMON Delivered
before this Assembly, on the 14th Instant, and Desire a Copy thereof that it
may be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

An Election SERMON.
I. COR. VII.17. But as God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has
called every one, so let him Walk. --
MAN is made after a fearful and wonderful Manner; endued with noble
intellectual Powers; a social Creature, capable of moral Government; and formed
for Society both civil and religious. We were designed for noble Ends and
Purposes, furnished with different Gifts, and endowed with different Talents,
made for Usefulness in the World, and called to different Offices; and are all
under very great and powerful Obligations to abide and act in our own Spheres,
making the Glory of GOD, our own Happiness, and the best Good of our
Fellow Creatures the great End of all our Actions. Man's chief End is, to
glorify GOD, and enjoy him for ever. And as we would glorify God and be
approved of him, we must through Grace in Christ, make him our only Trust; live
dependant upon him, and devoted to him; we must love him with all our Hearts,
supremely, ultimately and universally; and love our Neighbor as ourselves: The
Redeemer's Interest must lie with weight upon our Minds; we must be of a
public Spirit, Friends to lawful Society, and lay ourselves out in the right
Improvement of our several Gifts, Talents and Advantages. We are embodied
Spirits, and related to both Worlds in this Respect: and while we dwell in
this, we are acting for the next, which we shall find a World of intolerable
and endless Misery, or of unspeakable and everlasting Joy and Felicity,
according to (...) Behavior. If we are found at last to have abused our Gifts
distributed to us by a gracious GOD, and to have perverted them to the basest
Ends; or to have wrapped them up in a Napkin, and not used them at all to those
Purposes GOD designed in giving them; we shall be deemed slothful and
unprofitable Servants, and doomed to remediless Ruin: But if we are found,
through Grace in the Redeemer, to have answered in a good Measure, the great
Ends of our Being; to have acted well in our Orbit, and to have been
Serviceable in the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, and the best Interest of
that Body to which we belonged, we shall through the Merits of our Lord and
Savior, receive an ample Reward, even a crown of life in the coming world. And
of all Men it concerns us thus to Serve GOD and our Generation: for our
Advantages are distinguishing, and our Obligations arise in Proportion to our
Privileges and Advantages. The Word of GOD plainly reveals, and strictly
enjoins this, that more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto we do well that we
take Heed. This is implied and inculcated in the Words of our Text. But as God
has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called every one, so let him
walk. -- The Duty enjoined with divine Authority is plain, although the Reward is
not particularly mentioned: but all Gospel Precepts, Encouragements and
Exhortations are urged with this Motive, (viz.) That they who reject the divine
Counsels and continue Obstinate shall perish in their Rebellion; while they
that hearken, believe, and obey, through the efficacious Influences of the Holy
Ghost, shall for Jesus's sake, be gloriously and eternally Rewarded.

Some indeed have thought these Words were connected with, and the Truth
contained therein, a natural and necessary Consequence from what the Apostle
had laid down in the foregoing Verses: But others suppose them to be the
beginning of the following Discourse, wherein he treats of Christians of all
Ranks and Orders abiding in their respective Callings, and faithfully
discharging the Duties thereof.

This appears to me the Apostles Design; and thus I shall apply and improve the
Text.

The Words are very comprehensive, and include all Men, of all Ranks, and of
all Denominations; Men of every Station, and every Character, from the highest
to the lowest, that have any Gifts of any Kind or Degree, whereby they are
capable of usefulness in their Generation; as well him that has but one Talent,
as him that has five or ten. According as GOD has distributed to him, so he
is strongly bound and obliged faithfully to improve his Gifts or Talents, and
in that Calling wherein God has called him. For the Apostle goes on and says,
as the Lord has called every one. That God who gives us differing Gifts, and
qualifies us for different Offices, has called us thereunto, and commended us
to abide therein, and faithfully discharge the several Duties thereof. As the
Lord has called every one, so let him walk -- Let him abide in the Post
wherein God has fixed him, and there let him act as one that expects to give
an Account. Wherefore in treating upon the Words of the Text thus opened and
explained, I shall Observe,

I. That God has variously distributed his Gifts among Men, and qualified them
for a Diversity of Business in the World.

II. As God has distributed his Gifts unto Men, and qualified them for, so he
has called them to act their Part in different Offices.

III. Show that it highly concerns every one to abide in his Office or Calling,
and faithfully discharge the several Duties of it.

IV. Conclude with an Address to diverse Orders of Men, humbly exhorting them
faithfully to improve the Gifts which God has given them in their respective
Callings.

To each of these in their Order.

I. God has variously distributed his Gifts among Men, and qualified them for
a Diversity of Business in the World.

GOD has a great Work to be carried on in the World by Men as Instruments; and
has imparted Gifts to all, that every one may be busily engaged, and afford an
helping Hand according to his Ability, and not a Man to be idle. And as there
are various Parts of the same Work to be managed and performed, some of a more
difficult Nature, and of greater Importance, and some of less, so he has
proportioned his Gifts accordingly. See Mat. 25.14, 15. For the Kingdom of
Heaven is as a Man traveling into a far Country, who called his own Servants,
and delivered unto them his Goods: and unto one he gave five Pounds, to another
two, and to another one, to every Man according to his several ability; and
straightway took his Journey; saying unto them, occupy till I come. Luke 19.13.
Agreeably to this, the Apostle says, Romans 12.6. Having then Gifts differing
according to the Grace that is given us. This was spoken with immediate Regard
to the Church, considered as a religious Body. But it is true when applied to
the State; and likewise when to the Church and State; considered as a
collective Body. Accordingly when we view the whole Body, we see Gifts of a
different Kind, and differing in Degree, dispersed abroad among the Children of
Men.

God has abundantly enriched some with royal Gifts and Graces, and qualified
them to sit upon the Throne, to wear the Crown and sway the Scepter: For it is
by him that Kings reign and Princes decree Justice Prove. 8.15.
.

To Others, he has given Wisdom and Understanding, sagacious and penetrating.
Minds, Quickness of Apprehension, and a firm unshaken Resolution, as well as
Loyalty fitting for Ministers of State, to sit round about the King, and assist
him in his important Counsels.

To Others, he has given peculiar Gifts to govern in their respective
Provinces: clothed them with a natural Authority in their very Make, and
endowed them with an agreeable Mixture of Skill and Wisdom, Integrity and
Meekness, Judgment and Mercy, that all around are disposed to honor and obey
them with Freedom and Cheerfulness.

To Others he has imparted the proper Gifts of Judges and Counselors,
distinguishing them with the Faculty of discerning between Right and wrong, and
endowing them with a steady Mind, and a Principle of Righteousness, that with
courage and resolution they may judge with righteous Judgment, justifying the
righteous and condemning the wicked, agreeable to the Command given us in Deuteronomy.
25.1. And to these he has variously distributed his Gifts, to some in greater
Degrees, to others in less, as there are Posts of Honor of the same Kind, but
of a different Degree. As one is to act in a more elevated Station, and another
in a less.

To others he has given the Faculty of Speaking, and the Art ot reasoning and
pleading in Matters of Controversy; that Right may take Place, and the innocent
be cleared, while the guilty are punished; and every one have Justice done him.

And Others he has formed for executive Justice, that our Rights may be
maintained, Vice and Immorality suppressed, and the best good of the
Commonwealth promoted.

At the same Time our God, through the Riches of his Grace in Christ the
Redeemer, who purchased the Church with his own Blood, has furnished Others
with Gifts and Graces suited to the important Work of the sacred Ministry. And
among these he has variously distributed his Gifts.

To some he has given great Degrees of Knowledge, both divine and humane,
Depth of Judgment, and a large Acquaintance especially with polemical Divinity,
and set them with Paul for the Defense of the Gospel; Some he has made
Boanerges Sons of Thunder, to alarm the secure, and reform the profane: To some
he has given the Charms of Eloquence, that like Apollos of old, they have a
distinguishing Faculty of alluring and persuading weary and heavy laden Sinners
to cast themselves with all their Burdens upon the blessed Jesus: Some he has
endued with the Gift of opening and explaining the Scriptures, and of applying
them rightly and seasonably to wounded Consciences: And to others he has given
the happy Talent of healing Breaches and restoring Peace to broken Churches,
and of encouraging and building them up unto the Kingdom of Glory.

Some Degree of these Gifts all true Ministers have; but while some excel in
one, others do in another. So that this being the Case, the Kingdom of the
Redeemer is built up in the World, through the promised Presence and Blessing
of Jesus Christ, and the Interest of the Commonwealth greatly advanced.

And while God the glorious Author and Giver of every good and perfect Gift,
James 1.17.
is granting to some the Faculty of administering to, and healing the
distempered Soul of its spiritual Maladies, as Instruments; he is furnishing
others with Gifts suitable to administer to, and heal the sick and diseased
Body, through his sovereign Blessing accompanying their Endeavors.

Others, our God, who styles himself a Man of War, Exodus 15.3.
has formed for the Field of Battle: He is their Strength, and teaches their
Hands to war, and their Fingers to fight: Psalm. 144.1
And he sets them as Barriers to our Kingdom and Country; and makes them the
formidable, and yet glorious Defenders of our Rights, Liberties and Privileges.

Some, God qualifies to manage Trade and mercantile Affairs even to the
remotest Parts of the Earth, whereby a Kingdom is enriched: and others are
prepared to furrow the vast and wide Ocean, in their swift Ships to transport
their Effects.

And while some are most ingenious at Mechanics, others well understand, and
diligently pursue the Business of Husbandry, and cultivate the Field by which
the King himself is served. Eccl. 5.9.
Thus God has variously distributed his Gifts among the Children of Men.

These differing Gifts, and a Disposition or Inclination to use and improve
them in different Callings, is of that God who has the Hearts of all Men, even
the Hearts of Kings in his Hands, and turns them as the Rivers of Waters,
whithersoever he will. As a most ingenious Author says, upon a like Subject; He
qualifies Judah to sway the Scepter, and disposes Issachar to couch as an Ass
under Burdens; he prepares Zebulon to dwell at the Haven of the Sea, and to do
Business upon the mighty Waters; Benjamin to ravin as a Wolf, and Levi to teach
Jacob his Judgment, and Israel his Law. The late Mr. Pemberton.
All these things are of God, that none may boast, but all be humble and
thankful, and improve their Gifts and Talents to the Honor of him that gave
them, and learn that Lesson, 1 Cor. 4.6, 7. Not to think of Men above that
which is written, that no one be pussed up for one against another. For who
makes Thee to differ from another? and ^^at have thou, that thou did not
receive? now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had
not received it? Which brings me to say

II. As God has distributed his Gifts unto Men, and qualified them for, so he
has called them to act their Part in different Offices.

But as God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called every one,
so let him walk -- As he has distributed his Gifts unto Men, and thereby
fitted them for Usefulness in the World, some to act in an higher Station, and
some in a lower; Some in a more public Capacity, and some in a more private;
so he has called every one to his own Work and Business, and bid us abide in
our several Callings.

As Man is made a sociable Creature, and as the Design of his Maker was, that
he should be formed into Society; and as there are necessary Works of different
Kinds and Degrees to be performed in every Society in Order to advance the good
of the whole; so it is necessary that one should be fixed above another in a
more dignified Station than his Neighbor; and each one exert himself in his
proper Post, according to his several Ability. And thus God, the great Lord of
the Universe, who is all wise and infinitely good, a God of Order, and not of
Confusion, has called and fixed every of us. He has not only furnished us
with Gifts, but assigned us a Work to exercise them in. And every One,
according as his Talents are, and his Calling is, is under proportionable
Obligations to be diligent in Business, servent in Spirit, serving God and his
Generation. Indeed we have all one general Calling, and that is to be
Christians: But considered as Christians, we have different Works assigned us,
and we are called to different Offices.

Some he has called to civil Posts of Honor, fixing them above their
fellow-men in General, investing them with Authority from on high, some with
greater Degrees, and some with less, and bidding them rule in the Fear of God.
2 Samuel 23.3. All such are called of God, and their Authority is from him who
rules in the Kingdom of Men. For Promotion comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South, no, nor from the North, But God is the
Judge: He puts down one, and sets up another. Psalm. 75.6, 7. And because
God has exalted them to an elavated Station, and clothed them with that
Authority wherein they are to act in some Measure like himself, he has called
them Gods, but at the same Time, told them that they should die like Man, Psalm.
82.6 7.
that they may be humble and dependant, and walk righteously before him. The
Apostle confirms this in the new Testament, and says, Romans 13.1, 2, 4. For
there is no Power but of God: The Powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. For he is the Minister
of God to Thee for good. And having called them to, and fixed them in their
elevated Posts, he bids them abide therein, and improve their superior Gifts
and Advantages for the best good of the Community in which his Providence has
made them Rulurs. Their Calling and Business is, to consult the Interest of the
Commonwealth, to enact Laws which have a direct Tendency to promote the good
of the whole, and see them well executed. In all which, they are to have
Respect to the Law of God, which is exceeding broad, and see to it, that all
their Laws are consistent with, and consonant to the divine Law, as they would
answer the great and glorious Ends of Government. Indeed it is of the last
Importance, that civil Rulers be well acquainted with the Law of God, and
possessed of the Gospel Religion; that they be renewed in the Spirit of their
Minds, and united to Jesus Christ by a living Faith which is productive of all
good Works. It is so, as they would be emminently serviceable to the
Commonwealth, and able to give a good Account of their Stewardship, and
receive that blessed Sentence, in the great and last Day, recorded, Mat. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful Servant; Thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make Thee Ruler over many things: enter Thou into the Joy of thy
Lord. Civil Rulers stand in the cause of God, and they rule for God; they are
his Vicegerents, and the Judgment they pass is the Lord's. Wherefore it
concerns them to secure the divine Presence, and act under the Influence of the
divine Spirit; remembering the Charge given them, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take Heed what
ye do; for ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in in the
Judgment.

Civil Rulers should be wise and understanding Men, especially should they well
understand the Business of their exalted Station. Woe to Thee, O Land, when thy
King is a Child. i. e. when civil Rulers are unacquainted with their proper
Work and Business. But happy are they who have Rulers that are Men of Skill and
Wisdom to concert Measures for their Peace and Safety; for by Men of
Understanding and Knowledge, the State is prolonged. Wherefore the Direction
given in this Case is, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Take ye wise Men and understanding, and well
known among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. Moreover, civil
Rulers should be Men of Righteousness, and free from Partiality. The Scepter of
our God is a Scepter of Righteousness; and the righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, and hates Iniquity. Holy, just and true are all the
Administrations of his Providence, and clear and righteous are all his Ways,
and all his Judgments. And civil Rulers are to imitate him in Point of
Righteousness. As God respects not the Person of any, so neither should civil
Rulers; for they judge for the Lord. The celebrated Judge HALE would not
receive a Present at the Hands of a Man, whose cause he was about to judge,
knowing that a Gift, as the wise Man expresses it, Prove. 17.8. is as a precious
Stone in the Eyes of him that receives it; whithersoever it turns, it
prospers. It dazzles the Eyes, and perverts the Judgment of him that receives
it. It tends to this, and has this Effect, (it is to be feared,) on some' but
(we hope) not on all. It would be well for Rulers and Judges to look upon
Persons as Strangers in some Sense, as unknown by them, when they are about to
judge their Cause, and judge with Righteous Judgment. Lev. 19.15 Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in Judgment: Thou shall not respect the Person of the poor, nor
honor the Person of the mighty; but in Righteousness shall thou judge thy
neighbor. And see Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment, but
you shall hear the small as well as the great.

Moreover, civil Rulers should be of an undaunted Courage and Resolution,
Firmness of Mind, and a steadfast Resolution to maintain the Honor, and answer
the Ends of Government are highly necessary in all that wield the Sword of
Justice, that they may put an End to Vice as much as possible, and promote
Religion and Virtue. And it concerns them to put on Courage, and at all Times
carry an even Hand, paying no slavish Regard to the Frowns, nor the Flatteries
of Men. Deuteronomy. 1.17. You shall not be afraid of the Face of man, for the
Judgment is God's. They are set for a Terror to evil Doers, and for a Praise to
them that do well.

Moreover, civil Rulers should be Men of Kindness and Mercy. Our God is a
merciful God, and Mercy his beloved Attribute. He pities his People under all
their Afflictions and Burdens as a Father pities his Children. And civil Rulers
are the Fathers of a Commonwealth, who should have a tender Concern for the
Rights and Interests of the People, and ever consult their Happiness; endeavor
that they may enjoy their Liberties, and study to alleviate their Burdens as
much as possible. All our Eyes are upon them, and especially do the Eyes of the
needy wait on them for Help and Relief, and the injured for Redress. They
should look upon it, as their Privilege, as well as Duty, to show Compassion to
the Common People under all their Wants and Grievances; and be ready to afford
all reasonable Encouragement to every thing found among them laudable and
commendable. And although it becomes them, with an undaunted Courage to frown
upon Vice, and punish Criminals, yet it should be done with a tender Heart, and
a compassionate Mind; not as if they delighted in Cruelty, but as being
necessitated to act as they do in Point of Righteousness, and in Order to
maintain the Honor of Religion, and the Safety of the Commonwealth.

Moreover, civil Rulers should be of a generous public Spirit. Our God is
infinitely good in himself, and in the Communications of his Goodness unto us,
Mat. 5.45. He makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good; and sends
Rain on the just, and on the unjust. So should civil Rulers diffuse their
Blessings abroad, and be rich in all good Works that tend to promote the
Interest of the Community. As civil Fathers, they should have an affectionate
Concern for the Rights of the People, looking upon their Interests as their
own, and esteeming the flourishing State of the Commonwealth, their own
Security and Prosperity. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no Man seek his
own; not his own, only; but every Man another Wealth. And again, 1 Cor. 13.5.
Charity, that Godlike Principle of Charity which should be in every Heart, and
especially in the Hearts of Rulers, and which is absolutely necessary to
constitute a good and profitable Man, seeks not her own. Nor her own only,
but another. It is not private, narrow and selfish, but open, free and
generous, concerned for the public good. And indeed we can take no Method that
will advance our Interest so readily, as to study and pursue the good of the
public.

Once more here, civil Rulers should be Men fearing God, and practicing real
Piety. Their Business is, to enact good and wholesome Laws, and then show their
Regard to them by an agreeable Walk and Conversation. Examples in Rulers, if
bad, will have a Multitude of Followers; and let them be ever so strict in
punishing Delinquents, it will signify little or nothing toward reforming
them, if at the same Time, they show a disregard to the Laws themselves. But
if, on the contrary, they live peaceable and quiet Lives, in all Godliness, and
appear to be Men that fear the Lord and hate Covetousness, their Example will
be likely to influence all around them. If the political Head is sick, the
whole Body will be faint, but if the Head is in a good State of Health, the
Body will be well. When Kings of old ruled well, and lived well, Things went
well in Judah. Indeed there are always Exceptions under general Rules; but in
the Nature and Order of things, such a Practice in Heads or Rulers has this
Tendency. Thus briefly, these things, this Temper and Practice in Rulers are of
happy Consequence. And having these Qualifications, and being fixed in Posts of
Honor by divine Providence, it becomes them to abide in their Calling, and
diligently perform the several Duties of their Office, ruling for GOD, and the
good of the People. So let them Walk. -- Let them abide in their Posts, and
study to do their own Business. See the 20th Verse of the Context; Let every
Man abide in the same Calling wherein he is called. Let him give himself
especially to this Work; although under our present Circumstances, he may be
obliged to busy himself, at Times, in some of the common Employments of Life,
yet let this Work bear its due Weight upon his Mind: Let him labor for the
greatest Acquaintance with the Nature of it, and the several Duties belonging
to it, and be always ready to perform them in in such a Manner, as shall tend
to advance the Interest of Religion, and of the Community.

And while God is furnishing some with Gifts suited to manage this great and
important Work, and calling them to it; he furnishes others with Gifts and
Graces suited to carry on the glorious Work of the Ministry, and calls them to
that. A difficult but an honorable Work, and a Work of the greatest
Importance. Of all Men, it concerns the Ambassadors of Christ, the Ministers of
the everlasting Gospel to be Men of Godliness; to be well acquainted with their
Masters Will, and do the Work of the Lord faithfully. It Is of infinite
Importance that they be converted to God by the Power of divine Grace, and
experimentally, as well as doctrinally acquainted with the Methods of Grace,
and with the Operations of the holy Ghost in convincing and converting Sinners
from the Power of Sin and Satan unto the living and true God; and in building
them up in Faith and Holiness unto his eternal Kingdom: That they be wise and
faithful, apt to teach, and able rightly to divide the Word of Truth, giving to
every one his Portion in due Season: That they be exemplary in Conversation, in
Faith, in Charity and in Purity; and that they have a sincere View at the Glory
of the Redeemer, and be heartily engaged for the Eternal Salvation of precious
and immortal Souls. It infinitely concerns us to meditate on the Duties of our
Office, and give ourselves wholly to them; 1 Timothy 4.15
and deliver all the Counsel of God, and to be pure from the Blood of all Men.
Acts 20.26.
It highly concerns us to be engaged to secure the divine Presence, that we may
go forth from Time to Time, in the Fullness of the Blessings of the Gospel of
Peace, and offer well beaten Oil. It concerns us to preach a crucified Savior,
and all the Doctrines inculcated in his Gospel: The Fall of Man by Sin, his
moral Depravity and Impotency -- Redemption by Christ alone, the great Mediator
of the Covenant of Grace -- The Doctrine of the everblessed and adorable
Trinity -- And God's Sovereignty in the Displays of his Grace in the Salvation
of Sinners through the Blood of Christ -- The absolute Necessity of spiritual
Regeneration in Order to live to God here, and enjoy him for ever -- Free
Justification through the mediatorial Righteousness of Christ received by Faith
-- And the Necessity of the efficacious Influences of the holy Spirit to carry
on the Work of Sanctification in the Hearts of Believers -- A Life of
Repentance toward God, Love to God and our neighbor, a Christian Spirit, and
an heavenly Life, as Evidences of a gracious State, and the Way leading to
eternal Blessedness. Yea it concerns us to preach up all moral Duties in their
Place, but charge our People to remember that neither these, nor Faith itself
have any share in our Justification before God, as if there was any Merit
therein: And let them know that the Atonement of Christ is the sole meritorious
Cause of that, while Faith is the instrumental Cause, or that by which we
receive the Merit of the Redeemer's Blood: a Faith which works by Love,
purifies the Heart, and influences to new Obedience. It concerns us also to
preach the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body at the last Day -- of a
future general Judgment -- and an eternal State of Rewards and Punishments
assigned to every one according as he is found at Death. Thus in a Word, it
becomes the Ministers of Christ, (being qualified and called of God, and
regularly introduced into the work;) It becomes them to abide and walk as the
Lord has called them. While the civil Ruler is to wait on his Ruling, the
Gospel Minister is to wait on his Ministry. And while God is placing some in
the Chair of Government, and calling Others to the Work of the Ministry; he is
commanding others to march into the Camp, and to meet the Enemy in the Field of
Battle; and others, the main Body of the People to manage the common Business
of Life. And there is a great Diversity of Business besides that of the
Magistracy and Ministry, to manage which the Generality of the People are
called, some to do this, and others that, every one having his particular
Office, and something to do. There is none omitted, or passed by, nor need any
be useless, but all serviceable, every one performing his Part to advance the
good of the whole, and so answering the great End of his Being. There is not a
Member of the Body politic to be despised; nor may one glory over another, as
if he stood in no Relation to him, or had no Dependence upon him. We are all
mutually dependant upon, and obliged to one another. And if he that is fixed in
the lowest Station, and called to the meanest Office, walks as he is called,
and faithfully discharges the Duties of his Post, he is a profitable Member;
and he that is called to a more elevated Station cannot say, he has no need of
him. As it is in the natural Body, so it is in the civil and religious. 1 Cor.
12.21. The Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of Thee; nor again the
Head to the Feet, I have no need of you. Thus God, the Sovereign Lord of the
universe, has called us to, and fixed us in different Posts, in which we are
to act our Part, and not interfere with, nor interrupt one another; but every
one mind his own Business and do his own work. Which brings me to say,

III. It highly concerns every one to abide in his own Calling or Office, and
faithfully discharge the several Duties of it.

As God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called every one, so
let him walk -- Let him keep his Post and exert himself therein. But here I
will offer a few things which may serve to illustrate the Point, and excite to
the Duty.

1. God has distributed to us our several Gifts for this End, and commanded us
to improve them in our respective Callings. We can answer the End of our Beings
no other way; For this Purpose our Gifts and Talents are distributed to us; and
to this we are commanded and urged in the sacred Scriptures. So let him walk,
says the Apostle in the Text. And in the 20th ver. Let every Man abide in the
same Calling, wherein he is called. And, I These. 4.11. That ye study to be
quiet, and to do your own Business We have no Right nor Liberty to leave our
own Office, and invade another. Kings themselves, as Kings, have no Right to
invade the Office of the Gospel Minister; nor may the wisest of Rulers break
over into that sacred Enclosure; much less may illeterate, unskilful Men, who
need to be taught the first Principles of Religion. King Uzziah attempted to
offer Incense upon the Altar, and God smote him with a Leprosy, and he was a
Leper to the Day of his Death. 2 Chronicles. 26th Chap. So neither should Gospel
Ministers leave their proper work and Business, and intermeddle too much with
the Affairs of State. When they begin to set themselves up for Statesmen, in
Opposition to those that are qualified, and called to that Work, it presently
introduces Confusion, and tends to weaken the common Cause. So when they
involve themselves in the common Business of Life, and neglect that Work to
which the Lord has especially called them, it is very hurtful to the Interest
of the Church and State. This undoubtedly opens a Door for Men, that have no
Right, to invade their Office. It was an Observation of one Mr. Strong, whom
Mr. Flavel mentions as an eminent and judicious Minister, That God has
permitted so many to intrude into the Ministers Calling, because Ministers have
too much meddled with, and intruded into other Men's Callings. God has not
required this at our Hands, nor do we answer the End of our Gifts, by
neglecting our own Work, and undertaking that which properly belongs to
another, although we are ever so engaged, and ever so laborious in it.

2. To abide in our own Callings, and exert our Gifts therein, is the way to
promote a general Reformation, real Religion, and the Happiness of the
Community. As we would see the Redeemers Kingdom flourish, and the
Commonwealth in Peace and Prosperity, it concerns us, One and all, to fly to
our Posts, and be industrious in our Callings, and cultivate Religion in our
own Hearts. If all acted in this manner, we should have wise, merciful and
righteous Rulers, of a public Spirit, who would be careful to enact wholesome
Laws, and see them put in Execution; to set Shining Examples of Piety, and use
their Influence to promote universal Godliness. We should have a learned, a
pious and a faithful Ministry, who would have the Interest of Religion at
Heart. And we should be an industrious, thankful and frugal People. We should
be like Trees planted by the Rivers of Water which take Root downward, and bear
Fruit upward, and bring forth their Fruit in the Season thereof. Our Houses
would be Houses of Prayer, and we should be careful to cultivate real Religion
in the Hearts of our Children, and bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition
of the Lord, by divine Assistance; teaching them the Knowledge of God, and the
Way of Life by Jesus Christ; and Loyalty and Submission to lawful Authority, as
well as an honorable Esteem for the Gospel Ministry. This would empty Taverns
of Throngs and Crows of TownInhabitants, and sweep our Streets of Swarms of
idle Drones, and prevent ten thousand Mischiefs felt by Reason of those that
desert their Callings, and hide their Talents. This would prevent
Evil-Surmisings, Vain-Bablings, Intemperance, unlawful Gaming, and all Manner
of Unrighteousness; and consequently, Multitudes of needless and chargeable
Lawsuits. This would give a Check to all Kinds of Vice and Immorality, and
introduce Religion and Virtue. We should then seek first the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness; and do good to Mankind, and especially to the Community,
to which we belonged. This would heal our Breaches, and promote Peace and good
Order; and we should go on with one Heart, and one Mind in ways that lead to
our truest Happiness. We should then be diligent in Business, and faithful in
our Betrustments, and not hinder, but help one another, not aggravate, but
alleviate each others Burdens. And in this Way, every one from the greatest to
the least, might do something toward a general Reformation, and strengthening
and enriching the Commonwealth. But if we desert our Callings, and neglect our
Gifts, we shall hinder, and not promote the blessed Work, and impoverish and
waste the Community, and enrich it. We shall do nothing toward advancing
Religion, nor the common good, unless we act in that Sphere, in which God has
fixed us. 2 Timothy 2.5. If any Man strive for Masteries, yet is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully.

3. To walk as the Lord has called us, and well improve the Gifts distributed
to us, is the way to be able to give a good Account of ourselves in the Day of
the Lord, and receive a glorious Reward through the Merits of Christ. We have
our several Talents delivered to us, and the Lord has called us to our Work,
and bid us occupy till he comes. We are all in the Place of Stewards, and must
in a little Time; give an Account of our Stewardship. Luke 16.2* Whether we
have wasted our Lord's Goods, or improved them well, we must give an Account,
and be rewarded according as we are found, And we shall stand alike round about
the Throne of our impartial and almighty Judge, rich and poor, high and low,
Rulers and ruled, and blessed shall they be, whom their Lord when he comes,
sshall find so doing. Mat. 24.46. In the Post where God has fixed them, and
performing as he commanded them. If we are found out of our Callings; doing
what is forbidden, or abusing our Gifts; we may expect nothing but to be
frowned away from the blissful Presence of the great Judge: But if we are doing
the Will of God, we may give up our Accounts with of Joy, and shall be made
unspeakably Happy for ever in the immediate Enjoyment of God himself, to the
Praise of sovereign Grace in Jesus Christ.

4. Another Motive I shall offer to excite every one to Diligence and
Faithfulness in the Improvements of his Gifts, in the Calling wherewith God
called us, may be a Consideration of the remarkable Dispensations of divine
Providence toward us, is the Year past. God's dispensations toward us in the
Year past have been quite remarkable; and call aloud to every One to Mind his
own Business, and do his own Work, and make ready to appear before him.

In his holy and righteous Providence he has seen fit to take away by Death,
our gracious King GEORGE the SECOND, of blessed Memory; the civil Father of the
English Nation; and a most indulgent Father: who in his Life, was ever
concerned for, and tender of the Rights and Liberties of his British Israel. In
whose happy Reign and under whole blessed Influence, the Nation, for a long
Time, enjoyed the greatest of Liberties and best of Privileges. And verily his
Death gave the whole Kingdom a Shock, and was enough to put every Subject upon
a serious Enquiry; what have we done, that God is provoked to take our King and
our Head from us? And this little Province has special Reason to be alarmed,
to awake, and betake ourselves to God, and put our Trust and Confidence in him,
and look unto him for the sanctification of this awful Providence: For he was a
Father to us indeed, from whom we received large Benefits in a Time when
greatly needed. We should even sunk under the Weight of our heavy Burdens in
the present distressing War, had not we been encouraged and supported by him.
But he is gone. The mighty is fallen before Death, the King of Terrors: That
mighty Monarch, and greatly beloved has taken up Lodgings in the Dwellings of
Darkness; and he will think no more for us, and can do no more for us.

This is a loud Call of divine Providence to us all, to abide in our Callings,
well improve our Time, and our Gifts, and prepare to meet the Lord our Judge.
Hereby they that are styled Gods in the sacred Oracles, see that they must die
as other Men. If Kings die, certainly their Subjects must, from the highest to
the lowest. Wherefore it concerns us, one and all, to hearken to the voice of
Providence, and stand and mourn, and return to our Duty. And agreeable to King
Solomon's Advice, Eccl. 9.10. Do what our Hands find to do, with all our Might;
for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave,
whether we are going.

Moreover, it has been a Time of great Mortality throughout this Land:
Multitudes both at Home and in our Armies have died, and the Places that knew
them, will know them here no more. And by their Deaths, God says to us that are
alive, be ye also ready; every one to his Post, and stand waiting for the
Coming of your Lord.

But then, on the other Hand, we have remarkable Favors in the midst of our
Afflictions, And while God's Judgments should learn us Righteousness, his
Goodness should lead us to Repentance. Although it has pleased Almighty God to
take away by Death King GEORGE the Second, of blessed Memory, one of the best
of Kings; yet he took him away in a good old Age, full of Days, Riches and
Honor, as we read of King David, in 1 Chronicles. 29.28. And he left GEORGE the
Third, his Grandson, to reign in his stead. On whom the Eyes of the British
Nation are fixed, and in whom their Expectations are greatly raised.

One early and richly endowed with all royal Gifts and Graces; and through
whose Influence we hope for the Enjoyment of the best of Liberties and
Privileges for a great while to come.

His accession to the Throne was ordered in the most favorable Manner; all as
one rejoicing in it; no Usurper, nor vain Pretender interposing. And
immediately upon his Accession, he issued out an excellent Proclamation,
enjoining all his Subjects, and especially all in Commission, to use their
Influence to suppress Vice and Immorality, and encourage Religion and Virtue.
Will God Almighty be with him and bless him, and make him a rich and lasting
Blessing to his Church and People!

And this favorable Providence should excite Gratitude in every Mind, and
quicken us to walk as the Lord has called us. In Addition to this, God has
granted abundant Success to our Arms in all Parts, and especiin this Land.

Brigadier General Murray with an handful of Men, under the divine Direction
and Influence, defeated a numerous Army in their bloody Designs against
Qu^beck, early in the Spring. And in the beginning of September General Amherst
with his Army arrived, and landed on the South-West Part of Montreal, General
Murray upon the North-East, while Colonel Haviland advanced upon the
South-East, all at one critical Juncture, under the Influence and auspicious
Smiles of Heaven. And that important Place, important to us, soon surrendered; A
Place which has been a Terror and a Destruction to those our northern
Colonies, surrendered to the British Crown. A Mercy greatly desired, and
earnestly prayed for; and a Mercy granted in a Manner favorable vastly beyond
our Expectations. And verily such remarkable Dispensations; Such Frowns on the
one Hand, and such Favors on the other, are a loud Call to every one to seek
the God of our Salvations, to betake ourselves to our respective Posts, and
diligently attend upon the Work and Business of our Callings. As God has
distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called every one, so let him walk --
And from these Considerations it appears to be a matter of the greatest
Importance.

IV. I will now Conclude with a short Address to several Orders of Men, humbly
exhorting them to improve their Gifts in their respective Callings.

1. I would humbly address the honorable, the Governor, the Deputy Governor,
and the whole hounorable Assembly at present convened to act in their elevated
Posts, for the best good of this Commonwealth.

May it please your Honors, I am here by your Call and Invitation; therefore,
I beseech you, suffer the word of Exhortation.

We have the greatest Reason to bless God, the Author and Giver of every good
and perfect Gift, that he is raising up Men from Time to Time, and furnishing
them with Gifts suitable to stand in the Gate, as Job expresses it. Job 21 ^^
And we have Reason to bless God for the Liberty of choosing Men for this
Purpose; and that he is pleased to incline and direct us in the Choice of such.
We are sensible that a great Weight lies upon you: but that God who has called
you to the work, is able to support and direct you in it. The great Lord of the
Universe styles you Gods; intimating thereby, that you are to imitate him in
his imitable Pefections: But then he tells you, that you must die like Men:
Intimating that you should constantly maintain a Sense of your Frailty and
Mortality, and act as those that must give an Account. You are the Fathers of
the Commonwealth, and all our Eyes are upon you.

Wherefore see to it that your Powers of Mind are sanctified by Grace; and
always remember that you judge for the Lord. Look with an impartial Eye into
all Matters laid before you, and act with a generous Spirit in whatever you do
for the Government. Let the Interest of Religion, and the Welfare of the
Community, (which indeed are necessarily connected) let these lie near your
Hearts.

And we would commend the Gospel Ministry to you Care and Protection. We thank
your Honors for your Care of us, and kindness to us: and entreat you ever to
encourage alearned, a pious and an Orthodox Ministry among us. We would also
commend to your fatherly Care and Protection, the College in this Government;
and would beseech you for Jesus's sake, as you regard the flourishing of his
Kingdom; to think of its present Situation, and use your Influence to suppress
Vice and Extravagancy, and to encourage and promote real Piety and christian
Virtue, as well as good Learning there; And we entreat you to encourage good
Schooling among us, in all our Towns and Societies, that Knowledge and Religion
may be cultivated throughout your Province. We would also commend to your Care
and Encouragment, Trade and Manufactures, and especially Agriculture: Let the
Husbandman ever be remembered by you; for if our Husbandry fails, we shall all,
in a little Time, dwindle away to nothing.

Continue, we entreat you to encourage the Soldiery in this critical Juncture
of Affairs, who go forth and endure Hardships for our Lives and Liberties. Our
Burdens are great and heavy, I am sensible, but God has helped hitherto. We
have been abundantly succeeded in our Warlike Enterprises, which is Matter of
great Encouragment.

And we would recommend it to you in all your Counsels, Acts and Judgments, to
be of a calm and steady Mind, to carry an even Hand, and never be precipitate
in your Resolutions and Determinations, and especially when the Case is Dark
and intricate, and of great Consequence. Let your Moderation be known to all
men, and let your Example in holy Conversation shine before the People, that
they may take Pattern by you, and follow you, as far as ye follow Christ your
Lord and Master, remembering that you are under the lnspection of an Omniscient
Judge, as well as we. And he is not afraid to say to unrighteous Rulers, ye are
wicked: and it would be amazingly awful to fall from such an elevated Post,
into the Regions of Horror and Despair. O dread the dreadful Consequence! and
see that your Hearts are right with God, and act with a sincere View at the
advancement of his Glory, and the good of your People. And God, the God of
Blessings be with you, and afford you his Presence and Assistance, and make you
eminent Blessings in your honorable Callings, and finally receive you to
immortal Honor in his heavenly Kingdom, for Jesus's sake, your mighty
Redeemer, where you shall be gloriously exalted, and rejoice triumphantly with
Moses and Joshua, and all the true Servants of God for ever and ever.

2. I would humbly Address my Fathers and Brethren of the Gospel Ministry.
Reverend Sirs; you are called of God to a difficult, but an important, and a
glorious Work. Of all Men, we most need the divine Presence and Assistance; for
we are acting immediately for the Lord, and the Salvation of precious and
immortal Souls; the loss of one of which would be greater than the loss of the
whole World. Therefore, since we are to watch for Souls as they that must give
an Account, let us take Heed to ourselves, and to the Flocks over which the
holy Ghost has made us Overseers. Let us deliver all the Counsel of God,
preach all the Doctrines of the Gospel, and urge them with all the weighty
Arguments that can be offered: Let us be instant in Season, and out of Season,
enduring Hardships as good Soldiers, and not be weary in well doing, knowing
that we shall reap in due Time, if we faint not. Let us mind our own Business,
and shine in our own Orbs; let us study the Mind and Will of God, and bring out
of our Treasuries, things new and old, and feed our People with Knowledge and
with Understanding. Let us be determined above every Thing else, to know and
preach Jesus Christ, and him Crucified: Let us urge Repentance unfeigned
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus, and in their turn treat of all
the Branches of christian Morality. Let us teach our People to fear God, and
honor the King, to pray for all in Authority, to love and honor their Rulers,
and pay a cheerful Regard to their good and wholesome Laws. Let us labor in our
Work to cultivate Religion in our own Hearts, and in the Hearts of our People,
of all Ranks and Orders; That they and we may well understand our Duty, abide
in our Callings, and be diligent in our own Business, Blessings to the
Commonwealth, and Instruments of building up the Redeemer's Kingdom. And while
we preach Peace and Salvation to others, let us labor to be at Peace among
ourselves. Let us strive that brotherly Love may continue and abound among us,
and be always ready to support each others Character, and assist one another
under all our Trials in our great and difficult Work; not hinder, but forward
one another's Usefulness as much as possible. And for Encouragement, we serve a
glorious Master, who has said, Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord, when he
comes shall find so doing. Then let us see that our Hearts, our Views, our
Aims, and our Ends are right, and be faithful unto Death, and then shall we
receive a Crown of Life, and shine as the Stars of Heaven for ever and ever.

3. And to conclude, I would address the Body of the People now assembled
before the Lord. And suffer me to exhort and entreat you in the Name of our
Lord Jesus, to walk as the Lord has called you. Abide in your Callings, and
look to the living God for the renewing and sanctifying Influences of his
blessed Spirit; and as God has distributed his Gifts unto you, so improve them
to his Honor and Glory; and labor to be as useful and serviceable, as
possible, to the Community, in your Day and Generation. Although you are not
promoted to the Magistracy, nor called to the Ministry; yea, although you may
not be fixed in any public Posts of Honor, nor called to act in a public
Capacity, yet you are a free People, indulged with the greatest of Liberties
and best of Privileges, and under great Advantages to serve God and your
Generation. The chief Captain of the Roman Soldiery said, Acts 22.28. With a
great Sum obtained I this Freedom. A Freedom not equal to yours, which you have
upon free Cost. You have the Liberty of choosing your own Rulers, and your own
Ministers; and Liberty to worship God according to the dictates of your own
Consciences. And that you are governed by reasonable Laws, and obliged to
submit to lawful Authority in what is just and right, is your Privilege, and
not your Burden. We are all, even Rulers themselves, and Ministers of the
Gospel, subject to the same Laws, as the common People; and we are all Members
of the same Commonwealth. Wherefore, bless God for your inestimable
Privileges, and look upon yourselves the highly favored of the Lord. Be
contented with your own Posts, diligently attend upon your own Business, and do
your own Work, to which the Lord has called you, and never suffer as
Busy-Bodies in other Men's Matters. Permit me, my dear Friends and Brethren, to
urge and beseech you by the Bowels of Christ's Mercy, to secure the Knowledge of
God, and see that you are united to the Lord Jesus by a living Faith, and that
you are fruitful in all good Works. In your Places labor for a general
Reformation; return to God yourselves by unfeigned Repentance; amend what you
find amiss in yourselves, and in your Families. Study the Peace and Welfare of
the Commonwealth; look upon the general Interest of the Community, as your own
private interest; and every one afford an helping Hand, for we need you. Honor
your Superiors, and pray for all in Authority, pray for Gospel Ministers, and
pray for yourselves: For without the divine Blessing all our Labor and Pains
will be lost. Yea, in a Word, let us all Rulers and Ruled, Ministers and
People, so walk as the Lord has called us; let us do Justly, love Mercy and
walk Humbly, continually looking and aiming at the public Interest, in which
we are greatly concerned. Let every one labor to excel in the Improvement of
his own Gifts, in his own Calling, and be diligent in Business serving the
Lord. And the diligent Man shall stand before Kings, he sshall not stand before
mean Men. Prove. 22.29.
And let us stand waiting for the coming of our Lord, that when he shall
appear, we may be approved of him, and reign and rejoice with him, to the
Praise of divine Grace, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, world without
end. AMEN.

FINIS.

