REMARKS ON THE LETTER ADDRESSED TO Two GREAT MEN.

N. B. It is apprehended the Republication of these REMARKS may be pleasing to
those Gentlemen who have been so well entertained with Mr. F -- N's Answer
thereto. The REMARKER's Manner is elegant, and his Arguments plausible; but we
are taught to believe that it would be contrary to the Interest and Happiness
of GREAT BRITAIN, and Her Colonies, if his Sentiments should prevail.

REMARKS ON THE LETTER ADDRESSED TO Two GREAT MEN.

In a LETTER to the AUTHOR of that PIECE.

Vis consili expers mole ruit sua:
Vim temperatam di quoque provebunt
In majus: idem odere vires
Omne nefas animo moventes.
HOR. LONDON: Pinted in the Year MDCCLX.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by B. Mecom, at the New Printing-Office, near the
Townhouse.

REMARKS ON THE LETTER ADDRESSED TO TWO GREAT MEN.
SIR,
I SHALL not inquire who is the Author of the Piece on which I am going to
remark. Your Opinions, and your Arguments, are all that I shall consider.
Whether you are, or ever have been Vid. P. 2. of the Letter.
pensioned and employed, whether you are merely a private Man, or a Person
distinguished in Rank and Fortune, you are to me, and to the Public, on this
Occasion, only the Author of the Letter to Two Great Men; and you will give me
Leave to address you in that, and in no other Light. It is indeed a Light in
which you cannot be viewed to your Disadvantage; your Piece is animated with
the Spirit of true Patriotism; it discovers political and historical Knowledge;
and is written throughout with Fire and Energy.

But, Sir, that Animation of Language and Sentiment, which is allowed to the
Orator in political Conflicts in pulvere et in sole, has no Place in a sober
Discussion. I write not to the Ear or to the Passions; I aim at no Seduction of
Judgment; and I ask for no Approbation but what a Calm Reflection and
unprejudiced Reason may afford me. My End is, rather to examine the Justness of
your Plan, than to enforce any Plan of my own* and I shall not affect the Flow,
nor the Pomp, nor the high-colouring of parliamentary Declamation. If I can
deliver a plain Argument in plain Language, it is all I aim at: For this I
shall make no Apology; that Freedom with which you warn the Ministry against
falling into Mistakes in the ensuing Treaty of Peace, will justify me to you,
and to the World, if I should attempt to point out some of those Mistakes, into
which I imagine you are yourself fallen.

You cannot be ignorant in what Manner Success operates upon the Minds of Men;
with what a blind and haughty Confidence it inspires them; and in the insolent
Elation of Victory, how little they attend to Reason or Justice, and often to
their own most important Interests. People of all Nations imagine, that when
they are worsted, Success gives their Enemy very little Right to prescribe
severe Terms; and conceive when they are themselves successful, that there are
no Bounds to their own Pretensions. If this Disposition should happen at this
Time to prevail amongst us, it may be attended with very pernicious
Consequences. It may raise such extravagant Expectations, or excite such
wrong-placed Desires, as will render a Negotiation for Peace a Work of infinite
Difficulty. A virtuous and able Ministry may, in some Sort, find their Virtue
and Ability brought to act against themselves; they may find that their
Victories and Successes have excited so much Arrogance in those who had [no
Share in acquiring them, as to destroy all their Effects; they may find their
Virtue and Moderation overruled by the Madness of the People, and be thus
disabled from availing themselves of a successful War, in the Attainment of an
advantageous Peace.

I am afraid, Sir, that your Letter tends to increase and inflame this improper
Disposition. You are not to be blamed for delivering your Sentiments openly.
The Liberty of an Englishman, and your own Abilities, give you a Right to do
so. What I blame is your excessive Attachment to certain Objects, so excessive,
that if they should not be insisted upon by the Ministry, with a Warmth equal
to your own, you hesitate not to declare to the People, Vid. P. 29. of the
Letter.
that we shall have a treacherous and delusive Peace. This, Sir, is surely a
most unjustifiable Method of proceeding; it is to sow the Seeds of general
Discontent in Favor of your particular Opinions; Opinions, which, if they are
not ill founded, are at least very problematical: I cannot help observing, that
your Resentment against the Perfidy of the Enemy, has made you seem much more
intent upon affronting France, than providing deliberately for the Interests of
Britain.

You set forth, with great Strength of Fact and Reason, the Treachery of
France, and her frequent Violations of the most solemn Treaties. You insist
particularly on the Case of Dunkirk: and I admit that you could not have chosen
a more proper Instance. But I am sorry to see that you are even here guided
more by old Prejudices than by the true Nature of Things; and that you have
proposed such a Manner of acting, that, whilst we are in Reality only demanding
our honest and unquestionable Rights, we may have all the Appearance of acting
with the most wanton Insolence, with the most hateful Oppression.

You propose to the Two great Men, that, Vid. P. 24, 25.
before they enter upon any new Treaty, or listen to any plausible Proposal
whatever, they ought to insist that Justice may be done with Regard to former
Treaties; show France the solemn Engagements she entered into at Utrecht, to
demolish Dunkirk. Demand say you, immediate Justice on that Article, as a
preliminary Proof of her Sincerity in the ensuing Negotiation. Tell them, with
the Firmness of wise Conquerors, that the Demolition of Dunkirk is what you are
entitled to by Treaties made long ago and violated, and that it shall not be so
much as mentioned in the ensuing Negotiation, but complied with before that
Negotiation shall commence.

Though this is a Sort of Language hitherto, I believe, unheard in Europe, why
you confine it to Dunkirk I cannot imagine. Why would you not have them in the
same previous Manner renounce all Right to the disputed Parts of America? You
will, I hope, allow, that the French Encroachments there, are as much against
the Faith of Treaties, as the Restoration of Dunkirk; and that we have full as
good a Right to expect every Reparation of Interest and Honor with Regard to
the one as to the other. But if all Points wherein the Violation of Treaties is
charged, ought not, according to your Doctrine, to be so much as mentioned in
the ensuing Negotiation, but ought to be settled before that Negotiation shall
commence, the Business of the Congress will be so very short, and so very easy,
as to require no wonderful Share of that Knowledge, that Adroitness, and all
that Combination of Talents, and Virtues, which you demand in a
Plenipotentiary; but which you are almost in Despair of finding among our
Nobility. To speak and to act to the Letter of the Instructions which you give
him, instead of all those Qualifications, he need only assume a decisive and
dictatorial Tone; to rail abundantly at those employed by the Enemy to treat
with him; to remind them of their amazing Perfidy P. 24.
; to tell them that he owes them a Disgrace P. 25.
; to tell them that he can have no Dealings with such a People P. ib.
; and thus to go through the little that is left to be done with as great Airs
of Arrogance and Superiority as he can possibly assume. These are
Accomplishments indeed not difficult to be found, and which we need not despair
to meet with at Arthur's, ^r on the Turf. P. 6.


I do not, Sir, mean to insinuate, that the Demolition of Dunkirk is not an
Object worthy of our Regard. It is indeed probably not of quite so much
Importance, as you think it, and as formerly it was thought, whilst in the
Continental Wars of King William, and Queen Anne, we neglected our Naval
Strength, and the due Protection of our Trade. However, as it is still an
Object, there is no Doubt but in the ensuing Negotiation our Ministry will
attend with proper Care to have it demolished, according to the Tenor of former
Treaties. This, Sir, we may say with some Assurance, will be done. But that
this be done before we condescend to treat, that it is to be a Preliminary to
the Preliminaries of Peace, is an Idea altogether extravagant, and as little
justified by Precedent as by Reason. That those very Matters for which War was
declared should not be so much as mentioned in the Negotiation for Peace, is a
Principle entirely your own, and to which all the Writers on Politics have to
this Day been entirely Strangers. You seem indeed aware of this, and therefore
assert, that such Demands as you propose Vid. P. 9. of the Letter.
cannot be looked upon as the Insolence of a Conqueror, but as the wise
Foresight of a People, whom dear-bought Experience has taught the proper Way
of doing itself Justice. For you observe some few Lines before that we ought
Vid. P. 9. of the Letter.
to take every Method in our Power to secure the Observance of those
Concessions they may make; and to insist upon their giving us such Proofs of
their Sincerity before any Negotiation is entered upon, as may give us some
Assurance, that they mean to be more faithful to their future Engagements. The
Way you propose, then, of doing ourselves Justice, is to insist upon these
Demands, as the Compliance with them by the French is supposed to be a Security
for their adhereing to the Treaty.

I should, Sir, most willingly concur with you in recommending any Method which
might secure their Adherence to such Concessions as they shall make; which
might draw from them any real Proof of their Sincerity, or which would give us
some Assurance that they mean to be more faithful to their future Engagements:
But I have considered your Demand in every Light which I was capable of putting
it, and, after all, I am utterly unable to discover, if France should submit to
the humiliating Step you propose, what additional Security this will, or can
give us, that she will keep the Peace that is to ensue, whenever she shall find
it her Interest to break it. This Step may indeed be a mortifying Confession of
her present Weakness, but can be no Sort of Security for her future Faith.

So far from having any such Operation, there is all the Reason in the World to
expect that it would produce quite the contrary Effect. A Nation which, through
the Necessity of its Affairs, submits to Terms imposed, for no other Purpose
than to insult her, seeks the first Opportunity to wipe off the Stain. She will
not look upon such Engagements as a Treaty, but as an Oppression; and she will
find a Sort of Excuse for the Infidelity of her Conduct in the Insolence of
ours. Nations, like Men, often resent an Insult more than an Injury.

Unreasonable as this Demand may be, you however seem fond of it; for you again
ask, Can you have any Dealings with a Power, who, if he refuses this, at the
very Time that he is treating, affords you such a manifest Proof that his Word
is not to be relied upon, and that you cannot trust to the Execution of any
Promises ever so solemnly made? Vid. P. 25. of the Letter.
Why not? You may, Sir, undoubtedly, have Dealings with such a Power,
notwithstanding such a Refusal; because he only does what is extremely natural,
and extremely reasonable, in refusing to destroy a Place which is of Use to him
in War, before his Enemy has condescended to treat for Peace. You do not sure,
imagine, that any Nation is so ignorant and sottish as not to know, that the
voluntary weakening its Hands before a Negotiation for Peace, is not the Way to
secure it good Terms in that Negotiation; and that they may well refuse to
comply with this ignominious and unsafe Condition, without manifesting any
Intention of swerving from their Engagements. If it could be supposed for a
Moment, that our Administration would adopt your System, might not France, in
her Turn, ask, and very reasonably too, What Security we propose to give, if
she should submit to this extraordinary previous Preliminary, that we shall,
even then, consent, on our Side, to an equitable Peace? Or that this first
unreasonable Demand may not be followed by others still more unreasonable,
whilst we have any Thing to ask, or she any Thing left to give? to answer, Vae
victis, would sound strangely. To answer otherwise, with Consistency, is
impossible. And it must be allowed, that so extraordinary a Demand, previous to
a Treaty, would be a very bad Omen of our Moderation in the framing it. A
Compliance with it would indeed mortify the Enemy; but it would add nothing to
our real Strength, whilst it would alarm every Nation near us, and assist
France in exciting that Jealousy of the British naval Power, which she has for
a long Time been laboring, with great Industry, and some Success, to infuse
into all the Nations of Europe, and particularly into the maritime States. You
have very well observed upon the Terror which was excited by the Power of Lewis
XIV. and upon the general Confederacy against him, which was the Consequence of
this Power: But you have forgot to add, that the insolent Use he made of his
Greatness, alarmed as much, and provoked much more, than that enormous Power
itself. It was indeed the true Cause of his Fall. Other Nations also may be
thought too powerful; and they will be thought so, whenever they exercise their
Power with Haughtiness. Without having Recourse to a P. 38. And perhaps it
might, on Inquiry, be worthy of another Montesquieu, to assign the Causes of
the Rise and Fall of the French Monarchy. etc.
Montesquieu, perhaps, Sir, it may be found, that the Roman, the Spanish, and
the French Grandeur, have owed their Declension to the same Cause: They had
attained a greater Power than they had Wisdom sufficient to direct: For the
Sake of gratifying the Passion of the Day, they lost Sight of their lasting
Interest.

The utmost rational Aim of our Ambition ought to be, to possess a just Weight
and Consideration in Europe; and that the Power of the Nation should be rather
respectable than terrible. To effect this, it must not be employed invidiously:
It must operate discreetly and quietly; then it will be happily felt in its
Effects, while it is little seen in violent Exertions. The Genius and
Disposition of Nations, as well as Men, is best discerned by the Use they make
of Power. And therefore, my great Objection to this Part of your Plan, does not
arise from the Nature of the Thing which you desire; my Objection is to the
Time and Manner in which you insist on having it done; which is, as I
apprehend, to ourselves of no Kind of Use, and therefore arrogant and
unreasonable toward the Enemy.

After the Proposal concerning Dunkirk, you lay before the two great Men the
other Parts of your Plan. And here you recommend it to them to display their
Moderation, by giving up Guadaloupe, Senegal, and Goree; and their Wisdom, by
keeping the Possession of every Part of Canada. To keep Canada is the Point you
have principally at Heart: " Vid. P. 34.
This is the Point," you say, invariably to be adhered to; this is to be the
sine qua non of the Peace; and unless it is, we shall have a treacherous and
delusive Peace.

Before I examine the Justness of those Motives that make you so strenuously
attached to this Object, and so indifferent to every other, I shall beg Leave
to remark upon the Consequence you deduce from the Possibility that Canada will
be given up, that we shall have a treacherous and delusive Peace.

The Views which every State ought to have at the making of Peace, may be
reduced to two.

1 st, To attain those Objects for which she went to War. And,

2 dly, To receive some reasonable Indemnification for the Charges she has
incurred in carrying it on. Without openly avowing some P. 4. of the Letter. As
his Majesty entered into the War not from Views of Ambition.

P. 33. This Plan is perfectly agreeable to that Moderation expressed by his
Majesty in his Speech. Ibid. The Possession of Canada is no View of Ambition.


Views of Ambition, no Nation can possibly claim more.

This admitted, Sir, I ask, upon the first Head, Whether the Possession of
Canada, properly so called, was ever one of those Objects for which we began
the War? Was it ever mentioned as such in any of our Memorials or Declarations,
or in any national or public Act whatsoever?

The true Cause of the War, our real and indisputable Right, is well known. Our
Claims were large enough for Possession, and for Security too. And will you
say, Sir, that if, in the Beginning of these Troubles, France, influenced by a
Dread of the Exertion of the British Power, had acknowledged these Claims, had
given up Nova Scotia, or Acadia, with its ancient and true Boundaries, had
demolished their Fort in the Province of New York, had removed themselves from
the Ohio, and renounced all Claim to that Territory, and that, on those
Concessions, the Ministry had then ceased from Hostilities, without acquiring,
or even claiming Canada, will you say, that we should have had a treacherous
and delusive Peace? You will hardly venture to assert, that we should. And is a
Peace made after France has felt the Force of Britain, and submitted to that
Force, to be more treacherous and delusive than if she had made it from an
Apprehension only of the Consequences? Is a Peace to be treacherous and
delusive, if we do not get, on that Peace, what we never claimed as our Right
before the War? Is a Peace treacherous and delusive, that puts us in Possession
of a Territory larger than several flourishing Mornachies? Is a Peace delusive
and treacherous, only because something is left to the Enemy?

But you do not assert, that we have any original Right to Canada; nor do you
say, that the Concession of those Boundaries which we have claimed, do not give
us a vast Territory, and an advantageous Barrier. You go upon another, which is
indeed the only Principle which you make Use of, but which you are of Opinion
is so strong, P. 3. of the Letter.
as to silence the French Plenipotentiaries, and to convince all Europe of the
Justice of your Demand.

Ask the French what Security they can give you, if we restore Canada, however
restrained in its Boundaries, that they will not again begin to extend them at
our Expense?

The French Plenipotentiaries, Sir, must be very extraordinary Advocates to be
silenced, and Europe, as extraordinary a Judge to be convinced by such an
Argument. France, Sir, might answer, That she can give no such Security. No
Nation, whilst independent, can give it. And therefore, no such Security should
be desired. To desire the Enemy's whole Country, upon no other Principle, but
that otherwise you cannot secure your own, is turning the Idea of mere Defense
into the most dangerous of all Principles. It is leaving no Medium between
Safety and Conquest. It is never to suppose yourself safe, whilst your
Neighbor enjoys any Security. Indeed, such a Question, after the Matters
disputed in the War have been adjusted, is an Avowal of such an unreasonable
Ambition, that I trust you will never be seconded in it by any English Man, or
English Minister. For it is a Question that extends infinitely in its
Consequences; extends (for any Thing I can see to the contrary), to the utter
Destruction of Mankind. For whilst ever we have France, or any other Nation on
our Borders, either in Europe or in America, we must, in the Nature of Things,
have frequent Disputes and Wars with them; and we must suppose, at least, as
often as we are successful, that the Enemy is in Fault; that is, we must
suppose the Enemy had provoked us to take Arms, by the Violation of some
Treaty, or by the Invasion of some undoubted Right. The Business of a Peace is,
to adjust and to determine these Disputes: But after the Enemy has agreed to
our original Demands, if we go on to demand Security for the Preservation of
Peace, what less do we demand, than that they should yield themselves, bound
Hand and Foot, up to our Mercy? Let our Borders be ever so extended, as long as
we have any Nation near us, we must have the same Disputes, the same Wars, and
we must demand, upon your Principle, the same Security at the Conclusion of a
Peace.

There was a Nation indeed, which I am sure we resemble more in Courage than in
Ambition and Injustice, which frequently used to demand such a Caution: And
such a Caution they actually did require from the Carthaginians, when they
intended it as a Preliminary to the utter Destruction of that People, and to
the most notorious Breach of Faith upon their own Side. Their Pretense was
exactly yours; that the Enemy was a Nation perfidious to a Proverb; a People
whom no Treaty could bind. They used the Punica, in the same Manner that you do
the Gallica fides. I need not inform you, Sir, what followed: And indeed it was
impossible that such Principles and Pretensions could end in any Thing but the
total Destruction of the vanquished.

I do not see why the Arguments you employ concerning a Security for a
peaceable Behavior in Canada, would not be equally cogent for calling for the
same Security in Europe. They are our Neighbors, and dangerous ones, here as
well as there. The Low Countries, Lorrain, Alsace, show us that the French
Monarchy has been, at least, as intent upon extending its Dominion in Europe,
as it can be in America. We know that they have tried all the Methods of War,
of Treaty, and of Marriages, to enlarge their dangerous Empire. But still,
dreaded as they are in Europe, (and much more to be dreaded than ever they were
in America), if we could be so happy to see, what I fear we never shall see, a
Confederacy to reclaim their Usurpations, what would we say to the Insolence of
those who, on your Principle, should demand all France as a Security, that they
should not make the like Usurpations for the future?

But, Sir, our real Dependence for keeping France, or any other Nation, true to
her Engagements, must not be in demanding Securities, which no Nation, whilst
independent, can give, but on our own Strength, and our own Vigilance.

To say the Truth, we owe our Losses in America as much to our own Supineness
as to the French Perfidy. Our Ministers have heretofore acted in Regard to
America, as if they expected, from a Magic in the Contract, that it would
perform itself. They took no Steps to enforce it. But from the Wisdom and
Vigor of our present Administration, I should expect another Conduct. As soon
as France is happily reduced to cede us such Boundaries as may be thought
proper to demand, the same Spirit that has conducted the War, will maintain the
Terms of the Peace. Instead of leaving France at liberty to build Forts at her
Discretion, English Forts will be raised at such Passes, as may at once make us
respectable to the French, and to the Indian Nations. God forbid that we should
depend on the Sincerity of our Enemy. Every wise Nation will rely on its own
Watchfulness, and on its own Strength, to maintain the Terms they oblige their
Enemy to give them; and whoever expects any other Dependence, will find himself
the Dupe.

To supply any Defect that may be in your own Authority to persuade this
Measure, your favorite Measure of retaining Canada, you call in the Aid of our
American Colonies; and tell us, Though Care should be taken to keep all that we
have claimed, something more must be done, or our American Colonies will tell
you, you have done nothing. On what Authority this is so positively asserted to
be the Language of our American Colonies, you have not told us. I hope and
believe that you have been misinformed. But if our American Colonies should be
so absurd and ungreatful to tell us, after all the Blood and Treasure expended
in their Cause, that we do nothing, if we do not make Conquests for them, they
must be taught a Lesson of greater Moderation. If, with a Superiority of at
least ten to one, with a vast and advantageous Barrier, with the proper
Precautions to strengthen it, under the Protection of a great Naval Power, they
cannot think themselves secure, they must blame their own Cowardice or
Ignorance, and not the Measures of their Mother Country; who is bound to
provide for their Happiness and Security, and not for their vain Ambition, or
groundless Fears.

The Idea of securing yourself, only by having no other Nation near you, is, I
admit, an Idea of American Extraction. It is the genuine Policy of Savages; and
it is owing to this Policy, that England and France are able at this Day to
dispute the Sovereignty of Deserts in America; to which neither of us would
otherwise have had any Right.

As we pretend no original Right to Canada, that we can very rationally secure
ourselves in North America without the Possession of it, will, I apprehend,
need very few Arguments to demonstrate. I have already observed upon the vast
Superiority of Men that we have there; such a Superiority, that I am always
astonished when I think on the unaccountable Conduct that has ever made France
an Enemy to be apprehended on that Continent. We are in North America not only
a greater Naval, but a far greater Continental Power. Our Superiority in Point
of Situation is no less visible. If, added to these Advantages, we acquire on a
Peace all those important Posts and Communications, by which alone Canada
became in any Degree dangerous to us, I cannot see why Canada, weakened,
stripped, confined, and I may say, bound down, will not be infinitely in more
Danger, in Case of any Rupture between the two Nations, from our Colonies, than
ours can be from it.

I cannot help observing, that among all your Ideas of Security, and that in
particular anxious as you are for the Security of North America, you show
little Regard to that of the West Indies. Our Caribbee Islands must be ever
infinitely in greater Danger from Guadaloupe, than our North American Colonies
can be from Canada circumscribed as it ought, and as it is presumed it will be.
The French have a real Superiority in the West Indies, and they have once made
it to be severely felt.

If, as it has been shown, we may, beyond any rational Fear, secure ourselves
without the entire Possession of Canada, we can desire it in Preference to our
other Conquests only on Account of its superior Value. Though you have not at
all insisted on this, yet, lest this may be thought one of your Motives to that
great Preference, and it is, sure the best Motive you could have had, we will
consider the Point somewhat at large, and this will bring us to the second of
those leading Ideas, that ought to guide a Nation in a Treaty of Peace; that
is, to acquire a proper Indemnification for the Expenses of the War. You are
not one of the Number of those who think we ought to give up nothing in a
Peace. You do not claim Canada on a Principle of Right. We have examined it on
the Principle of Security; the only Question that now remains to be disputed
between us is, Whether Canada be a better Indemnification for the Expenses of
the War, than all our other Conquests put together? for you give up all the
Rest with great Ease, and insist on this only.

Before we enter into a Comparison between the Value of our Acquisitions in the
West Indies and those in Canada, I must beg leave to take some Notice of your
Reason, your only Reason, for giving up the Island of Guadaloupe P. 33. The
Possession of Guadaloupe, an additional Sugar Island, when we have so many of
our own, ought not to be insisted upon so strenuously as to make it a necessary
Condition of the Peace; and though Senegal and Goree are of real Importance in
the Slave and Gum Trades, our own African Settlements have hitherto supplied us
with Slaves sufficient for our American Purposes.
, that we have already so many Sugar Islands of our own. If any Argument could
possibly be drawn from our having Abundance of Territory, surely its holds much
more strongly with Regard to North America, where one of our Provinces alone
has more Land than ours, and all the French Sugar Lands put together. If we
have in the West Indies Land enough for Sugar, surely we have Land enough in
North America for the far less valuable Commodities, which are produced on that
vast Continent. On what Grounds you are pleased to think the keeping a great
Sugar Island an Acquisition of little Consequence, I am unable to comprehend.
You know, surely, that in one of our Islands, the greatest of them, we labor
under a Sort of Monopoly, and under other Disadvantages, hard, if not
impossible to be remedied. You know that another Island, I mean Barbados,
formerly one of our best, is at present much exhausted; so that the Produce,
and the Profit made on that Produce, diminishes daily; and that the Rest,
except perhaps Antigua, are quite inconsiderable; so inconsiderable, that the
Islands, which as Dependents on Guadaloupe are scarce mentioned, are much more
valuable. It was no sooner found that the King of Denmark was intent on
settling the Island of Santa Cruz, than some considerable Planters immediately
removed thither, and it is now almost wholly settled by the English. Many have
actually Interests in Martinico; and Guadaloupe was scarce taken, when our
Planters flocked thither, and immediately made conditional I say conditional,
because the Capitulation has rendered it impossible to make an absolute
Purchase; but they have already made Contracts to purchase, if the Island
remains to us, and have taken Possession of Plantations by Virtue of such
Contracts.
Purchases, sensible of the Superiority of this Island, and the Defects of our
own.

In Consequence of those Wants, and Disadvantages, our Sugar Islands produce
little more than what serves the Home-consumption; and that too at a very
advanced Price. From the foreign Market we have, before this War, been almost
wholly excluded. France supplied all the Markets of Europe, and supplied them
in a great Measure from the Produce of this very Island, which you esteem so
lightly. When we consider Things in a commercial Light, it is the foreign
Market which ought certainly to have the greatest Influence. Those who supply
the Home-consumption purvey to our Luxury: Those who supply the foreign Market
administer to our Wealth, and to our Power.

To show you, Sir, how much the Sugar-trade might contribute to the Wealth and
Power of any Nation, by what it formerly did contribute to ours, and what for a
long Time past it has contributed to that of France, I will lay before you some
Facts, which are, Sir, of a Nature infinitely more convincing than the warmest
Sallies of the most lively Eloquence. About the Time of the Treaty of Utrecht,
we supplied the greatest Part of the Sugar-consumption throughout Europe.
France, far from contending with us in the foreign Market, took from us a great
Part of what they used at home. From the Year 1715 to 1719, we exported, one
Year with another, 18,580 Hogsheads of Sugar; but from 1719 to 1722, we fell to
less than half; for we sent abroad but 9064 communibus annis. We continued
regularly on the Decrease to 1739, in which Year our Sugar-export had fallen to
4078 Hogsheads. Since that Time, it has fallen almost to nothing. Now, let us
turn the other Side, and view the Sugar-trade of France since the same Period,
the Treaty of Utrecht. At that Time the French exported no Sugars. But mark,
Sir, the Revolution in 1740, when the British Trade in that Article was in a
Manner annihilated: France, after serving her Home-consumption at a very easy
Rate, exported no less than 80,000 Hogsheads of Sugar, which, with the Gains of
the Commission, etc. was reputed to be worth to France more than a Million
Sterling, to employ 40 Ton of Shipping, and 4000 Seamen, solely in bringing
from the West Indies to Europe. These, Sir, are Facts to proclaim loudly the
Advantage of those Islands to France whilst they were in her Possession; and
declare no less strongly the Advantages which must accrue to Britain, if she
could attain the Possession of one of the very best of them. Facts these that
ought not to be passed lightly, until you can show something like them in
Favor of the Plan you so warmly embrace; which cannot, I believe, be done. I
therefore, Sir, cannot help thinking, that your Reasons for rejecting
Guadaloupe, on the Principle of our having Sugar-land enough, are not near so
strong, or the Matter so well weighed, as the Importance of the Question
deserves.

But let us see what the Value of this Canada is, in Comparison of which you
reject all our other Acquisitions.

Unluckily for your Argument, you yourself inform us P. 30 and 33.
at your setting out, that the French set very little Value upon this
Possession; and that they have even deliberated, whether it should not be
entirely abandoned.

If, in the Hands of the French, who have no other Northern Colony, from whence
to supply their Islands with Lumber, Corn, and Provision, Canada was of so very
little Importance, what is it like to prove in ours, who have such immense
Tracts so much more conveniently situated for that Trade; and who can easily
supply Five Times the Consumption of ours, theirs, and all the other West India
Islands put together; and that too at a much easier Rate than they can possibly
have these Things at from Canada? But I do not insist upon this Argument,
though it is strong against you; because I do not believe that France has such
a Disregard for this their only considerable Possession in North America. It is
a great While since they thought of giving it up; and they are long convinced
that it is of some Use to them, independent of their Hopes of incroaching on
our Possessions. Ask those, Sir, who lately saw Canada, if it had the Face of a
Colony which the Mother Country was weary of holding? I believe, Sir, they will
tell you, that the Cultivation of the Lands, the Number and Neatness of the
Houses, the warm Condition of the Inhabitants, by no Means seemed to imply,
that they were neglected by France; but evinced rather, that this Colony was
the Object of her very tender Concern.

There are, independent of the Opinion or Designs of France, many Reasons why
we should not think Canada a valuable Exchange for our Conquest in the West
Indies. Canada, situated in a cold Climate, produces no Commodity, except Furs
and Skins, which she can exchange for the Commodities of Europe; and
consequently she can have little Returns to make the English Merchant. We know
what trifling Returns we have from some of our own very flourishing Colonies in
America. The whole Trade of Furs and Skins, which Canada carried on with
France, fell short, in its most flourishing State, of 140,000 a year. The Rest
of their Produce, with regard to the Market of Europe, is as nothing. A very
great Part of the Value of those Furs was returned from France in the Article
of Brandy, without which, the Trade with the Indians for their Beaver and Deer
Skins could not be carried on. But, as an English Plantation, Canada must
supply itself, as all the other English Plantations do, with Rum; else they
will be obliged entirely to relinquish the Fur and Peltry Trade, which is the
only valuable Trade they have. But let it be considered, how they can come to
the West India Market from the Bottom of the River St. Laurence, with the gross
and cheap Article of Lumber and Corn, on a Footing with our Colonies, many of
which are not three Weeks Sail from the Leeward Islands. They could neither
Trade with Europe, nor with the West Indies, with any tolerable Advantage; not
with the West Indies, because they must be undersold in that Market; not with
Europe, because, being so undersold, they cannot have the Rum that is necessary
for the Indian Trade, which keeps up their Commerce with Europe.

Indeed, whilst Canada is in the Hands of France, the Skin-trade may be kept up
so as to be an Object; because the Return for those Commodities, brings back
the Brandy with which they are purchased: And thus the Trade is kept alive by a
continual Circulation. The bulkier Articles of Corn and Lumber may likewise
continue a Branch of their Trade; because it is their Interest to support, by
every Method, the Vent of these Articles in their West Indies in Preference to
Foreigners. But Canada, in our Hands can have no such Preference; and
therefore, from its Situation, cannot be on an Equality in the West India
Market; and from which Market alone it is that they, as a British Possession,
can derive the Spirits, or those Materials for Spirits, without which the Fur
and Peltry, their only Trade, must certainly perish. These Principles appear to
me so well grounded, that I think it no Presumption to prophesy, if that Place
should ever be ours, the Fur-trade of Canada must inevitably come to little or
nothing in a few Years.

But let us extend our View a little farther; let us suppose, that if, instead
of aiming at the entire Possession of North America, we confine ourselves to
those Limits which we have always claimed there; and that Canada is restored to
France, curtailed in such a Manner as to secure the Ohio Country, and the
Communication of the Lakes. The Country to the Southward of Lake Erie, and near
the Ohio, is the greatest Indian hunting Country in North America. If this
Territory should remain with us on a Peace, it naturally draws to us all that
Trade which depends upon the hunting of Deer and Beaver; and if this Country
should be further secured to us, by the Possession of Niagara, which is a Post
of infinite Importance, and entirely commands the great Lakes of Erie and
Ontario, I cannot see how it is possible to keep the far greater Part of the
Commerce of North America out of our Hands. The Indians must every where be
intercepted before they can arrive at the French Colony, even supposing (what
can never be) that the French could entice them thither by selling cheaper than
our Dealers.

Thus, without aiming at the total Possession of Canada, by establishing proper
Limits, and by securing them properly, we may draw to ourselves a great Part of
that Trade which must give Canada itself any Value, in the Eyes of a commercial
Nation.

So that the Question, Sir, is not, Whether Canada extended to the Ocean, by a
Possession of the River St. John, and a great Part of Nova Scotia, incroaching
upon, and menacing New York and New England, commanding exclusively all the
Lakes and Rivers, whether such a Country ought to be kept in Preference to
Guadaloupe, and our other Conquest? but, Whether Canada, stripped of these
Advantages, and confined to its proper Bounds, confined to the Northward of
those Lakes and Rivers, be a better Acquisition than our rich Conquest in the
West Indies?

If we compare the Value of the Returns of Canada, even whilst it flourished
most by its Encroachments upon us, with those of Guadaloupe, we shall find them
in no Degree of Competition. The Furtrade, whose Value is before mentioned, is
its whole Trade to Europe. But Guadaloupe, besides the great Quantities of
Sugars, Cotton, Indigo, Coffee, and Ginger, which it sends to Market, carries
on a Trade with the Carraccas and other Parts of the Spanish Main, which is a
Trade wholly in the Manufactures of Europe, and the Returns for which, are
almost wholly in ready Money. Without estimating the Land, the Houses, the
Works, and the Goods in the Island, the Slaves, at the lowest Valuation, are
worth upwards of one Million two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds Sterling. It
is a known Fact, that they make more Sugar in Guadaloupe, than in any of our
Islands, except Jamaica. This Branch alone, besides the Employment of so much
Shipping, and so many Seamen, will produce clear 300,000 per Annum to our
Merchants. For, having sufficient from our own Islands, to supply our
Home-consumption, the whole Sugar-produce of Guadaloupe will be exported; and
will consequently be so much clear Money to Great Britain. And, Sir, the whole
Produce of Canada, though it were all exported from England, and exported
completely manufactured, would not amount to the Value of that single Article
unmanufactured; nor would it employ the one twentieth Part of the Shipping, and
the Seamen. But this, though the largest, is not the only Produce of
Guadaloupe; Coffee, which in our Islands is none, or a very inconsiderable
Object, is there a very great one. They raise besides, great Quantities of
Indigo and Cotton, which supply Materials for our best and most valuable
Manufactures, and which employ many more Hands than the Increase of the
Hat-trade, proposed by the keeping Canada, can do. This island is capable, in
our Hands, of being improved to double its present Value; whereas Canada, in
our Hands, would not probably yield half what it did to France.

There is, Sir, one Argument I would use particularly to you, who are so
strongly sensible of the Inconvenience Dunkirk is to us from its Situation.
Surely there is not a single Word you say, in Respect to Dunkirk, that does not
hold as strongly in Regard to Guadaloupe, situated in the very Heart of our
Leeward Islands, and there infesting one of the most advantageous Branches of
the British Commerce. It is not to be denied but that the English Coaster and
the London Trader has suffered by the Dunkirk Privateers; but their Losses this
War have not been near so considerable as that of the West Indies, and above
all of the North American Traders, whose Interest, I believe, you will not
dispute to be of some Importance. Ask, Sir, the North American Traders, ask the
People of the Leeward Islands, what a vast Security they thought it to their
Trade, that Guadaloupe should be in our Hands? Our Islands were so annoyed from
thence, that they scarce considered it in any other Light than as a Nest of
Privateers: They were surprised on going there, to find a People richer than in
any of our own Islands; and Land so much better than their own, that many of
our rich Planters have already made I say conditional, because the Capitulation
rendered it impossible for them to make absolute Purchases; but they have
possessed themselves of Plantations, by Contract, to purchase them if the
Island remains to Great Britain.
conditional Purchases there.

Not to confine our Views solely to a commercial Point, give me Leave to
mention one great Advantage that, in a political Light, may arise from our
Possession of Guadaloupe. It is very well known, that the Hand of Government is
heavy on the Protestants of France; many of these People are already
established in this Island, and they have Connections of every Kind with those
of their own Persuasion at home; and may we not hope and expect that this may
be an Inducement to many others to make this their Retreat, and that the Colony
may be enriched by them?

In short, Sir, in whatever Light you view the Island of Guadaloupe, you will
find it a most valuable and a most desirable Object. Do you ask to deprive your
Enemy of an advantageous Post, from whence he might materially molest your
Trade in Time of War? Do you wish to extend your Trade in Time of Peace, and to
have a new Market for all your Manufactures? From being scarce able to supply
the Home-Consumption with Sugar, do you desire to be foremost at the foreign
Market? This Island, Sir, of Guadaloupe, that you esteem so little, will answer
all these Ends; Ends so material, that I trust, Sir, that the Stone you have
rejected, will be made the Corner Stone in the Temple of Peace.

Therefore, Sir, I must repeat it, that I am not a little surprised that you
should pass over, in a Manner so careless, and with such extreme
Superficiality, a Point so very material and interesting as this, to tell us,
that P. 33.
the Possession of Guadaloupe, an additional Sugar Island, when we have so many
of our own, ought not to be so strenuously insisted upon, as to make it a
necessary Condition of the Peace. Had you taken the Pains to inform yourself of
the Facts necessary for making a Judgment on this Matter, or had you duly
attended to them, you could not possibly have said, that it was not to be
insisted upon, and in the same Breath assert, that, without Canada, we should
have a treacherous and delusive Peace.

You say a great Deal, and with Reason, upon the Value of our If,
notwithstanding our having lost several Branches of Commerce we formerly
enjoyed in Europe and to the Levant, we have still more Commerce than ever, a
greater Demand for our Manufactures, and a vast Increase of our Shipping, what
can this be owing to but to the Trade of our own American Colonies? Vid. the
Letter.
North-American Colonies, and the great Increase of our Trade has had from that
Quarter. But you pass by, with very little Notice, how much both the Trade of
England, and the Trade of these very North-American Colonies, owes to the
Islands.

You look upon these Islands only as an inferior dependent Part of the British
Plantations, which you scarce think worth While to mention: But, because I
think you are under some Mistake in this Point, in addition to those Reasons
which have been given to show the Preference of Guadaloupe in particular to
Canada, there are some Facts which I beg Leave to submit to your Observation,
concerning Settlements on the Continent of North America and Plantations in the
West Indian Islands. Though it may be a new Idea, I shall not hesitate to say,
that an Island Colony is always more advantageous than a continental one, for
the Mother Country.

The Inhabitants of the West-Indian Islands never consider themselves as at
home there: They send their Children to the Mother Country for Education; they
themselves make many Trips to the Mother Country to recover their Health, or
enjoy their Fortunes. If they have Ambition, it is hither they come to gratify
it. I need not, I suppose, observe to you, how many Gentlemen of the West
Indies have Seats in the British House of Commons. I might, I believe, venture
to say, there are very few who have inherited Plantations in any of our
Islands, who have not had an European Education, or at least have not spent
some Time in this Kingdom. Many who have Plantations, receive and spend the
whole Profits of them here, without ever having even seen the West Indies. If
the Commerce with the West-Indian Islands had even been, in some Respects,
against us, this Circumstance alone would turn the Balance in our Favor. But
this, in Truth, is very far from being the Case. The Trade we carry on with
that Part of the World is as happily circumstanced as Imagination could form
it. The West India Islands lie in a Climate different totally from ours. The
natural Produce, therefore, interferes, in no Respect with that of England.
Their Produce is only such as the Taste and Turn of our Manners call for; but
demand so strongly, that if we had them not from our own Colonies, we must
purchase from Strangers. The Commerce between the Mother Country and a
West-Indian Island is natural and easy. It needs, in no Respect, to be forced
or managed: They are mutually formed for each other: Neither is there any Sort
of Fear, that the Islands in that Part of the World shall ever make this
Commerce less easy or less advantageous. The extreme Dearness of Provision will
never suffer them, how much soever they may be inclined, to set up any sort of
Manufacture which may interfere with our Fabrics. So that these Colonies, by
their very Nature, Situation, and Products, by what they have, and by what they
want, are kept necessarily connected with and dependent upon England, and must
ever be so, as long as we are able to protect them. Let us now examine, Sir,
whether the greatest Part of the Plantations which we possess or desire in
North America, can come in Competition with the Islands, either in the
Advantages we derive from them, or in the Certainty of holding those Advantages
for the Future. With regard to the Estates in North America spent in England, I
may affirm, that from Nova Scotia to Maryland and Virginia, there are
absolutely none; yet in this Tract are the four Provinces of New England, the
great Countries of New York, Pensylvania, and the two Jerseys, Places highly
flourishing in Commerce, and abounding with People: Even to the Southward of
this Line, there are few Estates either in Number or Value spent in England.

In North America, the Climate is not in general unfavourable to an European
Constitution, and it is such in which Men fond of rural Diversions may pass
their Time agreeably. The Truth is, though their Estates supply them with Plenty
to live at home, they do not furnish Money enough to send them abroad. Excepting
Proprietaries, I do not remember that this vast Continent supplies our House of
Commons with one single Member.

To view the Continent of America in a commercial Light, the Produce of all the
Northern Colonies is the same as that of England, Corn, and Cattle; and
therefore, except for a few naval Stores, there is very little Trade from
thence directly to England. Their own Commodities bear a very low Price; Goods
carried from Europe bear a very high Price; and thus they are of necessity
driven to set up Manufactures similar to those of England, in which they are
favored by the Plenty and Cheapness of Provisions. In fact, there are
Manufactures of many Kinds in these Northern Colonies, that promise in a short
Time to supply their Home-consumption. From New England they begin even to
export some things manufactured, as Hats, for instance. In these Provinces they
have Colleges and Academies for the Education of their Youth; and as they
increase daily in People and in Industry, the Necessity of a Connection with
England, with which they have no natural Intercourse by a Reciprocation of
Wants, will continually diminish. But as they recede from the Sea, all these
Causes will operate more strongly; they will have nothing to expect, they must
live wholly on their own Labor, and in Process of Time will know little,
inquire little, and care little about the Mother Country.

If, Sir, the people of our Colonies find no Check from Canada, they will
extend themselves, almost without Bounds, into the Inland Parts. They are
invited to it by the Pleasantness, the Fertility, and the Plenty of that
Country; and they will increase infinitely from all Causes. What the
Consequence will be, to have a numerous, hardy, independent People, possessed
of a strong Country, communicating little, or not at all with England, I leave
to your own Reflections. I hope we have not gone to these immense Expenses,
without any Idea of securing the Fruits of them to Posterity. If we have, I am
sure we have acted with little Frugality or Foresight. This is indeed a Point
that must be the constant Object of the Ministers Attention, but is not a fit
Subject for a Discussion; I will therefore expatiate no farther on this Topic:
I shall only observe, that by eagerly grasping at extensive Territory, we may
run the Risque, and that perhaps in no very distant Period, of losing what we
now possess. The Possession of Canada, far from being necessary to our Safety,
may in its Consequence be even dangerous. A Neighbor that keeps us in some
Awe, is not always the worst of Neighbors. So that far from sacrificing
Guadaloupe to Canada, perhaps, if we might have Canada without any Sacrifice at
all, we ought not to desire it. And, besides the Points to be considered
between us and France, there are other Powers who will probably think
themselves interested in the Decision of this Affair. There is a Balance of
Power in America as well as in Europe, which will not be forgotten; and this is
a Point I should have expected would somewhat have engaged your Attention.

With regard to Senegal and Goree, I concur with you in not making them the
principal Object of our Negotiations at the Congress P. 33. Senegal and Goree,
though of real Importance in the Slave and Gum Trades, our own African
Settlements have hitherto supplied us with Slaves sufficient for our American
Purposes; and the Gum Trade is not perhaps of Consequence enough to make us
Amends for the annual Mortality which we already lament of our brave
Countrymen, to guard our African Conquests.
for a Peace; but it is upon Principles very different from yours. You despise
the African Trade, and that consistently enough, because you seem to lay little
Weight on that of the West Indies, which is supported by it; but the Reduction
of the Price of Slaves, the whole Trade of Gum thrown into our Hands, and the
Increase of those of Gold and Ivory, would make even those Places a far better
Purchase than Canada, as might, I think, be shown without much Difficulty. But
I do not insist upon it; because I think we ought to be as moderate in the
Terms of Peace, as is consistent with a reasonable Indemnification, and because
too I know, in the Nature of Things, that it is impossible to retain all. In
one word, I will not venture, Sir, to say, we have a treacherous and delusive
Peace, unless the Peace is made in Conformity to my Ideas; for there may be
Reasons that neither you, or I, Sir, can possibly be acquainted with, which may
make this not proper to be insisted upon; but I will take upon me, Sir, to say,
that if by this War we gain Guadaloupe, we gain as great an Acquisition as ever
this Nation gained by any Treaty or any War; and if it is possible to retain
this, we need not ask for more.

At a Congress, Sir, in the Face of that August Assembly, formed by the
Representatives of the Christian World, we shall there exhibit ourselves in our
real Character, and show all the Powers of Europe what they are to expect from
us, and how far they ought to wish the Continuance and Increase of our
Greatness. Therefore any show of arrogant Superiority, any unmeasurable Claim,
any avaricious Grasping, though they may seem immediately to fall upon France,
are in effect Menaces to every other Power. But if Moderation is necessary
there, when the War is ended, and when we act as a Nation, how much more
necessary is it to private Men, whilst the War still continues with that
Uncertainty, which must always attend the most prosperous Fortune. You cannot
forget, in this very Year, what an Aspect our Affairs in Germany wore, before
the glorious Battle of Minden; and you cannot be ignorant how much this must
have affected in a Negotiation for Peace. Things are not yet decided there;
they look indeed favorable, but not favorable enough, either with Regard to
his Majesty's Army, and still less with Regard to the King of Prussia, to
entitle you to prescribe Terms in the Style of a Roman Dictator, even if any
Fortune could entitle you to do it. Let us, Sir, use a little Moderation in our
happy Hour, that we may at all Events preserve an Uniformity of Conduct, and
not act meanly, if, contrary to our Wishes, any reverse of Fortune should
oblige us to be moderate. I should indeed think it the more necessary in you to
have been so, as you have not, in my humble Opinion, chosen your Objects very
properly. France, Sir, though beaten in all Quarters of the World, worsted both
by Sea and Land; though the Credit of her Arms and her Finances are impaired,
she is not yet totally ruined; nor, as I conceive, brought so low as she was in
the War of Queen Anne. Yet, Sir, you will be pleased to remember, that by the
haughty Demeanor, the unreasonable Expectations, the arrogant, I may say,
ridiculous Demands of the Allies, the happy Hour for making Peace on the most
advantageous Concessions was suffered to escape; until Faction had Time to
raise its Head in England, the Posture of Affairs to change Abroad, and the
Fortune of the War to vary in so many Particulars, that the Result of all our
Success and Arrogance was -- the Treaty of Utrecht. The M. de Torcy's Memoirs
are a lively Picture of this Conduct and its Consequences.

I have, Sir, attentively, and I hope it will be allowed fairly, examined your
principal Arguments. You will give me Leave now to observe a little upon some
Things of less Consequence, which lie detached from one another here and there
in your Performance.

I respect the Zeal which you show for the Interest of your Country; but I
think that Zeal has transported you much too far in your Reflections on the
Conduct and Capacities of our Nobility. If the Easiness of their Fortunes
hurries many of them into a Life of Dissipation and Pleasure, that has always
been the Case, because it is the natural Consequence of Youth and Affluence.
This, if we may trust our Writers, was the Grievance of other Ages and other
Countries as well as ours.

This War is principally, with Regard to us at least, it is an American War.
When I consider this, I own my Eyes are involuntarily led, as I believe those
of most Persons are, to the few who from their Inclinations, their Studies,
their Opportunities, and their Talents, are made Perfectly Masters of the State
and Interests of our Colonies. There cannot be many; therefore we cannot easily
be mistaken. Nor can we, when we cast our Eye on the noble Person to whom we
owe the judicious Settlement of that Frontier Colony, whose Capital gratefully
bears the Title of its Founder, by any Means despair of an able Plenipotentiary
at a Congress, where, for the first Time, our own national Interest will be the
principal Object of Negotiation.

I admire, Sir, with you, the noble Struggle which that great Prince, our Ally
in this War, has made against such a Combination of great Powers as meant to
destroy him. I could wish for his Virtues, and profess I almost expect from his
Abilities, that he will still extricate himself from all the Toils that
surround him.

It must, however, be remembered, that it is not to his Connection with us,
that he owes his Distress. He has not, like the unhappy Prince of Hesse, lost
his Country twice, by adhering firmly to Great Britain, in a Quarrel entirely
British. We found him beset with Enemies, our Interests coincided, we made an
Alliance, and I am sure he has already found in Great Britain a most useful
Ally; and I believe he always will find in her an Ally faithful to her
Engagements. But, Sir, there is a Bound to every Thing, P. 42.
Let us, in your own Words, learn for the future to perfer our own Interest to
that of others; to proportion our Expenses on the Continent to the immediate
Expenses of our own Country, and never to assist a New Ally without remembering
how much we did for our Old one, and what Return we have had. We see plainly,
Sir, by the Conduct of Great Britain at this Hour, that the Ministry is not
inclined to let this Prince fall for Want of a due Assistance; but, sure, while
we assist him so materially in Europe, we are not bound to sacrifice our
Interests in other Parts of the World. It may be a popular Doctrine; but I
hope, it is not a Doctrine that will be received.

P. 40, 41. I would inculcate a Doctrine which, I think, will not be unpopular,
and which therefore, I hope, will not be opposed by our Ministers, that
whatever Conquest we have made, and whatever Conquest we may still make upon
the French, except North America, which must be kept all our own, should be
looked upon as given back to France for a valuable Consideration, if it can be
the Means of extricating the King of Prussia from any unforeseen Distresses.
Enthusiasm, Sir, is a noble Principle of Action; but good Sense and Knowledge
only must direct the sole Business of a Negotiation. The Protestant Cause
maintained itself before the King of Prussia was considered as its Protector;
and I trust it will still be able to support itself independent of him; it will
indeed always find a surer Support in the jarring Interest of the several
Powers of Europe, which will certainly never cease, than in the Faith of any
Prince, which will be always subject to Change.

The Circumstances of that famous P. 41. P. 35. Vide Note. The true History of
this Transaction here alluded to, may possibly some Time or other appear;
though, as yet, we are persuaded that the World knows very little of it.
Opposition in our Parliament, to which you allude, are indeed but little
known. It is however, a Period about which no Man is uninquisitive. Your
Description of the Medley which composed that Opposition, is spirited, lively,
and I doubt not, just: If you were yourself engaged in that Struggle, when you
had driven the common Enemy to the Wall, whether you found it convenient at
that Time to quit your Friends, or Whether you thought yourself deserted by
them, Time enough is now elapsed to have forgotten political Friendships, and
perhaps too, to have worn out Party-resentments; and in an Age so fond of
Anecdotes, and so curious in Characters, assuredly nothing will be more
acceptable than a true History of that whole Transaction.

It was indeed no undesirable Time to have lived, when a Field was opened for
every Man to display his Abilities, and exert his Talents; if we give the Reins
to our Ambition, we should, Sir, regret that where so many skillful Champions
used formerly to engage and struggle for Victory, one Man should at this Day
remain single in the Field of Battle. But, alas! Sir, however mortifying this
may be to us as Men, surely as Citizens we must rejoice that the great Man, to
whose active Spirit we in a great Measure owe all our Glory, our Success, I had
almost said our very Safety, can employ his whole Time against the Enemies of
his Country, without giving a Moment's Care to provide for his own Safety. If
we consider it in this Light, Sir, sure it must be a most pleasing
Contemplation to think, that P. 2.
the Extinction of factious Opposition, the Unanimity of every Party, and the
Acquiescence of every Connection, in whatever Scheme is proposed by his
Majesty's Servants, suffer the Speaker without the least Debate or Opposition
to take the Chair, only to vote Millions, and levy Thousands; Vid. the Letter.
but these Millions are voted, and these Thousands are levied, for the
Destruction of the Enemies of our Country.

Have a little Patience however; we shall soon, I trust, Sir, have beat all our
Enemies, and then we shall perhaps again have Leisure to quarrel among
ourselves; we may then see more than one Champion in the Field; we may then
list under that Banner, which our Interest or our Passions may direct us to.

In the mean time, let us thank Providence for the present happy Situation of
our Affairs. Every Man should, as far as he can, endeavor to continue that
Acquiescence, to cherish that Concord and Union, which is indeed so
advantageous to our Country; and every Head of a Party must in this have a
share in our Acknowledgments for their Acquiescence.

But the two great Persons you address, at present engross the public
Attention. The noble Lord has great Merit both to his Country and his Prince;
his early Zeal cannot be forgotten. His extensive Influence, his personal
Authority, exerted as they have been, and as I trust they always will be, for
the good of his Country, will always challenge the good Opinion of his
Countrymen. Nor will our Country forget to do Justice to the active Spirit of
that great Man, to whose unwearied Efforts Great Britain is so much indebted
for her present Glory; to whom you and I, Sir, owe it, that in a War with such
a Power as France, we now debate whether our Country should use Moderation. I
mean not, Sir, to make any Comparison, for it is not now a Time to draw the
nice Line between the Merits of great Men, or to ascertain exactly where the
Merit of the one ends, and the other begins. Comparisons are always invidious
and might at this time be hurtful, and tend to weaken the Bonds that unite so
many in the Service of their Country.

It was no Spirit of Contradiction, Sir, that made me take the pains of
answering your Letter; therefore as I canvass with Freedom those Points which
appear to me to be mistaken, so with great Pleasure I join Hands where I think
what you say is just and reasonable. I agree with you entirely in your Judgment
of a place Bill, which would, I believe, be more effectual, if not made too
violent in its first Operation like an Oliverian self-denying Ordinance. Your
Judgment on Mediators is surely just and sensible; and we may believe the
Ministry think so, who have not employed any Mediation, though they have
offered Terms to their Enemy.

I might now ask yours and the public Indulgence for any Mistakes. I have not
willingly perverted or misrepresented any thing. I do not pretend to the Credit
of a Writer, but I have endeavored to understand the Question I write upon, as
I think every Man is bound to do who troubles the Public with his Opinions. If
I am mistaken in what I advance, it does not much signify who the Author of
wrong Notions may be. If my Opinions are well grounded, and my Remarks just, my
Country may receive some Benefit from them; and if she receives a Benefit, it
is of little Concern what Hand administers it.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc. etc.

FINIS.

