PREDESTINATION Consistent with GENERAL LIBERTY: OR THE Scheme of the Covenant
of Grace.

It which will be handled, The Nature and Extensiveness of the Covenant, the
Decrees of Election and Reprobation, Efficacious Grace, AND A PROBATIONARY
STATE.

First, the Covenant -- 1. It is purely a gracious Covenant. 2. All Men are
included in it. 3. It is conditional. 4. There must be Life, or no Covenant. 5.
The Holy Ghost, a new Heart, and Remission of Sins, are promised to all the
human Race. 6. The Condition must be possible to all, or no Condition at-all.
7. Regenerating Grace is promised to the Faith and Endeavors of unregenerate
Men. 8. Influences to change the Heart, are the Purchase of CHRIST.
Second -- The Decrees of Election and Reprobation, are certain and definite.
Third -- Efficacious Grace is necessary to Regeneration and Justification, from
which none can fall. Fourth -- A Possibility of Falling, always necessary to a
probationary State, for Regeneration, Justification, Eternal Life, or any Thing
else.
New York: Printed by J. PARKER, and Comp. M.DCC.LXI.

THE PREFACE.
IF the scheme of the covenant of grace be true, in the light in which I have
handled it, the importance of something of this kind, will I presume, be a
sufficient apology for my undertaking; provided I had been able to do it in a
good form. As to the form, I shall only say, I have been so straitened in time,
that I could hardly think of any thing but matter, not manner.

If this scheme is not true, I can only tell the world I thought it was true;
and though this is a poor way of apologizing for error; yet it is as good as
any I can make; and there are but few can make a better apology, not only for
what they do and say, but write too, in many cases; if they can so good. If any
are disposed to think it not true, who yet count themselves able to refute it;
I shall take it very unkind, not to attempt it: But whoever shall attempt to
refute this general scheme of the covenant of grace, I beg will consider well
the affair; for it he don't convince me, he may expect, if God spare me long
enough, I shall endeavor to rack his thoughts, let who will be tortured by it.
Such a scheme promises too much advantage, to be easily submitted; though every
thing untrue, ought to submit. I beg all societies will endeavor to weigh what
has been said, without prejudice, as much as may be; and subscribe myself, a
friend and well-wisher to each of you.

Samuel Harker. Minister of the Gospel at Black River in New Jersey.

PREDESTINATION Consistent with General Liberty, OR THE Scheme of the Covenant
of Grace.
FIRST.
WITH respect to the grace of the covenant: I use the word Grace, to signify
freely, and so to exclude merit, or the desert of the Creature, (which I
understand to be the common acceptance of the word grace in Divinity) now
there are but two ways of meriting or deserving that I know of, which are
distinguished into Condignity and Congruity: Merit of condignity is the giving
as much, or doing as much for any thing as it is worth, therefore this kind of
merit never had any place in religion; for who among most perfect creatures,
even of the celestial order, could give or do as much for heaven and glory as
they are worth? or who among the guilty race of fallen men, can do as much for
God, as to deserve his own justification? or that God should unveil his
perfections to him, and grant him the free communications of his love and
mercy, and the gratifying enjoyment of himself? which is but an early heaven,
an earnest upon earth, of that full inheritance above.

Merit o^ congruity is only deserving any thing in order of fitness or
agreeableness; hence when God created men and angels, in knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness, capable to serve and honor him perfectly; it
was but fit or suitable to display his glory and perfections to them, and
promise them the full enjoyment of himself in an eternal heavenly state,
correspondent to their serving him perfectly as probationers for a time. Now
this merit of congruity was the condition of the first covenant, but has no
place in the second, or covenant of grace: for such defilement, imperfection,
and iniquity, cleaves to the best of our services, as renders it entirely
unsuitable, that the doers of them should be justified or saved on their
account: on the contrary, we deserve eternal damnation for their in
perfections: hence without shedding of blood is no remission, and heavenly
things must be purified. Heb ix. 22, 23. Agreeable to the ancient
representation of Christ by the high priest. Exo. xxviii, 38. That Aaron may
bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow
in all their holy gifts, etc. Now if every possible way of meriting, be
excluded (as we see) from the covenant of grace, justification and salvation,
(as to any thing we can do) must be freely bestowed, as is declared, Romans iii
24. Being justified freely by his grace; and vi. 23. The gift of God is eternal
life. And if the gift of God is eternal life, surely eternal life is God's
gift; and what can be more free than a gift? Suppose, when the second covenant
was made with Adam, and in him with his posterity, they had (for the time
ensuing) been rendered capable to serve God perfectly, so that it would have
been congruous to give them heaven on that account, (which is far from the true
state of things) yet such a covenant could not be a covenant of grace, but of
debt, and what could compensate for time passed, and injuries done? A servant
whose time and whole ability is due to his master, can never make up black
days, or compensate for injuries. Hence, it became infinitely reasonable, that
the new covenant should exclude every kind of merit, and be founded upon
another covenant, viz. that of redemption; which is a covenant to repair
breaches, and demands the taking of life, shedding of blood, and a complete
satisfaction for injuries done to infinite honors; which satisfaction, the
life and blood of all mere creatures, could not make in a finite time;
therefore it must be the blood of the son of God, who is considered as a Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world. Rev. xiii. 8. Here God appoints himself
another seed (not instead of Abel whom Cain slew, but) instead of Adam, whom
the Devil slew: hence, when the second covenant was made with Adam, and in him
with his posterity, as he was made a foederal or covenant father, this seed is
spoken of, as one to bruise the serpent's head, whose blood is the foundation
upon which a covenant of grace can be made with man; hence called the blood of
the covenant or testament. Luke xxii. 20. Heb. ix. 20. Ex. xxiv. 8.

Secondly. I was to show, that all men are included in this covenant: And in
order to this,

1. I observe, that this covenant was established to and with Adam; for it was
made immediately after the fall, before Adam had a son, as appears Gen iii. 15.
Now although some suppose, when the covenant of grace was made, all was passed
by but the elect; yet I have never understood that those persons held Adam to
be passed by, as a non-elect; but that it has generally been believed he was of
the chosen, and was saved. Now it appears altogether unreasonable to me, to
suppose, that God would choose him who had betrayed so great a trust, and done
such infinite injury to God and his own posterity, and pass by some of his
posterity, who had only sinned in his representation: choose the ruiner, and
passed by the ruined. Surely such are not the most grateful representations of
him, who declares he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner!

2. It appears infinitely reasonable to me to suppose, (that as Adam had
sustained so great a relation to his posterity in the first covenant, as to be
their representative for life and death, heaven and hell, and had actually
ruined them all) when God condescends to covenant with him again, that if it be
possible, God will give him some such relation to his posterity, as shall let
him see, they are not damned barely on his account; and nothing short of making
him a foederal father, could make such a discovery to him; for as there can be
but one covenant of grace, so if that does not propose, and promise salvation
to his seed (who are yet unborn) as well as to himself, he can see no way for
their salvation at all: And O how gloomy and melancholy a consideration must be
inferred, if Adam understood the covenant as many do in these days! sci. that
the greater part of his posterity was passed by in making the covenant,
reprobated, and left to perish in a ruin that himself had brought upon them.
Such a state of things, seems to be hardly consistent with the comfort of that
good man, when we consider the importance of his relation to his posterity.

3. But we are sure it was possible for God to make such a covenant with Adam,
as to confer on his posterity foederal holiness, or a new covenant relation of
sonship to God; for such a form of covenanting was after exemplified with
Abraham; and surely that form of covenanting was according to the original
pattern. The form of covenanting with Abraham, we know, was, that the whole
family are included; father, son, servant born in his house, or bought with his
money of the stranger, Genesis xvii 12, 13. The unborn seed of both are included
in the covenant, and if they are not dealt with as such, the covenant was null
and void with respect to them, ver. 14. Yea, the females are incovenanted with
the males, (as I could abundantly prove, was it denied) though incapable of the
formal external ratification of the covenant by circumcision. I shall say no
more at present, but that the females in Isra^l were ever treated as God's
covenant people; and the daughters might not marry with the uncircumcised. Genesis
xxxiv. 14. Now that God did so covenant with Adam, as to include all his
posterity, will appear, if we consider a few things. 1. That we have no Hint of
any covenant made with Adam's seed, sci. Cain and Abel; yet they are God's
covenant children; for it belongs to none but such, to use the modes of the
administration of the covenant of grace; and offerings and sacrifices have no
relation to any other covenant. We are sure God instituted this service, and
enjoined it them either immediately himself, or mediately by their fathers, who
alone can be supposed to be their instructors in this case, as Genesis iv. 3, 4.
2. We read nothing of any coming into the presence of the Lord, but only of
going out: Now the place of God's presence is the church, Psalm. cxxxii. 13, 14.
There is abundant proof of this in the word of God; and Cain's going out from
the presence of God, can mean nothing else but apostasy from God, and throwing
off the yoke of a covenant relation to him; which Cain could not have done, had
he not been a church member: and where did Cain sustain such a capacity, but
from the terms of the covenant, the father and the child? 3. That. these were
the terms of the covenant, will appear in Seth's family, who are all called
children of God throughout their generations, until the flood, Genesis vi 2.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair; and they took
them wives of the daughters of men. By sons of God, can be understood no other
than Seth's posterity; and by daughters of men, Cain's; in which account we
cannot but know, male and female of the former, are God's children, and neither
male nor female of the latter; for surely it was lawful for the sons of Seth to
marry. But if the daughters of Seth were not daughters of God also, they had
none but daughters of men to marry with; which we see was unlawful: and
consequently, it was as unlawful, for the daughters of God, or of Seth's
posterity, to marry with the sons of men, or of Cain's posterity. But how came
Seth's posterity to be children of God, above Cain's? It was not their being
regenerated, or their pious and virtuous living: no, it is the wickedness of
these sons of God, that is mentioned as the cause, why God will destroy men
from off the earth by a flood, Genesis vi. 2, to 13, and God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth; while Noah only was found righteous
in his generation, chap. vii. 1. "Their son ship therefore above the posterity
of Cain, could he no other than a covenant relation from their father Adam,
which Cain and his posterity had forfeited and lost, by his going out from the
presence of the Lord God was willing Cain should have his proper primogeniture,
or place of first born; which Cain seems to suspect, by the manner of God's
speaking to him, if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and unto thee
shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him, Genesis iv. 7. and when Cain
had slain leis brother, God did not excommunicate him, but brands him with
going out voluntarily; Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, Gen iv. 16.

By all which we learn, how unwilling God was, there should be a generation of
heathen, or uncovenanted people; and we see how highly God resents that heathen
race, disclaims all relation to them, calls them sons of men, and will even
drown his own children for marrying with them. -- 4. If Cain and Abel became
church members, from the very nature of the covenant, the father and his seed;
then they being God's covenant children, their seed's right cannot be denied;
and so the right of church membership, and a covenant relation to God, runs to
^^ed's seed forever; as was exemplified in Seth's posterity: for although they
were generally destroyed by the flood, yet not individually, Noah being found
righteous in that generation, his seed's right after the flood, is as good as
before: for the covenant is the s^m^^ and God never de (...) cov^nant rel^^ion
of sonship and Church member (...) of the seed of ^d^m, until they, by their
(...) as was ex-ex^mp^^^^ (...) infant posterity (...) ^^pen^ (...) their
father's (...) the Lord in covena^^ (...) do in i^^ancy, and liv^ (...) God, or
^^^om under his (...) Ephesians. ii. 4. (...) world; when they (...) to years, they
know (...) about it. Hence (...), that w^ ^^a^ of Cain's going out of the
presence of the Lord, b^^^^ we read of (...) coming in; for he was in, before
he could go out, or come in, of himself, and the ^^st thing he can do in these
respects, is to go out; a^^ ^o if parents had not disinherited their children,
the whose world must have been the church, God's children, and covenant people
to this day; and would be so to the end of time, if not so disinherited. After
the flood God spoke to Noah, and his sons with him, saying, and I, behold, I
establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you, Genesis ix. 8, 9
Here the seed are expressed, with a covenant established with them, as fully as
with the parents; and what comfortable encouragement, without this, could there
be, to be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth? ver. 1 and 7, or
fill it, as the word replenish signifies: and God's blessing Noah and his sons,
with the subjection of beasts, or a dominion over them, could yield but cold
comfort, if their seed are not the blessed of the Lord with them; but we see
they were: and here the whole world are the church again; and their seed after
them, as ver. 9, are all the human creatures that ever shall be born.

5. If infants did not belong to the original draught of the covenant of grace,
but must be taken in upon their own actual believing, when come to years; then
their covenant relation to God, in Abraham's day, was an appendant of the
Theocracy that he was under, and must be abolished with it, and then where is
our right to infant baptism? However, I think the case is out of all doubt,
from the reasons and arguments already used, that the covenant was made and
established with Adam, and his infant seed; and as all, male and female, are
his descendants; so the covenant of grace includes all, as really as ever the
covenant of works did: it is no more a reason, that the heathen are not in the
covenant of grace, because they receive no actual benefit from it, than it is,
that all were not in the covenant of works, because they reap no advantage. For
we see, children can as well be bereaved of foederal holiness, in the covenant
of grace, by parents' misconduct, as of real holiness in the covenant of works,
by the misconduct of Adam.

Thirdly. I was to show, that the covenant of grace is conditional.

But before I come directly to the point, I will premise a few things. 1. That
a covenant must exist before it can be conditional; therefore, what God does
for man, before a covenant is made with him, cannot be obtained by any
condition to be done on man's part; for conditions suppose a covenant. 2. That
a covenant must (as it is a compact by which God and men are to conduct
themselves, by obligations) be fairly exhibited, and the terms understood, and
such as can be complied with, and are suitable to be complied with. 3. The
covenanting parties must know they are parties concerned; otherwise the
covenant is a counterfeit and, cheat. 4. A covenant must be ratified, or
established, in order to its being obligatory, on the parties concerned. The
sealing of a covenant, cannot be a condition of that covenant, because it is
not binding 'till it be ratified: a covenant may be owned and confirmed, and
yet not one condition of it ever performed, and all the good conditionally
promised, forfeited and lost. There is no doubt but men are under obligations
to join themselves to the Lord in covenant, when God will covenant with them,
but these obligations arise from a natural, and not foederal relation to God.
5. That God has ever chosen to treat with men under the bonds of a solemn
covenant, ratified by oath, or visible seal, of bot^; see Genesis xiii. 11. Ezekiel.
xvi 8. and Heb. vi. 17. and has ever considered a people in covenant with
himself, in very happy circumstances, in comparison of an uncovenanted people,
see Genesis vi. 3. My spirit shall not always strive with man. Number. xxiii. 21, 23.
The Lord his God is with him; there is no enchantment against Jacob. Duet.
xxxiii. 27, 29. The eternal God is thy refuge; happy art thou O Israel. Mat xv.
24, 26. I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel; it is not
mete to take the children's bread, and cast it to dogs. Luke xv. 31. Son, thou
art ever with me, and all that I have is th^ne. Romans xi. 17. And with them
partakest of the root and fatness Cant. viii. 10. I am a wall, and my breasts
like towers; then was I in his eyes, as one that found favor. But as Balaam of
old, said, Numb. xxiii. 10. Who can count the dust of Jacob? so say I, who can
count (...) expressions of kindness, that there are in the word of God, toward
his covenant people?


I now come directly to the proof of the third thing proposed, viz. That the
covenant of grace is conditional. N^w all must allow, that this is the only
covenant, in which life and salvation is proposed, and promised to any of the
children of men; the only covenant in which he treats with them about life and
happiness; and that it is fairly exhibited, and the terms intelligible and
reasonable; that the parties concerned are God and the visible Church, between
both the parties: Hence I query, how are God's covenant people, or the visible
church, to expect life and salvation? Are they promised absolutely or
conditionally? To which I answer, if they are absolutely promised, all in the
covenant must necessarily be saved; it is impossible to evade this conclusion,
from these premises: but in order to deny the conditionality of the covenant,
that I am insisting upon, it is denied, that any were in the covenant of grace
really, but only the regenerate; others only visibly. Now if I can prove, that
all the visible church, were really in covenant, the argument will stand in
full force. And here I shall examine this distinction, between Reality, and
Visibility. To be visibly in covenant, is to be in covenant, so as to be seen
in covenant: but if they are not really there, they cannot be seen there; and
visible church membership, is a mere imaginary idea, i. e. a nothing. But do
not God and men see the church really in covenant, i. e. the visible church? or
is it only fictitious men? who in one breath say, they see a people in
covenant, and their seed foederally holy, and in the next they see nothing
really. One might have thought, common sense would not be turned quite out of
doors, to gratify a mistake.

If God tells me, that visible church members, though unregenerate, are in the
covenant of grace; I think I do well to believe, he saw them really there; or
must I believe, he tells me of that which has no reality? God says, the sons
of Seth were his sons ^urely none will say they were regenerate; for Noah only
was found righteous in that generation, Genesis vii. 1. If they were not really in
the covenant of grace, they were not really his sons; for one is as real as the
other; and if they were not really in, they were really out, and are no more
God's children than Cain's posterity. To use the words visible church, to
distinguish it from the invisible, or regenerate elect, is undoubtedly very
proper: but to use them in opposition to a real church, is a manifest
self-contradiction: for visible existence, is real existence; and the visible
church as really exists, as the invisible. To say, the visible church has no
real existence, is to make her only an imaginary, or fantastical church; she
exists only in fancy, but bath no more reality, than a pious man without
honesty, or heaven without holiness: and is this chimerical church, that
glorious one, that has so much occupied the pen of the wise and learned, and
godly, to defend? Let it not be told in Christendom, lest Anabaptistry triumph.
I am very sensible, it has been tenderness for the support of the grace of the
new covenant, that has crowded the best of men, to deny unregenerate men being
really in the covenant of grace; as knowing, if that was allowed, they would
have a right to spiritual promises, or the promise of spiritual blessings; and
for natural men to have a right to the promises of spiritual blessings, they
supposed to be inconsistent with free grace: but this I shall show is a
mistake, hereafter, and at present proceed to show, that the visible church is
really in solemn covenant with God. And having spoken of Seth's unregenerate
posterity, as being owned of God for his covenant children, under the first
dispensation of the covenant of grace; I shall next prove from Israel, under
the second dispensation; and full to the purpose is that xvith chap. and 8th
ver. of Ezekiel, Yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee,
says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. This could be no other but the
covenant of grace; for in relation to any other, there was never found with God
a time of love since the fall; and by no other, was the blood or defilement of
sinners, ever to be washed away. The time of this covenanting, was when God
called Abraham, as ver. 3, Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan,
thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite; and before God covenanted
with them, they were as helpless as a newborn babe: the covenanting therefore
here spoken of, was with their father Abraham, and yet made these his children,
so long after, God's children; he owns them for his; and thou becamest mine;
which is a manifest proof of foederal holiness. That they were unregenerate, of
whom these things were spoken at this time, is evident; for the design of this
prophecy was, to make Jerusalem know her abominations, ver. 2. and her vileness
is described throughout the latter part of the chapter; I shall cite a few in
stances. Ver. 20. Thou have taken thy sons and daughters, whom thou have born
unto me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them, to be devoured thou best
slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire
for them. Ver. 21. that is their images. Ver. 17. And I will judge thee as
women that break wedlock, and shed blood, and I will give thee blood in fury
and jealousy, ver. 38. etc. From all which accounts, it is fully evident, if
God may be believed, that these unregenerate Israelites, were parties with whom
the covenant of grace was made and ratified; I swear unto thee, and thou
becamest mine. To the same purpose is 2 Chronicles. xxxvi 15, 16 The Lord God of
their fathers sent to them, rising up betimes, because he had compassion on his
people, and on his dwelling place. But they mocked the messengers, and despised
his words, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his peoples, 'till there
was no remedy. Also Isai. v. 7. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the
house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for
judgment, but behold oppression: for righteousness, but behold a cry. See also
chap. i. 3. My people do not consider. Also Is. lxiii. 17, 18, 19. The tribes
of thine inheritance; the people of thy holiness; we are thine. Jer. iii. 14.
Turn, O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you.
L^stly, Romans xi. 17. If some of the branches be broken off; which they could
not, if they were not really in the covenant, neither could they if they had
been regenerate. How great a multitude of texts could I cite to the same
purpose? But those I have cited, shall suffice in this form of proving; and I
shall proceed to another, and say, 1. He that is not really in covenant, has
no right to offer sacrifices; but unregenerate Cain had such a right, therefore
really in covenant. 2. They that were not really in covenant, had no right to
eat the passover; but the unregenerate circumcised Israelites, and strangers
that sojourned with them, had a right to eat the passover; therefore really in
covenant. Ex. xii. 48. No uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. 3. No one out
of the covenant of grace, had a claim to the promises; but the unregenerate
circumcised Jews, had such a claim; therefore really in the covenant of grace
Acts ii. 39 The promise is to you; and Romans ix. 4 who are Israelites, to whom
pertains the covenants and the promises. I think I have more than
sufficiently proved, that the visible church is really in solemn covenant with
God; and as the covenant of grace, is the covenant of promise, so (...) and
salvation i^ promised to all that are i^ it; therefore the argument returns, if
life and salvation are absolutely promised; all in the covenant of grace, must
be necessarily saved; but that they are not; therefore the covenant is
conditional: if there was no condition, there could be no suspending term.


But more fully to evince this hypothesis. I observe, unregenerate men, really
in the covenant of grace, are ever treated with conditionally, under all the
dispensations thereof, Genesis iv. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? Deuteronomy. xxix. 12, read to 25. That thou should enter into the
covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which the Lord thy God
makes with thee this day: that he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and as
he has sworn unto thy fathers; lest there should be among you man or woman,
family, or tribe, whose heart turns away this day from the Lord our God; the
Lord will not spare him; then men shall say, because they have forsaken the
covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them, ver. 25.
See chap. xxxii. 5, to 29. They have corrupted themselves; a perverse and
crooked generation; for a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto
the lowest hell; O that they were wise, that they would consider their latter
end! Isai. xlviii. 17, 18. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit; which leads
thee by the way that thou should go. O that thou had hearkened to my
commandments, then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the sea. Luke xiii. 34. How often would I have gathered thy children
together, -- and ye would not! John i. 11. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. Romans x. 21. But to Israel he says, all day long I have
stretched forth my bands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. Rev. ii.
21, 22. And I gave her space to repent, and she repented not; I will cast her
into great tribulation, except she repent. And iii 18. I counsel thee to buy of
me, etc. All these texts speak of a people really in covenant with God; propose
to them the salvations of the covenant of grace, and yet no other way than
conditionally.

But that the covenant of grace can be, and is conditional, I more fully shall
make manifest from Romans iv. 13. For the promise that he should be the heir of
the world, was not to Abraham, or his seed, through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith. Now, that by the world, is in this text, to be
understood the land of Canaan, if we consider a few things, will appear, 1.
That the land of Canaan was expressly given to Abraham, and his seed, Genesis
xvii. 8. or promised to be given; hence in Heb. xi. 8. called the land of
promise. 2. That the exercise of faith was a condition to which the land was
promised. Heb. iii. 19. So we see they could not enter in, because of unbelief;
and the apostle tells us, that which is of faith, is of grace, Romans iv. 16. And
seeing that land was promised of grace, and to faith, and was a type of the
heavenly rest, or rest in Christ by faith; so the way of obtaining it, was fit
to be an example, of the way of' obtaining justification, or salvation: hence
is the apostle's reasoning in the ivth to the Hebrews, when he says, The
gospel was preached to the Jews, in the promise of the land of Canaan, ver. 2.
but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them
that heard it; and ver. 6.
They to whom it was first preached, entered not in, because of unbelief; the
entering not in of those to whom it was first preached, means their not
entering into Canaan, which was promised to them; for upon this the apostle
founds all his exhortation to the Hebrews, both to fear, as in ver. 1. and to
labor, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief; as in ver 11. Now
the sum of what I have here proved is this, viz that the promise of the land of
Canaan was a gracious gospel promise, and that the land was to be obtained by
faith, and not by the works of the law; and so a fit pattern by which to prove
justification to be of grace; and hence it is, that the apostle uses the
argument to that end, Romans iv. 13. But let the apostle in this text, mean what
he will by the world, this we have found, viz That the land of Canaan was a
world promised, exactly according to the apostle's account here, viz. that
Abraham and his seed should be heirs of it, and that, not through the law, but
through the righteousness of faith. Now though the promise of the land of Canaan,
was a gracious gospel promise, and to be obtained by faith, in opposition to
obtaining of it by the works of the law; yet they to whom the promise was made,
many of them, never obtained it, for want of complying with the condition; this
the apostle proves, Heb. iii. at large, ver. 18, 19; and in chap. iv. 1, 11,
proves, that those to whom the promise is made o^ entering into Christ's rest,
or into salvation by faith, may not obtain it, for not complying with the
condition, to which the pomise is made. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise
being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short
of it; let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after
the same example of unbelief. Nothing need be more plain than this, viz. that
to fall after the same example of unbelief, is for those to whom the promise is
made in the covenant of grace, not to obtain the salvation promised, because
they do not comply with the condition, to which the promise is made. But
lastly, if there is no coming short of things promised in a pure covenant of
grace, for that there are no conditional suspending terms; then for God ever to
declare, that men with whom the new covenant was made, perished for want of
complying with a condition; was, and is, to declare, that the covenant in which
he treated with them, though called new, yet was the old covenant of works; which
is blasphemous once to suggest. From all which it appears, the covenant of
grace is conditional.

Fourthly. I was to show there must be life, or no covenant.

Here I observe, that it is the covenant of grace, respecting the salvation of
perishing men, that I a^^ considering; and if all these with whom God made, and
ratified this covenant, are not parties concerned, it is ^^possible it should
be a covenant with them nor concerned in it; and if they are taken into it, it
is a counterfeit with respect to them, if life is not to be obtained. And
seeing it is impossible for God to counterfeit covenants; we are sure there is
life and salvation for all that God s^th are in the covenant of grace; and as I
have shown, that all the seed of Adam were foederally holy, until they were
disinherited by breach of covenant; so it must follow, that they were all
parties concerned, and that the covenant of grace contained life and salvation
for them. Hence it is, that Moses could call heaven and earth to record, that
he had set before God's covenant people, lif^, Deuteronomy. xxx 19. and Jesus could
weep over Jerusalem saying, How often would I have gathered thy children; and,
if thou had known in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace,
Mat. xxxiii. 37. Luke xix. 42. But what has the names grace and salvation, to
do with a covenant, that can only sink the greater part of these with whom it
is made, deeper into head? And yet this must re the case, it salvation in the
covenant, was provided for none but such as are saved: when Jesurun waxed fat,
forsook God, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his SALVATION; a fire was kindled
in God's anger, which should burn to the lowest hell, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15, 22. God
the Rock of his SALVATION, in the new covenant, and no salvation for him in the
new covenant; and yet for being in the new covenant, must be burnt in the
lowest hell. Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the
sea, a remnant shall be saved, Romans ix. 27. If there was salvation in the
covenant of grace, for none but this remnant; then but a remnant could be
saved: And all except that remnant, must burn in the lowest hell, for their
misfortune in being the children of Israel, and so foederally holy. Such
divinity cannot be true; therefore there must be no life, or no covenant.

Object. If life and salvation are in the covenant of grace for all men,
without distinction, then Christ shed his blood for all; and seeing all are not
saved, be must have shed his blood in vain; which cannot be allowed.

Answer. You say, for Christ to shed his blood in vain, cannot be allowed, but I
say, for God to make a new covenant with a people respecting the salvation of
their immortal souls, is impossible, if salvation for their immortal souls is
not in it: Yourself allow in the objection, life and salvation cannot be in the
covenant for ALL, unless Christ's blood was shed for ALL; if God therefore
extend the covenant beyond the blood of Christ, it is a defraud; and when God
owns the wicked, unregenerate sons of Seth for his children, made so by being
in the covenant of grace; does he counterfeit a covenant, and defraud Seth's
children? And when God tells Jerusalem, in order to make her know her
abominations, whose children were, most of them, like to perish in their
abominations; he had entered into a covenant with them; and made them his own;
yea, he had thoroughly washed away their blood, Ex. xvi. 9. Does he defraud
them by entering into a counterfeit covenant with them? What is become of the
charitable plea for the speechless, if this was the case? For this covenant was
made before they were born; and yet with them, as being in the loins of Abraham
their father, when God covenanted with him: For God covenanted to be a God to
him, and his seed. Now, to wash away the blood of a people, in a new covenant
religious sense, must mean one or more of these several things; either their
eternal election, powerful conviction, regeneration and justification, or a new
covenant, that made it possible for them to be saved. That they were elected,
convicted, or converted, appears not at all: Therefore by washing away their
blood, can mean nothing else but making such a covenant with them, as tenders
salvation possible and attainable. And that this covenant washing away of
blood, is the thing intended, will fully appear, from the time in which God
says it w^^ done, viz when the covenant was made with Abraham; then washed I
thee, yea, thoroughly washed away thy blood; THEN, refers to the time of
covenanting, which was before they were born; and so could be neither convicted
nor converted: And as to their eternal election, (if they had any) it was
before their father was an Amorite. From all which, if there was not life and
salvation in the covenant, their blood could not be washed away in any sense;
and to speak with reverence, he that says, I entered into covenant with thee,
and thou becamest mine; and then I thoroughly washed away thy blood, must be
insincere, false, and fraudulent; yea must even have taken a false oath, I
swear unto thee Now if God can be delivered from these blasphemous imputations,
no other way, than by concluding life and salvation is in the covenant of
grace, made with all the visible church, for all that are in it; and that
Christ's blood was shed for them; what do men mean, to say, Christ's blood was
shed in vain? Is it not as necessary Christ's blood should be shed to vindicate
sincerity, truth, and honesty; as to satisfy justice? Therefore when men say,
Christ shed his blood in vain, if it was for them that are not saved; they know
not what they say, not whereof they affirm; unless they could prove God never
made and ratified the covenant of grace with any but those that are saved;
which I think, is impossible. I know men have attempted to prove the covenant
of grace is made only with the regenerate, elect, or such as shall be saved;
and that in order (as they su^po^^^^^) (...) vindicate free grace, and the
efficacy of Christ's, blood. But in so doing, they have constantly contradicted
God and themselves, while both assert foederal holiness. Thus while they shun
Scylla, they split upon Charybdis. Hence it is no covenant of grace that has
not life for ALL that are in it. From all which it fully appears, that when God
made the covenant of grace with Adam, and his ^eed faederally holy, he
thoroughly washed away the blood of all of them, i. e. made it possible for
them all to be saved through the blood of the redeemer, which was shed for them
all.

Fifthly. I was to show, that the holy ghost, a new heart, and remission of
sin, are all promised to all the human ^ace.

I have shown already, that the covenant of grace is conditional; the promises,
of consequence, must be conditional also. Now promises being essential to a
covenant, if the covenant includes all (as before proved) then the promises are
to all; and the point would seem to be proved without further trouble: But
seeing distinctions are to be made between temporal and spiritual promises, and
supposing all will allow temporal things are conditionally promised to all in
the covenant; therefore the point to prove is this, viz. that the things I have
mentioned, are promised to all. This I shall do,

1. Thus, the covenant of grace never promises temporal things mainly, much
less only; i e it was never given, or dispensed to any man short of saying,
either implicitly or expressly, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall
be saved; and if thou will do so and so, God will circumcise thine heart, Deuteronomy.
xxx. 2, 6. Thou shall return unto the Lord thy God, and shall obey his voice,
the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart. He that joineth himself to the
Lord, to serve him, and takes hold of God's covenant, has the promise of
being accepted, and made joyful, Isai. lvi. 6, 7. Take away the righteousness
of Christ, the help of the spirit, (...) eternal life, and it is no longer ^^e
covenant of grace. But were not all that ever were visibly in the covenant of
grace, bound to seek eternal Life by it? Those to whom it propose eternal life,
it promises spiritual relief; if all the visible church were not bound to seek
spiritual life by the covenant they were under, they can never receive a double
or aggravated damnation for not doing it, and it is not the covenant of grace
that is dispensed to them, but some other temporary covenant. Therefore.

2. That it was the covenant of grace, in which life and salvation are promised
to all that are included in it, that was dispensed to Adam and his seed, I thus
farther prove; that covenant which was administered by offerings and sacrifices,
was the eternal covenant of grace, and such was the covenant dispensed to Adam
personally, and to all his seed relatively, as has been abundantly proved.

3. That covenant, the modes of the administration of which were given to
represent the redeemer's blood, atonement, and satisfaction for sin, and calls
the sinner to behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world;
must promise, as it is a covenant of promise, the holy ghost, a new heart, and
remission of sin; for there is no taking away the sin of the world without
these things; therefore is the eternal covenant of grace; and this is the
covenant that was dispensed to Adam and (...) ^^ed.

4. If the covenant dispensed in and by these mo^^^ of administration, was not
the eternal covenant of grace, it was not dispensed to Adam, or his s^ed at
all; Cain was called to do well by some other covenant, and the modes of the
administration of it, were signs without any thing signified; and so no man
called by it, to behold the lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world;
for what it speaks to one, it speaks to all that are included in it.

5. The covenant dispensed to Adam and his seed was the same that was dispensed
to Abraham and his seed; some of the seed of Adam had trodden under foot the
son of God, and counted he blood of the covenant whereby they were sanctified,
or made federally holy, an unholy thing; according to Heb. x. 29. This
ministered an occasion for God to call, and covenant with Abraham, which he
does without any alteration as to the nature of the covenant; which was, that
it conveyed foederal holiness to the seed of the faithful, or visible church:
God dispensed the covenant to Abraham with some ceremonial difference, and
added circumcision to be a criterion of the visible church; the better to
distinguish to the world, and the church, who should be the subjects of his
peculiar favor, and the heirs of promise, that men might know where to go to
find the footsteps of the flock, and where God makes flocks to rest at noon,
Cant. i. 7, 8. And also to seal the covenant as a gracious plan; and to bring
the church under more solemn bonds, Gal. v. 3. He that is circumcised, is a
debtor to do the whole law; and also to be a type of Christ's blood, and a sign
of heart circumcision, both to the father, child, and servant. This covenant
was dispensed to Adam and his seed with bloody types; but had not this seal,
and significant sign of heart circumcision, or regeneration; therefore the
covenant was dispensed to Adam, and his seed, with some ceremonial
disadvantages, and indeed, the covenant was not dispensed with all its
ceremonial advantages in Abraham's day, and some time after, viz. until the ark
was built, the mercy seat, and one high priest appointed to enter once a year
into the most holy place; with the names of the twelve tribes engraven on his
breast plate, bearing the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart
before the Lord continually, Exodus xxviii. 29, 30. And many other things that
might be observed. Now seeing these different modes of administration, did not
alter the nature of the covenant, as to the subjects, the father and the child,
not yet the promises to both; the difference being only in ceremonies: if I
prove the holy ghost, a new heart and remission of sin, was promised to all the
visible church, made so by circumcision, from Abraham's day to the coming of
Christ, and by baptism to the end of time; (...) prove the point in hand. And
full to the purpose is Acts ii. 39. For the promise is unto you, and to your
children. I he things here promised are remission of sin, and the gift of the
holy ghost, ver. 38. which must include a new heart, and justification: But how
could the apostle Peter say, these things were promised to the unregenerated
Jews? Answer, for no other reason, than this, viz. That they were the visible
church, God's covenant people, being the ^eed of Abraham* The promise is in
these words, Genesis xvii. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant; to
be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. From this, and no other
foundation, does Peter appropriate this pro^ise to the Jews; so that the
apostle understood, when God promised to be a God to Abraham: and his seed, in
the covenant of grace, he promised them the holy Ghost, or (...) new heart and
remission of sin; and Peter knowing these to be the seed of Abraham, with whom
the covenant was made, could, without hesi^ation, say, the promise of the holy
ghost, or a new heart, and remission, or justification, was promised to them,
and their children; and had it not been a general promise to all in the
covenant, the apostle could not have appropriated it to these Israelites in
particular, who had crucified Christ, ver. 36. of Acts ii. If they had been
regenerated, the promise of the holy ghost, or regeneration could not be to
them; and it is evident they had not received it, i. e. the gift of the holy
ghost, from the express words of the apostle; nay the promise the apostle
refers to, was made before they were born, and extends to their children yet
unborn: So that we see the holy ghost, a new heart, and remission of sin, are
promised to all the visible church; and hence it is that God could say, when he
entered into covenant with Abraham, he thoroughly washed away the blood of his
seed, so long after, as in the days of Ezekiel, chap, xvi. 8, 9. And the
church, (when comparing herself with the Gentiles, or as she calls her, a
little sister, having no breasts) could say, I am a wall, and my breasts like
towers; then was ^in his eyes, as one that found favor; the Church that
asserts this of herself, is the whole Jewish, covenant people, for this reason;
by the little sister, she means all the desolate uncovenanted gentiles; and if
she does not include the whole covenant people of the Jews in herself, the
unregenerate Israelites, are lost out of the world; for who are they, that
don't belong to either Jew or Gentile? And were it not for the promises, the
Jewish church would have been as weak and uncomly as the little sister, Cant.
viii. 8, 10. And hence God could say, of the son that continued in a covenant
relation with himself, (while Cain and his successors went out from the
presence of the Lord, and wasted their substance with riotous living) Son, thou
art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. Luke xv. 31. By this elder son,
undoubtedly Christ designed to signify the carnal Jews, who were displeased
that he received sinners, and did eat with them; as ver 2. and of whom the
apostle says, as concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sake, Romans
xi. 28. And what is here said of the elder son, viz. that all that God had was
his, cannot ex^^ed that promise, Genesis xvii. 7. to be a God unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee, in their generations. Therefore, when the covenant is recited,
and the blessings included are expressed, as Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27. A new heart
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, all is summed up, and
I will be your God, ver. 28. God cannot exceed this. Now as this was all
Israel's glory, that to them pertained the covenants and the promises of the
holy ghost; a new heart and remission of sin: So we being grafted in amongst
them, to partake of the root and fatness; these promises must be our happy
inheritance, to the end of time. See Rom ix. 4. and xi. 17.

Object. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel: Neither because they are
the seed of Abraham, are they all children; they which are the children of the
flesh, these (...) not the children of God: But the children of the promise an
counted for the seed. Romans ix. 6, 7, 8.

Answer. By children of the flesh, and children of promise, the apostle does
not design to distinguish the elect from reprobates, or the regenerate from the
unregenerate; but to distinguish false professors from true ones. Both in the,
words of the objection, and in the 4th chapter of the Galatians, he says, ver.
21, Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law? For it
is written. Abraham had two sons. Ver. 22. He of the bond woman was born after
the flesh: He of the free woman, was by promise, ver. 23. What the apostle is
proving in both these relations, is this. viz. that such as expect to obtain
righteousness, and justification, by the works of the law, are born after the
flesh; Why? Because that covenant gendereth only to bondage, and obliges God
to reject them, as he did Ishmael and Esau: As the covenant was made with the
Israelites, it made them all the children of promise; the promise is to you,
and your children, Acts ii. 29. Ephesians. ii. 12. Romans ix. 4. The service of God,
and the promises, belonged to them all by covenant, even to the whole house of
Israel. Whence God takes occasion to say, they were planted in a very fruitful
hill, and with the choicest vine, Isa. v. 1, 2. hence he looked for judgment
and righteousness, ver. 7. and declares, when he entered into covenant with
them, he thoroughly washed away their blood; even the blood of those that
perished among them, Ex. xvi. 9, 40. But as they entered into the covenant,
looking upon it to be a covenant of works, either in whole or in part; they
made themselves children of the flesh: Therefore says the apostle, having
begun in the spirit, i. e. according to the covenant of grace, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh? i. e. by the covenant of works, Gal iii. 3. These are the
two covenants the apostle speaks of Gal. iv. 24. though God had made no such two
covenants with them, yet they desiring to be under the law, ver. 21. and not
looking to the end of that which way abolished, made the covenant, a covenant
of works to themselves; and so were in bondage, with their children, ver. 25,
while the covenant of grace made its subjects free; for that it promised all
necessary relief, ver. 26. The covenant of works says, Cast out the bond
woman, and her son, ver. 30, while the covenant of grace sets Jerusalem above
such a helpless condition, ver. 26. As I am now handling the i^th to the
Romans, and ivth to the Galatians, (in both which it is generally esteemed, are
some things hard to be understood) my reader will indulge me the liberty of
being more particular, in answering this objection; seeing it is founded on
these very difficult parts of both the chapters: And in as much as the
objection is levelled against the visible church, as being not all of them
God's children, and Heirs of promise; and seeing that this objection is
supposed to be strengthened, from a great part of tie ixth to the Romans; I
shall consider all the parts, in which it may be supposed to receive support.
And here let me say*

The scope and design of the apostle in both these chapters was, to dissuade
professors from an attachment to their own righteousness for justification; or
prevent them from such attachments. This will appear, if we consider, that when
the apostle had expressed his most pathetick sorrow, for his brethren and
kinsmen according to the flesh; to whom pertained the service of God, and the
promises: The reason he gives why they perished, was, that they sought
righteousness by the works of the law, Romans ix. 2, 4, 32. And his argument in
Gal. iv. is on the same footing, ver. 21. tell we ye that desire to be under
the law. In order therefore to pursue his design, of establishing the doctrine
of justification by grace only, he takes notice of the different circumstances,
that the church, or particular members in it, are under, according as they
adhere to the law, o^ gospel covenant. Those that adhered to the law covenant,
he says, were children of the flesh: Why? Because no church, or member of it,
could be made spiritual by it; there was no promise of the spirit in it: And if
they would be righteous, it must be by their own natural ability; which the
apostle calls, being made perfect by the flesh, Gal. iii. 3. Those that adhered
to the gospel covenant, he calls children of promise: Why? Not because they
were regenerated; for the promise of a new heart, or regeneration, could not be
made to them who had got it already: But because the gospel covenant, had the
blood of Christ for its foundation; and promised all spiritual relief to those
that adhered to it as such. Now in order to establish, promote, and illustrate
this dictinction of covenants, and different circumstances of persons,
according as they adhere to either covenant, the apostle has recourse to two
instances, sci. Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob; in whose circumstances he
finds something very apt to his purpose. In Gal. iv. notice is only taken of
Ishmael and Isaac, both sons of Abraham; with whom God established the covenant
of grace: And though God promised to be a God to him, and his seed, which might
seem as though Ishmael was an heir of promise; yet he is not the seed, to whom
the promise is made, but in Isaac shall the seed be called, Romans ix. 7. Now
this circumstance, the apostle makes an allegorical figure of two covenants;
and the point of light in which he talks, is this: The promise being to
Abraham, and his seed, Ishmael being such, seemed as though he was an heir; but
he is not: Cast him out; for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir, with
the son of the free woman, Gal. iv. 30. Now, how does this answer to Jerusalem?
as ver. 25. Why, as God made but one covenant with the house of Israel, or the
twelve tribes; and that a covenant of promise: so it would seem a though all must
be heirs of promise; but they are not: Why? They adhere to a law covenant; so
cannot be heirs with those that adhere to the gospel, or covenant of grace: And
as Agar's seed was rejected, in the making the covenant; so such as adhere to a
law covenant, are rejected in the execution of the covenant of grace; for this
reason: They are the children of a bond covenant; and not of a free, or gospel
covenant; though such only was the covenant God made with them. The apostle
says, this law covenant was from mount Sinai, Gal. iv. 24. and gendered to
bondage; i. e. the law given at mount Sinai, in so terrible a manner, as to
cause Moses exceedingly to fear and quake, Heb. xii. 21. argued the rigor of a
law covenant (though no such covenant was made at that time, any more, than
Agar was in fact, mount Sinai, which is said Gal. iv. 25) and argued the
bondage of those that adhered to such a law covenant. So that when we join (as
the apostle does) Agar and Sinai together (as they signify bondage and
terrible) fitly represent the terrible bondage of those that adhere to a law
covenant. Hence, says the apostle, they answer to Jerusalem, which now is, and
is in bondage with her children, ver. 25* The inhabitants of this Jerusalem,
are therefore called children of the bond woman, ver. xxxi. and are those said
to be born after the flesh, ver. 23. of whom it is also said, when they
followed after the law of righteousness, did not attain to it, because they
sought it not by faith, but by the works of the law; so stumbled at Christ,
Romans ix. 31, 32. who also were broken off from the gospel covenant, or of
grace, because of unbelief, and adhering to a law covenant, chap. xi. 21. But
who is the Jerusalem above?

Answer. She is our mother, Gal. iv. 26. and seeing we are brethren, let us
endeavor not to differ, but honor our mother, as the law requires: And this
with truth may be said to her honor, she is a free woman, and placed above
that Jerusalem, that adheres to a law covenant. But is she converted, or
regenerated? Answer, No, by no means. And is this the way to honor a mother,
to deny her conversion? Answer, I do not understand it a lawful way, to honor
father or mother, to tell lies about them; and if you had no inclination to
have her exposed, why did you ask me? But how do you prove she is not
regenerated? Possibly that may be matter of doubt; and in charity, we ought
always to put the most favorable construction upon the states of persons,
especially our mother. Answer, You seem to be considerable of a stranger to
her; possibly you were educated abroad; therefore, I shall endeavor to
acquaint you with her circumstances in religion, as fully as I can: And my
reasons for believing she is not regenerate, are these:

1. She is the church spoken of Isaiah i. Sing O barren* for more are the
children of the desolate, than the children of the married wife. See that she
is the same, Gal. iv. 27. Observe, this is the gentile church, who once had
been desolate, and then called a little sister, having no breasts, Cant. viii.
8. But she is spoken for, as ver. 8. called, as Acts ii. 39. and married, as
Is. live. 5. before she brings forth children. The married wife, spoken of ver.
i. was the Jewish church; both are said to bring forth children when married:
which respects regenerate persons, that should be born in either church: But if
the gospel church is all regenerate, she cannot bear children at all, as being
married; therefore she is married unregenerate; and we are sure this was the
case with respect to the Jewish church, will fully appear Col. ii. II. in whom
ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, by the
circumcision of Christ. By the circumcision mad^ without hands, we must
understand regeneration; and by the circumcision of Christ, water baptism, see
ver. 12. and in as much as the circumcision made without hands, is done by the
other, Christ's circumcision must be first: and it was by water baptism, that
the marriage covenant between God and the gospel church, was solemnized and
ratified: So that she now remembers the reproach of her widowhood no more; for
her maker is her husband, Is. live. 4, 5. Hence she becomes fruitful, as being
under the promised blessing of, you are justified by the law; ye are fallen
from grace, ver. 4. having therefore clearly seen the apostle's design in both
these chapters, was to dissuade professors from an attachment to their own
righteousness, or a law covenant: And that his distinction between children of
the flesh, an not to distinguish the elect from reprobates; or the regenerate
from unregenerate: I would here observe, whoever would propose to himself, to
obtain a good understanding of Romans ix. must keep these things in his view. And
having considered the words of the objection, in which was supposed a denial of
the holy ghost, a new heart, and remission o^ sin being promised to all the
visible church; and finding no such thing in them; I now proceed to consider
whether any thing in Romans ix. will support such objection.

And it is supposed to be supported, from ver. 11, 12, 13. For the children
being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of
God, according to election might stand, not of works but of him that calls,
it was saih, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated, If these verses support the objection at all,
they must be understood thus, viz. that God from eternity, chose a certain
number, to be heirs of eternal glory: (which no body need to deny) and that
these only, are properly Israel; the Jerusalem above; and those only, with whom
the covenant of grace was properly made; and so the only children of promise;
but then these verses, have no connection with what was said about Isaac and
Ishmael, as I have proved: and how can such a construction, answer the
apostles' grand design? Which was to dissuade professors from adhering to a law
covenant and attach them to the covenant of grace; for though such design in the
apostle, might have a good tendency, to dissuade professors from trusting to
their own works for justification; yet it had as good a tendency, to make them
do none, for though it was impossible for them to be saved, in adhering to a
law covenant: ( Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for he shall not be heir,
Gal. iv. 30. Yet, according to such design, there was four degrees of
impossibility; to one of possibility of their being saved, let them adhere to
what covenant they would. Though the number of the children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved, Romans ix. 27. Who can believe this
remnant exceeded a fifth part, of the visible church of Israel? Yet these are
all the elect, and if they are all to whom the promise is made, the church was
under the above said, four fold impossibility; and could not be a party
concerned in the covenant of grace, if not of (...) elect; and could not know
they were concerned, till they were regenerated; therefore if this was the
apostle's design, he is endeavoring to attach them to a covenant, in which he
cannot acquaint them, that they are parties concerned; and under a fourfold
improbability, that they are concerned at all; these motives could not be
sufficient, to answer the apostle's design: Hence then we must look for some
other meaning, that will bear a connection with the foregoing instances of
Isaac, and Ishmael, and also answer the grand design. And here let me say, the
purpose of God according to election, Rom ix. 11. Has a twofold aspect;

1. It respects the choosing of Jacob, for that seed, with whom he, viz. God,
would establish his covenant; while Esau is rejected; and herein they exactly
agree, with the foregoing instance, for Isaac was chosen for the same seed, and
both are chosen before they are born; to this end Isaac was a son of promise,
before he was conceived, Genesis xviii. 10.

2. It respects the eternal purpose of God, with respect to the manner in which
he chose Jacob, as well as Isaac, to be those seeds with whom he would
establish his covenant; and the manner in which he chooses to save any sinner.
To choose a person for salvation, is one thing; but to chose a way in which to
save him, is another, though both are according to the eternal purpose of God.
That God has chosen a certain number for salvation, is certain; but the way
chosen wherein to save them, may be a way for all to be saved, notwithstanding
God chose a certain number of angels for eternal happiness from eternity; but
the way to that happiness was a way for them all to obtain it. Now it could
answer no end at all, as to the apostle's design, viz. to bring people to
adhere to the gospel covenant; to tell them, one out of five was. elected, and
four our of five reprobated from eternity: Children of the flesh, but not of
promise; of the bond, but not of the free woman; though all visibly in the
same; yea, it must entirely frustrate his design; for according to that; they
might adhere to the gospel covenant, and be children of the bond woman
nevertheless. Therefore the apostle has no design here, to speak, neither does
he, about elect, or reprobate persons in the church, as one being a child of
promise more than the other; but only as they are attached, to a law, or gospel
covenant; and this exactly agrees with the other instance: Hence, when he
speaks of election, it is only with regard to Isaac and Jacob, as certain
instances, whereby to point out the way, in which God from eternity purposed to
save sinners; which is, not of works but of him that calls, ver. 11. Here the
apostle in order to promote his general and grand design, of bringing
professors to adhere to the gospel covenant; and to show that election, and
justification is purely of grace; takes notice that Jacob was chosen to be the
seed, (with whom God would establish his covenant) before he was born, or had
done good or evil; by which he establishes this doctrine, viz. that man's good
work shall have no more hand in meriting, or deserving his own election,
justification, and eternal happiness, than as though he had never done any good
at all, This doctrine they that adhered, or were attached to a law covenant did
not believe; as appears, Romans ix. 32. They sought righteousness by the works of
the law, and Gal. v. 4. Whosoever of you are justified by the law, are fallen
from grace, chap. iv. 21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, etc. And
not believing this doctrine, they are children of the flesh, and of the
bondwoman, for that they adhered to a bond-covenant: But no because they were
not elected, or regenerated; for that the apostle says nothing about therefore
the objection gains no support, from these verses; for those that adhered to
the gospel covenant* entered into it, and ratified it as such, were children o^
the freewoman, and of promise, though unregenerate. But possibily some body
waits to ask me this difficult question. Why was Ishmael and Esau cast out of,
or rejected from the covenant, seeing infants belong to the Jerusalem above,
and are the children of promise?

Answer, Though I am wearied with difficult questions, yet I will endeavor to
give some account of this affair. And here let us consider what God was doing
in the early ages of the world; and let me say, to all bodies there must be a
head; in all families there must be a patriarch; in all kingdoms there must be
a supreme; in all states there must be a law giver; and to all branches there
must be a root: Now as in Abraham's family, God establishes a divine
government, or a theocracy, he made himself head, king, and law giver to them,
both as a church, and as a state; thus he gives them laws about dividing lands,
and settling bounds, see Josh. xv. 13. read chap. xvi. and xvii. However God
makes Abraham and his family, the metropolis of the nation. This was the
sovereign pleasure of God; for he might have given this preferment, to Nahor,
or Haran, Abraham's brother; but it cannot be the privilege of each of them.
Here God honors Abraham with the promise, that Christ should descend from him;
makes him, as it were, his bosom friend; undertakes to give laws to him and him
family; and from them shall laws be propagated in the world; especially
religious laws: To them were committed the oracles of God: Romans iii. 2. And the
law must go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Here God
makes him the father of all nations, Genesis xvii. The root of the church, Romans
xi. 17. So that if any will be members, Jews or Gentiles, they must take hold
of Abraham's covenant, be grafted into it, and receive divine blessings from
him patrimony, for there is the root and fatness.

Before Abraham's day, God made choice of no particular family, to whom he
would give laws, so as that all the world should receive the mind of God from
that family only. And this was not a privilege he himself obtained in a
covenant way; for God made no covenant before; that if he would do so or so, he
would make a covenant with him, in which he should be the father, first of the
Jew, and after of the Gentile also. Now to make a covenant of salvation with a
people is one thing; but to put particular preferment upon some person or
persons in that covenant, is another: And the Gentile church can never have
that preferment, the Jewish church had; until God destroy Abraham's patrimony:
Thou bear not the root, but the root thee, Romans xi. 18. Here I am prepared
to say; when Ishmael and Esau are spoken of as rejected, there is no appearance
that the were cast out of the covenant of grace, for that was the common
privilege of all that had a desire to be in it; and they were in it by God's
command, Genesis xvii. 10, 23. And if they are turned out, it is upon their own
default; but not before Esau was born, Romans ix. ii. Here then when Jacob is
spoken of, as being chosen before he was born, it has no relation to his
election for heaven, (though he might be one of that election too) but of his
being chosen to be a father of the church, and of Christ: and hence in honor
to him, he is called so, Romans xi. 28, and ix. 5. Now, as the promise to
Abraham, viz. that God would be a God to him, and his seed after him; did not
bind God to confer the particular preferment of patriarch, on one of
Abrabraham's, or Isaac's children, more than the other; God, as a sovereign,
makes the distinction, and discovers he has done it in respect of Isaac's
children, before they are born, or have done good or evil, in these words, The
elder shall serve the younger. This therefore, of choosing Isaac and Jacob, was
no more done in a covenant way, than the choosing of Abraham himself: For the
promise that God would be a God to Abraham, and his seed, was as much in favor
of one child as the other; and as to particular preferment, God, as sovereign,
could dispose of it in an unconditional way; whereas a covenant always
supposes conditions. And God's choosing Jacob, before he had done good, was an
excellent argument to establish the covenant of grace; and to bring professors
to adhere to it. And now I shall consider, what may be said further about
Ishmael and Esau. And

1. With respect to Esau, the elder shall serve the younger. This could not be
before they were born; therefore respects after time, and means Esau's
posterity, as well as himself: and all that is designed by it is, that Jacob,
and him posterity, shall be preferred; they shall rule with God: shall receive
laws from God; while Esau and his posterity, shall receive God's laws from
them, and a Christ from his brother's family, and not his own; and if he and
his posterity, will enjoy the blessings of their covenant relation to God, they
shall adhere to Israel, for to them shall the mind of God be revealed, as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. If we understand hated, to
respect Esau before he was born, it can mean no more, than prefering Jacob
before him, as above said; but if we join hated to the time in which he was to
serve his brother, it may mean more; for before he served his brother, he
profanely sold his birthright, Heb. xii. 16. and sought to slay his brother
Jacob, and he said in his heart, then will I slay my brother Jacob, Genesis xxvii.
41. When Isaac was blessing Jacob, he thought he was blessing Esau; but sure he
never thought he was rejecting Jacob from the covenant of grace: How then can
the same blessing falling on Jacob, reject Esau? But so great was the
resentment and prejudice conceived in Esau, on the account of Jacob's obtaining
the birth right (which as we are told, Genesis xxv. 34, he despised and profanely
sold) and his after obtaining the blessing; that he and his posterity, scorn to
be beholden to Jacob and his posterity, for divine instruction; and so probably
perished in their own ignorance and wickedness, while the ^rim and thummim was
with God's holy one, Deutronomy xxxiii. 8. Of Ishmael it is said by Sarah, Cast
out the bond woman, and her son, Genesis xxi. 10. which sentence God confirms,
ver. 12. and says, in Isaac shall thy seed be called; which can mean no
otherwise than the preferment before considered. If Abraham had understood by
casting our his son, rejecting him and his posterity, from the covenant of
grace; what satisfaction could it have been to him, for God to tell him, he had
heard his prayer, blessed Ishmael, and would make of him a great n^tion, Genesis
xvii* 20. ^e might better pray for his death, before he had any posterity to be
ruined. And if Isaac had understood, by the elder shall serve the younger, the
rejection of Esau, and his posterity, from the covenant of grace, why did he
circumcise him?

When God covenants with a father, it is a time of love with all his infant
offspring, as Ez. xvi. 8. Yet God as a sovereign, may choose to prefer one above
the other, and promise to do it, in the covenant, and that is to reject the
other from that preferment, but not from the covenant. God purposed that
Jacob's family should grow up into a religious kingdom, Ez. xvi. 3. should have
the land of Canaan, should build his ark and glorious house; should have the
spirit of prophecy, and his oracles; should keep their tribes distinct, and
bring forth his only-begotten son, with evidence, that this is the savior of
Jew and Gentile. This family shall be capital; and here religion shall be in
state, honor and dignity. This could not be the preferment of every family of
the earth; all could not live in Canaan; one ark is all that must be; and one
high priest at a time; and to give his written law and gospel to them, is
sufficient for the whole world; though all the world are not made the head. God
tells Israel, they shall be the head. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 13. The Lord shall make
thee the head, and not the tail; and thou shall be above only, and thou shall
not be beneath. Hence God says, he suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he
reproved kings for their sakes; saying touch not mine anointed, and do my
prophets no harm, 1. Chron. xvi: 21, 22. But how can this preferment of
Abraham, Jsaac and Jacob, exclude others from the covenant of grace? No surely!
God would have Jerusalem to be a praise in the earth, Isai, lxii. 7, and kings
to f^^ her glory, Ps. cii. 15. Declare his glory among the heathen, 1 Chronicles.
xvi. 24. And what could this be for? but that they may come to join themselves
to serve the Lord, and take hold of his covenant; to be made joyful in his
house of prayer; which is designed for all people, Is. lvi. 6, 7. And could God
put Ishmael and Esau into the covenant of grace, and then cast them out, and
hate them, and not allow them the privilege even of the heathen? They were in
the covenant of grace by circumcision; and if they had held to their covenant
relation, and they and their posterity had not hated and persecuted God's
chosen, wherein they confronted God, and his sovereign disposal of things; God
would never have hated them, in the light of rejecting them from the covenant
of grace; no, if their own wickedness had not debarred them, Ishmaelites, and
Edomites, might have come and eat of the passover with the Israelites; for he
that was circumcised, had a covenant right to do so, let him be of what nation
he would; and being found in God's covenant way, had a right to the promise of
the holy ghost, a new heart, and remission of sin. Therefore the objection
obtains no support from 11, 12, 13 verses of Romans ix. Now seeing the objection
has no support from the chapter thus far, I proceed to consider what more may
be said from the other parts of it. Ver 15. I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy. And 16. So then it is not of him that wills, or runs, but of
God that shows mercy. All the apostle could mean, consistent with his grand
design, in the verses, is this, viz. That men need not expect by all the good
they can do, to deserve a reward of glory and happiness: And this answered the
design of dissuading them from adhering to a law covenant. If he had meant to
tell them, that there was no odds, they might as well believe one thing as
another; or do one thing as another; or nothing, as they pleased, before they
were regenerated; this could be no argument to persuade them to adhere to the
gospel covenant, in order to be regenerated: Therefore, to show mercy, means to
deny merit; and to will, and run, means running in a law covenant; and there is
no promise to such, to be sure: For such are the children of the bond woman;
and will be hardened if they don't bring forth fruits meet for repentance; for
however they they may think to say, they have Abraham to their father, yet ^^ey
have Agar to their mother; and all such are enemies to Christ. And this
concludes with ver. 17. Ver. 18 For the scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for
this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show (...) power in thee.
Here again is sovereignty; as there was in choosing Jacob to the above said
preferment, and rejecting Esau from it. As God had designed to bring Israel to
great honor, so, as a sovereign God, he designed to bring them first into
great affliction and bondage; and bring them out with a stretched out arm; and
appoints Pharaoh to be the prison-keeper: But what is all this to the apostle's
purpose? but only to show, that God has a sovereign right to do what he
pleases, with such as adhere to a law covenant: They are more related to God
than heathen Pharaoh; they are in the hands of justice; and God may harden them
as he pleases; for they refuse to adhere to the covenant that has mercy in
it; and this was a good argument to bring professors to adhere to a gospel
covenant. But if we turn it the other way, and say, those that adhered to a
gospel covenant, were exactly so, in the hands of justice and sovereignty; no
argument is left to induce unregenerate professors, to adhere to the gospel
covenant at all; for in or out, they are no more related to the mercy of God,
than heathen Pharaoh; and yet they must adhere to the gospel covenant, or they
cannot be regenerated at all: And if they do adhere to it unregenerate, they
cannot be children of promise, nor really in covenant, and then they must be
children of the flesh, and of the bond woman; and if that means reprobates,
they must be eternally damned. Now what kind of jargon is this? Let the world
judge.

Now I come to ver. 19. Thou will say then, why does he find fault. The apostle
has all along been describing the bad circumstances of those that adhere to a
law covenant, as not being children of promise, but only in the hands of
sovereign justice, as the heathen: Here he states an objection of those that
adhere to such law covenant; and the who^^ latter part of the chapter is
designed to answer the objection. The force of the objection is this. viz. That
if man's good works can merit, or deserve nothing, at the hand of God; why does
he blame us? If doing good will not help us, we are sure doing band cannot. Now in
order to answer this objection; and with a view to bring unregenerate
professors to adhere to a gospel covenant; he again considers, that such as
adhere to a law covenant, have no reason to reply against God, ver. 20. Why?
Their circumstances are exactly parrallel to the heathen, they are clay of the
same lymp; and ver. 21, vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, one as really
as the other. Ver. 22, they have wasted their religious substance, (given them
in the covenant of grace) 1st in Adam, 2d in Noah, by heathenish and riotous
living, Luke xv. 13 so here you have wasted your inheritance in the covenant of
grace, given you, 1st in Adam, 2d in Noah, 3d in Abraham, by adhering to a law
covenant; you are the worst of the two, therefore they shall rise in judgment
against you. The nativity of you both, was of the land of Canaan, Ez. xvi. 3,
but God made you Israelites, Romans ix. 4. and you are turned into the degenerate
race of Agarenes, Gal. iv. 23. God made you of the Jerusalem above, but you
have made yourselves mount Sinai in Arabia, ver. 25. Hence if God save any of
either of you, it must be in a way of uncovenanted mercy, and sovereign grace.
He must call you as clay of the same lump with the heathen, your relation to
him is no better than thei^^; you are all children of the flesh, are of the
works of the law, and so under the curse, Gal. iii. 10. and hence the bitterest
enemies to the gospel covenant; you have delivered up, and denied, in the
presence of Pilate, God's holy son, Acts iii 13, 14. And although such as adhere
to a law covenant, are vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, yet God was long
suffering toward them, to see if they would adhere to the covenant of grace,
and when they would not, was willing to show his wrath, and make his power
known, Romans ix. 22, in breaking them off from the covenant altogether, chapter xi.
until the latter ages of the world; and here they are, under the visible tokens
of God's power and wrath, to this day, for adhering to a law covenant. And
seeing such as adhere to a law covenant, are of the same lump with the heathen,
God, if he call any of them to a gospel covenant state, must do it as much in a
sovereign way, as the calling of Abraham, the preferring of Isaac and Jacob, or
the making Egypt Israel's prison, and this is what the apostle calls the riches
of glory on the vessels of mercy, which he has before prepared unto glory, Romans
ix. 23. As Israel were chosen in sovereignty, to be the glory of the nations,
so the gospel visible church, is the glory of our lower world, and terrible as
an army with banners, Cant. vi. 4 As for the invisible church, it cannot be
seen. But behold the glory of the Jerusalem above, or she that adheres to a
gospel covenant; and the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings
thy glory; thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a
royal diadem in the hand of thy God; for the Lord delights in thee, Is. lxii.
3, 4. I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: Then was I in his eyes as one
that found favor, Cant. viii. 10. All this is spoken of the gospel visible
church, see Is. lxii. 6. Now, how great was the riches of glory, on us the
gentile vessels of mercy? that we should be called, together with the remnant
of the Jews, as Romans ix. 27. to a gospel covenant relation to God, to partake
with them of the root and fatness, ch: xi. 17. who on the one hand were
desolate heathen, and on the other children of the bond woman, both children of
the flesh and must be called to a gospel covenant state in sovereig^ mercy. And
this is the sum of the apostle's answer to the objection Romans ix. 19. taken
from the 20th ver. to ver. 29. And all this appears to have nothing in it, to
distinguish the eternal elect from the reprobates; or the regenerate from the
unregenerate; but only to distinguish the different circumstances of those that
adhere to a law, or gospel covenant; and to bring them to adhere to the latter;
and was well calculated to answer the grant design. Hence we see the objection
obtains no support from Romans ix. or Gal. iv. therefore I still conclude, the
holy ghost, a new heart, and remission of sin, are promised to all the visible
church, that adheres to the covenant of grace. And now we see with what
consistency the apostle could raise his lamentation over his kinsmen, who were
Israelites, Romans ix. 2. whom God had planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed,
Jer. ii. 21. when he made them children of promise in the covenant of grace,
Romans ix. 4 in covenanting with their father Abraham; and had conferred on them
the glory of preferment, to whom pertains the glory, ver. ix. who now are
turned into the degenerate plant, of strange Agarenes; had laid their honor in
the dust, by seeking righteousness by the works of the law, ver. 32. But if he
had understood, all these children of the flesh were reprobates, by an eternal
decree; and no salvation provided for them in the covenant of grace, his
lamentation must have been, an impious confronting of God's decrees; and he
could never say, the reason why they perished, was because they did not seek
righteousness by faith; for if they were so reprobated, they must perish seek
what way they will. By what has been said, we learn men are under a mistake,
when they bring Romans ix. to prove God deals with those that adhere to the
gospel covenant, in the way of sovereignty, for that is to confound the gospel
with the law. We see many things there spoken of were done in a sovereign way,
but not a word of the gospel church in that light, only the calling her to a
covenant state. For God to covenant to save a people on certain terms or
conditions, and yet to have a sovereign right to damn them, is a self
contradiction in any covenant whatsoever.

But now let us take the objection, and see what we shall make of it, in the
light in which it is used. Children of the flesh, are not the children of God;
but the children of promise are. Now as this objection is brought to deny, that
regenerating grace is promised to all the visible gospel church; if it can
answer that end at all, it must be understood thus: By children of the flesh,
the unregenerate or non-elect; and that no such are the children of God, in the
covenant of grace, and so not children of promise.

Here to prove, that the unregenerate are the children of God, in the covenant
of grace, I shall cite but one text, out of one hundred that I could bring to
that purpose; and that is, Ez. xvi. 8. I swear unto thee, and entered into a
covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. And that an
unregenerated church, are the children of the promise of regeneration, appears
from the nature of the thing; for that regeneration cannot be promised to the
regenerate. 2d. From Ez. xxxvi. 26, 27, A new heart will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and give you an heart of flesh. This is a promise made to them, as being
the visible church, in covenant, and God's children, and yet unregenerate.

If by children of the flesh, the apostle had a design to signify the non
elect, that is as much as to say, they are not the children of God in the
covenant of grace, and there is no provision made for their salvation in that
covenant; therefore not children of promise.

But how is it possible, that this could be his meaning? Does not God own all
Seth's posterity for his children, in the covenant of promise; and act upon the
relation in three fold respects; 1st, his spirit strives with them; 2d. he
binds them to do the duties of the covenant of grace; that is, marry in the
christian church; 3d. He destroys them for wickedness that they could not have
committed, if they had not been his children in covenant; i. e. marrying with
those out of covenant, Genesis vi. 2, 3, 13. So that they were bound to do its
duties, encouraged by its promised blessings, and exposed to its direful
penalties, as being in it: And Adam, before the fall, was never more firmly in
the covenant of works, a child of God, or of promise; yet who dare say, these
were of the elect? But to say there was no provision made in the covenant of
grace, for any but the elect, and that these are the only children of God, and
of promise, in the covenant of grace; is to set the secret and revealed will of
God a^ one eternal clash, as thus;

1. The revealed will of God says, the sons of Seth were his children; the
secret says, it was only the elect. 2. The revealed says, all Israel were
children of promise, Ephesians. ii. 12. Romans ix. 4. The secret will says, these are
not all children of promise. 3. They revealed faith, All day long have I
stretched forth my hand to relieve a disobedient people, Romans ^. 21. The secret
says, they were reprobates, for whom there was no relief, in the covenant of
grace. 4. The revealed will says, What could I have done more for my Vineyard?
Is. v. 4. The secret says, I never did any thing for you since the fall of
Adam, but only to increase your damnation. 5. The revealed faith, Jesus came to
feek and to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel; who yet received him
not, John i. 11. The secret says, Jesus came to save none but the elect, and
these do all receive him. So I might multiply self contradictions ad infinitum,
the apostle had designed to tell us, by children of the flesh, was to be
understood reprobates, for whom no provision was made in the covenant of grace;
therefore that could not be is meaning. Hence I still have the same right to
say, the holy ghost, a new heart, and remission of sin, are all promised to ALL
the seed of Adam; since all his seed, were made foederally holy, in the
covenant of grace, in him; and by necessary consequence, children of promise.
Sixthly I was to show, the condition must be a possible condition to all, or
no condition at all.

By a possible condition to all, I mean this, v^z. that the thing required in
the covenant of grace, as a term or condition of obtaining the salvation
promised in it, must be constituted in such a manner, as to be possible for all
those of whom it is required, to comply with faid term; or else it is no
condition.

This will appear thus; a covenant, as it is always a a platform, or compact of
agreement, can never be such, if the terms of agreement are impossible; for how
can I agree to that with which it is impossible for the to agree? As for
example; suppose a man would propose to give me 1000 l. to pass through, or
penetrate the earth to my antipodes; or to fly to the moon; could he possibly
make such a covenant with me, when I could by no means comply with the terms?
It could be no more than an unreasonable proposal; the condition of a covenant
it could not be. So, for God to promise, that he will he reconciled with me,
and give heaven to me, if I will make to myself a new heart, or sincerely
embrace Christ by a living faith, without his assistance, or by my own natural
ability, can never be the condition of a covenant; for the condition of a
covenant, is that which I can agree with; the which if I will not do it, I may
be guilty, but not if I cannot.

Objection. God has not lost his power of commanding only we of obeying.

Ans. Can God then make a covenant of grace with you, on impossible terms? If
so, you may agree on them terms, if you can; I am sure God cannot (to speak
with reverece) make such a covenant with me. It is impossible it should be a
covenant of grace, that has no mercy in it; and to promise me heaven upon
impossible terms, has no mixture of mercy, on the least tincture of it: And
according to the tenor of the objection, (though it is well known to be old
tenor) God could make a new covenant with devils, though Christ never take their
nature upon him. What then do wise, learned, and pious gentlemen mean (when
disputing with those that hold universal redemption) they say, The question is
not, whether Christ has paid a ransom sufficient for every individual of the
human race; in that we are agreed on both sides. But where is the agreement?
while one party says, if Christ has not purchased a power to believe; or in
other words, a sufficiency of the spirit to make an effectual application of
redemption, for each individual, the ransom of Christ is not sufficient for
each individual. And the other party says. Christ has not purchased a
sufficiency of the spirit or of grace, to make such effectual application of
redemption, for every individual. One might have thought, such agreements might
blush, when they appear in the public, under that character. However, I shall
not canonize them for agreements, though the injudicious may think, they fell
from heaven; because they dropped from judicious, learned, and pious men;
injudiciously I say.

To say, that Jesus Christ has paid a ransom sufficient for each individual of
the human race, if they will sincerely embrace him by saving faith, by their
own natural ability; is to say this, viz that if men had not lost their
original spirituality, and disposition of mind, to serve God sincerely and
perfectly, the ransom of Christ would have been sufficient for each individual
of them; i. e. it would have been sufficient, if no sufficiency or ransom had
been wanting. And is it not to mock common sense, to talk half an hour
strenuously about the ransom of Christ, as though it was sufficient for every
individual of the human race; and then glory of agreement with universalists,
when before the story it out, you say the ransom of Christ is not sufficient,
for every individual. I shall conclude this head, with saying if Christ has
not purchased sufficiency of grace for each individual of the human race, to
enable them sincerely to embrace Christ, of whom sincere faith is required; the
terms of the covenant are impossible; therefore tyranny, without mercy, is in
the new covenant, for all the visible church, except the elect. And this cannot
consist with the kind expressions of God to the visible church, and those that
perish out of her. Hence the condition must be possible to all.

Seventhly. I was to show, That regenerating grace is promised, to the faith
and endeavors of unregenerate men.

I have already proved, that regenerating grace is promised; and that it is
promised conditionally, and not absolutely: And also that it is promised to the
church, as being unregenerate, yet adhering to a gospel covenant; and that to a
regenerate church, it cannot be promised. Hence then, to whose condition can it
be promised, but to the condition of unregenerate men? To promise regenerating
grace, to a condition done by itself, must suppose, that the person to whom it
is promised has it, and has it not, at the same time; unless a man can be
regenerated more than once, which I suppose no person will assert. Christ
speaks of being born again once; but not a second time. John iii. 3, But
possibly it will be here asked, where did God promise the grace of
regeneration, to any individual unregenerate person or persons, in such a
manner, as that we can be satisfied, the promise was made to him or them
personally? To which I answer, Regenerating grace was implicitly, and by
necessary consequence promised to Cain; if thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? The acceptance here, can mean nothing less, than the acceptance of
his brother Abel, for God proposes to prefer him above Abel, thou shall rule
over him. And the promise in 2d of Acts ver. 39. and Ez. xxxvi. 26. are as
express and personal, yet conditional. But as I shall undertake to prove, that
God has bound himself to give regenerating grace, to the proper endeavor of
unregenerate men: So, all that might be more said to these texts, will be
properly then considered* therefore I omit further consideration of them at
present* and shall proceed to show, what the proper endeavor of an
unregenerate man is, to which the promise is so effectually made. Now before I
come directly to the point, it will be proper to inquire when and how, an
unregenerate man became an heir of promise: And as to the time when; it was
either when he actually entered as adult age into the covenant of grace by
circumcision, or baptism; or when he was entered by his parents, master, or
mistress in infancy, by either of those ordinances: Before Abraham's day, it is
most probable he was an heir in the covenant, by natural generation, as a
descendant from Adam, with whom the covenant was made. As to the manner how he
became an heir of promise; it was by faith; it was by the blood and
righteousness of the savior Jesus Christ, that the covenant became a covenant
of promise; and it was by believing in, owning, and adhering to his
righteousness, and the true doctrinal profession of it, that made men children
of promise, when they entered into the covenant of grace. As to infants being
children of promise, that was by faith also, but not their own actual faith. If
the parent, master, or mistress had not the true profession, of being saved by
the righteousness of another, viz. the Messiah, or Jesus Christ, they could
neither seek their own, nor the salvation of others, by faith; and as God
designed to save all, small or great, bond or free, in the way of a gracious
covenant, and as the answer of prayer; by faith they must seek, and seeking by
faith, their own, and their infants' salvation, may be obtained: When children
become able to act faith for themselves, as is required. In Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37. we
find, he that will have a new heart, or regeneration, must seek for it; and in
Romans ix. 32, we find it must be sought by faith. Now it is for want of
understanding this scripture distinction of faith, and the stress that God has
laid upon it, in the covenant of grace, that the christian word are in such
confusion about the covenant of grace, and who are in it; about the promises,
and who are heirs of them. Thus when faith is spoken of as a prerequisite to
baptism; the Baptists say, justifying faith is intended, and non have right to
be in the covenant of grace, by baptism, but such as have it, and therefore the
unregenerate, and infants are excluded: And then they are obliged, either to
deny, that faith was required of the adult Israelites, as prerequisite, to
entering them into the covenant of grace by circumcision; or the covenant being
that of grace, in which they were so entered: For if that into which they were
entered by circumcision, was the only covenant of grace; and faith was required
of all the adult, as a prerequisite to being so entered; faith being required
of the adult now, can be no argument, that either the unregenerate, or infants
are now excluded: and hence they are obliged to confront all the scriptures,
that speak of Israel's glory, as being all in the covenant of grace; holiness
unto the Lord; planted wholly a right seed; and the blood of them all washed
away by being in the covenant of grace, and all heirs of promise. See Jer. ii.
3, 21. Ex. xvi. 8, 9. Ep. ii. 12. Romans ix. 4. thus they are in the utmost
confusion in sentiments.

Now, though these that hold the right of the adult unregenerate, and infants
to baptism, can see the confusion of anabaptist sentiments; yet when it is
said, that faith, which qualifies a person for baptism, or entering into the
covenant of grace, makes him an heir of promise; this they deny, i. e. many of
them. And what is this, but either to say, the covenant that faith qualified
him to enter into, was not covenant of grace; or if it was, the faith that
qualified him to enter in, did did not entitle him to the blessings of it. And
herein will appear the confusion of this denial: When these Gentlemen are
disputing with Anabaptists, they will lay great stress on this faith of an
unregenerate man; that it qualified Israel to be in covenant; and qualified the
Gentiles to come in; and that they were all children of promise, that were in
the covenant by it; and that all the visible church were in glorious
circumstances. But when they are disputing with those that hold general
redemption; this faith is forgot; or it is good for nothing; he that hrth got
it, is not really in covenant; and if he seeks salvation by it, it is not
seeking by faith, etc. Hence they confront not only their own arguments, but
all the scriptures that speak of the visible church, in covenant by faith, as
being children of promised, though unregenerate. Now as I said, it was for want
of understanding the stress that God puts on the faith of an unregenerate man,
that has been the cause of much confusion in the christian world, about who are
in the covenant, and heirs of promise. So now I will briefly show some part of
the importance of this faith.

1. By it the christian church stood in the covenant of grace; while for the
want of it, the Jewish church was turned out doors. Because of unbelief they
were broken off; thou stand by faith, Romans xi. 20. What tongue can express
the importance of this affair! the earth is not only rent and shaken, but
heaven also; the children of the kingdom are cast out, Mat. viii. 11, 12. The
fruitful field turned into a barren wilderness; and the barren wilderness into
a fruitful field. The wife and children rent from the bosom and bowels of a
tender husband, and compassionate father; crying my bowels, my bowels, I am
pained at my very heart, Jer. iv. 19. My heart is turned within me, how shall I
give thee up, Hos. xi. 8.

2. It was by this faith of unregenerate men, the children of Israel came out
of Egypt, Ex. iv. 1. viii. 31. kept the passover; passed through the sea; and
the walls of Jericho fell, Heb. xi. 28, 2^, 30. went through the wilderness;
entered the land of Canaan; and without faith, none of these things could have
been done, Heb. iii. 19. Ex. iv. 1. And indeed men may have faith to remove
mountains, cast out devils, and do many wonderful works in Christ's name,
without the faith of regeneration. And as I said a man is an heir of promise,
when he is in the covenant of faith; and it is his faith, in the righteousness
of Christ professedly, that makes him an heir to the promise of regeneration.
Therefore I come now to the point, to show what is the proper endeavor of an
unregenerate man. And seeing no adult person, is a proper heir to the promise,
but only as a professed believer in the righteousness of Christ, as provided for
the salvation of guilty, sinful, and perishing men; he is, when under the bonds
of the covenant of grace, bound (as in a most solemn compact ratified) to do,
1st. the remoter conditions of regeneration, 2d. the direct condition; and both
at the expense of an aggravated damnation: Hence it is fit he should be an heir
of promise. And as there are remote conditions, so there are also remote
promises, of super added assistance, to enable to the performance of the direct
condition. I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, I will lead them
in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them,
Isai. xlii. 16. I said not unto the house of Jacob, seek ye me in vain, chap.
xlv. 19. And were it not that the promises apprehend him, at the very spot,
where faith, and the covenant first find him, the promise would not reach as
far as the covenant, and salvation could not be obtained in a covenant way.
Here then, faith and the covenant find him, 1. owning God to be the true, holy,
just, powerful, wise, and merciful God. 2. Owning himself a sinful, guilty,
cursed, ruined, and perishing creature; that has no righteousness wherewith to
appear before, or be reconciled to, this holy, just, and powerful God. 3.
Owning, God has provided a glorious, all sufficient Savior, for such helpless
and perishing creatures. 4. Owning, that as he can by this provision, be
reconciled to this holy, just, and gracious God, so it is his most reasonable
service. 5. Owning that he is bound in the solemn bonds of a gracious covenant,
to be reconciled, at the severest penalty. 6. Owning, God to be his God, in the
new covenant; ready, as a tender father, to help his perishing children.
Now take either of these six articles from him, except the second, and you
take from him, faith, and the covenant of grace. The second is not a gospel
article, and only enters that the offense may abound, Romans v. 20. So that we
see, faith, and the covenant puts a stock into his hand, that cannot be put into
the hand of a man, out of covenant; nor in covenant, without faith: Hence he
that is planted in the covenant by faith, is planted a noble vine, wholly a
right seed, Jer. ii. 21. Hence then in the spot where this faith, and the
covenant of grace find him, and the promise first apprehends him, there is not
more required of him, than he is able to do, and that which, in these
circumstances, he is able to do; is the proper endeavor of an unregenerate
man; to which super-added assistance, is directly promised, and regenerating
grace, remotely.

This then, is the proper endeavor of an unregenerate man; to set his face
Zion-ward, or in other words, toward heaven, going and weeping; this faith and
covenant state, has furnished him for mourning: For the faith is a confession,
that God is holy, just, and powerful; and that himself is vile and perishing,
and can work no acceptable righteousness; the covenant sets a dying Jesus
before him, and makes grace and mercy meet, with justice and holiness, before
his face. Hence it is a part of his proper duty, to look about him, and see
what he can see; for the view of God's holiness and mercy; of a bleeding
Christ; and of his own vileness; are proper objects to excite deep and just
sorrow. Repentance is the first proper duty in the covenant of grace, after a
man is entered; for faith must bring him in. Christ's baptism, is a baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins; not but that he ought to repent or
sorrow, before he enters, if it is at adult age; but when entered, if
unregenerate, it is a condition of the covenant. And as he is to mourn, so he
is earnestly to pray, and seek the Lord early. Neither sorrowing, or praying,
will do alone. And how graciously has God promised to hear the sorrowing
prayer of his own children in covenant. How gladly does he regard their
sorrowful cry, when they cry for convicting and converting grace. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; and saying, turn thou me, and I shall be
turned. Is Ephraim my dear son? I he a pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord God, Jer.
xxxi. 18, 19, 20. See 2 Chronicles. xv. 2. and Prove. viii. 17. Those that seek me
early, shall find me.

As it is the proper endeavor of an unregenerate man, to pray and mourn, so he
ought to use the means God has appointed for his help; such as fasting,
meditation, self-examination, attend on all the public means of grace; and
however men have embarrassed this affair, with not rightly understanding God's
mind in his word; yet undoubtedly it is the duty of all in the covenant of
grace, by the faith I am speaking of, to draw near the Lord's table. God
enjoined the Jewish church to use all the representations of a dying savior;
and nothing can be more striking, than to behold the symbols of his dying love,
nothing that has so much tendency, to cause us to look on Jesus whom we have
pierced, and mourn for him, Zech. xii. 10. But to proceed; it is the duty of
unregenerate men, to be much in secret prayer; and to take care they don't
quench the striving of God's spirit. This was a sin of the antediluvian world
of God's children, Genesis vi. 3. God's spirit will strive with God's covenant
people, until he gives them up to hardness of heart; and then their covenant
state, is left to them desolate. My spirit shall not always strive with man. Ye
do always resist the holy ghost, as your fathers did, Acts vii. 51. Behold your
house is left unto you desolate, Matt. xxiii. 38. Also it is the duty of
unregenerate men, to labor to be holy in all manner of coversation, 1 Pet i.
15. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, Ps. cxxvi. 6. And though it would be needless to tell
all that unregenerate men might do, as a proper endeavor to obtain
regenerating grace; yet it is proper to add; they ought by all means to take
care, that they do not rest in their moral virtues, or reformations of life:
They ought to consider that this doctrinal faith, and covenant state, and
reformation of life, cannot justify them; therefore they ought to labor to
obtain a deep and just sense of their unjustified, and perishing condition by
nature, and their inability to help themselves out of that condition; or to
change and renew their own hearts: Hence, in sense of weakness, and of a
perishing unjustified condition; they are to cry mightily to God; to make them
fully acquainted with their lost condition, and lead them to Christ; and enable
them to receive him, and his righteousness, by a living act of faith, for their
eternal justification, and peace with God.

Now though honest and sincere seeking, in all the above said ways, are the
proper endeavors of unregenerate men; and those to which regenerating grace is
remotely promised; yet they are not the direct; but the direct endeavor, is
the soul's crying under a deep, and just sense of an unjustified state; pressed
down with a heavy burden of guilt; owning he deserves no mercy at the hands of
a holy God; yet pleading for mercy, for Christ and mercy's sake. This endeavor
is never completely finished, as the condition of regeneration, until
regeneration be given; but when it is given, it is given as a thing promised in
covenant, to a groaning prisoner, appointed to death.

Now as we have found the proper and direct endeavor of an unregenerate man;
the which I think no reasonable man can deny to be such: I shall now proceed to
show, that God has bound himself to give regenerating grace to such men by
promise, in the covenant of grace.

Here then I shall say, as there can be but two covenants, namely, one of
works, and the other of grace: So there can be but two ways of saving in either
covenant; i. e. conditionally, or unconditionally; and a covenant, called a
covenant of salvation, must cease to be such; if salvation is not promised, one
of these ways. Covenants are always solemn, binding things when ratified. Take
away bonds and obligations, and where can a covenant be found? And if men's
covenants are solemn, because of their binding obligations; how much more
sacred, and solemn, must the covenant transactions of Jehovah be? If the solemn
covenant of grace is not a sacred repository, of inviolably stipulated terms;
where is the foundation for sacred trust? Here then, as I have inviolably
proved the covenant of grace was made in the favor of all the human race; and
that all that adhered to the gospel covenant, and ratified it as such, were of
the Jerusalem above; and like Isaac, children of promise; for that they stood
by faith in the covenant of grace, Romans xi. 20. Thou stand by faith. So they
were under the sacred inviolable transactions of stipulation, and
restipulation; and as I have shown, the promise must apprehend them, where
faith and the covenant first find them; otherwise the covenant and faith would
reach farther than the promise; whereas the promise is always made to the
church, when faith is their qualification. Here then, as there must be life and
salvation in the covenant of grace, for all that are in it, as we have before
seen; and as that life can be covenanted for but one of these two ways, viz.
conditionally, or unconditionally; so in one of these ways, salvation must be
certain; and what can make it certain, but the bonds of a sacred and solemn
covenant? Here then to say, God is not bound to give salvation neither of these
ways, is to say that salvation is not covenanted for in that covenant, in which
Adam, and all the visible church, have stood by faith, before they were
regenerated.

But in order to be better understood, I would endeavor to bring this affair
into a narrower point of light; and in order to do this, it will be proper, for
a short space, to abstract some part of the argument; For while I am
considering the visible church, as adhering to the covenant of grace, and
standing in it by faith, as heirs, and the only heirs of the promise of
regeneration, either remotely, or directly; I suppose the covenant to be
conditional: So also, when I consider the proper endeavor of an unregenerate
man, either remotely, or directly; as entituling to the promise of
regeneration; I still suppose the covenant to be conditional: And indeed I have
proved, that the covenant of grace is conditional; yet in order to reflect
light on the argument in this spot, it is proper to consider what must be the
state of the affair, if the covenant was unconditional: For as I am saying, a
covenant is a solemn, and if a religious covenant, sacredly solemn compact, of
inviolable stipulated terms; so it is no hard saying to assert, that the
covenanting parties are bound to abide by the sacredly stipulated terms of the
covenant of grace; for why? If the covenanting parties are not bound to abide
by the stipulated terms, it cease to be a bond, or obligation; therefore
cease to be a covenant. Here then it is easy to see, that if God covenanted
to save perishing men unconditionally, he is bound to save them
unconditionally; and as he cannot covenant to save, but either conditionally or
unconditionally; if be does not covenant to save unconditionally, if he
covenant to save at all, it must be conditionally; and then, if that condition
be complied with, he is still bound to save all that comply: I think the world
may be challenged on this conclusion. Hence then, if God had covenanted to save
unconditionally, all the race of Adam must be saved; and we have nothing to do,
to limit the promise to the visible church, or any condition to be done by any;
for that supposes the covenant to be conditional. And if God covenanted (as I
said) to save unconditionally, the wildest savage, or heathen in the world must
be saved, as soon as one of the visible church; for I have proved, that when
God made the covenant with Adam, he made all his seed foederally holy; and by
oath and covenant, washed away the blood of all of them; and made them his
children in the new covenant; which as I proved, could mean nothing less than
putting them into a salvable state, or a way of salvation by the new covenant.
Therefore as I used to say, seeing they are not all saved, since they are all
covenanted for; facts prove they were not covenanted for, to be saved
unconditionally; yet as there are but two ways that they can be covenanted for,
seeing they are not covenanted for unconditionally, they must be covenanted for
conditionally, or they cannot be made foederally holy, or their blood washed
away in any sense.

Here then, 1st. I am reduced to the necessity of considering men covenanted
with conditionally; and 2d. I am under the same necessity to consider all the
human race covenanted with conditionally; for as we have seen when the covenant
was made with the father, it made the unborn children, God's children, both
with respect to Adam and Abraham, as Genesis vi 2. and Ez. xvi. 8. Hence the seed
of both are God's, by the sacred bonds of a solemn new covenant transaction. 3.
I am under the same necessity (since the covenant is conditional) to consider
the condition as a possible condition to all the seed of Adam; otherwise
tyranny, and not mercy, would be in the covenant, for all that are not saved;
and then their blood could not be washed away in any sense; which the scripture
declares it was; and I have fully proved under former heads.

Now as we have found, if God covenanted to save unconditionally, all must be
saved, because all were covenanted for. So on the contrary, if God covenanted
to save conditionally; it must be possible for them all to do that condition;
because they were covenanted with conditionally; and as we have seen, it is
impossible to make a covenant upon impossible terms. Here then I shall say,
regeneration is salvation; he that is regenerated, is saved with an everlasting
salvation; he is as surely saved, as he that went to heaven twice seventeen
hundred years since. Regeneration, justifying faith, and justification it self,
are not one before the other, in the order of time; but only in the order of
nature; therefore he that is regenerated, acts saving faith, and is justified
at one and the same individual time. Now, as regeneration is salvation: when
God covenanted with Adam, and made all his seed foederally holy, made them his
own sons and daughters, and washed away the blood of them all, and made all
that he had theirs, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.
Luke xv 31. This of regeneration, must have been covenanted for, with respect
to every individual son and daughter of Adam: This is but the native result,
and most necessary consequence, of the several things I have before inviolably
proved. Hence then, as regeneration is the beginning of heaven, and as a
covenant that talks of salvation must be a counterfeit; but cannot be the
covenant of grace, that has not this salvation stipulated in it: So
regeneration must be covenanted for conditionally, or unconditionally, with
respect to all the race of Adam, for that they well all parties concerned, as
we have abundantly seen. Now if regeneration had been covenanted for
unconditionally, the sacred and solemn transaction, must necessarily have
inferred the sure salvation of all the seed of Adam: And seeing they are not
saved, we are sure God covenanted with them conditionally: And we are as sure,
from all the nature and force of covenant obligations, that when that condition
is complied with, God has bound himself by a most gracious and solemn promise,
to bestow that most valuable, and necessary grace of salvation, regeneration.
And seeing this grace cannot be promised, to any condition done by itself; it
must be promised to the condition of an unregenerate man; and what can be more
reasonable, than for God to promise regenerating grace, to such proper
endeavor as above described. Now as this conclusion is so native and necessary
from the premises, which have been all so fully proved; I think it superfluous
to produce more evidence at present; and shall only proceed to answer
objections.

1st Objection. If things are so, then God is bound, and the creature free.

Answer. If it is so, it is not the first, nor yet the second time, that God
has bound himself, and left the creature free; and if God make a covenant with
creatures, as probationers, ten thousand times, it will always be the case,
unless God can find a way to break covenant first; which I don't believe he
ever will.

2d. Objection. For God to be bound to save unregenerate men, is to destroy
sovereign grace.

Answer. What has sovereignty to do in a covenant that is conditional? and
where is the covenant that is not so? Do you mean by sovereignty, God's
reserving ^o himself a right to refuse to hear the prayer of a sincere seeker,
or that God will regenerate those that never sought? Such sovereignty as this,
is inconsistent with s^ving in a covenant way. God has bound himself by
promise in the covenant, to hear the prayer of a sincere seeker in Christ's
name, or by faith, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37. Romans ix. 32. They sought it not by faith.
And God regenerates no adult person without seeking first, for this I will be
inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them.

1. Query. Was not Paul regenerated by sovereign grace?

Answer. No. He was called to adhere to the gospel covenant, by sovereign
grace, because he had adhered to a law covenant, and had been as dexterous a
stickler to man's own righteousness, as any son of Agar, of Jerusalem below, or
of the flesh among them all: Therefore in that circumstance he was not a son of
promise, any more than heathen Pharaoh. But when he is by sovereign grace,
called to adhere to the gospel covenant, then he seeks by faith, prays and
fasts, and receives regeneration, as promised to the proper endeavor of an
unregenerated man. For it appears not that he was regenerated, nor is it
probable, till Ananias came, and he received the holy ghost, Acts ix. 11, 17.
And how is it possible, any man should be regenerated, before he is made
sensible of the insufficiency of his own righteousness, and the sufficiency of
the gospel way of salvation, by the merits of Christ? And can any man see the
danger he is in by nature, and the encouragement the gospel gives, and not cry
to God? It cannot be. Therefore. let a man's conversion be as sudden as the
thief on the cross, he will still pray, before he is regenerated, and
regeneration will not be given b^ an act of sovereign grace, but covenanted
grace; and the one is as free grace as the other.

2. Query, Does not God say, he was found of them that sought him not? Romans x.
20.

Answer. This text respects the Gentiles, whom God in sovereign grace, had
called to a gospel covenant state, who before their marriage with God in
covenant, were both barren and desolate, Is. live. 1. But can anybody think
they found God, in respect of regenerating their hearts in their desolate
condition? no, they must own the covenant of grace, before they can receive the
benefits of it; they were grafted into the covenant with the Jew, before they
partook of the root and fatness; and all the design of the apostle, is only to
tell us, that the Gentiles found God in the days after Christ, who in former
ages had not sought him.

3. Objection. If God is bound to give regenerating grace, to the endeavors of
unregenerate men, then men can boast.

Answer. I do not understand, that the scripture supposes any room for
boasting, but when salvation is of the merit of works. Now what is there in the
proper endeavor of an unregenerate man, that makes it meritorious? Does the
meritoriousness of it arise from the work itself, or from the sanction given it
by the connection of the promise? If the work in itself is meritorious, then
those that oppose me in this spot, are as guilty of giving room for boasting as
myself: For they all say, a man must be powerfully affected with the sense of
an unjustified state; pressed down with a heavy burden of guilt; own he
deserves no mercy at the hands of a holy God; yet plead for mercy, for Christ's
and mercy's sake, in order to be regenerated. I suppose no person will say,
this work considered in itself, can give room for boasting; and if room for
boasting arises only from the connection of the promise, then the work of
justifying faith, will also give room for boast; fpr justofocatopm os surely
connected with saving faith, by promise; as is allowed. Here let it be
observed, that room for boasting don't arise from the different degree, or kind
of influence, by which a man acts, but from the exact conformity of the action,
to the divine law. e. g. Suppose some of the angels to have continued perfect
by an irresistible influence, and others only by a common influence of
probationers, yet they would have equally deserved heaven: So the acting of a
justifying faith, does not exclude boasting, because it is done by irresistible
influence (for if the work done, was sufficient for his justification, for he
would be justified on the account of it, though it be done by such influence) but
because it is the soul's acting on the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is
sufficient; and therefore he cannot boast, because his own work was no cause,
why he was justified. And suppos^ ^e were able to act the same faith by a
common influence, by which he might do, or not do it; yet if he does act on the
righteousness of Christ alone for justification, he will be nevertheless
justified; and have no room to boast. So that it is not the power by which the
soul acts, let it be more or less, but the circumstance that attends the
action, that excludes boasting. I dare be bold to say, that if a man by his own
natural ability, could act the same individual act of faith, that a regenerate
man does, by the mighty power of God, he would be equally justified, and have
no room to boast, in the scripture sense of boasting: For faith does not
exclude boasting, because it was wrought by the mighty power of God; but
because it excludes our own righteousness; and applies the righteousness of
Christ, for the matter of our justification. And this exactly agrees with Romans
ii. 27, 28, Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay,
but by the law of faith. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the law. Now to suppose that the law of faith
excludes boasting, because it is wrought by the mighty power of God's spirit;
is to suppose, that it is not the righteousness of Christ alone, that excludes
boasting; but some sanction in the act of believing, as a work that excludes
boasting. But surely the action, nor the sanction of it, as a work, are the
righteousness of Christ: and the act of faith has no other sanction to exclude
boasting, but the bare acting on the righteousness of Christ: And to suppose,
that any sanction in the acting of faith, arises from the excellency of the
influence, by which the work is done; and for that reason excludes boasting; is
to suppose, that to be justified by a gospel law of works, will exclude
boasting: But the text is this; we are justified by faith, without the deeds of
any law whatsoever, as a work. And to the same purpose is Ephesians. ii 9. not of
works* lest any man should boast.

Here then we see, boasting is not excluded in the acting of faith, from any
excellency in the influence by which it is acted: why then should the faith of
an unregenerate man, by a promise being connected with it, give room to boast
more than the other? they are both called faith in scripture; the visible
gospel church, is said to stand by faith, in the gospel covenant, Romans xi. 20.
and the regenerate are said to be justified by faith; and the apostle faith,
that which is of faith, is of grace, Romans iv. 16. therefore it is of faith,
that if might be of grace. Surely that which is of grace, does not admit of
boasting.

But let us consider more distinctly, these two kinds of faith, in comparison.
The faith of an unregenerate man, with which the promise of regeneration is
directly connected, is this, viz. 1. he believes that God is an infinitely
wise, holy, just, powerful, and sin revenging God, and is humbled, and deeply
wounded and affected, with the view of the eternity, and inviolable excellency
of these perfections. The faith of him that is regenerated, is the same. 2. He
believes, that God has made a new covenant, and has sent his own son to die the
most shameful, painful, and ignominious death; to save perishing sinners: Hence
he believes God is merciful and gracious. So (...) the other. 3. He believes
that he is by nature, a hard, and stony hearted, justly condemned, and
perishing sinner. So does the other. 4. He believes that he has no power to
change his own heart. So the other. 5. He believes if he perish forever, he can
never do any thing to deserve the help of God's spirit, or his justification.
So does the other.


Here then he gives up hopes of salvation by law; and pleads in agonies and
pains for a new heart, and for light and strength, to lay hold of Christ's
righteousness, that he may be reconciled to God; and all is done in Christ's
name. This of giving up life by the law, belongs to conviction; belongs to the
proper endeavor of an unregenerate man. The first act of saving faith, is
venturing alone on the righteousness of Christ; and it is impossible to venture
on the righteousness of Christ alone, while any hopes are left by the law. Here
then we may see the harmony between the faith of the regenerate and
unregenerate. One gives up life by the law; and so does the other. One pleads
Christ's righteousness alone; so does the other. The faith of one is wrought by
the spirit of God; and so is the other. One has lost all room for boasting;
and the other also. But herein their faith differs: One ventures his eternal
all on the righteousness of Christ, and the sure word of faith; the other has
not light and strength to do so. Therefore, the faith of the regenerate man,
produces mourning and rejoicing; and the faith of the other, mourning and
lamentation. Now what is the sum of all, but only this? viz. That the faith of
the unregenerate man, is as real faith as the other; for as he must quit all
dependence on the law, before he can be regenerated; when he has so done, if
he seeks at all, it must be by faith. To seek salvation by Christ alone, is as
true faith, as to believe alone on Christ for justification; though one
justifies, and the other does not. And he that quits dependence on the law,
and seeks by faith alone, can by no means boast, though regenerating grace be
promised to such a seeker. It is this seeking by faith the apostle refers to,
when he says, Israel did not attain righteousness, because they sought it not
by faith, Romans ix. 31, 32. Here we see, seeking by faith, is made a condition
of obtaining; and if I cannot seek by faith, before I obtain regeneration, I
cannot seek righteousness by faith, until I have got it; for he that is
regenerated, has attained righteousness. There are but two ways of seeking.
viz. by the law, and by faith. The Jews were unregenerate, and if such cannot
seek by faith, they must seek exactly as they did; and why are they blamed? Why
did not God regenerate them, before he required them to seek at all?

But possibly by boasting, you mean this, viz. that one man can say to another,
if you had done as I have done; you would have been saved as well as I. To
which I answer, if this is your meaning, it is not the scripture meaning at
all, in respect of boasting. As I proved before; the land of Canaan was
promised to Abrabam, and his seed, by free grace; and by them was to be
obtained by faith, as really as salvation is promised by grace; and to be
obtained by faith. Now, could not those that went into the land, have said to
those that did not; if you had done, as I have done, you might have gone in, as
well as I. Did those that went in, go by the faith of regeneration, or
irresistible grace? And could not those that rebelled against God, and so
perished in the wilderness; have done otherwise? Could those therefore that
went in, boast? If this you talk of, is the scripture sense of boasting, they
could. But they could not; and why? because neither their sword, or bow, bought
the land; though the use of both, is a term, sine qua non, of their obtaining it.
i. e. boasting is excluded, because God gave it them; and their own
righteousness, no more deserved that inheritance, than it did heaven. So also
the Gentiles, that stood in the gospel covenant by faith; (though not the faith
of regeneration; as appears Romans xi. 20, 21) could boast in the light you speak
of; for men could adhere to the gospel covenant, and ratify it by baptism,
without irresistible grace: And was it impossible for the Jews to believe Jesus
Christ to be the true Messiah, without the faith of regeneration? when he had
wrought so many signs and miracles among them, to prove his mission. Nay, it is
impossible they should be regenerated, until they doctrinally first own Christ,
and adhere to the covenant of grace. Well then, could not the Gentile say to
the Jew, you might be in the covenant of grace, as well as I, if you would: He
surely might, and speak true too: But can the Gentile boast, in the scripture
sense of boasting? No: Boast not against the branches; thou bear not the
root, but the root thee. i. e. the covenant of grace and promise, into which
you are grafted by faith; and from which you are broken because of unbelief;
says nothing of your own righteousness, as the cause of your acceptance with
God: And were it not that this is the root or foundation of the covenant in
which you stand; you would be as soon damned st^^ding in; as they falling out:
Praying, as they blaspheming: Hence you cannot boast. And what do men mean
then; to tell us, that if the promise of regeneration, is made to the proper
endeavor of an unregenerate man; he can boast? When the promise has the same
root, the covenant has; and is made by those that seek by faith, without the
deeds of the law; which as we have seen, an unregenerate man can do; and must
do, before he can be regenerated. Such men know not what they say.

4th Objection. This doctrine supposes, an unregenerate man to have a saving
qualification.

Answer. By a saing qualification you must mean this, viz. That he has
something, which if rightly improved, he must be saved. Well, and is this
henesy chargeable upon no doctrine but this? Do not such as say, Christ
redeemed none but the elect; say also that the elect must be effectually
called, before they are regenerated? And by that effectual, they mean an
irresistible call; for if it is not such, the elect may parish nevertheless.
Now which is the greatest heresy? If it is a heresy to say, an unregenerate man
has got a saving qualification; he that makes that qualification most
effectual, must (...) the greatest heretic. The saving qualification in this
doctrine, is no otherwise such, than as it is (...) the connection of a most
gracious promise, (...) an eq^^^^ gracious covenant. And a covenant, that does
not (...) the persons with whom it is made, qualifications to do the stipulated
terms, can neither be a covenant of salvation, of mercy, or of justice. But
then this qualification does not necessarily infer the salvation of him that
has ^work^ any more than the promise of the land of Canaan, ma^^ in the same
gracious covenant, (by which the seed of Abraham received a saving
qualification for that la^^ and made them heirs of it) necessarily inferred,
they should be brought into the possession of it; which they (many to whom the
promise was made) never were; because of unbelief, Heb. iii. 17, 18, 19. but
the contrary doctrine necessarily infers, that a man is confirmed in a state of
salvation, before he has faith (as they say) and before he has the faith of
regeneration (as I say) for they say, he does not obtain this irresistible
call, by faith; but of sovereign grace; because he has no faith that entitles
him to the promise of such a call; and I say, that which is not promised to
faith, cannot be obtained by faith. For a man cannot believe for that for which
there is no promise, for faith has nothing to work upon.

Now surely, that which confirms a man in a state of salvation, must be a
saving qualification. An irresistible call, makes heaven as sure as
irresistible regeneration: And is it not an odd story, that a man should be
confirmed in happiness, before he is confirmed in holiness? If any one should
think, this effectual calling is regeneration, then it cannot be before
justifying faith, in the order of time; unless regeneration be before such
faith, in the order of time too. If effectual calling and regeneration, are one
and the same thing; the names are a distinction, without a difference; and if
neither of them are before justifying faith in the order of time, then
effectual calling is improperly used; for it is used to signify a call to
conversion, and not conversion itself. It is supposed effectual calling is
irresistible conviction; but if it is irresistible regeneration, and not before
saving faith, in the order of time, our ideas are confused with a distinction
of names, where there is no difference: For regeneration is allowed to be
effectual; because justifying faith, is necessarily connected with it in the
order of time. If they are both before justifying faith in the order of time,
then regeneration can mean nothing but effectual calling; and our ideas are yet
confused with a distinction, but no difference: And regeneration has been
improperly used to signify, that most excellent divine principle, that
expatiates in justifying faith, and pure love to God and holiness; or in other
words, conforms the mind to God, to eternal acceptance. Now, that effectual
calling, which is prior to faith, in the order of time, (call it regeneration,
or what you will) cannot so conform the mind to God: And then the abovesaid
divine principle, which cannot exist, in the order of time, prior to justifying
faith, wants a name, if regeneration is not the name of it.

But I shall criticize no longer, on other men's sentiments; but proceed to
communicate my own; both on effectual calling, and regeneration.

1st. As to an irresistible call, before justifying faith; there is no such
thing. This will appear from several reasons: 1. An irresistible call confirms
a man (as was said before) in a state of salvation; therefore it assumes the
prerogative of justifying faith; and no man has power to become a son of God,
in a confirmed sense, without receiving Christ by a justifying faith, John i.
12: though a man have all faith, so that he could remove mountains, 1. Cor. xiii.
2. yet if it does not conform the mind to God, in pure love, to God and
holiness; he is nothing in a confirmed sense: If men taste the heavenly gift;
and partake the holy ghost; taste the powers of the world to come, (in
conviction) they may fall away, and perish for ever, Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6.

2. The conclusion, that conviction is irresistible, is drawn from no premises
that infer it. The premises are 1. scripture, 2. experience. The scriptures
from which such conclusion is inferred, are such as Ps. cx. 3. Thy people shall
be willing in the day of thy power, and John vi 44. No man can come to me,
except the father draw him. But both these texts respect regeneration; and not
conviction; for it is the real coming to Christ, by a justifying act of faith^
that can be here intended; and who denies a day of mighty power, being
necessary to such coming? unless it be such as deny the mighty power of God
being necessary to regeneration. 2. The experience, from which such a
conclusion is drawn, is this, viz. men that are regenerated, are first
powerfully convicted; they are in great distress; and continue earnest seekers,
until they obtain regeneration; while many others, that seem to be as
powerfully convicted as they, turn back and perish. Hence it is concluded, that
such as continue seeking till they find, are under an irresistible sovereign
influence; but the conclusion will be as well inferred, that the angels who
continued perfect, were under an irresistible influence; which is to destroy
the notion of their being created probationers. Besides, those that did turn
back, were once earnest seekers; and who dare say, they could not continue
such? A resistible power made them such (is allowed) and to say a resistible
power could not continue them such, is a self contradiction. And if they had
continued seeking, why should they not find? Men must follow on to know the
Lord, if they would be successful, Hos vi. 3. and that we may see they can do,
without irresistible conviction; therefore (as I said) the conclusion is drawn
from no premises that inferred such conclusion.

2. As to regeneration; it is nothing else but the power, and principle of
justifying faith; it is that power by which the soul is renewed. Romans xii. 2.
so that it is transformed, and made to approve the good, acceptable, and
perfect will of God. It is the renewing of God's image; called the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. iii. 5. also called by
Christ, the New Birth, John iii. 3, Now this most necessary and excellen^
grace, cannot exist in the order of time, prior to justifying faith; for that
(as I said) it is only the power, and principle of faith. Faith cannot act,
until it exist; and regeneration is the power of its existence. Regeneration,
as it signifies renewing, transforming, and conforming the soul to God, to
eternal acceptance, does none of these things prior to, or abstract from a
justifying faith. It is therefore, only the principle of faith; but it is faith
that conforms the soul, purifies the heart, and works pure love to God and
holiness. And as there can be no such conformity, prior to the acting of faith;
so there can be no regeneration, prior to faith, in the order of time. But

I shall now enquire, whether convicting and converting graces, are of
different kinds; or regeneration, only a greater degree of the same kinds; and
I am of opinion, the latter is the truth. And here I shall say, it is darkness
in the understanding, ignorance and blindness of heart, that alienates the soul
from God, Ephesians iv. 18 and by necessary consequence, the restoring of spiritual
light in the understanding, must reduce the soul to its original bias, and
primitive suasion; in proportion to the degree of that light. Wherein did man's
original spiritual death (which was the death of all deaths) consist, but in
the privation of spiritual light, in the reasonable soul? God veils his
glorious perfections and attributes; as to their beauty and amiableness,
harmony, and consistency; and leaves the rational soul, destitute of a divine
impress. Hence the once elevated mind, is bereaved of its original happy biass,
and sweet suasion; God's moral image, with which it was impressed, becomes
extinct; and the desolate soul commenceth bankrupt. Now all that is necessary,
to the restoring the soul to its primitive glory, beauty, and original sweet
suasion; is the unveiling the divine perfections; and re-impressing the human
soul with their beauty, amiableness and charms. This will melt the hardest
heart; and make the most stubborn sinner bow. The soul is the ag^^t to all the
religious and regular decorum of the bo^^^ and reason is the agent of all the
moral and eva^^^^cal conformity, of all the powers, passions, and faculties of
the human soul to God. The spirit of God can make no religious impression on
the soul, but in the eye of reason; to suppose the will is bowed, any other
way, than by an impression made on the understanding; is to suppose, a brute
creature might be made religious; and is such a mechanical notion of religion,
as I desire not to be concerned with; for that it makes man a machine: Now what
is spiritual conviction, but an impression of God's perfections on the soul; by
a degree of illumination? those so enlightened, are made partakers of the holy
ghost, Heb. vi 4. The same spirit, that convinces of righteousness, convinces
also of sin, John xvi. 8. In conviction, the soul is carried from one degree of
illumination to another; convinced first of one thing, then of another; until
it is fully prepared, to be enlightened with the ability and willingness of
Christ to save; the freedom and satisfaction that God the father has, in
saving a perishing soul by the righteousness of his own son. And what is it can
make the guilty discouraged soul, venture its eternal all on the faithful word
of truth, and promise of God, but only being fairly enlightened about it? All
the light that a convicted soul obtains, though it create great anxiety to be
saved, yet cannot regenerate the heart, until it arise to such a degree of
clearness, as to enable the soul to venture; and whenever it arises to such
degree, there is no space of time between that and the soul's venturing. And
hence the soul is regenerated by that faith, which is only produced by a
greater degree of light. There was faith before, that created many changes in
the mind; but this only can conform the heart to God; for while the soul
refuses to venture on Christ alone, it can never be impressed with the beauty,
amiableness, and consistency of the divine perfections: All God's ways till
then, are not ways of pleasantness; therefore the mind cannot be conformed or
regenerated. Hence it is said, God who commanded the light to shine out
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowleage of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor iv 6 And we all with open
face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image, chap. iii. 18.

If all that is meant by regeneration being a different kind of grace, to that
of conviction, is only this, viz. that different graces, dispositions,
passions, and affections, are wrought in us; that is to teach the world
nothing; for every one may see that: But how does these different graces in us,
prove the grace of conviction and conversion are of different kinds? A greater
degree of light of the same kind, can make as great a difference as this. What
vast degree of difference is made, in the passions, disposition, and affections
of men, under high or low convictions; are they therefore different graces of
the spirit? And what is conversion, but acting by a high degree of conviction,
about what is right or wrong. We know the rays of the sun in direct lines, make
vastly different impressions on all globical substances, to those that are in
indirect, oblique, and circular lines. Those in direct lines, make it always
summer at the equinoctial; those in oblique, make it sometimes winter,
sometimes summer here, i. e. hot or cold. It is not the greater distance of the
sun from us, that is the cause of the extreme cold in our northern climes in
winter; but the more oblique manner of the rays striking on the earth, to that
of summer. Were the sun at twice the distance at the equator, it would be
hotter there than here, at the common distance; because of the straight
direction of the lines: or the lines striking in a direct manner, occasion a
direct reflection; while those in an oblique, only glance. And how vastly
different are the impressions of light on us, that are from the sun in direct
rays, to those that are indirect and circular: Such as before the sun makes its
appearance in our horizon, after day break; or at secondhand from the moon.
Those rays in direct lines from the sun, communicate heat as well as light, and
conjunctly conspire to promote every useful business; and inspire the creation
for vigorous action; while those from the moon, leave the creation chilled or
congealed dull, stupid, and inactive. And are all these different passions,
affections, and dispositions, occasioned by a different kind of light? No
surely! but only from a greater or lesser degree of the same kind Now the
convictions that are prior to regeneration, are more circular, oblique, and
indirect: They are by the law mainly; which is as a twoedged sword that cuts
every way; but cannot cure. There is light, but no perceptible heat, like rays
of the moon. But then, as the law is in the hand of a mediator, Gal. iii. 19.
It is the sword that goes from Christ's mouth, Rev. i. 16. and the convictions
create^ by it, are the striving of God's spirit, in the gospel covenant. Hence
they are like the day star arising in the heart: and the day spring from an
high visiting. They forebode the rising of the sun of righteousness, Mal. iv 2.
Luke i. 78. 2 Pet i. 19. But when the sun of righteousness arises, in displays
of rich grace, and gospel love; the stony heart dissolves; the affections are
fired with primitive beauty; and the anxious and perplexed soul is charmed to
rest. And yet all this is but the native result of greater light of the same
kind. And what is it that renders the church triumphantly perfect? (not a
different kind of grace) but greater degrees of the same kind. Now we see
through a glass darkly; but then face to face. When he shall appear, we shall
be like him: for we shall see him as he is, 1 Cor. xiii 12. 1 John iii. 2. and
yet how much more graceful are these heavenly fires, than we?

I conceive this notion of regeneration, being a different kind of grace to
that of conviction, has been the cause of much confusion in the christian
world; and possibly has slain its ten thousands: For by means of this, men
look upon regeneration to be some kind of unknown, unintelligible thing; and
conclude they can do nothing toward believing in Christ, or changing their own
hearts, until they obtain that grace of the spirit: Hence they wait for it, and
expect some kind of unknown power must fall from heaven, much like the
miraculous falling of the holy ghost on the day of Pentecost* Acts ii. 2, 3.
And when people of this notion are converted as they suppose, they love to
speak of wonders, of visions, or of voices, or of the immediate application of
a text; as though the word of faith was not sufficient to be believed, without
a new revelation of it: And though many of those who hold regeneration is a
different kind of grace to that of conviction, don't approve of these
extraordinary conversions; yet they take their rise from their own
extraordinary notion of regeneration. Hence also it is, that men are so much
urged to wait for the spirit; and it is supposed, both by preacher and hearer,
it would be presumption to attempt to believe in Christ by a justifying faith,
until they have obtained the grace of regeneration; which is a different kind
of grace, to any that an unregenerate man has, as they suppose. Here I shall
particula^^^e a number of the evils this false notion of regeneration ^oth,
both to saints and sinners.

1. Sinners often lose a very promising conviction by it; they wait for the
spirit of regeneration, until their convictions die, and dwindle to nothing.

2. They conceive hard thoughts of God, as though he was not willing to save,
because he will not regenerate them in the way they are waiting for it*

3. They are frighted from obeying God's commands; such as, Lay hold on eternal
life, 2. Tim. vi. 12. and work out your own salvatian, Phil. ii. 12. These
things they dare not attempt to do; because they have not the spirit of
regeneration (as they suppose) hence they must pray, and wait: This kind of
waiting is much like a youth that would learn arithmetic by neglecting the
study of his rules, waiting for the master to teach him: The master may be
under obligations to teach him, but not in the neglect of the exercise of his
rules. Now this notion of regeneration, will not allow the proper exercise;
whereas the notion of conviction, being of the same kind of grace to that of
regeneration, will; for the spirit of conviction the sinner has; and if all
that is necessary to conversion, is only greater light, then he can pray, and
study the doctrine of the gospel, search after knowledge as after hid treasure.
All he wants is rightly to understand how he shall see Christ so, as to venture
his eternal all upon him; and the God of love will never neglect assistance, in
what the sinner cannot find out by the just exercise of the rules of the
gospel. On the other hand, let him see ever so much of the way of salvation by
Christ, he must not venture to believe, until he knows he has the spirit of
regeneration; and that he can never know till after he has believed; therefore
he is waiting for impossible things. If men therefore would venture on a
Christ, they must believe from the spirit of conviction; for it is not
regeneration, 'till faith make it so; and it is also not irresistible, until
faith qualify it as such, by giving it the sanction of insurance: But that will
be considered under the last head of doctrine.

4. This notion of regeneration gives great discouragement to sinners in
general, which must be a great embarrasment to the success of the gospel.

5. This notion does great injury to the saints.

1. It keeps them long from believing, many times; except they had seen signs
they would not believe: They are like Thomas, except I shall see in his hands
the print of the nails, i. e. unless God will make some extraordinary discovery
to me, I will not believe. And though God may be merciful to their unreasonable
demands, as was the case with Thomas; yet they often are long neglected, and if
God does not indulge their extravagance, they are obliged to forget their
distinction, that the grace of conviction and regeneration are of different
kinds, and act upon the former, like men of sense.

2. This notion hinders them much from living by faith; as they did not first
believe, barely on the cre^i^ of the gospel, but on some sign, or extraordinary
discovery: So, when they have lost their elevated frame, and sweet sense of
their experience, they are as much at a los^ how to believe as ever; and then
they must pray and wait for a new revelation; but to try to believe when they
pray, that they conclude is still presumption. Hence we shall hear them
complaining of the hardness of their he^r's and of their doubts and fears; and
these they make evidences of their humility; while they are only evidences that
they live without the exercise of faith; and so they pray and wait.

3. This notion, that conviction and regeneration are different kinds of grace,
holds the church in constant self contradiction and confusion. Saying no
unregenerate man has a saving qualification, and then denying it, and saying
they must have an effectual or irresistible call Saying that the visible church
are in covenant, and bound to the duties, at the expense of the penalties, and
then denying they are really in covenant. Saying the promise of regeneration is
made to the elect; and then saying no unregenerate man is drawn by the mighty
power of God, otherwise he would be an heir of promise; and yet saying they are
drawn by irresistible conviction; and yet not heirs of promise. And these
confusions are not restrained to the vulgar, but are an epidemical distemper.

But now let us turn the affair and say, convicting and regenerating graces are
of one kind, and differ only in degree, and there is no need to say and unsay:
For why? Then we can say an unregenerate man has a saving qualification by
being really in covenant, and under the striving of God's Spirit, and that he
may be drawn by the mighty power of God, have faith, and be an heir of promise;
and there is nothing to contradict it, for it must be mighty power that can
effectually convince the soul of its own immediate danger, unworthiness, and
insufficiency, and yet that mercy rejoiceth against judgment; and can dispose
the soul to quit all dependence on the law, and cry mightily to God by faith,
or in Christ's righteousness alone; though all this does not regenerate, till
faith of justification act, and so not irresistible, till that act give it the
sanction of insurance. If the graces are of one kind, and differ only in
degree, t^^n conviction is really saving according to the degree of it; and
qualifies the creature to examine and exercise the rules of the gospel, in
order to obtain a sufficient degree of light, to venture his eternal all on
Christ for justification; and he need never stay to ask whether he has got
regenerating grace; for he has got that which is as much like it as any thing
can be, till ^aith of justification give it another name, and regenerate him by
it. He need not stay to ask whether he is one of the elect; for believing only
can determine that affair He need not stay to ask whether he has got the power
of God; for if he has such power to be willing to be justified on the acc^^et
of Christ's righteousness alone, that he might glorify God and enjoy him ^ver;
it is all the power he wa^^s, to do that work; and it will be regenerating
grace if he act justifying faith; and it would not be regenerating grace if he
had twice the power, without that act. He need not stay to ask whether he is a
child of God; for the prodigal could say father I have sinned, from the federal
relation he had sustained in Adam, by the new covenant. And he need not stay to
ask whether he is one to whom regeneration is promised; for if he is
unregenerate it can be promised to none but such; and if he seek in the
worthiness of Christ alone, he is one of the only persons to whom that promise
is directly made: And still the promise of regeneration is made to the proper
endeavors of unregenerate men, which was the point to be proved.

The Eighth and last thing under the head of he covenant was to show, That
influences to change the heart, are the purchase of Christ. And,

1. If the bereaving and depriving the soul of a divine and spiritual life, or
God's moral image, was a penalty of the first covenant; than Christ in
restoring that life and image, must answer the penal demand, and take away that
curse by the atonement he makes. The former is true, so the latter. The major
appears, Genesis ii. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
The bereavement of spiritual life, or God's moral image, was instantaneous on
rebellion; then our first parents knew moral and penal evil experimentally; and
moral good by the want of it; as we know not how to make a just estimate of
health, until we are bereaved of it: And though temporal and eternal death are
included in the threatening; yet these are but consequent on the other, and have
in them no moral, but only natural and penal evil; but the other, though it be
inflicted as a most just penalty; yet the cruel venom of a^ps is in it. This
death is the result, not of infusion, but bereavement or privation; God veils
his glory, and love to God and holiness expire. The minor appears in this;
God's glory cannot be unveiled but in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. iv. 6. In
turning to the Lord Christ, the veil is taken away, chap. iii. 16. As a divide
spiritual communication was impeded by the curse; Christ became a curse for us,
to purchase communication, Gal. iii. 13, 14.

2. The ^oly Ghost, by which the souls of m^n are to be enlightened, is sent
only in Christ's name, John xiv. 6. as Christ came that men should not walk in
darkness, but have the light of spiritual life; so it is he that must enlighten
every man; and of his fullness all we must receive, John i. 9, 16. Grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ, ver. 17.

3. The spirit, is called the spirit of Christ, Rom viii. 9 Gal. iv 6. For that
very reason, viz. that Christ has purchased it; for otherwise it is the spirit
of God.

4. If heart circumcision, was not purchased by Christ, why was it signified by
the type of Christ's blood, circumcision in the flesh?

Secondly, I was to show, That the decrees of election, and reprobation are
certain and definite.

Many things might be said touching the DECREES; many have been the
controversies about them; I believe there have been many injurious thoughts on
all sides; but my design is not to concern myself any farther with other men's
thoughts, than as they may lie as objections to my own; and shall proceed to
communicate my own freely.

Here then I shall say something concerning the nature, cause and manner of
God's decrees: for though we are not able to comprehend all the counsels of
Jehovah, or see into the reasons of all his determinations and conduct; yet
according as reason and revelation has furnished us, we may speak with safety.

1. With respect to the nature of a decree of God; it is the si^ed
determination of the unchangeable God, who is the supreme agent that does all
things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians i 11. What men or angels decree
is uncertain as to the event; but not so with respect to God' decrees; they are
like himself unchangeable. To suppose a decree of God can be changed, is to
suppose either the decree is found to be wrong, or God was not able to effect
the thing ^e purposed; either of which is blasphemy For the Lord of h^sts has
purposed, and who shall disannul it? And his hand is stretched out, and who
shall turn it back? Isa. xiv. 14, 27

2. The cause of decrees is this, viz God who sees all things from eternity to
eternity that are, shall be, or possibly can be, by one infinite view of his
all comprehensible wisdom and knowledge, cannot be an idle spectator. But as he
is able to cause, to permit, or to prevent, he must determine and decree
something, with respect to every thing that comes to pass; either that he will
cause it, or permit it, or prevent it, or permit it to be prevented. Our
rational minds furnish us with these dictates, viz. That if we could see all
that will be done in the next century, or age of the world, had it in our own
power to cause, or prevent; if we had wisdom sufficient at present, to be
absolutely determined which would be best; we could do no less at present, than
decree either to cause, permit, prevent, or permit to be prevented, every thing
that respects the next century; and then all things in that century would be
decreed by us now; in some sense or other

3. The manner in which God decrees things is this.

1. That they have no influence, either on his own, or any creature's conduct.
God's decrees are only indications, or expressions of the certainty of events;
but no cause either of the events themselves, or of their certainty. This
conclusion will appear inviolable in all; e. g. God from eternity decreed to
create the world, but does that decree influence God? i. e. does God create the
world because he has bound himself by a decree to create it? Why did he decree
to do it? he surely saw some sufficient reason, or he would never decree it:
And that reason which is sufficient to dispose God to decree it, must be the
reason of the certainty why he will do it; to found the reason of God's
creating on one thing, and the certainty on another, is to suppose that when
God saw sufficient reason to create the world, it was not certain that he will
do it, until he has bound himself by a decree, i. e. that reason which
infinite wisdom saw sufficient for the creating the world, is not sufficient to
dispose God certainly to do it; therefore lest he should neglect doing that
which he sees sufficient reason for, he decrees he will do it, and that makes
it certain he will do it. Surely when God saw sufficient reason, to dispose him
to decree the creation of the world; that same reason was sufficient, to
dispose him certainly to do it; therefore the decree has no influence in the
creating, or the certainty of it. If it is objected, God could not see the
creation as a certainty prior to the decree? It is answered, God saw sufficient
reason for creating, prior to the decree; and if God saw sufficient reason for
creating, prior to the decree; that reason must be sufficient to dispose him
certainly to create; and God's seeing the creation a certainty, is not the
result of the decree, but the result of infinite wisdom, seeing sufficient
reason for creating; and God seeing sufficient reason to dispose him certainly
to create, is the reason why he decrees certainly to do it.

Two things ought here to be considered; 1. When I say, God saw sufficient
reason to dispose him certainly to create the world, before he decreed to do
it; it must not be understood, one thing before another in the order of time,
but only in the order of nature; for there is no before or after with God, in
the order of Time, with respect to seeing sufficient reason for doing a thing,
and purposing or decreeing to do it. 2. When I say, the decree of God is not
the reason, neither of God's doing a thing, or of the certainty of his doing
it; it must not be understood as though when God saw sufficient reason to do a
thing, a decree is not connected with it; for what God sees sufficient reason
for doing, he must purpose (...) decree to do, at the same time: And if he does
not decree to do a thing; it is evident he did not see sufficient reason for
the doing of it; though at the same time, the decree is not the reason of
doing, or of the certainty of it; but only the sufficiency of the reason, upon
which he decreed certainly to do it.


When we purpose or decree to do a thing, we always have some (as we think)
sufficient reason for such purpose, or decree. Now is this decree the reason
why we will certainly do it? No, for if we see sufficient reason to do
otherwise, we will alter the purpose or decree: And the reason why God will not
alter his purposes or decrees, is this, viz. he can never see a more sufficient
reason for his conduct, than he saw at first; for if he could, he would surely
alter his decrees: That decree that binds to do that which there is not
sufficient reason for, must be dreadful, like the decrees of the Medes and
Persians, Est. viii. 8, 11. I need not multiply examples, for this is parallel
to all cases, in which it can be supposed a decree can influence God's doing a
thing, or the certainty of it.

That God's decrees have no influence on the conduct of creatures, I shall show
when I come to show what God has decreed in respect of them, and at present
add a word on the manner of decreeing.

2. The manner in which God decrees, is according to his infinite prescience,
or fore knowledge: He does not barely decree a thing because he fore knew it;
but because the thing decreed, is right to be decreed; and God must know it is
right, before he can decree it; therefore for^ knowledge is absolutely
necessary to a decree, though not the cause of it. e. g. God from eternity saw
a number of the angles would rebel, and bring ruin upon themselves; and he e^^
are two things decreed in respect of them; 1. ^o permit their rebellion; 2. to
inflict their ruin, and God could have decreed neither of these things, if they
had not been right; and God must know them to be right, before he can decree
them; though their being right is the cause why he does it; and as their b^^ng
right, is the cause why they are decreed, so it is the cause why one is
permitted, and the other inflicted; and n^^ the decree the cause at all: And
the decree has no influence, either as to the permiting, or inflicting.


I come now directly to show, how God has decreed with respect to men. And by
a decree of election, I mean a number of the human race, were chosen from
eternity, for everlasting happiness; and that the number is certain and
definite.

By a decree of reprobation, I mean that all except the elect were
predestined to everlasting destruction, from the fame eternity: But then no
man or woman need be terrified with this representation of God's decrees; for I
shall show that these decrees, are in no sense the cause why one is saved, or
the other damned: Or in other words, they have no kind of influence, and men
are all as ^^ee to be saved, as thought there was no decree of reprobation: And
the elect as free to be damned, as though there was no election, as to all that
that decree shall ever do toward their salvation. As I said before, the cause
why God decrees things, is only that he cannot be an idle spectator, but must
decree something with respect to all events; either, that he will cause, or
permit, or prevent, or permit to be prevented. And as I showed under the manner
of God's decreeing, that his decrees have no influence on himself; so there is
no reason why he causes, permits, preventeth, or permits any thing to be
prevented. I shall now proceed to reconcile these definite and fixed decrees,
with the covenant of grace: And here I shall say, the decrees of God can never
be so designed by him, as to oppose, clash with, or embarras the covenant of
grace. I shall therefore now show, when and how decrees, do these things.

1. Decrees oppose the covenant of grace, when they forbid the making of it:
And what I shall now say, let the world consider: If God had reprobated, by an
eternal decree of predestination, all the seed of Adam, except those that shall
be saved, in and for Adam's sin and rebellion, without any regard to their
rejecting of, or rebeling against Christ, or a salvation provided for them in
the new covenant; then God can never make a new covenant with them, after that
sin and rebellion: It is impossible for God to covenant about the pardoning,
and blotting out of sin and transgression, it he has bound himself by an
eternal decree, that he will never pardon their sins, or blot out their
transgressions ^uch a circumstance of a decree, utterly forbids a covenant of
grace, and salvation, ever being made after that sin is committed, on which
final damnation is sealed. Hell from beneath must enlarge herself, Is. v. 14,
and xiv. 9. before she can deny this self-evident truth. And how abundantly
evident, have I made it appear, that God did make the covenant of grace, with
the reprobate seed of Adam: and downwards, and damns them for sin they could
not have committed, if they had not been in the new covenant. Genesis vi. If I had
not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: But now they have no cloak
for their sin. John xv. 12. Thus says the Lord thy redeemer, the holy one of
Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, which leads
thee by the way that thou should go. O that thou had hearkened to my
commandments, then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the sea, Is. xlviii. 17.18. Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy ^ou^^, the
love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness; Israel
was holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase; what imquity
have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me; turn, O back
sliding children, for I am married unto you, Jer. ^i 2, 3, 5. and iii. 14. For
of old time I have broken (...) yoke, and burst thy bands, chap. ii. 20. Come
now and let us reason together, says the Lord, thought your sins be as
scralet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool, Is. i 18 Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord
has spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib; but Israel
does not know, my people do not consider, ver. 2.3. For when I shall have
brought them into the land which I swear unto their fathers, then will they
turn unto other gods, and provoke me, and break my covenant. Deuteronomy. xxxi. 20.
For the Lord's portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance, ch
xxxii. 9. He kept him as the apple of his eye, ver. 10 But Jacob lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation, ver. 15. though the eternal God was his
refuge, and happy was the people in such a case, chapter xxxiii. 27 29. Ps. cxliv.
15. What could have been done more to my vineyard? Is. v. 4. Last of all he
sent unto them his son, saying they will reverence my son, Mat. xxi. 37. but
when he came to his own, his own received him not, John i. 14. Therefore the
children of the kingdom of heaven, or of the kingdom of the covenant of grace,
are cast out, Mat. viii. 11, 12, Because of unbelief they were broken off from
their own olive tree, or own covenant state, Romans xi. 20, 24. Whoever therefore
shall deny, that the covenant of grace was made with all the seed of Adam, for
that they were all made foederally holy in him, and the blood of them all
washed away, as we have abundantly seen; however his soul may attain heaven;
yet, while he continues obstinate in that denial, he may never expect to enter
into the good land of promise, the general peace and tranquillity of the visible
church, because he speaks unadvisedly with his lips; and he may expect to die
in the wilderness, of the groaning, bleeding, contrariety, confusion, and
discord of the visible church: And the wood, hay and stubble, of his low and
contracted soul, will be burnt up, 1. Cor. iii. 12, 15.

For the sake of the we^k who do not easily see a conclusion from the premises,
what I have here proved is this, viz. that the covenant of grace was made with
the reprobate seed of Adam, as really as with the elect; and that it could not
have been made with them, if they had not been predestined to final ruin, in
the fall of Adam: therefore, they are predestined to ruin, no otherwise, then
as they reject the blood of the covenant of grace, with which they are
sanctified, or made covenantly holy, Heb, x. 29. So that they might all have
been saved, notwithstanding all, that the decree of reprobation ever did to
hinder it.

2. A decree opposes the covenant of grace, when it has influence on human
actions: A man cannot be regenerated, or powerfully convicted, without powerful
assistance from the spirit of God: And if that assistance is to be obtained by
decrees, and to by the terms of a covenant, the whole notion of covenanted
salvation, is overthrown. e. g. When God covenanted with angels; if the elect
among them had by a decree of predestination to happiness, been kept from
rebellion, they are not saved by a covenant at all; and its nonsense to talk of
a covenant with respect to them; for the decree influenceth all their standing,
and governs their conduct. On the other hand, if the decree of reprobation
takes away the power of standing from reprobate angels, that decree must
influence their fall, and necessarily infers their damnation, do the best they
can. So, if the help of the spirit is witheld from the non-elect of the seed of
Adam, in the covenant of grace, the covenant is opposed and clashed with; for
the covenant says, If thou will do so, and so, the Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart; and the decree says, God will not do it, do what you
possibly can; and the decree governs the whole conduct of the ruined creature:
And to talk of washing away their blood by a covenant, has nothing in it.
^ence we see, that decrees must have no influence, neither secret nor revealed.
And here we see, how impertinently the peace of God's Zion has been exhausted,
in the veins of needless controversy about God's decrees; for that they neither
help the elect, nor hurt the reprobate; they neither influence God, angel, or
men.

3. Decrees oppose a covenant, when they don't allow men to be probationers,
for a covenant always does, and if the decrees of God have any influence in the
determining man's conduct, they put the elect into a state of insurance from
eternity; and the reprobates are sealed to damnation; and a covenant is useless
for either of them. If it be replied, God has decreed to save the elect in a
covenant way; it is answered, that is true; but it could not be true, if men
were saved because they are elected: God, as I have said, decrees every thing
that comes to pass; yet I have also said, and proved, decrees have no
influence, and nothing comes to pass because it is decreed; for if it does,
that is not to save in a covenant way, as we have seen. If God has decreed to
save in a covenant way; and yet saves by sovereign grace, and absolute decrees;
then he has decreed to save in an impossible way; for that way of saving is
inconsistent with a covenant; or at least, he does not save in the way he has
decreed to save; and to save in two ways, directly contrary, is impossible.

1st Objection, Is not God a sovereign, cannot he decree to save whom he
pleases?

Answer, God is a sovereign, and if he had made the covenant of grace, with but
one of the children of Adam; and decreed all but that one to sinal damnation;
bis throne had been eternally guiltless. But blessed, and forever blessed be
his holy name, he has done otherwise; he has made the covenant with the whole
human race, in their (...) father Adam; and when this glorious covenant of rich
grace (in which he has magnified his mercy infinitely, is made; Adam, and his
seed are taken out of the hands of sovereignty; to be dealt with in a gracious
covenant way; and are considered no otherwise in the hands of sovereignty, than
as they forfeit the blessings of the covenant; either by going out from the
presence of the Lord, as Cain, and commencing heathen idolaters, and ^^asting
their covenant inheritance in riotous living, like profane Esau, who for a
morsel of meat sold his birthright, Heb xii. 16. or as the Jews, turning the
pure covenant of grace into a law covenant, and adhering to their own moral
virtues, and ceremonial cleannesses, for justification and salvation; and so
commencing children of the bond woman; but not children of promise. And here
indeed, both are in the hands of sovereign mercy, ever to be called again, to a
gracious covenant relation to God; or in the hands of penal justice, to be
finally left to perish, without God in the world, Ephesians. ii. 12. But if God call
them again to a covenant state, they are grafted in to partake of the root and
fatness of a gracious covenant dispensation; and are again taken from the hands
of that penal justice, and sovereign mercy, to be saved in the way of rich,
free, and covenanted mercy, as children of promise And here God's decrees have
nothing to do with sovereignty; for if they are saved, it is in the way of
covenanted, and not sovereign mercy; and if they are damned, it is in the way
of penal, and not sovereign justice. When shall we obtain, to understand God's
gracious covenant way on earth; that we may no longer, put a stumbling block in
the way of the blind? Levit xix. 14.

2d Objection, If the decrees have no influence, Christ died at uncertainty.

Answer, That is surely a mistake; were not the elect angels, a certain
definite number from eternity? and yet we are sure, the decrees of God must
have no influence, either to cause one to stand, or the other to fall; for if
they have, one cannot stand, and the other cannot fall: therefore they are not
probationers, and under no covenant dispensation. But all the angels were under
a covenant dispensation; and not under the influence of decrees; and yet the
elect a certain definite number; So all the seed of Adam, were under the
dispensation of the covenant of grace; and not under the influence of decrees;
must have a fair trial as probationers (as well as angels) and yet the elect
are a certain definite number; and Christ died at no uncertainty.

Query, Does not the scripture speak of some believing, because they were
ordained to eternal life? Acts xiii. 48. Answer, No; it is said, as many as
were ordained to eternal life believed; yet that could not be the cause, and it
is not said to be the cause: As many angles as were ordained to stand, stood,
when others fell; though we are sure all had power to stand; and their being
elect, could not be the cause why they stood, for all were probationers, and
must be at liberty to fall.

3d Objection, It is said those that are given to Christ, shall come to him,
John vi. 37. All that the father gives me, shall come to me: therefore those
that are given to Christ, in the decree of election, shall come.

Answer, There is nothing said about the decree of election, in this text,
either expressed, or implied. If there had been any design to tell us of the
gift of God from eternity, in the decree of election, the words must have been
in a past tense, has given; whereas they rather carry a future tense; all that
the father shall give to me, shall come to me; the time of giving refers to the
time of coming; or the time of coming, to the time of giving rather: Therefore
they respect the grace of regeneration; and the power of God to make the soul
willing, and able to act justifying faith; and it is such coming only, that can
insure the not being cast out; and it is surely such actual giving, at the time
of the soul's coming, that is here intended: As appears from ver. 44, and 65,
no man can come unto me, except the father which has sent me, draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Therefore said I unto you, that no man can
come unto me, except it were given to him of my father. The scope and design of
Christ here was, to convince the Jews, that he was Christ, and the only
savior, the sent of God; as the living father has sent me, ver. 57. And the
need they had of the power of God to change and renew their hearts; but he does
not in the least insinuate, that such power to regenerate their hearts, should
be obtained absolutely, and unconditionally, because it was decreed; for that
would have been to excuse, rather than reprove the Jews for not believing on
him; but labors to bring them first to own him doctrinally: and we are sure no
man will ever be given to Christ, by the mighty power of regeneration, until he
first own Christ doctrinally; for till then, he can never ask in Christ's name;
and yet seek he must, or his heart shall never be renewed, Ez. xxxvi. 26, 37.
and he must seek by faith in Christ, or it can never be done, Romans ix. 32.
hence he tells them, he is the true bread which came down from heaven; and when
they ask what they shall do, that they may work the works of God; he answers,
this is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, John vi. 28,
29, 32. And that the giving here, means the actual giving in time, by the faith
of regeneration, will fully appear from verse 39. This is the father's will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day. Which proves only, that such as
believe in Christ by a justifying faith, shall persevere; shall die in Christ;
and that these Christ will bring with him, in the resurrection, 1. These. iv.
14. and that they were given by the faith of regeneration, that he should give
eternal life, to as many as God had so given to him, John xvii. 2. but if
Christ had designed, to tell them of a gift in election from eternity, and that
all so given, shall come, for that reason absolutely, and unconditionally;
then all arguments are lost to persuade the Jews to believe on him
doctrinally, in order to be regenerated; for if they are of the elect, there is
no danger of being saved; and if of the reprobate, there is no possibility of
being saved; for that God by an eternal decree, has bound himself never to
give that gift, to any but the elect. And O! how sorrowful is it, that men
should put such unkind constructions, on the kind intentions of our kind
Emmanuel; who came to seek and to save, the lost sheep of the house of Israel;
even those that never received him, Mat. xv. 24. John i. 11. and thereby cast a
stumbling block in the way of the blind: And make the painful preaching of
Christ, to bring unregenerate people to adhere to the gospel covenant in order
to be saved, useless and vain.

But suppose the giving here, to be the gift of election from eternity, and all
such shall come; there is no person (that I know of) disputes, but the elect
shall surely come to Christ; for it was upon the certain foreknowledge of
that, they were elected: According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, Ep. i 4. But what is it that makes it certain, the
elect shall come to Christ? Answer, Foreknowledge of their coming, will surely
make it certain; for God can never foresee a thing, that will never be; he may
foresee things that would be, if they were not prevented, but then he cannot
foresee them, as having a being, which he foresees will be prevented from
being: Therefore, whatever God foresees as a real being, is a certainty; and as
God from eternity foresaw the elect would come to Christ; so he decreed their
salvation; and all things that God has decreed, shall surely come to pass. But
I suppose a certainty arising only from foreknowledge, will hardly give
satisfaction here, the decree must influence their coming, and then they cannot
help coming. If the decree does not influence their coming, there can be no
other certainty than that which arises from fore knowledge: And if the decree
does not influence their coming, there is nothing in the objection: Therefore
let us now inquire whether, the certainty of the elect's coming to Christ,
arises from fore knowledge only, or from the influence of a decree. I know a
decree cannot be separated from fore knowledge; but then, it is one thing for
God to foresee a thing, and decree it; and another for God to decree so, that
the decree shall produce, or influence the event decreed. God foresaw the fall
of Adam, and of angels, and decreed both; but what dreadful work do we make, if
we suppose those decrees had any influence, in producing these direful events:
And yet these events, being foreseen and decreed, are as certain, as it is that
the elect f^^ll come to Christ: And how has God decreed they shall come? Is it
in the way of a covena^^? Ans. Yes, Deuteronomy. xxix. 12. that thou should enter
into the covenant with the Lord thy God. ver. 13. that he may establish thee to
day, for a people unto himself. Is. lvi. 6. and take hold of my covenant, Romans
xi. 17. and with them partakest of the root and fatness. 2. Is it decreed, they
shall do the conditions of a covenant? Answer, Yes, Deuteronomy. xxx. 2, 6. If thou
shall obey his voice, according to all that I command thee; the Lord thy God
will circumcise thine heart. to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and
soul. Ez. xxxvi. 26, 37, A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I
put within you; yet for this will I be inquired of by the house of Israel, to
do it for them. Heb. iv. 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest,
lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief. 3. Is it decreed they
shall act the faith of regeneration, by the mighty power of God? Answer, Yes.
John vi. 44. No man can come unto me, except the father which has sent me,
draw him. Ephesians. i. 19. Who believe, according to the working of his mighty
power. 4. Is it decreed they shall do the condition of the covenant, to which
such mighty power, or regenerating grace is promised, by irresistible
conviction? Answer, No, (...) vii. 51. Ye do always resist the holy ghost; as
your sathers did. Genesis vi. 3, My spirit shall not always strive with man, Heb.
vi. 4, 5, 6, for it is impossible for those, who were once enlightened, and
were made partakers of the holy ghost; if they shall fall away, to renew them
again to repentance. So that if Christ had intended the gift of God from
eternity, which is not at all the case; yet there could be no other certainty
for the elect's coming to him, than what arises from foreknowledge; for God
never decreed that the elect should be saved, without first adhering to the
gospel covenant: And he never decreed, that they should have irresistible
grace, in order that they should doctrinally adhere to it; for men can adhere
to the gospel covenant without it; therefore it still appears, the decrees have
no influence: And the objection has nothing in it.

4. Objection, Christ says to the Jews, you believe not, because ye are not of
my sheep. John x. 26. which can have no other meaning, but that they were not
of the elect, for the following reasons: People are called sheep in scripture,
but in three respects. 1. Such as believe by a justifying faith, are called
sheep, ver. 27, 28, My sheep hear my voice, and they shall never perish; but
Christ could not mean, they did not believe because they were not of these
sheep, for that would have been to say, they believe not, because they believe
not, which could not be good sense. 2. All God's covenant people, are called
sheep, Ps. xxv. 7, and c. 3. Mat. x. 6. And Christ could not mean they were not
of his sheep, as not being of the seed of Abraham, and God's covenant people;
for they are all called Christ's own, in a covenant sense, John i. 11.
therefore, by not being of his sheep, he must design to tell us, they were not
of the elect.


Answer, I suppose Christ did not design to tell us, more or less, than he
designed to tell them; and if he designed to tell them, they were not of the
elect, he as fully designed to tell them, they were reprobates; and the reason
why they did not believe, was, they were predestined to damnation; and not
being of the elect, he had nothing to do with them. But if this was his design,
we may justly wonder. Indeed there were many things wonderful in Christ, his
person, name, counsels, and miraculous conduct, compose a most extensive scene
of wonders: But then his wonderfulness did not consist in inconsistency, and
injudiciousness; and who under heaven can tell, what end he could propose, in
telling God's covenant people, they were reprobates; for whom there was no
provision made in the covenant of grace; and that he had nothing to do with
them, for they were not his sheep, and he was not sent to be their shepherd:
And then cry O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, and ye would not. i. e. How often
would I have gathered reprobates, when I had no commission to do so. And then
behold the city, and weep over it, saying, if thou had known in this thy day,
the things which belong to thy peace; when they neither had a day of grace; or
any thing belonging to their peace; and it was impossible they should know they
had. But surely every man of sense must say, if Christ had once told them they
were reprobates, and he had no commission to be their shepherd, for they were
not of his sheep; he could not consistent with himself, ever after such
declaration, urge these reprobates, to believe on him for salvation. But this
he does with the most powerful arguments (consistent or inconsistent) John x.
37, 38, If I do not the works of my father, believe me not. But if I do, though
ye believe not me, believe the works: That ye may know and believe that the
father is in me, and I in him. Hence then we must look for some other
distinction of sheep, then either being regenerate, or of the elect, or barely
being the seed of Abraham, and so God's covenant people. And the true
distinction, is that which is made Romans ix. and Gal. iv. Such as turn the
gospel covenant into a law covenant, Christ cannot be their shepherd, nor they
his sheep, be they of the seed of Abraham as they will; they are children of
the bondwoman, and not of promise; for while they imagine their own moral
virtues, and ceremonial washings shall justify and save them; they must stumble
at Christ; but cannot follow him, as their shepherd; and he cannot feed them,
as his sheep. And when beyond all dispute this was Christ's meaning, we see
with what propriety Christ could tell these that were not of his sheep; of a
day that belonged to their peace; and weep over them, for ruining themselves in
adhering to a law covenant; and urge them with the most powerful arguments, to
believe on him, as the savior that God had sent into the world: That ye may
know and believe, that I am in the father, and the father in me, John x. 38.
And here we see, how sorrowfully this text, for many ages, has been racked and
tortured, to make it speak a sense, that makes Christ's conduct nonsense. And
still we see, decrees have no influence, and do no way embarras the covenant of
grace; though the number of elect and reprobate, are certain and definite; any
more than the decrees of God, with respect to angels, embarrassed their
convenant state.

3. I was to show, that efficacious grace is necessary to regeneration, and
justification; from which none can fall.

As to the grace of regeneration, and the efficacy of it, I have sufficiently
discoursed, under the 7th heard upon the covenant; therefore I shall proceed to
say something of the perseverance of the saints. And the reason why the saints
cannot fall from grace, is this, viz. a justifying faith insures all that have
it, in a state of salvation. He that is justified, shall not come into
condemnation; he has everlasting life, and is passed from death unto life,
John v. 24. he that believes on the son, has everlasting life. John iii. 36.
They shall never perish, John x. 28. A justifying faith, puts those that have
it, beyond a state of probation. To be on trial for any thing, supposes always
the thing uncertain, and not insured. The saints are upon trial for growth in
grace, and increasing fitness for the heavenly world. And this growth, as to
the greater or less degree of it, will be according as men improve in ordinary
cases. How much knowledge a saint shall have in this world, is uncertain; or
how great his faith, love to God and holiness, to the saints, his meekness,
patience, and temperance shall be, is uncertain. A degree of every grace is
certain, to every saint: He is therefore a probationer, only for a greater
degree; but a greater justification, a saint cannot obtain, than he has at
first; for it is perfect. God may pardon the sins of the saints every day; and
they have need of it, for in many things they offend, James iii. 2. And there
is not a a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not, Eccl vii. 20.
But it is one thing to pardon the sins and imperfections of a saint, and
another to justify his state. Men are insured in a state of salvation, when
ever they come into the possession of the righteousness of Christ. Adam's
righteousness would have insured all his posterity, if he had continued
perfect, whenever they became heirs of it, and that would have been by natural
generation. Men are made heirs of Christ's righteousness, by the faith of
regeneration. And though Adam's seed would have been bound to be holy, yet not as
probationers; for they would have been insured. So the saints are under the
highest obligations to be holy in all manner of conversation and godliness, 2
Pet. iii. 11. But then, they are not probationers to obtain a right and title
to the eternal inheritance of heaven, for that is made sure on the acting of
the faith of justification; and this is the only reason why a saint cannot fall
from grace. Satan may desire to have them, and sift them as wheat; but Christ
will always pray for them, that their faith fail not, Luke xxii. 31. Christ
prays they may be kept from the evil of the world, John xvii. 15. and it will
surely be done.

Fourthly and lastly, I was to show, that a possibility of sailing, is always
necessary to a state of probation, for regeneration, justification, eternal
life, or any thing else.

I have already considered, that such as act a justifying faith, are at the
same instant justified, and therefore not probationers for justification, after
such act. And that regenerating grace, is before that act, in the order of
nature; and also that eternal life, is necessarily connected with the same
justifying act of faith; so that heaven with all the glory of the heavenly
state, is insured, and confirmed in the favor of such person or persons. And
if persons are upon trial, as probationers for things, they are already in
possession of, and are influenced and confirmed to them; we have lost all in
the ideas of a probationary state; and must consider the angels yet as
probationers, for they are as much bound to their good behavior, as the
saints. Here then we see, if men are ever probationers for regeneration,
justification, or eternal life, it must be before they act the faith of
regeneration. And we also see, that all persons that say, men are not
probationers in the covenant of grace, for life and happiness, until they act
the faith of regeneration, implicitly say, they are not probationers for life
and happiness at all. To be a probationer in a covenant, includes these several
things. 1. The thing for which a man is a probationer, must be covenanted for:
For however God may give things not covenanted for, he that obtains them, does
not obtain them as a probationer in covenant. To obtain things as a probationer
in covenant, is to have them covenanted for, on certain terms or conditions;
for if there are no conditions, there can be no trial, and a state of
probation, is always a state of trial. 2. To be a probationer for a thing, is
to have it so covenanted for, that it is possible to obtained it; a sentiment
contrary to this, is madness. 3. To be a probationer, is to have the thing so
covenanted for, as that it is not certain, it shall be obtained (...) If the
thing covenanted for, is certain to be obtained, it is insured, and he for whom
it was covenanted, is no probationer. Take away either of these things, and you
destroy the notion of probation.


1. Hence then we see, if men are ever probationers for life and salvation, it
is before they are regenerated; for regeneration conforms the soul to God, in
acts of justifying faith, and holy love; and is the beginning of heaven; and
insures the full fruition of it.

2. Hence then we see, if men are ever probationers for life and salvation, it
must be covenanted for, before they obtain that life and salvation; therefore
it must be covenanted for, before they are regenerated, for a man is not upon
trial, for life and salvation, after he is regenerated, more than the angels in
heaven; for one is us much confirmed in salvation as the other.

3. We hence see, if men are ever probationers for life and salvation, it must
be, when it is possible for them to obtain it, or not obtain it; therefore,
they must be probationers, before they are regenerated: For after they are
regenerated, they are insured, and cannot perish; and consequently not
probationers.

4. We hence see, if men can be probationers no where, but where the salvation
covenanted for, may be obtained, or not obtained; (upon the truth of which, the
world may be challenged) then a possibility of failing is always necessary to a
state of probation for any thing; be it what it will: And this was the point to
be proved.

5. We hence see, if regenerating grace insures salvation to them that have it
(which I hope no thinking, understanding christian will deny) then God can
covenant about life and salvation, with no people as probationers for it, but
the unregenerate: For as we have seen, the regenerate cannot be probationers
for it, because they are insured in it; and a certainty of obtaining the
salvation covenanted for, or an impossibility of obtaining it, either of them
destroy the notion of a probationary state.

6. We hence see, if God makes the covenant of grace with none but the
regenerate, or such as act a justifying faith, and not until they are
regenerated, or act that act; then he saves none as probationers: For that act
insures; and if the covenant is not made before a justifying act of faith; it
is not made until the sinner is saved: And it is not made until he is put
beyond a state of probation: For from the original of that act, it is
impossible but he must be saved; and if the covenant cannot be made with
unregenerate men, because they have not regeneration, and the first act of
justifying faith; then that faith must be first; at least in the order of
nature; and they cannot be probationers, in the order of nature, much less in
the order of time, before that act: Therefore they cannot be saved as
probationers at all. If it be replied, faith is a condition of the covenant,
and men are upon trial whether they will act a justifying act of faith, and
when they will act a justifying act of faith; and when they do it, they are
saved as probationers. It is answered, if the covenant is not made with him
that is saved, before he act a justifying faith; faith, which is the gift of
God, was given to him before he was in covenant; and what God gives to men out
of covenant, is not given to them as probationers; for they are probationers no
otherwise, than as being in covenant.

7. We hence see, a man cannot be a probationer out of covenant, or in covenant
if he is insured, or confirmed in a state of salvation; or if salvation is not
so covenanted for, as that it is possible to obtain it. Hence then, God can
covenant with no person or persons, as probationers for life and salvation, but
the unregenerate: And these cannot be probationers, if they are confirmed in
salvation, as being elect; or sealed under a decree of predestination to
perish, as reprobates. Those only can be probationers in the covenant of grace,
for whom salvation is possible, but not infallible.

8. We hence see, if God has not covenanted with unregenerate men, and that so
it is possible for them, either to be saved or not saved; he has not covenanted
to save men at all as probationers: And such a conclusion, is to destroy the
nature of all covenants; and turn them into an absolute promise, of
unconditional salvation: Though the covenant of works, and of grace, are distinct
species, they must necessarily each of them, partake of the nature of the
genus: i. e. have what is essential to a covenant in general; and this is
essential; even a promise with stipulation, or condition: In this they must
both agree, or they cannot both be covenants.

9. We hence see, if men are not saved as probationers they are not saved by a
covenant state at all; but we are sure God saves none, but according to a
covenant: And the terms of salvation by Christ, are the terms of a well ordered
covenant. It would be a piece of the grandest superfluity, to produce
scriptural evidence for this; for the word of God is full of it.

10. We hence see the reason why God covenanted with unregenerate men, about
life and salvation; viz. that he designed to save men in a covenant way, and as
probationers; which could not be, if they were saved before be covenanted with
them: If the angels had been confirmed in a state of salvation before they were
covenanted with, they could never have been saved as probationers, or in a
covenant way: The covenant must be made before that confirmation, not only in
the order of nature, but also of time; for they must have time after the
covenant is made, to do either good or evil; for if they are not in the
covenant, they cannot be probationers by it; and if they are confirmed; and can
do nothing but good, neither are they probationers. So if God will save men as
probationers, the covenant of grace must be made with them, before a justifying
act of faith, not only in the order of nature, but also of time: For before
they can be probationers, they must be in covenant; and if, they are not there,
before a justifying act of faith, even in the order of time; they cannot be
probationers: for an act of faith conforms the heart to God; and they cannot
choose evil, so as to come into condemnation; therefore, if they are not in
covenant before regeneration, in the order of time; they have no time to do any
thing but believe: And they never saw a time, after they were in covenant, that
they could do that, for which they could perish: And so could not come into
covenant as probationers. And if they could not come into it as probationers;
we are sure they could not be probationers, when there. i. e. If God could not
make the covenant with them as probationers, because they were confirmed in a
state of salvation; they could not obtain salvation as probationers, after the
covenant was made; for the same reason.

11th, We hence see, there is no way to deny the covenant of grace, being made
with unregenerate men, without denying also, that God designed to save men in a
covenant way, and as probationers: And where is the man so hardy as to assert
such a thing?

12th, We here learn, the true properties of a probationer; which are these;
viz. 1. A real being in covenant, or under a ratifying covenant transaction. 2.
So in covenant, as that it is possible, either to be said, or lost. Hence
then, whoever asserts conviction, or regeneration, prior to a justifying act of
faith, in the order of time, are irresistible; asserts also, those that have
such conviction, or regeneration, are put beyond a state of probation, before a
justifying act of faith, even in the order of time; for he that is under an
irresistible influence, to do good; it is impossible but he must be saved; and
if he receive Christ by a justifying act of faith; he does not receive him as a
probationer: but as one confirmed in salvations, for he could do nothing else:
But was like the angles able only to do good.
And how not only unreasonable, is such a conclusion, but unscriptural also? So
that, the true state of things is this; no grace of the spirit is irresistible,
in its own nature; and no otherwise confirms a final perseverance, than as it
receives a sanction of insurance, by a justifying act of faith; And final
perseverance, is promised to none but such as act a justifying act of faith: It
is therefore the righteousness of Christ, that i^fers perseverance; and not the
virtue of any grace of the spirit.

13th, We hence learn, when God made the covenant with Adam, and in him, with
all his seed, for that they were all made foederally holy; they were all made
probationers; and is must be possible for them all to be saved; which cannot
be, if the promise is not made to them, at probationers: And if the promise is
made to them as probationers, it must be made to something they can do, or not
do: Therefore, it they are saved as probationers; the promise must be, to the
endeavor of an unregenerate man; for he only is a probationer, that can choose
a refuse; which is not the case of a regenerate man.

14 We hence see, the reason, and force, of all the pleas and expostulations of
ancient, and indulgent heaven; saying, O that Israel had hearkened unto me,
then had thy peace been as a river, If. xlviii. 18. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? mine heart is turned within me, and
my repentings are kindled together, Hos. xi. 8. etc.

15th. We hence see, the unreasonableness of all such, as would once think of a
universal redemption, and salvation in the covenant of grace, and yet deny
their children a privilege in it: If God had not made the covenant with the
father and his seed; it would have been impossible to prove general redemption;
for it is this only can make it general: Infants, cannot make a covenant with
God personally, and often die before they are able to do it; therefore God
covenants with them relatively, and expresses his covenant care of them, before
they are able to care for themselves; and herein appears his universal mercy,
grace, and love. What shall we render unto the Lord, for all his benefits; let
us take the cup of salvation, call upon his name, and render unto him the
sacrifices of praise, Ps. cxvi. 12, 13.

16th and lastly, We hence see, the unreasonableness of all such, as say,
unregenerate men, have no right to enter into covenant with God; for as we see,
none but such can be probationers: A new heart, and a new spirit, are the
promised salvation of the new covenant: And how can they be promised, to a man
out of covenant; or in covenant, if he has got them already? He only can be a
probationer for them, that is in co them; for if God give regenerating grace,
to a man out of covenant, it is not covenant, but sovereign mercy: And it is
covenant mercy, that makes salvation for walls and bulwarks, Is. xxvi. 1. and
compacts Jerusalem as a city; and he that prays for her peace, ought to join
himself to the Lord, and take hold of this covenant, Ps. cxxii. 3, 6. Is. lvi.
6.

IMPROVEMENT.
Now, O my precious and never dying soul, what have thou seen? and what
reflections will thou make, or inferences will thou draw either for thine own
benefit, or the advantage of others? Have thou from the mountains of covenanted
salvation, beheld the numberless posterity of thy first progenitor, or of thy
father Adam, engraven on the breast plate of the high priest of our salvation,
Christ Jesus, and he bearing their judgment on his heart, when he became a
sacrifice for sin? Glory to God in the highest, that on earth there has been
such peace and goodwill toward the ruined progeny of a bankrupt father. What
could the God of love and care, compassion and pity, have done more, to
rekindle the extinguished Fire of love to himself, and each other, than to
unfold the immortal sources of mercy and grace, in a gracious covenant
transaction, that should make him, who had ruined all his numerous offspring,
(which were but so many parts of himself) the restorer of primitive liberty, in
a foederal relation, that has not only, as universal salvation, but expresses
more readiness, and desire to save, than the original compact? O the force and
strength, the power and influence of these bands of love, that are created by
agonies and pains, of him, who entered once into the most holy place, by his
own blood. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends, John xv. 13. But God commends his love toward us, in that while
we were yet sinners, and enemies, Christ died for us, Romans v. 8, 10. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his so^, his only
son, his primogeniture, or first born, his well beloved son, to be a
propitiation for our sins, 1 John iv. 10. and not for our sins only, but for
the sins of the whole world also, chap. ii. 2. These sources of immortal love,
th^^ could be found in none but a God, were first unbosomed in these words, the
seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head, Genesis iii. 15. Here God the
supr^^^ renews a foederal compact, assumes and re-establishes a theocracy; or
the government of Adam, and his seed, both as a church, and state. Hence, though
he does not set them as before the fall, to dress the garden and keep it, Genesis
ii. 15. yet he sends them forth to till the ground, chap. iii 23. Here, O my
soul, thy infinitely kind and beneficent God, raises thy brankrupt father,
with all his numerous Offspring, to the glory, honor, and dignity of a
religious and spiritual kingdom; makes them Zion and Jerusalem above; and all
children of promise: And anoints his darling son, king and lawgiver, upon his
holy hill of Zion; makes him the high priest, to offer for them an acceptable
sacrifice; and thereby opens a fountain to wash away their sin and uncleanness;
anoints him with every grace, to run down from his consecra^^d head, to them as
the skirts of his garment; and their prophet and wonderful counselor to lead,
guide, instruct, and comfort them in all their work, and toil of their hands,
because of the ground which the Lord had cursed, Genesis v. 29. And now, O my
soul, shall we, whom infinite love, grace, and mercy has raised from the
dungeon of despair; from the spiritual Sodom and Egypt, of cruel bondage,
poverty, beggary, misery, and want; and brought us to sit together in heavenly
places, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. ii. 6. has brought from east to west, to sit
down in the kingdom of heaven, Matt. viii. 11. speak the cruel language of
unbrotherly Cain, saying, am I my brother's keeper? Genesis iv. 9: Shall we, who
are not only brethren by the original^ties of nature; but by the redintegrated
force of foederal compact, born under the sweet influences of the sun of
righteousness, and love; conduct ourselves as though we were a different
species of beings, aliens from friendship and brotherly love, as though we had
been born under the cruel influence of vulcan and Mars, and were but a complex
of fire and sword? My heart, my heart, shall thou cease to bleed for thy
father's children, and the vineyard of thy God; who though originally made one
fold, under Christ, the true Shepherd, long since schism'd, and razed the
foundations of peace, and friendship; that were so happily laid, by the
Emanuel, or prince of peace? O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou city of the living
God; who was originally filled with all the seed of Adam; how art thou come
down wonderfully by error and schism; thou that might have been princess in
the whole earth; how are thy gates desolate by reason of the heathen, the
Mohammedan, and the Jew? O Zion, ought not tears to be on thy cheeks, for thy
little sister that has no breasts? Cant. viii. 8, but is perishing for lack of
vision, Prove. xxix. 18. desolate, and without God in the world, Ephesians. ii. 12.
The heathen, who in the early ages of the world, went out from the presence of
the Lord, into a far country, and there have wasted their substance, with
riotous living, as strangers from the covenants of promise: The Mahometans, who
have exalted their false prophet Mahomet, above thy king, whom thy God has
anointed on thy holy hill, to be the only prince and savior: The Jews, who by
adhering to the law covenant, have trodden under foot the blood of their Lord
and Savior; all these are kept from thy solemn feasts; therefore thy gates are
desolate, Lam i. 4. O my soul, as these foreign afflictions, might justly open
all the sources of thy liquid grief; and make thine head as waters, and thine
eyes as fountains of tears, because of these slain of the daughters of thy
people; yet what additional cause of unutterable lamentation, presents to view,
when with bitterest regret, thou art obliged to reflect on the domestic schisms
of thy mother's children, the christian professing world? Who through the
hidden mystery of error and mistake, fit and speak against their brethren, and
slander their own mother's children, Ps. l. 20. O thou kindest Emanuel, why
do thou not take to thee, thy great power, and reign over us all? since thy
father has committed to the^ the government of the whole earth. O our
christian Zion, are we not in all our schisms, looking for Christ to come in
great spiritual power, and reign over all, even the Mahometans, the Jews, and
the heathen, as well as more fully over the Christian; and that he shall subdue
antichrist? but O, who can tell the reason why he does not come? Are not our
schisms the cause of it? Do we not think he is altogether such a one as
ourselves, a lover of schism, and sectarianism? But he will reprove us, and set
us in better order, before he will come in his great spiritual reign, Ps. l.
21. As to his personal reign on earth, there is no such thing ever will be; and
they that look for it, will be as much disappointed, as the Jew, in looking for
another Christ.

But O my christian brethren, when shall the Jew be subject to Christ's right
scepter? Ps. xlv. 6. To which query I answer, it will be, when they are beat
out, in long waiting for another Christ; and they are obliged to think, the
prophecies concerning a Christ to come, are fulfilled; then they will abide no
longer in unbelief; and then they will be grafted in, for then God will be able
to graft them in again, Romans xi. 23. God will not graft them into the covenant
of grace, by miracles and irresistible grace; miracles were wrought in Christ's
day, and the early days of the gospel, to confirm Christ's mission, but t^a^ is
all over: And if the way of grafting in, was by irresistible influence, God
would have kept them in, when they were in; and never broke them off, because
of unbelief, ver. 20. it is said, Jesus could not do mighty works, because of
unbelief, Mark vi 5. which could not be true, if his way of working in
unbelievers, was by irresistible power; and if Christ would not keep them in
covenant by signs, when they were there, as Matt. xii. 39. there shall no sign
be given; it cannot be reasonably thought, they shall be brought to the
doctrinal faith of Christ, by miracle. And alas, for us professing christians!
are not our schisms, and divisions, a great cause why the Jews are prejudiced
against our dear Lord and master; for they in their ignorance, know not to what
sect they shall turn: For this, O my soul, let tears be on thy checks, for who
can comfort Zion under this calamity? And what is it that keeps the pagan world
from the gospel of Christ, but our divisions? The Papists are striving to
proselyte them to themselves; and the Protestant are laboring to proselyte
them to the protestant religion; and they are proselyted to neither, little
more than to be cruel inhuman murderers, of professed christians, either on the
one side, or the other: And what can they in their ignorance, think of either
sect? And if they would turn to the protestants, they are schism'd all to
pieces; and every sect wants to make the proselyte. O my soul, how has
division and schism, like the river Kishon, swept away the strength of Christ's
kingdom? The heathens are not only prejudiced against the christian religion,
by our divisions; but by that means, it is often dangerous to attempt to
proselyte them; and Zion's gates are kept desolate: For this her priests should
sigh, her virgins be afflicted, and she in bitterness; for Jew and Pagan, are
kept from her solemn feasts; and all these things are against Christ, and his
kingdom. As for the Mahometans, or the Turks. it is to be feared, whether ever
they will come to Zion's gates any more, or ever be subject to Christ's
kingdom, any otherwise than only to be dashed in pieces, like a potter's
vessel, Ps. ii. 9. unless they should be conquered and subdued, by christian
nations, scattered and dispersed among them, so that they have no power as a
nation, to propagate their own religion. My reasons for this are these, viz. 1.
the Jews are looking for a Messiah to come; and the time will come, when they
will be convinced, that their expectations are vain; and then it will be easy
for them to join themselves to Zion's king; and take hold of her covenant. 2.
The pagans have no standard; they have no settled form of worship; no rule of
direction, no government in their religion; nothing that is made religion, by
any penal law; and therefore, every man may do, just what is right in his own
sight; either worship devils, or let it alone: And such a people may be
proselyted.
But the Turks are looking for no Christ: have a standard; and a government in
religion; a rule of direction; and a severe penal law, in the favor of their
religion; and a strong prejudice, in the favor of their false prophet Mahomet.
And as I am fully persuaded, Christ does not design to bring people to adhere
to him, as the only true prophet, priest, and king of the church, by miracles,
or irresistible power; so I am persuaded, the Turks are the Gog and Magog,
spoken of Rev. xx. 8. whose power and malice against Christ's kingdom and
church, shall be rest^ained for a long space: signified by a thousand years,
ver. 2. and the restraint signified by satan being bound; and by Gog and Magog
being in the four quarters of the earth; I would suppose no more is to be
understood, than the potency and pride of that nation; who as we are told,
style themselves three parts of the world; What more confirms me in this
notion, is this; the scattered remnants of any nations would hardly be called
nations, and we know of no nation, that by their constitution, are so
prejudiced against Christ and his kingdom, as they; though remnants of other
nations may join with them, to make war against the church; but Gog and Magog,
seem to signify great powers; and more than only scattered remnants; and surely
the Turks are great powers. But that Gog and Magog, signify the Mohometans, I
submit to better judgments; and would earnestly pray, that if God can see any
way for it, consistent with his covenanted grace and mercy, they may be
restored to the church, and adorn her gates. But whatever influence our
divisions may have in hardening these Mahometans, in their false faith, and
prejudicing them against our true prophet, priest, and king; yet O my christian
brethren, we are very sensible of the evil influence of our divided sentiments,
not only in respect of the pagan, and the Jew; but even among ourselves. How
can the long-expected glorious reign of the prince of peace, commence? While if
he comes by his power and grace into one sect, another will be disaffected; and
say it is not Christ; and few are willing to own it is Christ, unless he sets
his face to go, where they go to worship; like the Samaritans, who when Jesus
set his face to go to Jerusalem, would not receive him, Luke ix. 51, 53. and
how is it possible for Christ, to reign visibly, so as to be owned as reigning
in all the different sects; while every sect is fond to believe it is not
Christ, in any but their own: And surely while we that profess to be the
friends of Christ, are so strangely divided in sentiments; there must be a
great many errors and mistakes somewhere; and if Christ should come to reign in
every sect equally and alike; it would not only not be believed in general; but
Christ must, needs give countenance to more error, than any of us are willing
to think he is willing to do: Why then do we expect the coming of Christ, while
we are a house so much divided against itself? Surely, surely, however our kind
Emanuel came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; yet he will never
come to reign in general, until we that profess to be his friends, are more
friendly to each other; and can see more eye to eye: What duty is so much
inculcated as love; but O how do our divisions alienate our hearts, and keep us
at sword's points; and hence we weary ourselves in vain, in looking for the
peaceful reign of the prince of peace.

O my immortal soul, how long shall thy peaceful lord, and compassionate
savior, be kept out of his sweet repose, and peaceful throne in Zion; by our
schisms and divisions? And O where shall the professed friends, and expectants
of his glorious reign, go for a safe retreat from discord, confusion and
strife? To which distinct body of professors can we all go, and with which can
we all unite, that the Lord whom we all seek, may suddenly come to his temple;
even the messenger of the covenant, whom we all profess to delight in? Mal.
iii. 1. Can we all return to the once glorious church of Rome, and reunite with
her, who has filled the pure worship of her Lord and king, with weak and
beggarly elements? Gal. iv. 9. Can we believe, that we are obliged to take the
interpretation of sacred scripture, from her pretended holy fathers, for
infallible? and that she has power to impose traditions; such as holidays,
penances, and extreme unction? And many other things, not contained in the word
of God? Can we credit her notion of transubstantiation, i. e. that the
sacramental bread and wine, are changed into the real body and blood of Christ,
when consecrated? When we have manual and occular demonstration to the
contrary? And that in the sacrament there is offered to God, a true, proper,
and propitiatory sacrifice for the living, and the dead? Can we credit her
doctrine of a purgatory, and that men may be delivered from it, by the prayers
of the saints? And that justification is not complete before death? Therefore
persons must go to purgatory to make satisfaction to divine justice: And here
she tells us of two sorts of people, that go to purgatory. 1. Such as die
guilty of lesser sins. 2. Such as die guilty of greater, page 34, of a
profession of her catholic faith.
And here she errs in the fundamental doctrine of justification by faith alone.
Can we therefore credit her notion of her own infallibility; and that she
cannot be guilty of pernicious errors? p. 10. and that she has power to
anathematize, or curse, all that don't agree to her faith; for heretics: And
that none can be saved, unless they own her faith, and supremacy; p. 5. Can we
credit her notion of worshipping God by images; and praying to deceased saints,
or angels? And that she has power to take life for nonconformity? Do not we
that are protestants, rather believe, she is antichrist; an opposer of Christ
and his kingdom; the mother of harlots, and abominations; the mystery babylon
the great? Rev. xvii. 5. that is drunken with the blood of the saints? ver. 6.
and that Christ has quitted reigning in her Zion, and left her and her
pretended see of supremacy for the pope, or bishop of Rome, as Peter's
successor, and Christ's vicar upon earth, like the jewish theocracy, to
themselves desolate?

2. Can we all unite in the established Church of England; who has still
retained so much of the doctrine, and discipline of Rome; as in keeping so many
holy days, imposing set forms of worship, and so great supremacy in a bishop?

3. Can the church of Christ, ever be general, in the doctrine of the kirk of
Scotland; whose predestinarian sentiments allow but a remnant of the visible
church to belong to Christ's mediatorial kingdom? though this predestinarian
doctrine, is not restrained to the creed of the kirk of Scotland; for the
creeds of the church of England, and of the Anabaptists, are much the same, as
to the decrees of God. And O my soul! how is it possible that ever the church
of thy dear and kind Lord, should agree to a scheme of the covenant of grace,
that allows him to reign over but a few of them? And that the churches in
general should unite in such a scheme? A scheme in which its advocates have no
other way to reconcile the general calls, and professions of kindness, that God
has expressed in his holy word, and the general offers of grace, with their
notion of particular redemption and decrees, but only to tell us, that all that
God intended by such calls and honor, was to show how reasonable it is that
men should repent and turn to God: When they had no provision made in the
covenant of grace, for such turning, were not of Christ's sheep, and he not
sent to be their shepherd. O how has error trodden down the scheme of the
covenant of grace! that was originally calculated to promote harmony, peace,
and concord in the church, and brotherly love among all it is members. Surely
such a scheme of the covenant of grace, can never be very good natured, for it
is impossible but it must be very cross, and crooked to the visible church, if
there is salvation in it but for a remnant of those that are visibly in it. And
indeed I think, it will want more than metaphysical distinctions, to screen it
from lying, if there is not salvation in it for all: For that it says all were
foederally holy, and the blood of them all washed away. But such a scheme, is
as inconsistent with the general reign of Christ in the church, as it is with
the general peace of its members; and therefore must be turned out of the
church, before a general reign can be expected; or the church in general
united; and brotherly love promoted. If any should think that persons cannot be
broken from a law dependence, and brought naked to believe in Christ's
righteousness, without first believing particular redemption; let them only
inquire of experienced people, and such as may be judged to be truly gracious;
and see if they all believed that doctrine, before they embraced Christ. As for
myself, though I did once believe that doctrine, and the predestination
correspondent to it: yet it was some time after, I think my soul had embraced
Christ, by a justifying faith; and I am persuaded, that more embrace Christ,
before they believe the doctrine of particular redemption and decrees, than do
afterward; and many regenerate souls, never believe it: And therefore it is of
no use in the world; but only to be a stumbling block in the way of the weak; a
bone of contention; and a bar in the way of the general reign of Christ; and
the union of the churches.

4. Can all the different churches unite with those called the Friends; who
have thrown away the visible and external seals of the covenant of grace? When
did God make, and own a covenant with a people, without external seals? As soon
as the covenant of grace was made with Adam and his seed, God enjoins the
offering of sacrifices; which as they were types and shadows of Christ, and his
sacrifice; so they could be no less seals, or ratifying tokens of the covenant
of grace; for they confirmed the way of salvation by blood and sacrifice; and
therefore they could be no less than confirming tokens of the covenant they
were under; the covenant; so all those that were enjoined to offer them, were
thereby owned, and confirmed, as the people with whom the covenant was made;
and when did God take away all external seals from the covenant of grace? How
easy is it to prove, that baptism, and the Lord's supper, are yet the visible
seals of the covenant of grace; and are to continue so to the end of time. Go
ye, teach all nations, baptizing them, and lo I am with you to the end of the
world, Ma^^. xviii. 19, 20. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye do show the Lord's death 'till be come, 1 Cor. xix. 26. Then they that
gladly received his word, were baptized, and the same day there were added unto
them, about three thousand souls, Acts ii. 41. I very well know the arguments
the Friends use against the external seals of the covenant; but my design is
not to enter into debates with every sect of professors; but to suggest the
reasons why we cannot unite; and the injury our discord does to Christ's
kingdom; the peace of the church in general; and the general good of the world.
And O my soul, how can the christian world unite with a people, which we cannot
prove, are visibly in the covenant of grace? And who can prove to us, that the
Friends (as they choose to call themselves) are they and their infant
offspring, in said covenant? Neither of the churches distinct from them, can
receive them for members; admit them to their communion, or to sit at the
Lord's table (if they would desire the privilege) until they are baptized: And
could we possibly prove God made the covenant with Adam and his seed, and
Abraham and his seed, and so prove a universal redemption, from their all being
in covenant? If there had been no other evidence of their being in covenant,
than there is that the Friends are in covenant with God; we surely could not.
It will not do for men to tell us they are in covenant; God must tell us so, or we
have no right to believe; and God says, they were added to the church by
baptism, Acts ii. 41. and Christ has promised to be with no people as a church,
to the end of the world, but such as administer the covenant by baptism, Matt.
xxviii. 20. For it is by this mode of administration, the church is rendered
visible; and this coming in the room of circumcision, as Col. ii. 11, 12.
Sealing the covenant, as a covenant of promise to us, and our infants; we are
by this means grafted in with the remnant of the Jews, who were never broken
off because of unbelief, and with them grafted in by baptism, we partake of the
root and fatness of their covenant state; and as the promise is yet general to
the father, child and servant, so we can yet prove general redemption, under
all the administrations of the covenant of grace; which we could not do, if the
promise was not to us, and our seed, in the same manner, that it was to Adam,
and his seed; to Abraham, and his seed; and these things can be proved with
respect to neither of the dispensations of the covenant of grace; but only by
the external mode of the administration of the covenant: For it is by the
visible seals of the covenant, that God tells us who they are that he owns for
his covenant people. Hence we that are God's visible covenant people, can never
unite with those called the Friends, as a visible church of God; for we have
nothing to prove, that God has dispensed the covenant in the gospel day,
without visible seals; but much to the contrary. And O my soul, who can cease
to lament for our dear Zion; when societies are rent from her communion, by
tearing the seals from the covenant of grace; introducing anarchy or confusion,
into Christ's kingdom; and destroying the general peace of the church? Surely
an enemy has done this. And for this let tears be one thy cheeks, O Zion,
until God shall restore Jerusalem, a quiet habitation: Then in the city of our
solemnities; the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers; and
streams wherein shall go no galley with oars, Is. xxxiii. 20, 21.

5. Can Christ's kingdom ever be general in Anabaptistry; which people deny,
that any belong to the visible church, until they are regenerated, and
baptized? Could all the seed of Abraham, individually, have belonged to
Christ's kingdom; to the kingdom of heaven, Matt. viii. 12. or have been
Christ's own, John i. 11. if they had not belonged to the covenant of grace, in
their early infancy? Was it not from the covenant of grace they were broken?
Romans xi. into which they had been entered, before they were able to believe?
For had they been adult, they could not be entered by the faith they had; for
it was only fit to break them off. Woe to the world, but especially to the
church, when God shall cast infants out of Christ's kingdom. Christ is anointed
king, no where as a savior, but upon the holy hill of Zion, Ps. ii. 6. i. e.
the church? And if infants are not in the church, they belong not to Christ's
kingdom; and we have seen in the doctrine, how unwilling God was, there should
be a race of uncovenanted people: How highly did God resent the conduct of
Moses; when he would go to bring his covenant people out of Egypt; when he
would go to be a guide to others; and had neglected to guide his own family?
The Lord met him, and sought to kill him, Ex. iv. 24. and what is the matter?
Why Moses, that is reminded of God's covenant care of Abraham's seed, will not
remember the care of God to his own seed; has forgot that every man child that
is not circumcised, shall be cut off from God's people, as a breaker of God's
covenant, Genesis xvii. 14. And here we see, this curse first falls on the parent;
however the child may perish in the overthrow. But it is impossible, the whole
world can ever be Christ's visible kingdom, in this world, according to the
Anabaptist faith; unless we can find an age, in which there are no infants; and
it would be strange for God to destroy the power of generation, in order that
Christ should have a general kingdom, or reign in this world. However, if God
destroy the power of generation, for one age, Christ's general reign cannot be
long; for there will be nobody to reign over, in the next; unless God raise the
dead: It cannot be a thousand years, unless men live much longer than in these
days; and how can the church in general, unite with schemes of the covenant of
grace that are inconsistent with the general reign of Christ? Such schemes are
surely against Christ and his kingdom. Infants once had their blood washed
away, before they were born; as belonging to Christ's kingdom: And let him that
casts them out, see how he will answer it, to the king of the church; he never
can, unless he had express order to do it; and that cannot be found in God's
word, or any thing like it. And O, how sorrowful is it, that men should be
found to cast their children out of Christ's kingdom! and that which separates
Christ's kingdom from him, or any part of it; can never make his kingdom
general. And what then do Anabaptists mean, to mock those that speak of
infants, as belonging to Christ's visible kingdom; and yet profess to be
earnest expectants of the general reign of Christ? Do they expect, when Christ
comes, that he will make the newborn babe confess his faith: and so be taken
into covenant by baptism? Or that he will alter the terms of the covenant, and
take them in without faith? Or that he will reign over them out of covenant, as
though they were in it? Then the uncircumcised would not be cut off from among
God's people; as Genesis xvii. 14. or do they think, that little infants are the
Gog and Magog, spoken of Rev. xx. 8? without doubt, infants are as numerous as
those there spoken of; and if they are not Gog and Magog; they are of Christ's
kingdom, and must be baptized.

6. Can it be supposed, the different sects will ever unite with those who are
for establishing and propagating the national, and solemn league and covenant?
And this they do (and compass sea and land to do it) under the specious
pretense, that they are covenants of duty; and what is that but to suppose, the
covenants of grace is not a covenant of duty? Alas! what more solemn league and
covenant can men invent, than the holy covenant of grace, made with the visible
church? What duty can there be, that is not comprised in the covenant of grace*
Surely if the church covenant of our God, does not oblige us to extirpate
popery and prelacy, their solemn league and covenant can never do it; that
covenant can never prove popery and prelacy to be wrong; an^ ^f the covenant of
grace must prove them wrong, does in not bind and oblige us to extirpate all
that is wrong? Alas! what loose thoughts are such! but has not great
indulgence been given to suppose, God's covenant of grace is not a covenant of
duty, while some have declared the lowest condition of the covenant of grace,
must be done by justifying faith; and others, that it has no conditions at
all? What is this but to say, it is not a covenant of duty; and that
unregenerate men cannot be bound to duty by it? But as we have abundantly seen,
the covenant of grace was made with unregenerate men, and he that was
circumcised, was a debtor to do the whole law: O when shall Zion be delivered,
from these schismatical inventions of men? making void the law of God by their
own traditions; and thereby distracting the peace of the church; and keeping
the prince of peace, from his general reign?

7. Can we suppose, the christian church will ever unite with the Rogerrenes,
or those called Quaker Baptists; who have laid aside the weekly sabbath, before
they have done getting their bread by the sweat of their faces? as Genesis iii.
19. pretending they can keep every day as a sabbath. The church of Christ may
be sure, these are people of extraordinary talents; especially when as we learn
(if we will credit them) they can do more than God: For God tells us, he could
not work six days, and keep sabbath at the same time; therefore did not keep
sabbath, until the six days work was done; and began sabbath with resting from
his works. These people take pains to prove the sabbath was a sign (which no
person ever denied that I know of) and that all signs are abolished; and is it
not wonderful, those who are so great scriptorians, that they cannot find one
word in the bible for keeping a weekly sabbath; have not found the bow in the
cloud, Genesis ix. 13. Baptism, and the Lord's supper, abolished? For these are
signs are really as the sabbath. And why don't they tell the world (for they
are fond. to make proselytes) when, and where the fourth command was abolished?
And when they declare, they cannot find one word in the bible for keeping a
sabbath, especially the christian sabbath, or Lord's day; what do they more
than the Jews, who cannot find one word in the bible, that Jesus whom they, or
their fathers crucified, is Christ? Surely if they were not blind, they might
find a great many words in the bible, to keep the Lord's day, or first day of
the week, for the christian sabbath; for it is too evident to be denied, that
more sabbaths were kept to commemorate Christ's redemption, when it was only
wrought in figure, or represented to be done, than ever were kept to
commemorate the works of creation. The children of Israel were commanded to
keep every seventh year for sabbath, Lev. xxv. 4. and that was as much as every
seventh day, take time by the bulk; and the fiftieth year, or jubilee, is
overplus, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. add to these the passover, seven days in a year;
and the feast of tabernacles, eight; Levit. xxiii. 5, 41, 42* also the tenth
day of the seventh month, called the day of atonement, ver. 27, 28. Now all
these sabbaths were instituted to commemorate Christ's redemption; as may be
seen by a little attention. The pascal lamb was a type or shadow of Christ our
passover, 1. Cor. v. 7. The feast of tabernacles, a shadow of gospel worship,
Zech. xiv. 18. The tenth day of the seventh month, or day of atonement, was
the day the hight-priest was to go into the most holy place, with the blood of
a slain goat, Levit. xvi. 15, 16. and lay his hand on the head of a living
goat; and confess over him the iniquities of the children of Israel; and put
them upon the head of the goat; and send him into the wilderness. These two
goats figured Christ's death and resurrection, or that our savior must die,
and yet bear away our sins alive, ver. 21, 22. this was done but once in a
year; and God declares he will destroy the man that works on the day of
atonement, chap. xxiii. 30. And that every seventh year, as well as the
fiftieth year, were kept to commemorate Christ's redemption, appears, for that
these years of sabbaths, and religious years, began on this day of atonement:
The trumpet of the jubilee was to found on the tenth day of the seventh month;
which was the first day of the jubilee year, see Lev. xxv. 9, 10. Now as the
jubilee year began the next day after the last day of the 49th; which was also
a sabbatic year; the 49th year, must have begun on the same day of the civil
year, that the fiftieth year did; and of undeniable consequence, all the
foregoing years of sabbaths, must begin on the same tenth day of the seventh
month, or day of atonement. Now all these ceremonial sabbaths, were instituted
for no other end or design, but to teach the christian world, that the day of
atonement, or the day in which he was to finish his work of redemption, should
be the weekly sabbath. Until this work is actually done, the seventh day
sabbath cannot give place; and one day in seven for rest and sabbath, is enough
for God and men; but yet, when Christ's work of redemption is represented to be
done, lest men should think God did not design as much regard should be paid to
Christ's works of redemption, as to his own of creation, he institutes these
hand writings of ordinances, which the apostle says were against us, Col. ii.
14. and they were surely against the church, in some sense; as were
circumcision, and all the costly offerings and sacrifices; hence called a heavy
yoke, Acts v. 10. God before the fall, allowed men six days to work; and one in
seven to rest; and to be devoted purely to divine worship: When men were
fallen, they surely wanted as much time to work, as before the fall; whereas
God allows them (while these ceremonial sabbaths last) more than a day in a
week less: And what abominable perversion must it be to say, one day in seven
for a sabbath is against the church, because so many were? And then to place
the fourth command among ceremonial laws; and say a weekly sabbath was
abolished with them. But can the christian world think, Christ's most glorious
reign will be among a people, that will not allow him to be their law giver, as to
the time of divine worship; and use so free with the Lord of the sabbath; who
made the weekly sabbath for man, Mark ii. 27, 28* as to tell him, one day in a
week for a sabbath is an ordinance against the church? Because God makes so
free with them, as to tell them, two days and a half in a week for sabbath, is
against them; and as soon as Christ has suffered, he will lighten their yoke;
therefore they shall tell him, one (...) a week, is too heavy a yoke for man to
bear: And will neither keep the sabbath themselves; nor allow others to keep
it, if they could help it. And when they are punished for breaking the laws of
God and men, in going sabbath after sabbath, several miles to work, where they
have nothing to do, but only to be taken notice of; when they are fined, they
cry out of persecution. Alas, alas, how has error and schism destroyed the
peace of Zion! and when shall Jerusalem become a quiet habitation; and there
shall be none to hurt or destroy, in all God's holy mountain; but the knowledge
of God shall cover the earth?

There are several other sects of protestants, whose sentiments are possibly as
inconsistent with the general reign of Christ, and peace of the church, as
those I particularly named; which I omit speaking particularly about, for
brevity sake. I have said nothing with design to offend any, it is evident to
us all, we are, to the scandal of the christian religion, a divided house; and
that there must be abundance of mistake and error among us: And shall every
sect be so tenacious and confident of their own way, as never to call it in
question, or never hearken to terms of accommodation?

And now, what but error and darkness, can keep the christian world, from
uniting in the scheme of the covenant of grace, as has been described? As 1.
we have in this scheme of the covenant, seen room for Christ to reign over all,
high or low, rich or poor, young or old, bond or free. 2. That the covenant
when ratified, makes all proper probationers, with whom it is established;
which must minister great encouragement, to every fallen son of Adam; and
inspire them to use every possible effort, to be saved. 3. That the decrees of
God, are certain, and definite from eternity; and that fixed and certain
decrees, are no way inconsistent with general liberty, and universal
redemption. 4. We have seen, that the covenant being conditional, is no way
inconsistent with free grace. 5. The doctrine of instantaneous, and complete
justification, is herein asserted and maintained; and that it is by the
righteousness of Christ imputed, and received by faith alone. 6. Final
perseverance of the saints, is herein established; and the true reasons of it
asserted and maintained. 7. Proper distinctions, between a common and
regenerating influence of the spirit of God; is also asserted and established:
Hence I infer, if this scheme of the covenant of grace is true; and can be seen
to be so; there is no just reason can be given, why all (at least) the
protestant churches, may not unite as brethren, and become one fold: And can we
think, Christ will ever come to reign in general among us, until the kingdom of
satan be bound, by our harmony, unanimity, and brotherly love? Do we not all
profess to believe God loved, us, and gave his son for us? And is not this the
argument that God uses with us, to excite love to each other? 1 John iv. 10,
11. Now if Christ's general reign is impeded or hindered, by our divisions,
which is undoubtedly the truth of the case; how carefully ought we to examine
the grounds of our difference; and condescend to each others weakness, as much
as we possibly can, consistent with truth and a good conscience? Let us weep
sore in the night, and our tears be on our cheeks, for the injury our discord
does, to the heathen and jewish nations; as well (...) to ourselves. And may
the God of infinite compassion, pity, mercy, grace, and love, dispose us all to
endeavor after the promotion of the kingdom of our kind Emanuel; and peace,
unanimity, and brotherly love, among ourselves. Amen:


FINIS.

