Mr. Barnard's DISCOURSE PREACHED At the Public Lecture in Boston, 16 July 1761.

THE True Divinity of JESUS CHRIST; Evidenced in a DISCOURSE AT The Public
Lecture in Boston, The Day after the Commencement, July 16, 1761. And Published
at the Desire of the Hearers.

By JOHN BARNARD, A.M. Pastor of a Church in MARBLEHEAD.

I, even, I, am JEHOVAH, and beside me there is no SAVIOR.

Isa. 43. 11. The Man that is my Fellow, says the Lord of Hosts.

Zec. 13. 7. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL. MDCCLXI.

The true Divinity of JESUS CHRIST.
I. JOHN V. 20. This is the true GOD.
THE Belief of the Being of an intelligent Agent, eternally self-(...), and
independent, the first Cause of all Things, the supreme Governor of all
Worlds, to whom all national Agents must be accountable, is the only sure and
solid Foundation of all Religion: for he, that comes to God, must believe that
he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. The just
Conceptions in our own Minds of the true GOD include in them every possible
Excellency, and that in the highest Degree of Perfection; and may well strike
us with the profoundest Aw and Reverence, inspire us with the most fervent Love
and Complacency, and excite us to the highest Obedience and deepest Submission.

BUT of what high and mighty, of what illustrious and august Person does the
inspired Writer here most strongly affirm? This is the true GOD. This seems to
be the only Thing necessary to be enquired into, that we may come into a clear
and full Understanding of the Words now read. And it appears, to me, a Matter
of no great Difficulty, to attain to a satisfactory Answer to the Enquiry, if
we do but improve our common unbiased Reason, in a close Attention to the
Apostle's own Language, in the Verse which contains the Words of our Text. Says
he, We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding
that we may know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God, and eternal Life. We know that the Son
of God is come. There is no Difficulty in understanding, the Son of God is
come, to mean our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is the SON OF GOD, and has appeared
in this our World; for the Words cannot be understood of any other. And has
given us an Understanding, (a thinking, reasoning Mind,) that we may know him
that is true, (or the true one). The Connection plainly shows that he speaks of
the SON of GOD giving us an Understanding, (an enlightened Mind,) that we may
know him that is true, or the true one. And adds the Apostle, we are in him
that is true; that is, by Faith engrafting us into JESUS CHRIST. For that he
intends JESUS CHRIST by the SON of GOD, and the true one, he plainly tells us
in the next Words, even in his Son Jesus Christ. The Apostle does not here
speak of another Subject, but evidently explains whom he meant by him that is
true; and therefore our Translators justly say, even in his Son Jesus Christ.
The whole Discourse evidently speaks of one and the same Subject, namely, the
SON of GOD, or JESUS CHRIST, the true one. And then the Apostle positively
affirms, This is the true God. That is, This SON of GOD, This him that is true,
This JESUS CHRIST, is the true God.

So (...), indeed, supply the Word, the true, with the Word God, and so render
it, we are in him the true God; with Design, it is to be feared, to evade the
Force of the Apostle's Reasoning, and what he chiefly aims at. But admit their
Supplement, without their wrong Comment upon what follows, and it really
confirms what the Apostle asserts, we are in the true God in his Son Jesus
Christ. Only the Supplement seems to be too great an Inaccuracy for an inspired
Writer; we are in the true God, this is the true God. By this Supplement, which
they supposed to mean one essentially distinct from JESUS CHRIST, they intended
to exclude JESUS CHRIST from being the true GOD, whereas the Apostle expressly
affirms of Him, THIS IS THE TRUE GOD. The proper Signification of the Pronoun
here used, in the Original, necessarily infers, that the Words the true God,
refer to JESUS CHRIST. And eternal Life, adds the divine: by which Mode of
Speech the Apostle several Times in this Epistle, and in this very Chapter,
characterises JESUS CHRIST, and hereby gives further Confirmation to the Truth
he intended, that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD.

THE Form of Speech, throughout the whole Verse, is so clear, and plain, and
agreeable to common Language, that an ordinary Understanding, for whose Use the
Words were wrote, cannot easily mistake it; however a vain Mind may pervert it.
And now, having such an inspired Writer going before us, in asserting it, and
who designedly wrote in Defense of the Divinity of CHRIST, we may, without
Hesitancy, lay it down for a doctrinal Truth,

THAT JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD. That JESUS CHRIST, the SON of GOD, him that
is true, is truly, really, essentially, GOD. He is not merely nominally,
titularly, by Deputation, or Office, but truly, by Nature, and Essence, GOD.

IN discoursing upon this Subject, I shall not look upon myself as any Ways
concerned to treat it in a philosophical Manner; forasmuch as all that can be
affirmed, or denied, about it, must be fetched entirely from divine Revelation,
the Pillar and Ground of Truth: and therefore, that I may not pretend to be
wise above what is written, I shall confine myself to that sacred Volumn,
sufficiently confirmed unto us, which all Christians acknowledge to contain a
Revelation from GOD; and endeavor, in what I have to offer, to take Head unto
that more sure Word of Prophecy, as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place.

O THOU SON OF GOD! who art the true Light, irradiate our Minds, and give to us
an Understanding, that we may know Thee the only true One, as thou have
revealed Thyself to us in thy holy Word; that knowing of Thee, we may be in
Thee; and, being in Thee, may have eternal Life.

THAT I may discourse intelligibly, I shall as plainly, and briefly, as I can,

I. SHOW what we understand by JESUS CHRIST his being the TRUE GOD. And then,

II. LAY before you such Evidences, from the sacred Writings, as are fully
convictive, to me, of His being the TRUE GOD.

I. I SHALL as briefly, as the Subject will admit, show you what we understand,
by JESUS CHRIST his being the TRUE GOD. In the stating of this Truth, I observe,

THAT it cannot in Reason be supposed, that we mean, (for we do not,) that the
Humane Nature, in the Man JESUS; or, that any mere Creature, of the highest
possible Order of created Beings, and whenever formed, appearing in our
Nature, is the TRUE GOD. For GOD Himself, in his holy Word has plainly said,
Hos. XI. 9. I am God, and not MAN. Accordingly we have ever understood, and
openly declared, as the holy Writings abundantly hold forth, that there is an
essential Difference and infinite Distance between the TRUE GOD, and the most
excellent and exalted, mere Creature whatever. And therefore our Adversaries
treat us very injuriously, when they run away with the Cry of the
Self-contradictions of our Doctrine; as though we set up a mere Creature to be
eternal, self-existing and independent; and vilify the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST
his being the TRUE GOD, as so gross an Absurdity, as to be fit only to be
turned into Ridicule; hereby plainly evidencing, that they know not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm.

NOR do we, by asserting, that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD, in the least
imagine, that there is more than One truly Divine Nature, or Essence. For we
firmly believe, and constantly teach, that there is but One, only living, and
true GOD, as the sacred Scriptures have abundantly assured us. For so we read,
Deuteronomy. VI. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, is one Lord. And David, in his
Prayer, says, 2 Samuel VII. 22. Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God, for there
is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee. And we have the
Divine Being assuming it unto Himself, Isa. XLV. 5. I am the Lord, and there is
none else, there is no God besides me. After which, suffer me to add, the
Apostle assures us, 1 Cor. VIII. 4. There is no God but one. This Revelation we
heartily embrace, and are at the utmost Distance from advancing any doctrine of
Polytheism.

BUT then, by JESUS CHRIST his being the TRUE GOD, we understand, the Divine
Nature, or Essence, in the eternal Three-one GOD communicating of itself to the
Humane Nature in the Man Jesus; or, if you will, taking the Humane Nature, in
the Man Jesus, into an Union with itself, in such a special and appropriate
Manner, as to constitute thereby one Person: by Virtue of which Union JESUS
CHRIST becomes TRULY GOD, as well as really MAN. All of this appears plain, to
me, from the sacred Writings.

For it is very evident, that the sacred Language is expressive of a Plurality
in the Divine Essence, though there be but One GOD. Therefore the Name, or Style,
of GOD, the Creator of all Things, throughout the first Chapter of Genesis,
runs in the Plural Number, and that not for want of a Singular, as a late
Writer has well observed. It is also very plainly expressed, Genesis I. 26. God
said, let us make Man in OUR Image. And, Genesis III. 22. The LORD GOD said,
behold, the Man is become as one of us. And in the forementioned, Deuteronomy. VI. 4.
the Hebrew runs, The LORD, our GOD, the LORD, is ONE: which fully asserts the
Unity of the Deity, and a Trinity in that Unity; which Trinity wears the
Character of the Father, the Word or Son, and the Holy Ghost or Spirit,
throughout the Divine Revelation.

THAT the Divine Nature, or Essence, and most probably in, or under, the second
Character, or Denomination, in the sacred Trinity, the Son, or our God, has
communicated itself to the Humane Nature, or taken this Nature, in the Man
JESUS, into an intimate Union with itself, is evident, not only from the
ancient Prediction thereof, but from the actual Accomplishment of this
Prediction, in the Fullness of Time. Therefore we are told, 1 Timothy III. 16.
Without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness, GOD was manifest on
FLESH: and, Heb. II. 16. For verily, He took not on Him the Nature of Angels,
but He took on Him the Seed of Abraham. Which necessarily implies and asserts
the Union of the Divine Essence to the Humanity; and this with a special Regard
to the Humane Nature in the Man JESUS.

AND further, that this Union of the Deit, to the Humane Nature, in our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, is so special and appropriate, as not to be affirmed of any
other; and so close and intimate as to constitute one Person, appears, in that
what is proper and peculiar to each Nature, either the Divine, or Humane, in
the incarnate SON of GOD, is in Scripture applied to the Person of JESUS
CHRIST, without dividing, or confounding the two Natures. Thus, when our
blessed Lord was upon Earth, He said of Himself, Joh. III. 13. No Man has
ascended up to Heaven, but He that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man
which is in Heaven. And hence the Sufferings, Crucifixion and Death, which were
proper only to the Humane Nature, are ascribed to the Deity in JESUS CHRIST,
and the Blood which He shed, is called the Blood of God, Act. XX.28.

IN this Sense it is, we affirm that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD, forasmuch as
the Divine Essence, in the Character of the SON, has taken the Humane Nature,
in the Man JESUS, into such an intimate and inseparable Union unto Himself, as
to render the Divine and Humane Nature in Him one Person; and thus He is truly
and properly GOD, and truly and properly MAN.

I proceed now,

II. To lay before you such Evidences from the sacred Writings, as are fully
convictive to me, that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD. And I shall comprise the
Proofs I have to offer under these four Heads.

1. THE Titles that are given to Him.

2. THE Attributes of the TRUE GOD, which are ascribed to Him.

3. THE Works of GOD, which were wrought by Him.

4. THE peculiar Honors of GOD, which are due to Him.

IF these Things are to be found belonging to JESUS CHRIST, whatever may be our
Conception of the Way and Manner, by which this is brought about, and though we
should happen to be mistaken in our Attempts to give an Explication of this
Mystery of Godliness, it will evidently appear that He is really, in the full
and proper Sense of the Words, the TRUE GOD. I shall offer something to each of
these Heads in their Order.

1. THE Titles that are given to JESUS CHRIST carry in them a Proof of His
being the TRUE GOD. As that Title the SON of GOD. By this He is often
denominated in the Holy Scriptures; so, Mark I. 1. The Gospel of JESUS CHRIST
the SON of GOD. We find Peter making that noble Confession of Him, Joh. VI. 69.
We believe and are sure, that thou art that CHRIST the SON of the living GOD.
And our blessed Lord, who is the Truth, affirmed this of Himself; when the high
Priest asked Him, art thou the CHRIST, the SON of the BLESSED? JESUS said, I
am, Mar. XIV. 62. And so often is He styled the SON of GOD in the New
Testament, that there is no Room to call in Question His wearing this Title.
But then it is to be observed, the sacred Writings point out JESUS CHRIST, as
the SON of God, in an higher and more exalted Sense, than is to be affirmed of
any Creature; either by Similitude or Office, by Adoption or Regeneration; and
therefore style Him the Begotten SON of GOD. As the Apostle speaking of JESUS
CHRIST, whom GOD raised from the Dead, applies to Him what is said in the
second Psalm, Act. XIII. 33. Thou art my SON, this Day have I begotten Thee.
And He is often styled, the Only-begotten SON of GOD; plainly denoting that
there is none among all the Creatures in Earth, or Heaven, who is the SON of
GOD, in that highly exalted and peculiar Sense, in which the Lord JESUS CHRIST
is. So we read, Joh. III. 16. GOD so loved the World, that He gave his
Only-begotten SON. And I cannot but think, that the Words mean no less than to
hand to our Minds, that JESUS CHRIST is as truly and properly the SON of GOD,
as Isaac was the Son of Abraham, whom Abraham is said to beget: nor can it
reasonably be supposed, that the divine Being has given such an high Character
of his SON, and so distinguished Him from all created Beings, with Design to
impose upon our Understandings; and therefore this Title, thus given to JESUS
CHRIST, carries in it a strong Evidence, that he truly partakes of the Divine
Nature, as every proper Son partakes of the same Nature with his Father; and so
He is the TRUE GOD.

THUS also JESUS CHRIST has the Title of GOD, in express Terms put upon Him. So
He is called EMANUEL, GOD with us; Math. I. 23. Or, GOD in our Nature. Hence we
have that sublime Passage of the Evangelist, Joh. I. 1. In the Beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with GOD, and the Word was GOD. That WORD which we
are told at the 14th ver. was made FLESH, (which evidently means JESUS CHRIST,)
that WORD was with GOD, in the Beginning, before all Worlds; and the WORD was
GOD, one with GOD, participating of the same Nature and Essence with GOD. The
Subject here spoken of is the WORD, as is evident from the Article preceding,
as is the Manner of the Greek Language; and what is affirmed of this WORD is,
that it was GOD, in the full Purport and natural Meaning of the Phrase. Nor is
there the least Hint in all the Chapter; that by the Word GOD in the latter
Clause is to be understood GOD, by Deputation or Office, titularly and by Way
of Eminency, or in any figurative Sense Whatsoever. But as by the Word GOD, in
the former Clause, was with GOD, is meant the true proper Deity, or Divine
Essence; so in this latter Clause, the Word was GOD, (and so throughout the whole
Chapter,) the Word GOD signifies the One, only living and true GOD; and cannot,
without a great Abuse of Language, be understood to mean any other. It must
therefore be to serve some idle Scheme of vain Philosophy, for any to torture
the Word, and themselves too, to mean some Being, and that a mere Creature,
essentially distinct from, and infinitely below the TRUE GOD. According to
their Method of criticizing, they must suppose, or necessarily imply in what
they say, that the infinitely wise and good GOD does not speak intelligibly to
the common Capacities of Mankind, but designedly expresses Himself in such
Terms as they could not know the Meaning of; which would be to tax the Holy GOD
with fraudulent Dealing, and turn the sacred Writings into unintelligible
Language. Again, we read, Tit. III. 4. After that the Kindness and Love of GOD
OUR SAVIOR toward Man appeared. OUR SAVIOR is the appropriate Character of
JESUS CHRIST, plainly pointing to, and describing Him throughout the whole
Gospel; and He is here styled GOD in express Terms; as also in several other
Places in this Epistle, as well as elsewhere. GOD OUR SAVIOR, or, as the Greek
may be justly rendered, the SAVIOR OUR GOD. Here, again, we must observe, that
the Article used before SAVIOR, determines the Subjects spoken of to be the
SAVIOR, and what is affirmed concerning Him is, that He is OUR GOD. And what
is there in the Text or Context to lead us into the Conception, that the Word
GOD here used does not mean the same Divine Essence, that is means in all the
other Parts of the Epistle; but denominates some one peculiarly dignified
Creature, which yet is at an infinite Distance from the TRUE GOD? I will only
name the forecited Text, 1 Timothy III. 16. GOD manifest in FLESH. Can Words be
plainer? What is there in them, or what they stand related to, to make us think
they are not spoken of the Divine Essence, but of a mere Creature? Verily,
without a violent forcing of them, they are plainly expressive of the TRUE GOD,
in the full and proper Meaning of the Words, and assert that this GOD was
manifest in FLESH, or united to the Humane Nature in the MAN JESUS; and so our
LORD JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD.

THERE are other Titles which are given to JESUS CHRIST, too many to be now
taken Notice of; but I shall only mention this in the last Place at present,
viz. He is called JEHOVAH. This venerable Name is peculiarly significative of
the Divine Essence, and denotes the ever living One, and is appropriated to the
TRUE GOD alone, being incommunicable unto any mere Creature. Hence we have the
Psalmist saying. Psalm. LXXXIII. 18. Thou whose Name alone is JEHOVAH; and GOD
Himself saying, Isa. XLII. 8. I am JEHOVAH; that is my Name; and my Glory will
I not give to another. And yet we find in the sacred Writ this appropriated
Name of the only TRUE GOD given to JESUS CHRIST, the MESSIAH, the SON of GOD.
Eve, at the Birth of her first born Son, with a Sort of Ecstacy, cried out,
Genesis IV. 1. I have gotten a Man, the JEHOVAH: supposing the first Promise of
the Seed of the Woman had been then fulfilled. The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of
John's coming in the Spirit and Power of Elias, as the Forerunner of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, said, Isa. XI. 3. The Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness,
prepare ye the Way of JEHOVAH. Jeremiah, speaking of the righteous Branch that
should be raised up unto David, to reign and save his People, said Jer. XXIII.
6. This is His Name, whereby He shall be called, JEHOVAH, our Righteousness.
When Israel tempted GOD in the Wilderness, and JEHOVAH sent fiery Serpents
among them, an inspired Expositor directly applies it to CHRIST, saying, 1 Cor.
X. 9. They tempted CHRIST. When Isaiah had a Vision of JEHOVAH sitting upon His
Throne, the inspired Apostle assures us, Joh. 12. 41. These Things said
Isaias, when he saw His Glory, (the Glory of CHRIST,) and spoke of Him.

AND I doubt not but the Style JEHOVAH, in the Old Testament, is almost
constantly to be understood of the MESSIAH, the CHRIST, who was the Angel of
the Covenant, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the JEHOVAH that appeared to
Moses in the burning Bush, who dwelled between the Cherubims, and was
peculiarly the God of Israel; as KURIOS, into which the Septuagint constantly
translates JEHOVAH, is peculiar to JESUS CHRIST in the New Testament. But I may
not enlarge here, not need I, since you have had so elaborate and judicious a
Discourse, upon the venerable Name JEHOVAH, lately put into your Hands. I
therefore go on to say,

2. THE Ascription of the Divine Attributes to CHRIST is a full Proof of His
being the TRUE GOD. I do not now mean to go over all the Divine Attributes,
some of which may be common to Creatures, but only to take Notice of such of
them as are peculiarly descriptive of the TRUE GOD, whereby He is known and
distinguished from all other Beings, as a Man is known by his Name; and show,
that these incommunicable Perfections of the Deity belong to JESUS CHRIST,
which necessarily infers that He is the TRUE GOD. I shall have Time only to
select some of these Attributes, and give you but brief Touches upon them. Thus,

Omniscience is peculiar to the Divine Being, and not to be attributed to any
mere Creature. Knowledge is communicable to a rational Agent, but all Knowledge
is one of the distinguishing Characters of the TRUE GOD, who is perfect in
Knowledge; whose Immensity fills Heaven and Earth, who is every where
intimately present with all Things, and, as an intelligent Being, therefore
knows all Things past, present and to come. What a beautiful Description of
the Divine Omniscience and Omnipresence does the Psalmist give us, Ps. CXXXIX.
init. O Lord, says he, thou searchest me, and know me; thou know my
down-sitting, and my up-rising; thou understandest my Thoughts afar off; thou
art acquainted with all my Ways; there is not a Word under my Tongue, but thou
know it altogether. It Is a special Instance and peculiar Prerogative of the
Divine Omniscience, which no Creature can intermeddle with, to have a perfect
Knowledge of the Hearts of Men. Therefore Solomon, in his Prayer, said, II
Chron. VI. 30. Thou only know the Hearts of the Children of Men. And GOD
assumes it unto Himself, as His special Prerogative, Jer. XVII. 10. I the Lord
search the Heart, I try the Reins. And yet this adorable Perfection of the
Deity is ascribed to our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Hence when He said to Peter, Simon,
Son of Jonas, love thou me? Peter replied, Joh. XXI. 17. Lord, thou know
all Things, thou know that I love Thee. And the Apostle John said of Him,
Joh. II. 25. He knew what was in Man. Our blessed Lord, after His Ascension,
asserts concerning Himself, Rev. II. 23. I am He, which searches the Reins and
Heart: which Words are evidently fetched from Jeremiah XVII. 10. So that the
Omniscience ascribed to JEHOVAH, the TRUE GOD, in Jeremiah, is ascribed to
JESUS CHRIST in the Apocalypse. And indeed, the exact Agreement, in numberless
Instances, of what He foretold, even of the minutest Circumstances of Things,
attended with a vast Variety of fortuitous Incidents, plainly speaks His Divine
Omniscience.

AGAIN, Omnipotence is another of the divine Attributes, which belongs to the
TRUE GOD alone, and not to any mere Creature whatever. Whatever Degrees of
Power and Strength any Creature may be furnished withal, Omnipotence is
compatible only unto that Supreme Being, who is unlimited in all Perfections.
Therefore we find Joh saying unto the Lord, Joh XLII. 2. I know that thou can
do everyThing. And Abraham said, Genesis XVIII. 14. Is any Thing too hard for the
Lord? And GOD wears the Name of the Almighty, in the holy Writings, to
distinguish Him from the feeble, limited, false Gods of the Heathen World. Now
this glorious Perfection of the true GOD is attributed to our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. Thus we are told, Genesis XVII. 1. The Lord appeared unto Abraham, and
said unto him, I am the almighty God. So He appeared unto Jacob, and said unto
him, Genesis XXXV, 11. I am GOD almighty. And again, Jacob said, Genesis XLVIII. 4.
GOD almighty appeared unto me at Luz. Now, though GOD the SON often appeared unto
the Partriarchs, and in the Shechinab, yet GOD the FATHER is never supposed to
have made any Appearance, in any Likeness, Shape or Similitude whatever. Hence
Moses said, Deuteronomy. IV. 12. The Lord spoke unto you out of the Midst of the Fire;
ye heard the Voice of the Words, but saw no Similitude: and therefore adds he,
ver. 15, 16. Take ye therefore good Heed unto yourselves, -- lest ye corrupt
yourselves, and make you a graven Image, the Similitude of any Figure, the
Likeness of Male or Female. It was evidently therefore GOD the SON, the WORD,
or CHRIST, who of old appeared unto his Servants, and under the Name and Style
of GOD ALMIGHTY. But lest this should not be thought conclusive enough, we are
assured that the four and twenty Elders worship Him, saying, Rev. XI. 17. We
give Thee Thanks, O Lord GOD ALMIGHTY, -- because thou have taken to thee thy
great Power, and have reigned. All of which is most certainly spoken of JESUS
CHRIST, to whom the Kingdom, Dominion and Power belongs, and the Right to
pour out the Woe upon the antichristian Adversary, and give Rewards unto His
faithful Servants. But to put it beyond all Doubt, it is the enthroned JESUS
CHRIST Himself, who said, Rev. 1. 8. I am -- the Almighty. In which Place, as
in several others, the Word PANTOCRATOR is used.

BUT, that I may remove, at least confront and silence, the most plausible
Objections some have been wont to make against the true Deity of CHRIST,
fetched from the Ideas of eternal, self-existing and independent, which they
allow to be Characteristicks of the TRUE GOD, and say they belong unto the
Father only, I shall go on to observe, that

THE Attribute of ETERNAL, in the full Sense of it, is given to our Lord JESUS
CHRIST; if not in express Words, yet by necessary Deduction. So John the
Divine, who wrote his Gospel, as we are told, designedly to confirm the true
Divinity of CHRIST says, Joh. I. 1. In the Beginning was the Word. By the Word,
he evidently means JESUS CHRIST, who was in the World, and dwelt among us,
tabernacling in Flesh: and what he asserts of this Word is, that He was in the
Beginning. The Word was, existed, and had a Being, in the Beginning, when Time,
and all created Beings first began to be; and therefore He existed before all
Creatures, of every Order and Denomination; He is before all Things, as the
Apostle expresses it. Col. I. 17. And let who can conceive this to mean any
otherwise than from all ETERNITY. It is also said of Him, Heb. XIII. 8. JESUS
CHRIST to Day, Yesterday and forever the same. Which speaks not only the
Immutability of His Office and Doctrine, but the Immutability and Eternity of
His Person. To which Purpose also, the Apostle, quoting a Passage out of the
Hundredth and second Psalm, where the Psalmist designedly sets the ETERNITY
of the TRUE GOD in Opposition to the Finiteness of all Creatures, directly
applies it to CHRIST, saying of Him, Heb. I. 10. Thou Lord, in the Beginning,
have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Works of thine
Hands; which denotes His Preexistence to all Worlds, or His Existence from
ETERNITY. He goes on, they shall perish, but Thou remainest; -- Thou art the
same, and Thy Years shall not fail. Which plainly speaks His ETERNAL
Duration. So that this is a clear Testimony, brought by an inspired Writer, to
the true and proper ETERNITY of JESUS CHRIST. I make no Doubt but the inspired
Paul spoke of CHRIST, when he said, 1 Timothy VI. 16. Who only has Immortality:
and it is plainly said of Him, Mic. V. 2. Whose goings forth have been from of
old, from ETERNITY. But, what to me puts it beyond all Question is, the
Evangelist John introducing the Lord JESUS CHRIST Himself saying, Rev. I. 8. I
am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending; says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the
Ending, is evidently taken from the Character of the TRUE GOD, in Isa. XLIV. 6.
Thus says JEHOVAH, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I
am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no GOD. These Words of
Isaiah are evidently spoken of CHRIST, who is the King of Israel, his Redeemer,
the Lord of Hosts; and therefore very properly used by CHRIST. The Lord, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, is clearly descriptive of the proper
ETERNITY of the everliving GOD, who ever did, now does, and forever will,
exist; and most probably are spoken of the eternal Father, ver. 4. but here are
spoken by JESUS CHRIST, and of himself. So that in this we have a full and
clear Account, if words can give it, of the proper ETERNITY OF JESUS CHRIST, in
the natural Sense of the Words.

AND let us see, if we cannot find Him to be a self-existent and independent
Being. Now beside, that Being properly eternal, as I think we have proved JESUS
CHRIST to be, necessarily infers him to be selfexistent and independent,
because there can be no Being prior to Him, from which He should derive, and on
which He can be dependent; I say, beside this, we find the sacred Scriptures
give us to understand, that the same Marks and Characters of self-existent and
independent, (for the Words are not to be found in holy Writ,) which belong
unto the only TRUE GOD, are ascribed also unto JESUS CHRIST. Thus when Moses
enquired of GOD, what he should say to them that asked him, What is the Name of
Him that sent you, we are informed, Exodus III. 14. God said unto Moses, I am
that I am: and He said, thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM
has sent me unto you. It may be this is the most direct and express Assertion
of the Self-existence and Independency of the Divine Being, of any Passage in
the Holy Scriptures; though there are many others that necessarily infer the
same. For all, that have any Understanding in the Hebrew Language, do know that
this Phrase, I AM, carries in it absolute Being and Existence. And we find that
this very Phrase, (though in the Greek Language,) is directly applied to, and
assumed by our Lord JESUS CHRIST Himself, who never spoke otherwise than the
Words of Truth. For, said He unto the Jews, who, upon a certain Occasion, tell
Him, He was not yet Fifty Years old, Joh. VIII. 58. Before Abraham was, I AM:
not I was, which would have been a full Reply to the Objection they had made,
but I AM; thereby challenging unto Himself, and that with a double
Asseveration, verily, verily, the appropriate Character of the ETERNAL GOD, to
show that the Self-existing and independent Nature of the TRUE GOD was in Him.

AND now, since the Divine Attributes, and those especially which are
incommunicable to any more Creature, even of the highest Order, are to be found
in the sacred Scriptures, ascribed to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, we may with great
Justice to our Reason, look upon this as a clear and full Proof, that all the
Perfections of the Godhead are to be found in Him, and that in the highest
Sense of them; and therefore have all imaginable Reason to conclude, that This
is the TRUE GOD, as the Apostle affirms Him in my Text to be. I pass to say,

3. THE sacred Scriptures assure us, that the great and distinguishing Works of
God were wrought by our Lord JESUS CHRIST; which abundantly proves Him to be
the TRUE GOD. Here I do not take into Consideration those miraculous Operations
which were performed by the Concurrence of the Divine Presence and Power, with
the Agency of Men or Angels; but I speak only of those Works of God which are
so peculiarly and distinguishingly His own Operations, and which no Creature
is, or could be, the Author of. As particularly, the Creation, Sustentation and
Government of the World; which are wonderful Displays of almighty Power and
boundless Wisdom and Goodness. Respecting the two last of these Instances, I
shall only now observe, That it is entirely out of the Reach of any mere
Creature to Support the World, because it requires an almighty Power, which no
mere Creature is furnished with. And though some Creatures may be employed as
Instruments in some Parts of the Government of the World, yet it is absolutely
necessary, that the supreme Governor of the Universe, the first Cause of all
Things, should be every where present, at one and the same Time, to inspect the
various Wants, Situation and Circumstances of Things, and to direct, assist and
govern those Instruments He may make Use of; which no Creature can be capable
of.

As to the former of these Instances, the creating of the World, This is
apparently more peculiar to the TRUE GOD; of which the sacred Writings give us
a full and clear Account. As in the Mosaic History of the Creation, in the
first Chapter of Genesis. And so sang the Levites, Neb. IX. 6. Thou, even Thou
art Lord alone; Thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their
Host; the Earth, and all Things that are therein; the Seas, and all that is
therein. And how often does GOD assume it to Himself, as His sole Prerogative,
to be the Creator of all Things? As in Isa. XLV. 12. I have made the Earth, and
created Man upon it; even my Hands have stretched out the Heavens, and their
Hosts have I commanded.

Now all of these great and stupendous Works of GOD, which declare Him to be
GOD alone, are, in the sacred Scriptures, affirmed to be wrought by our Lord
JESUS CHRIST. Colos. I. 17. By Him all Things consist; are upheld, preserved,
and continued in Being. Ephesians. I. 22. All Things are said to be put under his
Feet; in Subjection to his Rule and Government; for the Government shall be
upon His Shoulders, Isa. IX. 6.

BUT what I more specially take Notice of is, that the Holy Writings assure us,
that JESUS CHRIST is the Maker of the World, and all the Creatures in it.
Therefore the Apostle John says, Joh. I. 3. All Things were made by Him; and
without Him was not any Thing made that was made: and again, ver. 10. He was in
the World, and the World was made by Him. He first affirms that all Things,
without any Exception, all Worlds, and the several Creatures in them, were made
by Him: and then he as strongly denies, that there was so much as any one Thing
received a Being, but what received it from Him; without Him was not any Thing
made that was made. From which it is very evident, that He was not made
Himself, for then it could not have been said, all Things were made by Him;
there would have been Something made, which He did not make. One would think,
that it is hardly possible to find out any Language, which would more strongly
deny that JESUS CHRIST is a Creature; and if He be not a Creature, then He is
the TRUE GOD, the Creator of all Things. But could not GOD (will some say,)
have made a Creature, by whom He should make all Things? I think I may, without
attempting to limit the Holy One of Israel, venture to answer in the Negative.
Because the infinitely holy and good GOD cannot contradict Himself, nor impose
upon us. He that made all Things is GOD; this is one of the first natural
Conceptions of the Humane Mind, and this is what GOD has made Himself known to
us by, in his holy Word, in too many Places to be now named. And therefore to
imagine that GOD has made a Creature, which Creature by itself, its own Power
and Ability, has made the World, is to suppose, that a Creature distinct from
GOD, and infinitely below Him, is the Maker of all Things, when it is clearly
evident, that it could not make itself; and carries in it this gross Absurdity,
that the infinitely good and holy GOD has imposed upon our Understanding, in
leading us to conceive of Him as the alone Maker of the World, when really it
was made by another; and this flagrant Contradiction, that the GOD of Truth is
not true to Himself. It is therefore but a vain Conceit, advanced in Support of
a groundless Scheme, built upon vain Philosophy, that the Apostle John, in the
Beginning of his Gospel, is speaking, not of a natural, but of a moral
Creation; when there is not so much as the least Hint given, throughout the whole
Paragraph, to lead us into such a Conception.

BUT if this Text was out of the Way, we have full Testimony, from other Parts
of the sacred Scriptures, to the Truth of JESUS CHRIST His being the Creator of
all Things. To name only that in Colos, I. 15. 16. There the Apostle is
speaking of Him, in whom we have Redemption through his Blood, and says he of
him, who is the Image of the invisible GOD, the Firstborn (or, as I think it
should be read, the First Cause, or Bringer forth,) of every Creature: for by
Him were all Things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible
and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or
Powers; all Things were created by Him, and for Him. Under which Expressions
the Apostle means to include every Rank and Order of created Beings, from the
lowest to the highest, and affirms that they were all created by Him, and he
doubles his Affirmation, all Things were created by Him, to assure us, that
there is not so much as one mere Creature, but what was created by Him.
Therefore He Himself could not be a mere Creature; for He could not make
Himself. And shall we, after all this Force of Language to the contrary, vainly
imagine, that there is a Creature which He did not make? Besides the Apostle
further adds, and for Him; to show, that as all Things originate from Him, so
they all ultimately terminate in Him, and were made for His Glory: so that He
is the first Cause, and last End of all Things, which is the high Character of
the only TRUE GOD.

IT were easy to turn to other Parts of holy Writ, which assert the same
Doctrine, but I need not: I shall therefore only say, that, from this clear
Account, which Divine Inspiration gives us, of JESUS CHRIST His being the
Creator, and Maker of all Worlds, and all the Creatures in them, we have a full
and demonstrative Proof, that He is the TRUE GOD, because none but the TRUE GOD
can be the Creator of all Things. From the Creation of the World are clearly
seen the invisible Things of GOD, even His eternal Power and Godhead, Romans I.
20. Nor is it in the Power of the most penetrating Genius, and most subtle
metaphysical Head, to discover a single Passage, in all the Divine
Inspirations, that styles the Creator of the World, or, JESUS CHRIST, a mere
Creature. But I proceed to the fourth and last Head of Argument proposed;
namely,

4. The peculiar Honors, which are due unto the only living, and TRUE GOD, are
to be given unto our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and that by Divine Direction and
Appointment; which is an abundant Proof that He is the TRUE GOD. By the Honors
due unto the only TRUE GOD is meant Religious Worship, as Faith in Him, Love to
Him, Reverence and Fear of Him, our Prayers and Praises to Him, our universal
and unlimited Obedience and Submission to His Will, in all Things concerning
us, with our final Accountableness to Him; which we, and all reasonable
Creatures, owe to Him, as our Maker, Preserver, Benefactor and supreme Judge.
This Homage GOD challenges from us, as what of Right belongs to Him, and to
no other. The Proof of this, from the sacred Scriptures, in the Whole, and in
the several Parts, are so numerous and so plain, that I know not well which to
turn you to. Let it suffice to quote the Saying of Moses, the Man of GOD, Exodus
XXXIV. 14. Thou shall worship no other GOD, for the Lord whose Name is Jealous,
is a jealous GOD: and that of the royal Psalmist, Ps. XXIX. 2. Give unto the
Lord the Honor due unto His Name, worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness;
and of our SAVIOR, Math. IV. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy GOD, and Him
only shall thou serve. It was apparently one great Design of Divine Revelation
to call off an idolatrous World, from the Acknowledgment and Worshipping of
many false Gods, to the Worship of the One, only living and TRUE GOD. And as
the Divine Being asserts it, as His peculiar Right, to be GOD alone, so He lets
us know, that He is so jealous of the special Honors which are due unto Him,
that He will not suffer any Part thereof to be given to any Creature whatever:
as in the forementioned Isa. XLII. 8. I am the Lord, that is my Name; and my
Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to graven Images.

NEVERTHELESS, notwithstanding the peculiar Right of the TRUE GOD to these
Divine Honors, and the solemn Enclosure around this sacred Mount, that
whosoever should invade it the Wrath of the Lord would be enkindled against
that Man, and he should surely perish; for cursed is the Man, that makes any
molten or graven Image, an Abomination to the Lord: yet we have the fullest
Assurance, that all of this Divine Honor is to be given unto the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, by Men upon Earth, and by Angels in Heaven. We are to believe in Him,
to love and reverence Him, to pray to Him, and praise Him, to obey and serve
Him, and that religiously, with all the Powers of our Minds, as well as those
of our Bodies, and to account unto Him as our Judge. Thus it was prophesied of
Him, who should be a Light unto the Gentiles, and for Salvation unto the Ends
of the Earth, Isa. XLIX. 7. Kings should see, and arise, and Princes also
should worship Him. Zechariah prophesied of Him, whose Feet should stand upon
Mount Olivet, Zec. XIV. 16. He should be King over all the Earth, and they
should go up from Year to Year, to worship the King, the Lord of Host. The high
Intelligences of the heavenly World, who surround the Throne of GOD with their
joyful Hallelujahs, are commanded to worship Him. Heb. I. 6. When He brings
in the First-begotten into the World, He says, let all the Angels of GOD
worship Him. And these bright and morning Stars are represented as paying their
religious Acknowledgments to Him, casting their Crowns before the Throne, and
worshipping Him that lives forever and ever, saying, Rev. V. 12. Worthy is the
Lamb that was stain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and
Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. And it is added, ver. 13. Every Creature which
is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the
Sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and
Power be unto Him that Sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb forever and
ever. In a Word, the great GOD and Father of all Things has made it the Duty
of all Men, commanding them to honor the SON, as they honor the FATHER, Joh.
V. 23. To pay the same religious Worship to the SON, which they are to pay unto
the FATHER. And we are assured, Romans XIV. 10. We shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of CHRIST.

Now what a full and clear Proof is this, that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD.?
For if He were not truly GOD, partaking of the Divine Nature and Essence, but
only a mere Creature, we should be guilty of the grossest Idolatry in giving
Divine Honor to that which is, by Nature, no GOD: and the everliving JEHOVAH
Himself, in commanding Men and Angels to worship Him, would be introduced,
instead of curing the World of Idolatry, as the great Patron of it; than which
nothing is more contradictory to His Nature, and abhorrent to the Divine
Majesty. So that, from this brief Account, which I have set before you, it
appears plainly evident, from the sacred Scriptures, the only Rule of our
Faith, that it is an established Truth, and what we ought firmly to abide in
the Belief of, that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD.

BUT it is Time to improve this Doctrine in a few Hints.

1. And now, my Beloved, stand still, and admire, and magnify the stupendous
Grace of our GOD; that the high and lofty one, who inhabiteth Eternity, and
dwells in Light unapproachable, should condescend to assume the Humane Nature
into a personal Union with Himself; a Nature so deeply guilty and polluted, and
obnoxious to the Vengeance of Heaven; that, as a glorious and powerful Mediator
for us, tabernacling in Flesh, and every Way adapted to our Necessities, He
might submit to a Series of the greatest Meannesses and Sufferings, and to the
most shameful and painful Death, on our Behalf, to satisfy for our manifold and
enormous Offenses, and buy off the heavy Punishment, which our Sins had justly
deserved; and by a Life of consummate Obedience instruct us in the whole of our
Duty, and bring in an everlasting Righteousness, wherein we may appear before
an infinitely holy GOD, as without Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such Thing; and by
His Obedience and Sufferings procure for us the Gift of the holy Spirit, to
renew and sanctify our Natures, and transform us into the Divine Likeness, and
to open to us a new and living Way into the holiest, the endless Glory and
Happiness of the heavenly World.

O LET the Thoughts of this high and true Dignity, which the incarnate SON of
GOD has raised our ruined Nature unto, inspire us with an holy Ambition of
Soul, never to indulge ourselves in any Thing that would debase, and cast
Contempt and Dishonor upon it. And let the View of this wondrous Grace and
Love to us, in the SON of GOD emptying Himself for us, that we might be filled
with the Blessings of Goodness, constrain us to love and serve Him with all our
Powers, both of Body and of Mind, as long as we live, yea, while we have any
Being.

2. SEE, my Friends, what a firm Foundation we have for our Faith and Hope in a
mighty and glorious Redeemer, who is truly GOD, as well as really MAN. For He
has not only the tender Sympathy of the Humane, but the boundless Compassions
of the Divine Nature in Conjunction, in continual and vigorous Exercise toward
us, under all our Weaknesses and Infirmities, our Wants and Distresses, our
Temptations and Trials; and knows how, and is able and willing to succor us;
and with the Temptation will find out a Way for our Escape, that we may be able
to bear it. What mighty Encouragement is this to us, to cast all our Cares upon
Him who cares for us?

AND because the truly Divine and Humane Natures are so closely united in our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, as that in Him dwells the Fullness of the GODHEAD bodily,
therefore we may be sure, that His Sacrifice of Atonement is perfectly
meritorious, and His Intercession most valid and efficacious, to procure the
full Pardon of all our Sins, be they ever so many and great, and bring us into
a State of Peace and Friendship with our GOD; to obtain for us the sanctifying
and comforting Influences of the Holy Spirit; and to secure to us the promised
Mercy of our GOD unto eternal Life. So that upon this solid Foundation, we may
safely build our Faith and Hope, that whosoever believes in Him shall not
perish, but have everlasting Life.

IF JESUS CHRIST is not truly GOD, as well as MAN, I cannot see upon what good
Foundation, a reasonable, but guilty, Creature could possibly place his Faith
in Him, or build a well grounded Hope of eternal Salvation; for all his own
Obedience would be so very defective, and short of the Demands of the exceeding
broad Law of GOD, as that it could never recommend him to the Divine Favor, so
as to obtain the Forgiveness of his Sins, and an Inheritance among them that
are sanctified; and a SAVIOR, who is but a mere Creature, could not possibly
have any Thing properly meritorious in him, nor a Sufficiency of Power to
confer the promised Blessedness, upon them that put their Trust in Him.

3. LET us all therefore, my Brethren, hold fast this great Gospel Truth, which
Divine Revelation only makes known to us; and suffer no Man to take away this
Crown from us, That JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD. Well might our blessed
SAVIOR say, Joh. X. 30. I and my Father are One; one in Nature and Essence, as
well as in Will and Operation, thereby making Himself equal with GOD; and His
Apostle assures us, Phil. II. 6. He thought it no Robbery to be equal with GOD:
He looked upon it as no Invasion of the Rights of the supreme Deity to be equal
with GOD. And shall we vainly attempt to reduce Him to the State of a mere
Creature? of the whole Universe of which it can not be said, they are equal
with GOD. Shall we esteem Him a finite Bein the Result of the Will of a Maker,
to whom all to peculiar Titles and Attributes of the eternal Godhead belong? Or
that He is made by and dependent upon another for His Being, who is the great
Maker, Preserver and Governor of the Universe? Or that He is infinitely below
the Deity, who has a just Right to all the incommunicable Honors of the TRUE
GOD? No; let the Absurdity be far from our Thoughts; rather let us, in the
Faith of the Divine Revelation, believingly say with Thomas, Joh. XX. 28. My
Lord and my God! O give unto Him the Glory which is His due, by our Faith in
Him, as JEHOVAH our Righteousness, in whom we have everlasting Strength; and
our Obedience to Him, as our Lawgiver, our King, and our Judge. Then may we
with Comfort look for the blessed Hope and glorious Appearing of the GREAT GOD
and OUR SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST; and when He, who is our Life, shall appear, then
shall we also appear with Him in Glory.

SUFFER me, seeing it has pleased a merciful GOD to spare me to a great old
Age, to spend some of my latest Breaths, in asserting and vindicating the
Honor of our common SAVIOR, by improving this last Opportunity I can ever
expect of standing in this Place, and upon such an Occasion, to address myself,
with great Humility and all due Respects, particularly to my younger Brethren
in the Ministry, and to the Candidates therefore. Dearly beloved in our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, let it be your great Care firstly to get your own Hearts firmly
established in the Faith of this vital Principle of the Christian Religion, and
then to (...)struct the Souls that may be under your Charge, and confirm them
in the Belief of it, that the Lord JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD.

REMEMBER, my Brethren, you owe this in Fidelity to your Lord, and in Love to
the Souls of His and your People. You owe it in Fidelity to your Lord and
Master, both your Lord and ours. For if, through an Affectation of being thought
deeply studied in Philosophy, you should insinuate in your Conversation, or
publicly teach your People, otherwise then this wholesome Doctrine of found
Words, that JESUS CHRIST, the SON of GOD, and SAVIOR of the World is the TRUE
GOD, would you not degrade Him from His Throne of Glory, strip Him of His
peculiar Honors, and number Him, who is higher than all the angelic Orders, in
the Rank of Beings, the most exalted and refined of which is infinitely below
the Deity; and thereby cast the highest Contempt and Indignity upon Him? Would
not such a Treatment of the incarnate SON of GOD expose you to the Danger of
being found among those Teachers, of whom Peter says, II. Pet. II. They bring
in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them? or Jude's ungodly
Men, before of old ordained to Condemnation, who turn the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, denying the only Lord GOD, and our Lord JESUS CHRIST? Jude ver.
4. -- Where, by the Way, I observe, that the Article in the Greek, placed
before the only LORD GOD, without any before our Lord JESUS CHRIST, evidently
shows, (for the Reason before mentioned,) that it is one and the same
Subject, that is spoken of the only LORD GOD, and OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.

AND you owe it in Love to the precious Souls he His and your People, who are
put under your pecular Care. For if, by an unmanly Sneer at the great Doctrine
of the true DIVINITY OF CHRIST, or by labored and sophistical Periods, you
should teach them any Thing herein, that is contrary to the found Doctrine of
the glorious Gospel of the blessed GOD, will you not be guilty of leading them
into gross Error? of teaching them to believe in and worship a mere Creature,
instead of the only TRUE GOD, and so blindly conduct them into abominable
Idolatry? Will you not herein direct them to build all their Hopes of Salvation
upon a sandy Foundation, which in the Time of Trial, will prove ruinous and
destructive to their immortal Souls? And if the Blood of Souls should at last
be found to lie at your Doors, what the Consequence of this will prove unto
yourselves, you are fully able to judge.

I DO not write not speak these Things, my Brethren, to shame any of you, but,
as my Beloved, I would humbly warn you. Neither would I be understood to mean,
that every Man should be tied up to exactly the same Mode of Speech; for I look
upon a Controversy about Words both as unmanly and unchristian; but that we
should carefully preserve and teach the Essentials of this sublime Doctrine,
that JESUS CHRIST is the TRUE GOD, and contend earnestly for this Faith, which,
from Heaven, has been delivered unto the Saints.

LET therefore the sacred Scriptures, my Brethren, in the only Rule by which we
judge of, and the sure Foundation on which we build, all the Doctrines of the
great Mysteries of the Christian Religion; and let us not suffer ourselves to
be warped and turned away from the Truth, as it is in JESUS, by any of the
precarious Principles, and uncertain Maxims of Philosophy; which, however
valuable in the Things of Nature, to which they properly belong, and however
ornamental they may be to him that possesses them, can no more be a Standard by
which to judge of revealed Mysteries, than the scanty, finite Reason of Man can
be a fit Line, by which to found the unsathomable Depths of infinite Wisdom and
Understanding.

To the only wise GOD our SAVIOR, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power,
both now and ever.

AMEN.

