Mr. Haven's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY IN BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 1, 1761. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY JASON HAVEN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN DEDHAM.

BOSTON, N. E. PRINTED AND SOLD BY EDES AND GILL. M, DCC, LXI.

A SERMON ON Prove. X^I.32. HE THAT IS SLOW TO ANGER, IS BETTER THAN THE MIGHTY:
AND HE THAT RULES HIS SPIRIT, THAN HE THAT TAKES A CITY.
THE author of these proverbs appears to have been greatly acquainted with men,
and deeply studied in civil policy. He knew the springs of action in the human
mind, and how to touch them in the most delicate manner. He possessed in a
superior degree, "the wisdom from above, which is pure and peaceable." In
answer to his judicious prayer God gave him "a wise and understanding heart."
Some valuable fruits of his wisdom may be gathered by us, if we duly attend to
his important maxims, and the excellent rules for the government of our hearts
and lives, which are scattered through his writings. In them vulgar errors are
corrected; false greatness is discovered; and the way to true honor and
happiness marked out.

THE verse, which is to be the foundation of our present discourse, teaches us
to judge properly of actions and characters; instructs us not to be dazzled
with those that wear the false glitter of heroism and magnanimity, while we
overlook those that are truly noble and important, in "the judgment which is
according to truth." He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty: and
he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a city.

IN discoursing from these words, I shall endeavor -- To open and explain the
characters which we find in them, -- To compare them together, that we may see
how much preferable the one is to the other -- And -- To animate all to pursue
them with a zeal proportionate to their respective importance.

IN speaking of these points, some things may be said not altogether foreign to
the present occasion.

THE explanation of the characters in our text is first to be attempted.

TO be slow to anger, and to rule the spirit, I take to be parts of the same
character; though not descriptive of precisely the same temper. The former may
refer, partly at least, to the natural make and frame of the mind, as having
less warmth and fire, less propensity to wrath and passion, than is frequently
found in some. That there is such a difference observable in persons, before
education or religion have had any influence upon them, I suppose will not be
disputed. An enquiry into the reasons of this difference, is beside my present
purpose. The latter, namely, to rule the spirit, may point out a mind, bro't
under the government of religion and the word of God, by the power of mighty
reason and almighty grace, whatever the original constitution might be.

THE man who deserves the character of one that rules his spirit, I take to be
necessarily a man of religion; who is "renewed in the spirit of his mind, after
the image of him that created him"; who has the fear of God ruling in his
heart; who acts from the noble principles of piety and goodness; who is
governed, in all his conduct, by a sacred regard to the Deity. The man that
acts up to this character, has put on Christ, and possessed himself of the genius
of his gospel. The inferior powers of the mind, so apt to rebel, are brought
under the influence of reason and religion, which ought to bear rule. Reason,
whose influence is so weak in the lives of many, in him reassumes her rightful
authority, and gains obedience to her laws. And reason herein acts like
herself, in not building too great dependence on her own native strength and
vigor; but thankfully receives the assistance of divine revelation; "makes the
word of God the man of her counsel at all times"; and freely submits to the
government thereof.

SUCH principles, deeply wrought into the heart by sanctifying grace, will
enable a man properly to rule his spirit; and nothing short hereof will be
effectual to do it, to any considerable degree. Indeed the more extravagant
actings of a turbulent spirit, and the more direful effects of pride and
passion, cruelty and revenge, may be generally suppressed by lower motives;
such as a regard to decency, and reputation among men of sober minds; and a
fear of penal laws. But though these external restraints may serve thus far, yet
the restless spirit, prevented from its natural exertion upon others, will prey
upon the man himself, and produce strange misery and confusion in his breast:
and if these feebler restraints were taken off, passion and anger would be,
like the breaking forth of waters, fierce and impetuous, and deal destruction
all around.

THE man who duly rules his spirit, has a full belief and abiding sense, of the
moral government of God; and that himself is a subject of this government. His
own will he knows ought to be ruled by the divine pleasure; and his conduct by
the divine laws. And what he knows to be right he desires should take place
upon him: accordingly he endeavors his spirit should be entirely "in
subjection to the father of spirits". This view of things has a powerful
influence to keep his mind calm and serene under all circumstances of life; and
amidst the various aspects of providence. Like St. Paul, he knows both how to
be abased, and how to abound; and learns, in whatsoever state he is, therewith
to be content.

I MEAN not to intimate, that the spirit of such an one loses its activity and
sprightliness; and becomes dull and unperforming. Far from this, -- he has life
and zeal to pursue every article of known duty: not a blind ill-guided zeal,
which leads him headlong; but that which is according to knowledge. He has
courage and resolution enough to enterprise great things; and a greatness of
soul which gives him serenity in the event, whatever it be. He does not run mad
with pride when his wishes succeed; nor despond when his hopes are blasted. Joy
and sorrow, hope and fear, do not put him out of possession of his own mind;
but prove proper springs of action, as they were designed to be; and he learns
"in patience to possess his soul".

WHEN the God of providence smiles upon him, and causes his goodness to pass
before him, he does not wax wanton, and riot in the kindnesses of his heavenly
father; but uses them with sobriety and moderation; and feels the generous
flame of gratitude kindle in his breast toward him "from whom comes down every
good and every perfect gift." When sorrows and afflictions, heavy and numerous,
overtake him, and many of his dearest outward enjoyments are taken away, he
calmly submits to the will of heaven; and learns meekly to say, as an afflicted
servant of God once did, "The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and
blessed be the name of the Lord. None of these things greatly move him; his
heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord."

MUCH the same composure of mind accompanies him through the trials which he
meets with more immediately from the hands of his fellowmen. Kindness and
benevolence are the habitual temper of his mind toward those who affront and
injure him. In one instance he silently pities them under the power of their
ungoverned passions, and is grieved to see them indulging to malevolence and
ill will; and tho in another he may manifest resentment, he does so only when
resentment is agreeable to reason and the gospel; and likely to advance the
good of those that abuse him. The calm exercise of reason straitens or relaxes
the reins of his passions; and he learns what is very difficult, "to be angry
and not sin." Such is the man who is slow to anger, and rules his spirit.

THE other character in our text comes next under our consideration. The mighty
-- he that takes a city.

THESE words point out a man of strength and vigor, able to bear the fatigues
of war, and ready to face the dangers of battle; one whose constitution is
strong, and his fibers braced; one who has succeeded in military attempts, has
been victorious in warfare, and borne a part in the conquest of a defenced
city. To raise the character still higher, let us suppose him to be commander
in chief in some important expedition. Let us consider him as enduring the
hardships, and bidding defiance to the dangers of the campaign, as vigorously
pursuing the plan of operation, 'til he has led his forces into the strong
city, and victory crowns his endeavors.

THESE things set a man in a distinguished point of light, and draw a train of
admirers. The vanquished fear and tremble; the multitude shout applause. This
character at least appears respectable; and really is so, when there is nothing
to detract from the honor and usefulness of it; tho indeed such things may be
found in a man whose conduct is not agreeable to heaven, and who is a stranger
to true felicity. The principles of action must be taken into the account, in
order to determine the character truly good, or not so. Who, that is inspired
with a generous love to mankind, can think with pleasure and approbation on a
Pompey, a Caesar, or an Alexander, who were mighty men, subdued people and
cities not a few, and marked their steps in blood while they traversed the
world! A man mighty in war, who is a stranger to humanity and the gentle spirit
of the gospel, may force trembling crowds to yield a feigned submission; to
"bow down their necks that he may go over;" but will never be a public
blessing, nor enjoy sincere love and esteem.

BUT each of these characters will be set in a clearer light by comparing them
together, as we proposed in the second place. This will discover him that is
"slow to anger and rules his spirit, to be better than the mighty and he that
takes a city."

THE preference must be given to the former, as the difficulty of gaining the
rule of our spirits is greater than that of obtaining a military conquest.

HOW hard is it to suppress the rebellion of corrupt lusts and affections, and
to bring them into obedience to the laws of Christ! How hard to hush angry and
tumultuous passions, when we meet the provoking language, or the more provoking
actions of our fellow-mortals; and according to the spirit of the gospel, "to
show all meekness to all men, and overcome evil with good!" How difficult to
maintain a spirit calm and serene, under losses, and crosses, and grievous
disappointments! Do we not find, in this case, "a law in our members waring
against the law of our minds;" and an evil spirit counter-working the good?
What hard struggles! What severe conflicts! What constant watchings! What
earnest supplications are necessary, before we gain the rule of our own
spirits, so as to pass unruffled through the shifting scenes of life! We, in this
spiritual warfare, "wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places;" which
abet the corrupt motions of the mind, in opposition to the nobler principles of
substantial goodness. To succeed therefore in this spiritual conflict, more
vigorous exertions, as well as more powerful assistances from above, are
necessary, than to meet an enemy in the gate, to scale the walls of a city, or
to subject the numerous inhabitants thereof.

AGAIN, -- Much greater is the happiness resulting from the former, than the
latter conquest, even in this world.

THE former prepares a man to pass smoothly through the rougher passages of life,
and gives tranquillity of mind in the most pressing emergencies. View such an
one in prosperity, and a soul healthful and prosperous, doubles every comfort;
and renders the good things of common providence blessings indeed. View him in
adversity, "his mind is fixed, trusting in the Lord: He is like Mount Sion,
which cannot be removed, but abides forever." He has that "peace which passes
all understanding," and drinks deeply of the comforts of religion. These
produce a noble firmness of mind, in the midst of the storms and tempests of
this evil world. "Though the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds
blow, and beat upon him," he remains unshaken. Though in the partial judgment of
some, his comforts may be small, yet it is to be remembered, that those joys,
like those rivers, are often the deepest, and the most lasting, which run on in
a silent stream, without noise and tumult.

THE greatest conqueror, whose spirit is not formed to such a religious
firmness, by the energy of divine grace, and the long and obstinate practice of
virtue, must be a stranger to such exalted happiness. The submission of the
vanquished, -- the applause of the populace, -- the glittering ornaments of
military dress, -- and the laurels of victory, may all accompany one, whose
mind is full of anxiety, confusion and guilt.

MOREOVER, -- The man that has obtained a victory over his own spirit, is
fitted for more extensive usefulness than he could be without it. This, far
from disqualifying him for any station and employment in life, serves to make
him more fit for every one.

VIEW him in low life, -- His mind is not swelled with boundless ambition, nor
does a restless spirit urge him on, at all adventures, and by any measures,
lawful or unlawful, to seek a higher sphere of action: but his mind is happily
accommodated to his circumstances; he is willing "to abide in the calling,
wherein he is called of God;" and desirous to fill with honor that station in
which providence has placed him, how low soever it be; sensible that in the
civil, as well as in the natural body, some members are appointed to higher,
and some to lower offices.

VIEW him as a magistrate, -- He, like the author of our religion, whose spirit
dwells within him, will rule the people in meekness, and judge in equity. His
gentleness will melt those, whom rigor could not subdue. The authority of the
ruler, accompanied with the kindness of the christian, will force a willing
submission from all; and insensibly learn the rebellious the language of
obedience; "what will thou have me to do?" In consequence of inward serenity,
"a law of kindness will dwell upon his lips;" which will often have a more
powerful influence upon the stubborn and refractory, than the greatest
severities of language; and give occasion to say; "how forcible are right
words?" The magistrate will be feared; -- the man will be loved; -- order will
be maintained; and civil government made to answer the excellent ends for which
it is designed. Such rulers will be likely "to rule for God, and be faithful;
they will be a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well."

IT IS in vain to expect these happy effects from the administrations of those,
who are slaves to their passions, and attempt to rule the spirits of others,
without ruling their own. The reins of government will be held with an unsteady
hand; relaxed too much, or too much straightened. The petulance of the man, will
counteract the influence of the magistrate; by which means authority will sink,
and law be trodden under foot. His observation must have been very much
confined, and his knowledge of human nature very small, who is not convinced
that this representation is just.

VIEW the man also that rules his spirit by the laws of Christ, acting in a
military character, -- How great an addition will this be to his honor and
usefulness! Hereby the officer will learn to command with meekness of wisdom;
and the private to obey, "not by constraint, but willingly." Hereby an
inviolable union of hearts will be promoted. The commander will not be basely
deserted in time of danger; nor the troops wantonly sold to destruction; but
each will be careful to keep his station, and every one resolved to do his
duty. What wonders may we not expect to see performed by such forces as these!

THEY greatly mistake, who imagine men necessarily enervated and rendered
effeminate, by having their spirits ruled by the gentle laws of religion, so as
to be less disposed to engage in the military service, when properly invited
thereto by providence; or less likely to act up to the character of valiant
soldiers. -- Far from this: -- None have so tender a concern for their country;
none will be more ready to exert themselves for the public good; none can face
dangers with so much fortitude of mind; none can view slaughter and death
spread before them, in all its gloomy horrors, with so rational a courage, with
such an elevation of soul, as they whose spirits are greatly christian; and
whose hopes of happiness beyond the grave, are rendered strong and bright, by a
long and intimate acquaintance with the power of religion. The confidence of
such is reason, not madness. They act from principles which cannot be
annihilated through the sudden assaults of fear, or base temptations to desertion:
such as a regard to the honor of God, the interest of religion, and the
preservation of our civil rights. Such are "mighty through God for the pulling
down the strong holds of their enemies: they go forth in the name and strength
of the Lord of hosts, and through him do valiantly." Though they are divested of
the restless passions and fury of unsanctified minds, yet none have their
spirits more fired with zeal and vigor than they, when the service of God and
their country invite them to action.

BUT then their magnanimity and zeal exert themselves, not to gratify revenge,
not to multiply the slain, or to triumph in the miseries of men; but to
establish the cause of truth and justice between contending powers. They don't
put off humanity in the field; nor borrow the spirit of him, who, "like a
roaring lion, goes about seeking whom he may devour." The occasion for war gives
them pain; they fight for peace. And it is evident that wars will be less
frequent, or cease, in proportion to the prevalence of a spirit of
self-government, which is the spirit of the gospel. When every one, from the
monarch to the peasant, shall be slow to anger, and rule his spirit, "wars
shall cease to the ends of the earth: Nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more." This is evident from the demand
of the apostle; -- "whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not
hence, even of your lusts, which war in your members?" But we may not expect
the prevalence of this spirit will be so great, as to close the tragical scenes
of war, under the present dispensation. Christ "came not to send peace on
earth, but a sword." But, "when he shall come a second time, he will remove
from them that are his, every thing that offends," and establish them in
uninterrupted peace and happiness for ever.

FURTHERMORE, -- They who bring their spirits under the government of reason
and religion, gain thereby a greater interest in the love and esteem of men
than can be obtained by military power and success, while the spirit remains
lawless and ungoverned.

THE mighty man, whose mind is cruel and savage, who "continually breaths out
threatenings and slaughter," tho he should be successful in war, tho he should
depopulate cities and countries, and go on from conquering to conquer, is still
an object upon which every man of humanity and religion thinks with horror: He
is feared by many, loved by none. Not so the man, whose every though it, and every
passion, is captivated to the obedience of Christ: a diffusive benevolence to
all mankind possesses his heart; and he learns to obey that difficult command
of our Savior, "Love your enemies." Such a spirit gives him a place in the
warmest affections of all.

WAS it not this spirit appearing in our late gracious Sovereign, which gave
him so firm a possession of the hearts of all his subjects, while he lived, and
which renders his memory so precious to them, since his removal? The nations
have risen up with one voice to call him blessed; and open and solemn respects
have been deservedly paid to his memory. Yet upon this returning public
occasion, you will allow me to say; -- that among his many royal
accomplishments, the humanity and gentleness of spirit which he appeared
possessed of, were none of the least; the natural consequence of which was a
mild and steady administration. Tho he manifested a surprising firmness of
mind, in his close attention to, and vigorous support of the present war; and
that at a time when his flow of spirits might be supposed greatly abated, by
the infirmities of age; yet so susceptible was his heart of the softer
passions, that he always prefered peace to war, when it could be obtained upon
terms honorable to his crown. A striking proof of this he gave in the overtures
of peace which he made to his old perfidious enemies the French; at a time when
success attended all his military enterprises; at a time when his enemies were
extremely reduced; and at a time, when an ungenerous monarch would have thought
it a fair opportunity to gratify a revengeful temper, by scornfully rejecting
the most equitable proposals for an accommodation. The happy effects of this
gentle spirit have spread far and wide. They have been sensibly felt, and
gratefully acknowledged, by his most dutiful subjects in these American
colonies. -- While we speak of this, to do honor to his memory, we necessarily
renew our grief for the very great loss we have sustained by his death. -- But
perhaps it may be though it unseasonable to indulge to sorrow in any great degree,
since through the goodness of God, this loss is so happily repaired, and our joy
takes place of our mourning, by the accession of our present gracious
sovereign, King GEORGE the THIRD, to the British throne; who shares so largely
in the excellent spirit of his royal predecessor; and who is formed, we hope,
by so great an example, and by the grace of God, to such a temper, as will
render him a distinguished blessing to the kingdoms, at the head of which he is
placed.

NOR does this mildness of disposition serve only to raise crowned heads high
in the esteem of their subjects; those that act in a lower sphere, enjoy the
affections of their fellow-men, in proportion to the degree in which they
possess it. Is it not this, in connection with other valuable endowments, that
fills our hearts with the warmest sentiments of love to the illustrious
Amherst? He, far removed from the cruelty of the tyrant, feels the influence of
humanity and religion on his mind: his actions breath the spirit of the gospel,
and he is "mighty to save," as well as mighty to destroy. His captives, struck
with the unexpected clemency and tenderness of their conqueror, forget the
sorrows of a captivated state, and fool in their breasts the delightful
sensations of love and gratitude to their gentle master. Who does not love, who
does not admire, those that manifest such a spirit! "Their names," like that of
their divine master, "are as ointment poured forth." -- He, who is possessed of
such a spirit, will secure more lasting honor, than he, who destitute hereof,
can boast great martial exploits. The most that will be said of the one, in a
little time, will probably be, that somebody cruelly conquered somebody; while
the actions of the other, will be carefully treasured up in the minds of many,
and mentioned to his honor from generation to generation.

BESIDES, -- If we view them when they draw near to the close of this mortal
state, and approach the solemn period of death, how different shall we usually
find the temper of their minds then! How differently will a review of their
respective characters affect them then! Then those tragical scenes, which, for
a while, might excite the admiration and applause of half-thinking mortals,
will produce no joyful reflections, to sooth the a king hearts of these men of
blood. Their minds, if destitute of any other support, besides what arises from
a review of their unchristian heroism, must be either strangely stupid, or else
filled with the most gloomy images -- Images of that blackness of darkness to
which they are going. But "at even time it shall usually be light" with those
that have shone in the other character. Their having the spirit of Christ, is a
good evidence that they are his; -- his true disciples and followers;
interested in all the promises of his gospel; entitled to all the important
blessings of his purchase. Such will have hope in their death, and immortal
light and glory dawning upon them, when they close their eyes upon this world.
There is no truer standard by which to judge of actions and characters, than
the aspect they have upon the eternal state, and their tendency to make us
happy or miserable there. And if we make this a decisive rule in the present
case, how much more noble and advantageous, will a victory over our own spirits
appear, than any martial achievements, while we are strangers to
self-government! The one, will leave us in the power of our worst enemies; in a
state of estrangement from God; without any interest in his favor; and doomed
to the strange punishment appointed for the workers of iniquity: -- while the
other, rescues us from the power of corrupt lusts and affections; vindicates us
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; accomplishes the design of
Christ's death upon us; and prepares us to receive an unfading crown of life.
"To him that overcomes," says our savior, "will I give to sit with me on my
throne, even as I overcame, and am set down with my father on his throne."

THUS I have endeavored a comparison of the characters in our text, with
regard to the influence they have upon our honor, usefulness and comfort here,
and our happiness in the future state. The design of this comparative view is
not to set them in opposition, or to represent them inconsistent with each
other; but to discover their respective worth. And is not the result of this
comparison plainly this, that the former is truly excellent and useful, in
itself considered; while the other is so, only when it is found in connection
with the former?

LET us all be animated, by what has been offered, to pursue them with a zeal
proportionate to their importance. Let us view them in a proper light, and
possess our minds with a lively sense of their respective usefulness; and shall
we not find, that, while the things which serve to promote the one, ought to be
done; those that promote the other, ought not to be left undone?

I HOPE none will think I mistake the occasion of our being together at this
time; or bring a discourse rather to discountenance, than encourage, a military
spirit; rather to sink, than raise, the character of a soldier. Sure nothing is
more distant from my intention; nor can I think this has been done, unless it
has by attending to the true spirit and meaning of that passage of scripture,
which is the foundation of the present discourse. The reasonable and religious
government of our spirits, which I have been describing, how much more
important an attainment soever it may be, than that with which it has been
compared, is yet, far from being contrary to a military spirit; or from having
any tendency to weaken or destroy it: so far, that I believe it will be found
the only true basis upon which it can be built; by which it can be supported;
and in connection with which it can be useful and good.

WHEN men become slow to anger, and learn to rule their spirits, they certainly
concur with the dictates of reason, and the word of God; and therefore cannot,
on that account, be said to oppose a military spirit; unless reason and
revelation tend to do it. That the former has not such a tendency, I need not
spend time to prove; and that the latter has not, is easily collected from many
passages of scripture, not only in the old testament, where God styles himself
"a man of war," and "the Lord of hosts;" and where we find, that troops were
led out to battle by God's express command; that he "taught their hands to war,
and their fingers to fight," and made them victorious by his mighty arm; but
also in the new testament, where, of the prince of peace himself it is said,
that "in righteousness he does judge and make war"; and where we find the
messenger sent before Christ's face, to prepare his way, implicitly owning the
lawfulness of a military life, in the answer which he gave to the soldiers
demand; "And what shall we do"? He does not tell them to quit their profession
as unlawful and scandalous: he does not intimate that there is any thing in
their employment inconsistent with the design of christianity, then about to be
introduced: but admonishes them of the importance of ruling their spirits, and
keeping them under the restraints of religion. Do violence to no man -- as if
he had said, -- "Think not, that because you are armed with the weapons of
destruction, you may wantonly violate the laws of humanity, and forcibly take
from men their properties, or their lives." -- Be content with your wages --
"Suppress an avaricious spirit: let not a desire of enriching yourselves, be
the main principle from which you act: nor suffer your minds to be discomposed,
though you should not succeed in your wishes and expectations of increasing
your substance."

IT IS a departure from such necessary regulations of temper and conduct, which
renders the soldier unchristian and base; when the only military
accomplishments he can boast, are a mind fierce and inhuman, that "fears not
God nor regards man", an "arm of flesh", and "feet that are swift to shed
blood".

SUCH is the present situation of human affairs, that recourse must be had to
the art of war. And 'til men's minds are bro't under the gentle sway of reason
and religion; 'til this is perfectly and universally the case; so that every
one, content with his own, shall by no unlawful measures endeavor to possess
himself of what belongs to another; so that envy and fraud, encroachment, and
oppression shall be wholly laid aside and forgotten; forcible methods of
defense will be necessary. Every one knows that this is not the present
condition of mankind; every one therefore, must be convinced of the usefulness
and importance of martial skill and prowess; and accordingly that endeavors
for the promotion hereof, are not only lawful, but honorable.

BUT not to enlarge --

I TURN myself to you gentlemen of the ARTILLERY, at whose invitation we are
now assembled in the house of worship.

IN aiming at superior military accomplishments, you act consistently with your
character, and suitably to the present state of the world. By this means your
ancient company will, not only possess, but deserve, the title of honorable.
The generous and public spirit which they appear possessed of, who devote
themselves to the service of their country, will conciliate for them universal
love and esteem; and, at the same time, fill their own minds with solid
pleasure and satisfaction. Under the influence and encouragement of HIS
EXCELLENCY, the captain general, we hope you will not only support a martial
spirit in general, but endeavor to cultivate the regular art of war; the
necessity and importance whereof, in New England, beyond what was requisite in
our infant state, when we had no enemy to meet in the field, when our warfare
was only with undisciplined savages in the wilderness, we trust does not escape
your notice and attention. The present war has afforded undeniable proofs, that
in order to succeed in battle the military art must be studied. Your knowledge
and experience herein, Gentlemen, we hope will be carried to such a pitch, as
will not only render you peculiarly useful yourselves, if called to action; but
also have a good influence to excite in others, a laudable ambition to excel
in the same things. And you will suffer me to remind you, that, in order to
your example's being loved and followed, it will be necessary for you to shine,
not only in the common ornaments of a soldier, but also in what is very
consistent herewith, "the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit." To be usefully
acquainted with the art of war, you must not be strangers to the religion of
the prince of peace. Would you conquer others, you must not be conquered by
yourselves, -- by your own lusts and affections. Slavery breaks the spirits,
and subdues the force of the mind: and certainly no slavery can be more
effectual to do it, than to be mastered by your own passions. Would you
therefore enjoy the comfort, honor and advantage of your character, as
soldiers, inlist yourselves under the banner of Christ; be firmly persuaded of
the excellency and usefulness of his spirit; and let your endeavors to possess
yourselves of it, be animated in proportion thereto.

TO CONCLUDE, -- Let us all be instructed by the doctrine of our text. Let us
all endeavor to have our minds deeply impressed with a sense of the importance
of ruling our spirits. In this we may strive to excel, without being guilty of
lawless ambition, or inglorious pride. This will be our honor and happiness,
whatever our stations in life are, whatever the circumstances of the world, of
our nation, and land. This will not be the less useful, if, through the
kindness of heaven, our hopes succeed, and the present war should issue in an
honorable and lasting peace; when "our swords shall be beaten into
plough-shares, and our spears into pruning hooks;" and our brethren of the
military character, shall leave the fatigues of the camp, to improve in
agriculture, that peaceful, but too much neglected art.

THE consideration of the infinite advantages of this conquest over our
spirits, may well inspire us with resolution to encounter all the difficulties
that lie in the way hereof. And that there are difficulties, great and
numerous, is a truth, which, far from denying or concealing, I must repeatedly
insist upon, and strongly urge the belief of: such difficulties as many shall
faintly seek to overcome, and shall not be able: such as will require all our
strength and fortitude to resist; and all, will be found too little, without
power from on high. He only "that formed the spirit of man within him," can
form it to a new and divine temper. To him therefore, let our thoughts be
directed: to him let us all repair: His grace let us earnestly implore: and for
our encouragement herein, he has declared himself ready to give the holy spirit
to them that ask him: and if we "walk in this spirit we shall not fulfill the
unlawful desires of the flesh and of the mind."

LET us "war a good warfare," and "fight the good fight of faith;" humbly
"looking to Jesus, the captain of our salvation," without whom we can do
nothing; but through the assistance of whose spirit "we can do all things;" and
shall come off more than conquerors in this spiritual conflict. This victory,
my brethren, will produce the happiest consequences. -- It will enable us to
enjoy ourselves, and our friends. -- It will lay a foundation for present
comfort, and usefulness. -- It will secure peace and safety at the close of
life. -- It will give the temper of heaven, and render us meet to enter the
mansions of glory.

LET us endeavor to lay our souls open to the full power of these important
considerations, and act under the influence of them, 'til "the same mind is
produced in us which was also in Christ Jesus;" and we are prepared to enter
his peaceful kingdom, where universal love and harmony reign for ever and ever.

AMEN.

