HEALTH. AN ESSAY ON ITS NATURE, VALUE, UNCERTAINTY, PRESERVATION AND BEST
IMPROVEMENT.

By B. GROSVENOR, D. D.

The THIRD EDITION.

BOSTON: Printed by D. and J. KNEELAND, opposite to the Prison in Queen Street,
for J. WINTER, in Union-Street. MDCCLXI.

TO Dr. Joseph Eaton, OF THE College of PHYSICIANS LONDON.
SIR,
MY Aim in this Address to You, is, to discharge some part of that Obligation I
am under, to Your tender Care, and most friendly Assistance, to me and my
Family; to let the World know how much You have been my Friend, and the
Pleasure I take in owning myself to be Yours.

SO often as we have put the Conduct of our Health into Your Hands, and so
often as you have been blessed and succeeded; after paying our Vows to God, the
next thing ought to be Gratitude to the Instrument of Providence in so great a
Blessing.

BY this Means I have found out a way of fastening an Acknowledgment upon You,
without leaving it in Your Power to refuse me. For that Reason I have broke in
upon You thus, without asking Permission; if there be any Fault in that, it is
owing to the utter Impatience I am under, of being always obliged.

THIS Present I make You is something agreeable to Your Profession. Your
Province is to restore and maintain Health, my Undertaking is to improve it.
May I be as successful in the one, as Your Care and Skill, Your Tenderness,
Integrity and Diligence, have been in the other; and may all the agreeable
Qualities, that made one of Your Profession of old be called The Beloved
Physician, abound in You. These are Wishes becoming

Your most obliged, and most humble Servant, B. GROSVENOR.

THE PREFACE.
THE pestilential Diseases that have of late Years walked their Rounds in
Germany, Poland, Prussia, Pomerania, Hungary, Hamburgh, and some Parts of
France, made us all very apprehensive for the public Health of our own Country.
Proclamations were indeed issued out for a strict Performance of the
Quarantains, but the Impatience of Restraint, so natural to ^he English, the
Carelessness of Officers, and the Avarice of those who usually oversee the
Execution of such Orders, render those Precautions less effectual among us;
less to be depended on, and consequently the distinguishing Providence of God
the more conspicuous.

We were alarmed afresh, by the Mortality among our Cattle, a Judgment that had
gone over all Europe, and for which there did not seem to be any human Remedy.
We feared it was the Prelude to some greater and more terrible Devastation; but
the Lord at length said to the destroying Angel, it is enough, stay now thine
Hand. 2 Samuel xxiv. 16.


I was excited by these Providence, to review and put in order some Thoughts I
had laid together upon the Importance of Health, its Precariousness, and its
best Improvement.

The World agrees in the Valuation of this Blessing, and have a general Sense
of its brittle Nature; and therefore I pretend not to make Discoveries, but to
make Impressions, if I can, and to recommend that Use and Improvement of
Health, without which it is indeed a Reproach upon any one to pretend to know
that it is a Blessing so important and so vanishing.

There is a great deal writ about the Preservation of Health. It is for the
Service of Health, that Men have traveled, studied, spent their Time, laid out
their Money, their Strength, and even Health itself, in the Pursuit of Health:
and yet after all, the Improvement of this Health, is of greater Importance
than the thing itself. Health, though a very great Blessing, is not for its own
sake, but for some farther and nobler End. It is to be regretted, that the most
delectable, most diffusive, and most esteemed Blessing in Nature, should be the
least improved, or not directed to its most excellent Purposes.

The Missionary tells us, that when all the Books in China were ordered to be
burnt by the Emperor Chiohamti, those in Physic were preserved by a peculiar
Exception. Letre 8.
As if the Whole Duty of Man was only curare cuticuiam, to keep the Body in
good Case, and to study nothing but how to be well.

Pindar has a bold Stroke, speaking in the Praise of Health: A Man ( says he)
that is in good Health, rich in Honor, and enjoys it all to a good Old Age,
need not trouble himself about being a God. Pindar. in Olympiis.
I wish this were nothing but Poetry, Fiction, and Invention all, without any
Example of any Character formed, or Lives led upon the same Sentiments. I wish
the Profaneness of the Turn were to be found no where but in the Poet, or that
the Men of Riches, Health, and Honor, were so mended since his Days, as that
those three things were not indeed to them instead of all that was divine. But,
oh Pindar! will Health do instead of Immortality and eternal Life? Is there any
Receipt for Immortality but this, that my Subject communicates to the World?
viz. the best Improvement of this best of Blessings? Having mentioned Health,
Wealth, and Honor, do thou leave us there? Will it do any Harm to go
farther, and to the charming Ideas of Health, Wealth, and Honor, join the
Epithet of eternal? I can no more be satisfied with any thing that I know must
come to an End, than I can be easy in thinking that my own Being would do so.
Why not aspire to be Divine, though not to be a God? Why do thou stop short
of that Health, those durable Riches and Honors, for the sake of which only,
it was worth our while to have been born, and for the actual Enjoyment of
which, it is at any time worth our while to die?

After all that is or can be said of Health, its highest Elogium is, that it is
the greatest temporal Blessing, and enters as the chief Ingredient into ^he
Happiness of this Life. If you will carry it any farther, you must render it
serviceable to the Purposes of an eternal Life.

This is what I endeavored to do in this Treatise, in a manner that I know no
Body has done before, among a great many Things written on the Subject of
Health in general, or with particular Intentions. Treatises have been writ with
a particular View to the Preservation of the Health of Princes, Ramazzini De
Principum Sanitate tuenda.
Scholars, Fortunatus Plempius, in Lovaniensi Universitate Professor egregius,
opus elegantissimum edidit, De togatorum valetudine tuenda.
Soldiers, Schinibergerus De Mili^antium Sanitate tuenda.
Sailors, Montaquana De Navigantium, etc.
Travelers, Johannes Jacobus Frisius De iter facientium, etc.
and lately of the Diseases incident to several sorts of Artificers. Ramazzini
De Morbis artificum Diatribe.
But I know of no Body that has considered this Subject in this View and
Intention, neither Divine nor Physician, nor handled in this Way the moral
Improvement of it. Tsehirnhausi^ Medicina mentis and corporis, I never saw.

Lessii Ugiasticon, it is so long since I have read and have it not by me, that
I have forgot how he manages that Subject.




Though it is certain Health, with all its Advantages, is not more important to
the Body, than the Improvement of it is to the whole Man.

Why should one Part only be studied for? When any new Discoveries toward the
Preservation of Health, are so welcomed into the World, Why should not an Essay
toward the best Improvement of it, be kindly received?

I am sensible the Order of some Parts of this Essay might have been better
disposed, and how much it might have been enriched and improved by Persons of
greater Acquaintance with that sort of Learning that borders upon the Subject.
Nay, I am ready to think, that I could have made it more complete myself, since
the improvements I have received, and the Addition made to the little Knowledge
I had before of the Human Structure, from the entertaining Lectures of the most
obliging Mr. Cheselden; in whom I know not which to admire most, the
Exquisiteness of his Skill, or the easy, frank, and generous Manner of his
communicating of it to the Curious. But my other Affairs would not permit me to
write that Part over again, and so I let it go with such Amendments as I could
conveniently insert. The Learned that way do not need, and others will not miss
it. What I have produced, I judge sufficient to illustrate that Chapter which
contains this Proposition, that Health for a considerable Time is a wonderful
thing; that it is not to be depended upon.

This would lead me to that part of a Preface which I have always thought might
best of all be spared: that is, a mighty Solicitude about the Reception of a
Piece into the World. But I shall spare myself and Reader any farther Trouble
than only to say, that when a Man has endeavored to oblige a few Friends, and
do a little Good in his own Manner and Way, and committed all to the Blessing
of God, he ought to be content with Neighbor's Fare, and must submit to the
Way of the World.

I cannot conclude without congratulating my native Country upon the Health and
Vigor that now fills the Throne, and stands round about it. Our Sovereign and
the Royal Family, are so much the greater Blessings to these Kingdoms, as they
are formed for Government, by the Capacity and Princely Virtues of their Minds,
and bring the Force of Constitutions not enervated by Luxury and Sloth, to the
steady Administration of Affairs. Now for a Conduct that shall raise
Great Britain to the Figure it ought to make in the World! Long may the Helm of
this State, and the Balance of Europe, be in such an Hand. We shall feel
ourselves well in the Health of our Princes, and that same Steady, which has so
long been wanting to our Counsels, shall retrieve the Honor and Glory of the
Happiest People in the World.

A TREATISE OF HEALTH.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Health.
IT is observed in the Nature of Light, that though it be the most familiar to us
of any Thing in the World, and That by which we see every Thing else, yet it is
so unknown to us in itself, and hardly to be defined. So it is in the Matter of
Health, which is the Light and Order of the little World: We better know when
we are well, than we know properly what it is to be so. I believe it is for
this Reason that the Sons of Art, who are the Tutelar Guardians of our Health,
are so sparing in their Definitions of what it is their Profession to restore
and maintain.

Pythagoras calls it Harmony, Hist. of Phys. Le Clerc.
but does not descend into the Particulars of which it consists. It Is observed
of him, that he gives the same Name to Virtue, which is indeed the Health of
the Soul, as Health is the Harmony of the Body. Harmony was with him one of the
Names of the Deity; so that this Word Harmony, seems to have been a darling
Word with him, which he gave to several good Things. But by Harmony in this
Case, he seems to intend, a right Proportion, Quantity, and Temperature of all
the Fluids; Soundness and Strength in all the Solids, to perform their
Functions; and to render it complete, a Mind fit to direct all the Motions that
obey the Will; which is, in a Word, the Universal Rectitude of the Animal
Economy.

All Things are now in their natural Order: The just Measures of the unerring
Pulse, the circulating Humors, and the moving Airs or Spirits, are all
undisturbed.

This is that E^kr^asia, that good Temperature, and fitting Conformation, of
all the Parts to their several Uses. This is Plato's Symmetry of Constitution,
wherein he makes Health to consist; to which he adds, That Sickness arises from
the breaking of that just Proportion of the Humors and Qualities in the
Constitution; which is the same Thing, I suppose, with what others mean by the
proper Mixture of Moist and Dry, Hot and Cold. Alchmaeon in Galen. Hist. Phys.


There are so many Things go to make up Health, the want of any one of which
would destroy it, that a Description of Health may be very long, and yet very
defective. Philosophers and Physicians both run mightily upon the Notion of a
Balance of Humors, the due Temperament of all the Qualities, a Sort of
Geometry in our Composition, which is destroyed by a Redundancy or Defect in
any of the particular Parts. Ap^a and jucunda eorum quibus Corpus animatum
constat Temperatio, ad Actiones secundum Naturoe leges exerendas and
perfieiendas. Chauvin Lex Phil.


Hippocrates's Account of it is, when the Humors, Spirits, and Solids, of the
Body are in their Natural State, while they balance one another in Quality,
Quantity, and due Mixture. On the contrary, Sickness is, when the Quantity of
either of these is less or more than it should be, or when any of these Humors
are discharged from their proper Place, upon any particular Part of the Body,
Hipp. de Natura Hom.
which amounts to the same.

As our Knowledge in the Animal Economy has improved, so have the Accounts of
this Matter been more accurate; and now we are told, That Life it self, so far
as it respects the Body, is, in one Word, the Circulation of the Blood, that
is, its Motion in conical distractile Vessels, from the Heart to the extreme
Parts of the Body, and its Return to the Heart again, by the same Canals
inverted: And it is upon this that all Animal Functions, all Sense and Motion,
voluntary and involuntary, do depend; so that the Regularity of this Course is
the Measure of Health, or most perfect Life; as its various Irregularities are
the Occasions of Sicknesses and Diseases, or a Beginning of Death. Dr. Mead of
Poisons. P. 155.


Though here it must be observed, that Life does not consist in the Circulation
of the Blood only; for there is no Part but will lose its Motion and Sense, as
certainly, by obstructing the Nerve that leads to it, as it will by
Obstructions in the Blood Vessels: So that Life and Health seem to depend upon
both. Stop the Nerves to the Heart, and it would as soon lose its Motion, as
the Brain would, if its Blood Vessels were stopped. As I have learned from the
ingenious Mr. Cheselden.
So that here is such a perfect Dependence upon the Motions of each other, that
neither could begin first, but must necessarily be set a going, and kept in
Motion, by a superior Agent, viz. that Power, in whom we live, and move, and
have our Being.

The Degree of this Health is always in Proportion to the Regularity of this
Motion: A Man may be in Health that is not Athletic, which is the most perfect
and highest Degree of it.

When a lively Vigor possesses every Part, and actuates the Whole; when the
Juices, Humors, and Spirits, without Obstruction, flowing in their proper
Channels; and the other Parts of the Body of a firm and lasting Tone, and in
their natural State perform their several Functions, agreeably to the whole
animal Economy, with Ease and Pleasure; this is Health in Perfection, or
highest Degree. A Man may be said to be in Health without being so happy as
this comes to. There are Measures (as I said) of Health, which may be thrown
into the following Scale of Degrees, and compose a Sort of Hygiometer:

ATHLETIC; Moderate Health; Declining; Nearer Health than Sickness; Nearer
Sickness than Health; SICKNESS; Mending, or Convalescence; Nearer Sickness than
Health; Nearer Health than Sickness; Moderate Health; ATHLETIC.
CHAP. II. Of the great Value and Blessing of Health.
SOME Writers in casting up the most desirable good Things of Life, have given
them this Rank, Health, Beauty and Riches; of the first, (says Sir William
Temple) I find no Dispute, but of the two others, much may be said. For Beauty
is a Good that makes others happy rather than ones self; and how Riches should
claim so high a Rank, I cannot tell, when so great, so wise, so good a Part of
Mankind, have in all Ages shown, that they could be happy without them, and
made it part of their Wisdom and Happiness that they knew how to be so. But
Health is so necessary to what we call temporal Happiness, that the greatest
and wisest of Men have always been ready to own it to be, not only an
Ingredient, but the very Foundation of it. Sir William Temple' s Essay on Long
Life.


Were I to deliver the Scale of the Blessings of this Life, according to the
Place they hold in my Mind, it should be in this Order; a peaceful Conscience,
my Time, Health, Learning and Knowledge, Liberty, Temper, or Self-government,
Friendship, and Riches. First, a good and peaceful Conscience; to have every
Thing within, serene and calm; and though I grant this does also belong to the
List of spiritual Blessings, yet it is so necessary to our temporal Enjoyment
of Life, that without it, every Thing else must needs be embitter'd and
spoiled. Next to that I must value my Time: because nothing can be enjoyed
without Time to enjoy it in; and because of what depends upon the Improvement
of it, for both Worlds; besides, when it is gone, it is an irrecoverable Thing,
and every Thing in this World vanishes with it. The next Blessing in Value and
Excellence is Health. This is necessary to the perfect Enjoyment of a Man's
self, and of every Thing about him, you can name after it. Knowledge and
Learning ought to be mentioned next: Health and Learning make the Philosophers
happy Men. Thales gave this for Answer to the Question, Who was the happy Man?
He (says he) that has a healthful Body, and a learned Mind. Thales in La^rti^.
Lib. 1. c. 1.
And now it is Time to mention Liberty. Health and Liberty are Blessings pretty
much of a Size. Without Health we could not enjoy Liberty, nor without Liberty,
Health. The public Vows of the Roman People joined them together, as appears
by the Inscriptions. One would think that a Man with a good Conscience, and
healthful Body and a learned Mind, might, even without fair Liberty, make a
Shift not to be miserable. On the other Hand, there are, to whom Liberty
appears a greater Blessing than Life it self. The Decision here will very much
depend upon the Degrees of Restraint taken into the Case. The next in my Order
should be what we call Temper; that Equanimity that preserves our inward
Tranquillity from lying at the Mercy of every cross Accident or Disappointment.
By this a Man is said to possess himself; has a Secret within himself for a
calm Serenity in the foulest Weather, and for his Soul to dwell at Ease in the
Midst of Trouble. By this Temper we farther mean that Benevolence or Benignity
of Disposition which is the Principle of all that Delight, which the Generous
conceive in doing Good to Mankind, and making those about them pleased and
easy; and is the secret Charm or Attractive of that Good Will from others, with
which it seldom fails to be rewarded. The next Rank in the Ingredients of
temporal Happiness I would assign to Friendship: Nothing does so much improve
and multiply a Blessing to one's own Enjoyment, as the having some Body to
impart it to, and communicate Indearments with. Horace reckons Friendship next
to Health; Nil ego praetulerim jucundo sanus amico.
And then in the last Place Riches: Not meaning thereby the overgrown, the
unwieldy, the cumbersome Wealth, wherein Man's Life does not consist; but by
Riches, I mean such a Competency of the good Things of Life as a Man has always
been accustomed to, and may answer reasonable Desires, and furnish out for the
Enjoyment of the Blessings already mentioned. And whether Riches in this Sense
must have a Place in the Account of temporal Blessings, is a Question that must
be very odly stated indeed, to be answered in the Negative.

Health stands in this Account at the Head of all merely temporal Blessings:
And I shall vindicate that Place to it from the absolute Necessity of it, both
to the Services and Enjoyments of Life; and shall farther illustrate the Value
of Health from its Serviceableness to the Purposes of Religion, and from the
Miseries of the contrary State of Sickness, and the general Consent of the
World.

SECT. I. The Value of Health from the Necessity of it to the Services of Life.
IF we were all Body, there could be no greater Blessing than this. The
Enterprise, the Pursuit, the Finishings, of the great and useful Affairs of
Life, are owing to this. Stately Buildings, flourishing Arts and Sciences,
learned Researches and Composures; the Hurry of thronged Streets, the Business
of the Exchange; victorious Arms, assiduous Counsels and Negotiations of
Princes, the Spoils of War, or of Navigation; they all grow out of Health. What
a Stagnation does the want of it bring upon all the Operations both of the Body
Politic and Natural? With the languid Motion of the Blood, with fainting
Spirits, feeble Limbs, heavy Pulse, and a sinking Constitution, every Thing
else sinks and languishes.

Not only particular Persons are disabled by want of Health in their private
Affairs; and Families, where the chief Manager has been valetudinary, have
dwindled in their Substance and Estate, the Vigor of the Mind decaying with
that of the Body; and not only Humor and Invention, but even Judgment and
Resolution, so far as concerns the active Life, change and languish with the
ill Constitution of Body and Health: But Kingdoms themselves are very often
affected by the Health or Sickness of those that rule them; and the public
Health and Constitution is very much felt in the Prince's Pulse. Charles IX.
King of France, 'twas very much to his weak and sickly Constitution that he
owed the Mortification of seeing a sickly and convulsed Kingdom. The
Indisposition of Rheuta, the seventh King of Scotland, gave his Nephew such an
Opportunity of practicing for the Crown, that he was obliged at length to
resign.

The Constitution languishes, where the Laws and their Administration are not
inspired with Vigor from him that sits at the Helm. Officers of State are the
Nerves and Sinews of the public Body: Where they are not quickened by a brisk
Spirit that flows down into them from the Head, they are not so likely to exert
themselves with that Sureness, Pleasure, and Ease. The public Felicity so much
depends upon this, that all Religions agree in injoining the Duty of praying
for Governors; and Christianity, whose Dictates, were they but observed, would
promote the Welfare of all Ranks and Orders of Men, both in this Life, and that
to come, has in a particular Manner recommended this to every one of its
Professors, that they pray for Kings, and for all in Authority. This is never
done with so much sincere Vehemence, as when it is for such good Princes as are
Ministers of God for Good to their People, a Praise to them that do well, and a
Terror only to Evildoers.

Within these 15 Years past (says Sir William Temple) I have known a great
Fleet disabled for two Months, and thereby lose great Occasions, by an
Indisposition of the Admiral, while he was neither well enough to exercise, nor
ill enough to leave the Command. I have known two Towns of the greatest
Consequence lost, contrary to all Forms, by the Governors falling ill in the
Time of the Sieges. I have observed the Fate of Campania determine contrary to
all Appearances, by the Caution and Conduct of a General, which were attributed
by those that knew him to his Age and Infirmities, rather than his own true
Qualities, acknowledged otherwise to have been as great as most Men of the Age.
I have seen the Counsels of a noble Country grow bold, or timorous, according
to the Fits of his good or ill Health that managed them, and the Pulse of the
Government beat high or low with that of the Governor; and this unequal Conduct
makes Way for great Accidents in the World: Nay, I have often reflected upon
the Counsels and Fortunes of the greatest Monarchies, rising and decaying
sensibly with the Ages and Healths of the Princes and chief Officers that
governed them. And I remember one great Minister that confessed to me, when he
fell into one of his usual Fits of the Gout, he was no longer able to bend his
Mind or Tho'ts to any public Business, nor give Audiences beyond two or three
of his own Domestics, though it were to save a Kingdom; and that this
proceeded not from any Violence of Pain, but from a general Languishing and
Faintness of Spirits, which made him in those Fits think nothing worth the
Trouble of one careful and sollicitous Thought: For the Approaches or Lurking
of the Gout, the Spleen, or the Scurvy, nay, the very Fumes of Indigestion, may
indispose Men to Thought and to Care, as well as Diseases of Danger and Pain.

Thus Accidents of Health grow to be Accidents of State; and the public
Constitutions come to depend in a great Measure upon those of particular Men:
Which makes it perhaps seem necessary in the Choice of Persons for great
Employments (at least such as require constant Application and Pains) to
consider their Bodies at well as their Minds, and Ages and Health as well as
their Abilities. Sir William Temple on the Moxa.


Plato, in his Commonwealth, brings in Socrates quoting the Authority of
AEsculapius, That a Valetudinary was not to be admitted to the Administration
of public Affairs, for the same Reasons already laid down; for (as Sir William
Temple farther observes) great Generals and Ministers of State in the Times and
Scenes of great Action, have upon them the Care of the State or of an Army; a
Care that ought to be as constant as the Chymick Fire, to make any great
Production; and if it goes out for an Hour, perhaps the whole Operation fails.
Now a Person whose Nature and Constitution is sickly, is not capable of such
constant Application of Thought. Besides, none that feel sensibly the Decays of
Age, or Sickness, and his Life wearing off, can figure to himself those
imaginary Charms in Riches or Praise, that Men are apt to do in the Warmth of
their Blood; and those are the usual Incentives toward the Attempt of great
Dangers, and Support of great Trouble and Pains. Idem on the Moxa.


Upon this Account I suppose it was, that among the other Qualities of that
great Minister of State, De Wit, the great Care he had of his Health, and the
little Regard he had to his Life, were not the least considerable.

Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, was one of the greatest Soldiers of his Time, an
enterprizing Prince, meditating vast Designs; as some Passages in his Life,
that are very well known, give a pleasant Account of. He knew to how little
Purpose the best Talents that could meet in a Commander were like to be without
Health; and therefore upon the Days of the most solemn Sacrifices and Prayers,
the Blessings that he came into the Temple to implore of the Gods, was
[Hygiainein] Health. As the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of a Kingdom would
not do without Health, so with it he thought himself capable of procuring all
the rest to himself. He built a Temple to Health, and declared he would worship
no other God nor Goddess; and carried the Matter so far, as to insinuate, that
if the Gods would but give him Health, he could give himself every Thing else.

The Graecians made it a Goddess: The Sicaonians worshipped the Image of
Health, and the Women offered their Hair to it; that is, they sacrificed their
Ornaments to their Health. And as barbarous as this may seem to be, they that
sacrifice their Health to their Ornaments, worship the meaner Idol of the two.

This sort of Idolatry, of making a Goddess of Health, is not to be found only
among the Heathen: There is something like it among some that would take it ill
not to be called Christians. Pyrrhus built a Temple to Health; so have the
Venetians, and instituted an annual Festival to the Public Health. The Church
Della Salute, is a noble Church at Venice, one of those that was the Effect of
a Vow, which the State made when they were infected with the Plague. Burnet' s
Letters.
It Is a wise Institution of that Republic, their appointing Magistrates Della
Sanita, whose Business it is to take Care of the public Health, to enjoin
Quarantains or Purgations upon Ships and People coming from Places suspected of
the Distemper, who will not so much as permit a Letter to be opened that comes
from a suspected Quarter, till it be performed. At Pavia they have an Officer
called Publicae Sanitatis Commissarius and Praeses. These are proper Methods to
preserve the public Health, of which no Government can be too careful; but
when we pursue it with superstitious Regards, when we pay it Honors that are
due only to the God of Life and Health, when we sacrifice to its Preservation
our Time, Usefulness, and our very Souls, we provoke God to show us the Vanity
of all our Precautions.

To close this Consideration of the Necessity of Health to the Business and
Affairs of Life: When once a Man has taken his Chamber, and begins to reckon it
the greatest Happiness in the World if he does but hit upon an easy Posture, or
could but relish a little Meat, how willingly, how easily, will he resign, to
any that can catch it, the Game of the World that he was in full Chase of
before? The Refinements and Intrigues of a Court, the Business of the Exchange,
the Operations of the Campaign, and all the other Scenes of Action, or
Prospects of Preferment? Which, however they had his whole Soul before, he now
lifts up his pale Hand, and in a trembling Tone, can say, Lord! how can Men set
their Hearts on such Things? Or, as that Lord, Sir William Temple speaks of,
when languishing and fainting, could think nothing in this World worth a
careful and solicitous Thought, nor could apply his Thoughts to Business,
though it were to save a Kingdom.

SECT. II.
WE are next to consider the Value of Health from the absolute Necessity of it
to the Enjoyments of Life.

Here it has a great Stroke: It gives a Relish to, and is the Foundation of all
the Comforts of Life. If I am sick my self, the World withers, and is blasted
to me, as every Thing is spoiled that is poured into tainted Vessel. What is a
well-spead Table to a nauseating Stomach, or a lost Appetite? Who will relish
the Pleasures of Drinks must have his Mouth in Taste. Nay, to find any
Felicity, or take any Pleasure, in the greatest Advantages of Honor or
Fortune, a Man must be in Health. The World agrees so universally in this, that
the first Concern we discover for each other is about our Health: The first
Question is, How do you do? This is the first Salutation when we meet; this is
the Wish we send to our absent Friends; this begins our Epistles, [ Salutem]
and this closes them, [ Vale;] and has done so, for ought I know, as long as
Writing has been in the World. We send Messages and Inquiries with the same
Question. It Is for this that Men travel into distant Countries, clamber the
Alps for Herbs and Plants, hang upon the Outside of Rocks and Precipices, dive
to the Bottom of the Sea, dig into the Bowels of the Earth, exhaust their
Spirits in Study, labor at Furnaces; and happy is the Man that can make any
Discovery toward the preserving of Health and long Life. He is in a fairer Way
of being an Alderman (as one says) than he that can show the sure Way to
Heaven. It Is the Value of Health that gives Splendour and Riches to some
Professions, and finds Business for so many others. 'Twas this that made
AEsculapius a God, and the poor Woman in the Gospel a Beggar; for what will a
Person think too much to recover Ease, return to the Business, and to enjoy the
Pleasure Life.

In a State of Health a Coxcomb may indeed despise Physicians, as a
Free-thinker laughs at Religion when he thinks himself at a good Distance from
experimenting the ( Grand Peut-estre, I allude to the Words of Rabelais: When
he was dying, the Cardinal du Bellai, who had been his Patron, sent to know how
he did; among other Things he told the Page, Je m'en vais chercher un grand
Peut-etre.
the Grand May-be of a future State: But when they fall sick, the one has a
Respect for the Art, and the other dreads Religion. So when the proud Spaniard
is boasting of his Parentage, Wealth, and Accomplishments, another shall answer
Proverbially, You will part with it for a Physician, if he can but untwist your
Guts when you cannot have the Benefit of Nature. Mr. Marlow' s Letters.


If Riches could always purchase Ease, or if Honors could make Distempers keep
their Distance, and force the Gout or Stone to pay Respect to Quality, who
would not be covetous, and with Reason? Who would not be ambitious, if Health
were at the Command of Power, or could be restored by Honor? But alas! a white
Staff will not help gouty Feet to walk better than a common Cane; nor a blue
Riband bind up a Wound, so well as a common Fillet: The Glitter of Gold and of
Diamonds will but hurt sore Eyes instead of curing them; and an aching Head will
be no more eased by wearing a Crown, than a common Nightcap Sir W. Temple, ubi
Supra.
. Croesus himself when he was sick was a poor Creature. Health is the Soul that
animates all the Pleasures of Life, and without it, a Man starves at the best
and greatest Tables, makes Faces at the noblest and most delicate Wines, is
poor and wretched in the midst of the greatest Treasures and Fortunes. Without
Health Youth loses all its Vigor, Beauty all its Charms; the softest Music,
grates in our Ears; Conversation is disagreable; Palaces are Prisons, or of
equal Confinement; Riches are useless (as to Enjoyments) Honor and Attendance
are cumbersome, and Crowns themselves a Burden. What Enjoyments are there in
lower Life, that can subsist in Pain and Sickness? I said, in lower Life, but
if Diseases are painful and violent, they equal all Conditions of Life, make no
difference between a Prince and a Beggar. A Fit of the Stone or Cholick, puts a
King to the Rack, and makes him as Miserable as he can do the meanest, the
worst and most criminal of his Subjects.

Princes have been so sensible of this, as to give their Physicians sometimes
an Opportunity of making themselves very necessary to them. Dread of Sickness
and Pain, well managed, by one who has Skill enough to increase this Distemper,
and remove others; will secure the Place not only of a Physician but of a
Favorite. Thus Alexander had his Philip Acarnius, and Augustus his Antonius
Musa; whose Statue he caused to be set up next to that of AEsculapius. What can
be too much for one that is held capable of restoring or preserving of that
Health, upon which the Enjoyment of all depends? Pulchra Valetudo Regno
regalior omni.
By this Means, some of them have held Princes themselves in a sort of
Subjection to them. Emperors have laid down their Arms at the Instigation of
their Physician, whom they durst not offend, because they durst not be sick.
The Kings of the Goths, after they had been settled in Italy long enough to
wear off their native Roughness, and were softened and polished by the Arts and
Delights of that Place, they grew proportionably solicitous about their Health;
and in the Instrument by which they created their chief Physicians they gave
them such Powers, that sufficiently show what a Value they had for Health, as
the Foundation of all their Enjoyments. Some part of it was to this Purpose.
Use our Palace with all Freedom, to go in and out with full Trust and Liberty;
a Privilege, that is sometimes purchased at great Rates by other Persons: for
though others serve by Right of Subjection, your more noble Business is to take
care of the Lord of the World. You have full Power to fatigue us with Fastings,
to prefer your Judgment to our Inclination, and when it is for our good, to
prescribe, although it be by Pain and Torture, what may restore us to the Joys of
Health. In short, we give you such Power over us as we have over others.
Indulge te palatio nostro, habeto fiduciam ingrediendi, quae magnis solent
pretiis comparari, nam licet alii subjecto jure serviant, Tu Rerum Domino
studio praestanti observa; fas tibi nos fatigare Jejunis, contra nostrum
sentire Desiderium, and in Locum Benefi^ii dictare, quod nos ad Gaudia Salutis
excruciet, talem t^bi denique licentiam nostri esse cognoscis qualem nos habere
comprobamur in caeteros. Cassi^d. Var. l. 6.


Lewis XI. King of France, had a most immoderate Passion for Life, and such a
Dread of Death, that he forbid the Mention of it within his Court, as too harsh
and ungrateful a Sound for the Ears of a Prince. He was Extravagant in his
Devotion to those Saints, from whom he thought he might obtain long Life. The
Legend had told him, that St. Servatius had lived three Ages. He laid out a
great deal in adorning the Temple of this long-lived Saint; who, because he had
lived so long himself, he thought he might be able to procure for him the same
Benefit: He flattered, he prayed, he would down upon his Knees before Francois
de Paul, to prolong his Days; and yet, it is a Question whether he regarded
God or the Saints so much in this Matter as he did his Physician, James
Cottier, to whom he was a perfect Slave, and entirely at Command, who had a
perfect Empire over him. The King gave him 6000 Crowns a Month, denied him
nothing that he asked, he durst refuse him nothing, and was ready to promise
any thing if he would but keep off Sickness and Death, at the very Name of
which he would cover himself over Head and Ears: Bishoprics and Benefices in
the Church, and Offices in the State, were disposed of by the Direction of the
Physician; for he had told the King, that he knew well enough some time or
other, he should be dismissed from the Service as others had been: But I swear
by -- (says he) you shall not live eight Hours after I am gone.

I shall conclude this Section in the Company of the Poets, who agree, that as
to all the Enjoyments of Life a Man must be in Health to make any thing of
them, Valeat Possessor oportet. Non domus, a^t fundus, non aeris acervus, and
auri,
AEgroto domini deduxit corpore febres;
Non animo curas, Valeat Possessor oportet.
Hor.


Auspicious Health appeared --
-- Divinely bright,
More soft than Air, more gay than Morning Light.
-- Propitious Power,
Whose Blessing, Mortals, next to Life implore.
With so much Luster your bright Looks endear,
That Cottages are Courts when those appear.
Mankind, as you vouchsafe to smile or frown,
Find Ease in Chains, or Anguish in a Crown. Dispensary.

SECT. III. The Value of Health is farther considerable from its
Serviceableness to the Purposes of Religion.
IN all Parts of Religion the Body is a Companion, in some, it must be an
Agent; and in those Parts of Religion wherein the Body is employed, it will
perform but sorrily if it be not in Health. Such as reading, discoursing,
public Worship; and even Meditation it self, if it be with any degree of
Application, or train of Thought, Sickness is indeed very friendly to the
Seriousness and Spirituality of the Mind, but Health has the Advantage, in two
Respects; in respect to the active Part of Religion, and upon account also of
the greater Evidence there is of the Sincerity of that Religion, which, with
sound Health, is not so likely to be the Consequence only of fearful
Impressions and Apprehensions of Death. Therefore it has been said, that though a
sickly Body be the best Physician to the Soul, a sound Body was the best
Servant to it; or, in my Lord Verulam's Comparison, an healthful Body is
serviceable to our traveling to Heaven, as it was to the Israelites in the
Wilderness, that their Cloths did not wax old upon them, nor their Shoes wax
old upon their Feet in their Journey to the Promised Land, Etsi enim nos
Christiani ad Terram Promissionis perpetuo aspiremus and anhelemus; tamen
interim itinerantibus nobis in hac mundi Eremo etiam Calceos istos and Tegmina
(Corporis-scilicet nostri fragilis) quam minimum atteri, signum erit favoris
divini. ve^^^am Hist. Vit. and Mort.
which made them travel with more Safety, Ease, and Expedition.

SECT. IV. The Value of Health appears from the Miseries of the contrary State
of Sickness.
COntraries do naturally set off and illustrate each other. It Is a Reproach to
our Natures, that we seldom come to a due Knowledge or Value of our Blessings,
but by the want of them, an Observation no where truer than in the Case before
us: We never set such a Value upon our Health as when we have lost it: Health
is never so welcome as when it comes with a Letter of Recommendation from
Sickness. To look into an Hospital and see what People there undergo, to regain
their Health; or to observe what passes at the Bedside of a sick Friend; what
disrelish to all the Comforts and Pleasures of Life; nay, and sometimes to Life
itself? How are all the Senses, and Appetites flatten'd to all the
Accommodations and Affairs of Life? What faintings of Spirits? What sickly
Qualms of Stomach, and languishment of the whole Frame; the painful Methods of
Cure in some Distempers, the restless Inquietude and Uneasiness, the nauseous
Draughts, the utter Waste upon all bodily Perfections, making our Beauty
consume as a Moth; the Confinement in which we are shut up, from Company,
Business or Pleasure; the long Trials of Patience in all this, besides the
Apprehensions of Death and Judgment; the painful and dangerous Operations and
Methods of Cure in some Distempers; and all this, and twice as much more, or
any thing else, that can be done, for a little Health and Ease, which then is
the most valuable Blessing of Life! When his Flesh upon him shall have Pain,
and his Soul within him shall mourn; when we are made to possess Months of
Vanity, and wearisome Nights are appointed to us, we lie down, and say, Job 14.
22.
when shall we arise and the Night be gone, and are full of Tossings to and fro
unto the dawning of the Day Job 7. 3, 4, 5.
: when in the Evening we wish it were Morning, and in the Morning that it were
Evening, and are chastned from Morning to Evening; when we say, our Bed shall
comfort us, and our Couch shall ease our Complaint, and yet lie down only to be
convinced, that we can rest no where; then we would rise and sit up, but have
not Strength to do it; then a little Ease, a little Health, Oh! of how vast a
Size does such a Blessing appear? Oh! if God would but give me the most
ordinary Degree of it! Time was indeed when nothing would do with me but
Pleasure, but now I would be very thankful for a little Ease, a little Health:
What can they complain of that are in Health? They that are mad upon Pleasure
and Entertainment, and undone if they are not enjoying something, don't know
what an Enjoyment I should take mere Health to be, by it self and alone. And
yet it may be, this was the very Person who was so prodigal of his Health while
he had it, that he flir^ed away a great deal of it in Frolic and Carelessness,
or sacrificed it to the Gratification of Appetite and inordinate Passions.

SECT. V.
I Shall add one Consideration more, from whence the Value and Worth of this
Blessing will farther appear, and that is, from the Esteem the sacred Writings
express of it, and the Price put upon it by those, who were above the Danger of
over valuing any worldly Blessing, or of marking it down in a wrong Place with
an inspired Pen.

And that not only by the Writings of the Old Testament, under which
Dispensation, Health was a great Ingredient of that temporal Reward that was
most plainly promised to their Obedience, but in the New Testament also.

How often has this employed the Omnipotence of Jesus? How many Miracles have
been wrought to restore it? How has the Son of God recommended his Person and
Message, by scattering this Donative among the People; healing all manner of
Diseases; and afterward lent his great Name to his Apostles, to perform the
same: Upon this Ground, tha^ as nothing could more evidence divine Power and
Warrant, so you could not do a more obliging Thing to Mankind.

One would hardly expect to find the Expressions of the Valuation of Health
rise so high, as in that Wish of the Apostle John, to his beloved Gaius.
Beloved, I wish above all Things, that thou may prosper and be in HEALTH,
Hygiainein.
3 John 2. Gaius was a Person of an excellent Character, and of a great Estate.
His Charity to the Brethren, and Hospitality to Strangers. Ver. 5. His generous
Assistance of those that went out preaching the Gospel, taking nothing of the
Gentiles: Ver. 7. whom he brought forward on their Journey after a godly sort,
and who bore Witness of his Charity before the Church; Ver. 6. These Things
speak a noble Soul and an excellent Spirit, Thy Soul prospers. Warm Love to God
and his Brethren, clear Light and active Graces, gave to his Soul an healthful
and vigorous Constitution. He had escaped the common Infection of Riches, i. e.
as they increased he set not his Heart upon them: The Soul, very often, never
prospers less than when the Body prospers most: But here the Christian was not
lost in the rich Man; the flowing in of this World had not drowned his Regards
to another; it was not with him the Prosperity of the Fool that destroys, but
it was the Prosperity of the faithful and wise Steward, who was resolved to
have his Accounts stand well and fair, when ever they should be called for: His
Liberality is upon Record elsewhere, as one that kept an open House, not only
for the Apostles themselves, but for the Christian Strangers, and the whole
Church. Gaius mine Host, and of the whole Church, saluteth you, Romans 16. 23.
and all this with the greatest Integrity, the Grace of all other Graces, and
which distinguishes the real Gold of a true Christian from the glittering
Tinsel of a pretending Hypocrite, Ver. 5. Beloved, thou do faithfully
whatsoever thou do to the Brethren and to Strangers, not to be seen of Men,
nor to purchase Applause, or serve some mean and low Design, but with sincere
Conscience of Duty, and the generous Pleasure of doing Good.

This prosperous Soul, it seems, dwelt in a weak and sickly Body: ( Ingenium
Gaii male habitabat) therefore the Apostle wishes him Health, that thou may
prosper and be in Health, even as thy Soul prospers, as to all things
spiritual, as thine Affairs flourish in the World, and thy Soul prospers toward
Heaven, so may thy Body recover from that feeble and languid State, and may
there be as much Health in the one as there is Grace in the other. (...) all
Things else are so well with thee, that I have only this to wish, that thy
State of Health may be such as may enable thee to exert a noble Soul, in an
healthful Constitution.

No body must be perfectly happy in this Life, however great or good, ( ante
obitum nemo supremaque funera, etc.) either in Mind, Body or Affairs, there
will be something always to put a good Man in Mind, that this is not his
Resting Place; something that may prompt him to seek, and dispose him to go to
the Blessedness of a perfect State.

Again, neither Love nor Hatred are to be known by the Things that are before
us: He whom Christ loved was sick, and suffered to die too, it may be more than
once; and here was one of the best of Men wanted one of the best of temporal
Blessings. Being so great a Man there was certainly no want of Means, and being
so good a Man there was no want of Prayer. Doubtless he improved the Happiness
of his Acquaintance with such Men as the Apostles, and of his being so well
beloved of them, so as to secure their Prayers, as well as he used his own. But
the Apostles could not heal arbitrarily, and to please their own, merely human,
Affection. The Gifts of Healing we see were only subservient to the Propagation
of their Doctrine, and exerted under proper Impulses; or else St. John could as
easily have bestowed Health as wished it, to his beloved Gaius, whom God saw
fit, for Ends above our Reach, to continue under such Indisposition. It Is not
unlikely that his infirm Body might very much contribute to this prosperous
State of his Soul; for while Men live as dying Creatures, and look upon
themselves as at the Gate of Eternity, this World has less Force upon us, which
we are leaving, and the other more, to which we look upon our selves to be so
near.

The Case of this excellent Man was very rare and admirable, that a Man's Soul
should be in so prosperous a Condition, that one cannot wish more, either to
Affairs, or Body, than to have them prosper even as the Soul did. Generally
it is quite otherwise, the Body prospers, but the Soul pines and languishes; the
Body thrives and is vigorous, the Soul withers and starves; and to wish their
Body and Affairs in the same Condition with their Souls, would be the same
thing as cursing both with Confusion and Decay. Few in Number are those happy
Persons, whose Soul-Prosperity might be the Standard of our utmost Wishes for
that which is Temporal. Beloved Gaius was such an one, and Religion has the
Credit of a few others that are a like Ornament to it; but for the most part we
fear the Case is so different, that it might well frighten us, if this Wish of
the Apostles were to be the Measure of God's dealing with us and our Affairs;
and he should say, Come, your bodily Health and Affairs in the World shall
thrive under my Providence, just as your Souls thrive under the means of Grace;
I Will make the Complexion of your Soul visible in the outward Condition of your
Body and Affairs. What Work would this make? How would some Estates dwindle,
and some Bodies consume and pine? The declining State of a Backslider would be
legible in his running to Ruin; the Breakings out of the Body would tell all
the foul Spots and Pollutions that are within; the Flames of Lust would catch
hold of the Body, and the burning Fever in the Pulse, proclaim the defiling
Heats that are in the Mind: A swelling Dropsy would let every one know where
dwelt the covetous Soul, that is unsatiable, and never knows when it has
enough: How many would lose their Sight, or see but a little through the affected
Ignorance that is in them? In short, we should see some Bodies break out all
over, like Job's upon the Dunghill, and swarm with Vermin, whose Souls do
actually swarm with what is worse than any Vermin in the World, viz. diverse
Lusts and Pleasures.

We may observe farther, that Prosperity to our outward Affairs may be desired
and prayed for by the most spiritual and heavenly Persons, without the
Imputation of a worldly Mind. St. John was an excellent Person, who made this
Prayer; Euchomai.
and so was Gaius, for whom 'twas made. They knew that Religion in its greatest
Spirituality did not oblige us to exclude the World entirely from our Prayers
and Wishes, and give it no Place; but to make it know and keep its proper
Place, which is, to give Way to Religion in the Competition, and to give
Assistance to it upon Demand. The Apostle must have a great Opinion of this
Man, to think he would be never the worse for the Prosperity and Health he
wished him. Health was the chief Article of that Prosperity he had wished him
before, and the most excellent Species of all the Blessings to which Prosperity
is the general Denomination. The Apostle speaks of it in very high Terms, I
wish above all Things; and, as we have rendered them, such Terms as must be
understood with some Qualification; for no truly good Man can value or wish for
Prosperity and Health, above all Things else, absolutely. It Is the Property of
true Goodness to seek first the Kingdom of God, from whence it derives, and its
Language is, There is nothing upon Earth we desire in Comparison of that. The
Meaning thereof must be, Above all Temporal Blessings, or, In all other Things,
or, As to all other Things. Non dubito quin animo sis tali, qualem optare
possem Hoc idem opto de corpore and rebus aliis; Optandum est ut sit men's sana
in corpore sano. Grot.
I wish you prosperous Affairs, and an healthful Body, as additional Blessings
to a gracious Soul: Men's sana in Corpore sano.

Thus far have I represented the Value of Health, from the Necessity of it to
the Business and Affairs of Life, and to the Relish of any of its Pleasures;
from the Use of it to the Purposes of Religion; from the Misery of Sickness;
and from the high Rank the Scripture has set it in, and the Valuation put upon
it by the best of Men.

Before I go any farther, I shall make here two Remarks, that are very proper
to be thought on, while the Evidence of the Value of this Blessing is fresh
upon the Mind.

The one is upon the Folly of throwing away so great a Blessing for some mean
Delights, some present Pleasure and Gratification. It Is a Sin against God to
unfit our selves for the Services of Religion, and of Life, in Greediness of
some single Sensations: And it is Nonsense for the Sake of one Delight to lose a
Thousand, nay, to destroy the very Foundation of All. Plutarch says very well,
That Diseases do not so much rob us of Business, and Journeys, and Exercise, as
of Pleasure: So that if a Man would continue his Pleasure, he must take Care to
preserve his Health, without which there is none, ( i. e.) he must omit some
small and short, for the Sake of great and lasting Pleasure. Pleasure is of
that Nature, that it cannot be born alive in the Midst of Distempers. Health is
to Pleasure what fair Weather is to the Halcyon Bird, that gives it a peaceful
Birth, and a commodious Nest Plutarch. De Sanitate tuenda.


But all this while we are speaking these Things of bodily Pleasures, that do
so much depend upon bodily Health, we do at the same Time demonstrate in the
next Place the Excellence of True Religion, that gives Pleasures which do not
lie at the Mercy of any Diseases, that do not depend upon Health, and
consequently are not lost with it; gives Pleasures that are Supports under the
Loss of Health; nay, are sometimes noble Equivalents for it, provided our
Reason be undisturbed, and the Christian has a clear Evidence of his good
Condition. It Is agreed that bodily Health is the Foundation of all worldly
Pleasures; consequently, when that fails, they must do so too: But even then do
religious Pleasures not only subsist, but improve, enlarge, grow, and
distinguish themselves; and are like the Soul, which is the Seat and Subject of
them, spiritual, immortal, and out of the Reach of Distemper and Accident. A
good Conscience, clear Evidences for Heaven, Sense of divine Favor, Prospect
of the Recompense of Reward, are Pleasures that depend not on bodily Health,
Pleasures that give noble Airs to the good Soul, shining illustriously through
the Cracks of a dissolving Body; Pleasures that make Religion look like it
self, glorious, heavenly, immortal. Certainly true Religion must be a pleasant
Thing, whose Delights cannot only subsist, but are sometimes exalted, when the
very Foundation of all other Pleasures is utterly destroyed. O Blessed God!
grant that I may make sure of that which will give me Pleasure of its own, when
all others are gone, and do me some Service when nothing else can.

CHAP. III. Of the Temptations of Health, and the Sins that are apt to rise out
of it.
BIshop Hall in one of his Meditations says, I will more fear the spiritual
Hurt that may follow upon Health, than the bodily Pain that accompanies
Sickness. What that spiritual Hurt is to which we are so liable in Health, I
proceed next to enquire. And the first Thing I shall mention is:

SECT. I. We are generally too little sensible of the Value of it while it is
enjoyed.
I Have already taken Notice that such is the Folly of Mankind, that we
understand and value our Blessings more by the Want of them, than by their
Enjoyment. What earnest Wishes and Prayers do we send up? What will we not take
in or abstain from, suffer or do, to recover that Health which a little before
was sported with, lavishly exposed to all Hazards as a very Trifle? How seldom
do we solemnly give God Thanks for it, and make a short Stop in the Carreer of
our Time and Business to take Notice to our selves of this Blessing, That we
are well?

Methinks a small Pause now and then with my self, to this Purpose, is very
becoming: As thus, I have no Qualms of Stomach, no Pains in Limbs; I have
escaped all the Diseases and Casualties of this Weekly Bill, and a thousand
more than can be named: What shall I return to the Lord for all his Benefits?
Of which, this is the chief in this World, I am well: It Is a pleasing Thing to
feel and find that I am in Health: Every Part of me bears witness to this
Goodness of God: and therefore every Part shall concur to praise thee, O Lord,
who art the Health of my Countenance, who causest it to look with an healthful
Aspect, make my Soul prosper as my Body does. I say, How becoming is this? But
how rare for your Men of Business, or Men of Pleasure, to make such a Stand, to
look inwards in Reflection upon what they insensibly enjoy, or to look upward^
in Acknowledgment of a Blessing, without which they could neither do Business,
nor enjoy Pleasure?

When we are long accustomed to Health, we take it for granted that we shall
^^^oy it, without taking it for a Mercy that we do so. We are not sensible
enough of our continual Dependence upon the Divine Goodness, if we enjoy it
long; and by that unthankful Heedlesness necessitate Providence to deprive us
of its wonted Supports, to make us sensible that we do always need them. It Is
but fit the Mercy should cease to be constant, when its Constancy only, which
should be its Indea^ment, keeps us from entertaining it as a Mercy. Boyl's
Reflections.


SECT. II. AGain; When w^ turn Health into Vanity, and make it our B^ast;
ascribing it to any Thing, in such a Manner, as plainly shows we are not
concerned that God should have the Praise and Honor of it.
You have heard Persons flourish upon the Strength of their Constitution, the
Art they have in the Management of themselves: They clap their Hand upon the^r
Breast, and cry, Here Is a Heart of Oak, with an Air of Defiance to Distempers:
Here Is a Constitution of Steel! I have not kept my Chamber a Day this twenty
Years, says another. You wait to hear when the Benefactor is brought into the
Account, and acknowledged; and you are as much disappointed as you are
surpised the next Week, to hear that this Person died suddenly upon such a
Day, and in such a Place.

It must be owned, the Forms, God be thanked, and I thank God, have been abused
by Hypocrisy and Affectation; but it must also be owned, that even that
Hypocrisy and Affectation is not more vile than the Ingratitude of not giving
God the Glory of so excellent a Blessing. Are you shy of Hypocrisy, and do you
run into Irreligion? You talk of your Constitution; Pray who framed it, and put
it together for you with so much Advantage? You boast of your Skill and Study
in Nature, and Acquaintance with the Medicinal Properties of the several Parts
of it; I ask, Who lodged those Properties in the several Parts of the Creation?
Who adapted them to their several Purposes? Whence came Understanding i^self?
Job shrinks into Dust and Ashes, after all his Philosophy, when God answers him
out of the Whirlwind, Gird up now thy Loins like a Man; for I will demand of
thee, and answer thou me. Where wast thou when I laid the Foundations of the
Earth? Declare if thou have Understanding.

He that pretended to the Art of giving Immortality to human Bodies, is now
Dust and Ashes. He that told others (...) to live an hundred Years, died at
Forty Paracelsus (...) of (...) Secrets to keep M alive for Ages, died himself
about Forty.
. We have seen Physicians of the best Renown drop down dead in the Streets. We
have seen some of the strongest and most promising Constitutions sink all of a
sudden, and not so properly go down as tumble into the Grave at once: The
Building was strong and beautiful, but the Ground was hollow; the Foundations
in the Dust crushed sooner than a Moth: And therefore, let not the strong Man
glory in his Strength, let not the wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor the mighty
Man glory in his Might, nor let the rich Man glory in his Riches; Jer. 9. 23,
24.
for it is not in Strength nor Wisdom, in Might nor Riches, to secure Health,
otherwise than as a Means through which God conveys and maintains it; therefore
let him that glories, glory in the Lord, who is our Life, and the Length of
our Days.

SECT. III. Presuming too much upon the Strength and Firmness of Health, and so
putting it to too great Trial and Expense, is a Fault of some healthy People.
THIS is one Way of boasting of it: A (...) deal of this most valuable Blessing
ha^ been sacrificed to Frolic, to Trial of Skill, to the Vanity of showing
what we can bear: And that which renders this the more criminal, is, That the
same Person would have found out a thousand Ways of excusing himself from the
twentieth Part of the Hazard or Trouble in the Service of God, or the Good of
Mankind, which he throws away in Ostentation of a robust Constitution. Health
is really too great a Blessing to be played away against so mean a Stake as the
Shout of half a dozen Companions; or to bear away the Repute of a Quality, in
which I am outdone by several Brutes. You glory in your Strength, ( Taurina
Gloria,) an Ox is more glorious if that be all: You have a great deal of
Strength, an Elephant has more. No Body was stronger than Milo: This was his
Glory; but it was his Shame; as indeed it generally is of such, to be of a
Character that had nothing in it besides to boast of.

We presume too much upon Health, when we too much indulge to those Pleasures
that waste and destroy it. Pleasures too long continued, and too often
repeated, spend the Spirits, and exhaust Nature too fast; they are said to live
too fast. The same may be observed as to Labors; but that is an Extremity to
which we are less liable, and Nature more forward and early in the Alarm it
takes of Danger, because not bribed or beguiled by Delights and Entertainment,
to which it has always an Inclination. Many are now silent in their Graves, and
many are groaning on sick Beds, on their Way thither, who might neither have
been sick nor dead, had they not presumed too much this Way upon the Firmness
and Stability of their Health; that it would carry almost any Load they would
at any Time lay upon it. But then on the other Hand:

SECT. IV. Too great a Tenderness and Value for Health, an excessive Niceness
about it, is another Extreme.
IT is indeed too valuable to be trifled with; but we ought to remember, that
it is not the only Jewel that we have: And to continue the Allusion, we should
manage it as we do those precious Parts of our Treasure; we neither suffer them
carelessly to lie about the House, nor are we hovering perpetually over them;
because they are precious they are not always under Lock and Key, nor are
produced without Care and Caution: As valuable a Thing as Health is confessed
to be, every Thing is not to be made a Sacrifice to it. We have some Things of
more Consequence to us than Health it self, viz. our Usefulness in the World;
our Duty to God; our Souls, that they may prosper even as our Body; our present
sensible Interest in the divine Favor; and our future eternal Happiness. What
is it to God or Man whether that Person be well or sick, be dead or alive, who
takes so much Care of his Health as to have no Regard to all these?

One would think some Persons more afraid of losing their Health than of losing
all these; more afraid of being sick than of being damned: They shut themselves
up in their Apartment from the Duties of Life, and the Service of God; not so
much from being really ill, as from an inordinate Fear of being so: The Wind
must not blow upon them, the Weather is not to be encountered by them, the
Inconveniences of God's Worship are not to be born by Complexions so nice and
fine; 'till at length they have contracted such a Tenderness and Delicacy, that
they can indeed bear nothing at all: And what was their Sin in the Beginning,
is their Punishment in the End.

God forbid that I should insinuate a Charge upon Cases wherein God makes
Allowance, and will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice. Such is the Condition of
many aged and infirm, and otherwise disabled Persons. No good Person will be
offended at this Caution, lest such Nicety should proceed from a bad State of
Heart, rather than a bad State of Health, and lest it should indeed provoke God
to inflict upon them what they seem to fear more than himself. But what shall
we say of such Persons, who as indisposed as they are generally on the
Lord's Day, are seen to pursue the Affairs and Diversions of Life all the Week,
that are ten Times the Risque of Health that any Parts of God's Worship can be,
this must be owned to look a little suspicious.

When I see some good People, who love the House of God, and the Place where
his Honor dwells, making hard Shift, through all the real Weaknesses of Age
and Infirmity, to come to him, and enjoy him there; and when I meet with some
others, most affectingly bewailing on a Sickbed their Neglects of Duty upon
too slight Occasions, O that I had now but one Quarter of that Health I enjoyed
when I fancied my self too much indisposed to wait upon God! Oh, the Guilt I
have contracted, the Benefit, Comfort, and Pleasure, I have lost, by indulging
too much an affected Softness of Life, and to imaginary Distempers! I say, when
I observe the hard Shifts of the one, and the Complaints of the other, I cannot
but think such a Caution as this may have its Use.

Under this Head I may mention a sort of Persons that are equally the Objects
of Pity and Blame; those I mean that are hardly ever well for fear of being
sick; that suffer a deal of the real Misery of Sickness from a Kind of Panick
Fear of being ill -- Tunc corpore sano
Advocat Archigen^n, onerosaque pallia jactat.
Juv.
: The sensible Pleasure, Comfort, and Delight of Health are lost in the Anxiety
and distracting Fear of losing it: The bitter Mortification, of living
physically they make sure to themselves, by way of Anticipation, in what they
call Preventive Physic. Now one Quarter of this Concern well placed, laid out
upon the Method of true Peace with God and Conscience, a steady Resignation to
his Will, and a sure Hope of Eternal Life, would rescue them from this Torture,
would enable them to taste the true Pleasure of being well, and help them to
continue so. And yet on the other Hand, another Fault that sometimes attends
Health is;

SECT. V. The putting off the Thoughts of Sickness and Death, and reckoning
them to be at a very great Distance, because we are now in Health.
INstead of making the Pleasures of Health, the Thoughts of Sickness, and
Prospect of Death, consist and be friendly, and agree with each other, as they
certainly may, we are for setting them at the greatest Distance we can. But is
Death or Sickness ever the farther off, because I will not think of them? Is a Man
the safer from any Danger by shutting his Eyes, that he may not see it? Is he
not in a fairer Way who views, considers, grows familiar with it, is thereby so
prepared for it, that it is no longer a Danger? The Danger is over so soon as I
have thought of it long enough to be prepared and ready; and if the Danger be
over, the greatest Allay to the Pleasures of Life is removed, and they remain
in their full Strength and Enjoyment.

When we are perfectly well, how natural is it for us to take it for granted
that we shall continue so? Though at the same Time, nothing in the World is
more universally acknowledged than that we must be sick, and die. No Body needs
Learning or ^arts to take in this, That Life is a Vapor, and Health a Shadow.
This is so much the common Sense, that a Man is thought to want it that sets
himself industriously to make out what no Body denies. But what is the Meaning
then that where the Conviction is so clear, the Impression is so small? That
where the Evidence is beyond all Contradiction, yet the Disregard and Neglect
should be to a Degree, as if it were not only a doubtful Thing, but utterly
false? For if it were utterly false that I should ever be sick, and die, I
could not be more heedless than never to allow my self to think at all of the
Matter. The Meaning is, they think it a great Way off, and for that Reason they
need not yet think of it at all. Some have ingenuously confessed, that because
Man's Life is measured at threescore Years and ten, they have imagined
themselves set in for the utmost Year of that Standard; nay, after they have
lived half Way to it, have dreamed of it as all to come; and have not easily
been able to get rid of the inward Delusion, That the Taper, though burnt down
so low, would yet last as long as the whole one when 'twas first lighted up.
And others we see, whether they will confess it or no, manage as if they
thought the same Way; nay, the Scripture goes farther, and says of some, That
their inward Thought is that they shall continue for ever, and their
Dwelling-places to all Generations. Psalm. 49. 23.
If it were not for their meeting now and then with a Funeral, or casting the
Eye upon a Grave or a Tomb, it would be hard to guess when some People would
think of Sickness or Death. From whose Course of Life, even in Spite of those
Memento's, one would imagine they flattered themselves with an earthly
Immortality. Nulla fere res est quam negligentius expendamus vel minus
meminerimus; Omnia molimur perinde a^que immortalitatem nobis in terra
constituentes. Calv. Inst.


But you are afraid of Death, you say, and therefore don't care to think of it:
You would be ashamed to reason so in any other Case of Danger. A wise Man would
think the more of what he had Reason to be afraid of, either to prevent it, or
to provide for it. By all Means let us get rid of the Fears of Death; for
without that Attainment, Life and its Pleasures can in none of its Channels run
pure and sweet.

Be gone the Dread of Hell, and all those Fears
That spoil our Lives with Jealousies and Cares,
Disturb our Joys with Dread of Pains ben^ath,
And sully all with the black Fear of Death. Creech' s Version of these Lines
of Luctetius:
Et metus ille for as praeceps Achoruntis agendus
Funditus, humanam qui vitam turbat ab imo,
Omnia suffendens mortis nigrore: ^neque ullam
Esse voluptatem liquidam puramque relinquit.
l. 3.

I say so too; Away with Fears of Death; but then I must add, that this can
never be done by Lucretius's Prescription. Indolence, Oscitancy, Unbelief, will
never do it. It Is a poor Relief to put the Evil Day far from one, and thereby
make it more an Evil Day than otherwise it would be. The Thing is inevitable,
and the Relief can never lie in preventing, much less forgetting it, but in
providing for it. It Is only Guilt that makes us fear; and the natural Way to
cure those Fears, is to remove that Guilt, and cease to do Evil, and learn to
do well, and go heartily into his Design and Method, who made it one Part of
his Salvation to deliver th^se who through Fear of Death were all their
Lifetime subject to Bondage. This is the proper Natural Cure of guilty Fears;
and this reconciles us to another World. For (to use the Words of a good
Writer) Repentance, not Infidelity, is the Voice of Nature. But Men ^ever think
of rejecting another Life, till they lay aside the Thoughts of Repentance: And
certainly that is not natural. To repent is an easy, natural, infallible Cure:
To disbelieve another World is a Work of Art and Difficulty, and a Force upon
Nature, and at best an uncertain Cure; for Infidelity can give Men no greater
Security against Fear, than it does against another World: And those remaining
Jealousies and Suspicions, and the frequent Return of such Fears, which disturb
bad Men, may satisfy us what that is. Dr. Sherlock of the future State.


Surprise is a mighty Addition to any Thing that befalls us: This they secure to
themselves, who are heedlesly unprepared for what they know must come. This is
a Folly beyond all Aggravation: There is nothing more absurd by which to expose
it. If any Thing like a Sigh proceed from the Mouth of God, it is That, O that
they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter End! Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
To consider this, it seems, is Wisdom in God's Account. This does not oblige
us to be melancholy, and always poring upon this Subject, but to dwell upon it
so long, till we have answered the Ends of Safety and Comfort; and then there is
an End of all Melancholy in the Thought; then it is so far from dashing the
Pleasures of Life, that it is an additional one to all the rest, and one of the
highest Relish too, when I think of coming Sickness and Death, with Composure,
as not to be avoided; and without Pain, as not to be undone by it; nay, with a
great deal of Pleasure, as being to my infinite Advantage and Gain.

This is an Improvement of the Pleasures of Life, a Refinement upon them: It Is
now that they run pure and sweet in all the Channels; That being removed which
of all Things in the World was most able to sully and disturb them. Death and
Eternity provided for, there is nothing left in the World capable of giving any
considerable Allay.

One may appeal to the most stupid in this Case, which is most to the Purpose;
To put off the Thoughts of these Things, or attain the Ability of thinking of
them not only till they are familiar, but pleasant and delightful; to lay in
for their stealing on gradually, or for their sudden Invasion. So provided, a
Man need not start at the naming the Tokens of the Plague or Sickness, or any
Distemper that is likely to become epidemical. He feels no inward Twinges at the
opening of a Bible, upon the Places about Death and Judgment. He need not
tremble with the Cup in his Hand, like Belshazzar, which the Fears of his
Destiny will not suffer him to drink, or does very much imbitter. Such an one
needs not be shy of a good Man's Company, that will be saying something of
Heaven and another World; nor, with Felix, shake and tremble, with all his
Guards about his Throne, while at the Bar Paul reasons of Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come. He need not endeavor to set a strong Guard
upon all the Avenues of his Soul, to keep out every Glance from another World,
le^t he should be so unhappy as to think of his God or himself; glad of any
Business, any Diversion, that will but deliver him from the meeting those he
dares not face, God and his own Soul. Nor is he in the Vapors presently upon
some Discoveries of his own Frame and Make, how frail, how perishing it is; or
to understand that Sickness and Death is always within a Moment's March of us;
and whereas it was once said, As the Lord lives, and as thy Soul lives, there
is but a Step between thee and Death, I may say, there is not so much as a
Step; because the Strength whereby the Step must be taken may fail before it is
finished, and the Breath that I am taking in may be stopped before it is
completely drawn. In short, he is the happy Man who can live without the Fears
of Death, and die without the Fears of Damnation; and whose Confidence in God
the Terrors even of a Judgment-Day shall not be able to dismay.

People may talk what they will, but it is Religion with its Evidences,
Supports, and Prospects, that must set us above the Fears of Death: Tho some
Gentlemen have prescribed the getting rid of all Religion in order to this
Attainment, and quote their ( Esprits Forts qui sont morts en Plaisantant)
brave Fellows that have gone off with an Air, to support a sort of Philosophy
that is too often practiced at the Place of Execution, by the great Geniusses
who have learned to dye hard.

Must Pride, Despair or Stupidity, furnish Instances of defying Death, to rival
the Faith and Hope, the calm Resignation, or joyful Assurance of the Christian?
What a swaggering does Lucretius make with his Epicurus? Primum Graius Homo --
This was the Man that first informed the World how to defy Religion and its
Fears: But they that knew as much of him as Lucretius did, tell us, that never
any poor Creature did so tremble at the Approach of what he had taught others
to laugh at, viz. Death and another World: Nec quemquam vidi, qui magis, ea
quae timenda esse negaret, timeret, Mortem dico, and D^os. Tull. de Hat. l. 1.
Nature recoiled upon him. To disbelieve another World is a Work of Art and
Difficulty, and a Force upon Nature, and at best an uncertain Cure, as was
observed before. But to close this Chapter: CARUS, we grant, no Man is blessed
but he,
Whose Mind from anxious Thoughts of Death is free.
Let Laurel Wreaths the Victor's Bows adorn,
Sublime through gazing Throngs in Triumph born:
Let Acclamations ring around the Skies,
While curling Clouds of Balmy Incense rise;
Let Spoils immense, let Trophies gained in War,
And conquered Kings attend his rolling Car:
If Dread of Death still unsubdu'd remains,
And secret over the vanquished Victor reigns,
The illustrious Slave in endless Thraldom bears
An heavier Chain, than his led Captive wears.
With swiftest Wing the Fears of future Fate
Elude the Guards, and pass the Palace Gate:
Traverse the lofty Rooms and uncontrolled
Fly hovering round the painted Roofs, and bold
To the rich Arras cling, and perch on Bust: of Gold.
Familiar Horrors haunt the Monarch's Head,
And Thoughts ill-boding from a downy Bed
Chose gentle Sleep. --
Thy Force alone, Religion, Death disarms,
Breaks all his Darts, and every Viper charms.
Softened by thee, the grisly Form appears
No more the horrid Object of our Fears.
We undismayed this awful Power obey,
That guides us through the safe, tho gloomy Way,
Which leads to Life, and to the blessed Abode,
Where ravished Minds enjoy, what here they owned, a God.
Sir RICH. BLACKMORE's Creation.

CHAP. IV. That the ordinary Continuance of our Health is a very great Wonder.
The Use we are to make of that Consideration.
THAT the ordinary and common Health of our Body, and its Continuance for any
considerable Time, is indeed a wonderful Thing, I shall endeavor to illustrate
from the Make and Frame of our Bodies, from the Accidents to which these fine
Compositions are exposed from without, and from the Diseases which they are
liable to from within.

SECT. I. From the Make and Frame of these our Bodies, and the Materials of
which they consist, and the Manner of their Composition.
AS to the Materials of which we consist, we dwell in Houses of Clay, whose
Foundation is Dust, crushed sooner then a Moth. The Workmanship is indeed as
curious as the Materials are mean; it would exhaust the Study of an Age, to
show the exquisite fineness and mavelous Composition of the Animal Machine,
where all is in Number, Weight and Measure, nothing without Design, Intention
and Use, In Corpore humano, nihil sine lege, nihil sine ordine, nihil sine
pondere m^nsu* (...) and numero. Nihil deficit, nihil redundat, nihil (...) aut
superfluum, omnia sum utilia, semperque operantia. Bausnerus
all wrought off with Characters of its Author upon it, and in a Manner worthy
of him that made the bigger World.

The Pieces or Particles of which we consist, and their distinct Intentions,
one is tempted to call infinite; besides the mutual Dependence of them upon
each other, tho at the greatest Distances in the Body; and that, both with
Respect to the due Circulation of the Fluids, and the Communication of the
nervous System, the smallest Interruption of either of which may be Sickness
and Death; besides this, I say, we are in every Particle liable to the Attack
of Distempers, and they may enter at every Pore.

They who understand the Make and Structure of the human Body, would be able to
illustrate this part of the Subject to much greater Advantage. All that I shall
pretend to, is, to lay together a few Instances, that they may make us a little
more sensible of the Wonder of Health, and that Wonder followed by another, and
that is, that this same Health which is so wonderful, should yet be so lasting
and common a Thing!

How many Parts and secret Operations conspire to that one Event, which is the
Spring of their own Continuance and Repetition, and of all other Operations of
Nature; namely, to Animal Nutrition, a Failure in any of which, would lay the
Foundation of Sickness; I shall lay it down in the Words of a great Master. The
Aliment Cheselden' s Anatomy. Chapter 14.
is received into the Mouth, and is there masticated by the Teeth, and
impregnated with the Saliva or Spittle, which is pressed out of the Salivary
Glands by the Motion of the Jaw and the Muscles that move it and the Tongue:
From hence it descends through the Pharynx into the Stomach, where it is digested
by the Juices of the Stomach (which are what is thrown out of the Glands of its
inmost Coat, and Saliva out of the Mouth) and a moderate Warmth and Attrition:
When through the Pylorus, or right Orifice, it is got into Duodenum, it is mixed
with Bile from the Gall Bladder and Liver, and with Pancreatick Juice from the
Pancreatick Gland. After this it is continually moved by the peristaltick or
vermicular Motion of the Guts, and the Compression of the Diaphragm and
Abdominal Muscles, by which Forces the fluid Parts are pressed into the
Lacteals, the grosser Parts still downwards.

The Chyle, or thin and milky part of the Aliment, being received into the
Lacteals from all the small Guts, they carry it into the Receptaculum Chyli,
and from thence the Ductus Thoracicus carries it into the left Subclavian Vein,
where it mixes with the Blood and passes with it to the Heart.

All the Veins being emptied into two Branches, viz. the ascending and
descending Cava, they empty into the right Auricle, the right Auricle into the
right Ventricle, which throws the Blood through the Pulmonary Artery into the
Lungs, where it is mixed with Air, and has those Globuli separated that cohered
in its unactive Course through the Veins.

From the Lungs the Blood is brought by the Pulmonary-Veins into the left
Auricle, and from that into the left Ventricle, by which it is thrown into the
Aorta, and so by the Arteries distributed through the Body.

From the Extremities of the Arteries, arise the Veins and Lymphatics, the
Veins to collect the Blood and bring it back to the Heart, the Lymphatics to
return the Lymph, or thinner part of the Blood from the Arteries, that the
Blood might not run too thin in the Veins.

All the Fluids we take in being carried into the Blood Vessels, the greatest
Part of them are separated and carried off by proper Vessels, viz. Urine by the
Kidneys, Bile by the Liver, etc.

How nice an Operation in Nature is the Animal Secretion of the Fluids? By this
the Juices of the Body of different Textures and Qualities are separated,
sorted, and made fit for what Nature designs, by passing them thorough so many
Strainers (the Glands) of various Name and Situation in the Body. The Passages
are exquisitely fine, numberless, involved, with innumerable Windings and
Turnings; yet so few Stoppages! and that the grosser Parts denied Entrance, do
not make a Damm, as we sometimes see at the Mouth of a Grate!

What innumerable Passages must be kept open for all this? What Variety of
Juices? What a prodigious Compass? What a Conspiration of Parts? What Geometry?
What Chemistry? What Mechanism of all kinds? And where the Operations are so
nice, the Intentions so numerous, and the Parts necessary to so many Functions
so liable, what a Wonder is our Health? Eleazar the High Priest, to the
Ambassadors of P^olomy, speaking of this Work of God. Ingentia sunt profecto,
si quis considerat diligenter, Formatio Corporis, Dispensatio Alimenti, and ad
singula membra mirabilis transitus. In Dr. Grew' s Cosmol.


We support our Life by eating and drinking, but the Mixtures, or Contrariety
of Qualities in it, an Error in the Season, Kind, Quantity of what we eat, may
destroy what it is intended to support and maintain. I may take in a Distemper
with a Morsel from the Animal whose Flesh I eat; from a noxious Vapor shut up
in the Herb I feed on; perhaps they are not to be numbered, the Worms, or
Animals, the Seeds, the Eggs, the Sands, that go into us along with our
plentiful Meal.

The Concoction of our Food, upon which all Health depends, is it self a
Wonder, so far as it is known. The Separation of the Parts, the Chylification
and Distribution of it, by so many small and intricate Channels; where, neither
the dissecting Knife, nor the best Glasses can carry the Eye. Whether this be
performed by some sharp Juices, which as a Menstruum, insinuate themselves
into, and tear the small Parts of the Nourishment asunder; or by some muscular
Motion, that by a gentle Collision grinds and attenuates the Food, or by
something of both; it is a Wonder that such a Variety of Liquors as enter the
Stomach, and produce there so many and so strong Fermentations; it is a Wonder,
I say, that it should not destroy all this; that the Fibers of the Stomach
should endure such continued Operations as would wear away any thing else in
the World! And such acid and corrosive Juices as would eat away by Degrees the
strongest Metals in a quarter of the Time. How great a Comprehension of the
Nature of Things did it require, to make a Menstruum that should corrode all
sorts of Flesh coming into the Stomach, and yet not the Stomach its self, which
is also Flesh? Dr. Grew' s Co^mol Sacr. c. 4.
Besides, one of those Humors produced by our Food, one of them let loose, one
of them overflowing and out of its Place, or predominant above the rest,
overturns the Balance, in the equipoise of which Health consists; or that the
same Thing is not done by the frequent Fermentations in our Blood, that
miraculous Fluid, (as one calls it) the Seat of Life and Spirits, is another
Wonder.

To any one that views the Contexture of the Brain, Health, for any
considerable Time, must appear a Wonder. How exquisitely fine the Nerves, the
Fibers, the Blood Vessels? The smallest of which if it should be stopped, or
crack; if it should too much relax with Heat, or contract with Cold, would,
according to the Degree of the Disorder, be immediate Sickness or Death: And
yet, how continual is the Passage of the Blood and Spirits through these small
Ducts and Canals? How fired are they sometimes by close thinking? Stretched and
swelled by the sudden Flushes of Passion and Surprise? When the Blood and
Spirits rush violently through these most slender Passages, that are finer than
the slenderest Threads of a Cobweb, and seem ready to break by their own
fineness.

How many thousand of these fine Pipes must be kept open to preserve the
Communication between the Brain and the Heart? What a Concurrence of
innumerable Parts, Actions and Strings, must go to produce one of those Motions
of the Heart we commonly call the Beating, or Pulse? The smallest Intermission
of which we immediately feel all over us, and dread the general Stagnation of
our Blood: And yet, ever since we were born, this opening and shutting has been
repeated (if we may depend upon some Calculations) no less than 4000 times in
an Hour! Ray, of the Wisdom of God in the Creation.
How many thousand times therefore in an Hour am I liable to the sinking,
fainting Consequences of an Intermission? By this, the Blood, which is the
Vehicle of Life, and with it the vital Spirits, are distributed into every part
of the Body. Admirable! that from this Fountain of Life and Heat, there should
lie Channels or Conduit Pipes to every, even the remotest Parts of the Body!
Just as if from one Water-House there should be Pipes conveying the Water, not
only to every House in the Town, but to every Room; nay, to every Vessel in
every Room: Or from one Fountain in a Garden, there should be little Channels
directed to every Bed, to every Plant and Flower growing there; nay, to every
Leaf, to every Fiber and hallow String of every Leaf!

And that these should not be stopped, broke nor fouled, for 20, 40 Years
together, notwithstanding their Number, Fineness, various Configuration, mutual
Dependence, and manifold Windings and Turnings, into which the constant Supply
is directed, is to me Matter of thankful Wonder.

Besides, this constant opening and shutti^g of the Heart would wear away any
thing else in the World but such a miraculous Substance as its own; which does
not lose its Force or Spring, though it continue the Motion, as has been
mentioned, for so many thousand times in an Hour, for so many Days, for so many
Years together.

We commonly say, our Breath is in our Nostrils, because it passes through them;
and is there not a free Passage for it to pass out of them? Why does it not fly
off? There is no more visible Nexus or Tie between Soul and Body by this
Breath, than for a Wreath of Smoke to tie a Sunbeam and a Cold of Clay
together. The Lungs could not draw it in, if any of the forementioned
Operations were obstructed; and yet, there are as many thousand to one but they
be obstructed, as there are thousands of Particulars necessary to complete and
continue this Motion. Valde pusillum est tempus, quo natura anhelitum repetit,
-- vix certe ad tertiam partem minu^ae. Pulsus arteriarum, and motus cordis,
systoles and diastoles, triplo velocior quam respiratio; adeo u^ si feri
posset, ut ille motus in cord absque inhibita respiratione, sisti posset,
sequeretur mo^s etiam celerius quam ex strangulatione. Verulam Hist. Vit. and
Mort. p. 390.
My Lord Bacon observes, that we breath in and out in a third part of a Minute;
and that the Pulse of the Arteries or Motion of the Heart (Systole and
Diastole) is three time quicker than that: So that the stopping this Motion
would be much quicker Death than strangling. The Question seems to be put every
ninth part of a Minute, whether I shall be well or sick, live or die? But
suppose all the rest perform their Part, it is going from one Wonder to another,
when we consider how the Lungs perform theirs after all: because of the
prodigious Number, the exquisite Fineness of those small Arteries, into which
they branch themselves? How easy for such small Passages to be stopped? For
such thin Vessels to be rent and torn by an over stretch of Voice, or corroded
by a Destruction of some fretting Juice, or be infected by some malignant
Vapor that is drawn in? For we must breath whatever the Air be: One would think
they should be spent by the continual Wear and Action of breathing and
speaking. If our Lungs had been made of Brass they could never have lasted so
long. Lord, what is Man! The Substance of his Body is Dust, the Tie of its
numberless Parts together a puff of Air: How easily is such a Knot united? Dust
scattered, and Air dissolved?

How great a Mystery is the Motion of any one Part about us? And how
inexplicable to this Day? It astonishes to consider how many Things must go to
produce any single Motion, any of which failing, all is ruined; and yet, our
Life and Health depends upon Millions of these Motions. Notwithstanding the
Help of the most exquisite Glasses, It is said that Lewenhook has discovered
Vessels in an human Body 79200 Times less than an Inch.
we still are ignorant of the internal Structure of the Motive Fiber, upon
which the whole Motion of the musculous Machine depends; we know as little (it
seems) of that Volatile Fluid, commonly called the Animal Spirits, designed to
put that Fiber in Motion: Baglivi Chapter 22. 5. Latet, aeternumque latebit, minima
illa, ac subtilis, non solum a sensibus, sed ab humanae mentis acie prorsus
remota, solidarum aeque ac Fluidarum Corporis Viventis Partium Texture.

Dr. Astruc Monspelii de Motu Musculu^i.




Galen, though himself no great Friend to Religion, could not forbear
acknowledging God, upon the Observation of the vast Variety, Contrivance, and
commodious adapting of the Parts to their proper Uses; Bp. Wilkin' s Natural
Relig. l. 1. c. 6.
the preserving all which in their natural State of Health (says Bp. Wilkins)
is a Matter of equal Wonder, and of thankful Acknowledgment. In his Book de
Formatione Foetus, he take Notice, that there are in an human Body above 600
several Muscles, and there are at least ten several Intentions or due
Qualifications to be observed in every one of these; proper Figure, just
Magnitue, right Disposition of its several Ends, upper and lower Position of
the whole, the Insertion of its proper Nerves, Veins and Arteries, which are
each of them to be duly placed; so that about the Muscles alone, no less than
6000 several Ends or Aims are to be attended to, a Failure in any of which
would put the Part out of its natural State, and endanger our Health.

The Bones of a Man's Body seem to pretend to Strength and Firmness; their Use
being to give Shape and Stability to the Body, to be Levers for the Muscles to
act upon, and to defend the more noble Parts from external Injuries; Cheselden'
s Anatomy.
and yet, it is often seen how little they can defend themselves; how easily
snap'd asunder, dislocated, carious, liable to many Diseases and Disorders.

Strong as they seem to be, if they remain safe and found, David teaches us to
whom we are to ascribe their Preservation; the Lord delivers the Righteous,
he keeps all his Bones, so that not one of them is broken; Psalm. 34 20.
and tells us the Language of sound Bones in another Place, Psalm. 35. 10.
all my Bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the Poor
from him that is too strong for him?

The Bones are reckoned to be 284, the distinct Scopes or Intentions in each of
these, are above 40, in all about 100,000. And thus it is in some Proportion
with all the other Parts; Skin, Ligaments, Glandules, Humors, but more
especially with the several Members of the Body, which do in regard of the
great Variety and Multitude of these several Intentions required to them, very
much exceed the homogeneous Parts; Bp. Wilkin' s Natural Relig. l. 1. c. 6.
and since the failing in any one of these would cause Irregularity in the
Body, and in many of them, such as would be very notorious, if not destructive,
we have reason to conclude, that we are not only wisely and wonderfully made,
but as wonderfully preserved, and that any common Measure of Health, or
Continuance in our natural State, for any Time, is a great Wonder; because
there are so many thousand to one that in some of these Instances in which they
are so liable to Disorder, they may be overtaken by it.

Since there are so many fine imperceptible Parts, so many Vessels, Channels,
Threads, Strings; since there are such Numbers of Bones, Muscles, Membranes,
Fibers, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Ligaments, Tendons, with their Insertions,
Positions, precise Motions; Juices, Humors, Fluids, Secretions, Spi^its; the
Stoppage, Breaking or Disorder of any of which, would infer Sickness and Pain;
what a Wonder is that Health to which the Harmony of all these is so necessary?
What a Wonder is it that an Instrument of ten thousand Strings should be so
long kept in Tune, through all the Changes of Heats and Colds, Wet and Dry? And
what Folly? What Ignorance? To depend upon the Health of such a Body for a Day?
To suppose Sickness or Death of such a Body, to be so far off? Especially, when
to all this we add, the Violences and rough Accidents it is liable to from
without, which is the next Thing to be taken Notice of.

SECT. II. The Wonder of Health from the Accidents from without, to which these
fine Compositions are exposed.
THAT which is of the most exquisite Make, may with much Difficulty and Hazard,
possibly, be preserved in its natural State, by a great deal of Care to keep it
out of Harms Way; but that is impossible in this Case; the bare Change of
Weather may as well discompose the Body, as untune the Strings of an
Instrument. This is represented by one of the Faculty, in the following Manner:
Dr. Wainright, his Non Naturals. p. 61.
It is so far (says he) from being a Wonder, that we sometimes suffer in our
Health by Change of Weather, that it is the greatest Wonder we do not always
so; for, when we consider, that our Bodies are sometimes pressed upon by a Tun
and an half Weight more than at another, and that this Variation is often very
sudden; it is surprising that every such Change should not entirely break the
Frame of our Bodies to pieces, and be the constant Harbinger of sudden Death.
One would think that when so many of the Vessels of our Bodies are straightened by
the increased Pressure, that the Blood would stagnate up to the very Heart;
which not being able to contract it self, the Circulation would cease, and we
should die. But such is the Contrivance of infinite Wisdom, that when the
Resistance to the circulating Blood is greatest, the Impetus by which the Heart
contracts, should be so too. The Weight of the Air increasing, the Lungs will
be more forceably expanded, and hereby the Blood more intimately broken and
divided, so that it becomes fitter for the most fluid Secretions, such as that
of the Animal Spirits, by which the Heart will be more strongly contracted; the
Bloods Motion toward the Surface of the Body being obstructed, it will pass in
greater Quantity to the Brain, where the Pressure of the Air is taken off by
the Cranium; and, upon this Score, more Spirits will be separated, whereby the
Heart will be so strongly contracted as to carry on the Circulation through the
passable Canals, whilst some others are obstructed. Thus far the Doctor.

What Hazard is here to our Health and Life even from imperceivaable Changes of
Weather? That a Man must almost look upon his Weather-Glass as the Measure of
his Health and Life. What Contrivance, what Artifice in our Composition to
prevent the fatal Effects of so sudden a Change? And what Hazard in that
Mechanism lest it should not play its Part with that Nimbleness and
unobstructed Regularity as to prevent the Mischief? Do we wonder that People
drop down dead? It is rather a greater wonder that they so seldom do so.

When we turn our Eyes from the Niceness of the Frame to the infinite Accidents
that are every where ready to ruffle and destroy it, it increases the Wonder!
The inimitable Structure of human Bodies is scarce more admirable, than that
such curious and elaborate Engines should be so contrived as to be no oftener
out of Order than they are; the Preservation of so nice and exact a Frame being
the next Wonder to the Workmanship. Boyl' s Occas. Reflect.


When I consider (says the forequoted excellent Philosopher) how many outward
Accidents are able to destroy the Life, or at least the Health, even of those
that are the most careful to preserve them; how easily the Beams of a warm Sun,
or the Breath of a cold Air, too much or too little Exercise, a Dish of green
Fruit, an infectious Vapor drawn into the Lungs, and so mixing with the Blood,
and circulating the Corruption into every Part; how a sudden Fright, or a Piece
of ill News, are able to produce Sickness and Death; when I think too how many
Mischiefs our own Appeties or Vices expose us to, by Acts of Intemperance, that
necessitate the Creatures to offend us; and Practices of Sin, whereby we
provoke the Creator to punish us; when, I say, I consider all this, and
consequently how many Mischiefs he must escape that arrives at gray Hairs, I
confess the Commonness of the Sight cannot keep me from thinking it worth some
Wonder to see an OLD MAN, especially if he be any Thing healthy. Boyl' s Occas.
Reflect.


It would be almost endless to mention these Accidents that are ruinous to our
Health, and Life itself: A Blast of Lightning, a Shock of an Earthquake,
Inundations, Wars, Thieves, and Murderers; the permitted Mischiefs of evil
Spirits, which have been allowed sometimes to go a great Way in doing such Sort
of evil. I ought always to carry my Life in my Hand, and to suppose when I go
out I may not come home alive and well: It may be a Fall, a Bruise, a Tile from
a House, a Thrust with a Sword, Discharge of a Gun, a Blow undesigned, the
Tooth of an Adder, the Mistake of a poisonous Herb instead of an wholesome one,
the like Mistake of a Drug through the Ignorance or Heedlessness of those you
trust, the Throwing a Stone, the Trip of a Foot, the Scratch of a Nail, the
Wrenching off a Bit of Skin: These are Accidents that have done as sure
Execution, though not so wide and spreading, as Famine, War, or Pestilence. The
Pairing of a Nail, Cutting a Corn, the Rent of a little Skin, from the Side of
the Finger, putting a Patch upon a little Pimple, the Plucking off a single
Hair: These have sometimes done the Business as effectually as Gun or Pistol.
Thus Anacreon the Poet was choked with a Grape stone. Fabius the Roman
Senator, was suffocated with a single Hair in a Draught of Milk; Pope Alexander
with a Fly, that flew accidentally into his Mouth. Homer died of Grief:
Sophocles with Excess of Joy: Dionysius with the good News of a Victory he had
obtained; Aurelianus in the midst of a Dance. What remote small Accidents have
proved mortal? The Dust of a Wall, the Lash of a Whip, the Unevenness of a
Pebble-stone: Nothing is so small as not to be able to conceal Disease and
Death under it.

Diseases and Death are secretly lurking every where: It is in our Bosoms, in
our Bowels, in every Thing we taste, in every Thing we enjoy. We have Death
dwelling with us in our Houses, walking with us in the Fields, lying down with
us in our Beds, and wrapped about us in our very Clothes; always at Hand, ready
at God's Command to give the fatal Blow. If Heaven permits, Benhadad is slain
in his Bed, and Amnon at his Table, Belshazzar in his Cups, the Egyptian
Firstborn in their Sleep, Saul in the Field, Caesar in the Senate, Caligula in
the Theater, Antiochus in his Coach, Zechariah in the Temple, Joab at the
Altar, and Pope Victor at the Sacrament.

The whole History of sudden Death, from known or unknown Causes, belongs to
this Head, and inforces the Admonition of the wise Man; Boast not thy self of
to Morrow, for thou know not what a Day may bring forth. Nay, it appears
from these Surprises, that thou know not what a Meal, a Mouthful, a Draught,
a Step, a Moment, may bring forth; and therefore it is a senseless as well as a
graceless Thing, in a Time of Health, to suppose Sickness and Death to be
always a great Way off.

SECT. III. The Wonder of Health is farther illustrated from the Diseases and
Distempers the Body is liable to.
COnsidering the Fineness of our Make, the infinite Variety of Accidents, and
the innumerable Diseases that we our selves breed within us: Considering, I
say, all this, Distempers and Death are not only sure of us at last, but our
Health for any considerable Time seems to me an equal Wonder with a Man's
standing the Fire of an Army, where the Shot can hardly be supposed to fly more
thick than the Diseases and Casualties that continually hover about us. A mere
Catalogue of Distempers, and of their single Names, what a Volume does it make?
Besides those for which as yet we have no Names at all. A Physician has
published a Treatise (De Morbis Anonymis) of Distempers that have no Name.
It would make one tremble to see what a Number of Distempers belong to any one
Part of the Body only, as in particular the Eye. They tell us of about 300
Distempers that belong to that single Part, liable to so many more Disorders as
it is a Part of a more exquisite Composition.

What an Illustration of this Matter could some of the Faculty give us, even to
Astonishment? What an Army of Diseases, if they were to be drawn out under
these two distinct Heads, either of such as belong to the Humonrs and Fluids,
as Fever, Smallpox, Dropsy, Jaundice, etc. which are distinct in their Nature,
and frequently occur to Observation? And how commonly they are the Instruments
of Death, the Weekly Bills are a perpetual Testimony. Then, if we should
descend into all the Sorts and Kinds of these Diseases, that Account would be
it self a Volume. Or in the second Place, the Diseases of the Solids: And that
Enquiry should be pursued in the Order the Animal Economy leads us; as first,
a Fault in the Salivary Glands of the Mouth, or in those of the Stomach, or in
the Tone of the Stomach, or a vicious Biliary Secretion, are any of them
sufficient to prevent Digestion, and consequently the Nourishment of the Body,
which must end in Death.

Besides these, Obstructions in the Lacteal Veins, or Thoracick Duct; Diseased
Lungs; not able to furnish the Blood with Air. Large Polypuses in the Heart,
Veins, or Arteries; Obstructions or Ruptures in the Blood Vessels, or
Lymphaticks; Excrescences, Inflammations, or Imposthumations, in or about the
Heart, Brain, or Liver: All which are one Time or other Causes of Death, and
baffle the Skill of the best Physicians. To these we may add the Diseases of
the Nerves; which are certainly numerous, though we have no very distinct Idea
of them.

Under one or other of these Heads must we rank the Fevers that burn us, the
Agues that shake us, the Smallpox that poisons the Blood, and turns us into
Lazars; Dropsies that drown and overflow us, the Jaundice that pours out its
baneful Suffusion upon our Blood; the Stone that grinds, the Gout that
tortures, the Convulsions that wrack the Nerves; Cholicks that tear and rend
our Bowels, and immoderate Fluxes; the Phrensies that unman us, the Epilepsies
that fell us to the Ground.

Besides these common and known Cases, there are Thousands of Disorders that
are wrapped up in general Names, and comprised under some single Distempers
above named, and whose very Symptoms are so many particular Distempers
themselves.

What Man now can ensure Life and Health for a Day, when there are so many Ways
of Attack, so many Shapes under which Sickness and Death may enter? Can I say,
I shall not die to Day, when many that have thought so have died the next Hour? Is
there any Sense in putting off the Thought of Sickness and Death merely because
we are well at present? Is it not a much better Condition to be able to think
of it, though as a Thing near, without Disturbance? By getting into such a
Condition as to Soul, Estate, and Affairs, as that a Man may say with himself;
Well, now let Sickness and Death come when they will, I thank God I have
nothing else to do but to observe them, to wait Orders, to compose my Soul to
resign cheerfully, and my Body to fall decently, and rise gloriously; and in
the mean Time, I Will enjoy my self, and my God, and all the allowed Comforts of
Life, with so much the greater Relish, as it is without the Hazard of Surprise,
the Fear of Death, or the Danger of Damnation.

To think of Sickness and Death, does it bring them a Jot nearer to us? And on
the other Hand, to banish all Thoughts of them, does it really set them a
Moment farther off? When you are at Sea, and perceive a Sail making after you,
you know not whether it be a Friend or the Enemy: Then you take up your
Perspective-Glass, and see what Colors, Built, and Aspect they bear, and form
a Judgment: If it be an Enemy, the Perspective will not draw it nearer to the
Ship you are in, though it brings it nearer to View, and so enables you to
discover whether it be so or no, and puts you into a better Posture to receive
them, let them be what they will. Sickness and Death are in full chase of us;
if we are resolved not to think of them, we throw down the Perspective, its
true, and refuse to know whether they are Friends or Foes; but are they ever
the farther off for that? Will they not as surely come up with us at Length?
For my Part, (to close this Head with the Words of an excellent young Man,)
Doyl' s Occas. Reflect.
Though my Beardless Chin (says he) allows me to presume that by the Course of
Nature I have yet a pretty Stock of Sand in the upper Part of my Glass; and
though I am too young to say with Isaac, Behold, now I am old, and know not the
Day of my Death; yet since the strongest and lustiest of us all have Cause to
say with Job, When a few Years are come, then shall I go the Way whence I shall
not return; and since it is the wise Man's Counsel, Not to boast of to Morrow,
since we know not what a Day may bring forth; I will endeavor (to use my
Savior's Terms) to take Heed to my self, lest at any Time that Day come upon
me unawares: And as the only Expedient in order thereunto, in Imitation of holy
Job, All the Days of mine appointed Time will I wait till my Change come.

Thus far of the Temptations that attend a State of Health, and the Sins that
are apt to spring out of it. We are apt to be so little sensible of it while it
is enjoyed, to ascribe it to many Things in a Manner derogating from the Honor
of God; presuming too much upon the Firmness and Stability of it; too great a
Tenderness of it on the other Hand, and an excessive Niceness about it. And
that Unwillingness healthy People discover of thinking of Sickness and Death,
and industriously putting them at too great a Distance; when at the same Time,
the ordinary Continuance of Health is really a great Wonder, as we have
endeavored, as well as we could, to represent from the Make and Frame of our
Bodies, the Accidents to which these fine Compositions are exposed from
without, and the Diseases they are liable to from within.

CHAP. V. Of the Duties of Health, which the Enjoyment of Health does oblige us
to, and fit us for.
SECT. I. It Is our Duty to acknowledge God to be the first Cause, the
Maintainer and Preserver of our Health.
HE is the Fountain both of Being and of Excellence to all Worlds: He formed
our several Parts with curious and inimitable Art, his own skilful Hand brought
us from the Darkness, wherein we were enclosed, safely to the Light of Day.
'Twas by his Goodness alone that we were not strangled in our Birth, nor
smothered in our Cradle; that by the Carelessness of our Keepers, or the many
Distempers and Evils that attend our early helpless Age, we did not soon find a
Grave, that is always so near us. His Goodness then saved us from Evils we did
not so much as apprehend, and delivered us from others, which, though never so
painfully felt, poor Infants cannot inform any Body of, and which without his
extraordinary Favor would have closed our Eyes as soon almost as we had seen
the Light, and sent us into the other World as soon as we had entered this: His
Mercy delivered us from the unknown Dangers of our heedless Infancy, and from
the unfeared Evils of our daring Youth. It Is God that holds our Souls in Life:
Psalm. 66. 9.
The Visitation of the Almighty preserves our Spirits. Job 10. 12.


He is the Strength of our Life, Psalm. 27. 1.
the Health of our Countenance, and our God, in whom we live and move, and have
our Being. He not only protects us from Dangers without, but supports our
natural Frailty by that secret Influence whereby he upholdeth all Things by the
Word of his Power. He that first breathed into us the Breath of Life, keeps it
there by the liberal Supply of those suitable Supports that nourish and
maintain it. The Manner of this Influence of his is very mysterious: It becomes
not the Weakness of our Minds daringly to determine it: We that are very much
in the Dark about many of the Motions of our own Faculties, must not pretend to
limit the Holy One of Israel, whose Ways are as unsearchable as his Nature is
incomprehensible. But this we do most certainly know, That our Dependence for
Life and Health is entirely upon him. And, methinks, the more visibly so, by
the Use of all those Creatures that are their necessary Props and Supports;
which show at once that it cannot stand of it self, and who it is that holds it
up. It Is his Sun that refreshes our Spirits with his Temperate and comfortable
Beams, and by its amiable Shine renders this World a Place of Delight, which,
were it always covered with Darkness, would be a very undesirable Region, and
full of Horror. They are his Vapors that are drawn up to fill the Bottles of
Heaven, and it is his Hand that opens them again, and makes the Clouds dissolve,
to cause Grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the Service of Man, that he
may bring forth Food out of the Earth, and Wine that makes glad the Heart of
Man, and Oil to make his Face to shine, and Bread which strengthens Man's
Heart. Psalm. 104, 14, 15.
The Day is his, in which we work, and are employed, and the Night also, in
which we rest. His Earth we tread, and his Air we breath; his Winds purify and
fan that Air, to keep it healthful and serviceable to us. From his Stores we
daily repair the Decays of Nature, and from his Gift we daily derive the
Necessaries that maintain, or the Refreshments that delight, our Lives, his
Corn, his Wine, his Oil. Hos. 2. 8.
He not only spreads our Tables, and fills our Cup, but when he has done that
he must go farther, and make those Supports of Life give us Strength; for we
live not by Bread alone, but by the Word of his Blessing, that comes out of
his Mouth. It Is in the Sense of this that we ask his Blessing before we eat,
and return him Thanks afterward; for where it not for his gracious Influence,
what would become of our Appetite or Desire of Food? How many Diseases that
would destroy it does he keep off? The Faculty of digesting, altering, and
distributing the Nourishment would be lost, and notwithstanding all our Care we
should quickly die.

SECT. II. It Is our Duty in Health to be sensible of, and acknowledge not only
that our Health and Life, and all our Blessings, depend upon God, but are
entirely at his Disposal, as Lord of Life and Death.
IT IS with the most magnificent and lofty Air of Divinity that he challenges
this Prerogative to himself: See now, that I, even I am he, and there is no God
with me, (in this Matter;) I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal;
neither is there any that can deliver out of my Hand. Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
And it is fit it should be so: For,

I. He is the Absolute Lord Proprietor of all our Blessings.

Life and Health, and all that belongs to them, are from him as their Fountain
Spring, and in his Hand and Disposal. We live as long as he pleases, by whom we
live. We are not our own, and therefore not at our own Disposal. Absolute
Disposal follows absolute Propriety. May he not do what he will with his own?
None so fit to determine the Continuance of our Being, as the Author of it.
None so fit to determine our Life, and the Length of our Days, as he who is our
Life, and the Length of our Days. Every one takes it to be his Right to dispose
of his own, whether it be the Lumber of his House, or the Gold and Silver of
his Treasure. Who but the Father of Spirits should have the Disposal of his own
dear Offspring? Who but the Former and Framer of our Bodies should have the
Power of taking them to Pieces? The Hand that tied the fine, the unaccountable
Knot, is the fittest to unty, and the properest Judge when to make the
Separation.

II. He is our Supreme Ruler and Governor, and therefore it is fit he should
have the Supreme Power of Life and Death.

Without this Power we cannot conceive how he should govern the World; the
Government of which so often requires the lengthning out one Man's Health and
Life, and ^he cutting short another's. There Is a Secret of Providence in the
sudden Death of some, and prolonging the Life of others, which could not be
attained by any Power short of this. If the Bloody Lives of some Nimrods were
not cut short, the Church on Earth would be hunted down; and if the Lives of
some Tyrants had not been continued, our Martyrology would have been very
scanty, and (...) never amounted to such a Glorious Army. The subordinate Power
of the Sword is the great Instrument of Government among (...) and there can be
^o Government without it. Such is the absolute Power of Life and Death in the
Hands of God, by which he can prevent, overruled, manage, execute, or forbear,
and do whatsoever he pleases among the Inhabitants of the Earth.

III. This Consideration of God's having the absolute Power of Life and Death,
gives a great deal of Force to all the Motives of Religion, and is a great
means to preserve it in the World.

To consider, -- The Object of my Worship is the Master of my Life and Health!
Surely it concerns me to live to him by whom I live at all! It Is but for him to
be displeased, and I die. He can stop my Breath the next bad Word I speak. He
that pronounced the Sentence of Death upon Adam and his Offspring for the first
Act of Disobedience; he that erected Lot's Wife a Monument of the Folly of
hankering after any Thing God commands us to abandon: He that struck Uzzah with
Death for his unbelieving Rashness; Herod with Worms for his Vanity and Pride;
and the Corinthians with Distempers and Death for their profaning the Lord's
Supper: Surely we should be careful to please, and afraid of offending one of
such Power; one that can wither the Hand that is put forth to Iniquity; can
blast with Lightning the wanton Eye, or close it in the Shades of Death in the
very Turn of a lustful Glance, as easily as he struck dead Ananias with a Lie
in his Mouth.

None can bless me as God can bless me: Nor can any curse me as God can. He can
bless me so, as that all the Curses in the World shall be but as throwing
Feathers against a Rock: He can curse me so, as that all the Blessings in the
World shall be but so many loud and sudden Wishes for a Man that is already
fallen over a Precipice. Whom thou blessest, they are blessed indeed; and whom
thou cursest, they are cursed indeed.

How much Pain can he crowd into one single Limb of the Body? Nay, into one
Joint? Ay, into one single Fiber? He can cause Blessings to descend upon me
like Rain upon the tender Grass, or pour down his Curses upon me like a Storm,
and take me away as with a Whirlwind. He can pluck the guilty Soul out of the
wicked Body; and throw the one into the Grave, there to lie and rot, and the
other into Hell, there to perish for ever. O my Soul, therefore hear and fear,
and do no more so wickedly, lest he take thee away in his Anger, and there be
none to deliver; lest he let fly his Arrows into thy Breast, which will pierce
like Lightning, and wound beyond all Recovery. Cleave to him, for he is thy
Life; In his Right Hand is Length of Days, and in his Left Hand are Riches and
Honor, to give of both to whom he pleases.

This Thought puts a mighty Efficacy, I say, into all the Motives of Religion,
the Calls of his Word, the Entreaties of his Ambassadors, the Motions of his
Spirit, the Promises of Heaven, the Threats of Hell: For all these are the
Instances and Applications of one who has the Power of my Health and Life, and
can easily avenge himself of any Affront or Slight, of any Neglect or Delay, at
the Cost of one or both of these.

IV. Hereby God has it in his Power to bless or punish a great many at once.

The Happiness of a great many is very often wrapped up in the Life and Health
of one: And therefore it is not fit such a Power should be in the Hands of any
other Being, but one of infinite Wisdom and Goodness. Providence often hangs
many Weights upon one single String, and when that breaks, all falls to the
Ground at once. If we go into the Houses of Mourning we shall see and hear most
affecting Evidences of this from the disconsolate Widow, the fatherless
Children, the sorrowful Friends; all have a long and mournful Story to tell,
how much they have suffered in the Loss of the Relation, or Friend, or useful
Man; how much Business there is a Stop to; or on the other Hand, how many good
Works are now no more; and how many suffer by that Means, who depended upon
him, or were the better for him. These are Things of such Consequence in the
World, that the Power of Life and Health ought to be only in the Hand it is in;
and is too big a Trust to be lodged with Angels or Men: I mean the absolute
Power over it, which can belong to none but God.

V. Life and Health are the Time of my Probation for Eternity, and therefore
ought to be in no meaner Hands.

Mine eternal Happiness or Misery is wrapped up in this little Life of mine: If
I die before I am fit to die, I am undone; and for that Reason I would not have
the Power of my Life and Death, my Health and Sickness, in the Hand of any but
the wise and good Governor of the World, for all the World. Who knows what
Measure of Health or Sickness is fittest to work upon the Conscience? Who knows
so perfectly well how to temper the Cup? What Sort and Measure of Ingredients
to put into it, that may reach the Case, when to begin, and when to stop? If
this Power were lodged in our Hands, we are such poor Creatures, we should
hardly ever touch or afflict some, nor should we spare others; we should deal
with too much Fondness, or too much Severity: There are some we would never
suffer to be sick, nor die; and there are others, whom we should long ago have
hurried out of the World, not knowing how to have made the same Use of them in
it that God does. He only knows when the Vessels of Wrath, that will not be
cleansed are fitted for Destruction, and have filled up the Measure of their
Iniquity. And on the other Hand, he only knows the Case of every good Man, how
far they are to be chastised, that they may not be condemned with the World: He
knows when they have done all their Work for him, and when he has done all his
Work in them, and fulfilled the good Pleasure of his Will in them, and the Work
of Faith with Power.

If these Things were left to us, how would fond Relations ever know when 'twas
fit to let go, and take Leave? What a tender Partiality would there be in the
Husband to the Wife, the Parent to the beloved Child, and the Friend that is
nearer than the Brother? However needful a Fit of Sickness was, it should never
come; and however fitted a good Man was for Heaven, he should not be permitted
to go: We should not know when 'twas Time to retire, and take our Leave, or
suffer our Friends to do so.

VI. It Is beyond any Skill but the Divine to order the coming into the World,
and going out of it, in such a Proportion, both as to Numbers of Persons, and
Distance of Time, as may best agree with the needful Succession of one
Generation passing away, and another coming upon the Face of the Earth.

This requires great Skill to prevent Confusion, Deficiency, or Superfoetation
of human Race. -- But how easy is all this to him, who declares his Concern
about Matters vastly less than humane Life, viz. that he numbers the very Hairs
of our Head, that one of them shall not fall to the Ground without our Father;
how much less our Head it self be laid in the Grave any otherwise than when and
as he pleases?

The Use that we should make of such a Truth as this, is,

This accounts for some Things we cannot tell what to make of in the Providence
of God, about the Health and Life of some Persons; that some weak Persons
should live a long while, when others of a more healthy Constitution are cut
off; that some pious, useful, an^ excellent Persons are so sickly, and (as we
think) immaturely taken away, while some of a very different Character are
healthy, and attain a great, though not a good Old Age. Some barren Trees are
suffered to cumber the Ground a long Time, when others that are fruitful are
transplanted into the Paradise of God, in Reward to themselves, and Punishment
to the World that is left behind. These are so much the less Riddles to us, when
we consider that the Power of Life and Death is in his Hand who is Wife and
Good, and whose Thoughts are not as ours, nor does he see as Man sees.

Again, It Is Matter of Comfort that my Health and Life is in so Wise and Good a
Hand. It Is of too great Importance both to me and others to have it any where
else, for the Reasons above mentioned. If Men are suffered to kill the Body,
it is because he suffers them, who has its Life in his Hand, and not they. 'Till
he permits it I am immortal: All the Devils in Hell, all the Men in the World,
all the Distempers in the Dispensary, all the Plagues and Pestilences,
Invasions and Famines, that ever swept away their Millions from the Face of the
Earth, shall not destroy my Life till they have his Commission, whose
Prerogative it is to ^ill, and to make alive.

Again, This aggravates the Sin of Murder, and whatsoever tends to it.

It Is offering to take the Power of Life and Death out of God's Hands, and in
Effect, to say, Such a one shall die when I please, I will kill, and I will
make alive: Whereas, he only that can say, I make alive, ought to say, I kill.
Self-Murder is another Attempt to snatch the Power of Life and Death out of
God's Hand, and to say, I will die when I please, and will have this Power of
Life and Death in my own Hand.

Again, This should teach us not to fear Men so as to offend God; not only, as
our Savior says, because they can only kill the Body, but because they cannot
so much as do that neither without God's Permission, in whom alone is the Power
of Life and Death; nay, and what is more, who can kill the Body as well as Men,
and without the Hand of any Man. The Life I save by offending God, God can
easily take away himself. If a Man say, I Will kill you unless you do this, or
that, let me remember that God says, I kill, and I make alive; and also, that
unless God permit, the Tyrant cannot.

The Martyr was full of this Thought, who, when his Life was offered him upon
Condition of his Recantation, answered, Though you don't take away my Life to
Day, can you assure me that God will not do it to Morrow? What signifies thus
saving what I cannot keep always, and can never better bestow?

Again, This teaches us where we are to go for Health, viz. to God, and him
only; because he only can say, I heal, and I wound; I kill, and I make alive. I
go to God when I use his appointed Means, and when I pray for his Blessing upon
them. The Papists do not only pray to Saints and Angels upon ordinary
Occasions, but have their, particular Saints to address to upon particular
Cases, Diseases, and Distresses: As, to St. Apollonia for the Toothache; to St.
Anthony for Inflammations, that are from thence called St. Anthony's Fire, a
Sort of Inflammation, for the Cure of which they used to pray to St. Anthony;
to St. Sigismund for Fevers and Agues; and to St. Sebastian for removing the
Plague; to St. Nicholas for Dangers at Sea; and a great many other Cases like
these.

But dare any of these Saints presume to speak such Words as these, I kill, and
I make alive? Is Health and Life in their Power? Do they wound and heal, that
they should be addressed to for Things only in the Gift of God? If God be
willing to heal, and make alive, why do they not directly go to him? If God be
not willing, to what Purpose is it to go elsewhere, since he declares none can
deliver out of his Hand?

SECT. III. 'Ti our Duty in Health, to give God the Glory of his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness, in making so fine a Machine so lasting.
THEY are both Wonders, both our Make, and our Preservation. The most knowing
Men in all Ages have been greatly affected with this. Plato calls it the Wonder
of Wonders. Galen, an Heathen Physician, upon Observation of the Structure and
Use of the Parts, could not forbear an Hymn of Praise to the Author and
Contriver. And a better Man than either of them, in Expressions worthy of the
Subject, celebrates the Author of his Being. I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made! Mavelous are thy Works, and that my Soul
knows right well! My Substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest Parts of the Earth. Thine Eyes did
see my Substance yet being imperfect, and in thy Book all my Members were
written, which in Continuance were fashioned, when as yet there were none of
them. Psalm. 139. 14. q. d. In the Composition of my Body, there are as many
Wonders as Particles, and the putting them together increases the Wonder beyond
Expression; it strikes me with Astonishment, and with a Dread of thy Majesty.
What Power must that be that can do this? How intimately acquainted with thy
Creature? How able to unravel what thou have so (...) put together? I know that
all thy Works are Mavelous, but this of my Body is eminently so, far above
all human Skill, as it was from the Observation of all Eyes but thine, to see
Nature darting her vital Energy through every Particle, in a manner so directed
by thee, as to serve a thousand Intentions at once, in Secret, as curious
Workmen carry on a Piece behind a Curtain till finished, and then it is
produced to the Public View. In this Work is laid out the Art and Curiosity of
a God, curiously wrought. Here divine Skill resolved to be exquisite, nor could
a Piece wrought from such a Model be less admirable, for, every thing was done,
it seems, according as it was written down in thy Book, according to his
Purpose and Wisdom; when he said with an Air of Consultation, Let us make Man,
the Model was then fixed, and the Lines drawn, and the Plan laid out of this
piece of Art. There thou had the Names and Number, Situation and Intentions
of every Part, to a Nerve, to an Artery; and according to that was I made; in
Continuance, in progress of Time, and by Degrees unfolded, formed into that
Distinction of Parts, which before lay wrapped and entangled together in that
Mass, which was the Chaos of this little World, when the whole was without Form
and Void and Darkness was upon the Face of the unformed Embryo; till he that
said, Let there be the Separation and Distinction of Earth, Water, Air,
Heavens, in the greater World, said here, let there be several Regions of Body,
let there be Members, Veins, Arteries, Muscles, Fibers, and all the other
innumerable Diversifications, and all adapted to their several Uses and
Designs; and it was so. Therefore will I praise thee, and give thee the Glory
of thy Wisdom and Power, in that I am so fearfully and wonderfully made. Know
ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, not we our selves, but
he.

Thus we see how David acquits himself of this Duty. Next let us observe how
others have remarked upon this. Those who know the most of the Frame and
Structure of the human Body, have a great Advantage both for Entertainment and
Pleasure, and for Devotion to the great Artificer. How it comes to pass that
they who know most this way, are often seen to defraud the great God of his due
Acknowledgements, I cannot tell; it is provoking to any Artist to lose the
Praise of his Workmanship, to have it slighted and overlooked; especially by
those who enjoy the Benefit of it; by those who derive to themselves a great
Glory from the mere Knowledge of that very Work which the Workman himself is
not regarded for. It is a great Honor for a Man to understand Anatomy; and to
gain this Honor, Volumes have been written by some, who have hardly afforded
three Lines to the Glory of the Maker of that Body, upon the bare Knowledge of
which Man so much values himself: Just as if a poor Doorkeeper, should be so
proud of being able to show you all the Appartments of a noble Piece of
Architecture, as to slight the Skill of the Projector, or Expenses of the
Prince that built it, and dwells in it.

Galen had less Light, but a better Temper than these Gentlemen, when he
followed the dissecting Knife till it led him to his Creator. He could not
forbear acknowledging God upon observing the Use and Structure of the Parts. I
look upon true Piety or Religion, says he, to consist in this, not the offering
up ever so many Hetacombs of Bulls; not in sending up Clouds of Incense of
Cassia, or a thousand other odorous Unguents; but when I, first my self, gain
the Knowledge of his Wisdom, and then explain it to others; when I show forth
his Power, his Goodness; when I represent with what Convenience and Ornament he
has furnished out every Part, so that nothing is defective; this shows his most
perfect Goodness; and this is the true way of praising his Goodness by showing
its real Instances. To have projected such a beautiful Disposition of all the
Parts, this is the Work of Wisdom; and to have been capable of doing thus
whatsoever he pleased, this is the Effect of invincible Power. Quem ego
Conditoris nostri verum Hymnum compono. Existimoque in eo esse veram Pietatem,
non Hecatombas Taurorum ei plurimas sacrificare, and Casias, aliaque sexcenta
Odoramenta suffumigare; sed, si noverim ipse primus, deinde and aliis
exposuerim, quaenam ip^ius sit Sapientia, quae Virtus, quae Bonitas; quod enim
cultu conveniente exornare omnia a^thilque suis beneficiis priv^^um esse
voluerit, (...) benitatis speciem esse statuo; and hac (...) ratione ejus
Bonitas Hymnis est celebranda. (...) autem omne invenisse quo pacto cuncta
ador^arentur, summae sapienti^^ est. Effecisse autem omnino quae voluit,
virtutis est invictae and (...). Galen, de (...) Part. l. 3. c. 10.
His seventeen Books upon the Structure of the human Body, are represented by
some as a continued Hymn to the Author of our Frame; and it is said, that he
was in a continued Rapture, all the way he was laying in Materials for them,
and putting them together.

God is known, admired, enjoyed in his Works, the Works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all that have Pleasure therein, because in them the Power, Wisdom
and Goodness, i. e. the Nature of God, is made known to us; he is seen and
enjoyed in his Works of Creation, Providence and Redemption. The unfolding of
which through all the manifold Wisdom of God in them, is enjoying and seeing of
God, without considering at present, what other Ways there are of doing so, and
in what other Senses we are to see and enjoy him: The distinct and sure
Knowledge of these Works forms to a disposed Mind one great Notion of the
heavenly Happiness: And as to the Knowledge of this Part of the Work of God,
the human Body, we shall surely both know and admire it, as well as the other
parts of the Creation; for God will not lose the Glory due to his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness, in making and preserving any part of the Creation, much less so
noble a Part as this; and how he can have the Glory of his Workmanship from us,
without our Acquaintance with the Excellency of it, I know not. What we call
the Glory of God does not lie in an implicit confused Ascription of Perfections
to him in the general, but then is God glorified when the Mind is filled with
such distinct and clear Perceptions of the Nature of Things, their Make, and
the Government and Conduct of them, as gives infinite Pleasure to the Soul, and
prompts it to the most rapturous Acknowledgment. It Is one of Aquinas's
Thoughts, Patebitque corporal^bus oculis ipsa corporis harmonia. Aquin. Sum.
Q. 85. De Res.
that the human Body shall be perfectly known to us at the Resurrection, and
the whole of its admirable Contrivance and Harmony of its Operations shall be
visible to us, as in a Glass; meaning, I suppose, both what it has been, while
it was Flesh and Blood suited to this World, as well as what it then shall be,
when suited to that Kingdom of Heaven, which present Flesh and Blood cannot
enjoy. The same Thought may be carried into all the Philosophy of the Creation,
the History of Providence, the Divinity of Redemption; which, besides the
Fountains of Pleasure and Knowledge that may be opened in the Divine Nature it
self, will be Subjects of everlasting Pleasures to us, and of endless Praise
and Glory to God.

In the mean time, to return to the Particular I am upon, let us give God the
Glory of this, so far as we do know at present, of the Elegance and Delicacy of
our Texture, and of his Preservation of it; that the many Errors we commit in
the Use of those very Things that are the Means of Health and Life, such as
Meat, Drink, Exercise and Rest; that the violent Accidents about us, and many
unregarded and shocking Convulsions within us; that none of those millions of
Things that we know are capable of destroying Health or Life, have done it
hitherto.

SECT. IV. It Is our Duty with an healthful Body to secure the Health and
Prosperity of the Soul:
THAT both may flourish together, and we may enjoy the Apostle's Wish complete,
Body and Soul to prosper and be in Health. Health of Body is a great Blessing,
but the Health and Prosperity of a Soul must be owned to be as much the greater
Blessing, as the Soul (...) more valuable tha^ (...) Body, as Heaven is above
Earth, and as an Eternity of Happiness is beyond a temporal Life, even in its
best Circumstances. He that believes prevailing Sin, which is the Soul's
Sickness, (...) the Damnation of Hell, which is the Soul's Death, are greater
Evils than the Sickness or Death of the Body, can never rest satisfied with an
healthful Body only, will never neglect his better Part. He will never let the
Soul bring its Complaint, that while the Body truly has wanted for nothing,
neither Entertainment, Food, nor Physic, in order to its thriving State, the
poor Soul is neglected and forgot, and suffered to lie in a languishing and
pining Condition.

How to promote the Health and Prosperity of this Soul, requires no mighty
Depth of Thought to understand. You may learn what you are to do for your Soul
in this Case, from your Conduct toward your Body: It Is but observing how
careful and studious you are of the Body's Health and Welfare, how cautious of
exposing it, how little you grudge what you lay out for it, either of your
Money or your Time; how quick your Concern is to avoid what may be mischievous
and hurtful. Go and do likewise for the Soul, do but spiritualize the Instances
of your Regimen and Conduct for bodily Health, and thy Soul will prosper too
even as thy Body prospers. As thus,

Let thy Soul have its proper Food in due Season, and such as thou know to
be the most nourishing and most wholesome, let the Word of God dwell richly in
you (...) thy Soul with Knowledge and Understanding: this (...) heavenly Ma^na,
the Bread of Life that (...) down from Heaven, the sincere Milk of the Word to
some, and strong Meat to others. I found thy Word and did eat it, and it was
the Joy and Rejoicing of my Heart. By the Words of Truth and of sound Doctrine,
your Souls will be nourished unto eternal Life; see that they be wholesome
Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is
according to Godliness: What the Stomach is to the Body, that the Conscience is
to the Soul; and as thou will take nothing into the Stomach that would be
offensive to it, use the same Discretion here, and think not any thing
wholesome, that offends the Conscience, but endeavor to keep a Conscience void
of Offense toward God and Man. Again, let thy Soul never want proper Physic
any more than thy Body: Repentance, Self-denial, and needful Mortifications are
the Physic of the Soul; to the same Purposes Christ sometimes makes use of
Afflictions and Crosses. Let all these be improved and managed under the
Direction of the great Physician, the Lord Jesus Christ, apply to him both for
recovering and preventive Physic. It Is one of his Title, Able to keep us from
falling, and to present us blameless; or, He can heal our Backsliding, receive
us graciously, and love us freely: He has all Skill and Furniture requisite to
the Health of Soul; Cordial Promises for the Faint and Weary; restorative
Compassion for the Ignorant, and such as are out of the Way; purgative
Chastisements for others, whereby he purges away Iniquity from Jacob, and this
shall be the Fruit of all, to take away their Sin, and make them Partakers of
his Holiness: He has Eye Salve for those that are blind, or need a better
Sight; which he counsels us to buy of him: He has softening Grace for hard
Hearts; enlivening Grace for dead and dull, humbling Grace for proud Spirits:
He has Grace and Mercy to help in every Time of Need. His Furniture is all the
Fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily: His Skill amounts to all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; the Appearance of this Sun of Righteousness
was with Healing under his Wings: His Business was going up and down, healing
all manner of Diseases: His Character is, the Lord that health all thy
Diseases, and forgiveth all thine Iniquity.

Let thy Soul never want proper Clothing, both for Fence and Ornament; Put on
the Lord Jesus Christ, be clothed with Humility, adorn with that white Linen,
pure and white, which is the Righteousness of the Saints, and buy of him white
Raiment that thou may be clothed.

Let thy Soul have its proper Entertainments and Refreshments, as well as the
Body; some seasonable Retirements from the World, for Communion with God, Joy
in the Holy Ghost, delighting thy self in the Lord, rejoicing in the Prospect
of the Heavenly World, and in the Hope of the Glory of God.

Let thy Soul have its proper Exercises; exercise thy self unto Godliness; let
none of the Graces languish and decay through difuse; Practice gives Facility in
every thing, without which, even the Limbs that are sound may be unwieldy and
stiff.

Avoid whatsoever would endanger the Safety, Peace or Purity of thy Soul, as
thou do avoid what thou know prejudicial to thy bodily Heath; the very
Suspicion of Unwholesomeness in Cases of Air, Places, Posture, Diet: How does
it make People curious, inquisitive, cautious, as to these things? Why should I
not be as kind to my Soul, and as tender of its spiritual Health, by keeping
out of the Way of Temptation, and avoiding even the Appearances of Evil?

The Symptoms of an healthful Soul are to be discerned, in the same manner of
Allusion to the Signs of a healthful Body; for Instance, when the Pulse is
regular, i. e. the Affections of the Soul, when they are as they should be,
when they beat strong, even and constant, toward Heaven and heavenly Things;
indifferent to this World, and but moderate to our selves; when there is a good
Appetite to the spiritual Food, the Word of God, the Knowledge of God, and an
high Value of all the Means of Union to him, Enjoyment of him, and farther
Acquaintance with him; when we hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and have
a mighty Relish for all the Duties and Enjoyments of Religion in their proper
Season; ( I esteemed the Words of thy Mouth more than my necessary Food) and
are never better pleased than when we have engaged God with us in a religious
Transaction, and find our Souls are satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness; when
Sin is our growing Aversion, as God and his Company is our growing Delight and
Pleasure; when we can say, we hate all Evil, but thy Law do we love; when we
hate what God hates, and love what God loves, and endeavor that his Regards
and ours should be after the same manner, and to the same Objects; when we fear
Sin more than Suffering, love God more than the World, and covet Grace more
than Gold, and make the great Prospects of the other World the habitual
Regulation of all our moral Actions in this; when our Faith enables us to live
much upon Christ, and with him, and to walk as always before him, and upon all
Occasions to come to God by him, and derive Strength from him, in constant
Supplies of Grace; when we can heartily submit to his Authority, depend upon
his Merits and Intercession, and cheerfully imitate his Example; when we can
digest the hardest Truths, and bear the most burden some Providence, it
argues a good Constitution of Soul; when we can believe in Hope against Hope;
when we can walk by Faith though in Darkness, live by Faith though we have nothing
else to live upon, and die in Faith although not having yet received the Promises.

These Things argue a sound and healthful Soul, and that Establishment in the
Faith, which is attended with all the happy Symptoms of an healthful Mind, a
clear Head, a warm Heart, a regular Conversation, a florid Complexion, i. e. an
uniform Course of Life, which makes it visible, that things are well in the
Soul, as a good Complexion usually shows when it is so in the Body.

When there is that Activity in Religion, that shows it is our Meat and Drink to
do the Will of our Father which is in Heaven; that holy Vivacity toward God
that proves him to be our Center of Rest, and the Element of our Spirits; when
there is a Peace of Conscience, the Result of impartial Search and
Self-acquaintance, and not the poor Contrivance of Evasion and Shift; when
there is that Cheerfulness of Spirits, that Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost,
wherein so much of the Kingdom of God does consist; when we can bear Fatigues
with Patience, enjoy Prosperity without Corruption and base Degeneracy; when we
can endure Adversity without Dejection and loss of Temper, and are never the
worse for either Fortune in the World, whether it smiles or frowns, and the
ordinary Occurrences of Life do not disorder us: It Is a crazy Body that is
affected by a little Change of Weather, a Stumble, a small Cold, an accidental
Surfeit, a Disappointment in Diet; but it is a strong and healthful one that can
rub through them all, without Concern: So does an healthful Soul through common
Temptations, these he is able to bear down before him; and as for great ones,
and those more p^culiar, they do not make an easy Prey of him: He can overcome
the Malignity of some unwholesome thing accidentally taken in, he knows how to
throw it off by Repentance, and where to go for the Cordial Mercy for what is
past, and for Antidoting Grace for Time to come.

SECT. V. That we must use the Ease, Liberty and Leisure of a Time of Health,
to the best Purposes, to obtain this healthful Condition of Soul, to lay in
before hand such Principles, Prospects, Promises and Evidences, that may be a
safe and comfortable Preparation for Sickness and Death.
THE last time I was sick, I could not but think, that were I well again,
released from this Confinement, got rid of these enfeebling and disabling
Pains, sinking and fainting Qualms, I should, I think, value more than ever,
and use better, the Opportunities of laying in such Principles, Promises,
Evidences, that might be a safe and comfortable Provision for Sickness and
Death.

Well, the Thing desired is come, I am well and in Health, I have the very
Thing I so earnestly desired, and shall desire again: I am now freed from those
Depressions of Spirit that made Life a Burden; what Use have I made of it all?
To what Purpose is the Blessing bestowed upon me? He that has given me the
Blessing, has told me how to improve it, in such Words, as carry in them a most
affecting Mixture of Compassion and Authority, Oh! that they were wise, that
they understood this, that they would consider their latter End. Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

It should seem then, in the Account of God, that a Man has neither Wisdom nor
Understanding that does not use them to this Purpose of consid^ring his latter
End.

A Time of Health is the best Time, and it may be the only Time of preparing
for Death; for, may not I be cut off by a sudden Death in an unprepared State?
Or, may not I be seized with a Distemper that may as suddenly snatch away the
use of my Reason, and so be derived of a Capacity of preparing for Death? The
Disorders of Sickness, do they not generally unfit for such Actions of Mind as
are necessary to Preparation? Is it not next to impossible, that long Customs
in Sin should be changed at once, and that inveterate Habits that have taken
deep Root in the Soul, should be plucked up at once? Though we limit not the Holy
One of Israel, yet we must regard his own Representation of this Matter, as
next to an Impossibility, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or
the Leopard his Spots? Then may ye also do Good that are accustomed to do Evil.
Besides, the Grace necessary to effect so great a Thing (without which such a
Miracle cannot be done) is less likely to be given to one that has opposed and
rejected it, during the Time of Health. Prove. I. 24. Because I have called, and
you refused, v. 25. and you have set at naught my Reproof: v. 26. I will laugh
at your Calamity, I will mock when your Fear comes; v. 27. When your Fear
comes as Desolation, and your Destruction as a Whirlwind; when Distress and
Anguish comes upon you. v. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. And farther, the
Repentance in a Time of Sickness, and on a Death Bed, is seldom true; the Tears
and Cries are generally wrung out, only by a Dread of what is a coming, not from
a Conviction of the evil of Sin, or a Turn of Mind from it, as appears for the
most part in the Return to Sin upon their Recovery, with the same, or greater
Greediness than before; like Esau's Tears bewailing, not the Sin of despising
his Birthright, but the Suffering of going without any Blessing. And farther
still, the Gospel does so plainly require Holiness of Heart and Life, the
Fruits meet for Repentance, the putting off the Old Man, putting on the New,
the walking after the Spirit (things that do not lie merely in a Turn of
Thought, or a sudden Change of Mind) that some have been ready to imagine, all
that can be done upon a Death Bed too late, if nothing have been done before;
and that the Case of one who has rejected the Offers of Grace all his
Lifetime, is desperate upon a Death Bed, let his Convictions or Pretensions be
what they will; and that a forced Repentance in this Extremity, cannot come up
to the required Gospel Terms of Salvation. The Love of Sin was in its full
Strength to the very Time they took their Beds; it is Sickness that has taken
off the Appetite, not Grace, and so they have not left their Sins, but their
Sins have left them. As to those called at the eleventh Hour, that is far from
being the Case here, because they were never called before, as you have been
all your Life. They obeyed the first Call, though it came at the eleventh Hour,
whereas you disobey the heavenly Call at present, in Presumption upon an after
Game, which very Presumption is a Provocation to God not to give you then the
Opportunity, the Means, or the Grace of Conversion.

The same may be said with respect to the Thief upon the Cross, which so many
abuse to a Purpose, miserably wide from the Design of so illustrious an Act of
Grace. For, that was not only an extraordinary thing in it self, and
consequently no more to be drawn into ordinary Application, than a Man should
expect to be fed by Ravens, in neglect of his lawful Calling, because he has
read that Elijah was so; but also, it must be observed, that this was (very
likely) the first Call to Christianity he ever had: He was not, it may be, one
of those lost Sheep of the House of Israel, to whom Christ and his Apostles
directed their first Address of the Gospel; but, as should seem, by the Roman
Manner of his Execution, was a Sinner of the Gentiles; and had now, first of
all, met with Christ, and now first of all called by him; and what is this to
the Purpose of those who live in a constant Slight of the Calls of the Grace
and Word of God, upon the secret Hope of complying at last, which is the
desperate Presumption of those who quote this Instance to their own Destruction?

This may suffice to show how wise a Thing it is to consider our latter End, in
a Time of Health; the next Thing is to engage Persons to be so wise as this
comes to.

This is a Thing of that Importance that it ought to be a little enlarged upon;
but then it is a Thing People are wondrous shy of; they take the State of
Health and Vigor to be given for nothing but Enjoyment, Pleasure, or Business;
as for thinking of the latter End, it is time enough when we come to be sick,
that is to say, the greatest Blessing of Life is given for every Thing but the
main Thing for which it is given, providing for Sickness and Death; and it is
time enough to do that, at that Time, when it is next to impossible it should
be done at all; it is time enough to prepare for a Thing when the Thing has
surprised us unprepared.

Let not the healthful Person be frighted at the Words, Preparing for Sickness
and Death; they mean nothing but what is the most friendly and delightful in
the World, namely, Pleasure, Peace, and Safety; it does not signify, that you
must think of nothing else but your latter End it does not oblige you to sleep
in a Winding Sheet, to lie down every Night in a Coffin, and always have a
Death's Head upon the Cabinet; but it will set you above the Weakness of
counting even these Things Melancholy.

It will render those Thoughts familiar to you that are the Dread of Mankind,
and take off the Horror of the most horrible Thing to human Nature; horrible,
merely because in Time of Health we will not make our selves acquainted with it.

They who are put upon preparing for Sickness and Death, and answer, What, must
we be always thinking of these Things? They know in their Conscience, that is
not the Thing God or Man means by it; they know it is an impertinent Evasion,
and objecting against what no body supposes: No Body supposes you must always
be thinking of it, but you would, by your good Will, never think of it at all,
even though you don't so much as pretend to escape it; which is the meanest
Folly, and most sordid Lowness of Soul that can be described.

By considering our latter End, God does not require that we should be
inconsiderate about our temporal Affairs; there is no Quarrel against this
forethought upon this Account. Take your Time for Business and Diversion too,
only let them not have all your Health and Time. There is no need to set at
Odds those Things that may and do very well agree, Business and Religion, the
Trade for both Worlds, Earth and Heaven, the Health and Prosperity of both
Parts, Body and Soul; these may very well be carried on together, and be
rendered friendly and helpful to each other. We may be Christians without
turning Hermits, and must overcome this World not by retiring out of it, but by
bringing the other World down into it. The Affairs of this World have an
allowed Place in our Consideration; the Business is, to make them know and keep
their Place; as the Church is represented, not shut up from the World, above
it; the World under her Feet, but her Head above the Clouds, clothed with the
Sun, the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars. Rev.
12. 1. If we use the World so as not to abuse it, if we live in it, as those
who are not of it, and make that Mammon, which is the World's God, to be with
us God's Servant, and our Assistant, and so press this World into the Service
of the other, we answer that Representation.

Nor is it such a Poring upon approaching Sickness and Death as should in any
wise destroy the Comforts of Life, but rather heighten and improve them: If you
are not able to think of Sickness and Death without a Blast upon all your
Comfort, and the Though It imbitters every thing, that very Thing proves it to be
high Time for you to consider the Matter; for, what a Condition must you be in,
or what sort of Pleasures must they be, that are not able to bear the Thoughts
of your latter End? There is not a Pleasure a Christian need meddle withal, but
what will bear the Thought, and be improved by it too, with this additional
Pleasure, unknown to the Inconsiderate, viz. My Pleasures can bear, not only
the Thought of Death, but the Thing it self; it can overtake me in them without
my Ruin: Lord! is not this an happy Condition? But of this more hereafter.

In the mean time, I shall explain this last Direction and Duty a little
farther in the following Particulars. If I would make the best Use possible of
my Health, and consider my latter End to Purpose, I must,

First, think of it frequently, till it grows a familiar and an easy Thought,
as it will do to a Christian.

This will gradually remove the Dread and Horror that attends an unconsider'd
Trial. Monsters of Africa are not terrible to their Keepers, because they are
always with them; the Dread wears off as the Eye becomes accustomed to the
Object. I lie down at Night, stretch out my self, and take it for granted, I am
bidding the World farewell. I have blessed my Family, and composed my concerned
Friends to a willing Resignation. The vital Knot is untying, suppose; I am but
a little Way from the Presence of God, the Seat of his Judgment, and his Glory.
Well, what is it now that hinders my enjoying the Pleasure of this Thought? I
am upon the Borders of Immortality and Perfection, what is it makes me shrink
and hang back? What am I defective in? Now, whatever I find, that would spoil
the Pleasure of such a Season, let me set my self to repent of those Sins, to
mortify those Corruptions, to obtain that Grace, and secure those Measures of
Faith, Hope, and Love, of Spirituality, and Evidence for Heaven, as may enable
me to think of dying into Immortality and Perfection, with all the Pleasure
that becomes the near Approach of perfect Happiness.

I die daily, says the Apostle, that is the Way to die safely and pleasantly.
They that will not bear the Thoughts of this while they are well, will find it
hard to look Death in the Face when they are not able to avoid it; when he that
has often thought the Matter over, meets it as an Acquaintance, as a known
Thing, a Thing he has often acted over with himself, and so puts himself into
the best Preparation for doing it in Reality: He is able to consider Death, as
having no Sting in it, nor Curse belonging to it, and consequently no Hell
following it; he looks at it under more agreeable Notions, as it is a parting
with Corruption, dropping Mortality, ceasing to Sin, to suffer, or to die;
entering the assured State of unalterable, Blessedness, Immortality and eternal
Life, that instead of groaning at the Thoughts of it, they can sometimes with
the Apostle, groan to be uncloathed, in order to be clothed upon, to be
dissolved and be with Christ, which is far better.

It must be owned, there are some Constitutions of such a Make, that double the
Share of Grace they have, would not reconcile them to the Thoughts of dying,
though they may have Grace enough to render their Death safe, they may not have
enough to render the Forethought of it pleasant to them, but like some
timorous Persons, shrink at the Sight of a Gun though it be not charged, and
tremble at a naked Sword, tho it be in the Hand of a Friend they know will do
them no ^^arm. To such I would only say at present, that frequent thinking on
your latter End, acting over the Scene of your Farewell to the World, stating
your Accounts with God, and placing your self at his Bar, and clearing your
Interest in your Advocate, at the same Time you present your self before your
Judge; this will by Degrees wear off that unpleasant Aversion, which, of it
self, ought to give us more Concern, than the Thoughts of dying, lest that
Aversion should continue me unprepared, as, to be sure I shall be, if I never
think of the Matter.

And not only for our own Comfort, but we ought so far to consult the Honor of
Religion, and the Glory of Christ, who has delivered us from the Second Death,
as to endeavor to overcome the Fears of the First, to deliver us from which,
was one Branch of his Redemption, and one Design of his Conquest; for as he
came to destroy him that had the Power of Death, so he came to deliver those,
who through Fear of Death have been all their Life times subject to Bondage. Was
this Freedom one thing Christ died to procure, and is it not my Duty to
endeavor to obtain it? Is it not very odd, for a Christian to say, my
Conversation, Hope and Happiness is in Heaven, but as for going thither, I
dread and abhor the Thoughts on it.

Secondly, to think wisely of our latter End, is to act under the Influence of
such Thoughts while we are in Health, as those that know they shall not be
always so.

To think of our latter End, would be but a sorry Direction, if to think of it
was all, without acting in a constant Reference to it, and under the Influence
of it: If our Preparation goes no farther than Thoughts and Purposes, the
Fruits of eternal Life perish in the Blossom; it does not so much lie in poring
upon the Memento's of Mortality, an Hourglass, Coffin, Tombs, a Death's Head,
etc. as in acting upon the Conclusions, which these things suggest; as thus,
The end of all Things is at hand, therefore let us watch and be sober; the
Night comes wherein no Man can work, therefore let me work out my Salvation
with Fear and Trembling, therefore let me work the Works of him that sent me
while it is called to Day? Time is short, Health is uncertain; short and
uncertain as they are, my Eternity depends upon them, therefore will I keep my
Eye upon my Glass, and wisely observe how fast my Sands do run, how soon they
will be out, how easily my Glass may be broke, even before my Sands are out.

Again, to act under the Influence of such Thoughts, is to think with my self,
how will this Acti^^ look when I come to be sick and die? When I come to review
it upon a sick and dying Bed? I see how it looks now, pleasant, delightful,
promising, entertaining, and seems allowable; but may I trust its Appearance?
Will it not have another Aspect when I am forced to review it upon a sick and
dying Bed? When every thing will appear in a very different Manner from what it
does now, through the false Colors of Prejudice, Partiality and Self-Indulgence.
How will Holiness then look, compared with Sin? The Favor of God compared with
venturing the Loss of it? Resisting Temptation compared with yielding to it?
How will it look then, to have nobly conquered by Self-denial, or to have
meanly yielded through Self-indulgence? Heaven, Hell, this World, and the other,
the Gospel Promise and Invitation, and the Excuses, Shifts and Evasions we have
used, how will they then look, either to the wise Christian, or to the awakened
Sinner? For want of living under the Influence of this Foresight, some who
have slept under the most affecting Calls of the Gospel, have awaked at once
from their secure Dream into the utmost Confusion. Upon a sick Bed, when Things
began to appear just as they were, then, the Folly of Sin! the Wisdom of
Holiness! the Wisdom particularly of this Part of Holiness I am now
recommending, of improving Health to the best Purposes, and acting under the
Influence of this Prospect of our latter End, then it will appear in fullest
Evidence and Luster!

Now, (says the surprised Soul) I see plainly, this World is not what I took it
for: Satisfaction, Rest, and Happiness! Lord! what have I been doing? that ever
I should so forget, what 'twas impossible I should avoid, and banish from my
Thoughts, what I find will always come too soon to those who think on it least?
Oh! Why could not I have been contented with allowed Pleasures? Now I fully
see, God's Allowance was always sufficient; and to exceed that, was needless
Folly, as well as impudent Disobedience; 'twas like getting up from a
well-spread Table, to cram down Poison in secret, merely because 'was forbidden
Fruit; or at least, because it was sweet. Now I can see no Sense in those
Excuses and Palliations, which I before thought wondrous witty and cunning.
Lord! where was my Understanding, that I should venture my Soul upon a slight
Turn of Thought, against such a deal of Evidence that I was in the wrong? But I
would not suffer my self to think; or if I did, I labored to place Matters in
such a View as has deceived me, and undone me. A little Forethought might have
prevented the dire Confusion of this Hour. I might have been looking upward,
through an open Heaven, to a smiling God: I might have been adorned with the
Grandeurs of a Christian breathing after Immortality, instead of the Horrors of
a perishing Sinner: But when I need Comfort most, the Things about me, that I
made my Trust, can yield me none: And God, who only can, is departed from me:
Satan busy about me, as an Executioner about a Malefactor! What then? -- No
Angel to take Care of my Soul? No God to smile upon a dying Creature? Must I
never see Christ Jesus in the Form of a Redeemer more? -- No, no more in the
F^rm of a Redeemer. -- Oh Lord, I am cheated, gulled and deceived, out of my
Soul! for want of being wise enough to think of my latter End, while I was well
in Health, and had Time, Liberty and Ease, to do it!

It was the Saying of a grave Divine, that he wondered how any Man could dye in
his Wits, that did not dye in Faith: And that their Souls did not leave their
Bodies, as the Devil left the Body of the Demoniacs, rending and tearing.

Again; To live under the Influence of the Thought of our latter End, is to
consider, How if this Action should close my Life, and be my last? How would it
look to lose my Life with such an Action as this? Every thing that it is fit
for us to have, and allowable to do, or enjoy, will bear such a Thought as
this. All becoming Pleasures, all lawful Business will subsist, ay, and thrive
and sweeten under such a Thought as this, and not be blasted by it. If any
Business or Pleasure can be spoiled by this Meditation, either that is not
good, or we are not in a good Condition; and which soever it be, it is time that
something give way to settle a Question of so great Importance; whatsoever will
not bear this Thought, is to be suspected, stopped and examined: That cannot be
good it self, that is shy of, and will not agree with, such good Company, as the
Thoughts of God, and another World.

If in my Conscience I know that this is my lawful Business, or this a fit
Recreation for needful Health, or allowed Enjoyment, I may venture to dye in
that Diversion or Business. I say, venture to dye in it. For it is one thing,
indeed, what a good Man may venture or dare to do, it is another thing, what he
would choose to do. A good Man may venture to dye in drinking a Glass of Wine at
a Feast, or in taking a Walk, or riding out, though he would not choose to do
so, it being desirable to do so great a Work in the best Order, and with some
suitable Composure: But then there are some Actions in which a good Man would
not so much as venture to die, no nor live neither, in Actions or Pleasures
that will not stand the Presence of good Thoughts, Thoughts of God, and of
dying into his immediate Presence in the Act; they have not Warrant or
Allowance enough to bear the Thought, that when our Lord comes, he should find
us so doing.

Sad is the Case of those who die in Act of Sin, for a Man to finish his last
Bre^^ with a Lie! to dye away in the Sleep a Drunkenness! to be cut off in the
conducting an Affair of Cheating and Couzenage and so go down to the Pit with a
Lie in ou^ right Hand! Problems in Divinity may be started, and Cases may be
put, but for my own Part, I cannot form to my self an Idea of greater Horror,
Confusion and Dread, than to think of my wilful sinning against God one Minute,
and standing before His Bar the next. He is the Man that lives well, He
understands the Art of living and dying too, both for the Pleasure and Safety
of it, who can in all his Actions say, If God pleases, let this be my last; I
could venture it, though I would not choose it; who behaves as if every Day and
Action were to close his Life, not with so much Solemnity and Concern as if he
certainly knew he must die to Day, for that would spoil the common Affairs and
Pleasures of Life, but with equal Respect to the Righteousness and Holiness of
all he does, and so, as would render the dying it self uncumber'd with any
Disturbance that should be trouble some or unbecoming.

To this I may add, that to act under the Influence of the foresight of our
latter End, is to think with our selves, How does God look upon this that I do?
What Opinion has he of it? What does his Word say about it? The Judgment of God
is according to Truth, and every thing is right that is according to that. We
shall all be of his Mind sooner or later; it is Wisdom to be as near it now as
we can; for, as to be like God is the highest Perfection of our Natures, and to
enjoy God the highest Felicity we are capable of, so to be of the same Mind
with him, is the highest Wisdom and Prudence; to see things in his Light, and
look upon them with Sentiments conform to his unerring Mind. Thus have I shown
what it is to act under the Influence of the foresight of our latter End; it is
to consider how this Action will look when we come to be sick and die: How if
it should be our last, and close our Lives? How does God look upon it, what
Opinion has he of it, and what does his Word say about it? Which is to be the
Rule of Judgment.

Thirdly, No Man can think wisely of his latter End, that does not endeavor to
get all things ready for it.

In all other Cases this is accounted Wisdom, to have Matters in Readiness, not
only to prevent the Danger of Delay, but the uncomfortable Hurries, Confusions
and Distractions of a Man surprised and unprepared; if it be but a Journey of
Importance, or a Cause to be tried, especially of Life and Death, a Man would
not be able to lift up his Head under ^he Load of Reproach with which the World
would condemn such Heedlessness in any of these Cases. Dying is all these Cases
in one; it is a Journey into the eternal World; it is also a Trial for eternal
Life or Death: Unpreparedness here is part of that eternal Shame to which the
Wicked shall be condemned.

Now the Time of Health is the most proper Time in the World for this Work, you
have Leisure, if you please to have it, for Enquiry; Capacity and Strength for
thinking, and pursuing any Thoughts till you have brought them to a Point;
Opportunity and Ease for Conversation with Friends that may assist or direct;
the Duties of Religion, and the Means of Grace are all before you, without the
sadning Interruptions of Pain and Sickness; when the Physicians, it may be,
will give Orders, that you must not be spoke with, you must not think, nor be
put into any Concern for fear of inflaming the Distemper, and so in Compassion
to the Body the Soul must run dreadful Hazards; but whose Fault must i^ be if
it be thus? This Business ought to have been done long before, the working out
of our Salvation is a Work of Health: Then every thing ought to be set in such
Order, as that in Sickness we may have nothing to do but with inward Calm and
secret Joys to relieve the Anguish of the outward Man, and with curious
Expectancy and pleasing Glances of Heaven dress for Eternity, and put on every
Grace; and so with holy Resignation wait the opening of that Door, that will
let us into the best Company, and the brightest Scene that ever our Eyes
^^held. Certainly Sickness and Dying are, either of them, Work enough for any
Man of themselves alone, without the additional Weight of Examinations, dubious
Enquiries, bitter Repentings, dreadful Complaints, fearful Apprehensions, of a
wounded Conscience, and a surprised Mind, at the time when a Man can hardly
bear a single Sheet upon him (...) Be ye therefore always ready is the Advice
of infinite Wisdom; Stand, says he, having your Loins girt, in a Posture of
Waiting and Readiness for whatever comes; as Men that wait for the coming of
the Lord, be ready both as to your State and Frame, both for Safety and for
Comfort. He is indeed a good Steward, who when his Lord shall come is found
honest enough to have all things safe, though his Accounts were not ready cast
up, stated and clear; but he is a better and a wiser Steward, who when his Lord
comes (...) all things not only safe but ready stated and in Order for the
welcome Reception of his Lord; and to whom the coming of the Lord may not only
be void of Fright and Surprise, but may be a thing of Joy and Delight, because
his Reward is with him. Let then your Loins be girt about, and your Lights
burning, and be ye your selves like Men that wait for the Lord when he shall
return from the Wedding, that when he comes and knocks ye may open to him
immediately. Blessed are those Servants whom when the Master shall come he
shall find watchimg. Verily I say unto you, he shall gird himself, and make
them sit down, and will come forth himself and serve them: Be ye therefore
ready, for the Son of Man comes in an Hour ye think not of. We must not be
content to die in the Dark, for though Comfort in Death be not in our Power, but
is the Gift of God, and it be no Sin merely to want it; yet, it is a Sin to be
willing to want it, it is a Sin to want it through our own Default and
Negligence, and the Confusion and Uncertainty in which we suffer Matters
heedlesly to lie. Let your Loins be girt about, are Words, commanding us to be
ready either for Business, Contest or Traveling. Let your Lights be burning,
are Words that forbid our dying in the Dark, and make it our Duty as well as
our Consolation to have our Graces shining, our Evidences clear, and the
Promises of God sued out and applied: The Lord will come at one Hour or
another, and that Hour unknown, and there is no Hour wherein we can promise our
selves the Son of Man will not come, as to us in particular, by Death; and to
welcome his coming with Joy is so honorable, so much to the Advantage of those
that are ready, that our Lord not only pronounces them three times blessed,
Luke 12, 37, 38, 43. but in a Strain very singular and extraordinary, expresses
the Blessedness of that Man whom he finds so prepared. It Is a very strange and
unusual thing for a Master to get up and wait upon his Servant, and yet, he
says here, Verily he shall gird himself, and make that Servant sit down, and
will come forth himself and serve him, that is to say, the Honors he will do
them in Person, and the Blessedness he will entertain them with, are as much
beyond all our Expectation, as it is beyond a Servant's Imagination, that his
Master should get up and make him sit down for himself to wait upon him; for it
has not entered into the Heart of Man to conceive what God has laid up for them
that fear him. You your selves would have but a mean Opinion of that Servant
who should squander away the Time of your Absence; and instead of setting every
thing to Rights, that so they might have nothing to do but to wait for and
welcome your coming home, you should find them all in Confusion, and every
thing out of Order. Would you like such Service? Would they deserve any
Commendation? Would not their Love, Obedience and Regard be better expressed,
and your Approbation better secured, if they did every thing in your Absence
after the same Manner as if you stood by? And upon your sudden unexpected
Return you found all things ready and in Order?

Fourthly, If you would consider wisely of this, you must suppose it near, even
in a time of Health, and not imagine it a great way off because you are now
well.

We have already shown the Reason of this, when we proved, that the Continuance
of Health is so great a Wonder. Your own Observation of the sudden Deaths of so
many Persons, that seemed to die in Health, may farther convince you that it is
not to be depended upon. He is a Fool upon Record, who said to his Soul, Soul
take thine Ease; because he had got a good Estate, he promised himself the
Enjoyment of it for many Years, when that very Night his Soul was required of
him. It Is always foolish and ignorant, it is often fatal and destructive to put
the evil Day far from us. Besides, that it is doing so that makes it an evil
Day, which otherwise would be better than the Day of our Birth, Eccl. 7. 1. But
we bid the Young consider their latter End, and they look at you, as if you
offered to put them to Bed at Noonday, they have so much Time yet before them.
We bid the grown Persons consider their latter End, and we come in the wrong
Time, for they are just got into Business, and they must mind that. We bid the
Old consider their latter End, and they have a Proverb in Readiness to answer
us, None are so old but they may live another Year. The bare Possiblility that
they may live, will do more toward their Presumption upon an Uncertainty, than
the Certainty that they must die, toward their Preparation. We bid those in
Health prepare, and they think it is time enough when they come to be sick. And
as for the Sick, some of them are so full of the Hopes of Recovery and Escape,
that minding them of their latter End and to consider it as near, would be more
grievous than any part of the Distemper. All Ages of Life, all Ranks and
Degrees of Men, contrive to keep off the Thoughts of a Thing unavoidable and
near, as if Pleasure, Ease and Happiness of Mind did not lie in being above the
Fears, and beyond the Danger of dying, but in being insensible of both.

Epicurus himself says well that no Man is either immature or over-ripe in
regard to his Soul's Health; upon which Words Dr. Barrow thus comments, We can
never set upon it too soon, we should never think it too late 'to begin; to
live well is always the best thing we can do, and therefore we should at any
time endeavor it; there are common Reasons for all Ages, there are special
Reasons for each Age, that most strongly and most clearly do urge it; it is
most seasonable for young Men, it is most necessary for old, it is most
advisable for all.

Fifthly, We must consider our latter End as our final Determination for
Eternity.

This is a Matter that adds infinite Weight and Importance to the Business of
dying, and consequently sets an unspeakable Value upon our time and Health,
upon the Improvement of which our everlasting Happiness or Misery depends. It
is our Determination for Eternity! There is no After-Game to be played! No
Reserves for future Probation and Trial! Heaven and Hell are the only
Receptacles for departed Spirits; and he that has made Heaven and Hell has told
us nothing of a Purgatory between, nor has any one yet found it, either in the
Word of God, or in their Passage to these invisible Worlds; but he has told us,
that the next thing to Death is Judgment, that as the Tree falls so it lies,
that the Spirit immediately returns to God who gave it, who knows how to
dispose of it according to the Condition and State in which it appears before
him. He has told us that there is no Return in that Warfare, no fighting the
good Fight over again; but as we are carried off the Field, so it will be with
us, whether we go off Conquerors, or are carried off Slaves and Captives.
Lazarus dying, stops no where till he came to Abraham's Bosom, which was no
Place of Torment, for then he was comforted; and Dives when dead, and was
buried, the next Place you find him in is Hell: In Hell he lift up his Eyes,
being in Torments, without any Hope of Relief from, or Relief under his
Miseries; for such Hope would have been more than a Drop of Water toward the
cooling of his Tongue.

Sixthly, I think that my Health is given and continued so long for this very
End and Purpose, that I may consider my latter End and prepare for it.

You cannot suppose the best of temporal Blessings as we have proved Health to
be, is given for any meaner Purposes than those that are spiritual and eternal;
acquiring Grace, and securing Glory. Vitam gratis ac^^pimus a Domino, sed hac
lege, ut omni momento reddamus reposcenti. Eras^. de Praep. ad Mort.
To suppose Health and Life given for those common Affairs only, upon which it
is generally wasted, were to imagine the glorious Sun Beams created only for
Flies to sport it, or to make the Worm lie warm in its Bed.

The Uses People generally put their Health to, are equalled in the Business of
a little Ant upon a Molehill, or the sportiveness of a Fly, or the
sluggishness and earthiness of a Worm; such are the Men of Bustle, the Men of
Pleasure, the slothful and idle Servant, the Lust of a Brute, or the Pride and
Passion of a Devil! Whereas the Uses for which God gives us our Health, are to
work out our Salvation, to grow fit for the heavenly Place, Company and Work;
that I may have Time and Space to repent; and whatever my Hand finds to to do,
to do it with all my Might, because, there is no Work nor Device in the Grave
whither I am going, and it is impossible that in the Neglect of these Things I
can lay out my Health upon any thing lawfully; for however lawful the Affairs
of Life are in themselves, yet to me, neglecting God and my Soul for their
Sakes, they become Sin. They are the Idol of my Affections, to which Time and
Health are sacrificed, and the Price of my Soul, which by such Neglect I do
actually give in Exchange for them, and thereby sell it into Perdition. But the
wise Consideration of our latter End, prevents this greatest of all Evils, viz.
a Life full of Dread, of shrinking Fear and Terror upon every Apprehension of
Danger, which is a great Slavery and Imbitterment of Life; and it prevents a
Death full of Horror, and a Resurrection to Confusion, Shame and Misery: And is
it not our Wisdom to prevent the greatest Evils, Sin, Sorrow, Terror and
Damnation, and to secure the greatest Good, Grace and Glory, God and Heaven,
and the Enjoyment of them for ever?

It Is said indeed, the Children of this World are wiser in their Generation
than the Children of Light; but how? neither in Degree, a^ having more Wisdom,
nor in Kind, as having a more excellent Sort, but by the Use and diligent
Application of what they have, and Steadiness in what they pursue. What they
resolve upon, they for the most part prosecute with greater Diligence, than the
Christian does what he resolves on. They are wiser in their Way, than the
Children of God in theirs; just as a Spider is in its Way, wiser than a Man: A
Man cannot weave a Cobweb; wiser (eis genean autoon) for their present Age,
Time and Affairs, than the Children of Light are (eis genean autoon) for their
Age, which is to come, to secure the true Riches, and the celestial Habitations
prepared for them: They are wiser in their Way, though that their Way is their
Folly; for, can a Man be wise that is not wise for the main, the eternal
Concern? Can a Man be wise that disobliges his best Friend, and provokes the
most Powerful of all Beings to become his Enemy? Can a Man be wise that
neglects the properest Season of Action, and perhaps the only one he may ever
have, for doing the most necessary Business in the World? So that in short, as
the Sinner of an hundred Year old is accursed, so the Sinner of an hundred
times more Wit, Learning, Riches, or Parts than any honest Christian, is a
Fool; for unto Man he says, the Fear of the Lord, this is Wisdom, and to
depart from Evil, this is Understanding. All the Wisdom, Learning, and
Knowledge in the World, will not make a wise Man in God's Account, if this
Branch of Wisdom be wanting; the Consideration of our latter End. Oh! that they
were wise, that they would consider, etc. If you know these Things, says
Christ, happy are you if you do them. If you know these Things, says God, happy
are you if ye consider them. Then happy the Man who has considered this Matter
so, as to be placed above present Fear, or future Danger. Happy in a sublimer
Sense than the Poet ever thought of, when he said: Felix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere causas,
Atque metus omnes, and inexorabile fatum,
Subjecit pedi^us, strepitumque Acherontis avari.


I shall conclude this Section with these two Remarks: The First, That as easy
as this Matter seems to be, this Wisdom is very rarely attained. And secondly,
That where this Consideration is practiced, it spoils neither Business nor
Pleasure, but is a great Advantage to both.

There are but few that attain this Wisdom of considering their latter End. Not
one thing in the World is more universally agreed on than this, that we must
also in our Turn, be sick and die. It Is a Jest to go about to prove what no
Body denies; and yet not one thing of all that concerns us, is so little
considered! Such a Witchcraft there is in the World, that People cannot abide to
hear they must one time let it go. Busy, like so many Ants about a Molehill,
they take no Notice of the Foot that is just going to crush them: Like
Archimedes, so intent upon drawing his Schemes, that the Sword was in his
Bowels, before he apprehended the City was taken, and the Enemy was near him.
Such is the Love, the greedy Love of present Pleasures which they will not suffer
to be mingled with a Thought of Death, it is dashing Wormwood into their merry
Cups.

Sometimes it is Laziness hinders the Consideration of this, and keeps Men from
setting Matters to Rights between God and their Soul. Sometimes it is a secret
Suspicion that their Estate is bad, that keeps them from looking into it, as
they that run behind hand in the World, do not care to look into their Books,
and as Children in the dark are afraid to open their Eyes, lest they should see
something; but even those very Children know, that they are never the safer for
shutting their Eyes. Is it possible for any to imagine, that by thinking of our
latter End, we do really hasten and invite it? And that to make a Will, is
ominous and foreboding? I give my Soul to God, and my Body to the Grave: These
Words are dreadful to a Man that does not know what God will do with his Soul;
to a Man that never gave his Soul and Body to God before; to a Man that is
afraid God will take him at his Word, and really take the Soul and Body that he
surrenders: It sounds like a Passing Bell. They desire to be excused such
melancholy Things. But is it not really a much more melancholy thing, to find
your self in such a sorry Condition, as to dread the Thought, and banish the
Consideration, when you cannot avoid the Thing? To think of Death cannot bring
it nearer, but never to think of it, will certainly make it come too soon,
though it be an hundred Year hence.

In the next Place, I say, these Thoughts with a Christian need spoil neither
Business nor Pleasure. I should rather wonder how any thing could be pleasant
till these Matters are settled. It is very strange to me, that the Voluptuous
should have the Secret of heightning their Pleasures from the Views of Death,
and that the same Views carried onward into Perfection and Life, should be any
Draw-back upon the Pleasure of a Christian. Pange Toros, pete Vina, Ro^as cap^,
tinger^ Nardo,
Ipse jubet mortis Te meminisse Deus.
Mart.


The Egyptians at their Feasts, served up first of all a Death's Head that
stood all the Time in View. And in the famous Feast of Trimalcion, a Skeleton
of Silver was presented, to advertise, that the Time for Pleasure was short and
precious, and consequently to be filled up to the best Advantage. -- Catullus
and Horace, and other Poets, use the same Turn of Thought to the same Purpose;
and these are the People who say, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.
Heathen as they were, they did not think a Memento mori, spoiled all the
Entertainment: Are we set back by Christianity? Have we lost Ground by that
Life and Immortality which Christ has brought to Light by the Gospel? Could
they reconcile Pleasure with the Thoughts of Death and Extinction? And cannot we
make it agree with the Thoughts of Dying into Immortality? Should not that be
rather adding Pleasure to Pleasure, by remembering, that our Delights improve
and rise, where they imagined theirs to expire for ever? Shall an Heathen be
able to feast with a Death's Head in view? Shall a Jew choose to have his Tomb
in his Garden, where he could never after take a Walk, without the Hint of his
last Step? And shall a Christian think he should never take a pleasant Walk,
nor eat a comfortable Morsel, in the like Circumstances? Shall a Christian upon
the Mention of another World, in a Season of pleasantry, cry out, Lord what
melancholy Stuff is this? Ah! but these People had no Fears of what was to come
after Death! I answer, they were never the more safe for that, since it
proceeded from affected and wilful Ignorance, not desiring to retain God in
their Knowledge: Or if they knew God, yet glorified him not as God. Besides,
they had one of the most intolerable things to humane Nature, next to Hell and
Damnation, to fear, and that was a total Extinction of Being, if, as it is
pretended, they had no other Expectation. Moreover, if they had nothing to fear
after Death, which can scarce be true, with respect to those who were a Law
unto themselves, though without the revealed Law; and had Consciences that either
excused or accused them; but I say, if they had nothing to fear, so neither had
they any thing to hope for; nothing that might give dying a gainful Notion, and
cloth it with Ideas of Pleasure and Advantage: No Knowledge of an Happiness
hereafter, large as our Desires, and lasting as our immortal Souls, that
lessens our Calamities, and doubles our Joys, and without the Prospect of
which, the highest State of Life is insipid, and with it, the lowest is a
Paradise. And finally, as to thy Fears, whose Fault is it that thou have any
thing to fear after Death, any thing that should make you unwilling to think of
it in Health? For that very Reason, think of it till you can think of it with
Pleasure, as if you are true to God and your own Conscience, you may and must.

It is a Lie of the Devil, that Religion destroys any of the worthy and
becoming Pleasures of Life in its ordinary Course; and if in some extraordinary
Cases, it may by accident give Trouble, that is not Religion, but the Want of
i^ in wicked Persecutors without, who make Work for suffering, or unconquered
Lusts within, which make Work for Sorrow; and even then, Religion secures
infinitely more Pleasure than they can take away. No! no! Religion provides the
Plenty of a Paradise, and says, of all the Trees in the Garden, thou may
freely eat: It only commands our Hands off from forbidden Fruit, and from
Excess of Affection, even to lawful Objects: It corrects the Excess, Levity,
and Extravagance of our Pleasures, which are but the Froth of Joy, and so far
from properly belonging to the Truth and Reality of Pleasure, that they destroy
it. Religion gives so much the fuller Possession, and purer Taste of every
Pleasure, as it places a noble Soul above the Power of any Thought that can
come a cross to destroy or disturb it; no, not the Thought of our latter End it
self can do it, a Thought, upon the very Appearance of which, all the Delights
of the Wicked vanish like the visionary Entertainments of Witchcraft at the
Mention of the great Name of God, unless hardened by vicious Principles,
against all Regard to what shall become of them after Life. It Is the Fear of
Death, that destroys the Pleasures of Life, and the Love of Life, that hinders
the easy Death, and for want of settling this Matter in a Time of Health and
Leisure, we neither live agreeably, nor die with Ease and Tranquillity.

I hardly admire Doctor Rivet more, in the patient Sufferings under his
dreadful Sickness, than I do in his Conduct of making the Foresight of his
last Hours mingle with the Pleasures of his perfect Health. He delighted in his
Garden, there he was walking and entertaining himself, and giving Orders about
the dressing of some Trees; for, says he, if I live till the Spring, they will
afford me a pleasant Sight; if not, I shall be in a much more delightful Garden
than this. His Friend interrupting him, that there was no Cause for a Man of
his Health and Liveliness, to drop any such Presages. The Doctor replied with
an Air of Rebuke, The Time is come now, that I must be addressed in another
Manner. My Age is so far declined, and hastening to an End, as plainly declares
that Death, which none can be exempted from, stands at my Door: And truly,
Death is the principal Subject of my Meditation. God is my Witness, I desire
not its Delay, but am ready with a cheerful Mind, to embrace it; yea, even this
Day, if the Will of God were so. Testem Deum esse sibi, se non cessare, quin
aequo and ^laeto animo accinctus sit and paratu^ ad Mortem, non dilatam sed
etiam hodie immissam. Rivet. horis ultimis.


Our Kings are crowned in the same Place where they were buried. The Throne is
erected in a Manner upon a Grave. But does the Lesson which this carries in it,
diminish the Pleasure and Splendour of a Coronation-Day? If some Officer were
appointed to improve this Circumstance, and say, -- Sir, this Crown cannot give
Immortality. You must die as well as your Predecessors, over whose Ashes you
now spread your Glories. From this Throne you must come down into that Vault,
and the same Place must be Witness of your highest Elevation and Dignity, and
of your lowest Abasement. This might be thought an uncourtly Admonition at such
a Time as that? But by whom? by little Minds, narrow Souls, that are Strangers
to that real Grandeur of Spirit that raises it above all that is mortal, and
consequently above Mortality it self.

It was the Custom with some of the Emperors at Constantinople, at their
Coronation, while they were seated on the Throne, to receive the Homage and
Acclamation of the People, for a Mason to come with several Patterns of choice
Marble -- Sir, you are to choose of which sort of these you please to have your
Tomb. To have any Notion of the Pleasure arising from the inward Power, of
adding fresh Delights to a glorious Day, from the Prospect of another World,
and of a more glorious Day to come, a Man must be a Christian, whether he be an
Emperor or no. But behold! a greater than all these is here! The most
illustrious Congress for Splendor of Appearance, for the high Quality of the
Persons and Entertainment, was that we read of at the Transfiguration: The
Company were robed in Glory, Luke 9. 31. Moses and Elias talked with Him, who
appeared in Glory: But their Discourse was of the Decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem. So that we have the best Company in the World on our
side, in this Maxim, of rendering the Thoughts of our Dissolution familiar to
us, even in our highest Advancements and Pleasures.

SECT. VI. COmpassion to the Sick is a Duty of Health, a tender Regard to them,
and Care of them, to assist them in their helpless Condition, as we are called
by Providence, invited by Friendship, inclined by Pity, or obliged by Relation
or Office.
We bestow, this way, a little of our Health upon those that have lost their
own: By the Refreshment of our Conversation (where that can be borne) and the
Concern we express, we do by that Sympathy, wherein we take part with them in
their Trouble, seem to take off so much of it from them. This is the only
Sense, I believe, in which that Fancy that prevailed among some People I have
read of, can be true, viz. That every Friend that came to visit the Sick,
carried away such a Degree of the Distemper from the Patient.

What is done this way is Courtesy or Conscience, Civility or Religion,
according to the Motives it proceeds from, and the Ends I propose: And so the
paying a Debt of Love to my Friend, may be at the same time an Act of Obedience
to my God, and an Instance of that pure Religion, and undefiled before God and
the Father, which is, to visit the Fatherless and the Widow in their
Affliction; and Sickness is one of the greatest Afflictions.

The Enquiry that is made after this sort of Charity at the Judgment-Day,
demonstrates how great a Place it holds in our practical Religion, and those
Words, Sick and in Prison, and you visited me, or visited me not, show what an
Influence it has upon our Sentence, either of Absolution or Condemnation.

Some are obliged by Office to this Work, as Ministers; others by Relation and
Dependence; and all, so far as the Royal Law of Love, and Goodness, and Charity
extends: But then it must here be observed, that the same Scripture that makes
it the Minister's Duty to visit and pray with the Sick, makes it the sick
Person's Duty to send for the Minister: Jam. 5. 14. Is any sick among you, let
him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. Not that a
Minister is always to stay for this Invitation and Call; but then where and
when it may be either Duty or proper to go uncalled, is a Matter that must be
left to Discretion and Conscience to determine, supposing him so much at
Liberty from other Parts of his Charge, as to leave room for the Question.

Relation and Dependence oblige to all the kind and tender Offices at this
time. It Is Compassion, Affection, Duty, Gratitude, to bear with their
Infirmities, to compassionate their Pains and Sufferings, not to be offended at
their Uneasiness or their Fretfulness, nor grudge the necessary Services which
thou thy self may come to need, and so much the sooner for not doing as you
would be done by in the same Case.

We should not serve our sick Friends as the Priest and Levite did the wounded
Man, who, when they saw him, they passed by on the other side; but as the good
Samaritan, who when he saw him, had Compassion on him. It is indeed too natural
for us, to love rather to go to the House of Mirth, than to the House of
Mourning; but that is no great Sign of our Wisdom or Goodness; for the Heart of
the Wise is in the House of Mourning, but the Heart of Fools is in the House of
Mirth, Eccl. 7. 4. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the
House of Feasting, ver. 2. Better upon the account of the Good you may do
others, and gain your self.

1. Better upon account of the Good you may do to them that are in this sick or
mourning Condition.

It is a great Opportunity of doing Good: It may be now you may be heard, even
by those who would never give you an hearing before, as having always something
else to mind; or at least heard with greater Advantage, when the Heart is more
weaned from the World, the Mind is convinced of its Emptiness and Vanity, the
Conscience has them under, and is more at Liberty to speak, and they more at
Liberty to hear.

2 Better upon the account of the Good you may get to your selves at the House
of Mourning, ver. 2. The Living will lay it to Heart. Go to the House of
Mourning, look upon your sick Friend, and let his decayed Strength and Beauty,
consumed like a Moth, his sunk and hollow Eyes, his pale Cheeks, panting Heart,
and nauseating Stomach, preach to thine Eyes what thou have often heard with
thine Ears. See what it is you must be, observe how little you can then do for
your self, or any one else for you; see the Frailty of thine own Nature in a
Manner far beyond what the best Description can represent.

When you see your languishing Friend, say with thy self, Sin! what have thou
done? thou art the Inlet and Cause of Sickness, and the worst Part of its
Misery, where the Sense of Guilt is not removed by the Blood of Christ, through
Faith and Repentance toward God.

Look at thy Friend again, and when you shake your Head at the Symptoms of his
End drawing near, say with your self, Friends and Relations are but dying
Comforts, and I am a dying Comforter: These are dying off from me, and all is
dying about me, should not I maintain a dying Frame?

Sit down by him, and when he rolls his languishing Eyes toward thee, think --
This will be my Case in a little while: The same Enemy that now encounters my
Friend, my Wife, Child, or Husband, is upon its full March toward me, and will
as certainly overtake me. The same Arrow is levelled against me, how deep will
it go if it strike me naked and unprepared?

When you see how little Relief can be administered by Art or Industry, how
little Ease procured for Love or Money, think of the Emptiness and
Insufficiency of this World, that cannot afford Ease to the Body, nor Comfort
to the Mind, at a Time when they most need it.

I plainly see that is the best Thing that will do us most Good at the worst of
Times. Such is the Blessing of an Interest in Christ, through the Grace of God,
and the Promise of the Gospel. It Is this only can give Light in Darkness,
Comfort in the Midst of this Trouble, enable us to bear Sickness and Pains, and
to go through the Valley of the Shadow of Death. This is the best Cordial on a
Sickbed, this lies warm at the panting Heart of a dying Christian, who knows
that he can look the other World in the Face with Comfort and Confidence; who
knows, that if the earthly House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, he has an
House, not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens; who knows in whom he has
believed, and that he is able to keep what he commits to him, unto the Judgment
of the Great Day. This is something that Sickness cannot waste, nor Death
destroy, but will thrive and flourish the more for that which blasts and
withers all other Things. When the Flesh and the World turn us off in our
Extremity, as the Jews did Judas in his Anguish, with what is that to us, see
thou to that? then do thou, O Lord, stand by and own thy Servants; thou
regardest them in their low Estate, thou know their Souls in Adversity: Thou
stand by at the Time of dying Agonies, and parting Struggles, as a Friend
that will be by when some hazardous Operation is to be performed, and in the
multitude of their Thoughts within them, thy Comforts delight their Soul; for
when their Flesh and Heart fails thou art the Strength of their Heart, and
their Portion for ever.

Look upon thy sick Friend, and bless God for thy own Health. Learn the Value
and Blessing of it, from his restless tossing to and fro, his nauseating every
thing, his Sighs and Groans. And when you observe the Interruptions that their
necessary Care of him occasions, the Weakness, Fainting, Fears, Pains,
mortifying Prescriptions, Applications, the Sorrow of Wife, Children, and
Friends about him, that are so disturbing and distracting, think how sad a Case
it is to have the great Work of Conversion and Reconciliation then to do.

This little I thought not improper to add concerning Compassion to the Sick as
a Duty of Health. It is the last Opportunity we have with our Friends, and it
is the most important. It is at such a Time, that we are most capable of doing
Good, or receiving it, most likely to teach others, or learn our selves, the
Mischief that Sin has done; that our Friends are dying Comforts, the Emptiness
of this World, and its Inability to do us the best Good in the worst of times,
the Preciousness of Jesus Christ, and an Interest in him, the Excellency of
Grace, the Value of Health, and the Misery of having the great Work of
Conversion to do at such an unfit and unlikely Time as this.

SECT. VII.
IT IS our Duty in Health to use the best Means that are within our Reach, for
its Preservation and Continuance.

To preserve my Health, is as truly my Duty, as to expect and prepare for
Sickness. But of the Preservatives of Health in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Preservatives of Health, so far as belongs to Moral and
Divine Prescription.
MY Part here is not to discourse of Food and Physic, Air and Exercise; for
these things I refer you to the Physicians, the Guardians of Health: But there
are some things that have no small Influence upon our Health, that do as
properly belong to the Philosopher, or the Divine to recommend, without which
the Physician himself prescribes in vain. And in the first place I would advise
every one that would preserve his Health:

SECT. I. Not to be overmuch afraid of being sick.
THE Dread of Sickness is a Distemper of it self, and the next Disposition to
many more. What a Bondage does this keep some People in? The very Fear of a
Climacterick, has killed some that knew not how groundless such a Fear was.
It Is an easy Transition from the Fear and Fancy of being sick to Sickness
indeed. In many Cases there is but little Difference between those two. How
some Persons think themselves into Diseases, what it is that disposes the Body
to receive some kind of Infection the sooner for the Fears of it, I leave to
others to explain; while I take notice of some Instances of this Fear that have
done the Business as well. There Is one so afraid of being ill, that he would
not stir out of Doors, and for want of Air and Exercise, he contracts a
Distemper that kills him. Another you shall see tampering with preventive
Physic, till by endeavoring to prevent imaginary Distempers, he dies of real
ones: according to the Italian Epitaph upon one who died this way, Stavo ben,
ma per star meglio, sto qui.
I was well, I would be better, took Physic, died.


The common Comparisons express this Matter well enough, that by often blowing
the Fire it is blown away, and by frequent scowring over, the hardest Metals are
worn out. They do not only live miserably, as the Proverb says of those that
live medicinally, and measure out their Life and Actions by the Scale of
Scruples and Drams, but they quicken their Fate, and hasten Disease; as the
Poet says of Turnus's Wrath, Exuperat magis, aegrescitque medendo.
Virgil.

The Fear of Death often proves mortal, and sets People on Methods to save
their Lives, which infallibly destroy them. This is a Reflection made by some
Historians, upon observing that there are many more thousands killed in a
Flight than in a Battle, and may be applied to those multitudes of Imaginary
sick Persons, that break their Constitution by Physic, and throw themselves
into the Arms of Death, by endeavoring to escape it. This Method is not only
dangerous, but below the Practice of a reasonable Creature. To consult the
Preservation of Life, as the only End of it, to make our Health our Business,
to engage in no Action that is not part of a Regimen, or Course of Physic, are
Purposes so abject, so mean, so unworthy human Nature, that a generous Soul
would rather die than submit to them. Besides, that a continual Anxiety for
Life, vitiates all the Relishes of it, and casts a Gloom over the whole Face of
Nature; as it is impossible we should take delight in any thing that we are
every Moment afraid of losing. Spectat. No. 25.


I do not mean (continues that excellent Writer, full to my purpose) by what I
have here said, that I think any one to blame for taking Care of his Health. On
the contrary, as Cheerfulness of Mind, and Capacity for Business, are in a
great measure the Effects of a well-tempered Constitution, a Man cannot be at
too much Pains to cultivate and preserve it. But this Care which we are
prompted to, not only by common Sense, but by Duty and Instinct, should never
engage us in groundless Fears, melancholy Apprehensions, and imaginary
Distempers, which are natural to every Man who is more anxious to live than How
to live. In short, the Preservation of Life should be only a secondary Concern,
and the Direction of it our Principal Verulam Hist Vitae and mort. Nos in hac
sententia sumus, ut existimemus officia vitae, esse vita ipsa potiora. And then
he exposes that scrupusous Accuracy and Tenderness of ^^^ing that destroys the
End of Life. Q^ae sol^m hoc (...) agere, and nihil ali^d curare, quam ut quis
vivat.
If we have this Frame of Mind, we shall take the best Means to preserve Life,
without being over solicitous about the Event, and shall arrive at that Point
of Felicity which Martial has mentioned as the Perfection of Happiness, of
neither fearing nor wishing for Death.

And then in Answer to those who temper their Healths by Ounces and Scruples,
and govern themselves by the Prescriptions of the most anxious Solicitude and
Care, he tells a short Fable, which I cannot forbear inserting.

Jupiter, (says the Mythologist) in order to reward the Piety of a certain
Countryman, promised to give him whatever he would ask; the Countryman desired
that he might have the Management of the Weather in his own Estate. He obtained
his Request, and immediately distributed Rain, Snow, and Sunshine among his
several Fields, as he thought the Nature of the Soil required. At the end of
the Year, when he expected to see a more than ordinary Crop, his Harvest fell
infinitely short of that of his Neighbors. Upon which, says the Fable, he
desired Jupiter to take the Weather again into his own Hands, or that otherwise
he should utterly ruin himself.

SECT. II. If you would preserve your Health, maintain always a good and
peaceful Conscience, a Conscience void of Offense toward God and Man.
THIS may be thought wide of the Mark by some, but I am sure a good Conscience,
and a peaceful Mind, are not only the best Festivals, but the best Physic too;
if it be but considered how preventive of some Evils, how healing to others,
and how conducive it is to something more than both; that is, to a State,
wherein we shall never complain of Sickness more. Take the wisest Man's Word
for it, who understood both Physic and Divinity, beyond all the Professors of
both. Prove. 3. 1, 2, 7, 8.
My Son (says he) forget not my Law, but let thine Heart keep my Commandments;
for length of Days, and long Life, and Peace, shall they add to thee. Fear the
Lord, and depart from Evil; it shall be Health to thy Navel, and Marrow to thy
Bones. That Self-denial and Government of Passions, that Calmness and Composure
of Spirit, that Restraint and Moderation of bodily Appetites, which maintains a
good Conscience, does at the same Time maintain a good Habit of Body. Health to
thy Navel! that Channel of our earliest Nourishment; and Marrow to thy Bones,
which is their Nourishment and Strength, a great Preserver and Prolonger of
Life; and the Decay of it is a great Cause of that Weakness, Dryness, and Decay
in the Body which is a Symptom of old Age, and the Consequence of sinful
Courses. And a little after, Prove. 4. 22.
They (the Commandments) are Life to those that find them, and Health to all
their Flesh.

The same Author says (speaking of Wisdom's Ways, as Ways of Pleasantness and
Peace) that, Chap. 3. 18.
She is a Tree of Life to all that lay hold of her: The surest Means to
preserve Natural Life, and to obtain that which is Eternal. The Allusion is to
the Tree of Life in the midst of Paradise; which was so called, either as it
was a natural Means of Life and Health, by some immortalizing Quality God might
put into that Fruit, some secret Virtue to prolong Life, support Nature,
prevent Diseases, and keep off the Infirmities and Decays of Age; or morally,
by Virtue of a Covenant, Agreement, or Promise, which made that Tree a kind of
sacramental Pledge of Life and Health, upon Condition of his constant
Obedience. In both these Respects, Religion, and a good Conscience, is a
Preservative of Health and Life; that is, generally, and for the most part; and
allowing for those reserved Cases, which God sees fit to make from the ordinary
Course of things. With this Caution (which must be admitted, of whatsoever
Causes we speak) I proceed to show, that the keeping a good and peaceful
Conscience, is,

1. Bishop Wilkins' s Natural Religion.
A natural Preservative of Health: Which may appear upon this twofold Reason:
Because it does remove those things that would hinder it; and does promote such
things as will help it.

(1.) It does Removere Prohibens. It is apt to prevent and remove such things
as are the great Impediments of our Health. Nothing is more evident, than that
there are several Vices which have a physical Efficacy in the producing of
Diseases; as all Kinds of Intemperance of Body, all inordinate Passions of
Mind; to one of which the greatest part of the Sickness among Men may be
ascribed; and consequently the Virtues opposite to these, Temperance, Sobriety,
and Moderation, must needs have a natural Causality for the hindering of these
Diseases. It Is by Religion that Men are enabled to prevent all such Excesses as
are prejudicial to Nature, to repress all such violent Transports of Passion,
Hatred, Anger, Fear, Sorrow, Envy, as are in themselves very pernicious to our
bodily Health, and that violent Commotion which they are apt to put the Humors
into; these do sometimes cause present Sickness, and always, lay in us the
Seeds of future Diseases.

Disease first of all made its Entrance by Sin, and still continues to find its
way, very often, by the same Means. There is hardly a Sin of any size but has
its particular Distemper annexed to it. Murder forfeits the Life at once, by
the Laws both of God and Man. Gout, Dropsy, Stone, (...) etc. are in the Train
of Drunkenness, and of Lasciviousness.

Solomon's Account of this is, Prove. 7. 22, etc.
He goes as an Ox to the Slaughter, till a Dart strikes through his Liver; As a
Bird hast'neth to the Snare, and knows not that it is for his Life. Let not
thine Heart decline to her Ways: Go not astray in her Paths, for she has cast
down many wounded, yea many strong Men have been slain by her. Her House is the
way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. To Hell, in both Senses of
the Word, to Death and Damnation, to the Ruin of Soul and Body.

To keep a good Conscience is to prevent that Dread, that fearful Apprehension,
that attends a bad one. Those Terrors, those Pains of Mind, that Anguish of
Spirit, that Load with which Guilt presses, and alarms the Soul. These have an
ill Influence upon Health, corrupt the Blood, and sower the Spirits. The
Anxiety of the future, the Fears of divine Wrath and Displeasure, are
themselves a Disease, and inward Torture. A wounded Spirit who can bear? Call
you such a Man well, and in Health, whose Sore runs in the Night, whose Wounds
stink and are corrupt? Dr. Sprengell, on Hippoc. Aph.. 6. Aph. 23.
Fear and Sadness if it continue long, the Person is melancholic, the Blood
thickens and grows heavy, Perspiration is suppressed, and great Disorder
follows in all the animal Functions. Which agrees with the Aphorism of an
inspired Physician, That a merry Heart makes a cheerful Countenance, Prove. 15.
13.
but by Sorrow of Heart the Spirit is broken.

2. Bishop Wilkins ubi supra.
Religion and a good Conscience, is a Preservative of Health, as it does
Promovere Adjuvans, promote all such things as may most effectually conduce to
the improving of it; by obliging us upon the Account of Duty and Conscience to
a careful Observance of the most proper Means to this End: keeping us within
due Bounds in our Eating, Drinking, and Exercise; preserving our Minds in an
equal Frame of Serenity and Calmness; supporting our Spirits with Contentation
and Cheerfulness, under every State of Life; so that nothing can be more true
than that of Solomon, Prove 17. 22.
That a cheerful Mind does good like a Medicine, and Chap. 15. 13.
makes an healthful Countenance; whereas Chap. 12. 25.
Heaviness and Cares will break a Man's Spirit, and make it stoop.

I know (continues he) there are other Means to be made use of, in order to the
procuring of Health, various Kinds of Medicaments to be applied by the Art of
Physic, according as the Nature of several Diseases shall require; which,
Religion does oblige a Man not to neglect: But yet this, I think, may be truly
said, that those who are most expert in the Profession of Physic, are not able
to prescribe any Catholicon, which shall more effectually operate, both by way
of Prevention and Care, than the Observance of those Duties which Religion and
Virtue do oblige us unto. He goes on to my Purpose, Nor is this true only in
Theory and Speculation, but it may appear to be so upon common Experience, to
which I shall appeal for the farther Confirmation of it. What kind of Persons
are those who enjoy the best State of Health, and the longest Lives? Are they
not such generally who are most sober and regular in their Conversations, most
temperate as to their Bodies, most free from all kind of inordinate Passions,
Fierceness, Anxiety, Cares, as to their Minds? It Is said of M^ses, that though he
were exceeding old, Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
ye^ his Eye was not dim, nor was his natural Force abated. Which (among other
Causes) must be ascribed to those eminent Virtues he was endowed with, the
Temperance of his Body, and the Meekness of his Spirit. That beloved Disciple,
whose Thoughts and Writings seem to be wholly taken up with the divine Virtue
of Love, is upon Account of this Temper of his Mind, thought to have enjoyed a
more vigorous old Age than any of the rest. Such a Power is there in Religion,
though not wholly to prevent the Infirmities of old Age, yet in a great measure
to alleviate and abate them.

And on the other side, if we consult Experience; Who are the Men most
obnoxious to Diseases? Are they not such generally as are most vicious in their
Lives? Most given to Surfeits, Debauches, and Lewdness, where by they do so far
inflame their Blood, and waste their Spirits, as not to live out half their
Days: Insomuch that no Man of ordinary Prudence, who is to take a Lease for
Lives, will be content (if he can well avoid it) to choose such an one whom he
knows to be vicious and intemperate.

This is unexceptionable, after we have made due Allowance for the tender and
brittle Constitutions of some, whom a very small Matter shall break to pieces;
and for the tough and strong Constitution of others, who are able to hold out
against many Batteries and Assaults. Besides the Allowance to be made (as I
said before) for such exempt Cases, as shall seem good, to the Providence of
God in the Government of human Affairs. Some good Men may be taken away from
the Evils to come. Others may be exercised with Diseases in their Body for the
Cure of their Minds, or to make their Patience and Courage exemplary to others:
And some that are good Men, for the main, may yet, by their own Carelessness, in
using the fittest Means for the Preservation of their Health, expose themselves
to Sickness; none of which can be any Prejudice to the thing I have been
proving. This being that which I affirm, that so far as the Infirmities of our
natural Tempers are capable of Remedy, by any thing in our Power, it is the
Observance of the Duties of Religion, that does for the most part, and
generally, prove the most effectual Means to this Purpose.

It promotes that Cheerfulness of Spirit which is on all Hands acknowledged so
friendly to bodily Health. Si tibi deficiunt Medici, Medici tibi fiant Haec
tria, Men's hilaris, Requies, moderata Dieta.

Schol. Sa^ern.


Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. Great Peace
have they that love thy Law. Righteousness, Joy, and Peace, go together, and
make up the Kingdom of God. Thus Righteousness tends to Life, and we may by
this (as one says) transplant the Tree of Life into our own Gardens. Such Ease
and Pleasure of Mind has an wholesome Effect upon the Body. It fills the Soul
with Light and Vigor, and thereby infuses Alacrity and Sweetness into the
Humors. If the Spirits be not briskly moved, and vigorous, they could not
thrust the Blood into the Extremities of the Vessels; the Contraction of the
Heart would be weakened, and the Blood be apt to stagnate in the narrowest
Passages. This is the Philosophy of a good Conscience, and the wholesome
Cheerfulness and Joy that arises from it. Upon this Account it is celebrated as
a perpetual Feast to those that are well; Prove. 15. 15.
A merry Heart is a continual Feast, and an healing Medicine to the Sick; Chap.
17. 22.
A merry Heart does good like a Medicine; in which a good Conscience, regular
Desires, and noble Prospects, are the chief Ingredients. Vita Religiosa, and in
Sacris, videtur ad longaevita^em facere. Sunt in hoc genere Vitae, Admiratio
and Contemplatio rerum divinarum, Gaudia non sensualia, Spes nobiles, Metus
salubres, Moerores dulces; denique Renovationes continuae per Observanti^^,
Poemtentias, and Expiationes; quae omnia ad Diuturnitatem Vitae potenter
faciunt. Verulam Hist. Vi^ae and Mort.
What though some good People have little enough, either of this Cheerfulness of
Mind, or Health of Body, to which it is so useful? That is their own Fault, and
not the Fault of Religion. It is something contrary to Religion that has
occasioned that, or else to be acccountd for as above, when we mentioned the
Cases exempt from the General Rule.

Again: That Confidence and Trust in God, which a good Conscience supplies, has
a very wholesome Influence. Beloved, if our Hearts condemn us hot, then have we
Confidence toward God. We can trust him in this World, and meet him in the
next. And if you ask what this is to Health: Let an excellent Person Bishop
Patrick' s Discourse written in the time of the Sickness.
answer you in a Discourse of Trusting in God, written in the time of the
Plague. It Is apparent (says he) from what Physicians write concerning the
Preservatives against this Pestilential Disease, that they can prescribe
nothing like to Trust in God, which contains in it the Virtue of them all.
First they tell us, that whatsoever expels all Fear, and makes us bold and
confident, is of great Efficacy against the Infection. I ask then, what can do
this like a good Conscience? A Mind that discerns it self well with God, and
makes Report of good Terms with the Upper World? What room, what need at least,
for unwholesome Panics, in one who can think of dying without Terror, meet it
without Confusion, and suffer it without Destruction? Nay, I might have said,
enjoy it, because of the infinite Gain and Advantage of it. It Is the Character
and Comfort of a good Man, he is Psalm. 112.
not afraid of evil Tidings; his Heart is fixed, Trusting in God. The sudden
News of invading Enemies, spreading Pestilences, or any other public
Disasters, does not presently sink his Spirits, overload his Heart, and
dispossess him of himself: The inward Uproar arises from Guilt, Sense of Guilt,
and unfitness for another World, upon the Loss of this. If tormenting Fears of
Events are indeed such Enemies to our Health, a good Conscience must needs be a
Preservative to it; since it gives that Confidence in God, and Trust in him,
for all Events, as frees us from those Agitations and Distractions of Mind,
which toss the Wicked to and fro like a troubled Sea; for there is no Peace,
says my God, to the Wicked.

Again: Physicians say, That whatsoever makes us quiet and still, calms the
Passions, and stops the raging and boiling of the Blood, has a singular Force
in it to preserve, restore, or continue Health. But to this Design is there any
thing in the World so powerful as this Trust and Confidence in God? To know my
self in his Hands, so that nothing can touch me, but it must come, as we may
say, through his Hands? I beseech you, whither would you send a Man for that
inward Calm and Serenity, that is of so balsamic an Influence upon Health, but
where David himself went for it, and every good Man must go? Return unto thy
Rest, O my Soul! It Is in this Ark only that the Dove can find Rest for the Sole
of her Foot; all besides is Deluge, Tempest, Confusion, restless Agitation. But
here, enfolded in the Arms of Power and Faithfulness, lying down in the Bosom
of Love, under the Wing of cherishing Providence, we may say, though the Earth be
cast into the Sea, yet will I not fear, as David; or, none of these things move
me, as St. Paul; both Men of great Trust in God, and both arrived to a good old
Age.

Again: Physicians say, That in the Time of Infection it is necessary to use
Cordials, and keep up the Spirits to a joyful Pitch, for that which keeps the
Heart cheerful and merry, is of notable Use against Contagion. This, we have
already seen, is one Fruit of a good Conscience: And trusting in God will rear
it up to its Exaltation and Triumph, to Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory;
which a Stranger to this good Conscience, and Confidence in God, intermeddles
not with. And thus we have considered how a good Conscience is a Preservative
of Health, as a natural Means.

2. The maintaining a good Conscience is a Preservative of Health in a moral
Sense, as it tends to the Blessing of God, and the securing of his Favor.

Godliness has the Promise of this Life, as well as that to come, and it takes
Place sometimes in this Respect, for all those Scriptures, that mention Health
and Life, Quiet and Peace, as the Reward of Goodness, do express God's declared
Intention and Promise, and the Nature and Tendency of the thing: Prove. 3. 16.
Length of Days is in her right Hand, and in her left Hand are Riches and
Honor. Wisdom advances toward you with both Hands full, and enforces her
Offers with the most powerful Motives of Riches and Life; for upon both she has
a moral Influence, from the Blessing and Promise of God. Diseases are the Rod
of God's Correction, and Health the Gift of his Goodness, and the Reward often
of ours. One way then to avoid the former, (Diseases) must be not to provoke
his Anger; one way to enjoy the other, (Health) must be to engage his Favor;
for in his Favor is Life; Prove. 3. 21.
keep sound Wisdom and Discretion, so shall they be Life to thy Soul, and Grace
to thy Neck, for by me thy Days shall be multiplied, and the Years of thy Life
shall be increased; Chap. 9. 22.
the Fear of the Lord prolongeth Days, but Chap. 10. 27.
the Years of the Wicked shall be cut off.

The whole ninety first Psalm has Trust in God for the Premises, and long Life
for the Conclusion, ver. 2. My God, in him will I trust; ver. 3. Surely he
shall deliver thee from the noisome Pestilence; ver. 16. With long Life will I
satisfy him, and show him my Salvation. The same Promise is made to Charity to
the Poor, and keeping God's Sabbath, and several other Parts of Godliness that
are put together in Isaiah 58 and then shall thy Light break forth as the
Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily.

It is certain, let a Man be never so religious, he must be sick and die, as
well as the rest of his Neighbors: But the Truth we advance by these
Scriptures, is this, that Religion and a good Conscience, as it has a natural
Tendency to Health, in the Manner treated of above, so it has a Moral Connection
with it, made by the Promise of God and the Influence of his Providence, which
keeps off Diseases longer, or alleviates them when they do come, supports us
under them, and prevents even their worst Extremity, dying to our Loss.
Whereas, if we live to our selves, the Devil, the World, and Lust, to no
Purpose, or a vile One, we provoke God to cut us off in the Midst of our Days;
or whenever he does it, to our Destruction. To close this Section: Though it must
be owned that Religion does chiefly respect the Good of the Soul, and is not
thought so much to avail the Body, yet I dare affirm, however paradoxical it
may seem, that the Commands of Christ effectually do as much toward the Health
of the Body, as ever his Miracles themselves did; for these never healed more
Diseases, than the due Observation of those have prevented and kept off.
Quamvis autem religio animam praecipue spectat, and in corpora nostra minus
val^re videatur, fidenter tamen affirmabo (quod in paradoxis multi enumerabun:)
praecepta Christi, rite observata, non pauciores morbis liberate quam miracula;
quippe quae tot occurrunt morbi^, quot miracula medebantur.

Lucini Lucrum Homini praecip.




SECT. III. The due Government and Moderation of the Passions, is a
Preserva^ive of Health, which Philosophy and Divinity do both prescribe.
THE Government of the Passions, is a great part of practical Religion, as well
as a good Direction in Physic. It Is a Preservative from Sin, as well as from
Disease, and without it, there can be neither Religion nor Health. The Seat of
the Passions, and of Health, are so much the same: viz. the Blood and Spirits,
that they must have a near Relation to, and Influence upon each other. The
Perturbation of either, must affect both. It Is all one if the Sediment be
raised, whether it be by Agitation from without, or Fermentation within; if our
Passions which have their Seat in the Blood and Spirits, be not under
Government, it is impossible for those Spirits and that Blood, to be in their
natural State.

Our Passions are compared to the Winds in the Air, which when gentle and
moderate, let them fill the Sail, and they will carry the Ship on smoothly to
the desired Port; but when violent, unmanageable, and boisterous, it grows to a
Storm, and threatens the Ruin and Destruction of all.

All the Passions of the Mind range themselves under these two, Love and Auger,
which the Schools distinguish by the Name of the Concupiscible and the
Irascible; all of them Murderers from the Beginning, as it was said of him who
first raised and armed them against ourselves and our God.

It would look too remote to charge them with the first Introduction of all
Distempers and Death, and yet it is so true, that I cannot omit saying, that
there had never been any Diseases or Death at all in the World, had the
Passions of Man been governed as they ought to have been. Appetite and eager
Desire, Pride and Ambition, have rivaled Plagues and Pestilences, and all the
Diseases put together, for the Desolation wherewith they have filled the World.

Passions in their Violence are themselves Distempers, have the proper
Symptoms, and are the Occasion of many more. Lust is a Fever in its self,
besides the Diseases of other Names, that are in its Retinue. Envy, Pride,
Anger, inordinate Grief, Fears, Hopes, Desires, Joys in their Excess, have been
mortal, have done the Work of Sword and Poison, as well as of Diseases, and
that not only in their long Continuance and distant Consequences, but in their
immediate Influence.

Excess of Admiration may fix the animal Spirits so immoderately in the Brain,
as to hinder their usual Influx into the other Parts of the Body.

Immoderate Desire, what Languishings and Pinings does it create, as well as
too eager Hopes? Whence it is said, that Hope deferred, makes the Heart sick.
Immoderate Joy has cost some their Lives. Sophocles having a Victory in a
Performance, adjudged to him by the Applause of a whole Theater, is said to
have died immediately with Excess of Joy. It is said (though disputed by some)
that Diagoras died of the same Death, Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 15.
for Joy that his three Sons had gained the Prizes in the Olympic Games. The
People crowded about him with Acclamation and Applause of the Old Man's
Felicity, and of his Family; poured out a Shower of Flowers upon him, and in a
pleasant Manner, and with an Air of Congratulation, said to him, Die Diagoras,
die, while you are so happy. Three Sons victorious in a Day! -- The Man died in
earnest with the Transports, as he was embracing his triumphant Children.
Chilon the Philosopher died much the same way.

There are modern Stories too of some, to whom excessive Joy has been fatal.
The Dilatation of the Heart, and the Discharge of Blood and Spirits, thereby is
so great, that the Seat and Center of Life is left abandoned, the Blood and
Spirits are not able to recover themselves Time enough, and return to their
former Station, or else Life is drowned by their too violent Rushing into their
Channels: There is an Inundation in some Parts while there is a Deficiency in
others.

Pope Leo X. was at a Pleasure-house a little way off from Rome, when an
Express arrived with Advice, that the French were driven out of Milan and
Pavia; he received the News with that Transport that carried him off.

Grief will do the same Execution, though in a different Way, with Languor,
Dejection, Pining, Wasting; where it is not moderated and overruled, it will
wear away the most flourishing Constitution. Food shall not nourish, nor Air
refresh, nor any of the Faculties in Nature, perform their Functions. We then
say, such an one's Heart is broke, when they die of that Distemper which their
Grief brought upon them. There has not a Week of late passed (says Dr. Pat^ick
in the Sickness Time) but we are told in the Bills of Mortality, that some are
dead of Grief: The Weight of Sorrow has sunk many down to their Graves. Prove
15. 13.
By Sorrow of Heart the Spirit is broken; the Heart is suffocated, Life
strangled, by the too great Contraction of the Muscles, and the retiring of the
Blood and Spirits to that Part, in too great Quantity, and thereby at the same
Time the outward Parts being robbed of their natural Heat, and proper Recruits,
grow weak and languid.

Walthmeidt and Baglivi observe, that Diarrhoea's from immoderate Grief, are
incurable, and that principally from a Suppression of Perspiration; Grief
contracting the Skin, as all troublesome Passions of the Mind do; so that the
perspirable Matter returned, will be thrown upon some other Glands, and if on
those of the Intestines, will continue a Diarrhoea Dr. Wainright' s Non
Naturals.
And another very learned Man says, that an heavy Heart dries the Bones: Prove.
17.
It consumes the Spirits, wastes the Body, contracts the Heart, hinders all the
healthful Operations of Nature.

Immoderate Cares and Fears are very prejudicial to Health; Si vis te reddere
sanum,
Curas toll graves, irasci creed prophanum.
Schol. Salem. Curae enim corpus vehementer extenuant and exsiccant; Somnum
impediunt, perpetuisque vigiliis conficiunt, vires destruunt; Febres etiam
accendunt, and gravissimis valetudinibus initia praebent, melancholiam
generant, pariterque calorem innatum resolvunt, and extinguunt, and magis si
diutius durarunt. Galen. Aph. l. 2. Com. 26.


and if we would preserve Health, we must learn to give them to the Winds, in
the Phrase of the Poet, or cast them upon God, in the better Phrase of the best
Author in the World.

It is in the Nature of excessive Fears, to withdraw the Nourishment from the
extreme Parts, and summon it inward, and so to leave the outward destitute of
Blood and Spirits. The Symptoms are Paleness, Trembling, disordered Pulse,
sometimes to be speechless with Convulsions. What Sorrow does by degrees, Fear
has done more on a sudden: They seem to differ not in Kind, but in Degree.

And if any of these singly can do so much Mischief, what Execution will a
great many of these Passions do, when they break loose at once; when Envy,
Hatred, Malice, Revenge, Discontent, Ambition, Pride, are all at work together?
What Disorders in every Part? What Distempers, not only in their distant
Consequences, but in their immediate Influence? What irregular Motions of the
Heart? How confused the Spirits? The Lungs oppressed, the Stomach inflated, the
Blood boiling, the Nerves, by which the whole Machine is moved, have lost their
due Spring and Extension, These Disorders, and many more, are visible in little
Animals, by the help of Glasses. Plutarch advises any one in a Passion to
behold himself in a Glass, and see how he looks. Those Diseases are observed to
be most dangerous which produce Alterations in the Countenance, whereby it
appears to what Stress Nature is put by excess of Passion, and consequently, no
wonder it is by Physicians reckoned the worst Enemy to Health both of Body and
Mind. Pride, Passion, Avarice, Intemperance, Lust, seldom or never enter our
Weekly Bills, because the Question What they dyed of, is answered, not by the
Account of what brought the Distemper, but by the Distempers themselves; while
the Passions and Lusts that brought those Distempers are not mentioned; which
is much the same, as if when a Man is stabbea, you should give it in, that he
died of Loss of Blood, of Fa^n^ing in his Spirits, without naming the Cause of
either. The Marshall d'Estrees. Minister of France at Rome, carried himself to
rudely and proudly to the Po^e Paul V. that it is said, the Pope fell into such
a Passion against him, that he vented his Passion and his Life at the same time.


An Captain John Grant.
ingenious Observer upon the Weekly Bills of Mortality informs us, that in 20
Years there dyed 229250. Of this Number but two are set down to the Article of
Excessive Drinking: But can any one imagine that kind of Excess to have done no
more Execution in 20 Years? No doubt if the Matter were truly stated, and the
Informations of the true Causes of their Deaths fairly given in, several
Hundreds, might be set off, from the Articles of Gout, Stone, Palsy, Apoplexy,
Consumption, and such other Diseases, generated by Drinking, and set down to
the Account of Excessive Drinking, as having directly brought those Diseases of
which they are said to die: The like Remark may be made concerning the Passion
of Grief, of which there died within that Period 279. Graunt's Tables.
But how much greater a Number would they amount to, who might be fairly
reckoned to die of Grief, if we take those into the Account, who, died of such
Diseases as Grief threw them into, or brought upon them? Worldly Sorrow works
Death. 2 Cor. 7. 10. And Heaviness in the Heart of Man makes it stoop. Prove.
12. 25. Philosophers and Physicians agree in the hurtful Influence of Grief
upon the Health of the Body; it is the Moth to the Garment. Christ was a Man of
Sorrows and acquainted with Griefs; and this some think was, the Reason that he
appeared as a Man of fifty, when he was little more than thirty Years old. Joh.
8. 17.

Envy does the Work of Consumptions; for this Reason it is always painted a
lean and meagre Fury, preying upon its own Flesh; as on the other hand, good
Humor, and Benevolence of Spirit, if there be nothing to hinder its natural
Effect, is generally allowed the way to grow fat, and obtain a good
Constitution. The Scripture confirms the common Opinion, when it says, That a
sound Heart is the Life of the Flesh, but Envy is Rottenness to the Bones.
Prove. 14. 30.
And they that see the Prosperity of others, and envy and grieve a^ it, the
Psalmist says, Let them gnash their Teeth and melt away, the Wicked shall see
it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his Teeth and melt away. Ps. 112. 10.
The mortal Effects of no Disease can be expressed in stronger Terms, than to
say, it rots and melts away the Patient. Anger ferments the whole Mass of
Blood, throws it into a Fever, swells every Vein, and strains every Nerve. Keep
your Eye upon the angry Man in his Fit, and you will see all the Symptoms of
some of the most formidable Distempers, Madness, Frenzy and Convulsions, to say
nothing of the Mischiefs done to others in the Paroxysm; the redning Eyes, the
fiery Look of a Serpent, the Countenance pale or flaming, the Lips livid and
trembling, the Mouth foaming, the Speech abrupt and broken, from a Breast
heaving and working as if it were ready to burst; the violent Postures of Hands
and Feet striking one against the other, or stamping the Ground; would not a
Stander-by be ready to ask the Name of that Distemper, which had so many, and
so bad Symptoms?

It Is observed of Moses that he was 120 Years old, and yet his Eyes was not
dim, neither was his natural Force abated. Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
And that this was not only the general Reward of his Obedience, but a
particular Effect of that Meekness and Quietness of Spirit for which he was so
famous. Mr. Henry.
This being a Grace, which as much as any other, is Health to the Navel and
Strength to the Bones. The Noble Venetian Aloisius Cornaro, in Thuanus, could
write himself more than an hundred Years old, and he himself, as well as his
Historian, ascribes it in part to his great Moderation in this Respect, the
calm Serenity of his Temper, as well as the Government of all his Passions.
Infirmitates ex Intemperantia in Adolescentia contractas Aloisius sobrietate
and victus moderatione emendavit, Propensionem ad iram subitam rationis vi
temperavit ut quam infima valetudine and ira impotenti in florente aetate
fuerat, tam prospera corporis constitutione, and miti natura, in senectute
fuerit. Thuan. l. 38.


How often has the whole College been baffled, every Prescription ineffectual,
and after repeated Trials of the best Means, it has been found out that the
Passions of the Mind have both brought and fed the Distemper, and that there is
no curing the Body without the Mind? Galen speaks of several Persons whose
Passions of Mind have rendered their Bodies diseased, and that he cured them by
calming first of all those disorderly Motions: So, says he, De Sanitat. Tuend.
l. 1. c. 8. in Histor. de Physic.
did AEsculapius, the God of my Country, relieve those whose violent Agitations
of Mind raised intemperate Heats in their Bodies; and he did it, as Pindar
says, malakais epaoidais. Reason and Grace will help one to those softning
Charms. A good Spirit, an easy Mind, a Benevolence and Sweetness of
Disposition, and a due Government of those Passions that would throw us off our
Temper are things of the greatest Consequence, both to the Preservation of
Health, and to the Enjoyment of it, when we have it.

SECT. IV. The Observation and Experience of what has been agreeable or hurtful
to our Health, is another good Means for its Preservation. Socrates, ut
Valetudinis curam habe^ent, partim a peritis quae possint discerent, and partim
singuli per omnem vitam se ipsos qui observarent, quinam cibus, qui potus, qui
labor, iis conduceret: and quo pacto his utendo, quam optima valetudine uti
possent.

Sustentatur valetudo notitia sui corporis, and observatione eorum, quae, aut
prodesse aut obesse solent: and Continentia in omni Victu, a^que Cultu,
corporis tuendi causa. Cic. off. l. 2.

Isis the Wife of Os^ris first King of Egypt, was called Hygeia, for teaching
the People to distinguish Food, to avoid the pleasing hurtful, as in Egypt
they which were the most pleasing, were observed to be most hurtful.



IT is in this respect we say, every Man must be his own Physician, and that a
Man is either a Fool or a Physician at thirty Years of Age; because it is
supposed, that by this time, a Man must be a Fool indeed, must have observed
what is agreeable or disagreeable to himself, as to the Quantity, Quality,
Time, and Season, or Frequency of any thing.

-- Memor illius Escoe
Quae simplex olim tibi sederit. --
Hor. l. 2. Sat. 2. Galen is said to have lived from the 28th Year of his Life,
to a good Age, merely by this Rule; though before he used to be afflicted with
annual Distempers, and had no very good Constitution from the first. The
Physician certainly understands human Nature, and the Cause and Cure of any
single Distemper, better than the private Person; but there are Particularities
in all Constitutions, which a Man must observe for himself, and have a suitable
Regard to in Meat, Drink, Labor, Rest, Air, Exercise, Cold, and Heat, with
respect to all which a Man may know himself better than any Body else can.

This has been known to preserve some very tender Constitutions for a great
while, and has spun out a very small and feeble Thread to a very great Length,
while some others, too robust and strong to be thought to need such Regularity,
have been snapt asunder in the midst of a Confidence of a much greater Length
of Time. So the finest Venice Glass has been preserved as long as an earthen
Pitcher, with careful handling; especially when those Methods of Life which we
mean by careful handling, are made customary and habitual, till they become
easy, natural, and pleasant, which leads me to another Direction.

SECT. V. Render customary and familiar all those Methods of Living that you
have thus observed agreeable and useful, toward the Continuance or Improvement
of Health. Optimum Vitae genus eligito and Confuetudo faciet jucundissim um.

THESE Methods are of little or no Use, when observed only by Fits and Starts,
taken up for a little while, and then dropped again and given over. We must
conquer the Difficulty of the first Attempts, by Resolution and a manly Sense
of Things; and when once any Methods are become habitual, they become a second
Nature, pleasant and easy of Observation: By which it comes to pass, that those
Methods of living that would cost an unpractised Person a great deal of
Self-denial and Mortification, will have no Difficulty in them to you, who by
constant Practice have made them habitual.

Cornaro the noble Venetian I mentioned before, had brought himself when young,
into a very ill State of Health, But, says he, as soon as I resolved to believe
Physicians and thought it a Disgrace not to have Courage enough to be wise, I
accustomed my self so much to live soberly, that I contracted an Habit of so
doing, without any Trouble or Violence offered to my self.

SECT. VI. Temperance and Moderation in the Use of all sensitive Delights.
THis Government of Appetite and Inclination, as to the Pleasures of Sense, has
at once the Nature of a Christian Grace, a moral Virtue, and a medicinal
Prescription, and may therefore be reckoned a Preservative of the Health both
of Body and Mind.

As it is a Christian Grace, you find it among the rest of the Fruits of the
Spirit, without which none of the rest can either thrive or subsist; the Fruits
of the Spirit are Longsuffering, Gentleness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Gal.
5. 22.
It is one of the Pearls upon that goodly String, add to your Faith Virtue, and
to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience. 2
Pet. 1. 6.
And it is made one of the constituent Virtues of Religion, at the Foundation
of all the rest: The Grace of God that brings Salvation, teaches us, that
denying all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live godly, righteously
and soberly. Tit. 2. 12.


Moral Writers call it the Storehouse of all Virtue. Its own proper Names
bespeak its Excellence. It it sometime expressed by a Name that includes the
Idea of Sophrosunee.
Wisdom. It must indeed be a Piece of great Wisdom, to cultivate that which is
so much to the Advantage of Body and Soul.

In this all Ages and Authors agree, the Advantages of Temperance to bodily
Health.

A Man has but these four Things to choose out of (as Sir William Temple
observes) to exercise much, to be very Temperate, to take Physic, or be sick:
And now the Choice is left to every one as he pleases, and a Man cannot be long
in suspense, that considers the Trouble of Exercise, the Uncertainty and
Nauseousness of Physic, and the Danger and Pains of Sickness.

We don't mean by Temperance, a mortifying Abstemiousness. Temperance allows to
Nature all that is necessary, not only for Support, but Refreshment, agreeable
to the Rules of Health already mentioned. It forbids only those undue
Repletions that lay in the Principles and Seeds of Sickness and Death: It Is one
of the first of Hippocrate's Rules of Health, Non satiari cibis. He means only,
that we should not feed Distempers, by glutting our selves, and indulging the
Wantonness of Appetite.

The first Physicians by Debauch were made,
Excess begun, and Sloth maintains the Trade.
Dryd. The Difficulty is to know where Necessity and Refreshment end, and when
Excess begins. Nescit cupiditas ubi finiatur necessitas.
There Is no great Matter if we should stop a Degree or two on this Side the
utmost Bounds. Sir William Temple stopped at the fourth Glass; I drink one Glass
(says he) for Health, a Second for Refreshment, a Third for a Friend, but he
that offers a Fourth, is an Enemy.

Gorgias Leontinus was become a Proverb among the People, for Strength and
Vigor at a very great Age: Every Body was inquisitive into the manner of living
that had brought him to 108 Years with so hail a Constitution: His Account was,
Schol. Salern. Praef^
That he only observed this one Rule, never to do any thing merely for
Pleasure. By this means he was indeed out of Danger from one of the greatest
Banes of Health in the World, and enjoyed the most exquisite Pleasure in
Nature, which consists in the Satisfaction of purely natural Appetites; but at
the same Time we may abate of the Rigor, without losing any Thing of the
Benefit of this Rule, by bringing Temperance into our Pleasures themselves.
Temperance does not banish, but regulate our Pleasures; and doubtless Pleasures
themselves under Regulation, are friendly to Health.

The Proverb says, He that would eat much, must eat little; (i. e.) he will
live longer, and so eat more than he, who by indulging to Appetite, shortens
his Days. He is likely to live longer, both as a Reward from Heaven upon the
Duty of Temperance, and as a natural Means of Health, as it keeps out those
Humors that disorder and oppress Nature, and hinder its Operations with
Freedom, Ease, and Pleasure.

Cornaro would sometimes say merrily to his Friends, That of all Parts of a
Feast, that which one leaves does one the most good.

Hence it is that one seldom sees in Cities, Courts, and rich Houses, where
People eat, and drink, and indulge to the Pleasure of Appetite, that perfect
Health and athletic Soundness and Vigor which is commonly seen in the Country,
in the poor Houses and Cottages, where Nature is their Cook, and Necessity is
their Caterer, where they have no other Doctor but the Sun and fresh Air, and
no other Physic, but Exercise and Temperance. -- It has been observed in the
earlier Ages of the Church, that none lived such long and healthful Lives, as
Monks and Hermits, who had sequestered themselves from the Pleasures and
Plenties of the World, to a constant ascetick Course of the severest Abstinence
and Devotion -- I shall transcribe what follows from the same smart Author, Dr.
South. Vol. 2.
because it touches upon an Head that I shall make no other Room for but in
this Place, which ought not wholly to be omitted: He goes on thus.

Nor is Excess the only thing by which Sin mauls and breaks Men in their
Health, and the comfortable Enjoyment of themselves thereby, but many are also
brought to a very ill and languishing Habit of Body, by mere Idleness; and
Idleness is both it self a great Sin, and the Cause of many more. The
Husbandman returns from the Field, and from manuring his Ground, strong and
healthy, because innocent and laborious. You will find no Diet-Drinks, no Boxes
of Pills, nor Gally-pots amongst his Provisions: No, he neither speaks nor
lives French, he is not so much a Gentleman (forsooth). His Meals are coarse
and short, his Employments warrantable, his Sleep certain and refreshing,
neither interrupted with the Lashes of a guilty Mind, nor the Aches of a crazy
Body, and when Old Age comes upon him, it comes alone, bringing no Evil with it
but itself: But when it comes to wait upon a great and worshipful Sinner (who
for many Years together has had the Reputation of eating well and doing ill, it
comes (as it ought to do to a Person of such Quality) attended with a long Tram
and Retinue of Rheums, Coughs Catarrhs, and Dropsies, together with many
painful Girds and Convulsions, which are at least called the Gout. How does
such an one go about, or is carried rather, with his Body bending inward, his
Head shaking, and his Eyes always watering (instead of weeping) for the Sins of
his misspent Youth? Old Age seizes upon such a Person, like Fire upon a rotten
House; it was rotten before, and must have fallen of it self; so that it is no
more than one Ruin preventing another Very much to the same Cause, though not
to that only, may we ascribe the long Lives of those Patriarchs before the
Flood, when they lived so many hundred Years; viz. the Temperance of their
Diet, and the Simplicity of their Manner of Life. They had not then found out
those Arts of shortening Life, that will now let Men live but a little while,
and of that little, but a small Part of it well. Cornar^'s Lamentation over
Italy, is calculated for other Meridians besides Rome and Naples.

O unhappy Italy! Do thou not perceive that Gluttony and Excess robs thee
every Year of more Inhabitants, than War, Pestilence and Plague? Thy true
Plagues art too frequent Feasting, which are so extravagant now, that no Tables
are made large enough to hold the Number of our Dishes. We not only prodigally
heap upon them, but are forced to raise them one upon them, but are forced to
raise them one upon another, in Pyramids. What Madness, what Fury is this?
Regulate those Disorders, if not for God's sake yet for your own, because no
Sin is more offensive to him, none more pernicious to your selves. Cornaro of
Long Life.


Every one that dies in his Bed, does not die a natural Death. Daggers and
Halters, or Poison, are not the only Violences the Body can suffer. The
Disorders of Intemperance are altogether as properly Violences, though the Man
dies in his Bed.

Over how many Graves may it be written, Here lies such an one that killed
himself by drinking. Here lies one that died of intemperate Pleasures. No, says
a Stander by, it was a Fever. I ask what brought that Fever? and so of any
other Disease of which the Intemperate are said to die.

Can such with any Face quarrel with God's Providence, for making their Lives
so short, when they by their Intemperance make it yet shorter? Would one
believe that some of these have only their Portion in this Life, to see them
cut it so short? Would any Man shake the Glass, which, when run out would bring
on his Execution? Of all People, they should make the most of this Life, who
have no Hopes of another. But if it were only to be punished with the Loss of
Health, how great a Blessing is melted down in the transient Pleasure of a
Gusto of Palate, or a wanton Fancy? A Pearl in a Draught with Cleopatra, or a
Kingdom for one Cup with Lysimachus, oh quantum ob quantillum! to surrender
Health for a Cup too much!

AEsculapius, as Plato in his Commonwealth represents him, would not allow
Physicians to those who were sick only through Luxury and Intemperance: Let
them die (says he) they neither deserve, nor ought to be cured, whose Disease
was their Choice, and whose Recovery would be but a Return to their Crime. And
truly, abating the Prospect of their growing sober, and good for something, it
were not Matter if such Examples were removed out of the Way, and such
Consumptions of the good Creature ( Fruges consumere nati) were let die for the
Good of the Public. AEsculapius thought Physic was not made for such, and that
it was not his Duty to cure them, though they were as rich as Midas. I shall
close this Head with a fine Passage of Temperance out of Sir William Temple.

Sir William Temple.
Temperance, thou Virtue without Pride, and Fortune without Envy. That give
Indolence of Body, and Tranquillity of Mind. The best Guardian of Youth, and
Support of old Age. The Precept of Reason as well as Religion, and Physician of
the Soul as well as the Body. The tutelar Goddess of Health, and universal
Medicine of Life. That clears the Head and cleanses the Blood. That eases the
Stomach and purges the Bowels. That strengthens the Nerves, enlightens the
Eyes, and comforts the Heart; in a Word, that secures and perfects Digestion,
and thereby avoids the Fumes and Winds, to which we owe the Cholick and Spleen;
those Crudities and sharp Humors that feed the Scurvy and the Gout, and those
slimy Dregs, of which the Gravel and Stone are formed within us. Diseases to
which Mankind is exposed, rather by the Viciousness than by the Frailty of our
Natures; and by which we often condemn our selves to greater Torments and
Miseries of Life, than have perhaps been yet invented by Anger or Revenge, or
inflicted by the greatest Tyrants upon the worst of Men.

The due Observation of these Preservatives will sometimes prevent the
Necessity of the more costly and disgustful Means; or at least render them more
efficacious when they must be used; or, which is indeed of greater Consequence
to us than either, will make us better disposed for that Sickness and Death
that must be no longer deferred.

SECT. VII. On proper Occasions, which call for the Direction, Advice, and
Skill of the Learned, we ought to consult those who profess the Arts of
restoring and preserving Health.
THE Art of Healing is one of the Gifts of God to a miserable World; to relieve
us under, or save us from, Distempers, which Sin has brought upon our Nature.
The Jews say, God created the Physician. It is he that gives Science to Men,
and it is he that heal^th Man Ecclus. 31. 1, 2.
The Pagans ascribed it to the Gods, as their Invention, or made Gods of those
who were the Authors of any considerable Discoveries or Improvements in it.
Inventum Medicina meum est Opiserque per Orbem
Nominor. --
My Lord Bacon in Hist. Vit. and Mortis, calls the Physicians, Omnipotentiae
and Clementiae divinae administros in vita hominum proroganda and instauranda.




It Is not to be doubted but the first Physician, and the first Patient too, are
to be found in the Person of the First Man; Adam, when he became mortal, no
sooner found any Ailments about him, but he would use all the Knowledge he had
in Nature to find out some Remedy and Relief.

I am of Opinion, that there are no Maladies incident to our Bodies, but the
Goodness of God has provided Remedies or Alleviations for them, that lie in
some Part of the Creation or other. The same God has, in his wise Providence,
given Inclination, Opportunity and Ability, to some Persons, to study, and find
out those healing Properties, and to render them useful by a proper Manner of
Application. And as secret Treasures lie hid in the Bowels of Mountains, which
would have been for ever secret, but for Industry or Providence; so there are
Treasures of Health and Relief, lodged in the animal, vegetable and mineral
Kingdoms, that had never been discovered but by Industry or Providence.

It must be owned, to the Mortification of the Pride of Man, that some of the
noblest Things in Physic are owing merely to providential Discovery; but on the
other Hand, it must also be allowed, that the same good Providence has blessed
the Industry of some Persons in the Knowledge of Distempers, and Methods of
their Cure, and in pursuing Experiments to some very useful and excellent
Purposes.

It is true, we are not to depend entirely upon the Physician, nor must we
neglect him. We live not by Bread alone, but by the Word out of God's Mouth,
and yet, if we refuse our Food, we starve. We are healed not by Physic alone,
but by the same Word out of God's Mouth; and yet, if we neglect to use the best
Means within our Reach, we die.

It must be a great Degree of Ignorance, as well as Ingratitude to the Goodness
of God, and the Labors of the Learned, to question whether they who study the
Natures an Properties of Things, with reference to our Make and Fame, must not
know more of it than others. They who have so often taken the Machine to
Pieces, examined the Structure, Use, and Operation of the Parts; they who have
hunted out the Properties of Herbs, Minerals, and Drugs; they who have studied
the Causes, Symptoms, and Effects of Distempers; they, who to their Reading,
Enquiries, and Experiments, have by Practice joined the constant Observation of
the Process, Course, and Crisis of Distempers; to question (I say) whether
these Persons must not be allowed to know more of the Matter than others,
notwithstanding Mistakes in some Cases, and Darkness in others. As an Artist
can tell where the Disorder of a Watch lies, whether in the Spring, Balance, or
any of the Wheels, better than one that has never so much as seen it taken to
Pieces and put together.

Nature will certainly very much help it self, and Art will very much help
Nature; and the Intention of Art is to assist Nature against what is unnatural,
to supply where it is wanting, to remove Obstructions, to ease it of any Load
or Burden, and promote its own Forces and Operations. Hence the Name
Physician, or Naturalist, Heathen Mythology has made Hygeei^ and Panacea two
Sisters; the one presided over the Preservation of Health, the other over the
Restoration of it; both the Daughters of AEsculapius.
one whose Study it is to restore and preserve the Body in its natural State
and Condition. Duae Medicinae Parts constituuntur Principles, Ugieina s^il,
atque The^apeusis, quarum illa preserva^ a Morbis, haec eosdem profligat Etmull.

It has been disputed, whether Conversation of Health belongs to the
Physician's Province or no; this was formerly claimed by the Gymnasticks, who
presided over the Exercises for Health Physicians, on the other Hand, say, the
Gymnasticks were only their Servants in that Business. Galen has written a
whole Book upon this Controversy, ad Thrasybulum.

Firma valent per se nullumque Machaona quaerunt,
Ad medicam dubious confugit aege^ opem.
Ovid.


Hipp. Aph. 1.
Life is short indeed, Art is long, Occasion and Opportunity fleeting, Judgment
difficult, Mistakes have been many, the Catalogue of incurable Distempers, and
of those that are the Opprobria Medicorum, is large; the Art, in a great
Measure, conjectural, and the Dependence of many, on their Physicians, is
superstitious and ridiculous; and several of the Healing Faculty may have drawn
Contempt upon their own Profession: And yet, for all the Raillery these Things
are liable to, I cannot but think it a Sort of Profaneness to put a Slight
upon the Gift of God, and the Labors of Men, who, though they don't know all
Things, yet many important Things, that are Mysteries to the Vulgar, are very
plain and easy to them.

Buchanan was doubtless a polite Man, and had a very great Genius, but it was
no Part of his Sense that he defied the Physicians, in his last Fever, and
refused all their Assistance. They knew Wine was mortal to him, as well as he
knew how to make a Verse. They talked like Physicians, he would die like a
Poet. He takes a Bumper in Bravado, and is said to expire with the Glass in his
Hand, and those Lines of Propertius in his Mouth; Cynthia prima su^s miserum me
cepit Ocellis,
Contactum nullis ante Cupidinibus.
Tum mihi constantis, etc.


He might as well have fallen upon his own Sword.

Ecclus. 38. 13, 14.
Give Place to the Physician, for the Lord has created him. Let him not go
from thee, for thou have need of him. There is a Time, when in their Hands
there is good Success; for they shall also pray unto the Lord, that he would
prosper that which they give for Ease and Remedy, to prolong Life.

There was a Time, it seems, when there were praying Physicians, as Men that
owned the Power of Life and Death to be in the Hand of God, and that all the
Means were ordained by him, subordinate to him, and incapable of doing any
Manner of Service without him. I hope the Number of such now may be greater
than we are generally apt to imagine; and for their Sakes I shall add the
following good Remark of a dignifyed Writer. Dean Stanhope's Epistles and
Gospels. Vol. 3.


I take the wise Man here to have left us a good Hint for making Choice of such
Physicians who are likely to profit us by their Prayers, as well as by their
Prescriptions. For sure it argues too little Sense of the Hand of God, in all
Events of this Kind, when we lay our Lives at the Mercy of impious Wretches,
who do not only seem to have no Reverence for, or Regard to God, but live in
open Contempt and Defiance of his Majesty, and are much more like to draw down
a Curse by their Profaneness and Irreligion, than to give us any reasonable
Prospect of a Blessing upon their Undertakings.

SECT. VIII. Prayer for Health, and a Blessing upon the Means of it, ought to
be reckoned among the Preservatives.
IT is a Blessing worth asking for; to neglect this, is in Effect to say, We
will be well, whether God will or no. If to do nothing but pray toward Health
is ridiculous, -- Alitur vitium, vivitque, tegendo; Dum medicas adhibere manus
ad vulnera pastor Abnegat, and meliora Deos sedet omina poscen^.

Virg.


not to do it at all is impious. An Heathen would not place his God in such a
Rank of Insignificancy. Should we not go to the great Physician? Has he not
called himself our Physician? I am the Lord that heals. That Health that
could not be commanded by Power, nor bought with Riches, nor conveyed by
Physic, has been often fetched down by Prayer. The effectual fervent Prayer of
the righteous Man has availed much, to save the Sick, and preserve the Well.

Nor let it be thought an Errand too mean to come to Christ upon. For it is in
a Manner as valuable as our daily Bread, which we are commanded as daily to ask
for as to work for. Let a Man's Trade or Estate be what it will, still he must
say, Give us this Day our daily Bread. It Is God's Gift, by whatever Hand it
comes. Daily Bread would not be worth asking for, if it were only to feed
Misery, and nourish Distempers. Many had never come to Christ at all, while he
was upon Earth, if their Diseases had not brought them; and when they did come,
they carried away a Cure for Soul and Body at the same Time.

But while we pray for Health, let us not destroy both that and our Prayers by
throwing it away in the Manner of our Living. Diogenes had Reason to laugh at
those who came and offered Sacrifice for Health, and at the same Time sed so
intemperately upon the Sacrifices, that they eat and drank away the Health they
were offered for. Thuein men toi. Theois uper Ugieias, en autee de tee Thusia
kata tees Ugieias deipnein. Laert. l. 6.
This is the Case of saying Grace over a spread Table, that is turned to a
Debauch. A Man may with equal Sense pray to be invulnerable. You pray for
Health and Vigor, says Persius, laughing, Why it is a Jest! this Array of
Dishes, this Luxury, will not suffer it, if Jupiter himself were never so much
inclined. Poscis opem nervis, corpusque fidele senectae: Esto, age; sed grandes
patinae, tucetaque cras^a Annuere his superos vetuere, Jovemque morantur.

Pers. Sat.




CONCLUSION.
THUS have I gone through this Subject of Health. My chief Design in it was to
increase our Value for the Blessing, to direct how to avoid the Sins of it, and
to assist toward the best Improvement of it, in the Duties that belong to it.
Above all, that we lose not so happy an Opportunity as a Time of Health, to
secure Blessings that are beyond even Health it self; eternal Health and
Pleasure, both of Body and Mind!

If any say that some Persons, who practice all these Things we call
Preservatives, do yet sicken and die as well as others, and some that mind none
of them are healthful: I answer;

We have all along allowed for Cases of Reserve in the Divine Providence, which
often overrules even the most natural Connexions and Tendencies, and disposes
them in a Method beside and above the Discourses of Men's Reason.

The same Observation may be made on those Preservatives that are purely
Medicinal. They themselves do not always reach the Intention, and answer the
Design. It is not the Pretense either of Divinity or Medicine, to give
Immortality to Men in this Life, though the Prescriptions of both may have a
Tendency to Health and Welfare.

Some, who mind all these Preservatives, sicken and die! Granted; but so do
they who eat and drink, exercise and change the Air, and use the best Physic;
and yet, who ever denied those to be Preservatives of Health and Life? Food,
Physic, Exercise, and Air, will be Means of Health to the End of the World; and
yet it is appointed for Men once to die, and it is appointed to Man to use these
Means of Life and Health. They are both appointed.

I have endeavored to make this Subject as practical as I could, and to order
the Matter so, as to make the Thoughts about bodily Health, as useful as I
could to the Prosperity of the better Part. I shall close all with three Words.

Take Care of your Health, since it is so valuable. Make the most of it, since
it is so uncertain and frail. Long, pray for, and endeavor the ensuring of
that State and World, where there is Health without Sickness! Eternal Health,
without the least Shadow of Death.

1. Take Care of it, since it is so valuable.

If the Display of the Value and Blessing of Health shall make Men a little
more careful of it, and more thankful for it, and more useful with it; it will
add something to the Benefit and Advantage of Mankind, and the Glory of God;
the only Purposes of Life, that can give a true Relish to our Being.

Think of the Miseries of Sickness once more, and if you remember what passed
when you were ill your selves, or have observed how it is in those that are so.
What Confinement, what Closeness! how far, how quickly removed from Business
and Pleasures the Heart before was set upon. A Man is dead to the World, before
he dies out of it. Those very Senses which before took in all their Delight,
are now the Inlets of Sadness and Offense. The Sight of his Medicine is
ungrateful to the Eye. So is the Smell of his Meat. The Taste is lost to
Delight, or only subsists to be tormented with nauseous Draughts. The least
Noise wounds his Ear, the least Air pierces him. Dr. Harris.
It turns his Comforts into Crosses. His Bed tires him, his Chair troubles him;
Friends disquiet him if present, and offend him if absent; their Silence or
Discourse, their Mirth or Sorrow, alike disturb; being uneasy himself, every
thing about him is so. Poor Man! something he would have, and cannot tell what;
he is not well himself, and nothing about him is so.

Consider farther the Difficulty of Recovery, with the Hazards and Uncertainty
of Physic.

It is a very easy Matter to lose our Health, but not so to recover it. However
useful Physic is, it is not infallible. It must be used, but may not be depended
upon. It Is greatest Masters have called it Hipp. Aph.. 9.
a conjectural Art, and such as neither Conjecture nor Experience can always
make successful. The Number of Diseases is prodigious, and yet every single one
is enough for the Study of a Man's Life. The Variation of Symptoms of the same
Diseases, at different Times and Ages; the Hazard in the Quality, Goodness, and
Composition of the Medicaments; the Difficulty of observing the due Proportion
in their Mixture, according to the Nature of the Disease, and the Circumstances
of the Subject; the Hazard of promoting one Mischief by remedying another; the
great Way round about the Medicine has to go, before it can reach the Case, or
the affected Part; the many Alterations of its Parts it must undergo, the many
Juices and Humors it must meet and mingle with; these are all likely to
disappoint the Intention of the best Prescriptions. To say nothing of the many
Differences among the most learned of the Faculty, nor of the sad Effects that
some Distempers leave behind them, though cured in the best Manner the World can
afford. These Things are enough to cure us of Ahoz' Distemper, of trusting to
the Physicians, Non est in medico semper relevetur ut aeger.
or of exposing our Health at any Time in Dependence upon the Art. These show
the Reason of representing AEsculapius's Staff full of Knots, to denote the
Difficulty of this Study.

2. Make the most of it, since it is so uncertain and frail.

Let us improve it to the best and most lasting Purposes; catch hold of it as
the Opportunity and Flower of Life; remembering that like a Flower it will
Wither and Decay. But to this I have said so much Chap. V.. 5. that I need add
no more.

3. Long and pray for that State and World, where there is all Health without
Sickness; eternal Health, without the least Disorder, or Shadow of Death.

When we consider that Sickness and Death is the way to this Health and Life,
it softens the Idea of Sickness, and abates the Terrors of Death. Sickness and
Death are themselves the surest Physic, and most infallible Cure. Under this
Notion they have been considered by wise and great Men. Socrates seemed to have
this Thought, when he bid his Friends, after he had drank the fatal Cup, to
sacrifice a Cock to AEsculapius; this being the usual Thank-Offering to that
God, from those who had recovered from Sickness, and were very well. It was as
much as to say. Now I am in a fair Way to perfect Recovery; I am just going to
be quite well, do my Honors to AEsculapius for the Health I am entering upon.
The pious Emperor Theodosius Third, with the same Design, ordered this one Word
only to be put upon his Tomb (Hygicia) Health; as much as to say, All is well;
now I am out of the Reach of Distemper, in that perfect Health, that is not to
be found in a dying World. We are willing to endure some painful Operations for
the Recovery of an uncertain Health, in this World; now Sickness and Death are
to be looked upon only as some painful Operation we are to go through, and then
all is well. The Head that is once crowned with Glory, shall never ach more.
The Eye that is once opened upon the beatific Vision, shall never weep more.
The Hand that has once laid hold of eternal Life, shall never tremble more.
Everlasting Health and Vigor, Youth, Life, and Prosperity, both of Soul and
Body, after a small Separation, belong to the Paradisaical Constitution, and
are the Properties of that Place where the Inhabitant shall not say I am sick,
for the People that dwell therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity. Isa. 33. 24.


THE END.

