THE FOLLY, INFAMY, AND MISERY OF UNLAWFUL PLEASURE. A SERMON Preached before
the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, May 25, 1760.

By JAMES FORDYCE, D.D.

BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, M.DCC.LXI

TO HIS GRACE CHARLES LORD CATHCART, HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND, MAY MDCCLX. THE FOLLOWING
DISCOURSE, PREACHED BEFORE HIS GRACE, AND PUBLISHED AT HIS DESIRE, IS, IN
TESTIMONY OF THAT ESTEEM, WHICH IS DUE TO DISTINGUISHED VIRTUE, AND OF THAT
GRATITUDE, WHICH PECULIAR OBLIGATIONS CLAIM, MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY
JAMES FORDYCE.

A SERMON
On PROVE. vii. 7. I looked, -- and beheld among the simple ones, I discerned
among the Youths, a young Man void of Understanding.


HAVING formed a variety of resolutions with regard to the subject on which I
should address you, my honored hearers, on this occasion; having found myself
dissatisfied with them all, for one reason or another; and having felt a
growing apprehension, that the very great respect to which this audience is
entitled, would not leave me sufficient recollection and presence of mind, to
explain myself in so easy, free, and natural a manner, upon a particular
argument that struck me; I at length determined, contrary to my first
intention, to read to you a discourse, which, I am afraid, may appear less
proper, but which, I am persuaded, cannot be deemed improper in an age of
domineering pleasure, like this; an age, that amidst many valuable improvements
in arts and sciences, and many high exertions of civil and military virtue,
which distinguish it, does still retain too much of that luxury and effeminacy,
which some serious writers, and many serious men, have ranked amongst its
characteristic features.

The very lively and affecting passage, of which our text is a part, I leave to
your attentive perusal, and pious reflection, when you go home. Let it suffice
to observe in the mean time, that it presents us with the most striking
picture, which perhaps is any where to be met with, of a young man ensnared by
the blandishments of an abandoned, but artful woman, into whose evening-walks
he had thrown himself, with a fatal purpose, as it should seem, to indulge the
impulse of his passions, under the covert of night, esteeming that the fittest
season for those works of darkness. The character which our divine
proverbialist gives of this unhappy youth, is strongly pointed, and merits our
particular attention: "I looked and beheld," says he, among the simple ones, I
discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding: a character,
which viewed in the connection wherein it stands, will, I doubt not, on a little
consideration, appear exceeding just. To prove it such, by entering into the
detail, and to apply it, as indeed it is but too applicable, to those young
persons of the present age, who are seduced into the purlieus of criminal
indulgence, and trained on by the enticements of evil communication, will, with
God's assistance, be the business of the following address. How happy should
the preacher account himself, if any thing that shall be suggested, might be
useful, by God's blessing, either to recover, were it but one youth, who has
been entangled by that wheedling, pernicious prostitute, called, by the world's
courtesy, Pleasure, or to guard the unexperienced and unwary part of this
congregation, who may be in danger from her deadly snares! Now I will endeavor
to demonstrate, that the young man, who gives himself over to voluptuousness,
is really void of understanding, inasmuch as he wants taste in what belongs to
genuine pleasure; sentiment in what relates to true glory; and prudence in
point of his most important interests.

I. I will show that he wants taste in what belongs to genuine pleasure, that
is, on the very subject which he pretends to understand best, and where he even
piques himself on the supposed superiority of his skill. Suffer me, my dear
hearer, whoever you are, whom this discourse does chiefly concern, to convince
you how much you are mistaken in your favorite system, by showing that the
uncontrolled gratification of your appetites deprives you of the very
satisfaction you aim at, robs you of a thousand delights of a much higher
relish, and exposes you to innumerable pains, which far overbalance the
pleasures you are so fond of.

1. I say that the unbridled pursuit of sensual enjoyments defeats its own
intention. Such is the wise and righteous appointment of providence, to deter
men from dishonouring their maker, and themselves, that excess of every kind,
and this especially, destroys the very end it seeks, hurts the body as well as
the mind, and disappoints the benevolent purposes of nature, by going beyond
them. I appeal, my friend, to your own experience: Do not you feel your
constitution impaired and dulled by a course of intemperance? Are you not
forced, if you will continue the chase you are engaged in, to spur your jaded
desires, by all the methods which fancy, variety, and a super-refined luxury
can furnish? These indeed may serve to inflame your passions, but, alas! the
more they are inflamed, the farther are they from being satisfied. New objects
may excite new propensions; but the diversity of the one does not keep pace
with the violence of the other. The rage of pleasure grows, but the sense of it
diminishes; till at last you do not so properly pursue it, as you are dragged
along by it. The attachment and liking to it are in a great measure soon over:
mere use and habit hurry you headlong. It is possible indeed you set out with
resolutions of restraining yourself within certain fancied bounds of sobriety
and prudence, of preserving a sort of economy and coolness, in the indulgence
of your inclinations. Have you adhered to these resolutions? Have you practiced
this self-command for any space of time? Is your bent to sinful gratifications
no stronger now, than when you first gave way to them? Can you still stop, when
and where you please? Can you say to the incroaching current of passion,
Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther? Ah the vanity and illusion that are
inseparable from sin, the self-deceit and folly of sinners! to think that they
can transgress with safety the boundaries of innocence, or answer for
themselves, that having once entered on the declivity of vice, they shall not
slide into a quicker and quicker progress, till at length they sink into all
"the superfluity of naughtiness."

Nothing more common than for the sons of intemperance to boast of their
reason, their refinement, their sentiments, and the like. But have they cause
to do so? Your brethren of the stall, and of the forest, eat, and drink, and
play, and gratify the appetites of nature, in due season, measure, and
proportion. Therefore they are well and happy, according to their rank. Thou
who art called a man, can not pretend to so much order and felicity.

The persons whose character I draw, are proud to style themselves Men of
pleasure. The world adopts the phrase, and bestows it on them freely: but I
aver they do not deserve this title. You are mere sensation-men; you are
strangers to sincere, to real pleasure. That consists in regularity, and dwells
with innocence alone. Figure a young man master of his passions, diligent in
business, or assiduous in study, smitten with the charms of truth, of
friendship, of virtue, of devotion, following their divine attraction through
the slippery paths of youth, and in due time entering, with judgment and
choice, into that honorable state, which heaven has ordained for the support
and comfort of mankind. Will those ungodly men, who forego the chaste and
heartfelt delights of this amiable connection for the bought smiles and
mercenary caresses of a harlot, "loveless, joyless, unendeared," pretend to
equal these latter to the former, or once to compare their lawless, restless,
selfish pursuits, to the tranquil, the virtuous, the generous joys of an union,
which, when wisely formed, is founded on esteem, supported with fidelity,
sanctified by faith, and sweetened by mutual sympathy, trusty and complacence?

2. I will not attempt to enumerate all the superior gratifications which are
forfeited by an irregular life: but surely this is a farther consideration
worthy your regard. Surely a sound mind in a healthful body, moderate desires,
and quiet passions, a spirit calm and clear, unobscured by the fumes of
intemperance, and undisturbed by the tumults of lust, peaceful and pleasant
reflections on a discreet and honorable conduct, manly, rational, and useful
conversation, the society, the applause, and the patronage of the best men, the
humble, yet triumphant hope of the friendship of God through every future
period, with all the solid and sublime consolations of devotion; surely these
are not things to be rashly renounced, or lightly esteemed. If you are so
unfortunate as to be a stranger to these things, will it follow that you may
boldly contemn, or neglect them? Because you are blind, will you take upon you
to say, that light is not sweet, or that it is not a pleasant thing for the
eyes to behold the sun? If these are not blessings, and blessings too of
inestimable value, why have they been so highly prized, so pathetically
recommended, so ardently sought, so diligently, zealously, and perseveringly
cultivated, by the learnedest, the wisest, and the greatest men of every age,
who have been ready to undertake any thing, to suffer any thing, to sacrifice
any thing, rather than forego these sweetest and noblest enjoyments? But I will
submit the question to yourself; let your own understanding judge whether the
enjoyments of the mind and of the heart do not bid fair to be the sweetest,
because the noblest. You are a man, and will you say, that the distinguishing
characteristic pleasures of a man, I mean, those of reason, of conscience, and
of affection, are not better, or more estimable, than the pleasures of an
animal, I mean, those of sense and appetite? What? will you give up at once,
even in speculation, all the dignity and superior excellence of your nature, in
order to justify to yourself the deplorable perversion of your taste? But in
vain do you labor to justify it even to yourself. There is, I know there is,
something within you, that takes part with uncorrupted nature, and reclaims
against the vile abuse. There is something within you, which tells you, at this
very moment, you are unhappy, in having forfeited those substantial and sacred
joys I lately mentioned, for I know not what fantastic, frivolous, and mean
indulgences. I refer the cause to your most intimate feelings. Have you not
often secretly sighed to think what you lost, when you lost your innocence?
When you look back on the lovely, joyous scenes of childhood and early youth,
before your mind was debauched and distempered by guilty pleasures, do you not
inwardly wish you could recall those blessed days, at least that you could
regain the peace and ease, and gaiety of heart you then possessed? When you see
other young persons of decent characters, and irreproachable morals, cheerful,
lively, healthy, satisfied in themselves, and beloved by all about them, do not
you envy their happy destiny, and feel on the comparison how miserable you are?
In such a view, do you not both despise and hate yourself at bottom, for the
folly and futility of your conduct?

I am sufficiently aware, that amidst your hours of giddy riot, in the circle
of your mad companions, you will be false enough to disguise any such feelings,
bold enough to deny even the deepest convictions of your soul, to boast what a
charming life you lead, and in the height of your pride to talk with pity of
the sons of virtue, as a set of poor, gloomy-minded creatures. And pray let us
hear wherein you have such mighty advantage over them? Why, you have the
pleasure of often getting drunk in the tavern, of frequently revelling in the
brothel, perhaps of violating and defiling the marriage bed, possibly of
seducing and ruining credulous innocence, probably of gaming away your own
fortune, credit, and peace, or those of others whom you call your friends; the
pleasure too, no doubt, of laughing at the laws of your country, at the
religion of your fathers, at those rules of decency and virtue which sober
Heathens themselves revere; at all serious men, nay at every body that will not
run with you into the same excess of riot; and, for aught I know, the pleasure
of directly blaspheming him that made you. Great God! what outrages against
nature, society, and thee, are daily committed by those, who bursting the
bounds thou have so wisely and mercifully set them, reverse the use of thy
creatures, disturb the order of thy world, and having done all they can to
deface and destroy the beauty of thy creation, both within and without them,
turn at last their impious fury on thy tremendous majesty! These, these are the
men, who talk so loud, and so big of pleasure, which they would wholly
appropriate to themselves, as if they alone enjoyed and understood it. But
however you may rave, Sirs, in your fits of delirium, we believe your hearts
suggest a different language, in your sober intervals; and sober intervals you
will and must have. A man cannot be always in the tavern, nor always in the
stews, nor always in company: and when he comes to himself, and is alone,
reason will reflect, and conscience will feel: And would such a man but speak
out his feelings, and his reflections, you would find them -- ah how sad! How
would you hear him reproach, if not curse himself, for the desperate madness of
sacrificing to the momentary, muddy, gross indulgences of a sensual life, which
consist chiefly of a violent agitation of the blood and spirits, which cloy the
fancy by repetition, pall more and more every day upon the senses, in short,
exhaust and weary the appetites instead of soothing and delighting them, and
are totally insignificant in seasons of weakness and distress; sacrificing to
these, I say, the pure, the masculine, the celestial, the immortal pleasures of
a wise and pious life; pleasures that never tire, that never fail, that never
decay, but, on the contrary, receive fresh luster, and growing improvement from
familiarity, from recollection, nay from accidents, from age, from affliction
itself. Are you conscious of no such uneasy feelings or reflections as these,
you, to whom I am particularly addressing myself on this occasion? If you are,
must you not confess, that the pains which accompany a course like yours,
though they were no other than those of the mind, do far overbalance the
pleasures you are so fond of? That was,

3. Our next consideration; and you will give me leave to insist upon it, as a
point of great importance in this argument. You will give me leave to ask you
in sober sadness, as a sincere wellwisher of yours, that would willingly set
you right in what highly concerns you, whether even in the hurry of your
unhallowed pursuits, you find that satisfaction and self-complacence you are so
apt to boast of; whether you do not perceive at certain moments some inward
monitor whispering to you, Do not this great evil, and sin against God,
pleading with you to have mercy upon your own soul, pointing out your danger,
and, like an angel with a drawn sword placed across your way, striving to stop
you in your wild career? Do not these remonstrances, though insufficient, it
seems, to answer that end, give you however very disagreeable checks, which
lessen greatly the gratification you expected? Do not those gratifications,
when you think you have them, and hold them fast, vanish in an instant from
your eager grasp, and leave nothing but a cloud behind them? I am mistaken in
this last particular; it were well if they left nothing more, if they proved at
worst but airy phantoms, that amused for a little, disappeared, and were
forgotten. Confess you who best know, what disgusts attend the disappointment;
what satiety, what bitterness, what vexations follow; what cutting remorses for
the past, what fearful forebodings for the future, what secret horrors of
conscious guilt do then haunt you, flashing like so many specter on your
fancy, whilst all is dark, dark, and desolate within you. What say you, my
friends? do you deny it? If you do, then tell us, what mean that restlessness
and uneasiness you so often betray on the back of your debauches? Why do you
not sit down and review, with serenity and inward approbation, the part you
have acted? Why do you shun retirement, and self-inspection? What makes you fly
from yourselves, and your own thoughts, to company, to diversion, to noise, to
dissipation of every kind? What is it you want to lose there? Lay your hands
upon your hearts, and answer honestly. Is it not the severe remembrance of your
crimes and disorders, which you wish to shake off by that expedient? You know
it is. And will any man in earnest affirm, that those indulgences deserve the
honorable name of pleasure, which cannot bear to be calmly reflected on, which
reason will not approve, and on which conscience refuses to bestow her sacred
sanction?

What shall I say farther on this head, or how paint the train of mischiefs,
and of furies that follow the wicked enchantress, whose hollowness and
worthlessness I am endeavoring to expose? What shall I say of those diseases,
that rottenness, those tortures, which her deluded votaries, often suffer in
their bodies; those perplexities, that (...), those jealousies, that envy,
those resentments, (...) almost always tear in pieces their minds; with the
(...) caprices, reproaches, insolence, and imprecations, which they must often
swallow (...) wretched creatures, who are their accomplices in vice; (...) with
the sweet innocence and charming modesty that become their sex, have laid aside
its delicacy, its softness, and all its gentlest graces; What shall I say of
the self-accusation that dissolute men must needs feel on account of the
foolish and fruitless expen^^^ in which a life of this kind does unavoidably
involve them, from the endless inconveniences they draw upon themselves; from
the desperate courses to which they are often driven, in order to support their
prodigality, or to repair the ruins of a broken fortune; from the complicated
distress they bring upon their parents, families, and friends, which cannot but
recoil upon themselves, if they have any sparks of ingenuity remaining; and,
finally, from the challenges, the censures, and the infamy they inevitably
incur by a behavior so blameable, and so base? Suffice it to have just
mentioned these particulars, without entering into a minute description of
them; the reverence I feel for the virtuous part of this auditory forbids me to
pain them by dwelling on scenes that are too shocking. But the last mentioned
particular leads me to the second point, which was,

II. To show that persons of the character now under consideration, are void of
understanding, in as much as they want sentiments of true glory. I do not say,
that they hove lost all inward sense of honor and disgrace. I am persuaded the
number of those who are so perfectly hardened and flagitious, is in comparison
but small. Conscience may be shamefully suppressed and overlaid. It often is.
But I do hope, it is seldom, very seldom quite subdued, or extinguished. In
some wretches who are manifestly given up of just heaven to a reprobate mind,
to work all uncleanness with greediness, it may be seared as with a hot iron,
so as to be past feeling. But I (...) again; such total insensibility, such
calousness of (...) probably very rare. With regard to the generality of
sensualists it may (...), that they have not hitherto been able to over (...)
wholly, whatever they may pretend, that internal perception of praise and of
blame, which is so deeply inwrought in the human mind. I need not tell you, for
what wise and excellent purposes it was given. They are abundantly apparent.
Nevertheless it may be asked with respect to those unhappy men in too many
instances, Were they ashamed, when they committed abomination? They were not
ashamed, neither did they blush. They have hardened their faces as flint; they
declare their sin as Sodom; they even glory in their shame. Doubtless it
requires some time thus far to conquer the modesty of nature. But the sad
conquest may be gained.

A young man enters into forbidden paths with a trembling step. The principles
of his creation shrink back from the horrors of vice. He reddens at the thought
of his first deviation from virtue. He yet reveres that heavenly form. He
starts at the appearance of her worthless rival. But "beguiled by her much fair
speech," to use the style of our inspired author, impelled by the desire of
what is prohibited, instigated very probably by evil companions who have got
before him, betrayed by the deceitfulness of his heart, working on the
simplicity of his youth, he ventures forward, he is led on insensibly, his
appetites take fire as he advances, his sense of right and wrong becomes less
quick and urgent, conscience is but little heard, and less regarded, amidst the
tumult of company, and the clamor of the passions. Its admonitions and
reprimands proving officious and troublesome, as they naturally will do in this
situation, meet at length with such unkind reception, and violent opposition,
that, in many cases, where it was wont to raise its awful voice, it ceases very
much "to be a reprover." The Siren song of false pleasure, that "prophesies
smoother things," it listened to with greedy attention. The most corrupt and
corrupting maxims are collected from every quarter, received with admiration,
and entertained with transport. Every witling; that can break a miserable jest
on revelation and its friends, is sure of audience and applause. Those
execrable books that are calculated to inflame and pollute the imagination, and
which are the dishonor and the pest of the age, with what curiosity are they
sought, with what rapture perused? Such writings of the infidel tribe, as
contain the most audacious sarcasms against whatever is serious and sober, and
tend most directly to subvert the foundations of all religion and morality, are
cried up as the very quintessence of wit and humor, and the only standards of
ingenious controversy, and fine composition. Is it any wonder, if the poor
youth I have described is by this time intoxicated with the cup of folly,
administered to him by so many bands: if he grows bold in wickedness; if from
walking in the counsel of ungodly men, and standing in the way of sinners, he
proceeds at last to sit in the chair of the scornful, to erect himself into the
boasted character of a freethinker, to laugh amongst his compeers at religion,
and law, and decency itself, to represent those who retain and testify a regard
for these, as dastardly, low, and little souls, shackled by the prejudices of
education, controlled by the craft of politicians, overreached by the tricks,
and overawed by the terrors of priests, and, finally, to applaud himself, and
his companions, as the only men of spirit and vivacity, who have gloriously
broke asunder those vulgar bands, and asserted the original privileges of
nature? Deluded man! how little cause you have for all this vaunting? pray
consider, and say in sad truth, whether you deserve so much praise for a
behavior that degrades your nature, destroys your usefulness, injures your
neighbor, dishonours your maker, contradicts the judgment and practice of all
the wise and good, and counteracts the conviction of your own mind. I say,

1. That your behavior degrades your nature. You talk of asserting her
original privileges. But can you seriously believe that the proper rights of a
reasonable being consist in acting against reason, that heaven-descended
principle, which raises a man above a brute? Did your kind creator make you
wiser than the beasts of the field, and teach you more knowledge than the fowls
of heaven only that you might have it in your power to sink yourself to their
level, or rather beneath it? Did he render you capable of the pleasures of
knowledge, of goodness, of piety, only that you might have an opportunity of
preferring the pleasures of sense and passion? Did he form you for another
world, that you might show the bravery of neglecting it, and the hardiness of
sacrificing immortal perfection and happiness to a little present, passing
gratification? I always thought that the voice of honor called men upward,
taught them to aspire, promted them to raise their fame by doing something
great and excellent, and, if possible, above their station, rather than below
it. But you it seems, would have us to believe it nobler to descend, and hold
it better to live and die, like a beast, than to climb the ascent of thought
and virtue, and by behaving like a man to become in due time like an anqel.
When you have thus debased and embruted every divine faculty, will you still
lay claim, and on that very account perhaps, to reason, to refinement, to
superiority of sentiment? What inconsistency, what extravagance is here? But
again,

2. Let me remind you, that, by being devoted to sensuality, you destroy your
usefulness and significance in life. Your constitution is weakened, if not
ruined; your spirit is enervated, if not dissolved, and lost for ever; the
native vigor and sprightliness of youth are melted down, and absorbed in
debauchery. That generous ambition, which, beyond any thing on earth, incites
to worthy deeds, is extinguished in low and inglorious indulgences. Study has
little relish: business is a burden; application of every kind is
insupportable; all is dissipation, debility, indolence, trifling; nothing
manly, firm, or resolved remains. Is this the road to real honor? But farther,

3. By persevering in such a course, you cannot fail to be injurious, as well
as useless to mankind. You are injurious by being useless. Society has a claim
on every man: it is entitled to the labor of his head, or of his hands, or
both: He is bound to benefit others by his good offices, and to edify them by
his good example. Therefore you would be unjust to the world, were you barely
to shut yourself up from its intercourse, and to neglect its interests. But if,
living in it, you act in such a manner, as directly to hurt these interests,
and turn that intercourse into an occasion of corruption to those you converse
with, are you not guilty of a double injury? You not only do no good: you do
much harm. You not only deprive the public, and your friends, of that exertion
of your powers, and improvement of your opportunities, for the satisfaction and
advantage of both, which they have a right to expect, but which are either
wholly obstructed, or greatly hindered by a disorderly life: you make yourself
a downright nuisance in society, a daily offense to virtuous men, and a
stumbling block to the weak and unwary: you spread infection amongst your
neighbors and acquaintance, the worst and deadliest kind of infection. A man
that brings the plague with him, is not half so dangerous. The contagion you
propagate kills the souls, as well as the bodies of those it seizes.

But who can describe the misery you cause to those, with whom you are most
nearly connected, and to whom, under God, you owe the greatest obligations? For
aught I know, you are born of a respectable and worthy family, the heir of a
plentiful, perhaps of a noble fortune; and when you came into the world, it is
very probable, your rejoicing parents blessed that bounteous providence, which
gave them a man-child, and said to each other, This one shall comfort us, shall
be the ornament, the pride, and the stay of our house, and shall solace us
amidst the infirmaties of age. They watched over your infant years, with
inexpressible tenderness and care. As you grew in stature, you seemed to grow
in wisdom. They marked with joy and exultation the opening buds of sense, and
ingenuity, and worth. They boasted of your hopeful appearance, and pretty
sayings to all about them, who naturally congratulated them on the pleasing
occasion. They spared no pains, they grudged no expense, to form you, as you
advanced, to every quality and accomplishment, that might become your birth,
adorn your station, grace your family, delight your friends, and ensure,
through the divine blessing, your future utility, reputation and happiness. It
may be that, for some time, you repaid their parential affection and labors,
with the strictest duty and the fairest improvements, by which you still added
to their hopes. Gracious Lord! how did their hearts heave with the biggest
emotions of gratitude to thee, and their eyes overflow with tears of
unutterable gladness, whilst they beheld that young man in those auspicious
days, setting out in the paths of glory, with an ardour that promised the
happiest progress in his after course! I would willingly suppress the sequel,
but in vain. Yet I need not speak it. The cruel, the killing disappointment I
refer to in general, is already present to every imagination, and deeply felt
by every sensible nature in this assembly. Happy those parents, happy beyond
the reach of language, who know not, by their personal experience, what such a
disappointment imports! -- But is it nothing to you, my young hearers, whom
this description may answer; is it nothing to you to be a calamity to your
father, "the heaviness of your mother," and the ungracious author of so much
shame and grief to both, as will probably bring down their gray hairs with
sorrow to the grave, if they have not already done it? Is this the way to
reputation? Can you support the idea of such aggravated guilt?

4. You dishonor your parent in heaven, the great original and end of your
being, and of all its capacities and opportunities, whether for improvement or
pleasure. Can you forget him; forget him, did I say? Can you disobey his laws,
despise his power, even insult that majesty, whom angels worship with
profoundest awe? Can you treat what belongs to him, or bears the stamp of his
authority, with scorn and ridicule? Can you alienate those affections and
faculties, which he gave you for the purposes of piety and wisdom; habitually
alienate these from their glorious destination, and pervert them to the
foolish, nay the vilest pursuits? Once more: Can you quench that ray of
divinity within you, which came from heaven, and was intended to raise you
thither; can you quench it in the mire of sensual indulgence, and extinguish
the desires of immortality, that your maker kindled in your bosom, by such
disorders, as render it your interest to die like the beasts that perish, and
to mingle for ever with the clods of the valley? Can you do these things, and
by your conversation and example teach others to do them, and not be guilty of
horrible ingratitude, depravation, baseness? And will you yet tell us of your
sense and yet style yourself a Man of honor? What abuse of language! Shall I
mention after this,

5. The striking opposition between your conduct, and the sentiments,
dispositions and deportment of all the wise and good men that have ever
existed? Need I go about to prove what is so exceeding palpable; or will you
have the effrontery to affirm, that these have all been deceived, and blinded,
from the beginning to this day; that all the worth and sense the world has
ascribed to them, have been merely imaginary; that how much soever those
amongst them who have been, or now are, most eminent in the opinion of the
public, may have thought, or discoursed, or argued, or writ, in favor of
virtue and religion, they have never been able to establish their reality and
excellence, or to demonstrate, that there is any higher good than pleasure, the
pleasure of the senses, and of the fancy; in a word, that those who have been,
or now are the lights of the world, and the ornaments of humanity, deserve no
better character than that of a company of poor, prejudiced, deluded people,
the children of ignorance, and the dupes of superstition? And will you venture
to aver, that a set of men, whom you call Men of pleasure, whom we call
Infidels, Libertines, Profligates, the Refuse and Dregs of nature, the Scourges
and Plagues of mankind, the avowed Enemies of God and goodness; that these
abandoned men of pleasure, with their mean and miserable adherents, who follow
them at some distance, licking up their spittle, and laboring to overtake
them; I mean, many an unfortunate youth, but lately initiated in the mysteries
of iniquity; that these, I say, are the only persons, who have learnt to think,
and speak, and act properly, with true spirit, manhood, and sagacity. Oh! my
brethren, to what a pitch of frenzy human beings are capable of arriving, when
they can thus call evil good, and good evil, put light for darkness, and
darkness for light, and dignify with titles of fame and glory opinions and
actions the most infamous! But this species of frenzy, like most others, has
its iuced moments, and, as we hinted before, there are sober moods every now
and then recurring, when reason breaking loose from the restraint and force
which obstructed its operation, will rebound upon the sinner with double
vengeance, by means of that elasticity which belongs to it. He may strive to
bury and extinguish under the load of intemperance the fire of conscience: but
that, like embars raked up under ashes, will burst out at times, and burn up
all the hay and stubble of his vain and false confidence, and show him by its
piercing light that he counteracts the conviction of his own Mind, which was,

6. The last particular on this head. The next morning, for instance, after a
debauch, when you are once more alone, and the fumes of the former night's
intemperance are evaporated, can you look back on the scene with calm
exultation, and conscious pride? Do you really think the better of yourself for
such "revelling and drunkenness," such "chambering and wantonness;" for
mingling with prodigals, with debauchees, with gamesters, with harlots, and
such like creatures, the very off-scourings of the world? Do you indeed esteem
it creditable to have these for your companions? Would you have been glad to be
found among them by a virtuous relation; or that any decent person of your
acquaintance should have detected you sharing in their "works of darkness?" I
trow not. Why not? Why shun the light of day, and the eye of virtue? If your
works are truly honorable, why be afraid lest they should be made manifest?
What is the reason that you "love darkness rather than light," if you are not
inwardly convinced, that "your deeds are evil," and cannot bear the awful
glance of wisdom, nor the sacred inspection of the laws? For shame; a
reasonable being obliged to court the twilight, to fly, like a bird of
darkness, from the face of the sun, and, like the midnight plunderer, to hide
his guilty visage under the mask of secrecy. Can you stand the comparison? Do
you not blush at the thought? Do you not feel yourself little and despicable at
this moment? Are you not overawed by the superior presence of every worthy
person you behold in this house? Are you not sensible, that you are -- a slave,
a very slave, the worst of all slaves, and must remain such, so long as you
continue to "serve diverse lusts and pleasures," which say to you, Go, and you
go; Come, and you come; Do this, and you do it; leaving you no settled rest
from the dreadful drudgery, no generous, free, delightful command of yourself,
but using you like a beast of burden, driving and hurrying you along through
all the joyless, jading ways of vice and folly?

If through the repugnance of reason not yet wholly broke, or the languors of
sickness, or the restraints of disease, or the remonstrances of friendship, or
some other happy bar thrown in your road by a merciful providence, you stop a
little in the path of destruction, take time to cast your eye back, to reflect
on your conduct, and attend to its consequences, if persisted in, how are you
shocked at the horrid spectacle? What indignation against yourself arises
within you? What abhorrence of your base accomplices? What resolutions to
relinquish them for ever, and associate thenceforth with virtuous men? Then, in
fine, you see, with a mixture of confusion and horror, all the deformity and
infamy of false pleasure, and can enter with full conviction into the meaning
of those pointed words, What fruit had you in those things, whereof you are now
ashamed? I will suppose these salutary sentiments to continue a while, and your
purposes of reformation to keep pace with them; tell me, whether in such a
serious conjuncture, and such, I doubt not, you have experienced (the case is
not uncommon: I have known those that have been in it: they confessed the
truth), tell me, I say, whether you did not then perceive a certain dignity of
thought, a certain internal elevation above your former self, which even
surprised you, and told you that purity, purity alone was proportioned to your
frame, that it alone, under God, could restore your original greatness, and
preserve you from sinking into your wonted debasement. If after all these sober
counsels, and those secret dawnings of peace and joy, you have suffered your
self to fall into the mire again, and plunge perhaps deeper than ever, as
though you had only returned a little to make your run more bold and violent,
what fresh dishonor, as well as guilt and sorrow, must you be conscious of
incurring? and will you yet boast of the glory of your course, and give the lie
to your own heart, by vaunting that you, and such as you, are alone entitled to
the praise of fortitude and freedom? Blessed maker! what a distracted creature
is a young man abandoned to voluptuousness! Whatever he may pretend, he is
destitute of sentiment in what relates to true glory, no less than of taste in
what belongs to genuine pleasure. But he is equally devoid of prudence, as to
his most important interests; which was,

III. The last point I proposed, as the finishing proof of his being void of
understanding. This indeed is at first sight so very plain a point, that it
needs little more than to be proposed. The persons we are at present concerned
with will not dispute, that the course they follow is not in general the road
to wealth. They will allow that the votaries of pleasure must often be content
to sacrifice their fortunes on her altar; and frequently they even pique
themselves on nobly despising, as they are pleased to express it, the sordid
considerations of gain and credit, when these would interfere with their more
elegant gratifications. Now I will not say that those considerations are of
such value, as to merit being preferred to all others, or made your principal
objects. No: I would rather remind you, that you were formed for much greater
ones, and that the real prosperity of a man's life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses, but in obtaining the proper ends
of it, which are nothing less than the glorifying God, the benefiting men, and
the bettering his own immortal spirit. But I would remind you at the same time,
that, in subordination and subserviency to these, reputation and success in
business, a decent competency, or, if it so please God, an honorable affluence
in life, are very valuable objects, and very worthy of a wise man's attention.
I say, they are so in a secondary view. In such a view, there is nothing
better, says the preacher from the throne, than for a man to eat and drink,
and make his soul enjoy good in his labor: this is from the hand of God. The
same great person mentions it as an encouragement to the study of wisdom, or
the practice of religion, that length of days is in her right hand, and in her
left hand riches "and honor." We are likewise assured by a christian apostle,
that godliness is profitable for all things, having the promise of the life
that now is, as well as of "that which is to come." In short, we are warranted
to affirm, that wealth well gotten, enjoyed with gratitude, sense, and
moderation, improved in works of piety, friendship, and beneficence, is an
important blessing, adds greatly to a man's comfort and consequence here, and
will hereafter prove so much treasure laid up in heaven. May we not conclude
then, that those who call themselves Men of pleasure are fools, when they laugh
at men of business, or speak with derision of the virtuous gentleman, the
honest citizen, or the industrious farmer, as a set of low, plodding, drudging
characters, that know nothing of the value or enjoyment of life? What will
those arrogant men say, if poverty should come upon them like an armed man,
with all the evils it brings along with it, to such, especially, as never felt
its gripe before? How will you be able to bear it, ye sons of softness; you
that have lived in pleasure, and nourished your hearts as in a day of
slaughter? With what accumulated weight will it fall on you, whose bodies and
minds have been enfeebled and pampered with intemperance and sloth? With what
consternation, distraction, despair will it overwhelm you? How will you that
are strangers to habits of prudence and application, who perhaps were never
possessed, or not thoroughly possessed, of any one useful art or talent for
business, who probably have offended highly your best friends, and lost every
degree of credit and estimation among the sober part of mankind; how will you
be capable of struggling with adversity, and rescuing yourselves from it? If
disease brought upon you by your disorders should add its pressure to all the
rest, what will you then do? What resource then find under consumption of body,
joined with consumption of fortune, sharpened by so many attendant calamities;
and, pray remember, rendered intolerable by anguish of mind, the remorses, the
horrors, the hideous images of misery past, present, and to come, that will
rush like an host of enraged enemies upon your tortured breast? Oh terrible!

I asked just now, what resource you will find amidst this combination of woes?
I think of one, one dreadful resource. Nature shudders at the black idea. You
can imagine what I mean. You have heard, I question not, the horrible system
proposed, and pleaded for, at your nocturnal orgies. In those hours of madness
perhaps you have applauded its patrons, studied their desperate arguments, and
at last adopted an opinion, which in a christian land must appear to men in
their wits shocking to humanity, dismal as hell, and daring as its fiercest
fiends. This resource those fiends, who sport with human wretchedness, have
certainly contrived, to make their prey, in such cases, more sure and speedy.
May the merciful father forbid, you should ever fly to that fatal refuge! What
a refuge for an immortal being, to plunge himself with his own hands into the
depth of damnation, in order to elude his incumbent misery!

But let us turn from the dismal picture, and suppose in the next place, that a
young man addicted to voluptuousness escapes the mischiefs which often overtake
his brethren in iniquity, arising from a dissipated fortune, a broken
reputation, incensed relations, and a ruined constitution; that he spins out a
long life in a state of external ease and indulgence, amongst a set of people
attached to him from different causes, perhaps fond of him for his parts, his
politeness, his vivacity, or his natural goodness of temper, and that he makes
shift to suppress, as much as possible, the painful convictions of a
self-condemning mind; need I tell him, that old age will come at last with its
unavoidable decrepitude and frailties, and these not the less surely for the
freedoms he now uses with his health? This he cannot but know, however he may
contrive to overlook it. And when those days of darkness overtake him, which
will very probably be many, if a distemper or an accident does not suddenly
snap asunder his weakened thread; when he is made "to inherit," as the
scripture speaks, "the sins of his youth," and when through the surrounding
gloom he reviews a life lost in dissipation, and prostituted to sensuality, his
talents by which he might have honored God, and profited men, partly
neglected, and partly abused, the remonstrances of his friends, the principles
of his education, the powerful checks of his own mind, the calls of religion,
the warnings of providence, the secret workings of God within him, generously
intended for his recovery to virtue, all these slighted and opposed; how will
he bear such reflections as the following? Now my inglorious and criminal course
draws near an end; what have I gained by it? A few hours or days of giddy
amusement, and guilty pleasure, often dashed with inward disgust and
bitterness, always interrupted with long and tedious intervals of insipidity,
languor, and dejection, at best with scenes of labored mirth, and forced
laughter, that left my heart, as they found it, heavy and sad. I have gained
too the boisterous applause of worthless and witless men, like myself, for
casting in my lot with them, and participating in their impiety and
debaucheries. I have gained -- nothing more. And what have I lost? What have I
not lost? My innocence, my honor, my character, my peace of mind, the favor
of my maker, the intellectual, the moral, the domestic, the divine joys, that
sweeten and dignify existence. I have lost whatever was worth living for. I
have lost -- my soul. The path I have trod has been marked all along with
folly, and vanity, and vexation. A few steps more, and it will land me -- where
-- in the place of weeping, where that wretched sensualist lift up his eyes to
heaven in vain. For new, alas! it is too late to offer the great Almighty the
dregs of a dissolute, polluted life, or attempt to vanquish those inveterate
habits, which have enslaved my soul, and taken away my heart. In this mournful
period, who, do you think, my brethren, will appear to the man I pant, truly
prudent, and truly wise? The boastful votary of pleasure, or the humble
worshipper of God? But

Once more. Let us follow the unhappy man a little further. Let us figure him
at last laid upon the bed of death, bidding adieu to his sorrowful friends, if
any friends he has, rolling his despairing eyes on every side. He looks back:
his ill-spent youth, and the whole tract of his life past, presents nothing to
his view, but one wild waste. He looks forward; all, all is woe unutterable. He
receives the sentence of death within himself. Nothing now remains but a
fearful looking for of wrath and fiery indignation to consume him. I fancy I
see the poor creature just about to shoot the irremeable gulf of death, that
death he used to talk of with such an affectation of superior indifference. Oh
the shudderings, the strong reluctance, the unimaginable convulsions that seize
his nature, as he stands lingering on the tremendous precipice! He wishes for
annihilation, which he often tried to believe in, but could never seriously be
convinced of. The dreadful alternative entirely misgives him. He meditates the
devouring abyss of eternity. He recoils, as he eyes it. Alas! alas! how he
struggles for life! Impotent efforts all. The resistless decree is gone forth.
He sinks in final despair. The blackness of darkness closes round him. He
feels himself undone, without one ray of hope. -- Is this the man, that laughed
the children of wisdom and temperance to scorn; that admired, extolled, and
imitated sensualists and sots? Is he of the same opinion, think ye, at the
last? Ah, how different his sentiments and language in the bower of pleasure,
and on the bed of death!

Did you ever visit a dying voluptuary? Did you ask him, what were his
sensations then? -- How do you feel, Sir, in the view of your approaching end?
Do you still approve of a voluptuous life? Would you now recommend it to those
about you? Would you lead it again yourself, could health and vigor be
restored? How such questions would pain and pierce him! If he uttered his real
apprehensions, with what pathetic, solemn, melting, death-inspired eloquence,
would he then express his perfect detestation of the party he had chosen; would
he then declare his heart-rending remorse on that account; would he then
pronounce those young persons only wise, who remembered their creator in the
days of their youth; would he then admonish and conjure his companions and
friends to fly the paths of unlawful pleasure, and betake themselves without a
moment's delay to the ways of wisdom and virtue! -- Men may live fools, but
fools they cannot die.

Would it be reckoned an unseasonable digression from the subject, or an
insupportable addition to this discourse, were I now at last to address myself
to those who have more immediately committed to them the care of youth, and to
my younger brethren of the clergy who are present?

1. To parents, teachers, tutors, guardians, and masters of families. Allow me,
my friends, to call on you, with all the concern and solemnity which the
importance of the case demands, to watch over your respective charges, as those
that watch for immortal souls. To do so is not the business of the ministers of
religion alone. Think, oh think! of what value and consequence so many young
minds must naturally be. Think how much will necessarily depend to them, to
you, to society, to religion, on the turn they shall take betimes. Think what
risks they run of taking a bad one, in so ensnaring an age, especially a fatal
bias to licentious pleasure. Guard them on that side with particular vigilance.
Be peculiarly sollicitous about the books they read, the company they keep, and
the friendships they form. What effects these will have upon them, it is easy
to imagine; and should you neglect them with regard to these, is there not
reason to fear, that all your best instructions and wisest monitions will be of
little avail? They will but too readily contract a fondness (...) such ^^ings*
such conversation, and such intimacies, as will sooth and nourish their
youthful passions those very passions, which you should endeavor to correct
and moderate. Need I inform you, how delicate a task that is, and what
judicious attention it will require to prevent or check the irregular fallies
of young spirits, without disgusting or depressing them? A form of pleasure
must needs be exhibited; something to charm their imaginations, something to
captivate their hearts. The worthier and nobler sensibilities of nature must be
indulged and cultivated. A feeling of true honor, the love of virtuous praise,
the admiration of moral beauty, the amiable reciprocations of a refined and
generous friendship, the sweet sympathies of natural affection, and domestic
union, all these must be recommended and encouraged.

Above all the rest, a sense of religion must be strongly inculcated, as that
alone can be the groundwork of every virtue, no less than its highest
finishing. But take care how you proceed in your attempts to enforce this
divine principle. Beware lest you damp or overlay the minds you desire to
profit. Be sure you set forth religion in all her native smiles and graces. Let
her never wear, in your discourse, or manners, a forbidding countenance. That
were to disguise, to misrepresent the angel, to do her infinite wrong, and
those under your inspection an irreparable injury. Should you frighten them
away from piety by making them fancy its spirit gloomy, or feel its exercises,
burdensome, they will conceive such an aversion to it, as you will never be
able to conquer. Whereas if you convince them by all the arts which prudence
can prompt, or sweetness suggest, that there is nothing so beautiful as the
character of true goodness, nothing so delightful as its practice, and show
them in your own temper and behavior its happy and ornamental influence; you
will, by the blessing of the Most High, which you will ever impore, inspire
them with the love of that heavenly power. And when that heavenly power has
taken full possession of their souls, where is the phantom of false delight,
that can have force to seduce and detain them?

Expect not however to see them perfect, or established all at once. Require
not too much from their tender years. Make candid allowances for the gaity, the
giddiness, and little innocent frolics of youth. Remember you were once young.
Restrain them not from a sober mirth, and decent amusements suited to their age
and station. Let them plainly perceive that you are pleased to see them so, and
that you are disposed to deny them nothing in your power to grant, but what
would hurt them. Give no quarter to falsehood, disingenuity, or bad passions of
any kind. But let not every trifling folly excite your displeasure, or provoke
your censure. Remonstrate seldom, and never in wrath, but always with great
seriousness, and great firmness. In fine, if you would give them the most
valuable proof of your affection, fail not to conduct them to Jesus, as the
friend, the brother, and the restorer of their natures, who came down from
heaven to lead them up thither, and guide their feet in the way of peace and
joy, which is no other than the way of wisdom and of holiness. Tell them how
much he loves the young, and with what gentleness "he carries the lambs in his
bosom." Cease not to assure them, that "his yoke is easy, and his burden
light;" and that, if they will take these upon them cheerfully, bear them
steadily, and lean with unbounded confidence on his almighty support and
patronage, all shall be well. I wish it devoutly for their sake, and yours.

2. As to you, my younger brethren of the clergy This and the preceding
address contain the substance of an extemporary effusion, which the author has
endeavored to recollect, and set down more fully and distinctly.
; may I not hope that you will take kindly the parting counsel of one who loves
you, and who will never, it is likely, have an opportunity of this sort to
address you again? It would help, not a little, to leviate the concern which it
is natural for me to feel on removing from your society, if I might indulge the
pleasing idea, that any thing I shall now offer may contribute to your
usefulness, or satisfaction.

I would begin with observing, that the rising generation should be a principal
object of your care. From them chiefly must arise your hopes of success in your
profession. They are not yet hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, nor
hackneyed in the ways of the world: And being young yourselves, you can advise,
admonish, and reprove them with the best grace, and the most efficacy. Your
bestowing peculiar notice on them, will always give pleasure to such as are
connected with them, who will, on that account, listen to your other
Instructions with greater advantage. Such as are not so connected will still
however approve of your conduct, if they are good: and if they are otherwise,
if they are grown old in iniquity, or accustomed to do evil, can you expect the
Ethiopian should change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Nevertheless you
may be assured, that the very veterans in vice themselves will secretly applaud
your endeavors to train the young to virtue and religion; so irresistibly are
they led by the force of truth to admire in speculation those venerable forms,
which in practice they neglect to pursue. There is not, I am convinced, in this
house, a parent, or a tutor so lost to every sentiment of worth, as not to
wish, let their own characters be ever so foolish or so wicked, that those
young persons whom nature or providence has entrusted to their inspection, may
be wise and virtuous.

When the younger part of your hearers discover, that they possess a particular
share in your regard and labors, a distinction so obliging to them will
wonderfully conciliate their esteem and confidence: and these, under God, will
open their hearts to attend to the words that shall be spoken by you. They will
hardly be able to withstand the arguments, the exhortations, the entreaties, of
those whom they find so deeply concerned about their edification and welfare;
more especially if you apply to their ingenuity mainly, or to that sense of
truth and probity, of praise and reputation, which originally belongs to their
natures, and which will always afford you a handle, whereby to take hold of
their consciences, unless these should become totally obdurate. And that, it is
to be hoped, will rarely be the case, so long as they are young. Such a case, I
am well persuaded, would be yet more rare, if every working of modesty, every
tendency to good, every the smallest shoot or sprouting of virtue were early
and tenderly cherished and supported.

By commending where you can, by rebuking only where you must, by never
shocking or revolting them with an ill-judged severity, whilst you never foster
their pride or vanity by undeserved, undistinguishing, or extravagant applause,
you will preserve a happy balance in their spirits. They will hearken to you
with equal delight and reverence, as at once their friends and their teachers.
And having thus engaged them to love and honor you, it is natural to think you
will the more easily and effectually win them to the love and veneratian of
your master.

To recommend your master and his religion to their hearts, to all hearts, I
need not say, should be your ruling ambition, and your leading aim. "To know"
and to preach "Christ and him crucified," was the resolution, the study, and
the glory of the greatest man, and the best minister, the christian church did
ever produce. To be called a preacher of christianity, and not to preach
Christ; to bear that honorable title, and to preach Plato or Epictetus,
Antoninus, or Seneca, exclusively of Christ, or preferably to him; -- May God
almighty forbid that so great a contradiction, such a gross prevarication, a
conduct so absurdly, so shamefully impious, should ever be chargeable on any of
you! Let the philosophy of Greece and Rome have its due. Let those who taught
it meet with all the approbation and respect they deserve. And doubtless they
deserve a great deal. In many instances they thought well, and wrote better.
Many of their sayings concerning life, and morals, and natural theology, may be
adopted with safety, and inculcated with advantage. I pity the man who affects
to despise them. He betrays ignorance, or prejudice, or poorness of spirit, or
all these together. But could we suppose a christian preacher by profession,
giving them the preference, in his estimation and discourses, to that truly
divine philosopher, who descended from the father of light and love to teach
and to save mankind, I should pity such a man still more, as destitute alike of
taste and worth, of understanding and honesty: Never, oh never! my beloved
brethren, be ashamed of the gospel of Christ. You never can have cause. Regard
your relation to the Son of God, as your greatest honor. Be wilfully guilty of
nothing to forfeit the felicity connected with it, or to make the Son of God
ashamed of you.

Let the fond admirers of Paganism dote on a philosophy, which the experience
of ages has proved defective, feeble, inefficacious; as the reason of things
shows it to be perplexed with uncertainty, warpt with error, and altogether
disproportioned to the demands of human nature. Let us, us I say, who profess
ourselves the disciples of him who lived, and taught, and died in Judea, who
spoke and acted, as never man spoke or acted, let us maintain with boldness,
though with meekness too, the cause of our master. -- Think again, of what
master. -- Of the sweetest and sublimest spirit, of the most enlightened,
comprehensive, and penetrating mind, of the most heroic benefactor, and
meritorious sufferer, in a word, of the most accomplished and dignified
personage, that ever appeared on the theater of humanity!

Let us study by day and by night the philosophy of the evangelical system. It
were easy to evince, that no institution, no discipline, which we are
acquainted with, is adapted, like the gospel, to the frame and the state of
man. This in general I will venture to affirm, that there is not in the human
breast a single point of sensibility, a single spring of action, any one
faculty, principle or perception relating to moral, spiritual, or eternal
things, which the philosophy of Jesus Christ is not calculated to strike, to
move, to direct, to govern; at the same time that the distempers, the
distresses, the weaknesses, and the wants of our nature, are most wisely and
generously provided for: so that the preacher who hesitates a moment to display
or to press the doctrines, the motives, and the grace of the New Testament, is
a stranger to his own nature, and in effect its enemy.

To display and to press these, or, in other words, to explain, and to enforce
the whole counsel of God, respecting the restoration of fallen man, so far as
that is revealed, together with the grand, immortal truths and laws of natural
religion; to do this with ability and success, is surely one of the noblest and
most delightful of all employments. To acquit yourselves well here, what
application, what zeal, or what energy, if rightly directed, can be too much?
From what quarter should you not be willing to borrow light and aid, in the
glorious art of true eloquence? You may learn it, my friends, from Tully; you
may learn it from Demosthenes: I add with peculiar pleasure, you may learn it
from Paul of Tarsus: I subjoin with the highest joy, you may learn it from
Jesus of Nazareth.

Let it always be your care to speak to the heart, to enter into the
conscience, to make men acquainted with themselves. Contemn every ornament that
serves not, in some shape, to the purpose of persuasion, and every species of
address that does not tend to render the hearers better or wiser. Never rest in
general, or vague harrangues. Such, believe me, how ingenious or elegant
soever, are always "from the purpose of" preaching, a principal part of whose
end, both at the first and now, was and is to hold, as it were, the mirror up
to nature, to show virtue her own feature, vice her own image, and the very age
and body of the time its form and pressure. I shall readily be pardoned for
applying to this subject, with a small variation, those beautiful words of the
greatest human writer in the world.

I conjure you, brethren, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his kingdom; never sacrifice
utility or truth to show or popularity. Let no desire of applause tempt you to
spoil your discourses with affected rhetoric or vain philosophy, on the one
hand, or to disgrace them with vulgarity and cant, on the other. Let no dread
of bigots, however violent or numerous, deter you from holding up to the people
a high standard of christian morals. Let no respect for libertines, of what
rank or parts soever, turn you aside from the simplicity of "the truth, as it
is in Jesus." A virtuous christianity, that is, genuine christianity, is the
cause of heaven. It will always bear you out. If you have felt its sacred
operation, are taken with its beauty, and awed by that majesty which it has
derived from its author, blessed Savior! what fortitude and fervor in
preaching it will these inspire!

If indeed you have undergone the discipline of repentance, if you have passed
the strait gate, and entered the narrow way, that lead to life eternal, if the
prospects which faith unfolds have opened on your illuminated eye, and that
celestial spirit who proceeds from Jesus has descended into your bosoms; what
force of feeling, what depth of discernment in the best things, what unction of
sentiment and language, what unstudied allurement and dignity of manner, will
ordinarily accompany your performances! How clearly will you trace, and how
sensibly describe, from the fund of your own experience, the movements of the
soul, the measures of conscience, the salutary pains of conversion, the secret
struggles of virtue, the aspirations of an advancing piety, in short, the whole
rise and progress of the divine life!

Let me particularly remind you, that nothing will more assist or animate you
in the exercises of the pulpit, than the devotions of the closet; provided
these are are humble and liberal, simple and exalted, serious and fervent. In
that case, they will be -- what will they be -- a rich, perennial spring of
inspiration. They will duffuse through your public addresses, both to God and
to man, a certain ethereal influence, that will be universally seen and felt.
Oh, how different from the constraint, the formality, the frigidity, the
deadness, you have sometimes witnessed!

After all, let it be remembered, that the benediction of God alone can give
proper power to all your ministrations. I hope you daily ask it. But remember
likewise, you can only expect it, in the road of righteousness. And therefore
to all your improvements, and all your exertions, fail not (I will take the
liberty to say it to the whole order present), fail not to join purity of heart
and sanctity of manners. Practice as much as possible the breeding of
gentlemen; but never drop the character of clergymen. Between these, when truly
understood, there is, I am persuaded, no incompatibility. But if there were, it
is easy to see which of the two, in point of propriety and uniformity, ought to
give place in your deportment. An engaging demeanor, it is certain, can never
be inconsistent with clerical decorum. But wherever the fashion of the times,
or the folly of men would attempt to build either pleasure or refinement on the
ruins of virtue, may we have the firmness in our behavior, to sink the man of
the world in the man of God. Finally, brethren, farewell: be perfect, be of
good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace
shall be with you. Amen.

FINIS.

