IMPORTANT QUESTION, Considered and Answered; OR, A Saving Faith, Scripturally
explained, IN TWO SERMONS Preached at MERIDEN, ON THE Lord's Day, August 10th,
1760.

By Theophilus Hall, A. M. Pastor of CHRIST'S Church there.

Wisdom is the principal Thing.

SOLOMON. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
Word; it is because there is no Light in them.

ISAIAH Call no Man your Father upon Earth, for One is your Father which is in
Heaven.

JESUS CHRIST. The Wisdom that is from Above, is first pure, then peaceable --
full of Mercy and good Fruits --

Apostle JAMES. NEW HAVEN; Printed by J. PARKER, and COMPANY, MDCCLXI.

(...) CHARGE; Especially them, at whose Desire and Cost the following
Discourses are made public.
AS these Discourses were composed with a particular View, to some Questions
among you, and differing Sentiments upon the great Subjects handled therein; so
they now appear just as they were delivered, with this Alteration only; that
under several Heads, some Enlargements have been made for no other End but for
illustrating, and making more manifest, the particular Points under
Considetration.

AGREEABLE to your Desire, I here present them to your View, as a sincere Token
of my hearty Love to you, and real Concern for your best Interest, and Welfare.
Wherein I have honestly endeavored to represent the Truth, as it is in Christ
Jesus; and so to make the Way of Life plain. And if the hearing of them has
given you some Satisfaction in these things; I hope a Review, and Perusal of
the same will give you more; and by the Blessing of GOD, become abundantly
serviceable to establish your Minds in the present Truth.

AGAIN, As I have gratified you in this Thing; so in Return, let me ask this
Favor of you, that you will gratify me in another^ which is, that you will make
these Things, not a Matter of more Speculation, but put them into Execution,
and Practice; that so you may adorn the Doctrines of the Gospel, shine as
Lights in the World, and glorify your heavenly Father by bearing much Fruit.

IN doing this, you will lay the Foundation for Peace of Conscience, and the
sweetest Serenity of Mind, become a living Sacrifice unto God, of a sweet
smelling Savor, and be a Crown of rejoicing in the Day of the Lord, to him,
who is,

Your Pastor, and faithful Servant in the Gospel, Theophilus Hall.

The most important QUESTION, CONSIDERED.
ACTS, xvi. 30, 31. -- And said, Sirs, What must I do to saved? And they said,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House.


AS the great, and true, and I may say the only valuable End of all Knowledge,
is Practice; even so, right Knowledge is most necessary, in order to right, and
regular Action: The Reason is, there being in the very Constitution of Things,
certain Rules for all Humane Conduct: Right Action depends upon its Conformity
unto them. This is the Case in civil, or secular Life: We cannot talk in a
Foreign, nor in our own Langue, before we have learnt it. No Man can sail a
Vessel into a strange and distant Port, without the Art of Navigation. No more
can any One be a regular Practitioner in Physic, without some Acquaintance
with the Mystery thereof.

So it is in the moral Life: There must be the Knowledge, before there can be
the Practice of Religion. He that comes to God, must believe that he is -- If
we don't know what will be acceptable to God, how can we please him? We must
know the Way, that lends to eternal Life, before we can walk in it. Agreeably
thereto, says Thomas to our LORD;

"We know not whether thou go, and how can we know the Way?"

NOW as this is our main Business, and highest Concern to serve GOD in this
Life; that so we may partake of his Favor in the next: So it is of equal
Importance to us, to understand and know the Way, and the Manner how to do the
one, that we may enjoy the other. For this Purpose therefore, have I chosen,
for the subject of my present Discourse, these Words, What must I do to be
saved, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy House.
For the understanding of which, and the person speaking therein; it may not be
amiss to consider the Occasion, that led the Way, and gave Rise to them.

AT this Time, Paul the Apostle and Silas his fellow Labourer in the Gospel,
were preaching the Kingdom of GOD nigh Philippi, a chief City in Macedonia. And
many resorted unto them, among whom was a certain Damsel, who, as we are told
was possessed with a Spirit of Divination, and brought her Master much Gain by
Soothsaying. But this notwithstanding she openly confessed, that these Men were
the Servants of the Most High God, which show unto us the Way of Salvation. And
this she did many Days. Where we may observe, that these holy Men, received
more Honor, Respect, and better Treatment, even from one possessed of the
Devil, than from that stupid, and sinful People. And what an ample Reward did
she soon recieve therefore! For Paul being grieved for her, turned and said to
the Spirit, I command thee in the Name of Jesus Christ to come out of her and
he came out the same Hour. This made no small Stir. For her Masters, when they
saw that the Hope of their Gain was gone, were greatly moved.

HOW dear to some, and near their Hearts, their Money, and worldly Interest
lies! Touch this, and you gall the^ to the very Quick: Nothing moves them like
it. See the Operation! They being thus moved; the Populace also being raised:
What a mighty Uproar soon followed! They laid violent Hands on the Apostles;
dragged them into the Marketplace, and hauling them before the Magistrates,
brought in a grievous Complaint against them; not for Murder, or Sedition, or
any enormous Crime; but being Jews, for teaching Customs unlawful as they said,
for Romans to receive; and this, (to say no worse of it) was a false Charge.

AND yet the Magistrates, not regarding their Persons, or Sacred Characters, or
the Damsel's Testimony in their Favor, or the Trivialness and Falsity of the
Complaint; (all which must needs aggravate their Proceedings, except we may
suppose them totally ignorant of these Things:) but without any Examination, or
giving them the least Opportunity to defend themselves against this
unreasonable Charge, as we read of, in the most inhumane and barbarous Manner,
ordered them to be stripped and beaten. And this not slighty; for having laid
many Stripes upon them, they cast them into Prison, charging the Jailer to keep
them safely. Who having received such a Charge, thrust them into the inner
Prison, and made their Feet fast in the Stocks. And now he it seems, concluding
all Things were safe, commits himself to his Bed.

HERE see the pious Devotion, and heavenly Tempers of these Servants of GOD!
notwithsanding their hard Treatment in the Day, and so uncomfortable a Lodging,
in a filthy Dungeon at Night; yet they were so far from meditating any Revenge,
that at Midnight they prayed, and sang Praises to God; likely that they were
counted worthy to suffer for the Name of CHRIST. And Behold the Event! A Speedy
Answer of their Prayers, and a Miraculous Deliverance by a great Earthquake! By
which the Foundations of the Prison were Shaken, all the Doors opened, and
every ones Bands loosed.

THIS Shock, doubtless, waked the Jailer out of his Sleep. Who starting from
his Bed in the greatest Fright; it seems, his firsst Thoughts was about the
Prisoners; and seeing the Prison Doors open; probably no Way apprehensive of
the Cause; but thinking that some evil minded Person had made Insurrection,
broke open the Prison, delivered the Prisoners, and they were gone, and
withal, that he was no ways able to answer it to the Magistrates: This added
to his Surprise, and put him almost beside himself. In this Confusion, He drew
his Sword, and was about to kill himself, but was prevented by Paul's crying
with a loud Voice, DO THYSELF NO HARM; for we are all here. This was as much
unexpected, and as great a Surprise as the former; though in a more agreeable
Manner. For this brought him to his Senses again; altered his bloody Design and
wrought upon all his Passions: Which by this Time were thrown into such a
Ferment and violent Agitation, as caused the whole Humane Frame to tremble. And
in this Manner and Form, he ran and threw himself at the Apostle's Feet.

NOW it is no ways apparent, that the Jailer as yet had any Concern about his
Soul, or future State; but all this was the natutal Effect of his Surprise and
a Concern about the present Emergency; though it might greatly serve to prepare
the Way for his Reception of the Messages of the Gospel.

AFTER this we read of the Jaylor's Question, and the Apostles Answer; his kind
Offices to them and their preaching to him and his House, the Word of the LORD.
But possibly these Things are not set down just in the same Order, in which
they happened; a Thing common in the Scriptures. For to me it don't look
likely, that this Question was asked, or answered in the Prison, or while the
Jailer was in his Fright, or in the Beginning of their Conversation, and before
he had some Information of the Gospel Way of Salvation; for these were a
Heathen People, and most likely wholly Strangers to these Things.

AND probably, the whole Affair might be conducted in some such Manner as this.
When the Jailer came to the Apostles; had a little recovered himself, and saw
the Prison Doors open, the Persons Bands loosed; but no Tumult, nor any one
gone: It wrought in him some good Opinion of these Men; that they were not such
vile Fellows as before he had conceived them to be. This disposed him to treat
them, in the most courteous and hospitable Manner; and accordingly invited them
into his House, ordered their Stripes to be washed, and Meat to be set before
them.

WHILE this was doing, some Conversation would naturally arise, and how could
it begin more aptly? Than by the Jaylor's enquiring: How came these Things to
pass? What was this great Noise I heard? How came these Doors open and your
Bands all loosed?

IN Answer to th^se Queries* the Apostle gives him a particular Detail of the
whole Affair. (...) of the Gospel Salvation, through the Redemption of JESUS
CHRIST: That they themselves were the Servants of the most high GOD, and were
come to show them this Way of Salvation: That for these Things only, they had
been apprehended, beaten and imprisoned: That all this hard, and abusive
Treatment of them was fighting against Heaven. Therefore Almighty GOD has thus
appeared in this Miraculous Manner, shook the Earth, opened the Prison Doors,
loosed our Bands and set us at Liberty. This, by the Spirit of GOD, wrought
such Conviction on the Mind of the Jailer, as put him on some real Concern
about his Soul and future State. And now he proposes this Question, in the
Text. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And the Apostle answers, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved, and thy House.

HAVING thus prepared the Way. These are the two Things that now lie before us
for consideration, namely, the Jaylor's Question; and the Apostle's Answers.

I. The Jaylor's Question in these Words; What must I do to be Saved? The
Salvation here spoken of* don't mean a Deliverance from temporal, but eternal
Evil. He don't enquire, how he should escape the Magistrates Resentment for the
Release of the Prisoners, or Sickness, or Death or any other worldly Trouble;
but how he should escape eternal Misery; which now he saw himself in Danger of.
The Question therefore plainly refers to eternal Life, and is an Enquiry about
the Way thither.

THESE Things being considered; the Meaning is natural and easy: It is not a
captious Question, with a Design to entrap and entangle the Apostle in his
Discourse; but a plain honest Question, respecting a Man's Duty, and Conduct.
And the Occasion, Manner, and Circumstances of its Proposal, seem plainly to
denote the Honesty, and Sincerity of the Enquirer; with a hearty Desire to know
the Truth, and the same Reso^^tion to obey it. I shall therefore say no more in
Explanation of it, but make the following Remarks upon it.

1. THIS is a Question of universal Concern. There was Nothing in the Jaylor's
Circumstances, that should make it ^eculiar to him, but what is common to all
Men. It as ^uch concerns me, and you, and every one to enquire, what we must do
to be saved, as it did him. The great Foundation of this Enquiry, is the
Relation we all stand in to Eternity. If there is such a Thing as a future
State, eternal Rewards and Punishments, an Heaven for the Righteous, and an
Hell for the Wicked; if we have all precious and immortal Souls to save or
loose; if this Life is a Prelude to the Other; or our eternal Doom depends upon
our Conduct here; and we shall spend an Eternity, either the Realms of Light
above, or in informal Shades of Darkness beneath, just as we act a Part on this
Stage of Action; (all which, I make no doubt, you will grant at first Thought.)
Surely when, it is of equal Concern to us all, to know how we may enjoy the
Former, and escape the Latter. It therefore Concerns All, both High and Low,
Rich and Poor, Old and Young, Bond and Free; yea, it concerns the King upon the
Throne as much as the Peasant upon the Dunghill.

YET, are there not some of great Descent, and high Birth, but of such a low,
mean, and fordid Spirit, as to fancy Religion don't belong to them? They Will
allow that it becomes the Poor, and Wretched in the World, and such as are in
low Life, but think it is too melancholy and dejected a State for Princes, the
Nobility and Persons of Rank and Fortune in the World.

JUST as if these dignifyed Worms of the Earth were got above their Maker, or
beyond the Reach of Omnipotence; or could bear Everlasting Burnings better than
others; or that their Souls, like the Spirits of the Beasts, at Death, would go
downward to the Earth. Indeed, there is too much Truth in what One observes,
upon another Account, That which principally distinguishes some Men from the
Beasts of the Field is the different Formation of their Bodies: Their Bodies
are Humane; but they are in a manner Brutal beside. But however such may amuse
themselves, with these vain Thoughts for the present, they may be convinced of
their Mistake, when it is too late.

2. It is a Question of the last Importance, not only of universal Concern, but
of the highest Consequence. Religion, to take care of the Soul, to prepare for
another World, all which in general, means but one and the same Thing, is the
greatest Concern in Life: It Is our main Business, for this End were we born,
and came into the World; it is more than Meat or Drink, then Food or Raiment.
Yea, all the Concerns of this, Life, though in many respects great and valuable,
yet when compared with This, are but ^oys and Trifles.

THIS will easily appear, only by considering, the infinite* Disproportion
between this, and the coming World. What is the Chaff to the Wheat? Says the
Lord. What is a Man profited, if he gains the whole World, and loose his own
Soul? Says our Savior. What is Earth to Heaven? The Body to the Soul? or Time
to Eternity? And in a Word: What a mean and contemptible Thing, is a short
Pilgrimage in this stormy World, through a thousand Vicissitudes, full of
Auxiety, and Vexation of Spirit, compared with an eternal Duration in the
Realms of Light, and Peace, with Rivers of Pleasure at God's Right Hand?

RELIGION therefore, and the Care of the Soul, is the one Thing needful, and I
may add, the only Thing absolutely necessary to our well being. We are ready to
think, many Things here are necessary Enjoyments; such as Life, Health, Riches
and Friends; but this is a Mistake* None of these are absolutely necessary. A
Man may be happier, and better without, than with them. I make no Doubt, but
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, notwithstanding his Want of all Things in this
Life, is a Thousand Times better of it, than the rich Man in the Gospel, with
all his Plenty and worldly Grandeur here. But if this one Thing be wanting, we
are totally ruined, and may be sure, our Doom will be Misery, and Wretchedness.

THE great Reason is, the inevitable Consequences of these two different
Courses. If we neglect so great Salvation; how can we escape the Damnation of
Hell! Awful and dreadful the Perdition of ungodly Men! To go into Eternity, to
reap the Wages of an ill-spent Life! Who can dwell with devouring Fire, or
inhabit everlasting Burnings? But if we lay hold on eternal Life, by Faith; our
End will be Peace; Glory and Blessedness our Portion forever.

THEREFORE, on the one Hand, the Scripture always represents Religion, and the
Care of our Souls, as the only true Wisdom, and calls it, the Wisdom, that is
from above; by Way of Distinction from that which is said to be eartly, sensual
devilish. And indeed, that Man only deserves the Character of a wise Man, that
foreseeth these Evils, and ^ideth himself. While, on the other Hand, it as
often represents the Neglect of our Souls, as the greatest Folly imaginable;
and true it is, that no Man in the World lives, and acts so void of
Understanding, and so much beside himself, as he that does this. Neither can
there a greater Dilirium besal the Minds of Men, than this: If it would be
looked upon, Distraction for a Man to run into the Fire; must it not be
accounted infinitely greater Distraction, to throw himself headlong into
everlasting Burnings?

BY this Time, methinks, you are convinced of the Importance of this Question;
and that it cannot be a Matter of Indifference with you, whether you spend an
Eternity in Weal or Woe, with Angels of Light above, or with infernal Spirits
beneath. And yet,

3. HOW few Persons comparatively, that make this Enquiry seriously for
themselves! There are too many in the World, that, Gallio like, care for none
of these Things: They are so eaten up with Pride and Ambition, or so immersed
in Pleasure and secular Views, that the World is their GOD ^ their Cups, their
Idols; and the Gratification of their sensual Appetites, is their highest, and
chiefest Good: These Men, all their Concern is about the World, what they shall
eat, and drink, and wherewithal they shall be clothed: They scarcely think,
or say a Word about Religion.

THERE are others quit of another Turn of Mind, though perhaps of no better
Principles, or Practice; who love to be talking about Religion: When at the
same Time, they have no Regard to, or real Concern about it, especially as to
the practical Part of it. And this may be easily discoverd, by the Air, and Run
of their Discourse, and the Topics which it turns upon: For it is not an
Enquiry, how they shall live to GOD, or what they shall do to be saved: but
such as tends more to pull down, than bu^^^ up the Gospel Religion: And is
indeed rather a Wrangling, Disputing, and Quarreling with the Doctrines of
Grace, and the holy Religion of the Blessed JESUS, than any Thing else.

THERE are Enemies to the Cross of Christ: Of this Sort are they that are
quarrelling with Divine Revelation, the Divinity, Sacrifice, and Atonement of
our Blessed LORD.

SUCH are they, that are making the Religion of JESUS CHRIST, to consist only
in a heated Imgination, in Trances Visions, and enthusiastic Flights, and
Raptures; that are affecting party Names, and Terms, valuing themselves
therein, imposing their own Sentiments upon others, and stigmatizing those,
that cannot conform to them, or pronounce their darling ^hibboleths.

SUCH are they, that are always disputing about Forms, and Modes of Worslhip;
certain Words, Opinions, and subtle unscriptural Distinctions in Religion:
Concerning which, it may be said (of some at least) that they understand
neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. All which, like Jewish Fables,
and endless Genealogies, serves to minister Questions, rather than Godly
Edifying. ^ Tim. 1.4


NO better are they, that are casting a Slight upon, or talking against
Holiness and Sanctity, good Works, and Obedience to the Commands of CHRIST, as
absolutely necessary Terms, pre-requisite to our Acceptance with GOD, and
eternal Life. Things alone, wherein an Harmony, and Union between GOD and Men
can subsist. Things, which are the Employment, Glory, and Happiness of Saints,
and Angels in Heaven, and Earth; and are the greatest Honor, that the SUPREME
BEING can receive from his intelligent Creatures. Such Talk as this! is it not
against the Crown and Dignity of Heaven? A stiring up Rebellion, against our
most Rightful Sovereign? I mean Him, to whom all Power is given in Heaven, and
Earth. And is it not like the Sin of Witchcraft; and an Iniquity to be punished
by the Judge? Job xxxi. 28.


AMONG these, there is scarce any one Thing more disputed (especially by Some)
than a Person's doing, or Duty in Religion. The Scripture tells us, Whatsoever
thy Hand finds to do; do it with thy Might. Eccles ix. 10.
And our Savior, Whosoever hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him unto a wise Man -- And every One that hears -- and does them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish Man -- Mat. vii, 24.
Yet Some who, it seems, would be wise above what is written, are always
complaining, and faulting Ministers for urging, and pressing Persons to their
Duty. Indeed they must condemn such Preaching, or themselves; for they will do
none. And rather than take the Blame to themselves, as they ought, they will
cast it where they ought not.

IT is well known, there is a Generation in the World, that hate to work for
their Living; who will turn, twist, and make use of every mean Artifice, rather
than get their Livelihood by honest Industry. Even so, there are some lazy,
idle, slothful Servants in Religion, that cannot bear to think of going to
Heaven, in the plain Road, through the st^rait Gate, and in the narrow Path of
Duty. Therefore they are seeking, and trying to climb up some other Way; and
indeed it is no Heaven for them if this wont do.

YET These would seem to show a Zeal for GOD, and Religion; but it lies all in
Words, and not in Deeds. They count the Name, they affect the Show, but cannot
bear the Thing. Therefore they are much for disputing, and asking Questions in
Religion; but then these are generally about Trifles, and Things to no Profit:
Like that Question put to our Savior, in St. Luke, Chap. xii. 23.
"Are there few that be Saved?" Which was so trifling a one, that he thought it
not worthy of a direct Answer. Or that captious Query of the Herodian, Is it
Lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or not? Mat. xxii, 17.
And that impertinent one of the Saducees, about the Woman that had seven
Husbands in this Life, "Whose Wife she should be in the Resurrection?" v. 28.
Things as foreign from the great, and main Concern, as the Idle stories in the
Apocripha. But seldom will you hear these Querists say a Word about the great
Things of Religion, such as Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, or enquire, What must
we do to be saved? But,

4. WHENEVER Persons come to themselves, and see their Danger of eternal
Misery, they will seriously make this Enquiery; however lightly they might
think, and talk of these Things before, however disposed to ridicule or quarrel
with the Doctrines of divine Revelation; however forward they may have been to
plead in Excuse for their Sins, Man's Inability; or able by sub^^ and artful
sophistry to dispute and even exclude Duty and Works of Obedience out of the
Gospel Scheme. Yet when the Vail is taken off, and the Scales ^all from our
Eyes; GOD and eternal Things appears no longer mere Chimeras, but the greatest
Realities: at once their former Coldness, and Indifference vanishes; their
former Pleas and Qbjections are silenced, and they will Solicitously inq^^^e;
What must we do?

THIS is generally the first Step they take; such is our Frame and Make, that
Nature itself recoils at the Approach of Danger, and whenever it is
apprehended, the first Thought is of escaping, the next, of putting it into
Execution; or at least trying to do the same. And eternal Evils, when
apprehended, have the same Influence upon Men, as temporal Ones. They will as
soon flee from Everlasting Burnings, as from a Lion and a Bear.

THIS is most manifest from a few plain Instances. Thus the very Men, that had
been active in the Crucifixion of JESUS CHRIST, so soon as they were convinced,
by the Aposte's preaching, on the Day of Pentecost, of what they had done;
their Folly, and Danger therein; at once cry out, Men and Brethren, What shall
we do? In like Manner, the Apostle Paul, before his Conversion to the Christian
Faith, while he was breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter against the
Disciples of the Lord, and going to Damascus with a Commission to apprehend,
and bind all he could find of that Profession, so ^oon as he was convinced by a
Light, and Voice from Heaven, that that was a dangerous Road; stopped at once,
and with Tremor and Astonishment says, LORD, what will thou have me to do?

SO the Jailer in my Text, no sooner was he made sensible of his Danger of
eternal Ruin; but he also immediately cries out, Sirs, what must I do to be
saved? And this will always be the Case, when Men see themselves in Danger,
whether it be of temporal, or eternal Misery. Human Nature is the same, as it
was ten or fifteen Hundred Years ago; and Mankind have just the same Movements,
and Springs of Action now, as they had then. Again,

5. THIS Question supposes, that the Querist takes it for granted, that
Something is to be done by us, in order to Salvation. And this indeed is, the
Sense of Mankind, in general, upon this Affair, although some talk much against
it. For one of these Things must follow; either Something is to be done by us,
or Nothing; there can be no Middle Way. If the latter -- then there are no
Duties to be performed by us; neither Seeking, Praying, Believing, Repenting,
nor obeying the Commandments. If this be so, these Consequences will follow,
the Calls, Invitations, and Rules of the Gospel are all to no Purpose; the
Gospel Ministry, Sabbaths, Sacraments, yea the Revelation itself in all in
vain. And in a Word, there is an End of all Religion: He that embraces it, is
not better than he that don't, and he that despises it, bids as fare for
Heaven, as he that observes it. In this Case, the Preachers of the Gospel have
nothing to do; but to dismiss their Assemblies in the Manner, in which that
was, in Jereboem's Rebellion. To your Tents O Israel. (...). 16.
What Part or Portion have we in this Matter? And those ancient Times will be
again revived, wherein every Man did that which was right in his own Eyes.
Judges xxi. 26.
But these are such gross Absurdities, that, methinks no Man of Reason, and
Consideration can possibly give into them. From hence then, it necessarily
follows, that something is to be done by us, in order to eternal Life. This is
a Deduction almost as manifest, as any first Principle in Nature, or the
shining of the Sun at Noonday. And however Persons in their Vanity, may be
di^posed to make Objections against it, yet a little Self-reflection will
answer them all.

IF a Man will but look into himself, he cannot help seeing: He is made, not a
Stock or Stone, nor merely an Animal, but a rational Being, capable of moral
Action; that he has (...) Powers, and the Faculties of Thinking, Know^^^ (...)
and Choosing. That he is capable of Happiness and Misery, is actually moved by
Hope, Fear, and moral Arguments, and Motives. And if he is not altogether of an
Atheistical Turn, he cannot but be convinced, especially if he lives under the
Gospel, that he is designed for another State. That these Powers and Faculties
were given him for real Action, and Improvement -- That he is Accountable to
his Maker for them -- That he is here upon his Probation, must act a Part for
Eternity, and his future State will depend upon his Conduct here.

THESE Things being considered, how natural, and reasonable are such like
Queries as these? What must I do? How must I improve these Talent? What Course
must I steer? Which is the Way to eternal Life, or what must I do to be saved?
And all this arises, not from Enthusiasm, or vain Curiosity, or any Fright or
Panic; but is the Result of the most rational Consideration. This brings me to
the Apostles Answer; but before I consider that, suffer me to Observe,

ONCE more, that this same Question, if not verbatim, and in the same Words,
yet in Substance, has been asked various Times in the Scriptures and particular
Answers given thereto. My Text is not the only Place in the Bible, that makes
mention of it, neither was the Jailer the only Person, that ever proposed it;
but this has been done by various others, at different Times, and various
inspired Persons have given their Opinions upon, and Answers to it. Thus it was
proposed by Peter's Converts on the Day of Pentecost, and his Answer thereto,
was, Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ.
Acts. ii 27.
So it was by the Apostle Paul to CHRIST himself, in his Way to Damascus. And
his Answer was, Arise, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what
thou must do. Acts ix. 6.
What it was, appears from what followed: He was baptized, and preached Christ
in the Synagogues. In like Manner, the young Man in the Gospel says to our
Savior, Good Master, what good Thing shall I do, that I may have eternal Life?
Mat. xix. 16.
He replies, If thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments. Again, while
John the Baptist was preaching the Baptism of Repentance; the People came, and
asked him, What shall we do then? He answers, He that has two Coats, let him
impare to him that has no^^; and ^e that has Meat, let him do likewise. Lake
iii. 11.
The Publicans also said to him, Master, what shall we do? He tells them, Exact
no more than that which is appointed you. V. 13.
And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And What shall we do? To
them he says, Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content
with your Wages. Once more, Some that followed CHRIST, asked him, What shall we
do, that we might work the Works of God? He tells them, This is the Work of
God, that ye believe on him, whom he has sent. John vi. 29.


IN all these Cases, I have no Reason to think, but that the Querists proposed
them honestly, with a Desire to know, and be, taught their Duty. But let that
be as it will; these were proper Questions to be put to a Teacher sent from
God. And we have all Reason to believe, they were answered honestly, and in a
direct and proper Manner, and agreeably to the End and Design of the Gospel.
For our Savior, (although when Persons came to him with captious Questions,
designed to entangle him in his Discourse; as he knew what was in Man; so he
often answered these Fools according to their Folly; and in such a Manner, as
most effectually to confound, and take them in their own Craftiness. Yet) when
any came to him with an honest Design to know the Truth; as became a divine
Teacher, and One that taught the Way of Life truly, he always instructed them
therein, with the greatest Plainness, and Simplicity.

HOW these particular Answers are to be understood, I purpose to consider in
the Sequel of this Discourse; when I come to compare them together. But I must
not proceed, for the Time fails; will therefore hasten to a Conclusion, with
one or two Reflections relative to the present Subject; if your Patience will
hold out. The,

FIRST is, that the Scriptures are always urging and pressing Persons Duty. I
am sensible, that to persuade Men to a Life of Duty, and sincere Obedience to
GOD, is one of the hardest Things in the World. For I have not only Flesh and
Blood, but also the Powers of Darkness to encounter herein. Besides all this,
there are some, who say they are enlightened, that pretend, that this is a
legal, and not a Gospel Religion; and are so much harping upon Man's Inability
to do any Duty, especially before Conversion; that all (...) such can possibly
do, is an Abomination to the Lord; and as the Consequence is narural, upon this
Supposition, so they draw it, that no Man before Conversion, ought to pray, or
attend upon Gospel Ordinances. And all this being so agreeable to corrupt
Nature, Many believe they have nothing to do, but to sit still, and wait, till
they are specially moved, and wrought upon by the Spirit of GOD.

BUT nowithstanding what these Men say, if you will go to the ORACLES of GOD,
you will find, that they put us upon Duty from one End of the Bible to the other.
And I Believe, there is not one Sacred Penman, but what presses this Matter
besure Moses, and the Prophets, CHRIST and his Apostles do it; and they not
only urge, and press Duty and Obedience, but make it one main Point of our
Religion; if they don't lay the very Stress of our Acceptance with GOD and
eternal Salvation upon it.

THAT this was the Case under the first Covenant, no Man will dispute. No more
will any dispute it under the Jewish Dispensation, if they will read but one or
two Texts in Moses and the Prophets. And it shall come to pass, if thou shall
hearken diligently unto the Voice of the LORD thy GOD, to observe and to do all
his Commandments, which I command thee this Day; that the LORD thy GOD will set
thee on high above all the Nations of the Earth. Deuteronomy. xxviii, 1.
But if thou will not hearken unto the Voice of the LORD thy GOD to observe to
do all his Commandments, and Statutes -- that all these Curses shall come upon
thee and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the City etc. -- Wash ye, make
you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings -- cease to do Evil, learn to do
well. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the Good of the Land. But if
ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword: For the Mouth of the
LORD has spoken it. Isaiah i. 16.


AND if we come to the Gospel Dispensation, is not the Language just the same?
Our Savior says, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets:
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven
and Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till
all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever shall do, and teach them, the same shall be
called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. v. 17.


SO the Apostle Paul, who preached up Justification by Faith, and the Doctrines
of Grace, as much as ever any inspired Person did, tell us, Circumcision is
Nothing, and Uncircumccision is Nothing, but the keeping the Commandments of
God. 1 Cor. vii. 19.
The Meaning is, all other Religion without this, is of no Value in the sight
of GOD. Now whether we shall obey GOD or Men, Judge ye. And the,

SECOND is, that the Scripture never faults us for Obedience, or doing Duty in
Religion, but always for the Neglect of it. The World often condemns us for
doing our Duty, but the Scripture never does: And it is so far from this, that
it always commends, and approves of that, although it be done, but partially, or
externally, or even with wrong Ends, and Designs. I don't mean, that every Man
that has ever done any Duty, will be finally approved of by his Maker. For many
such will be condemned; but then, not for the Duties they have done, but for
them they have left undone. The Fault don't lie in doing, but in the Deficiency
of Duty. So long as a Man keeps in the Path of his Duty, he is right; but
whenever he turns out of it, then he begins to err.

THE great Reason is, the Law of GOD is the Standard of our Conduct, and of
Right and Wrong. Whatsoever therefore, is a Conformity thereto, is right, and
commendable; and what is not, is wrong, and Blame worthy. For instance, the Man
that professes well and lives ill. The Fault don't lie in the Profession, but
in the Practice. So he that does a good Action, with an ill Design, the Action
is right and commendable; but the End is sinful.

AND indeed Duty to GOD, Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong, as they are
founded in the Constitution of Things, so they are inflexible, and unchangeable
in their very Natures. The One is excellent, and glorious, the other hateful,
and abominable; and they will remain evermore the same, let them be found where
they will; neither can they be altered in their Nature by the Quality of the
Doer, nor the End in doing them. The Sun is the same under the Earth, as it is
above it. A Jewel of Gold is of the same value in a Swine's Snout, as it is in
a Damsel's Ear. Truth is the same glorious Thing when spoken by a Devil, as by
an Angel of Light. Wilful Murder is the same horrible Crime when committed by a
Saint, as by a Sinner: And though a Man had never so good a Design in it, yet it
wont make that a lawful Action. No more will the vilest End make the Praising
of GOD, horrible Wickedness. For it is not the Quality of the Doer, that
denominates the Action either good or bad; but the Quality or Nature of the
Action denominates the Doer. Apostasy, and Rebellion would make an Angel a
Devil; and Grace and Goodness would make a Devil, an Angel of Light.

FOR this Reason, (because Virtue and Vice take their Rise from their
Conformity, and Nonconformity to their Standard, the Law of GOD) it is that
the Scripture always commends Duty and Obedience, though it be found among much
Wickedness; the abounding of which, though never so much, don't alter the Nature
of that which is right.

HOW plain is this in Jebu's Case! Although he took no heed to walk in the Law of
the Lord God of Israel, neither departed from the Sins of Jeroboam which made
Israel to Sin; yet the LORD bears him this Testimony, Thou have done well in
executing that which is right in mine Eyes, and have done unto the House of
Ahab according to all that was in mine Heart. And is it not as plain in Ahab's?
Who, when GOD denounced his Judgments against him by the Prophet, rent his
Clothes, and humbled himself. Which, most likely was only in an external
Manner; yet this was right so far as it went. Therefore GOD takes Notice of it,
and says, Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the Evil in
his Days. 1 Kings xxi. 29


AGAIN, When GOD show his ancient People for their Sins, they returned and
enquired early after God -- and although they flattered him with their Months --
and their Hearts was not right with him -- Yes he being full of Compassion,
forgave their Iniquities; that is, so far that he did not destroy them. Psalm.
^^xiii. 34.
But after all, will not some say, The Scripture does lay Blame for doing Duty,
and for Proof quote the Prophet Isaiah, i. 13. Bring no more vain Oblations,
Incense is an Abomination unto me. The true Meaning is not, that they were
faulted for offering Sacrifices according to the Law of Moses; but because as
the Context tells us, their Hands were full of Blood.

THIS will appear by considering one Case more, and that is the fault for which
CHRIST denounced the W^e upon those Hypocrites in St. Matthew, Chap xxiii. v.
23.
Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for (...) ^ay In^^^^ M^re,
(...), and have omitted the (...) Matt^^^ of the Law. Now their Fault was not
in paying Tithes; ^^r CHRIST says, These ought ye to have done; but in
neglecting, Judgment, Mercy and Faith. And this is the Thing that the Scripture
always (...), and condemns; as is easy to show from innumerable Instances. But
I need mention but one, and that is, the awful Doom of the slothful Servant in
the Gospel, for neglecting to improve his Talent, Cast ye the unprofitable
Servant into outer Darkness; there shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. Mat.
xxv 30.


NOW let me appeal to your Consciences; Is not this your Condemnation, that you
have too much neglected your Duty? Did ever a Man's Conscience condemn him for
doing it? It may for his sluggish Manner of performing it -- for the selfish
and carnal Views, he has had in it -- that he (...) only as a Cloak and
Outside Garment to cover his (...) -- and that while he has been cleaning the
Outside, he has been within full of Extortion and Excess. But did it ever
condemn him for doing what his LORD and Master required of him? I don't
remember that ever I have heard this Complaint from any One; but it is
altogether on the contrary Hand. Of All that I have been acquainted with, under
deep Concerns about their Souls, or lying on Death Beds, and apprehensive of
their Departure's being at Hand, that were under any Conviction of their
Consciences; this has been the Burden of their Song, We have forgotten God, and
too much neglected our Duty; neither have we lived and prepared for Death as we
ought to have done. In a Word then, can we ever be pleasing and acceptable to
GOD without this Obedience, and Conformity to his Will? Or, have any Communion
with him? I am sure I must think, we can have none, so long as I believe that
Righteousness has no Fellowship with Unrighteousness, Light no Communion with
Darkness, and Christ no Concord with B^^^^.

WELL then, my Brethren, does the Voice of Reason, Revelation, and an awakened
Conscience too, like a three Fold Cord that cannot be broken, obligate and call
upon us, to be up and doing! Why do we stand here all the Day? Let us enquire
out the good old Way, and (...) our Lamps, keep our Vessels filled with Oil,
and in the path of Duty be waiting for the Coming of our LORD. AMEN

A SAVING FAITH, SCRIPTURALLY EXPLAINED. SERMON II.
ACTS, xvi. 30, 31. -- And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And they
said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and the House.


HAVING considered in the proceeding Discourse, this great Question, and shown
of what infinite Importance and universal Concern it is; and that although the
most of Men are so indifferent, and unconcerned about it; yet when they come to
be sober and seriously thoughtful about their future State, solicitously
enquire, and as earnestly desire to know What they must do to be Saved. I now
proceed to consider,

II. THE Apostle's Answer thereto: Which is, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shall be saved and thy House. This Answer of the Apostle has Nothing
in it peculiar to the Jailer but what is applicable to any other Person, and is
a direct and proper Answer to this Question, let it be proposed by whom it
will. The Direction and Instruction herein contained, belongs to every One; and
all may take Encouragement therefrom, yea reap the same Benefit upon the same
Terms. The true Meaning is, that believing in JESUS CHRIST is the Way to, and
the Means by which we, under the Gospel are to obtain, and inherit eternal
Life; or in other Words, that eternal Life is promised by the Gospel, to them
that believe in JESUS CHRIST; and if the Jailer would comply herewith, he
should inherit the same: And so may any other Person too, on these Terms.

THIS seems to be intimated in the last Clause of the Verse, And thy House,
that is, thy Family also, shall be saved upon their Believing. It may also
mean, that upon the Jaylor's Faith, his Family should enjoy the Gospel
Privileges, (...). Be Baptized, brought into the visible Church, and be put
under special Advantages for their eternal Salvation. But this is not what I
intend to insist upon; but the Way that leads to eternal Life, which we must
all walk in, or we shall never arrive thither. Here the Jailer inquiries, What
must I do to be Saved? or which is the Way to eternal Life? The Apostle Paul
Answers, "This is the Way, believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST." This is the
Direction given us by an inspired Person, and a most skilful Pilot: And the
Enquiry is; What is the Meaning of it? What is it to believe? or rather, What
is the Apostle's sense of believing in this Text.

THIS is a Subject not new, but of equal Date with the Gospel Religion; of
great Weight, and Moment, and a corner Stone in this spiritual Building. Although
it has been greatly exhausted, much said, and wrote upon it; yea, Volums and
Folios filled with it, yet now it needs to be handled by an able Hand, a
skilful Pen, and in a much better Manner than I am able to do it: And that
because of the many mistaken Notions about, and wrong Constructions that are
put upon it. And in as much as Truth never suffers by Examination; and every
One ought to lend an Hand, yea exert their utmost Efforts in defense of, and
against the Errors and Mistake^s about it; for these Reasons, and especially
for your Instruction, my Brethren, I shall endeavor to give you my best
Thoughts upon it, and according to my small Abilities, show you the true
Meaning of the Apostle in these Words, or explain a saving Faith in CHRIST,
according to the Gospel. In order hereunto, before I enter upon this; to
prevent Mistakes, and prepare the Way for your understanding the same; let
(...) observe one or two Things in general. As,

1. IT is common in the Scripture, that one christian Grace or Quallification
stands for, and is used to signify all the Rest: though but One be expressed, yet
every other Grace is included therein. There are several Things necessary to
make up and complete the Idea and Character of a real good Man; such as
Holiness, Righteousness, Mercy and the like. Now the Scripture, speaking of
such an One, seldom mentions him, but under one or other of these Characters,
and by that, means all the rest. Thus the merciful Man in Scripture means, not
only one that shows Mercy, but him that has all the Qualifications of a real
religious Man: So also the upright, the just and the faithful Man, all mean the
same. This is agreeable to our common Way of speaking in this Case: When we
speak of a Christian at one Time, we call him a true Penitent, at another the
Believer; by which we mean not only him that has these particular Graces, but
One that has every christian Grace and Virtue.

IN like Manner, the Scripture speaks of several Things, as necessary Terms of
our Acceptance with GOD; such as Faith in CHRIST, Repentance of Sin, the Love
of GOD: And yet at the same Time promises the Favor of GOD to each of these
Particulars. In which Case, it must always be supposed that the others are
couched therein, and to be understood thereby; and that because the Way of
Salvation is but One, and the Scriptures are all of a Piece, though Different in
Expression. Here is the Reason, that the Promise is made to such different
Things, viz. To Believing. He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life.
John iii. 36.
To Obedience, If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love John xv 10.
And even to external Duties, Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him will I
confess before my Father which is in Heaven. Mat. x 32.
And possibly in such a Manner, the Words under Consideration, are be
understood. Therefore,

2. The Apostle's Answer here to the Jailer, is the same in sense and Substance
with the other Answers given in Scripture, to the same Question. I have shown
before, that this Question has been asked various Times, and these following
Answers given thereto, viz. That given to Paul was Arise and go into the City.
To the ^^^ing Man in the Gospel, Keep the Commandments. To Peter's Converts,
Repent and be baptized. And to the Jailer, Believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST.
Now as those Questions were all really but One; so are not all these Answers
really the same? though different in Words, yet don't they mean one and the same
Thing? Nothing is more frequent in both Scripture, and common Language, than to
express the same Thing, by various Words and in different Forms of Expression.

YOU may say with Nicodemus in another case, How can these Things be? The
Jailer was put upon believing, but the others upon working and doing. It is
true, they were; but then, was not the Jailer as much? ^s not Believing, as
much, doing and acting as any other Duty whatsoever is? I know not why the Word
( Works, or working as used in a religious Sense) is restrained to bodily
Exercise, or external Action; or why it is not as applicable to the internal
Actions of the Soul ^ I am sure Action or Working is not so much the Property
of Body, or Matter, as it is a Mind and Spirit. The Love of GOD, and Repentance
of Sin are as much Works and Acts of Obedience, as any external Duty,
whatsoever. And is not Faith or Believing the same?

YOU may answer and say, No; for Faith is the Gift of GOD. I grant it; and so
is Love, Repentance, Humility, and every christian Grace the Gift of God. But
then the Meaning is not, that believing, loving, and repenting are the Acts of
the Divine Being; for they are the Actings of the Soul. It is not GOD that
believes, loves, and repents; but it is the Soul that performs these Acts. The
Truth is, by Strength received from CHRIST, the Soul is enabled to put them
forth; and in this very Light, the Apostle Paul clearly sets this Matter. I can
do all Things through Christ which Strengthens me. Philip. iv 1^.


I AM very confident the Scripture uses the Word (Works) in the same Manner and
applies it to the internal Actions of the Mind, as well as the external Ones of
the Body. Thus, not only Fornication, and Drunkenness, but Hatred, Envy, and
Covetousness, are called the Works of the Flesh, and unfruitful Works of
Darkness. So we read of the Work of Grace in the Heart; He which has begun a
good Work in you. ^ Phil. i 6
And Faith also is called a Work; This is the Work of God that ye believe on
him, whom he has sent. John vi. 29.
If these Things are so, then are not these Answers similar?

I AM no Ways insensible, that the Scripture makes a Distinction between Faith
and Works; which is the same, that Divines generally do between the ^redenda,
and Facienda of Religion; that is, the Things to be believed, and the Things to
be done. A Distinction very just! for there is a wide Difference between them:
The one is the Assent of the Understanding, the other the Consent of the Will.
The former is the Principle of Action, and the latter the Practice upon it. But
I don't see that this any Ways affects the present Argument, either in Whole or
in Part. It don't follow from this, that Believing is not a Work or Act of
Obedience, when it is a Compliance with a divine Precept: All that it proves
is, that Believing is a distinct Thing from Repenting, Loving, and doing
Justice.

BUT after all, you may say, as some have taught; The Law puts us upon doing,
but the Gospel upon Believing. Here I would ask, How you know this? You Will
easily answer, The Gospel says it in plain Words, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. But at the same Time, don't it put us as much
upon doing, and us plainly say? If you will enter into Life, keep the
Commandments. And our Savior, Not every One, that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the King of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father
which is in Heaven.

NOW are not these Texts of the same divine Authority, and as much to be
regarded as the other? Especially if we consider that in the Gospel Revelation,
we are oftener urged to Duty and Obeying, than we are to Faith and Believing;
and if you will search from one End thereof to the other, you will find, at least,
two Texts in Favor of the former, to one in Favor of the latter. In this
great Question now under Consideration, which (as I have shown before) has been
asked in the Scripture eight Times; the Answers thereto have been given six
Times for doing and obeying, and but twice for believing.

HOW then must we understand these Things? Are there two or three different
Ways to Heaven? Is divine Revelation become fallible, that there is no
depending on it, or so mysterious, that none can understand it? Is the
infallible Spirit of GOD, got bewildered, and so gives different Directions in
the important Affair of our Salvation? at one Time sends us to the Covenant of
Works, at another to the Covenant of Grace? Tells One to believe in CHRIST,
Another to take his Yoke upon him; and a Third, to keep the Commands of the
moral Law? Or, are CHRIST, and his Apostles at Variance in their Doctrines, and
Instructions, and not only militate against one another, but against themselves
too?

IN this Case, what must we do? Are we left altogether at Uncertainties? Is
every Man at Liberty to settle his Opinion in Religion, according to his own
Humor and Fancy, and pick and choose such Scriptures only, as he can shape to
his Mind? Or must we fix down upon some certain Texts, and conster them in the
most rigid Manner, as some are wont to do, and then at all. Adventures buckle
and bend the Rest to them; though it be never so contrary to all Rules of
Grammar, and Interpretation. If this will do, then the Rule for understanding
the Scriptures, given by a great Divine, which is a good One, for aught I know,
may take Place here: That is, That those Duties that are most insisted on, and
oftenest repeated in the Scriptures, are of the greatest Weight, and most to be
regarded, and those that are less insisted on, and more seldom mentioned, are
of less Importance, and not so much to be regarded. Watt^'^ Ortho. and Char. p.
239.
By this Rule, for the Reason before given, Works and Obedience must have the
Pre-eminence to Faith and Believing, But I see no Need of any of these Refuges
in the present Difficulties.

AS Joseph said of Pharaoh's Dreams, so I may say of these Scriptures; they are
but one, and the Interpretation is one. They all lead us unto CHRIST, as the
only Savior, and into the Way, he proposes to save us by; that is, to
acknowledge him, such a divine Person as he is revealed in the Gospel; depend
upon him for Salvation, and follow him; that is, comply with his Religion. Thus
when Faith is spoken of as the Term of Acceptance with GOD; it means not only
that we believe CHRIST to be the Savior, but also that we receive the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and comply with its Precepts. So when Obedience is
made necessary to Salvation; is not the same Thing implied? that there must be
the receiving of the Doctrines, as well as complying with the Precepts of the
Gospel.

AGAIN. When our Savior at various Times directs us, to believe in him; take
his Yoke upon us; follow him, and keep his Commandments. Is not the Counsel and
Advice uniform, and though different in Words, yet all aiming at the same Thing?
And are not each one of these Duties expressive, and implicative of all the
rest? Just so it is in the Cases before mentioned. The Apostle tells the
Jailer, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved. Now don't
every One take his Meaning to be, that the Joylor must believe CHRIST to be the
Savior, become his Disciple, and follow him, in order to Salvation? And when
CHRIST directs the young Man in the Gospel, the Way to Life, the Result is the
same; the End of their Conversation was, Sell that thou have, give to the Poor,
come and follow me, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. Where is there then
any material Difference in these Answers? For my part, I can see none.

IF you should be disposed to reply once more If the Case be so, why are these
Things so differently expressed in the Scripture? The Answer may be, to let us
know, that the gospel Religion, is a Religion of the whole Man; that the
Understanding and Will, both Heart and Life must be engaged in it; there must
be both Faith and Works; and that these are all of a Piece; GOD has joined them
together, and no Man may put them assunder. Yea, they are so close^^ connected,
that you cannot separate them, without destroying them both: There can be no
Gospel Faith, without Obedience, nor a Gospel Obedience, without Faith.

AND I may add, as another Reason hereof; possibly these Answers were given in
this different Manner, on purpose to adapt them to the particular Circumstances
of these Querists, which were very different. Peter's Converts were some, that
had a Hand in CHRIST'S Crucifixion; therefore he tells them, "Repent, of this
your Wickedness, and be baptized," The young Man in the Gospel was disposed to
do some Thing for eternal Life, and possibly though it, he could merit it thereby:
Therefore CHRIST wisely takes him in his own Way, and tells him, Keep the
Conmandments; but finally leads him into the Gospel Scheme of following him.
This Jailer it seems, was a Heathen, and likely, an utter Stranger to
Revelation; therefore the Apostle tells him Believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

THIS brings me to the particular Consideration of these Words, as I proposed,
which is to enquire, What is meant here, by Believing on the LORD JESUS CHRIST.
And doubtless this means something more than the Belief of Devils, or any
wicked Men, something peculiar to GOD'S own Children, that is, the Faith of
GOD'S Elect: To which the Gospel promises eternal Life. For the Apostle says
here, Believe -- and thou shall be Saved. And is the same Thing, which Divines
are wont to call a justifying or saving Faith. So called, not because there is
any Thing meritorious in it, or that it justifies us in the Sight of GOD by
virtue of its own Worth, and Excellence; but because it has pleased GOD in his
great Condescension to Men, to make it the Term of our Acceptance with him,
through the Redemption of his Son* And so He will bestow eternal Life on all
such, in whom it is found.

IT IS a little beside my present Subject to show, how this divine Principle is
wrought in the Soul; yet I would observe once for all, That it is done and
effected by the divine Agency; or if you like the Phrase better, by the special
Operations of the Holy Spirit upon the Soul; enlightening the Understanding,
renewing the Will, and aiding, and assisting our weak and feable Powers, in
this Work of Grace. He that has true Faith, is one born of the Spirit. But
then, this is generally, and ordinarily done by, or through the Instrumentality
of Means, such as the Ministry of the Word, the Gospel, and its Ordinances, as
the Apostle observes. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And thus concludes, So then
Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God. Romans ^ 14. ^^.


NOW in discribing this great Article of the Christian Religion, I shall not go
into the Method, (as some have done) of describing it in a logical Manner, by
its Object, and Subject, its Matter and Form, its Causes and Effects; nor take
the Opinions of the Learned; but the holy Scriptures, which are the only Rule
of Faith and Manners, for my Guide and Directory herein: Being of Opinion, that
as it is Revelation alone, which has made Faith in the Redeemer, the Term of
our Acceptance with GOD; so Revelation is the best Judge of this Matter; and
the likliest. Way to get a true Understanding of it, is to search the
Scriptures, and compare one Part with another. Accounting also, that the
Description of this Faith, as it is given by CHRIST himself, and his holy
Apostles, is more accommodated to the Genius and simplicity of the Gospel
Religion; and better adapted to Humane Capacities, especially those of the
vulgar Sort, than all the nice and critical Distinctions in the World, that are
made herein by the Learned. According to the Gospel then I take it, that a
saving Faith contains these three Things following; all necessary and essential
to it, I say essential, because if either be wanting, it ceases to be such a
Faith. As,

1. A REAL Belief of the Truth of divine Revelation, or that the Scriptures are
the Word of GOD: That is, a full Assent of the Mind, to the Truth of all the
divine Doctrines, and Propositions therein contained. And this arising not
merely from Custom or Education, but from solid Reason, and a full Conviction
of the Truth of these Things, by proper Evidence, and such as the Nature of the
Case requires. The Sum of which is, that there is one God, and me Mediator
between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. That He is the only Savior of the
World; and that the Gospel is the only Way of Salvation, besure to them that
live under it. This is the Kind of Faith, the Apostle speaks of; without which,
it is impossible to please God. For he that comes to God, must believe that he
is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb. xi. ^


THIS is one Thing in a saving Faith, and the very Foundation of it. And it may
be, some have thought this to be the Whole, but if so, it is a great Mistake.
Though it be the Foundation, yet it is not the Building; though it be the Corner,
yet it is not the Top-Stone. For if this be all, it is at best but a dead Faith,
if the Apostle James be right; and no more, than what the Devils have; and for
aught I know, Pilate and Judas had it; so may any other Person too, and yet be
in the utmost Despair.

2. ANOTHER Thing contained in a saving Faith, is a Trusting and Depending on
JESUS CHRIST for Life and Salvation; on his Sacrifice for Pardon of Sin, and on
his Righteousness for Justification before GOD. This, I take to be the Meaning
of these Scripture Phrases, Coming to Christ for Life, and looking to him for
Salvation. JESUS CHRIST is represented in the Scripture, as a Redeemer and
Savior. Now Faith, as it corresponds, and answers to these noble Characters,
is Trust and Reliance; it is applying to CHRIST, as the great Physician, to heal
our spiritual Maladies; a flying to him, as the only Refuge, to shelter us from
the Wrath of GOD.

FROM a Sight of CHRIST'S Abilities and Willingness to save, and a Sense of its
own Wants, the Soul is moved to put its Trust under the Shadow of his Wings, to
depend on him for all its Wants in this Life, to be conducted through Death; and
finally presented faultless and blameless before the Throne of GOD. This is
another necessary Part of saving Faith, but yet both these are not the Whole;
although some, if I mistake not, have represented it in this Light, as only a
believing JESUS CHRIST to be the Savior, and resting in him for Salvation. Yet
if I may be allowed to give my Opinion, I must think, that all this comes short
of a saving Faith; that one principle Part is yet behind; yea all this may be
without the least Participation of a divine Nature.

FOR where is the Inconsistency of wicked Men's trusting in GOD for the
Salvation of their Souls? I can see none. They are as fearful of Misery, and as
willing to be happy as any others; and when they see Danger approaching, and no
Help any where else, they will fly to GOD, and trust in him therefore. This is
the Way of the worst Men in Times of Danger. Thus the Scripture represents the
Matter; When GOD slew them, then they sought him. Psalm lxxviii. 3^.
So the Prophet; The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the Priests thereof
teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money, yet will they lean
upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? None Evil can come upon us.
Was not this the Barrier of the Jews in CHRIST'S Time, against their Rejection?
When they said, We have Abraham to our Father, that is, we are the Children of
Abraham, the Promise of GOD is to us, it cannot sail, and this is our
Dependence. And if we come to plain Matter of Fact; is not this the Case with
Many, of corrupt Principles, and no better Lives? They have a Hope in GOD; and
if you will inquire into the Reason of it, they will boldly tell you, We know we
are Sinners, but CHRIST has died to save such* there is Merit enough in him; he
is a whole Savior, and our sole Dependence is on the Righteousness and Merits
of JESUS CHRIST. But you will say, All this is Nothing but Presumption, a false
Hope, and Trust. I know it well enough; but all Hope and Trust in GOD will be
no better, if there is Nothing else. Wherefore,

3. The last Thing contained in a saving Faith, is the Love of God, or a
Principle of universal Obedience reigning in the Heart. I say Love, or a
Principle of Obedience; because I take it, that Love is the very Principle
itself, that operates in Obedience. Love, Benevolence, or a Disposition to do
good and right, (all which are the same in Principle This Principle is a most
noble, divine Perfection, whereby the Supreme Being is always disposed to act
in the wisest, and best Manner; and to, treat all his Creatures; as it is most
fit and reasonable, they should be treated by him. And is called by various
Names, according to the Diversity of its Operation, which arises in a great
Measure from the different State and Condition of the Object it is exercised
upon. For Instance, when God reveals himself, and keeps his Covenant, it is
called Truth and Faithfulness; when he communicates Good, it is called
Goodness, or Benevolence; when he pities the Distressed, it is Mercy and
Compassion, when he approves of any, it is Love, Esteem, or Complacency; and
when he renders to any, according to their Desert, either of Merit, or Demerit,
it is Justice and Righteousness. Thus all these divine Perfections, which to our
narrow Capacities, appear many and various, are, really but an infinite, and
most glorious ONE. Even as GOD and CHRIST are One. And this same divine
Principle, when we are made to Participate thereof, influences, and operates
just in the same Manner, according to its Measure, and our Capacity therefore.
The same Principle, that dispose us to Kinkness and Charity toward our Fellow
Creatures, will dispose us to Love and Esteem, Subjection and Obedience to the
Supreme Being and all others, that are worthy and deseving of the same.
) in every Being whatsoever, is the great Spring of all right and rational
Action, both of Munificence in the Supreme, or any superior Being, and of
Obedience, and Subjection in an inferior, and dependant Being. Thus the great
Source of all the Divine Beneficence toward the whole Creation, is Love. This I
shall illustrate in one Instance only that is, the Redemption of CHRIST, and
this I Will do in the Words of Inspiration, God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting Life. John ill. 16.
This is the Spring of all real Beneficence in the Rich and Wealthy, toward the
Poor and Needy; and of true parental Care for Posterity. In like Manner, the
Spring is the same, from whence all dutiful Behavior in an Inferior does
proceed, in Children toward their Parents, in Subjects toward the Magistrate,
and in the Creature toward it is Maker. This noble, and divine Principle, I
take to be implied in a saving Faith; and not only so, but the actual Operation
of it too, at least, so far as to bow the Heart, bond the Will, and bring every
Faculty of the Soul into Subjection to CHRIST. Therefore, I expressed it
before, as a Principle reigning in the Heart.

IN a Word then, a saving Faith is the Submission of the whole Man to JESUS
CHRIST, as our Savior, Lord, and Master; a believing and depending on him for
Salvation, and yielding up ourselves to him, as his Disciples, and Followers;
or in other Words, a hearty Compliance, or falling in with, the Gospel Way of
Salvation. This, I cannot but think, is the main Point, the Spirit and
Quintessence of a Saving Faith. Nothing short of it is the Thing; but when once
a Person comes to this, he has the Gospel Term of Acceptance with GOD; the
Faith that interests us in the Righteousness of CHRIST.

THE whole Affair, as Things appear to me, stands in this Light; Mankind by
their Sin, and Rebellion had departed from the living GOD; by which, a great
Breach was made between them. The Most High, by the Gospel, is bringing about
their Return, and a Reconciliation between him and them. This is all done in a
Covenant Way; it is a solemn Transaction between GOD and Men, and some Thing to
be done by both Parties. The Language is the same now, as it was in ancient
Times; I will be your God, and ye shall be my People; though the Terms hereof,
are something different now, from what they were then. The Most High first
makes the Motion for our Return; this he does by revealing his Mind and Will,
concerning our Salvation; offering his own Son to be a Mediator herein;
appointing the Terms of our Reconciliation, and inviting us to comply with the
same.

NOW our Return to GOD must be, as one expresses it, "An Echo to this Voice of
the LORD." An Answer to these Calls, and such a Behavior, as bears some
Analogy to these divine Motions; that is, a cordial Entertainment of these
Messages, accepting these Offers, and complying with these Terms. This the
Scripture in general calls Faith. Thus we are said to be saved through Faith; and
justified, not by the Works of the Law; but by the Faith of Christ. But then,
this Return, as it respects the different Ways, wherein GOD is moving toward
us, bears different Denominations, according to the various Actings of the Soul
herein. For Instance, as Faith is a Receiving the Doctrines of Revelation for
Truth; it is called Belief, as it is an accepting of CHRIST as our Savior; it
is called Trust and Reliance; and as it is a Compliance with the Gospel Way of
Salvation, it is called Obedience. In this Sense, I understand a saving Faith
to mean all these Acts of the Soul, Believing, Trusting and Obeying. And this
is the Return of the whole Man to GOD, every Ways correspondent to these divine
Motives, wherein GOD applies himself to every Faculty of the Soul, and has so
adapted them, as to draw the same into Exercise and Action. Thus the Revelation
of divine Truth, is to employ our Understandings; the Offers of CHRIST, and
Salvation, to move and allure our Affections; and the Precepts of the Gospel,
to put our Will, and active Powers upon Action, and compliance therewith. Now
when all these Faculties are thus cordially set to work toward GOD, in
compliance with these Designs of Grace; no Doubt our Reconciliation to him is
accomplished. This is the Sinner's Return to GOD, according to the Gospel, and
whoever thus complies, and so answers these Calls, has the Faith of God's
Elect, and is an Heir to eternal Life.

IN this View of Faith, when these several Actings of the Soul therein, are
compared together, those of the Will must have the Pre-eminence; and a
Submission to CHRIST, is the most noble Part of Faith; in as much as the
practical Part of Religion, is preferable to the Knowledge, and Profession
thereof, and that the Illumination of the Understanding, and the Alluring of
the Affections, are but the Means, and for this End, to gain the Will, and
bring the Man into an entire Subjection to the Obedience of CHRIST.

IN this same Manner, Dr. Watts, if I mistake not, describes a saving Faith, or
Coming to CHRIST; And Mr. Pool in his Annotations, having been speaking of
Faith, as an Assent to the Propositions of the Gospel, and Trusting in CHRIST
for Salvation, says in these Words, Which no Man can indeed do, without doing
what in him lies, to fulfill the Condition upon which CHRIST has promised
Life, and Salvation; that is, keeping the Commandments of GOD. His Annotations
on John iii, 18.
But I have greater Witnesses than these; they are CHRIST, and his Apostles.
And I persuade myself, you will be of my Mind, if you will but consider the
Scripture Account of (...) saving Faith.

THUS they represent it to be a receiving CHRIST, as the Assembly of Divines
and all Men agree. But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become
the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. John i. 12.
What is meant by receiving CHRIST here? You will say perhaps, Believing and
trusting in him. This is true, but is this all? Don't it as really mean
receiving his Commandments, and keeping them? Can a Man receiving CHRIST, and
not be his Disciple, and Follower, or without doing his Will? If you think this
is stretching the Matter too far; yet you will own, it is a receiving CHRIST, as
he is revealed in the Gospel. And this will bring it to the same Thing. For
Nothing is plainer than this, that CHRIST is there set forth, as our Prophet to
teach us; our Priest to make Atonement for us; and our King to reign in and
over us. Now can there be a receiving him in all these Offices, without an
entire Subjection to his Government? Believing in him may receive him in the
first, and trusting in him, in the second of these Capacities, but it is
Obedience that receives him as our King; and nothing short of this, can be a
proper Acknowledgement of him as such. It Is not all the World can make me
believe, a Person to be a loyal Subject of King George, that lives in open
Rebellion against him.

AGAIN. When the Scripture describes true Faith, so as to distinguish it from
all Counterfeits; it tells us, It purifies the Heart; it works by Love. Gal.
v. 6.
And also, that this Love don't lie in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed;
that is, in obeying. By all which, it is plain, that these Qualities, and
Operations, the Purity of the Heart, loving and obeying GOD, are of the Esse,
and the vital Acts of Faith; not of believing strictly considered, but of a
saving Faith; and that as much as Form, and Extension, or any other Quality, is
of the Essence of Matter. Only remove these Qualities from it, and it ceases to
be such a Faith.

TRUE Faith has Love and Obedience in its very Nature, as much as the Sun has
Light, and Leaven its fermenting Quality. The very Ideas we have of these two
Objects, as such, arise from these essential Qualities; the Idea of the one, is
its Light or Shining; and of the other, its fermenting Quality. Remove these
Qualities, and you lose the Ideas of these Objects; take away the Light from
the one, and it is not a Sun, destroy the fermenting Quality of the other, and
it ceases to be Leaven. Even so it is in Faith; take away these Qualities of
Love and Obedience, and it is not saving.

HOW full to my Purpose is the Apostle James? But will thou know, O vain Man,
that Faith without Works, that is, without Obedience is dead? James ii. 20.
If this be so, then Faith cannot have any Life before there is Works; and then
it as plainly follows, that it is Works, that give Life to it. If this should
seem strange to any, I desire them to consider, that the true Meaning of this
Word, (Works) as the Scriptures uses it in a religious Sense, is Obedience to
God. And by it (as I have shown before) the Scripture means an internal, as
well as external Obedience. So here and all along in this Discourse, I mean by
it Repentance of Sin, the Love of God, and the Submission, and Conformity of
the Heart, as (...) as Life to his Will. Now these Acts and Operations of the
Soul being joined to that of Believing, do constitute a saving Faith. And in
this Manner I think, the Apostle describes the Faith of Abraham when he says,
Was not Abraham justified by Works when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the
Altar. And then tells us: This was the fulfilling of that Scripture. Abraham
believed God^ and it was imputed or counted to him for Righteousness. The
Question here is, How was this a fulfilling of that Scripture? The general
Answer is, This Act of his Obedience proved and evidenced the sincerity of his
Faith. But is this the Apstle's Sense of it? Don't he rather mean, that
Abraham's offering his Son in Obedience to God's Command, was explanatory of,
and discovered the Nature, and Quality of the Faith, which was counted to him
for Righteousness? And showed wherein it consisted, that it was a working
operative Faith; and really contained in it, a Conformity, and Submission to
the Will of God. If this is not his Meaning, this Instance of Abraham is
Nothing to his Purpose. For the Point, that he is here laboring, is to show,
that Faith without Works is dead, and that it must include Obedience in it, in
order to make it saving; and brings this Instance to prove it; and then
concludes, hereb^ Abraham's Faith was made perfect and the Scripture was
fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, etc. -- And then if Abraham's
Faith, which was counted to him for Righteousness, was a Faith without Works,
or not including Obedience in i^, for the Apostle to say, he was justified by
offering or when he offered his Son; would be so far from fulfilling that
Scripture, that it would contradict, and overthrow it. And in this Sense, I
believe, this Word is generally in the Scriptures to be understood. Says
CHRIST. I am not come to destroy the Law* ^ut to fulfill it. Which means, not to
prove there was such a Law given; but to show what the Law is; pu^ its Precepts
into Practice; explain, and give the full Sense of it agreeable to its Nature
and the Extent thereof, which the Jewish Doctors and so much c^^taile^, and
interpreted in so (...), contracted and superficial a Manner. O^ which, we have
several Instances in the Gospel.
I don't mean, that Works are the Foundation of believing the Truth, or that
they make this belief real; but that they render this Belief acceptable to GOD,
and make it a saving Faith. That this is the true Meaning of the Apostle,
appears from the following Comparison he brings to illustrate this Doctrine by.
For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, ^o Faith without Works is dead
also. Now if there be any Force in the Apostle's Argument drawn from hence; it
must be this, that all Believing without Obedience, is no more pleasing to GOD,
than a dead, and lifeless Corpse can be to us; and that, as it is the Spirit,
that animates, and enlivens the Body; even so it is Obedience that enlivens
Faith, and renders it acceptable in the Sight of GOD.

THIS great Truth, if there needs any Thing more to be said upon it, may yet be
abundantly confirmed by these following Considerations.

1. THAT the Scriptures universally make Obedience, and Holiness of Heart and
Life, absolutely necessary to the Favor of GOD, and eternal Life. If you will
search the Scripture, you will find this to be the Language of the Old
Testament. The Sacrifices of GOD are a broken Spirit. Who shall ascend unto the
Hill of the LORD, and stand in his holy Place? He that has clean Hands, and a
pure Heart. Fear GOD, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole Duty of
Man. This Thing commanded I them, saying, obey my Voice, and I will be your
GOD. Jer. vii 23.
He has showed thee O Man, what is good, and what does the LORD require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with your GOD?
Mich. vi. 9.


THE Language also of the New Testament is the same. The Pure in Heart shall
see GOD. To do good, and communicate are the Sacrifices with which GOD is well
pleased. He that does Righteousness, is righteous even as GOD is righteous.
Without Holiness no Man shall see the LORD. The Unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of GOD. Neither shall any Thing enter thereinto, that defiles, or
works Abomination, or makes a Lie. Now when I read these peremptory
Declarations, and consider, that GOD is the same Yesterday, today, and
forever; that his Glory, and Man's true Happiness is ever the same; that the
Scriptures are all of a piece, and were indicted by the same infalible Spirit of
Truth; I say, when I consider these Things, I must conclude, that Religion is
the same in Substance, as ever it was; that Holiness, and Righteousness are
absolutely necessary to the Favor of GOD, and no Faith can be saving till it
has something of these divine Qualities in it.

AND I am the more confirmed in this Opinion, when I consider these
unchangeable Maxims, viz. That the Obligation of Obedience to GOD, results from
our Relation to him, and can never cease so long as that subsists. That Man's
true Happiness lies in the Enjoyment of his Maker; and a Conformity to him is
absolutely necessary in order thereunto. Agreeable hereunto the grand Plan
formed in the divine Mind for his own Glory, and Man's Happiness, was in the
Way of our Obedience, Righteousness and Holiness. These Things were eternally
designed to be the Foundation of our Enjoyment of GOD. The original Method
proposed for putting the same into Execution, was Man's personal, and perfect
Obedience to the Law: But this failing, through Man's Deficiency, opened the Way
for the Gospel Dispensation. Because we are become weak by reason of Sin, and
could not enter into Life by the Law; GOD in Mercy has interposed, and sent his
Son to undertake for us in this great Affair.

AND now, is the divine Plan any ways altered? It Is true, the Manner of
accomplishing it is, but the Plan is the same. Is not a Conformity to GOD now
as necessary to the Enjoyment of him as ever it was? Did Not CHRIST come to
restore in us the Image of GOD, that we have lost? Don't the Gospel aim at the
same Sanctity, and Holiness of Life as the Law did? I Am sure, it tells us,
CHRIST came to Save his People from their Sins. Precious Promises are given to
us thereby these we might be Partakers of a divine Nature. 2. Pet. i. 4.
(...) of GOD that brings Salvation, teaches us, that de^^^ Ungodliness, and
wordly Lusts, we should live soberly, (...), and Godly in this present World.
Tit. ^i. 11.


IF these Things are so, then our Faith, although it must look to, and rest on
CHRIST, as our Savior, and for Strength to do all these Things* ye^ it cannot
be considered as loving, till it contains this Sanctity, and Holiness in it.
This will still further appear, if we view Faith in every Light it is wont to be
considered in; either as the Image of GOD on the Soul, ^n Union to CHRIST,
Conversion to GOD; or that which brings Glory to him, and is useful to Men; in
all which it will also appear, that this is the most noble Part, yea the
Perfection of Faith. Therefore,

2. IF we consider Faith as the Image of GOD upon the Soul, it lies in this
divine Conformity. True Faith may be justly called a divine Principle, and the
Image of GOD. So the Scripture represents it. Whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ is born of GOD. 1 John v. 1.
And surely such an One has the divine Image upon him. By which I can
understand Nothing else, but some Resemblance of the divine Being; a
Christ-like Temper, and Disposition, an Imitation of him, and acting for
suchlike Ends, and on suchlike Principles as he does. Now wherein does our
Faith resemble or imitate the divine Being? not in trusting, and believing the
Truth: For these are Things incompatible with an Omniscient, and powerful
Being; and peculiarly to weak, and dependent Creatures. Neither are they any
Participation of a divine Nature.

BUT Love and Benevolence are divine Principles: doing right and showing Mercy,
are God-like Actions; an Imitation of him in his most noble Perfections, yea in
those Things which he declares, are his Delight. And if there be any Thing, we
may glory in, it is in this. Let not the wise Man glory in his Wisdom, neither
let the mighty man glory in his Might, let not the rich Man glory in his
Riches: But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me that I am the LORD, which exercise loving Kindness, Judgment and
Righteousness in the Earth; for in these Things I delight, says the LORD. Jer.
ix 23


THE most noble Acting of Faith then ^^es in becoming holy as GOD is holy,
merciful as he is merciful; and leading a Christ-like Life, harmless, blameless
and inoffensive in the World. This will be adorning the Doctrines of CHRIST;
shining as Lights in the World; and more pleasing to GOD, than whole burnt
Offerings, or Thousands of Rame and Ten Thousand of Rivers of Oil. Therefore,
says the Apostle, Though I have the Gift of Prophesy, and understand all
Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could remove
Mountains, and have no Charity, I am Nothing. 1 Cor. xiii. 2.
In like Manner,

3. IF we consider Faith as our Union to CHRIST, or what (...) wont to be
called a Closing with him; it must lie in Holiness, and in divine Conformity.
For there can be no Union before there is some Concord and Agreement. What
Fellowship has Righteousness, with Unrighteousness? What Communion has Light
with Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? So also, if we
consider, as I have observed before, that GOD'S Dealings with us, are in a
covenant Way; CHRIST offers himself us on Gospel Terms; that is, that he will
become ours, if we will become his. Now believing and trusting in CHRIST,
strictly considered, is not a closing with this Offer; though these may be
necessary pre-requisites, and in Part thereof; yet do not come up to the Terms
of the same. But it is yielding up ourselves in Obedience to CHRIST, and to be
his, that is, the Fulfillment of these Conditions: And when this is done, the
Bargain is closed. The Believer is CHRIST'S, and CHRIST is the Believer's, by
an everlasting Covenant, that shall never be broken.

THIS will appear very plain, if we consider the Comparison, the Scripture
makes much use of, to set forth this divine Union by. And that is the Marriage
Covenant. In Allusion to which, it is said to GOD'S People, Thy Maker is thine
Husband. And the Church is called the Spouse, and the Lamb's Wife. In this
Covenant, we all know, the Offers of Marriage must be made, and complied with;
both Parties must covenant, and contract; the Man offers the Woman to be hers,
and she must give her Consent to be his, before the Covenant is made, or she
can be entitled to his Estate. Again,

4. IF we consider Faith as our Conversion to GOD, it lies in Holiness and
Obedience. Such is the Alienation of our Affections from GOD, and the
Opposition of our Wills to him, by Reason of our Sins; that in order to a
Reconciliation to him, the Scripture plainly intimates, that there must be a
great Change wrought in us. Except ye be converted -- ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. xviii. 3.
This Change the Scripture calls a New Birth, a Resurrection from the Dead, and
a New Creation. By all which is meant nothing more or less, than a Change of
our Affections from the World to GOD, or a being turned from the Ways of Sin to
those of Godliness. Now true Faith is this saving Change, so called; it is that
by which we pass from a State of Nature to a State of Grace: And so by the true
Believer, and true Convert we mean One, and the same Person.

THE Question then is; what is it in Faith that is this Change? The Answer, is
not believing and trusting in CHRIST for Salvation; for, as we have shown
before, a Man may do all this, and yet be attached to this Lusts. But it is his
Conformity, and Obedience to GOD. And this will appear by considering wherein
all the Wickedness, and Rebellion of the World, against GOD consists; and that
in one Word is their Nonconformity, and Disobedience to his Law. For Sin is
the Transgression of the Law. And where no Law is, there is no Transgression.
GOD is never offended with any that have not broke his Laws. If so, that Man's
Apostasy and Departure from GOD does lie in their Disobedience to him, and
Nothing else; then it follows that so long as they remain in a State of
Disobedience, there is not this Change in them; but they are in a State of
Rebellion, as much as ever, and no more in a State of Reconciliation with GOD
than the fallen Angels are.

AND it as plainly follows that this Change and our Return to GOD can lie in
Nothing short of becoming obedient to him. If Disobedience makes the Breach
between GOD and Men; Nothing but Obedience can heal it; if the former puts us
into a State of Rebellion; Nothing short of the latter can bring us into a
State of Reconciliation again. You Will say, it may be, By this Argument, a
perfect Obedience is now required of us, in Order to Acceptance with GOD. I
answer, No; but an upright and sincere One is: And that will be accepted. For
such is the Grace of the Gospel, through the Redemption of CHRIST, who has
performed a perfect Obedience for us; that if there be a willing Mind, it is
accepted according to that a Man has, and not according to that he has not. 2
C^^ x^i. ^^
Let me add,

ONCE more, it is this View of Faith alone, that makes it honorable to God,
and useful in this World. What honor to GOD is all the Faith of Devils? No
more will be all the Faith of Men, without Obedience to him. To call CHRIST,
LORD, and Master, and not to do his Will, is but an Affront to him, and mere
Mockery in Religion. A free and cheerful Obedience to his Commandments, is the
greatest Honor, that either Men or Angels can give to their Maker: Yea it is
the sincerest Token of our Love, and the highest Acknowledgment of his
Supremacy and Perfections that we are capable of making.

SO also, of what Profit is all our Faith to our fellow Men, if it don't make us
just and righteous, kind and merciful, and exemplary for Piety and Holiness in
the World? Yea, Persons making a Show in Religion, pretending to have a Zeal
for GOD, and Communion with him, when these Things are wanting, do but bring a
Scandal on Religion, and expose themselves to the Contempt and Railery of the
World.

AGAIN, of what Advantage will all Faith be to ourselves, if it don't humble
our proud Hearts, mortify our Lusts and Passions, and bring us into an entire
Subjection to JESUS CHRIST? No Doubt these are eternal Truths, viz. Obedience
is better than Sacrifice, Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft; and true
Faith, is that Holiness, without which no Man shall see the LORD. Though Heaven
and Earth may pass away, yet these shall abide forever and ever.

THUS have I given you my Thoughts upon this great Article of our Religion.
Therefore take your Bible, and look if they are not agreeable to the Scripture,
reject them; but if they are, let no Bias, or Prejudice keep you from embracing
them.

AND now I beg your Patience a few Minutes longer, while I add two or three
Things more, as follows;

1. BY this Discourse I would not be understood, in the least to intimate, that
there is any Merit in our Works of Righteousness; or that Obedience, as
distinguished from believing, is the whole of the Gospel Religion; or to cast
the least Slight on the Redemption of CHRIST, or the Duties of believing, and
trusting in him, as though they were not necessary to Salvation. For I fully
believe, these Things absolutely necessary to eternal Life; that it is, by
Grace we are Saved; that our Acceptance of GOD is for the Sake of, and through
the Redemption of CHRIST, and that believing, and trusting in him, is necessary
in Order hereunto.

BUT what I would, is, that all this falls short of the Mark the Gospel aims
at; it is not the closing with CHRIST the Gospel means; but one Thing needful is
yet behind, that is, the Image of GOD as a divine Conformity. This is the grand
Point and main Thing; without which no Man shall see the LORD. This is the
Thing sinful Men want; for this End CHRIST came into the World; the Gospel was
given; Believing and Trusting in CHRIST were instituted as Means, even to
restore this Image of GOD in the Soul. Now if this is not done, the End of the
Gospel is no ways answered; CHRIST has died in vain, your Faith is vain, and ye
are yet in yours Sins.

HERE you may ask, "Is not this a legal Way of Justification?" I answer, legal
or illegal it matters not; if it be the Way the Gospel establishes, and CHRIST,
and his Apostles preached up. Yet there is a wide Difference between them; by
the Law, a Man was to be justified by his own Righteousness; by the Gospel,
it is by, or through the Righteousness of Another: By the former, a perfect
Obedience was required; by the latter a sincere one is accepted through the
Righteousness of CHRIST. But a Principle of Obedience, a divine Conformity is
absolutely necessary to Acceptance with GOD under all Dispensations. Can it
possibly be otherwise? Are there any Contraries in Nature greater than Sin and
Holiness? Can a Swinish Nature, whose whole Delight is in the Filth of Sin,
relish the pure Joys Heaven? Can an holy GOD delight in Sin, or approve of it?
And a Devil or a Murderer be received to Glory, before he is renewed and
sanctified? If this could be, surely there was no Necessity of CHRIST'S
Redemption, or the Gift of the Holy Spirit to sanctify and fit us for Glory.

NO more can any One be purified in the Sight of GOD; the Meaning of which is,
approved and accepted as righteous by him, without some Thing of this divine
Conformity. This is a Consequence so clear, from the foregoing Premises, that
it is not easily denied; yet so contrary to the Antinomian Notion, that a
little to evade the former and support the latter; a subtle Distinction, has
been made by Some, between the Right of Heirship, or a Title to eternal Life,
and the Right of Fitness, or a Qualification for the Enjoyment of it; and so
they say, it is Believing alone that justifies and gives the Title to the one,
but it is Holiness, that is the Fitness and Qualification for the other. That it
is in this Case, as with a Child in Infancy; though by Birth he is an Heir to an
Estate, yet it is unfit for actual Possession, 'til he comes to Manhood. Even
so One justified by Faith, is an Heir to eternal Life, but must be fitted by
Holiness, before he can enter thereinto. An artful Device to support an
unscriptural Doctrine! But has this Misfortune in it, that it no Ways serves
the Purpose for which it is designed. For the Reason why an Heir to an Estate,
in his Minority cannot inherit the same, is not, because he wants a legal
Fitness therefore, but because of his natural Incapacity to improve it. So, not
only the Person justified, but the greatest Saint while in the Body, is unfit
for the actual Enjoyment of eternal Life; not because he wants the moral, or
the Gospel Qualification; but because Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God. Every One therefore, so soon as he is justified in the Sight to
GOD, has this moral Qualification; and should his earthly Tabernacle, that
Moment be dissolved, he would be fit to enter into his Master's Joy. How plain
is this, if you will but consider, that a Man is justified either before any
divine Conformity, or afterward? If before, then it follows, that a wicked
Man, that hates GOD, and whom GOD hates, is yet approved, and accepted as
righteous by him. An Inconsistency too great to be believed! But if it is
afterward, then the justified Person has the divine Image upon him, and such
an One is fitted for the Enjoyment of his Maker.

2. THIS View of Faith will help us to see the Harmony and Agreement that there
is in the sacred Scriptures, and reconcile the seeming Contradictions between
the Preaching of CHRIST, and his Apostles; I say, seeming Contradictions; for I
look upon it, they are only in Appearance, and not in Reality. And a little
Attention to the Ambiguity of Language in general, and in what a various Sense
the Scripture uses these Words, Faith, Law, Works, and suchlike, will solve
the whole Difficulty.

YET a wide Difference is made by Some, if not a real Contradiction between
them; and it is generally done in this Manner. Through too much Inattention to
these Things, for Fear of slumbering on the Jewish Error of seeking Salvation
by the Works of the Law; and mistaking the true Meaning of the Apostle's
Arguments to confute the same; they take saving Faith to be a distinct Thing
from Obedience, complete and entire without it; and that this is not to be
brought into its Consideration as such. And now these Difficulties arise; Paul
preaches up Justification by Faith, without Works. CHRIST makes Obedience to
the Commandments absolutely necessary thereto. And James says, a Man is
justified by Works, and not by Faith only. And upon the foregoing Suppositions,
they are inextricable Ones too. For they set the Scripture at Variance with
itself, the Apostle Paul against his Lord and Master, and against himself too.
For there is not one sacred Writer that expresses himself in stronger Terms for
Obedience than he does, when he tells to this effect. That in CHRIST JESUS
Nothing avails, but a new Creature, or keeping the Commandments of GOD, and
that all Faith without Charity is Nothing.

NOW to extricate themselves from these Difficulties, they have suchlike
Refuges as these, viz. That Paul speaks of our Justification before GOD, but
James of our Justification before Men: That the Former speaks of the
Justification of a Sinner, but the Latter of the Justification of the Faith of
a Believer. But to evince this, I believe, there needs a new Revelation, for I
don't think the Bible gives the least Hint of it. But what is worse than all
this, they represent JESUS CHRIST as a legal Preacher only, that he did not
preach up the true Gospel Way of Salvation, as his Apostles did afterward; but
preached up the Works of the Law, to prepare Men to receive it from them. A new
Doctrine this! The Scripture tells us, CHRIST taught the Way of Life truly,
Grace and Truth came by him, and that he preached the Gospel. But these Men
tell us, that he preached the Law, and not the true Gospel. The Scripture tells
us, John the Baptist came to prepare the Way for CHRIST. But these in Effect,
that He came to prepare the Way for his Apostles. No Wonder Men r^n upon such
Rocks and Shoals, when they leave the Light of divine Revelation, to be guided
by that of their own Understandings! For all these Difficulties arise not from
the Scripture, but from a misconstruing the same. Only view Faith in this
Light, as a Believing and Trusting in CHRIST, and an entire Subjection to his
Will; than which, I think, nothing is plainer from the Scripture; and all these
Difficulties vanish at once; there is no Discord any where, the Gospel and
Epistles sweetly harmonize, and teach the same Doctrines; CHRIST as the wise
Master Builder, has laid the Foundation, and his Apostles as Workers together
with him, are building thereon.

3. IN this Light, saving Faith, Regeneration, and true Conversion (which are
all, if not in a grammatical, yet in a religious Sense, one and the same)
appear plain and intelligible Things; natural and easy to be understood; and
adapted to vulgar Capacities, as they were designed by the Gospel. There is no
Mystery, nor any Thing unintelligible in them; but so plain, that he that runs
may read them; and it seems no Person of competent Understanding, unprejudiced,
and desirous to know the Truth, could easily mistake the true Meaning of them.

And yet what a Mystery do some make of these Things! When they tell us, That
saving Faith, or true Conversion is a Thing altogether unintelligible to a
natural Man; that such an One cannot understand it himself, and much less
describe it to Others, before he is specially illuminated by the Spirit of GOD,
and has true Grace wrought in his Soul; that such are ignorant of the true
Sense of the Scriptures, and so unable to open the same to Others; and that in
all spiritual Concerns, it is safer to apply to One that is converted, though of
the meanest Capacity, for Direction; than to the wisest and most learned Man in
the Scriptures, that is not a true Convert. A Notion, that is big with
Inconsistencies, and embarrasses Religion with insuperable Difficulties. By
this I don't mean in the least to undervalue true Grace or saving Faith in
JESUS CHRIST; for I esteem it to be the most noble of divine Gifts the greatest
Ornament of human Nature; and a most desirable Qualification for the Ministers
of the Gospel, and all Professors of Religion too. Yea, I look upon it a
preposterous Thing for any One to pretend to Preach a Religion to others, that
he don't heartily embrace himself But to suppose that a Man not renewed by the
Holy Ghost, cannot understand what true Faith and Conversion to GOD is, nor the
true Meaning of the Scripture, so as to ex^^^^n them to others, runs us into
these inex^^cable and everlasting Difficulties viz. It wholly confounds the
Apostle's Distinction between Spiritual Gifts and Saving Grace -- Represents
the Grace, and Mercy of divine Revelation in a diminutive Light -- Reproaches
the Teaching of our blessed Savior, as though in all his public Ministry, He
never preached a Sermon to them he came to save, that they could understand a
Word of; except it were some of those that were never written -- Render the
Revelation of GOD altogether useless to sinful Men; for if they cannot
understand it, they had as good be without it as with it. And this will justify
the Romish Practice of keeping the Bible from the common People. And what is
worse still, it leaves them under a Kind of Impossibility of ever getting
Instruction in the Scriptures, or at least totally at a loss where to go for
it. For if they only, that are thus renewed can teach them; it is in vain to
seek any where else; and who these be, they can never tell, till they can know
the Hearts of Men: And this they can never do, so long as they are in this
World. To say in this Case, we must apply to them, that we have the more Reason
to think, are born again; is to say Nothing to the Purpose. For these may be
the most dangerous Persons, and whom above all others, we have Reason to fear,
and shun upon this Account. So that this supposition is the direct Way to
frustrate the very End of divine Revelation, and leave us wholly in the dark,
and altogether at the Mercy of such proud conceited Ones who are ready to say
to others, Stand by your selves, for we are holier than you.


AND when they come to explain Faith or Conversion, they don't do it in the
natural, and plain Scripture Way, by showing its essential Qualities, such as
Repenting, Loving, and Obeying; which are the very Things the Scripture means,
even by all the Metaphors it uses to express it by: But in such a Way as if
they did not intend it should be understood. For it is all done in mystical
Language; too much like the ancient and Heathen Mythology, by high Flights of
Expressions, And Scripture Metaphors, such as, the Turning from Darkness to
Light. The Moving of the Spirit of God on dry Bones. A new Birth, a new
Creation, and a Resurrection from the Dead. And from hence they infer, That it
is a miraculous Change in the Heart, wrought by the Almighty Power GOD; an
Infusion of a new Nature, and a divine Principle of Life and Action into them,
that is altogether beyond the Reach of carnal Reason; and then they confidently
conclude, that those that are dead, or are yet unborn, cannot understand these
Things.

THIS finishes the Description of Faith, except it be to tell of some of the
Effects thereof; and thus they leave this noble Topic far worse, and more
unintelligible than they found it.

NOW what Instruction is there in all this? Or what Profit any Ways to Mankind?
Methinks, It only tends to puzzle and confuse Persons' Notions of Faith, and
Conversion; leaves them wholly in the Dark, that they know nothing what they
are, and totally at a Loss, where to go for Instruction. And these unhappy
Consequences naturally follow herefrom, viz. That People too generally are at a
Loss about their State and Condition Godward, yet easy and quiet in their
Ignorance. -- To Some, these Things appear so shocking and contrary to Reason,
that they are ready to give up all Revelation, to look upon its Religion as a
Piece of Priestcraft only, and had rather turn Deists than embrace it. -- There
are Others of a warm Imagination, and a fond Conceit of themselves, that by
some Means or other, fancy that they have passed through this Change, and are
the Children of GOD; yet the World have no other Evidence of it, but their bare
Word; and that not much to be depended upon in any other Affairs. -- And there
are Some, that are the most humble and conscientious Persons, that have the
best Character among their Neighbors for holy Living; yet walk in Darkness,
and live in Fear all their Days, that they are not born again. And all this,
because they are so puzzled about Faith and Conversion, and know not what it
is. By these Means, it comes to pass, that GOD'S own Children, are starved, and
their Bread, and that which is holy is given unto Dogs.

BUT all this, notwithstanding, if Persons will only go to the Scripture, and
take Faith to be, as it is there described, a believing the Doctrines of the
Gospel, trusting in CHRIST, and embracing his Religion, there is Nothing
mysterious, or hard to be understood in it; but it is so plain, that I may say
in the Words of a great, and good Man. I acknowledge, I have been some Times
uneasy and ashamed, to hear a Divine of the protestant Church, tell his People,
that Faith in Christ is a mysterious Thing; As though there was any Thing in
the Affair of human Life clearer than this Notion, viz. Upon a Sight of our
Sins, and Weakness to help ourselves; to commit ourselves to CHRIST, by an
humble Act of Trust in him; complying with the appointed Methods of Relief in
the Gospel. It Is but as a Man sensible of Sickness, applies himself to a wise
Physician, and trusts himself in his Hands to relieve him, complying, with the
Remedies appointed, in Order to his Cure. Dr. Watts on Orthodoxy and Charity,
P. 143.


And,

LASTLY. There is no just Cause from Reason or Scripture, for the loud
Complaints that are among Some, against good Works, or the preaching up the
same. But this most certainly arises from some other Quarter. To talk against
evil Deeds, is in Deed, just and right; but to speak against good Works, is
sinful and vile; and to do this out a Zeal for GOD is strange and
unaccountable; for this is to talk against Religion, and against the Author of
it too.

YET are there not many, who call themselves Christians, that cannot bear to
hear the Name of good Works? And is it not, because they don't like the Thing?
Therefore they are frequently speaking most diminutively of them. Yea, have not
Some been so severe in these Censures, as boldly to call them cursed Things?
But what Wild fire, and raving Zeal is this! And where will it fly? For what
are good Works, but right Actions, doing as we ought; obeying GOD'S Law, and
conforming to his Will? To call these Things cursed, is to call the Law so,
that requires them; and to do this, how far short does it come of calling the
Maker of it cursed also. To say the least, what daring Wickedness is this! and
shocking, when it is under a Cloak of Religion too! But in Imitation of CHRIST,
I can heartily pray, Father, forgive them, for I verily believe, they know not
what they say, or do.

NO more Reason is their for the great Outcry, that many People make against
the Preaching up Works, and the Duties of Obedience. If I am not much mistaken,
this is flung at the faithful Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, by many Persons, that
they are legal Preachers only; that they neglect the Gospel, and preach up only
Works, and Nothing but Works. This I believe, is altogether a
Misrepresentation; for I never heard any such Preaching. But, that they
preaching up the Necessity of a Gospel Obedience, by Faith in the Redeemer, in
Order to eternal Life, no Doubt it is true. And what every Minister ought, and
I believe every faithful One will do. For this is the Example, that CHRIST and
his Apostles have set before us, who have preached up this Doctrine, in as
strong Terms as ever I have heard any. Now is it a Crime to follow them? To
build upon the Foundation they have laid? Or to try to imitate him, of whom it
is said, never Man spoke like him? If this is to be vile, I am willing to be
more vile still.

THEREFORE, for Persons to cry out against these Things, is to talk against
God, and CHRIST, and against his divine Institutions. And whatever Cloak, and
Pretense Persons may have therefore; yet it is actually espousing the Devil's
Cause, and openly opposing the Gospel of CHRIST, and his Ambassadors in the
main and principal Errand they are sent into the World upon; which is to preach
up Holiness, and Obedience to GOD. This indeed is not the whole, but it is the
main Business to carry on their Master's Designs against the Kingdom of Sin,
and to break Men off from their Wickedness, and bring them into an Obedience to
the Gospel.

THIS will appear, if we consider, that this is the express Instruction in
their divine Commission. Go teach all Nations -- teaching them to observe all
Things whatsoever I have commanded you. Mat. xxviii. 20.
That is, to observe and do every Thing the Gospel injoins upon us. If we also
consider, what Influence our Works will have on our eternal State. Not the
Hearers, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified. GOD will render to every
Man according to his Deeds. And our final Sentence at the Day of Judgment will
be passed, and we doomed to Heaven or Hell, according as our Works have been
Good or Evil, in this Life. Again, the Preaching up Holiness, and universal
Obedience, as absolutely necessary to Salvation; is the grand Engine of the
Gospel, and the most powerful Weapon, for the pulling down the strong Holds of
Sin. And there is Nothing in all the Gospel Artillery, that will so gall, and
vex the Enemy as this will. Wicked Men will bear any Doctrine of divine
Revelation better than this; Nothing will wound them like it. Tell the Drunkard
in plain Words, if he don't leave off his Cups, he will certainly be damned. And
there is not an Arrow in the Gospel Quiver, that will stick in his Heart like
it. When Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come,
Felix trembled. The Reason is, if this be the Case, they ha'nt a Spark of Hope
left; besure while they remain such. Therefore, when Men are so attached to
their Lusts, that it is like Death, to part with them, they cannot bear such
Preaching. No Wonder then, they keep a continual Fire, and muster up all their
Strength against it.

ONCE more, if we consider, that this is the most needful Preaching in a
christian Land, in general, and in ours in particular. Indeed the whole Counsel
of GOD is to be preached up, and no part thereof to be kept back. But then,
there are the greater, and lesser Things under the Gospel, as well as under the
Law, and the former should be the principal Object of the Preacher's Attention.
Next to this the State of Religion, or Growth of Wickedness is to be kept in
view. For as one great End of all Preaching is to put down Sin; so it should be
principally levelled against those Sins, that are most prevalent among a
People. If it be open Infidelity; then that is to be encountered. This was the
Case, when the Apostles were sent forth into the Heathen World: Therefore they
preached up Faith in CHRIST and embracing the Gospel. Where I may observe, that
when any renounced Heathenism, and declared their Belief of the Gospel, and
their embracing it, they were baptized. And from that Time they were called
Saints, and of the Household of Faith.

IF it be Heresy that is prevailing, then that is to be opposed. Such was the
Jewish Error in Paul's Time, when they were for bringing Circumcision, and
keeping the Law of Moses, into the Gospel Religion. Therefore the Apostle, to
confute this Error, teaches, That a Man is not justified by the Works of the
Law, but by the Faith of Christ. And if it be Disobedience to GOD, Immorality
or Profaneness, that is prevailing; then these Crimes are to be openly
testified against, and principally born down upon. Thus the Artillerly of the
Gospel should always be turned and aimed at the strongest Force, and principal
Batteries of the Enemy.

THIS was the universal Practice of CHRIST and all the inspired Teachers, to
adapt their Discourses to the Times, Occasions and particular Circumstances of
their Hearers. And why should it not be so now? What then must be the main
Drift of our Preaching at the present Time? This will be determined by the
Sins, that are prevalent in the Land. Well then, What are these? Not open
Infidelity. The Land is become Christian; and People generally receive the
gospel Revelation; neither is it called in Question. For my Part, I don't know
of a Deist in the Land. Is there so much Need then of pressing that which every
One believes?

AGAIN. Are there any Heresies prevailing in the Land; by which, I mean, a
Denial, or not owning any of the fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel? I know of
none. Except by Heresy, we mean every Thing has is wrong and Sinful: such as
Ignorance of the Scriptures; all Mistakes about the Meaning of particular
Texts; every different Sentiment, even in the lesser Matters of Religion; and
all Immorality, and Ungodliness. But in this Sense I don't understand it; but
take it (in the Sense that Ecclesiastical Usage has fixed on this Term) to mean
such pervese Opinions, as tend to overthrow and lap the Foundations of the
Gospel Religion. And by it, here I mean, those in particular, that some have
been suspicious, are growing and increasing among us, viz. Deism, Aarin,
So^inian, Pelagan Errors, and such as eclipse the Glory of free Grace in man's
Salvation; and derogate from the divine Honor that the Scriptures universally
ascribe to JESUS CHRIST, as the only Savior, and both the Author and Finisher
of our Faith.
Indeed I cannot promise for every Individual, but believe that the People are
generally orthodox and sound in the Faith. It Is true, there has been some
Fears, and Jealousies; and the Watchmen upon our Walls do well to keep a good
Look out; and warn the People of all approaching Danger. Accordingly some
Alarms have been made; and this special Service has been done by it: That
People are waked up; put upon their Guard, and strict Enquisition has been
made; but they have found none. So that I Am not apprehensive of so much Danger
from this Quarter.

WHAT is the Wickedness then, that is prevailing? Is it not as clear as the
Sun? It Is now with us, as GOD told the Prophet; They hear thy Words, but they
will not do them. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 31.
And as Paul says of some, They profess that they know God, but in Works they
deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and unto every good Work reprovate.
Tit. i. 16.
Go through the Land; search every where; and are not these the loud
Complaints, of our pious Rulers, in their religious Proclamations? of our
faithful Ministers from their Pulpits, and almost every Body else? The
Injustice, Fraud and Oppression! the Intemperance and Uncleanness! the Cursing,
Swearing, and Lying! the Pride and Covetousness in the Land! and too general a
Coldness and Indifference to the Things to GOD, and Religion!

THE Truth is, Men profess well, but live ill. They say, they are Christians;
but are not. They say, they love GOD; but they hate their Brethren. And are
there not some that think, that high Pretenses to Religion, party Zeal, and
contending for the Faith, as they call it, will make an Atonement for, or, at
least palliate, and cloak over those Land-defiling Sins? Is not this then the
Burden of the LORD of Hosts, upon all his faithful Servants in the Land, to set
their Faces like Flint against these raging Torrents, and threatening Evils?
should they not lift up their Voices like a Trumpet, cry aloud, and not spare
to show unto Jacob their Sin, and Israel their Transgressions? And if it be the
Duty of Ministers thus to preach, then surely it is the Duty of People to hear,
and hearken, consider and reform.

WHEREFORE, my beloved Brethern, my Counsel and Advice is, lay up these Things
in your Hearts. Take the Word of GOD for the Rule of your Faith, and Practice;
as the only sure Word of Prophesy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a
Light that shines in a dark Place. Labor after that Faith, which works by
Love to GOD. Put your Trust in JESUS CHRIST as your only Savior. Lean not to
your own Understandings; but incessantly implore the Aids of GOD'S Holy Spirit,
to guide you into the Truth; and assist you in all your Duty. And endeavor to
walk in all the Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. If these
Things be in you, and abound, -- ye shall never fall. And for Motive hereunto,
I Will only leave with you, these awful Scriptures, which, I beseech you, keep
continually before your Eyes. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell. The
unrighteous shall not inherent the Kingdom of GOD. And without Holiness no Man
shall see LORD.

AMEN.

