THE CONSTITUTION OF A CHRISTIAN CHURCH ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON AT THE OPENING
OF CHRIST-CHURCH IN CAMBRIDGE ON THURSDAY 15 OCTOBER, MDCCLXI.

BY EAST APTHORP, M. A. LATE FELLOW OF JESUS COLLEGE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
CAMBRIDGE.

The visible CHURCH of CHRIST is a CONGREGATION of FAITHFUL men, in which the
pure WORD of GOD is preached, and the SACRAMENTS be duly administered. Artic.
XIX. BOSTON PRINTED BY GREEN AND RUSSELL, AT THEIR OFFICE IN QUEEN STREET.
MDCCLXI.

SENECA de Tranqu. Anim. c. iii. Habet ubi se etiam in privato lare explicet
animus: ita tamen delituerit, ut ubicunque otium suum absconderit, prodesse
velit et singulis et universis, ingenio, voce, consilio, Qui juventutem
exhortatur, qui virtute instruit animos; qui ad pecuniam luxuriamque cursu
ruentes prensat ac retrahit, et, si nihil aliud, certe moratur; qui docet quid
sit Justitia, quid PIETAS, quid Patientia, quid Fortitudo, quid Mortis
contemptus, quantum bonum sit bona Conscientia -- in privato publicum negotium
agit.

IDEM. Epist. xxvii. Tu me, inquis, mones? jam enim te ipse monuisti, jam
correxisti? ideo aliorum emendationi vacas? non sum tam improbus, ut curationes
aeger obeam; sed tanquam in eodem valetudinario jaceam, de comm uni malo tecum
collquor, remedia communico.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY FRANCIS BERNARD, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR OF HIS MAJESTY'S PROVINCE OF
THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY, etc. AND TO ESQUIRES HENRY VASSAL DAVID PHIPS RICHARD
LECHMERE JOHN VASSAL RALPH INMAN THOMAS OLIVER

THE COMMITTEE FOR BUILDING THE CHURCH AT CAMBRIDGE THIS SERMON PRINTED BY
THEIR DIRECTION IS IN TESTIMONY OF HIS DUTY, RESPECT AND FRIENDSHIP, INSCRIBED
BY THE AUTHOR.

INSCRIPTION On a Corner Stone of the Church.
DEO. AETERNO. PATRI. FILIO. SPIRITVI. S. HANC. AEDEM. SUB. AVSPICIIS.
ILLUSTRISS. SOCIETATIS. PROMOVENDO. EVANGELIO. IN. PARTIBUS. TRANSMARINIS.
INSTITUTAE. CONSECRABANT. CANTABRIGIENSES. ECCLESIAE. ANGLICANAE. FILII. IN.
CHRISTIANAE. FIDEI. ET. CHARITATIS. INCREMENTVM. A. D. MDCCLX. PROVINCIAM.
PROCURANTE. V. CL. FRANCISCO. BERNARDO.

THE PRAYER.
ETERNAL GOD, parent and sustainer of all things, infinite in wisdom and power,
justice and mercy; most humbly we adore thy divine Majesty, approaching thy
throne with our prayers for the catholic church, the whole congregation of
christians over all the earth: more especially for the reformed churches of
these realms and nations.

WE implore thee, O KING of kings, to crown with the blessings of heaven and
earth our most gracious sovereign Lord GEORGE III by Thy Grace King of Great
Britain and Ireland and of all the dominions thereunto belonging, defender of
the Faith, and throughout all his realms, supreme in all causes ecclesiastical
and civil. Endue Him with all ROYAL VIRTUES; prosper His Arms and Counsels;
grant Him a long and happy reign over a free and willing People, to Thy Glory,
the welfare of his subjects, the protection and advancement of RELIGION.

BLESS, O LORD, Her Royal Highness the Princess Dowager of WALES, and all the
Royal Family: enrich them with thy heavenly Grace, and prosper them with all
Happiness.

ILLUMINATE with the truth of thy doctrine the dispensers of Thy most holy word
and sacraments, the ARCHBISHOPS, BISHOPS, PRIESTS and DEACONS of the Church of
ENGLAND, and the Ministers of all other protestant churches. Pour down upon
them the continual dew of thy blessing, that they may be holy and exemplary in
their lives, and faithful stewards of Thy mysteries.

BLESS the Nobility and Magistracy: endue them with grace and wisdom, that they
may all in their several characters, maintain religion and virtue. In more
especial duty, We pray for His Excellency the GOVERNOR of this Province, His
Honor the Lieutenant-Governour, The Honorable Council, and House of
Representatives. So bless them in their respective stations, that wisdom and
knowledge may be the stability of our times, and the fear of Thee our treasure.

FATHER of Lights, from whom descends every good and perfect Gift, grace with
thy divine favor and enlighten with Thy Spirit all seminaries of learning and
religious Education; particularly the universities of ENGLAND, -- and the
colleges of this place, on whose President, Tutors and Students, we implore thy
heavenly benediction, that they may equally excel in virtue and useful
knowledge.

O MOST gracious GOD, hear thou in heaven Thy dwelling place, and behold with
an eye of favor this congregation here assembled. In all humility, conscious
of our own unworthiness, we implore thy mercy, pardon and acceptance through
the Merits and puissant Mediation of Thy Son JESUS CHRIST; TO WHOSE MOST SACRED
NAME, and to the promoting of whose Glory and Kingdom, WE CONSECRATE THIS
CHURCH, and ourselves, the living Temples of the HOLY GHOST. Bless, we beseech
Thee, all those whose pious munificence and public spirit have assisted in this
good work; especially the venerable and religious SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION
OF THE GOSPEL. Grant success to their christian purposes for the advancement of
True Religion: endue their Missionaries with fidelity to their trust, a sincere
faith, unfeigned charity, and sanctity of manners. Make them in their several
stations the happy instruments of extending the kingdom of THY SON, as well by
supporting Thy pure worship in these colonies, as by publishing the glad
tidings of the Gospel among remote and barbarous nations.

GRANT, O GOD of truth and love, to Thy servants here before Thee, an
uncorrupted, firm and efficacious Faith in the merits, mediation, and promises
of their DIVINE REDEEMER: aid and enlighten them by Thy HOLY SPIRIT, that they
may sincerely practice all the duties of the Christian life, and adorn the
doctrine of GOD our SAVIOR by Holiness and Piety, and by their ardent Charity
toward all Mankind, especially toward all Christians of every denomination;
preserving indissoluble the bond of Peace, and endeavoring in meekness to
restore the unity of the Spirit.

FINALLY, O LORD, we praise Thy Holy Name for all thy servants departed this
life in thy faith and fear; beseeching Thee, that we may so follow their good
example, that, our Probation ended, we may be partakers with them of a glorious
resurrection, and of that everlasting inheritance purchased for the faithful by
the most precious blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Savior and Redeemer of
the world; in whose prevailing Intercession we trust for the acceptance, and
with whose sacred words we supply all the defects, of our imperfect petitions.

OUR Father, which art in heaven! Hallowed be Thy name: Thy kingdom come: Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For Thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

THE CONSTITUTION OF A CHRISTIAN CHURCH ILLUSTRATED.
ACTS II. 42. They continued steadfastly in the APOSTLES DOCTRINE and
FELLOWSHIP, and in BREAKING OF BREAD, and in PRAYERS.
TO understand the nature and genius of the Christian religion, it is necessary
to examine it in it is first principles and review it is original constitution:
when in the simplicity of truth it had so divine an influence on the manners
and hearts of it is professors. In an enquiry of this kind, we may find great
assistance from the whole book (and particularly from the above cited passage)
of the acts of the holy apostles: in which are recorded the first conversions
to the faith, the arguments used by inspired teachers, the doctrines and
conduct which they held essential to the votaries of JESUS CHRIST.

THE manners of christians, the conditions of their communion, and the
constituent principles of the first church-society, are expressed in the text,
from the practice of the primitive believers, with so much exactness; that an
enquiry into them will furnish a most perfect model for the forming a christian
society on the maxims of the gospel.

THE first essential in the institution of this amiable fraternity is
stedfastness in the DOCTRINE of the Apostles.

THE next is CHURCH COMMUNION.

THE third is the commemoration of their common Lord in the BREAKING OF BREAD
or celebrating the holy eucharist.

THE fourth and last is PRAYER.

BENEVOLENCE and purity of manners was the natural result of such an
institution: and the church of JERUSALEM, the most ancient and mother of all,
was equally distinguished by simplicity and innocence, virtue and fraternal
love; as by truth of doctrine, unity of its members, frequency of eucharist,
and fervor of devotion.

APOSTOLIC doctrine, union, sacraments and prayer are therefore, by the
authority of this respectable precedent, requisite to the right constitution of
a christian church; and are those essentials so much sought after, in which all
who agree compose ONE SOCIETY, notwithstanding small differences of ritual,
discipline or polity. These essentials constitute that catholic church, 1 Pet.
ii. 6, from Isai. xxviii. 16. Ephesians. ii. 20.
which is built on the foundation of the prophets and apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the head cornerstone. On this immovable Rock, against which the
gates of hell shall never prevail, which shall survive the ruins and
revolutions of every other polity civil and religious, has been raised, in
different ages and countries, a cumbrous superstructure; much 1 Cor. iii. 9 --
15.
wood, hay, stubble, as well as gold, silver, and precious stones: discordant
materials, and ill compacted forms, which, although for a while they may deface
the beauty and symmetry of the building, fall off and decay without impairing
the strength and integrity of the foundation. But as it is of great importance,
how, and what we build thereupon; as every man's work shall be made manifest;
and either abide the fire that shall try it, or be burnt, to the loss or hazard
of the unfaithful or unskilful builder: we cannot more usefully adapt our
reflections to the present solemnity, than by attentively considering the
constituent principles on which the earliest Christian church was modelled by
the whole college of apostles under the illumination of the HOLY GHOST.

1. THE first thing observable in this transaction is the forcible address of
the apostles to the consciences of their Jewish audience; convincing them of
their guilt in crucifying and rejecting the LORD of life; insisting on the
proofs of his resurrection, both from ancient oracles and their own testimony;
and asserting his divine legation from the signal miracles by which GOD had
approved him. Pierced to the heart by this pathetic remonstrance, they
fervently solicit the Apostles to teach them what they shall do to escape the
punishment of their impiety. St. Peter's reply is remarkable, as it includes
the essentials of the christian religion, or of that DOCTRINE mentioned in the
text as the first requisite in the constitution of a true church. REPENT and be
BAPTIZED in the name of JESUS CHRIST, for the remission of sins. Repentance and
faith (the latter implied in being baptized in the name of Christ) appear to be
the substance of the apostles doctrine, from this and many other places of
their xx. 21. Hebr. vi. 1.
acts and writings. Mark i. 15.
Repent ye, and believe the gospel, was the original preaching of CHRIST
himself; and the usual topics of his apostles are assertions and testimonies of
CHRIST's resurrection, and animated exhortations to faith and repentance.

HOW many elaborate controversies are cut short, if not decided! what learned
contentions are appeased! what strifes and animosities subside! by recurring to
these simple terms of the gospel covenant: which wholly fix the mind on piety
and duty, -- that piety and that duty, which are so often lost sight of, in the
mists of disputation. Repentance, (by which I understand universal and sincere
obedience, properly enough termed repentance when proposed to new converts, who
had been heretofore Ephesians. iv. 18.
alienated from the life of God) this repentance, and Faith, include
undoubtedly the whole of christian ethics and doctrines. As he who would divide
them, gives an imperfect and mutilated scheme of religion; so the additions of
unintelligible controversies and refinements, as articles of faith and matters
of duty, are that very wood, hay, stubble, which will not abide the fiery test
of a divine examination.

YET the superadding human institutes to these primary truths and principles of
christianity, appeared very early in the attempts of blending the ritual of
Judaism with the doctrines of faith and repentance: and afterward more
flagrantly in the portentous heresies of the first ages. These were succeeded
by the politic superstitions of the Romish church: and the barbarous sophistry
of explaining religion by the philosophy and logic of the Greeks, produced the
subtleties of the scholastic metaphysics; which from a simple creed and plain
rule of life, have tortured christianity into a continued aenigma. Formed in
these schools, though their barbarism was polished by the studies of humanity;
the great restorers of religion in the XVIth century, still continued to
violate it is simplicity, by inventing new doctrines, and embarassing revelation
with accessory difficulties.

TO find rest to our souls, amidst these perplexities of human interpolations;
we must recur to the original terms of the gospel covenant. By a diligent
search of the scriptures, and by employing all the aids of learning that may
best illustrate them; by this study, accompanied with a love of truth and a
moral practice, we shall best discern what doctrines are specifically included
in the notion of faith: what duties are implied and comprehended under that of
repentance. The first, considered systematically, implies a firm, sincere, and
practical BELIEF (if I may so express a faith that operates by virtuous
practice) including all the doctrines of the MEDIATORIAL economy, or scheme of
REDEMPTION: which, being matter of pure revelation, and depending solely on
divine authority, is to be collected only from the inspired scriptures. To give
an exact analysis of the christian faith would be a work of much industry. At
present, it may be sufficient to remark, that the essentials of which it
consists are summed up with sufficient accuracy, in that best medium of unity
and peace, the CREED ascribed to the apostles.

THIS very ancient symbol may be considered as the palladium of christianity --
and as it must be guarded by all parties with most religious care, and
preserved inviolable from the sacrilegious hands of heresy and infidelity; --
so, those who are studious of what is most useful and important in religion,
will not find it advisable to extend their creed beyond the limits prescribed
by simple antiquity, by inserting into it the many problematical speculations,
which a curious mind may form on scattered hints of the divine volumes.

THE particular duties, comprehended in that REPENTANCE which comprizes all our
moral obligations, may be illustrated by the christian ethics, by a careful
scrutiny and observation of the human heart, and even by the rational
deductions of ancient philosophy. Revelation does not give a regular system of
ethics; in this part, she appeals to Reason and Nature, which however, by
occasional precepts, she reforms and completes, sweetens, adorns, and elevates.
Philosophy, though erroneous as to the principles and means and motives of
duty, yet by calling in the aid of eloquence, describes and inforces particular
moral truths and virtues in a manner so touching, so persuasive, so reasonable;
as much confirms that DR. S. CLARKE. Evidd. of Not. and Rev. Relig. Prop. vi.
candid opinion, that the schools of Pythagoras, of Socrates, of the Porch and
the Academy, were raised up by the providence of GOD, to preserve among mankind
the purity of natural religion; at once to fix the limits, to mark the extent,
and repress the arrogance of human reason; in a word, to form and institute the
nations for the reception of the gospel.

THIS observation is not inconsistent with a full acknowledgment of the
blemishes and defects of natural religion and ethics: of which the best
philosophers have left some CICERO, in a fine panegyric on LUCULLUS, reckons
Revenge and Malice among that great man's Virtues. Admodum adolescens, cum
fratre, pari pietate et industria praedito, paternas inimicitias magna cum
gloria est persecutus. Acad. II. 1. See other instances of a loose Moral, in
the same philosopher's agreeable Oration for M. COELLUS. p. 447.
disgraceful testimonies and PLAT. in Alcib. II. p. 255, 256. edit. Jo. North.
ingenuous confessions: and which, however useful for the conduct of political,
oeconomical, and private life, were utterly destitute of such principles as may
form the DIVINE LIFE in the soul of man, by that exalted intercourse with
heaven which is maintained by prayer, resignation, penitence, holy hope, and
faith, and love. Here, in consequence of their mistakes about the object of
their worship, the very guides of gentilism Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte, per
umbras --
Quale per incertam lunam, sub luce maligna
Est iter in sylvis --
VIRG.

AS the result of what has been advanced on the subject of apostolic doctrine,
we may deduce the principles on which the ministers of the gospel may most
usefully conduct themselves in teaching it. The province of man is, not an
amusing theory, but life and action: and the most exalted speculations can be
only of use as they terminate in practice, and produce the effects of
righteousness and piety. Aiming at so noble a purpose as (in his own
department) THE RESTORING OF PRACTICAL CHRISTIANITY, a minister will endeavor
to declare the whole counsel of God, as revealed in holy scripture: and will
employ his utmost diligence and capacity, in clearly explaining the whole
system of redemption; from thence deducing the particular duties of morality:
which should be accurately defined and stated, and urged on the conscience by
arguments and persuasives, for the most part, purely christian, drawn from the
precepts, example and authority of our LORD and SAVIOR, and enforced by their
true and adequate sanctions, the rewards and punishments he has set before us.
A moral theory, proposed in the manner of ancient philosophy, may be sometimes
of use to recommend the practice of civil virtues, and to influence the will
from motives of prudence, honor, pleasure, or advantage. These may
occasionally be added to, but must not supersede, the only legitimate motives,
principles, and sanctions of moral conduct, the love of God, obedience to his
will, the hope and fear of his promises and terrors.

IN our zeal for the purity of christian doctrine, we should conduct ourselves
with charity and discretion, making a difference between such deviations from
the authentic standard, as are rather curious than essential or of consequence
to life and manners -- and such as strike at the divine essence, or attributes,
or any ways impair the sacred interests of virtue. When gigantic impiety
assaults the skies; and man, a rebel to his GOD would dethrone his REDEEMER, by
divesting him of his divine and mediatorial honors: when drawing his portrait
of the DEITY from the sanguinary passions of the worst men, any one represents
the all-merciful Father as the tyrant of the universe, reprobating his
creatures, predetermining their crimes, and predestining their eternal misery:
when opinions falsely charged on christianity are subversive of all moral
obligation, leading weak minds into enthusiasm and licentiousness: when a just
attention to the cause of virtue is reproached as derogating from the glories
of Hebr. xiii. 12.
HIM, who has sanctified us with His blood; and the justification of sinners
by grace, and faith in his all-sufficient merits, is proposed in such a manner,
as to render virtue useless and even a crime: these horrors certainly affect a
good man, otherwise than any difference in points of curious enquiry, or than a
dissent from an ecclesiastical polity, however wisely planned.

II. BUT it is time to undertake the consideration of the second essential in
the right constitution of a christian church, called in our text, the
FELLOWSHIP of the Apostles: by which I understand that UNITY in
church communion, which may best promote the social interests of religion.

SOME indeed interpret this Fellowship of the Apostles by a mutual
communication of temporal good things and other offices of kindness and
charity. But the expression seems ill adapted to convey this sense. Primarily a
Hammond in loc.
commercial term, it denotes a partnership in a common stock, a joint interest
and association for mutual advantage. Hence it is easily transferred to express
the friendship and fraternal society of christians with one another.

AN enquiry into 'the degrees of unity in the city of GOD (which the Lord BACON
ranks among the deficients in theology) may best be introduced by the
sentiments of that illustrious philosopher.

IT imports exceedingly the peace of the Church, that the league of Christians,
prescribed by our Savior in those two clauses which seem to cross one the
other, were well and clearly expounded; whereof the one defines thus, He that
is not with me, is against me, Luc. xi. 23. the other thus, He that is not
against us is for us, ibid. ix. 50. From those two several assertions it
plainly appears, that there are some articles, wherein whosoever dissenteth is
to be held as not comprehended in the league: and there are other articles,
wherein a man may dissent, and yet the league be kept entire. For the bounds of
christian community are set down, one faith, one baptism, and not one rite, one
opinion. Wherefore it will be found a matter of great moment and use, to define
what, and of what latitude, those points are, which discorporate men from the
body of the church, and cast them out and quite cashier them from the communion
and fellowship of the faithful. And in the judgment of the same noble writer,
the peace and unity of the church, would be most effectually consulted, -- if
the points fundamental and of substance in religion, were truly discerned and
distinguished from points not merely of faith, but of opinion, order, or good
intention. Adv. of Learning. b. IX.. 2. See also Ess. III. and the XIIIth and
XIVth Sermm* of the Principles of Not. and Rev. Relig. by DR. WARBURTON, now
Lord Bishop of GLOUCESTER: on whose Authority (no less respectable than that of
the Chancellor BACON) the Writer gladly rests his private opinion in some
things that follow on this argument.


AS PROTESTANT churches claim neither inspiration nor infallibility, they must
all be obnoxious to error; this should naturally lead to a reciprocal
indulgence. Being all founded on free enquiry, so large a scope for difference
of opinion as a dogmatic Theology affords, necessarily induces variety of
decisions. The many curious doctrines, invented in the dawn of Learning by an
unrestrained speculation, and proposed by their abetters as the terms of
associating, rent the Reformation into Parties: that glorious work itself
having been effected, not systematically and with united counsels, but in a
tumultuary and zealous manner. Thus from the fallibility of the human mind,
from the genius of the reformed religion, and from some inauspicious
circumstances attending its origin, we may trace the variations in the
Protestant Church. To these causes we may add the spirit of dominion, which
though it first occasioned, certainly infected the great instruments of, that
illustrious revolution, the Reformers themselves: who by making the terms of
associating rigid and confined, and by persecuting those who would not
subscribe to them, shivered the simple Faith of the gospel into sects and
separations.

UNION of faith, charity, peace; not a political unity in external government:
is essential to christianity, and required of necessity Ephesians. iv. 1 Cor. xii.
etc.
in the New Testament: and it seems an equally false persuasion, that
church communion demands unity of sentiment in the utmost strictness, not only
as to a few plain fundamental articles, but as to particulars neither necessary
to salvation nor perspicuous to human reason.

THAT intolerant spirit, so contrary to the humanity of the gospel, which would
exclude from the communion of Saints all who are not within the national
Establishment, certainly changes the terms of salvation; which (as we have seen
above) are only faith and repentance, not fellow-membership in
church communion. An universal conformity of mere outward profession, enforced
by civil penalties, would perhaps destroy the whole power of religion; and
instead of making conscience the arbitress and judge, would render her the
slave of public opinion: which would necessarily induce much hypocrisy, with an
almost general spirit of unbelief, indifference, and insincerity.

I WOULD not assert, with the sophist THEMISTIUS ap. SOCR. H. E. IV. 32.
to the Arian Emperor VALENS, that 'the DEITY is delighted with diversity of
worship, as best suited to the unsearchableness of his nature.' For unity being
as essential to truth as to GOD himself, diversity of religious opinions must
imply error somewhere: and falsehood, as such, can never be acceptable to GOD;
though circumstances may soften its evil aspect: and where the substance is the
same, perhaps the mode may alter, without any important ill influence.

IT may be useful to adapt these sentiments to the present situation of the
christian church, which has now so flourishing an appearance in the AMERICAN
British empire.

1. RELIGIOUS moderation is consistent with the firmest adherence to our own
establishment. That temporizing spirit, or levity of principle, which can
resign essentials, or blend inconsistencies, is either an artifice to serve
men's secular purposes by making their advantages on both sides, or an argument
of fickleness and an unsettled judgment. The moderation of christianity and of
the church of England, is founded on the immutable law of justice. Whatever
claims or privileges we expect from others, the same we should grant to them.
To be the aggressors in any way molesting peaceable persons in their enjoyment
of religious liberty, is a species of persecution.

2. COMPREHENSIONS and accommodations are, as religion is circumstanced,
perhaps impracticable: but charity, mutual indulgence, forbearing one another
in love, suspending useless controversies, and a (...) attache a (...)
Angli^an^, (...) pas persecute les Non-conform^^^s (...) ^amener. (...) j^ge^it
les hommes par les mo^urs, et les ^rais (...) les vi^ieux ^^les mechants.

(...) de Chev. NEWTON. p. 35.
reciprocal esteem for the virtuous and conscientious -- are duties as
indispensable as our common belief of the christian faith. Truth indeed, the
object of religion, being simple and one, is discredited by sects and parties,
some of which must very more or less from the authentic standard: but peace,
the object of society and civil government, is so well secured by private
forbearance and charity, and by a judicious toleration; that where these are
kept inviolable, diversity of opinions will not affect the quiet of a state or
of smaller communities. Since therefore we cannot attain to the unity of the
SPIRIT; our attention must be exerted, to preserve indissoluble the bond of
PEACE.

3. IT is not indifferent in what particular church or society, we profess our
Faith in CHRIST, or whether we associate ourselves to any church at all. This
were to argue like the philosopher, who because he esteemed himself a citizen
of the world would not become a citizen of Athens: a maxim, which if
universally followed, would dissolve all societies, and deprive mankind of
mutual succor and protection. Since the providence of GOD has permitted
those, who seceded from the church of Rome, to subdivide into numerous sects
and parties; it is contrary to the nature of human society, to stand aloof from
them all: and not to attach ourselves uniformly and steadfastly to some one in
particular, would argue a sickleness and inconstancy, unbecoming the importance
of Religion. Education usually determines this point. But as it is the
privilege, so it seems the duty of reasonaable men, to undertake the task of a
free, serious, and intelligent enquiry: and, after a mature examination,
uniformly to class themselves with that society, which comes nearest to the
purity of the gospel, and which best preserves that apostolic union, doctrine,
eucharist and liturgy, which are essential to the right constitution of a
christian church. In so momentous a concern as every man's religion, if
sincere, is to himself as an individual; much less than absolute rejection of,
or invincible prejudices and objections against, those protestant churches,
from whom we do not differ in the essence of DOCTRINE; -- a reasonable
preference of one church or society before another; -- a well-grounded
persuasion, that a man's private religious improvements are most advanced by
uniting in such or such a communion; -- all these motives -- especially, if
that communion be a national church, or one in which he has been baptized and
educated; -- seem to be sufficient, to determine his adherence to that
particular community, whose doctrines and mode of worship he finds are best
adapted to advance his piety, purify his heart, and enlarge his benevolence.

III. AS a third characteristic of the primitive and archetypal church of
Jerusalem; the historian observes, that they continued steadfastly in BREAKING
OF BREAD. That by this descriptive in fractione Eucharistiae. Verse. Syriac.
expression is meant the celebration of the holy communion, is a point so
generally agreed, that it hardly requires any proof. The most ancient
christians generally concluded their charitable repasts and sacred assemblies,
with the solemnity of the communion. In imitation of so venerable examples,
this sacrament is and ought to be held essential to the form and construction
of all christian churches; and that, for these following reasons:

1. AS commemorative of the sacred Head and Founder of our religion. 2. As a
faederal rite, confirming the covenant between CHRIST and his church. 3. As a
mark of union between CHRIST and his members, of the communion or charity of
the members one with another.

THE breaking of bread, and the pouring of wine, as a memorial of the body and
blood of JESUS CHRIST broken and shed for us upon the cross, is an expressive
rite which derives its origin from very ancient religious institutions. GOD, in
both his dispensations, has condescended to the infirmities of his creatures,
in conveying religious ideas, and preserving the memory of them, by the
intervention of external signs. The assent of faith, the deductions of reason,
and the powers of the imagination are in our present state inferior to in their
energy, and quickened in their operations by strong and lively impressions on
the senses. This method was employed most amply in the Jewish ritual, which is
every where a material language, a speaking emblem: in particular the rite of
the passover (between which and the christian eucharist there is discernable an
exact analogy) most significantly represented the deliverance of the Israelites
from the Egyptian tyranny, and typified our redemption by JESUS CHRIST. In this
last revelation (as being designed for universal influence, and so not adapted
only to the genius of oriental manners) external emblems and significant rites
are more sparingly a^hibited: and the only positive institutions of
christianity are its two august and expressive sacraments. The ablution of
baptism, expressing the stipulation of a good conscience toward God, is an
initiation of all into this holy faith: the eucharist so perfectly adumbrates
the passion of JESUS CHRIST, and by uninterrupted usage has so preserved the
authentic memory of that event, the very basis of His religion; that for the
noblest purposes our LORD, so near his death, injoined his apostles, and in
them the church, to 'do this in remembrance of Him.'

IN a federal respect, this commemoration ratifies the faith and obedience of
His subjects. Feasting on sacrifices was an ancient usage in confirmation of
alliances and compacts: and in this memorial of the sacrifice of CHRIST, GOD
and man severally ratify that solemn covenant, of which JESUS CHRIST undertook
the mediation: the terms of this compact being on the part of GOD pardon and
acceptance, in consideration of the atonement made on the cross: on the part of
man, repentance and universal obedience. This sacred and solemn confirmation of
the baptismal covenant, must in true believers be very instrumental to the
subduing their sins, advancing their sanctification, and confirming their
allegiance to their LORD and Head. But I am obliged on this occasion rather to
glance at this illustrious argument, than to give it an accurate inspection:
and I hasten to a cursory view of the third circumstance, wherein the eucharist
must be consisidered as essential to the completeness of christian worship:
namely,

AS a mark of union between CHRIST and His members, and of the communion and
charity of the members one with another. This idea is accurately expressed in
the devotions of our Liturgy, which teaches us, that by 'the spiritual food of
the most precious body and blood of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, we are assured,
that we are very members incorporate in his mystical body, which is the blessed
company of all faithful people.' And in the same prayer, we implore the
assistance of the divine grace, 'that we may continue in that holy fellowship,
and do all such good works as GOD has prepared for us to walk in.' This union
and communion is clearly asserted by St. Paul. 1 Cor. x. 16. 17.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ; the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? For we, being many, are one bread and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread.

HENCE it appears, that the charity we exercise in the sacrament, is not only
that sincere and hearty forgiveness of all injuries and offenses, which is the
heroism of a christian, triumphing over the evil dispositions of nature; but
this commemoration of divine love, is itself a sublime act of love to GOD and
benevolence to man. The former will interest the heart and affections in
expressing our obedience to his holy and reasonable laws of virtue: the latter,
consisting in a strong inclination to promote human happiness, leads us to
consider all mankind, and especially all christians as one body. This was the
charity which so eminently characterized the church of JERUSALEM; wherein all
that believed were together, and had all things common: parting their
possessions and goods to all, as every one had need; and the multitude of them
that believed were of one heart and of one soul. Such were the graces of that
original church; at its first establishment small in extent, few in number; but
perfect and complete in all the will of GOD, rich in all the fruits of the
SPIRIT, and overflowing in all the exuberance of charity.

BUT, to the glory of religion, as well as of our age and country; we need not
go back to primitive times, for instances of the happy effects of this social
and benevolent spirit. By means of such a disposition, when general and public,
we see the most useful designs formed and executed, to which the utmost
enterprise and liberality of a few individuals would be altogether unequal. By
means of such united efforts among yourselves, you see a noble undertaking in a
great measure performed, without being too burdensome to any, while the weight
of it is born by the combined strength of all. By the union of your counsels
and expense, this TEMPLE has arose, to the glory of GOD, and the promoting of
christianity, with a In urbe Templum aedificas? pulcherrimum id sit omnium in
urbe palatiorum. in villa? aequet, immo vincat, reliquas in villa aedes. MR.
MEDE. b. II. p. 406.
beauty and elegance, not unbecoming the majesty of religion. Much has been
done already by your munificence, toward completing a structure, the lest
merit of which is the honor it does to our country, by adding to the few
specimens we have of excellence in the fine arts: which, under the conduct of a
good imagination, have so much influence in polishing and humanizing the mind;
and when employed in the service of religion, are so expressive of reverence to
the DEITY; that they may justly be considered (as they were by the sages of
antiquity) in a moral view, and made subservient to the noblest purposes of
policy, ethics, and devotion. This design still demands, toward completing
it, the liberality of an enlarged benevolence: and as I am persuaded it has
been begun and conducted on truly christian principles, with views of adding to
the extent and stability of our common faith, uninfluenced by party, bigotry,
or intolerance; I do not scruple, in the warmest manner, to recommend the
promoting of this good work, as well deserving a general patronage and
munificence.

THIS short digression will not be thought foreign to this day's solemnity, or
to the subject which introduced it, -- that high and sacred expression of
benevolence, which we exert in that communion of CHRIST's body and blood, which
is essential to the form and constitution of a pure and apostolic church.

IV. The order of the text leads me to a short discussion of the fourth and
last requisite in the churches of CHRIST, namely, that of PRAYER. In this
friendly converse and exalted intercourse between GOD and man, the soul is
purified from sense and passion, the imagination is elevated and refined, the
heart is humble, sincere and holy, the will resigned and obedient, and all our
intellectual powers are enlightened by contemplation, 'stedfast in faith,
joyful through hope,' and inflamed with sacred love. Under the sense of a
present DEITY hearing and accepting our prayers and praises; the storms of
passion subside, the world recedes, the soul asserts its divine original, and
in some sort assimilates itself to the 'Father of spirits.' Hence we may
collect how indispensable in the life of a christian is the duty of prayer,
whether public, private, or domestic. The first of these is principally
intended by the writer of the Acts in this place. From the sacred historian,
Acts ii. 46. iii. 1. Of the stated forms of he temple and synagogue, and the
history of ancient liturgies, see BINGHAM. Chr. Ant^qq. XIII. 5, and LEWIS.
(...) Hebr. III. 22.
it appears, that, while the temple subsisted, the Christians united with the
Jews in the public prayers, as to the time, the place and the form of devotion.
An example of much moderation, and an express authentic testimony of the
lawfulness, the use, and authority of a PUBLIC LITURGY.

I SHALL not enter into a minute enquiry of ancient offices; whether essential
to the church, whether any were composed by the apostles or their immediate
successors, for the general use of the faithful. It is probable, that the
bishops and pastors of particular churches composed their respective forms,
adapted to their state and times, and occasionally altered or varied, by their
successors. But the necessity of a liturgy, or of offering our public prayers
in precomposed words. I do not choose to contend for: its expediency will
perhaps appear from the following observations, which are strictly applicable
to that of our own church.

1. A PRECOMPOSED FORM assists and regulates devotion, as it supplies the mind
with apt expressions and clear ideas, which every where ought to accompany that
great duty: it being as requisite to pray 1 Cor. xiv. 15.
with a right understanding, as with a fervent spirit. It not only more
strongly and justly affects the heart and imagination, but composes the mind to
a train of devout thinking, by ascending methodically through the various parts
of prayer, 1 Timothy ii. 1.
supplications, petitions, intercessions, and giving of thanks.

2. IT prevents impropriety and inconsistence; which, highly unbecoming any
part of so reasonable a service as religion, is most incongruous in our address
to the Majesty of heaven. When men approach the throne of an earthly monarch,
they are cautious and exact in arranging their ideas, selecting their words,
and embellishing their address with a dignity of style becoming that of the
prince. In the case of prayer as well as sacrifice, the prophet's criterion is
applicable: 'Offer it now unto thy governor -- will he be pleased with thee, or
accept thy person? should I accept this of your hands? for I am a great King,
says the LORD of hosts. Mal. i. 8, 13, 14.
Therefore, whether in the pious effusions of unpremeditated devotion, or in
the more elaborate exactness of composition; whatever is most accurate in
reason, most august in imagination, most sublime in eloquence, should be humbly
offered in adoration to the Giver of these and of all good gifts.

3. A PRINCIPAL use of a judicious form of common Prayer, is to include in our
most solemn devotions the essentials of our duty and faith: which is the most
effectual method of impressing them, both on the understanding and conscience,
and of securing the sincerity of our profession. To this stability of our
public forms we may perhaps be indebted for that remarkable freedom from FALSE
RELIGION, which has ever distinguished the reformed church of ENGLAND: the
purity of her faith and morals having never been generally sullied by any
tincture of superstition, enthusiasm, heresy, or licentiousness. The doctrines
and duties of the gospel are so interwoven by most significant definitions in
the public Liturgy; that the most illiterate, who are capable of attention and
piety, may collect from it the principles of 'our common salvation.' Its use is
no less important as a guard and preservative against heretical opinions. Most
of the depraved doctrines, that have corrupted and deformed religion, are so
explicitly condemned in our public offices; that it is scarce possible for a
disciple of Arius, of Pelagius, or any other haeresiarch, to shelter himself
under the communion of that church, which so openly declares against their
dangerous errors. That such a Liturgy, (though composed on ancient models, and
in which the wisdom of CRANMER, the eloquence of RIDLEY, the piety of martyrs
and confessors, and the temperate criticism of its subsequent reviewers,
combined to produce a most accurate form of devotion) that it should still be
subject to some exceptions, is a necessary imperfection of even the happiest
efforts of human reason and industry; not excepting the best translations of
Holy Scripture, and our own in particular; which is thought by the ablest
judges to be capable of much improvement, by the collation of MSS and versions,
and other aids of sacred literature: a work, which would give a new luster to
religion, and which, it is hoped, will do honor to the learning and piety of
the present age. But to return to our liturgy; if notwithstanding smaller
blemishes, the purposes of devotion are effectually served by it; if it
maintains order, decency, and propriety in our administration; if it excludes
heresy from our doctrines; if it preserves inviolate the apostolic faith and
sacraments; let these important uses vindicate it to others, recommend and
indear it to ourselves.

AS no Protestant can assert the perfection or infallibility of the visible
church; so we need not scruple to acknowledge, that in the best ecclesiastical
constitutions there are defects and errors, which as a private man cannot
amend, so a good subject and humble christian will not aggravate or
misrepresent; but will think it his duty to submit to unessential
imperfections, for the sake of peace, order, and obedience. After so large a
concession, we may do so much justice to the constitution of the church of
ENGLAND, as to remark that it is eminently distinguished in those IV great
apostolic requisites, which we have described as the notes or marks of a true
church, and as essential to a christian society. For the purity of her
doctrine, we may appeal to the united suffrage of all the protestant churches:
its terms of communion are evangelical faith and repentance: its government and
discipline are founded on the usages of the most remote and pure antiquity: the
eucharist is restored to the simplicity and integrity of the divine
institution: its liturgy is as perfect as the circumstances of times, and the
state of religion would admit.

WITH hearts enlarged by devotion and charity, let us, my friends, approve
ourselves not unmindful of the divine goodness, which has made us members of
so pure a church, and has given us an easy access to all the ordinances of
religion. Let us not spend our lives in the unavailing possession of them; but
by a right improvement of these means and instruments, let us labor to attain
the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls. And while we piously
consecrate this material temple to the pure worship of that GOD, who is
uncircumscribed by space, whose throne is heaven, and earth His footstool; let
us remember above all things to consecrate to HIS service those more solemn
temples of the HOLY GHOST, our souls and bodies, both collectively, as a
christian society, and severally, as individuals, 1 Cor. iii. 16. Ephesians. ii. 19
-- 22.
'Know ye not, that ye are the temple of GOD, and that the SPIRIT of GOD
dwells in you? Ye are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of
GOD -- and are builded together in CHRIST for an habitation of GOD through the
SPIRIT.'

YET farther to excite your pious thankfulness, expressing itself in a pure
faith, enlarged benevolence, and sanctity of manners; permit me, in conclusion,
to remind you of the FELICITY OF THE TIMES, and auspicious circumstances, that
distinguish the era of the founding this Church.

UNDER a MONARCH, who is already recognized by the most amiable and glorious
attribute of empire, AMOR AC DELICIAE GENERIS HUMANI; while reposing under HIS
effectual though distant protection, we lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty; we may behold the effects of HIS BENEVOLENCE in the
happiness of HIS extensive kingdoms, in the flourishing state of commerce and
the arts: we may contemplate HIS victorious arms, not madly grasping at
dominion and frantic with conquest, but presaging tranquillity and PEACE even to
his enemies: while Science, Virtue, and Religion, encouraged, honored, and
extended, complete the glories and blessings of HIS reign.

THESE colonies very sensibly feel the benign influence of His Majesty's
government, while defended and enlarged by the conquests of a GENERAL, who
equally eminent in courage and humanity, seems to have accepted the command of
armies, with the noble purpose of saving the lives of mankind.

WHILE this province flourishes under a GOVERNOR, who has drawn his politics
from the schools of philosophy, and the free genius of the english
constitution; in an age of learning, humanity and moderation; we have every
circumstance concurring to patronize and protect a church, which, we hope, is
constituted on a pure and apostolic model. Let us not be wanting to ourselves,
in improving our advantages to the best purposes of piety and virtue.

NOT the lest of those instruments, by which JESUS CHRIST will extend his
spiritual empire on earth, and render his religion universal; is that
illustrious SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF HIS GOSPEL, the success of whose
pious designs is a signal distinction of the XVIIIth-Century; and in some
degree emulates the purity and extent, with which the christian faith was
diffused in the first ages of the church. Should GOD give his people the
blessing of Peace, it may be hoped in a time so favorable to their intentions,
that the SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS will, by HIS blessing on their prudent and
unwearied zeal, still more irradiate the American world. The attempt indeed of
teaching savages a divine philosophy, before they have acquired any tincture of
humanity, is judged by the ablest reasoners, and found by experience premature
and ineffectual. As christianity addresses its doctrines to the heart, and its
evidence to the reason of mankind: armed with no force but that of truth, it
offers itself in the way of persuasion; which supposes its converts capable of
understanding its doctrines and precepts, and the proofs of their authority. It
argues great ignorance of the human mind, to suppose that uncivilized
barbarians can admit the gospel with any stability or continuance. The
christian faith has always met with the readiest and most durable reception
among the most learned and civil nations. While EUROPE, which is so polished by
science and arts, has generally submitted to the empire of JESUS CHRIST; other
parts of the world are either in total darkness and ignorance, or but partially
illuminated; and that, in very near proportion to the state of civil society.
The consequence is obvious from so clear a fact, which points out the only
method of diffusing the faith among the savages of our own continent.

THE wisdom of policy must prepare the way for the reception of religion. Peace
and its attendant blessings of commerce and the arts, will soften the ferocity
and suppress the hostilities of a barbarous people. A mutual intercourse
between the colonies and the natives must be opened, for the purposes of civil
life. The ranging lawless tribes must be collected into communities, and fixed
to settled habitations. Thus situated, they will find the want and the benefit
of arts and commerce: which should be restrained to the (...) and more (...)
articles: with a strict prohibition, both of fraudulent dealing, violence, and
injustice in our own traders, and of whatever commodities may vitiate their
manners or extinguish the glimmering light of nature. Such (...) commerce and
settlements would soon establish an exclusive property in lands and goods. This
will require, to secure it, the institution of Lews and administration of
justice. The education of children naturally succeeds: and the recovering of
humanity from a brutal state is achieved by this gradual process: an
achievement, that would add new luster to the greatest of kingdoms, and a most
benevolent Monarch: yet so difficult, as to suppress the most sanguine hopes of
accomplishing it. Whatever the policy of THE STATE can effect in making them
men, may successfully be followed by the zeal of THE SOCIETY in making them
christians. For to use the decisive sentiment of a great writer, Bp. WARBURTON.
D. L. of Moses, b. II. vi.
who has considered this subject with his usual penetration: "As whoever would
secure civil government, must support it by the means of religion: so whoever
would propagate religion, must perpetuate it by the means of civil government."
Yet amidst all the despondency expressed on this subject, the providence of God
will undoubtedly prosper any rational undertakings for this truly christian
purpose; and the political state of our country seems every day ripening to
maturity for the execution of it. And perhaps with regard to these unhappy
nations, the time, long since predicted, is approaching, when Isai. ^x.
violence shall no more be heard in the land, nor wasting and destruction
within our borders. Darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people:
but the LORD shall arise upon it, and His glory be seen among them.

FOR us, whatever difficulties may prevent the hastening this great work; it is
our duty, in the stations providence has assigned us, to render our services
as useful as may be to the general interests of religion. To this end, both
ministers and people may reflect, what an influence, however indiscernable, the
maintaining of pure christianity in these colonies may have on its more ready
reception among those, who are as yet unprepared for it. If ministers, wherever
their lot is cast, are careful to retrieve the simplicity of the gospel; and to
apply its doctrines to their genuine purpose of extirpating vice, of ennobling
and spiritualizing human nature: -- if the magistrate and the statesman,
instead of the cruel policy of turning their The removing from our continent a
turbulent rival would unite the Indians in the British interest and alliance.
At present, either nation Utitur auxiliis, damni securus, et astu
Debilitat saevum cognatis viribus Indum;
Et duplici lucro committens praelia, vertit
In se barbariem, nobis utrinque cadentem.
CLAUDIAN. VI. cons. HON. 219.
arms against each other, cultivate the friendship and alliances of the
INDIANS, by settling towns, by giving their protection to the weaker tribes, by
establishing an useful and equitable commerce: -- if the people are assiduous,
by a blameless conversation, by commercial integrity, and general charity, to
adorn the doctrine of GOD OUR SAVIOR: -- such a system of divine truths, most
persuasively recommended by a benevolent policy and consistent morals, would,
though silently and imperceptibly, diffuse the reputation and enlarge the
extent of the gospel.

TO crown the auspices of this day, we may congratulate our age and country on
that spirit of candor, charity and moderation, and those improved ideas of
christianity; which are their just distinction, and may assist these desirable
effects. The boundaries of religious freedom, the rights of conscience, and the
terms of union, are so well ascertained, as to consist with the variations of
human reason in apprehending divine truths. I cannot quit this argument, so
pleasing to me, without expressing my hopes and earnest wishes, that this
amiable charity, among those who agree in a common faith, may be continued,
cherished and improved to so pure and bright a flame, that all may know, we are
indeed the disciples of CHRIST.

MAY the favorable circumstances, with which THIS CHURCH is dedicated to HIS
NAME, portend its future fortunes! may its walls be ever sacred to pure
religion! and may WE so steadfastly emulate the earliest apostolic model, in
faith and virtue, charity and devotion; that as we are already admitted to all
the privileges, so (by means of this pious institution) we may at length attain
to the supreme felicity and promised honors of the Hebr. xii. 22 -- 24.
heavenly JERUSALEM! and may come unto the city of the living GOD, and to an
innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven; and to GOD the judge of all; and to
the spirits of just men made perfect; and to JESUS, THE MEDIATOR OF THE NEW
COVENANT.

AMEN.

