THE Excellence and Importance of the saving Knowledge of the LORD JESUS CHRIST
in the GOSPEL-PREACHER, plainly and seriously represented and enforced: And
CHRIST preached to the Gentiles in Obedience to the Call of GOD.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT EAST-HAMPTON, August 29, 1759; AT THE ORDINATION OF Mr.
SAMSON OCCUM, A MISSIONARY among the INDIANS.

BY SAMUEL BUELL, M. A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST, at EAST-HAMPTON,
LONG ISLAND.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A Letter to the Rev. Mr. DAVID BOSTWICK, Minister of the
PRESBYTERIAN Church, in NEW YORK, giving some Account of Mr. OCCUM's Education,
Character, etc.

1 COR. ii. 2. For I determined not to know any Thing among you, save JESUS
CHRIST and him crucified. 2 TIMOTHY iii. 16. Preached to the Gentiles. -- PSALM
cxix. I made Haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commands. ROMANS i. 16. For I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST. NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES PARKER (...)

A LETTER, TO THE Rev. Mr. DAVID BOSTWICK. At NEW YORK.
Reverend and dear Brother,
MOST gladly I embrace the present Opportunity to answer you Request, viz. That
I would give you a brief Account of the Rev. Mr. Occum's Education, Character,
and fitness for his designed Mission: -- Most gladly, -- because, I am not
without Hope, that it may have some Influence, to promote one of the most
important and beneficent Designs in the World: As I am well assured it will, if
by Means thereof, any well disposed Persons shall be excited to contribute the
more liberally toward upholding and supporting Mr. Occum, in his Mission among
the aboriginal Natives of America; and any of them by the Blessing of God upon
his Labors, for that Purpose should be truly evangelized.

To make Use of Mr. Occum's own Phraseology, He was brought up a Heathen till
he entered upon the eighteenth Year of his Age: At which Age, he began to seek
after an increasing Acquaintance with the English Tongue; and to labor after
being indoctrinated in the Christian Religion. But before the Expiration of
this Year, (which he calls the Year of Salvation to him) he says, that he can
but hope, "it pleased GOD to reveal his Son JESUS CHRIST, in him and to him,"
in a spiritual and saving Manner. He had at this Time, a clear, powerful, and
practical Conviction of the moral Pollution of his Nature, and of the great
Defilement of his Life, by actual Sin; of his lost, miserable and undone State
by Nature; of his utter Inability to liberate himself from this deplorable
Condition; of his Unworthiness to be helped, and of the Justice of GOD in his
final and eternal Rejection. And having with deep Solicitude, and Anxiousness
of Mind, turned every Stone, and tried every Expedient within the Compass of
his Power, by the Use of Means, in order to obtain Salvation, found thereupon,
an absolute Necessity of resigning himself up to GOD, as rightful Lord, and an
infinite Sovereign, who might save or destroy him forever, as he pleased: And
thus submiting to GOD, as merciful, and could save, and just if he cast off and
destroyed; at this solemn Season, he believes, the holy Spirit illuminated his
Mind, and enabled him to behold the divinely glorious Objects of Faith, and
inclined him to elect and choose GOD, as his last End, and chief Good, through
the divine Mediator CHRIST JESUS. From which Time to the present, he seriously
professes, to have found a great Change wrought in the Temper, Bias, and
Inclination of his Soul; turning of it from Sin to Holiness, from the Creature
to GOD. He observes, that among other Things, opening to View at this Time; he
saw in an affecting Light, the infinite Reasonableness of dedicating himself,
entirely and absolutely, to GOD the FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, as his Owner,
to be disposed of by him, as his Ruler, to obey him, as his Benefactor and
chief Good, thankfully to depend on him, and love him, and live to him, as his
ultimate End. And also, that while he looked upon his Kinsfolk, "as perishing
for Lack of Vision," he found within himself a bleeding Tenderness of Heart,
and unutterable Bowels of Compassion toward them: Which excited in him, ardent
Desires after becoming under Advantage to promote their Instruction, in the
Knowledge of the Christian Religion, and to befriend them with Regard to their
eternal Salvation. -- Hearing that the Rev. Mr. Eleazar Wheelock, Minister of
the Gospel at Lebanon, had a Number of Youth under his Care and Tuition, Mr.
Occum, earnestly requested of him, the Favor of becoming one of the Number;
which, after some Examination was readily granted. Mr. Occum, lived about three
Years with the Rev. Mr. Wheelock, and one Year with the Rev. Mr. Pumroy,
Minister of the Gospel at Hebron, -- prosecuting the Study of the English,
Latin and Greek Languages; and also contracted some Acquaintance with the
Hebrew. -- During this Time, Mr. Occum, made such Progress in Learning, that he
was so well fitted for Admittance into College, (which was designed) that he
doubtless would have entered upon his second Year, at his first Admission. But
through intense Application to Study, he very much weakened his Eyesight, so
that 'twas judged prudent for him to desist from severe Study for a Time: After
some Months Trial, finding his Eyesight still remained so weak as not to admit
of hard Study, 'twas thought advisable, that he should enter upon the Business
of keeping School: Which he accordingly did among the Indians at Montauk, who
live upon the East End of this Island, to whom he has been very beneficial,
especially to the Youth and Children there.

ABOUT a Year and a Half before Mr. Occum's Ordination, the Reverend
Association of Windham County, in the Colony of Connecticut, gave him a License
to preach, as a Candidate for the Gospel Ministry, and referred him to our
Presbytery for Ordination, in case we thought proper. While these Things were
transacting, several Letters came to Hand, from our worthy and dear Friend, the
Rev. Mr. Davies, (since President of New Jersey College, and we trust now in
Glory) warmly urging Mr. Occum's Ordination, with a View to his going upon a
Mission among the Cherokees; but they taking an unhappy Turn, and engaging in a
War with us, that Design was obstructed. We received the Information of the
perfidious Conduct of the Cherokee Nation, a few Days before the Time appointed
by the Presbytery for Mr. Occum's Ordination; nevertheless, that was not
preventive of it; for a Motion had been made for his entering upon a Mission
among the Mohawks; and there are several Tribes of Indians on the Continent,
and also upon this Island, that he could minister unto occasionally; and it was
hoped that GOD in his Providence, in due Time, would open an effectual Door for
his Usefulness, among them who dwell in the Wilderness. -- Whereupon, the
Presbytery finding of him, upon due Examination, possessed of a hopeful Measure
of necessary Qualifications therefore, proceeded to separate him to the Work of
the sacred Ministry, according to Gospel-Rule and Order.

FROM which Time to the present, he has principally preached to the Indians at
Montauk; who, I fear will soon perceive some lamentable Effects of his
Departure from them.

IT IS now eleven or twelve Year since Mr. Occum has officiated in the Quality
of a Schoolmaster; during which Time, he has been making Proficiency in the
various Parts of Learning, which serve to qualify, in their Place, for
preaching the Gospel, which all along he has had in View. But his Progress in
Learning has been much retarded, and his Usefulness greatly embarrassed, for
Want of due Support, and thereby Freedom from wordly Cares and Avocations; yet
he has improved Time with so much Vigilance and Industry, as to become possessed
of a good Degree of useful Learning; and has been improving to good Purpose in
the Christian Life. He is endued with no small Degree of Knowledge in the holy
Scriptures; and in the whole of his Deportment, he exhibits ample Evidence,
that he has a living Faith within, of divine Truths.

As a Preacher of the Gospel, he seems always to have before his Eye, the great
End of the Ministry, the Glory of GOD, and the Salvation of Men. As the Matter
of his Sermons is designed for the good of Souls; so his Way of Expression is
proper to that End. He uses great Plainness of Speech, and makes close
Application of Truth to the Conscience; which you well know Sir, that although
this is not so agreeable to those, who are loath to have their Minds impressed
with a just Sense of the Weight of Things eternal; nor so pleasing to them who
form a Taste rather for the Flowers of Oratory, than for the substantial Food
of the Sanctuary; yet it is that Method of preaching which is best adapted to do
good to the Souls of Men; and upon which, the LORD is pleased to command his
Blessing. Those, who have had Opportunity to observe, take Notice, that his
Manner of Expression, when he preaches to the Indians, is vastly more natural
and free, clear and eloquent, quick and powerful, than it is wont to be, when he
preaches to others. As an Instructor of the Indians, he makes frequent Use of
apt and significant Similitudes, to convey and illustrate Truth: Such a Method
of conveying Ideas, you know, Sir, is natural to Indians in general, and
therefore, doubtless, as pleasing as it is natural.

IN Prayer, his Solemnity and Reverence are becoming one that beholds him who
is invisible: He appears eminently enriched with a Spirit of Adoption; and
seems often indulged with much holy Freedom of Access to the Throne of Grace.
His Mind is chiefly intent upon, and his Heart much drawn forth, in Desires
after those Blessings which are infinitely the most excellent and important.

HE adds Force to the Doctrines he preaches, by the prevailing Charms of an
unspotted Life, and a Conversation as becomes the Gospel. From the Time that he
hopefully experienced a saving Change, to this very Day, he has been preserved
from that Sin, which seems to be the Indians' Constitution Sin; and from every
Sin, that is commonly called scandalous: In all Respects, he has a negative
Goodness; and shines in the positive Beauties of Holiness. In short, he is an
Ornament to the Christian Religion, and the Glory of the Indian Nation,

MR. Occum is well acquainted with the Nature and Essence of Religion, as it
eminently consists in a Conformity of the whole Soul to the moral Excellencies
of GOD, and his Will. He is sound in Principle, and well established in the
Belief of divine Truth; and is far from resting in a naked and cold Assent
thereto, he labors after, and appears actually possessed of a good Degree of the
Life and power of Godliness; as a Man, judiciously zealous and happily free
from an enthusiastic Turn of Mind; an Attainment, we believe, Sir, as truly
excellent as it is useful and r^^e. He is indeed well pleased with raised and
holy religious Affections, as the Result of a proportionable Degree of
Illumination of Mind, and as they powerfully influence to practical Holiness,
and excite to a permanent Devotedness to the Service and Glory of GOD. There is
therefore, just Ground to believe, that as an Instructor of the Heathen, he
will teach them the Truth as it is in JESUS; that he will be far from resting
of them in the Form of Knowledge, and mere external Reformation; without
pressing upon them the absolute Necessity of Regeneration, by the holy Spirit's
Operation; and thereupon, the Fruits of evangelical and universal Holiness.

AND now, Sir, from these broken Hints, and that agreeable personal Interview,
I suppose you will likely have with Mr. Occum, when these Lines come to Hand,
you will no Doubt, judge for yourself, as to his Qualifications and Fitness for
the Mission he is entering upon.

MY known Affection to Mr. Occum, may perhaps incline some to conclude, that I
am prejudiced in his Favor, and therefore am excessive in giving these
Sketches of his Character: It Is true, that I am not ashamed the World should
know, that my Heart loves him; that I rejoice in the Grace of GOD conferred
upon him; that I admire the Pearl of Gospel Grace, that is set, not in the
Heart of a Nobleman, but in the Heart of an Indian, born a Pagan; where it
displays a sprightly Beam, may be of signal Service, and afford a Fund of
Usefulness; and that I seek to promote his being under Advantage to do much
Service in his Day, by what I now write; but then I risque my Character upon it
with those Ministers of the Gospel, and private Christians, who are most
acquainted with Mr. Occum, that, (so far as I know) I have written no more than
what is just, and the real Truth, with Respect to him.

I am apt to believe, Sir, that in the Request you exhibit, -- you seek not so
much your own Satisfaction, (having before now heard so much in Mr. Occum's
Favor) as the Information of those, who would gladly be informed what
Encouragement there is to promote him in his Mission, on Account of his
Qualifications therefore: And that you propose as a special End, an Incentive
to the benevolent and truly generous Spirit of Christianity, that nothing of an
outward Nature may be wanting, which may be conducive to promote his important
and glorious Embassy. This, Sir, I hope will sufficiently justify your Request,
and my Compliance, in giving so much of the Character of a Man yet in the State
of so great Imperfection, and in a World of so much Temptation, as this in
which we at present live. We have, doubtless, often thought, when we have
beheld for a Time, shining Appearances, and hopeful resplendent Virtues, at
length overcast with the dismal Gloom of Error in Doctrine, or Scandal in
Practice; that it is enough to say of the best Man upon Earth, by Way of
Encomium, "All Things as yet appear well and excellent, and we have sufficient
Reason to hope they will do so:" And thus much I may truly say, with Respect to
our dear Brother Mr Occum. Amidst all that Respect and Honor he receives from
many, I am well assured, that he has some particular Friends, who observe to
him the Danger he is in of receiving Injury by that busy Sin Pride; not because
they see the Appearance of it in him, but as supposing Satan very active in his
Temptations, and that he would exert himself more to effect his falling into
Sin, preventive of his Usefulness, than he would to procure the Fall of twenty
other Christians, not Half so likely to act a Part destructive to his Kingdom.
Mr. Occum, is not unapprehensive of Danger from this Quarter; he receives with
becoming Respect, and retains with a watchful Eye, that needful Exhortation to
all Christians, "Let him that stands take Heed least he fall." His Heart says
Amen, to that divine Sentence, summarily expressive of the whole Design of the
Gospel, "Let him that glories, glory in the Lord." With Pleasure he adapts
that Declaration of the Apostle, so descriptive of Self-emptiness, -- "I am,
what I am, by the Grace of GOD:" May such Grace-exalting Language ever have a
genuine Flow, from his and our Hearts!

IT yet remains that I observe, that Mr. Occum has a Family, consisting of a
Wife and six Children; he has one Son at School, under the Care and Instruction
of the Rev. Mr. Wheelock: (who has a considerable Number of Indian Lads under
his Tuition, that promise well for eminent Usefulness in their Day, by the
Blessing of GOD.) From the first of Mr Occum's coming to Montauk, he has been
so faithfully engaged in keeping School, that he has been able to do but little
for the Support of his Family: He has indeed received about Twenty Pounds per
Annum, from the Gentlemen Commissioners in Boston; -- and a few private
Donations, from particular Friends, all which, has in no due Measure been
equal to the necessary Expenses of his Family; so that in order to it is
Support, he is become much involved in Debt; and therefore he stands in Need of
considerable charitable and liberal Donations, in order to the Discharge of
Debts already necessarily contracted, as well as for the present Support of his
Family, and for his own Expenses, while engaged in his Mission. -- It verily
seems a Thousand Pities, that Mr. Occum's Usefulness should be flung away, for
the Want of his due Support; especially in this Day, in which a very glorious
Prospect opens to View, for evangelizing Multitudes of the Heathen, and
thereby, for his doing much for GOD's Honor, and Men's Salvation. While there
are so many Christians, who daily ply the Throne of Grace, and pray for the
magnificent Enlargement of the divine REDEEMER's Kingdom among Men; we hope, we
must in Charity hope, that their liberal Donations, to promote the Propagation
of the joyful Tidings of Salvation among the Heathen, will agree and correspond
with their solemn Prayers: Surely we need not hesitate a Moment, whether it is
possible to honor GOD, in a more excellent Way, with our worldly Substance. --

AND now, my dear Sir, I can scarce lay my Pen aside, 'til I have taken the
Liberty, and received the Pleasure, of expressing some of our joyous Prospects,
our harmonizing Hopes, and our hearty Wishes. We receive the Information as
well authenticated, that the Oneida Indians (to whom Mr. Occum is going) make
the first Motion themselves, and earnestly request that a Gospel Minister may
be sent among them; they promise to receive him with Joy, to treat him with
Respect, and to hear him with Candor. They have already collected two or three
Hundred Dollars, which they Design, (with others to be collected) to improve
for erecting a Meeting House, that therein they may unite in the Worship of the
true and only GOD. They hope their Cousins the Tuscaroras will join with them
in receiving the Gospel: So that the Prospect is hopeful, that GOD has a Design
of special Mercy toward them. And upon the agreeable Supposition, that the
Gospel should become the Power of GOD to their Salvation, it is quite hopeful
the blessed Leaven will spread, and be diffused far and wide among the Heathen
Nations: And how "this Grain of Mustard Seed may grow, and increase and
spread," GOD only knows. When we take a View of the signal Successes the LORD
OF HOSTS, has given to British and American Forces, especially when we call to
Mind the moral Impediments that were in the Way thereof, and the Manner in
which GOD has wrought, the Wonder and the Prospect grows upon us; that he has
a Design at this Time, to spread the the Name and Fame of the glorious and dear
IMMANUEL among the Heathen, in these Ends of the Earth.

WE rejoice in Hope, that all those who are replenished with generous and
active Zeal for the Glory of GOD, the Honor of CHRIST, and the Salvation of
Men, will soon share in the sublime Joy and Satisfaction of hearing, that they
"who dwell in the Wilderness," hear of, trust in, bow before, and yield
unfeigned Subjection to the exalted King of Zion. And as conducive thereto, may
we not hope, that a generous Scheme will soon be set on Foot, for forming a
Society in these Parts, to receive Subscriptions and Contributions, with Design
to promote the Education of Indian Youth, the Support of Schoolmasters among
the Indians, the Distribution of useful Books, and in due Time Bibles, etc. and
especially, with a Design to promote the Propagation of the Gospel among the
Heathen, by the due Support of well qualified Missionaries, for that beneficent
and glorious Purpose.

WHEN we recollect the tragic Scenes of Years past, our Forts demolished or
burnt to Ashes, our Armies cut to Pieces, our Countrymen, in Numbers, butchered
and mangled; -- and call to Mind, how the Voice of Lamentation and Woe was
heard in our Streets! How the Hearts of Multitudes were failing them for Fear,
while they heard the confused Noise of War, saw Garments rolled in Blood, and
the insulting Foe, spreading Desolation and Ruin all around! And when we
remember, what a dismal Storm seemed gathering fast upon us, big with awful
Fates, threatening of us with Privation of our wordly Substance, our
inestimable Privileges, civil and sacred, and all in this World, that ought to
be the most dear to us! Ill-boding, as if Ignorance and Superstition, Slavery
and Persecution, would soon overspread these Regions of Light and Liberty; and
when at the same Time, we recognize, that notwithstanding the Demerit of our
Crimes, just at this momentous Crisis, the GOD of Armies, the GOD of
Salvations, by Miracles of Providence, scattered mighty Forces, diverted the
Storm, and wrought an admirable Train of glorious Deliverances, and positive
Salvations for us; I observe, when we view and review these Things, we can but
hope, that furnished with an irresistible Train of Motives and Obligations,
Praiseworthy Charity will be reflected from Breast to Breast: And that we shall
see Christians, though in some lesser Matters of differing Opinions, agreeing
harmoniously in this truly generous, interesting and important Work, viz.
contributing liberally toward promoting the Propagation of the glad Tidings of
Salvation among the Heathen.

WE heartily wish, for the Comfort of having Reason to believe, that all who
have Interest at the Throne of Grace, are much in Prayer to the great LORD of
the Harvest, that he would raise up, qualify Men therefore, and spirit them to
carry the Light of the glorious Gospel among perishing Savages, and crown their
Ministrations with glorious Success.

WE wish, that in Answer to a Spirit of Prayer poured out in a Kind of
caelestial Torrent upon Believers, the Kingdom of our Lord CHRIST among Men,
may be enlarged intensively and extensively; that the Heathen Nations, who have
been for Length of Time, overcast with rayless Gloom, and benighted with
Shadows of Death, may be enlightened and enlivened, by that glorious Gospel,
which has brought Life and Immortality to Light: That they, who have long been
resident "in the Pit in which there is no living Water," may see Rivers opened
in high Places, and Fountains in the Desert, that they may taste the Sweetness,
and feel the salutary Refreshment of the Fountain of Life, that they may drink
copious Draughts of those heavenly Streams, the living Waters of the Sanctuary;
and by them be quickened, purified, comforted, and live for ever. That Prodigal
Pagans, who, for numerous Ages, have been wandering far from the Father of
Mercies, and living without spiritual Food for their Souls, may now behold "a
barren Wilderness turned into a fruitful Field," and find themselves furnished
with living Bread from Heaven, in order to nourish them up in the divine Life,
and secure them the Possession of immortal Blessedness and Glory: And
thenceforth celebrate the divine Praises, 'till the Praise reaches Heaven, and
joins the Songs of Angels and glorified Spirits, and the Courts above echo
back the Hosannas, 'til all that has Breath shall praise the LORD, in that the
eternal SON of the eternal FATHER, according to Promise made to him as
Mediator, has the Heathen for an Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the
Earth for a Possession.

King JESUS reigns, and spreads his glorious Fame,
The savage Nations know, and trust his Name;
Triumph ye Saints! Ye Angels strike the Lyre!
In everlasting Praise, let ALL conspire!
DEAR Sir, I forget myself, the pleasing Theme has transported me beyond the
Limits I had prescribed to my Mind: Pardon Prolixity, and the Inaccuracy of my
Thoughts and Pen; and I shall add no more, only that you are at Liberty to make
such Use of what I have now written, as you shall judge proper; from the Hand
of,

Reverend and Dear Sir, Your affectionate Brother, In the Work of the Christian
Ministry; And ever faithful Friend, And Servant, SAMUEL BUELL.
EAST-HAMPTON, May 9, 1761.
THE PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH soon after the Delivery of the ensuing Sermon, undeniable Importunity
prevailed upon me to consent to its Publication by the Press, yet I deferred
for a Time, as hoping divine Providence would open a Door for Mr. Occum, to
enter upon a Mission among the savage Nations in the Wilderness: And that Hope
not being in vain, the Sermon under Promise, as now more fitly timed, comes to
Hand from the Press. Having asserted therein some Things diametrically opposite
to that Scheme of Principles which some Men embrace, I shall meet with no
Disappointment, if I come under their Censure. All Men don't see Things in the
same Point of View; yet it is a common Profession, we must think for ourselves.
Hanc venian petimusque damusque vicissim.


IN the following Sermon I have freely declared it as my Opinion, that Men who
enter upon the holy Ministry, ought to know the LORD JESUS CHRIST savingly. If
any should censure me, as chargeable with Arrogance, think that I assert Points
too boldly, and that I affect Singularity: I have this to (...) in general,
that had I aimed at being a Man-pleaser, I might have escaped their Censure.

I freely acknowledge, that many who agree with me in point of Principle, would
doubtless have done far greater Justice to the Subject, and have handled it to
vastly better Advantage, I said that Days should speak, and multitude of Years
should teach Knowledge. I found no Answer; the Stage being clear, I said I
would show mine Opinion. In publico discrimine omnis Homo miles est.


When I preached the Sermon, I had just Reason to fear, that a Decay of the
Life and Power of Godliness among us, and the Prevalency of Arminian Principles
in some Places, would unhappily prepare the Way for some Men to grow more bold
than ever, in opposing divine Truth, and experimental Religion; and as a native
Consequence, the next Thing would be their open and warm Opposition to the
Examination of Candidates for the Gospel Ministry, as to their experimental
Acquaintance with Religion. For if Men can once imagine, that the Gospel does
not require saving Grace, or which is the same Thing, the saving Knowledge of
the LORD, as a necessary Qualification in Candidates, -- what should hinder,
but that, as Arminians, they drop all Pretense to the Examination of
Candidates, upon the Point of their experimental Acquaintance with divine
Truth, by efficacious and sovereign Grace. In the View of these, and such like
Things (sadly ominious to the Church of Christ,) I was, and am willing,
according to my small Ability, and Sphere of Influence to give a Caveat against
threatening Errors, to declare Truth for the Establishment of some, and to
offer Matter of Conviction to others: And whether it be judged too assuming, or
not, I am as yet apprehensive, that I did not fear where there is no Danger.

IF censured as asserting this, and other Points too boldly, small Apology must
suffice. I own real Modesty in asserting Points properly dubious, to be
graceful; but false Modesty, concealing or betraying the Truths of the Gospel,
is abominable. "I have believed," and assigned the Reasons why I thus believe,
and have spoken plainly, and whosoever will, may call this speaking boldly. As
a Christian Minister, I think myself under the strongest Obligations to speak
our my Principles openly, and so honestly: And as a Believer to dec^^^^ the
important Truths of the Gospel of my LORD and SAVIOR, boldly. Let him that
hesitates, and cannot answer this Question, "What is Truth?" Speak doubtfully.
Let Arminians sculk and peep in the Dark, and as well as they can by
unsanctified Reason, defend their unhallowed Principles, which cannot bear the
glorious Light of Divine revealed Truth. Let Trimmers with the Times, observe
their needful Decorum, and be sure to speak modestly, and with a bright Eye
watch narrowly, or they may lose their beloved Popularity. But let the
Ministers of the enthroned SAVIOR CHRIST JESUS the LORD, who know Gospel
Truths in their Life-giving and transforming Power, as illuminated by the HOLY
GHOST, "Preach the Kingdom of GOD, and teach those Things which concern the
LORD JESUS CHRIST with all Confidence." When pernicious Errors are advanced and
disputed for, and important Truths rejected and disputed against; with Zeal
awakened to Flame we will to speak our Opinions, with the Reasons of them, with
an undaunted Parrhesia, with a noble Boldness, whilst we plead the precious
Cause of GOD, and dear Zion. When Truths that greatly concern the Honor of
GOD, the Glory of CHRIST, and the Salvation of Men, are concealed or betrayed,
given up or oppose; can the Ministers of the living Word, appear as void of
sacred Fervor, as lifeless Statutes? Can they imagine that GOD or his Prophets,
that CHRIST or his Apostles, instructed Men in the modish Art of keeping
Silence? Or can they dream, that Love Divine sent Preachers among Men to
palliate Gospel Truths? No; surely. We have renounced the hidden Things of
Dishonesty: -- We speak as in the Sight of GOD: -- We have the Testimony of
JESUS to keep us in Countenance, and are not ashamed of his Gospel, -- which
gives Boldness against that universal Fire, which shall melt the Elements, and
shrivel up the Heavens like a Roll of Parchment.

IF censured, as holding an Opinion for the sake of Singularity, I discard the
Thought, as I do being a Latitudinarian, for the gain of Popularity. I am quite
sure, that in the present Case, I am far from being singular in my Opinion:
Many of my Fathers and Brethren, I well know, hold the same Principle. And all
Men of any tolerable Reading in Divinity, know that numerous Divines, in
various Ages, most renowned for Wisdom and Piety in the Church of GOD, have
been of the same Opinion, I own indeed, that in the Compass of my small
Reading, I have not, that I remember, seen the Point handled by way of
methodical Argument, yet casual Hints, and plain Declarations, in Authors, give
us their Opinions: To quote, would be endless. If numerous Authorities may add
Force, and serve to confront Opponents, the Balance is in my Favor. Vis unitur
fortior.


IN Consequence of the foregoing Principle; in my Sermon, I have insisted upon
the strict Examination of Candidates, -- as to their Acquaintance with
experimental Religion: For it is quite beyond me to comprehend, how to separate
here, with Consistency. Nevertheless, we find that Men will sometimes make the
Concession, that Candidates for the Gospel Ministry ought savingly to know the
LORD, and yet don't care to admit that they should pass an Examination, as to
their experimental Religion. Here I would take the Liberty to observe: That
upon this Concession, that the Gospel does require saving Grace, as a necessary
Qualification in a Candidate for the Holy Ministry, then he has not a solid
Foundation, of Right to engage therein, unless he is possessed thereof. And of
Consequence, Ministers ought not to separate him to the Work of the Ministry,
without Evidence sufficient to found a Judgment of Christian Charity upon, that
he is truly gracious: For Faithfulness to our LORD, does necessarily require,
that we have all Reason to believe that the Candidate to whom we commit the
Ministry, is qualified as the Gospel does injoin: And therefore we must have
all the moral Evidence, and Satisfaction, the Nature of the Case will admit,
that the Candidate is truly gracious. The Point then seems to turn upon this
Hinge, or upon the Solution of this Question, viz. "How shall we have all the
Evidence the Nature of the Case will admit, in order to exercise a Christian
Judgment of Charity, that the Candidate is truly gracious?" Now, for a Person
to appear blameless, as touching the Law, as St. Paul tells us he did before
Conversion, or as strict a Legalist as the the young Man in the Gospel, who yet
lacked the main Thing; will this, or in other Words, will an Appearance of
outward Holiness of Life, sufficient for a King of mere negative Charity,
afford all the Evidence for the Exercise of a Christian Judgment of Charity,
that a Person savingly knows the LORD, that the Nature of the Case will admit?
If it will, nothing farther must be sought. But if the Nature of the Case will
admit, that a Profession of the Essentials of Christian Piety, or an honest
Declaration of experimental Religion, as affording some Degree of Evidence, for
the Exercise of a Christian Judgment of Charity, that a Person savingly knows
the LORD; then, in the present Case, such Profession, or experimental Religion,
must be sought. Now whether experimental Religion has in it, ordinarily, any
Thing of the Nature of Evidence; and is of Use, or useless, as to a Judgment of
Christian Charity toward a Person, let all judge who profess to believe there
is such a Thing as experimental Religion, and that the Bible informs us what it
is.

THAT I may be the better understood by my common Reader, I will suppose, that
he and I were Present the other Day, at a Session of the Presbytery, when the
Candidates Theodorus and Popularus were examined: We had some previous
Knowledge of them both, so as to have an equal negative Charity. -- They were
asked as to their Aims and Views; -- As to what they had experienced of the
Power of Divine Truth, convincing, sanctifing and comforting. -- As to a Life
of Faith, and Devotedness to GOD. -- And, it is needless to repeat, -- we
remember Questions and Answers. -- To be short, so far as we could judge, (and
we could not help forming some Judgment) Theodorus gave an Account of his
experimental Religion, and a Life of Holiness, as a Fruit of Faith in CHRIST,
well agreeing with the Word of GOD: But Popularus could give no such Scriptural
Account of experimental Religion and Holiness, for he had none to give. Now if
my Reader will acknowledge, that he has more Evidence for a Judgment of
Charity, that Theodorus is truly gracious, than he has that Popularus is so, I
have gained the Point I have pursued. -- It Is not my Design at present to
answer Objections; "What says the Law and the Testimonies? -- However, as
there is one that is Chief, and is thought by some unanswerable, and as bearing
all, that can be said, down before it, it may not be improper here to give it a
brief Consideration, The Objection is this, viz. If saving Grace is required in
the Gospel, as a necessary Qualification in a Candidate for the Ministry, the
LORD CHRIST would have given some certain Rule, whereby Ministers might
assuredly know whether they have such Grace, or not; but no such Rule is given,
therefore the Gospel does not require such Grace in the Candidate. Now, if
there is any Strength in the Objection, it lies in the Truth of his
Proposition, viz. That whatever Qualification the Gospel requires in a
Candidate, the LORD CHRIST has given some certain Rule, whereby Ministers may
know whether he has such a Qualification, or not. If this Proposition is not
true, than there is no Force at all in the Argument. But is there a Divine upon
the Face of the Earth, that will assert and stand to it, that this Proposition
is true? No; not one: For all will own that some internal Qualifications are
required, some King of Faith and Sincerity, and all must own they have no
certain Rule whereby they can assuredly know the hidden Things of the Heart:
And this is to disown the Proposition, as to its Truth, and consequently to
give up the Objection, or Argument. I suppose all who make the abovementioned
Objection, against what I have asserted, are agreed, to a Man, that the Gospel
does require in Candidates for the Ministry, what they call moral Sincerity,
moral Seriousness of Spirit, and soundness in the Faith, as necessary
Qualifications. I will now suppose, that some one, lax in Principle, and rude
in Speech, becomes and Objector against my Objectors, saying, Gentlemen, you
hold a Set of rigid Principles indeed: You assert that the Gospel requires that
Candidates for the Holy Ministry, must have these Qualifications, moral
Seriousness of Spirit, and Soundness in the Faith: But the LORD CHRIST has
given you no certain Rule, by which you can assuredly know that a Candidate has
such Qualifications; therefore the Gospel does not require them. Now, what will
my Objectors do? To profess they have such a Rule, they know they cannot; to
say that CHRIST has been unfaithful to his Church they dare not; infallibility
they have not; to give up their Principle they must not, for the Gospel
expressly requires these Qualifications: What can they, what must they do! There
is but one Thing that can be done consistent with common Sense, and that is to
acknowledge, that their grand and beloved Objection, brought against the Truths
I assert, has no Force at all in it. Should they imagine any, it lies as much
against them, as others: In short the Argument proves too much, if any Thing,
and therefore nothing at all. I am quite sensible that the Things I assert fall
heavy upon those Candidates, who are not what they ought to be, and dislike to
be told what they should be: -- I expect their Displeasure, however, they have
my Compassion, and my Prayers. They no doubt greatly applaud the Conduct of
those Ministers who look upon it needless to examine Candidates for the Gospel
Ministry, as to their experimental Acquaintance with Religion: Yet I take the
Liberty to tell such Candidates, that if ever a Sovereign GOD is pleased to
give them sanctifying Grace, and impresses their Hearts with a due Sense of his
glorious Attributes, the Holiness of his Law, the Purity of the Gospel, the
Weight of Things Eternal, and the immense Worth of Souls, they will then be
very far from an Approbation of the Practice of such Ministers, upon the Point
of which I speak; (not to say of their experimental Religion also) or I am
greatly mistaken.

As to what (...) said; with respect to the gracious Presence of the LORD with
his Ministers, and Cooperation of the Holy Spirit with their Ministrations;
whatever some think; yet the Ministers of CARIST well know, that if He withhold
his Help, no Part of his Work can be rightly performed, if He deny his
Blessing, the best Performances are in Vain.

I have no Apology to make for the Length of my Sermon, but the Importance of
its Contents; nor for the Length of my Preface, but with Relation thereto; and
the Times that are, and are to come.

AND now, oh my Soul! With the Friends of Zion, stretch forth the Arms of
intense Desire, and by Faith take Flight, over Darkness, Impurities,
Altercations, and Confusions; and salute the Dawnings of that glorious Day of
Zion's Light, Purity, Harmony, and Regularity, when the Church of the Living
GOD, will approve of nothing short of that Gospel Furniture in
Gospel Ministers, which has been insisted upon. --

MEAN while, my Work is with the LORD, to whom I trust my Motives are approved;
I commit it with all Humility to his Blessing, and to the Prayers of my
Christian Friends,

S. BUELL.
EAST-HAMPTON, May 10, 1761.
AN ORDINATION SERMON.
GALATIANS, i. 16. TO reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
Heathen; and immediately I conferred not with Flesh and Blood.
THE Glorious Immanuel, the Messenger of the Covenant, the everlasting Covenant
between the Persons of the holy Trinity, first proclaimed the eternal Secret of
redeeming Counsel and Love, unto trembling Man in the Garden: This Revelation
the Apostle remarkably terms the glorious Gospel. Thus it will appear, if
considered as the unalterable Dispensation of GOD, toward a complete Display of
the Perfections of his Nature and Will; and as the grand Mean for bringing
about the Glory of the adorable Trinity, and as the only Contrivance for
accomplishing the Salvation of lost Man; and also, that its infinitely
important and amiable Truths, will furnish the redeemed, and even all the
bright Intelligences above, with sublime Praise and Admiration to all Eternity.
If we seriously consider Things in this Point of View, we shall be apt to
conclude, that the Gospel must surely be a "scheme of Doctrines" worthy of
devout Meditation, deserving the most cordial Reception; and also, calling for
the most solemn Manner of Dispensation; as by Men enriched not only with
doctrinal and speculative Knowledge concerning our Lord Christ, and the
important Truths of his glorious Gospel, but also truly adorned and embellished
with that Knowledge, which is experimental and practical; or in other Words,
that Jesus Christ be revealed in, and savingly manifested to them, by the
Illumination and Operation of the Holy Spirit.

THE great Apostle of the Gentiles, that excellent and noble Pattern of
Ministerial Qualifications and Performances, was brought up at the Feet of
Gamaliel; and not only so, God from Above revealed his Son in him; thereby
making up a most accomplishing Mixture of saving divine Knowledge, and solid
human Literature. He had an extraordinary Call to preach the Gospel, and was
furnished with extraordinary Gifts and miraculous Powers, the proper
Credentials of such a Call. Having preached the Gospel for a Time to the Jews,
and their Proselytes, without receiving Ministerial Ordination; when the
appointed Time came, for the Gentiles to become "Fellow Heirs with the
believing Jews," St. Paul, and Barnabas his Colleague, were made Ministers by
Divine Designation, submitting to Gospel Ordination, according to the Direction
of the Holy Ghost. Acts xiii. 1, 2, 3.
But the Things which at present especially call for our Notice, are, That as a
necessary Qualification for preaching the Gospel, the Apostle had Jesus Christ
revealed to him, and in him; and that the great and glorious Subject of his
Sermons was Jesus Christ; and that he instantly obeyed the Call of GOD, to
preach Jesus Christ to the Heathen.

IN discoursing upon the Words, as I hope not unsuitable to the present
Occasion, by the Divine Assistance, I shall attempt to show; I. What Revelation
and Manifestation of the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, which those ought to have
who preach Him to others. II. Show what is intended by preaching the Lord Jesus
Christ to the Gentiles. III. I shall observe that the Calls of GOD to engage in
his Service, are to be obeyed without Delay. And lastly.


I shall make some Application, by Way of Address.

1. THEN, I am to show what Revelation and Manifestation of our Lord CHRIST
that is, which those ought to be the Subjects of, who preach Him to others.

PREACHERS of the Gospel, entrusted with the Holy Ministry, as a necessary
Qualification, ought to know the Lord Jesus Christ, not only by objective
Light, or the external directive Light of Divine Revelation; but also by an
internal, powerful and saving Illumination of the Mind, by the Irradiation and
Operation of the Holy Spirit. And so to become possessed of a Knowledge, that
is not produced by the Power of human Reason, or the common Methods of
Education or Instruction; and therefore a Knowledge not confined to the Head,
but seated in the Heart. An affectionate and fiducial Knowledge; disposing the
happy Subject of it to an entire Reliance upon the Lord Jesus Christ for
Righteousness, Grace, and eternal Life; and to love Him superlatively, as
discerning his incomparable Beauty, Glory, and Excellency. A Knowledge that is
Soul-humbling, Self-emptying, Soul-transforming, Christ-exalting; and
productive of Hatred to all Sin, and of a sincere, cheerful, solemn
Consecration of the whole Man to the Service, Honor, and Glory of the Lord
Jesus Christ. This is that Knowledge, which disposed St. Paul to improve all
his Abilities to holy Ends and Purposes; which put him upon subordinating all
his natural and acquired, intellectual and moral Accomplishments, unto the
Glory of Christ, and the Good of his Church: And according to the Measure of it
received, will always have an answerable Effect upon Ministers of the Gospel.
This is that Knowledge, which the Apostle in Distinction from the Form of
Knowledge, calls the Savor of Knowledge; 2 Cor. 2. 14.
and with Respect to which, he accounted all Things but Loss and Damage, as in
the View of it is vast Importance, and transcendent Excellence; Phil. 3. 8.
and in Comparison with which, he determined to know nothing, even in Corinth
itself, the Seat of Learning and Politeness 1 Cor. 2. 2.
. This is that Knowledge by which all the Divine Perfections are beheld, as
they shine forth in their united Glories, with a bright and charming Luster, in
the Person, and Mediation of our Lord Christ; and transform the Spectator, in
Heart and Life, into his Holy Image.

THUS the Apostle had Jesus Christ revealed in him, and savingly manifested to
him, before he preached Him to others: And this supernatural, experimental, and
practical Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, every Man ought to be possessed of,
that enters upon the Evangelical Ministry.

FOR, unless the Lord Jesus Christ is thus revealed in, and savingly manifested
unto a Man, he cannot be qualified for the Gospel Ministry, as the Word of GOD
does require; nor in any due Measure answer the Characters and Epithets given
to Gospel Ministers, in the sacred Pages. The Word of GOD requires, that Men be
Holy who are put into the Holy Ministry; Tit. 1. 7.
and the Holiness required is not merely relative, but real, and injoined as a
necessary Qualification for a Gospel Minister. The Ministers of Christ's
Church, have a sacred Rule of Direction given them, that will abide though Heaven
and Earth pass away; that they put faithful Men into the Ministry: 2 Timothy 2. 2.
And it is required of Men in the Gospel Ministry, that they be faithful; 1.
Cor. 4. 2.
and Faithfulness in this Case, includes pure and spiritual Aims and Intentions
for GOD; and necessarily implies the saving Knowledge of our Lord Christ, and
the Derivation of Divine Grace from him. Amongst the many Characters of the
Ministers of the Gospel recorded in Scripture, we repeatedly find this given
them, viz, the Man of GOD: 1 Timothy 6. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 17.
This honorable Compellation or Title imports, that a Gospel Minister ought to
be a Man greatly conformed in his Nature to the moral Excellencies of GOD, and
in a sincere Manner devoted to his Service and Glory: And therefore implies
saving Illumination in the Knowledge of our Lord Christ. The Holy Spirit gives
the Character of Gospel Ministers, and the Character of Men in a State of
unrenewed Nature, as extremely diverse and exceeding opposite, the one to the
other. Men in a State of unrenewed Nature, and without the saving Knowledge of
Christ, He calls blind, dark, ignorant, ungodly, and c. But ascribes to Gospel
Ministers the Titles and Epithets of Watchmen, Stars, Angels, Men of GOD, and
c. Now can there possibly be a greater Solecism in Nature, a more absolute
Inconsistency in Terms; than to say, a blind Watchman, a Star of Darkness, an
ignorant Angel, an ungodly Man of GOD? Men, nor Angels, cannot render these
discordant, jarring Terms and Characters correspondent and harmonious. If
without the saving Knowledge of our Lord Christ, Men cannot be qualified for the
Gospel Ministry, as the Word of GOD does expressly require; nor answer the
Characters the Holy Ghost gives to Gospel Ministers. -- The Consequence is
plain. --

I proceed, unless Men savingly know the Lord, they cannot covenant with Him,
after the Manner He requires, at the Time of solemn Separation to the Work of
the Holy Ministry, by Prayer, and the Imposition of the Hands of the
Presbytery. At this Time, there is a Covenant entered into the GOD, called the
Covenant of Levi; (...)
the Person ordained vows and swears Allegiance to the Lord, that he will be
faithful in the Work now devolved upon him, as sincerely consecrated to the
Service of GOD. Now, how can a Person thus declare before GOD, Angels, and Men,
that he sincerely gives up himself to GOD, and promise all good Fidelity; when
at the same Time he keeps back his Heart, and has not the least Spark of Grace
to enable him to be sincere and faithful? Nor does it avail here to suggest,
that although he has not gracious, yet he has moral Sincerity; for in this
Covenant, GOD calls for the Heart, for Uprightness of Heart; and will accept of
nothing short thereof. There is not one Word in all the Bible that tolerates
us, in substituting moral Sincerity in the Place of gracious; nor that permits
us to play the Hypocrite or Parasite with GOD: The Consequence again is plain.

MOREOVER, if Men who know not the Lord savingly, enter upon the Work of the
Gospel Ministry; they cannot perform the Duties of the sacred Function after
the Manner he requires, nor meet with his Approbation or Acceptance therein.
It Is often, and truly said, that not Nouns; but Adverbs make good Works; that
it is not merely doing Bonum a good Thing, but doing that good Thing Been well,
which is what the Apostle calls Well-doing. For a Work to be good, as to the
Manner of Performance, and circumstantially considered; it must be done, not
only according to the declared Will of GOD; but also must proceed from the
noble Evangelical Principles of Faith and Love, and be performed with an
ultimate View to the Glory of GOD: But this never can be, 'till a Person
savingly knows the Lord Christ; consequently the Person destitute of
Evangelical Obedience, cannot meet with the Acceptance and Approbation of the
infinite Majesty of all Worlds; and if not his Approbation, then of Consequence
disapproved by Him: A Thought infinitely shocking! The Minister who knows not
the Lord savingly, will necessarily and unavoidably seek himself, supremely and
ultimately. He sets up himself in the Room and Place of GOD; and the grand Idol
Self, is prefered to the GOD of Heaven and Earth, and his Glory. He undertook
the Ministry under the Power of selfish Views; and let him study, try to pray,
and preach; in all he does, the grand Object Self still terminates his Views.
He acts the Part of down right Rebellion, against his infinite SOVEREIGN; and,
as it were, disputes the Rights of Godhead with Him. Becomes guilty of a
sacrilegious Robbing of GOD, and the vilest Idolatry under the Sun; and the
Violation of infinite Obligation to his glorious and dread Sovereign. Now, let
those who impartially read the ancient Gospel, judge, whether Men thus
disapproved of GOD, and such Self-seekers; can be Christ's duly qualified
Ministers.

I go on to observe, That the Nature and Reason of the Ministerial Office, and
Service, requires that Men engaged therein, should savingly know the Lord. The
Laws of God required the Priests under the Law to be holy Persons, in the most
strong and vehement Expressions, founded on the special Relation they stood in,
to God; and the Nature and Reason of their Office, absolutely and repeatedly
enjoining Holiness upon them. Lev. 21, 6, 7, 8,
The Obligation is as express and strong under the Evangelical Dispensation.
Does it not appear reasonable and fit in the Nature of Things, that they who
are called to serve the holy GOD, in a high and holy Station; to stand before
Him, to minister in holy Things, for high and holy Purposes; should be truly
Holy, his hearty Friends and Servants, wishing well to his Cause and Interest
in the World? Are not known Enemies in Heart, to the Person and Interest of the
Prince, unfit Persons to be entrusted with negotiating the important Affairs of
his Kingdom? There is no Man who is not either a true Subject to Christ, or his
Enemy. That Man who don't truly know Christ, and submit to him as his King and
Lord, by bearing true Faith and Allegiance to him; is the Enemy of Christ, and
his Kingdom.

DOES it not appear inconsistent in its own Nature, to beseech others to become
reconciled to God; and at the same Time to be irreconciled to God, and an Enemy
to the exalted King of Zion? A Preacher going forth to evangelize others; and
yet a Stranger to real Gospel Holiness, and incapable of performing any one Act
of Duty evangelically? A Preacher of that Word which is pure and holy, of that
Gospel which is glorious in its Light, Life, and Power; himself unholy and
impure, in Darkness, legally and spiritually dead? As a Minister, the Servant
of Jesus Christ by Legation; and yet seeking himself with a supreme Affection?
The Chariot and Horseman of Israel; yet unable to promote the Protection of
God's People, by Zeal and fervent Prayer, unskilful in wielding the Sword of
the Spirit, by which the Devil is not invulnerable? The Glory of Christ; yet
himself in Darkness, and under the black Banner of Wrath Divine? The Salt of
the Earth; yet unsavory? The Light of the World instrumentally; yet never
truly illuminated by transforming Beams of Light from the Sun of Righteousness?
I say, is there not an incongruity, and an unfitness in these Things, in their
own Nature and Relation considered.

AND does it not appear as having a Sort of Impropriety in it, that the
Minister who is the Mouth of the People to GOD in Prayer, leading the Devotion
of the Assembly, in which, we would charitably hope, there is ordinarily a
Number of gracious Souls in a spiritual Frame, breathing forth a Spirit of
Adoption; and the whole Assembly greatly needing Blessings for both Worlds,
Blessings to be given in Answer to Prayer, "the inwrought Prayer of the
righteous Man;" but the Minister himself destitute of a Spirit of true
Devotion, assisting Grace, and real Adoption?

HOW many, and how various, are the Temptations, Desertions, Trials, spiritual
Conflicts, and Exercises of the People of GOD, in this twilight-State of the
Imperfection of Grace, and probation-Season for Eternity? And how much in such
Cases they need a spiritual skilful Guide? Unexperienced Ministers will be
miserable poor Casuists, in such Cases. And also with Respect to Sinners; if by
some Means, any are awakened, and solicitous to know how they must be saved;
now, now, for a Messenger of the Lord, one of a Thousand, to speak a Word in
Season. But the Minister that knows not the Lord savingly; in preaching, and in
converse with such poor distressed Souls; will most likely place Duties, in the
Room of Christ; and after all the Help he can obtain by Books and Reading, he
will be a blind Leader of the Blind; and the Consequence of such Conduct, our
Lord has told us.

IF we cast an Eye upon the final Hour of Life, and behold the Sick and Dying,
among a People professing the Christian Religion; we shall see them, ordinarily
now, very desirous of the Presence and Prayers of a Minister: (peradventure in
some Instances before slighted) The very Verge of Time is now come, the eternal
Judgment is at the Door, unmeasurable Eternity opens with a growing View; the
Exchange of Worlds appears an Affair of great, of solemn, of infinite Weight;
the Angel's dread Trumpet sounds, "Time shall be no more;" the immortal Spirit
must enter upon the unutterable interminable Joys of Heaven, or be plunged into
the intolerable eternal Torments of Hell In this final Hour, some few, a
special, little, happy Number; are highly favored of the Lord, with copious
Measures of divine Light; with the Triumphs of Faith, with the joyous prospect
of the substantial, untarnish'd Glories of the Sanctuary of Immortality: Although
these do not stand in so much Need, yet they rejoice, greatly rejoice, in the
Presence, Converse, Prayers, and Praises "of the Man of GOD." Others who
hopefully "have the Root of the Matter in them," have the Evidences of their
gracious Sincerity much clouded over. -- Some are terribly harrassed with
Templations -- Others are under the Power of Self-Flattery, and a vain
Confidence; and need to have their Foundations shaken. -- Some are awfully
secure, and need an alarming Word. -- Others are full of Anxiety, as perceiving
themselves tottering, not only upon the Verge of Life, but on the very Brink of
Hell: Alas for them! What a dying Paleness invades their Cheeks? What Agonies
of Fear rend the Heart? What tumultuous Throbbings seize the Breast? Millions,
Millions of Gold, were too cheap a Purchase for Health to be restored, for the
Day of Grace to be prolonged: The Voice of pardoning Mercy, would now sound in
sweeter Accents than the Music of the Seraphic Choir; the Weight of Worlds
eternal, is suspended upon the Event of one momentous decisive Hour. Now,
although all real Sanctification, and Preparation for eternal Glory, depends upon
the holy Spirit's Agency; yet as Means are the Appointment of Heaven, without
an undue Dependence upon them; the Presence, spiritual Conversation, Counsel,
and Prayers of "the Man of God," at such Times, and in such Cases, must surely
be of no small Importance, and ought to be much desired and prized. And O! how
sad the Calamity, when the Minister is unfit to deal with Persons
understandingly in Soul-Cases, especially at such a Time; as whatever Attempt
he may make, is not able to offer up one Petition to GOD, in a right Manner for
them; having no special Interest in the Redeemer, nor Access to the Throne of
Grace. In short, the more closely we view the Nature and Reason of Ministerial
Office and Service, and the various Duties of the sacred Function; the more
evident it will appear, that Men who enter upon the holy Ministry, ought to be
Men who have a saving Knowledge of the Lord; and an experimental Acquaintance,
with the Power and purifying Influence of divine Truth upon their Hearts.

LASTLY here, those, and only those, who savingly know the Lord Christ; have
Warrant to expect his gracious spiritual Presence with them in their Work. As
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, we can neither look for Assistance in our
Work, nor Success unto it; but from the promised Presence, and special
Influence of the holy Spirit alone. The Gospel is called "the Ministry of the
Spirit," 2 Cor. 3, 8.
as it is that Ministry which the Spirit makes effectual unto all the Ends of
it; or because it is that Ministry whereby the Spirit, in his Gifts and Graces
is communicated unto Men. The Kingdom of our Lord Christ is spiritual, and the
animating Principles of it invisible. If we fix our Minds only on outward
Order, we lose the Rise and Power of the whole; it is not an outward "visible
Ordination by Men," though that is necessary by Rule and Precept, but Christ's
Communication of the Spirit according to Promise; that gives Being, Life,
Usefulness, and Success to the Gospel Ministry. It Is only those Ministers who
savingly know the Lord, that have any just Ground to hope for his Presence with
them, and his Blessing upon their Labors: To them He has said, -- "And lo, I
am with you to the Consummation of all Things." Lo, I am with you, to qualify,
protect, assist, and succeed you, by the Aids and Influences of the Holy
Spirit. It Is a Point of Truth that may be evidenced, as Mr. Fleming observes,
That now under the New Testament, there are Ministers of the Spirit, and not of
the dead Letter and empty Sound. That with the Word there goes a Ministration
and Life. It is very discernable, what a great Difference, and another
Appearance, there is both on Ministers and Christians at one Time, from what
they are at another, in the Discharge of Duty, as if these were not the same
Persons; which appears not only in the Enlargement, and straitning of their
Gifts, but also in Power and Life. Is it not seen, with what Liberty these do
sometimes pray, and are as a Ship with a full Gale before the Wind? That it is
then easy to preach. -- When Ministers have the Grace of GOD in them, and the
special Presence of the Spirit of GOD with them, they are wont to preach so as
they could not if left to themselves, destitute of Divine Influence and
Assistance. We pretend not thereby to immediate Revelations and Inspirations of
new Truths, no; there is an exact Agreement between the Works of the Spirit,
and the Word of GOD; and therefore all Impulses, Revelations, or pretended
Operations of the Spirit, which are contrary to, or have no Foundation in the
Scriptures; are to be rejected as enthusiastic Fancies, or satanical Delusions.
But we suppose, that the holy Spirit "takes of the Things of Christ, and shows
them unto us;" illuminates our Minds, and helps us to discern the moral Beauty
and Amiableness of Things Divine; draws forth our Graces into lively Exercise
while we are preaching; increases our Views of the infinite Importance, as well
as surpassing Excellence of Divine Truth; and thereby enlarges our Hearts, and
helps us to speak with Power and Freedom, concerning the Things of GOD. And I
see not why, we may not freely own, that the holy Spirit frequently helps us,
in the Time of preaching, to seasonable Thoughts, which upon a quick and due
Scanning, we perceive to be important Truth, and pertinent to present Purpose;
and hereby we enlarge upon some Branch of our Discourse, and urge some Points
home upon the Consciences of our Hearers, beyond what we thought of in the Time
of Composition; and so as to exceed what we have done at some other Times, when
under the best Advantages by preparatory Thought. But this is not the Point I
mean to pursue at present. That which we insist upon to our present Purpose,
is, That the assisting Influence of the holy Spirit in preaching the Gospel, is
a Blessing of great Importance; and that ordinarily the Lord works by, and
improves those Men, as Instruments for the Conversion of Sinners, and the
progressive Sanctification and Consolation of his People; whom He has
qualified and fitted for his Service, by confering upon them, both the Gifts
and Graces of his Spirit: And thereupon granting them present divine
Influences, and crowning their Labors with his efficacious Blessing. Of this
we are firmly assured, from the Word of GOD; and as accessory Evidence, from
Church History; and some Degree of Observation. At the same Time, we do not
imagine, that the Efficacy of the Word dispensed, depends upon the Worthiness
and Holiness, or Good Will and Intention of him that speaks, no; the Lord is an
infinite Sovereign, He has not limited himself, though He has us: He may bless
Truth by whomsoever spoken; and sometimes displays his absolute Sovereignty in
this Respect. Nevertheless, we insist upon it, as a Point never to be given up;
that Ministers eminently need the Spirit of the Lord with them, and in them; in
order to preach, and to perform Ministerial Duties, as they ought, and in a due
Manner. By the Aids and Influences of the holy Spirit granted to Gospel
Ministers, they are endued with Zeal for God's Glory, the Honor of Christ, and
the Salvation of Souls; and are disposed to study and preach such Things as do
especially tend to promote those important Purposes; thereby they are prepared
to declare the Word of GOD powerfully and faithfully; are saved from the
ensnaring Fear of Man, and the superficial downy Touch of Conscience; now they
become Boanerges, proclaiming the Terrors of Horeb's fiery Law, in the shocking
Accents of Sina's dreadful Thunder; they lift up the Voice like a Trumpet, and
will not spare to declare important Truth, whether People will hear or forbear;
and Barnabas like, they sound the jubilee Trumpet of the Gospel; proclaiming
Liberty to the Captives, and offering the Oil of Joy to the brokenhearted and
disconsolate Christian; and hereby they become wise to win Souls to Christ, and
to conduct them on their Way to eternal Glory. Now, when the Lord is thus
present with his Ministers, and affords them special Assistance; He ordinarily
associates the Influences of his Spirit with the Word preached, and makes it
powerful to Salvation. But the Preacher that knows not the Lord savingly, can
lay no claim to his gracious Presence, by any Word of Promise; nor has he any
just Ground to expect a Blessing upon his Labors. The true State of the Case
is, the Institution of the Gospel Ministry is eminently the Work of the Holy
Ghost; (I mean not exclusive of the Father and the Son, the Works of the
Trinity, toward the Creatures, being undivided) it is his Work to confer on Men
Gifts and Graces, as necessary Furniture for, and to put them into the
Ministry, Acts (...)
and to assist and succeed them therein; making them able Ministers of the
New Testament, and thereupon crowning their Labors with glorious Success.
Therefore, the Man that has not an experimental Knowledge of the sanctifying
Operations of the holy Spirit in and upon his Heart; cannot honestly, and with
a well informed Conscience, engage in the Gospel Ministry: If he does, he
enters upon this arduous and difficult Work alone; and alas for him, abides in
it alone! As he goes on therein without a saving Knowledge of the Lord, he
cannot prove himself called of GOD to preach the Gospel, nor can he in Faith
pray for a Blessing upon his Labors, having no Word of Promise for that
Purpose, nor any just Ground to expect the Lord's Blessing. -- And whatever
shining Appearance he may make in his own Eye, and in the Judgment of some;
there is great Deficiency in all his Performances, a main Excellency is
wanting. We must hence conclude, that if the gracious Presence of GOD, the
assisting Influence of his Spirit, and his Blessing are important and
excellent; that such Men, and only such, ought to engage in the Gospel
Ministry, who savingly know the Lord: And surely we must believe, that the
Divine Influences to sanctify, assist, and bless; are of the last Importance,
and highest Excellence. The whole Success of the Ministry in propagating the
Gospel in the World, and building up the Church; depends entirely upon the
Mission, Presence, Assistance, and Influence of the Holy Spirit. Upon the whole
then, if the Preacher who knows not the Lord savingly, is thus left alone,
without his Assistance and Blessing; -- if the Nature and Reason of Ministerial
Office and Service, require that Men who enter upon the holy Ministry, should
truly know the Lord; -- if they cannot serve GOD aright, nor meet with his
Approbation in their Work, unless they thus know Him; -- if without such
Knowledge of Him, they cannot transact a Covenant with Him, as He requires; if
they cannot answer the Title and Characters of a Gospel-Minister, nor be
qualified for the Work of the holy Ministry, as the Gospel does expressly
require; -- we conclude thus, that Men who enter upon the holy Ministry, ought
to be Men who have had the Lord Jesus Christ revealed in, and savingly
manifested to them.

2. I am to show what is intended by preaching the Lord Christ to the Heathen
or Gentiles.

THE great Apostle of the Gentiles, often speaks of it as a mysterious
Dispensation of GOD, that our Lord Christ should be preached to them; and he
intimates thus much in our Text. Although we find that Prophesies and Promises,
respecting this grand and mavelous Event, lie thick in the Old Testament; yet
in former Ages it was not so clearly made known to the Jewish Nation: The Time
when, the Manner how, and Means by which, were not well understood, 'till now
revealed by the Holy Ghost. When GOD gave his Word to Jacob, and his Statutes
to Israel, "He dealt not so with any other Nation;" other Nations were left to
walk after their own Ways, but to them Himself came down, Angels attending Him,
Clouds and Darkness covering the Place, Voices and Flames diffusing the Law and
Authority of infinite Majesty. All along from that very Time, when GOD revealed
that Promise, which was blooming Gospel; that "the Seed of the Woman should
break the Serpent's Head," 'till He came, who was the Desire of all Nations; He
was narrowing the Interest of Religion, by every new Dispensation of the
Covenant, 'till the Gospel came to be preached in the last and best Edition.
Every new Dispensation, though it made the Covenant brighter, yet it made the
Application of it straiter. The Empire of Christ for many Ages, for Thousands
of Years, appeared only in a narrow Compass, as if He loved not a Diffusion,
but a Confinement of his Kingdom and Glory; 'till by his Cross he broke down
the Wall of Partition between Jew and Gentile, and broke up the Enclosures of
his own making; and as Almighty Lord and Conqueror, arose from the State of the
Dead, and thereupon gave Commission, and Orders to his Disciples, his flaming
Ministers, on this wise, Go, says He, and disciple all Nations, preach the
Gospel to every Creature. From this Period of divine Mercy and eternal Wonder,
according to ancient Prophecies, BEHOLD! "The Wilderness and the solitary Place
are glad, the Desert rejoices and blossoms as the Rose! The Gentiles see the
Glory of the Lord, and the Excellency of the God of Israel!" But why was GOD so
long silent to the Gentiles? And why did He speak out at last? Whence was it,
that the Love He used to keep within Bounds, now shone out at large, and became
the Glory of the Universe? Even so it seemed good in his Sight! The Jews
trained up for so many Ages, and by all Kind or Preparations for a Redeemer,
reject him; and the Gentiles who were no Way prepared, receive him; He who was
the Desire of all Nations, becomes the Contempt of his own. -- Without any
preparatory Dawn, the Light of the glorious Gospel is darted among the
Gentiles, like a sudden Rush of Light in a cloudy and dark Day. And among those
who have the Province of preaching Christ to the Heathen, assigned them, behold
Paul! Who was Saul the Persecutor, apprehended by Grace Divine, when on the
Brink of Hell, be-miracled with sovereign Mercy; Christ is revealed in him, and
he commences a Preacher of him to the Gentiles! In the View of these, and such
like Things, no Marvel that St. Paul so often, and with so much seraphic
Praise, speaks of the Preaching of Christ to the Gentiles, as a mysterious
Dispensation of GOD: For verily it expresses his Wisdom, his Sovereignty, and
universal Goodness; its full of his Glory, it bears his Image, its wondrous in
our Eyes; it is rather to be admired than explained, we can neither leave the
Subject with Indifference, nor comprehend it with Knowledge.

IN Pursuance of the Method proposed, I would briefly observe, that to preach
Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, intends, that we make him the grand Subject of
our preaching: That we declare him to be the only Mediator between GOD and Man;
and as Mediator, invested with a prophetical, priestly, and kingly Office; and
thoroughly furnished for his Work of Mediation, as wanting nothing to render
him successful therein; that we represent him as sufficient to answer all the
Danger our Souls are in, and all the Necessities they labor under, both by Way
of Atonement for them, and of Conquest over them; that we proclaim his infinite
Willingness, as well as Almighty Power to save; that we assert his Authority
over the whole Creation, and especially over the Churches. That we declare,
that He of whom we assert these Things, is by Nature GOD; essential and eternal
God, possessed of all infinite Perfections; and that as God-Man Mediator, having
by his Obedience and Death purchased Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption; He must certainly be a most perfect and complete Redeemer. Thus the
Gospel exhibits Christ to our View, in his personal Glories and mediatorial
Fullness, and thus He is to be the main Subject of our preaching.

To preach Christ, is to preach the Gospel, and to preach the Gospel, is to
preach those Things declared in the Gospel; there are those Things which are
proper and peculiar to the Gospel, and are its own, and are no where else to be
found. Of this Nature are all Things concerning the Love and Will of God in
Jesus Christ; the Harmony and Glory of the divine Attributes, as most
conspicuous in the Person and Mediation of Christ; his Natures, Offices, and
whole Mediation; of the Dispensation of the Spirit, and our Participation
thereof, and Union with Christ thereby; our Adoption, Justification, and
effectual Sanctification thence proceeding. In brief, every Thing that
appertains to the Purchase of Redemption, and the effectual Application thereof
as by the Holy Spirit. These Things are purely and properly evangelical,
peculiar to the Gospel alone. I add also, to preach the Gospel, is to preach
the Precepts and moral Duties, with their Sanctions therein declared and
enjoined, with an evangelical and proper Reference to Christ. The Gospel first
proposes and declares the Things which are properly its own, lays them as the
Foundation of Faith and Obedience, and inlays them in the Mind, thereby
conforms the whole Soul unto them; this Foundation being laid, it then grafts
all Duties of moral Obedience on this Stock of Faith in Christ Jesus; directs
unto a right Performance of them, from a right Principle, by a right Rule, and
to a right End and Purpose; and by a Communication of the Spirit, if supplies
with Strength for their Performance, in the Manner it prescribes; and so to
their Acceptance with GOD: Hereby the Gospel gives them a new Nature, and turns
moral Duties into evangelical Obedience. And this is Christian Morality; a
Morality springing from Faith in Christ, and animated by Gospel-Principles and
Incentives, governed by Gospel Rules, and directed to Gospel-Ends. These Things
are the appropriate Glory of the Gospel: And for a Missionary among the
Heathen, thus to preach them, is for him to preach Jesus Christ to them. The
Case is just the same, with Respect to us, who preach to those that are apt to
call themselves gospellized; to them we must thus preach the Gospel. We have no
just Warrant to look for the Presence of Christ with our Sermons, if Christ be
not thus in our Sermons: "The Things that concern the Lord Jesus Christ," the
Principles of his Religion, must live upon our Lips, must reign in our Sermons,
or it cannot be truly said, that we preach Christ; without which, we cannot hope
for a divine Blessing to attend our preaching. This is the Way to preserve the
Christian Religion in its full and evident Distinction, from every false
Religion; this is the Way to make Christ crucified appear "the Wisdom and the
Power of GOD;" this is the Way to keep Professors sound in the Faith, and to
make them obedient to the Faith; and this is the Way to advance the Kingdom of
GOD, and to promote the true Knowledge of GOD, and of Jesus Christ which is
Life Eternal.

BY the Way, these Things present to our View, the main Difference between
legal and evangelical Preaching. Men who have no true Knowledge of Christ, and
his Gospel, in its Spirituallity; yet have some Notion about moral Duties,
which have their Foundation in the Law and Light of Nature. These moral Duties
taught in the Gospel, the legal Preacher pretends to embrace, as esteeming them
full as good, or rather better, than Seneca's Morals; and having his Mind
principally fixed upon them, he makes them the reigning Topics of his
Discourse. He professes indeed to admit the Gospel Scheme of Doctrines, and
resolves to appear a warm Advocate for it is enjoined Duties; he thereupon cries
up moral Duties, but alas, not in their proper Place, nor to their proper End!
These he makes the Foundation, according to the Place they held in the Law of
Nature, and the Covenant of Works; whereas the Gospel allows them to be only
necessary Superstructions on the Foundation. And by advancing Morality above
the Mystery, and Grace of the Gospel, thereby the Gospel is rejected; and
strictly speaking, Morality is destroyed also; for take it from its proper
Foundation, and it falls of Consequence. Such a Preacher, will sometimes have a
cold and casual Hint relating to the Merits and Grace of Christ; but is
evidently so defective therein, that he cannot justly escape the Compellation
Arminian, or legal Preacher; though he may for the present, the more odious
Epithet, Infidel. The evangelical Preacher dwells much upon those very glorious
Topics, which are Matters of pure Revelation: He is indeed fully assured, that
the Scripture Doctrine of Salvation, by free and sovereign Grace, is a Doctrine
according to Godliness; he urges, he warmly urges, the Performance of all
Duties enjoined in the Gospel, and this in their proper Place, and to their
proper End; always taking Care to have a beautiful Intertexture of References
to Jesus Christ. And thus to make Jesus Christ the Sum and Substance, or
subject Matter of our preaching, either directly or reductively, is that which
is intended by preaching of Him to Jew or Gentile.

I might also observe, that to preach Christ to the Gentiles, intends that we
make Him the End and Design of our preaching: That herein, we do not
principally propose our own Honor and temporal Interest, but that we have in
View the Honor and Glory of Christ, as our ultimate End; "Preaching not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord." -- But the Time would fail to enlarge
here.

3. To observe, that the Calls of GOD to engage in his Service, are to be
obeyed without Delay.

"IMMEDIATELY, says the Apostle, I conferred not with Flesh and Blood:" The
Apostle had an extraordinary Call to preach the Gospel to the Heathen, and
Evidence thereof, by extraordinary Gifts, which we look not for at this Day.
But it holds as a general Rule, that the Calls of GOD should be instantly
obeyed; and that, because of the infinite Wisdom of GOD; -- the supreme
Authority of GOD; -- and the infinite Reasonableness of his Calls. -- Omitting
Enlargement here.

THE Question will occur, how shall the qualified Preacher obtain Evidence and
Satisfaction, that he is called of GOD in a mediate Way, to enter soon upon a
Mission among the Heathen? As preliminary to the Solution of this Question, it
may be observed, that preaching the Gospel to the Heathen, seems to be a Sort
of moral Duty, and a Work of Benevolence, comprised under that general Precept
of doing Good unto All; and a Work, in some Respects, much to be desired, as
appears evident from the Apostle's Declaration, "Yea, so have I strove to
preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another
Man's Foundation. Romans 15. 20.
As to a particular Call, -- special Circumstances must have their due Weight
in the Scale, in order to determine how it preponderates. Ordinarily we refer
not the Decision of the Case to a Lot; nor are we to expect an immediate
Revelation to make known our Duty; nor to give Way to Impulses, or Impressions
made upon the Mind with, or without Scripture; nor to wait for the Furniture of
an extraordinary Measure of Gifts; these belong not to a Call in an ordinary
Way.

IT may help to lucidate and clear up a Call to engage in a Mission, -- if
those whose Work and Business it more especially is* to promote an Affair of
this Kind, and who are proper Judges of meet Qualifications for a Work of this
Nature, unitedly and warmly apply to a Man to engage therein; -- If a more
effectual Door seems to open hereby for a Man's promoting the Redeemer's
Kingdom, than he is under Advantage for, by his present Situation; If the
present Events of Divine Providence give growing hope, that the Lord is
preparing his Way for the Salvation of the Heathen; -- If they among whom the
Mission is designed, make the Motion therefore themselves, and promise to give a
Missionary a candid Hearing. -- And as a Circumstance among others, at the
present, not to be omitted; if it is highly probable, that the Person engaging
in the Mission, will meet with an uncommon welcome Reception among the Heathen,
in that He is "their Kinsman after the Flesh." And if in Concurrence with other
Things, a Man finds within himself a strong Desire after, and powerful
Inclination toward engaging in this Work, it is of no small Weight in the
present Case; provided He is conscious to himself that in this Undertaking, he
has the Glory of GOD, the Honor of Christ, and the spiritual and immortal
Interest of Souls chiefly in View; and is thereby able to surmount Objections,
Difficulties and Discouragements, that may seem to be cast in the Way; and
finds that Desire and Inclination, is not accompanied with an unaccountable
Violence, but with a calm Submission to the Will of GOD, as made known; and is
answerable to the outward Rules of the divine Word, and concurring
Circumstances of that Providence which rules over all: I say, these and such
like Things, may in a Measure conduce to afford Evidence and Satisfaction to a
Man, that he is called of GOD to preach the Gospel to the Heathen. And that as
soon as may be with Convenience, he ought to be on his Way, to spread the
joyful Tidings, and good News of Salvation among them.

The Application of my Discourse remains;

AND here, would the Time admit, many useful Inferences might be drawn from the
preceding Topics of this Discourse; but having already been so prolix, I must
make, and pursue such Inferences no otherwise than they will naturally fall in,
under the several Addresses, which I shall now proceed to make, and with which,
I shall conclude the Discourse.

IN the first Place, permit me, therefore, with all Humility, to address myself
to those of the sacred Order here present.

My reverend Fathers, and dear Brethren!
I need not inform you, nor this Assembly, that the reverend Person we expected
to stand here, in the Province of a Preacher, to perform the present Service,
has by some Means failed us." The Reverend Mr. Eleazer Wheelock, Pastor of a
Church of Christ in Lebanon, etc.
You have thereupon devolved preaching Service, upon a Person younger, and much
more unworthy; and who hopes you will permit him to use great Plainness and
Freedom of Speech.

I am well assured that your Candor and good Sense, will not allow you to
imagine, that by what I have said in the preceding Discourse, I suppose every
one that savingly knows the Lord, is thereby fitted for the Work of the holy
Ministry, and that human Learning is an unnecessary Endowment in the Gospel
Minister; and that regular Induction, according to the standing Order of the
Gospel, is not to be observed; no, thus you do not receive what I have said:
Nor that I Countenance Seperations from Ministers, merely upon Suspicion of
their Want of the saving Knowledge of the Lord. If a Minister of the Gospel is
guilty of moral Scandal, or unsound in Point of Doctrine; or but more rarely
preaches upon the more important Doctrines of the Gospel, and when he does,
gives them but a superficial Handling; or is some how notoriously deficient in
his Work* in such Cases, I will not deny, but People have Liberty to seek a
Redress of Grievance, according to the Method the Gospel prescribes. -- Nor
will you suppose, that I mean to insinuate, that the Want of the saving
Knowledge of the Lord in a Minister, absolutely invalidates his
Administrations, and renders then unlawful, and ipso facto void; no, a Man
being constituted a Minister of the Gospel, according to the known and standing
Laws of Christ's visible Kingdom, found in his Word, and thus invested with
Office Power, according to Gospel Order; he has lawful Right and Authority to
perform all Parts of the Ministerial Work. But then, may I not here apply that
Maxim, in use both by Civilians and Divines? "Quod factum fieri non debet,
factum valet;" at least so far avails, that there is Validity in Ordinances
administered by such a Man; though it might have been well, if such a Man had not
been permitted to enter into the holy Ministry; for an unconverted Ministry is
one of the greatest Calamities.

HAVING thus presumed upon your Candor and Judgment, I am apt to imagine you
have gone before me, in drawing this native Inference, from what has now been
said, viz. That it greatly concerns us, to use utmost Care and Caution in
putting Men into the Ministry, lest we commit the holy Ministry to such Men as
known not the Lord savingly. Our blessed Lord and Master has charged us, not
only to "lay Hands suddenly on no Man," but also "to commit the Ministry to
faithful Men." I am well assured, that we are unanimous in this Opinion, that
Men ought savingly to know the Lord, who engage in the holy Ministry. We take
the Liberty to think for ourselves, as well as others, who are not of the same
Opinion: And it is at once conceded, that we have all the same Liberty of
thinking for ourselves, yet no Man has Liberty to think contrary to Truth, be
that what it will. As for those who declare there is no such Thing as forming
any Judgment about Men, whether they are truly gracious, or not; and think it
needless to make any Inquiry after a Candidate's Acquaintance with experimental
Religion; as supposing, that if he has a compotent Measure of Literature, and
is not grossly ignorant, or scandalously profane, he is fit to be put into the
sacred Ministry; upon their Principles, whole Clusters, of light, airy,
graceless young Men; who are far from a savoury Relish of the Things of GOD,
and a serious, solemn Sense of Things Eternal; may be introduced into the holy
Ministry: Is not this to throw down the sacred Enclosure our Lord has set
about his Vineyard, and to Act the Part of Opposition, to that solemn
Prohibition, "Lay Hands suddenly on no Man?" Some there are who in Terms
profess, that Candidates for the Gospel Ministry, ought to be godly or gracious
Persons; and yet, when they explain their Profession, we find it does not
amount to holding, that a Candidate ought to be gracious, or a real Convert, in
order to give him Right to undertake the Work of the Gospel Ministry. Their
Meaning seems to be this, that they ought to be truly gracious; for so ought
all that hear, as well as all that preach the Gospel; adding thus much, that
renewing and sanctifying Grace, is a very useful Qualification in the
Candidate; but then it is not their Opinion, that it must be insisted upon as
such a necessary Qualification, as that the Want of it shall be preventive of
engaging in the holy Ministry. They plead Necessity, in Justification of
Principle; that there are a great many vacant Churches and Congregations, and
perhaps more in Number, than there are truly godly young Men to afford a
Supply; that that which is wanting cannot be numbered, that they must take up
with such as they can get. -- I would at present only observe here, that
whatsoever the Circumstances of Christ's Church are, Men whom we set apart to
the Work of the holy Ministry, should be such as his Gospel does require them
to be. The Question in Debate, in plain Terms, is this, viz. Does the Word of
GOD so require sanctifying Grace, in a Candidate for the holy Ministry, as that
being destitute thereof, he has not a solid Right of Foundation to engage
therein? Now, if a Person who has not sanctifying Grace, or a saving Knowledge
of the Lord, cannot lawfully undertake the Work of the Gospel Ministry, as I
have endeavored to prove from the Word of GOD, and the Reason of Things; then
Ministers of the Gospel ought not to separate a Person to the Work of the holy
Ministry, without having Evidence sufficient to found a Judgment of Christian
Charity upon, that a Person does thus know the Lord: For Faithfulness to our
Lord and Master, will not suffer us to commit the holy Ministry to a Person
that we do not judge qualified therefore, as his Gospel does require: Therefore,
in putting Men into the Ministry, we must seek all the Evidence that the Nature
of the Case will reasonably admit, that Men savingly know the Lord, and
cautiously avoid taking up with any Thing short of this.

Reverend and Dear Sirs,
YOU will allow me to speak out our Opinion freely. In them whom we introduce
into the Ministry, we look for and expect to find, a Competency of natural
Endowments, acquired Improvements, Orthodoxy, or Soundness in the Faith,
visible Holiness of Life, as it is commonly called, and that they give us some
Account of their Acquaintance with experimental Religion, such as shall appear
to us sufficient for the Exercise of a rational Judgment of Christian Charity,
that they savingly know the Lord. We pretend not to immediate Revelation from
Heaven, and Infallibility of Knowledge in this Case, no; but we seek such
Evidence, as the Nature of the Case will admit, and as Faithfulness does
require. We are to form a Judgment of the spiritual State of our Fellow-Men, in
the Case before us, by what they profess with the Mouth, and the Influence such
a Profession has upon the Life. Men without an Intention to deceive, may impose
upon themselves, and upon us; yet this is no Argument against an Examination as
to these Things; yea, it is an Argument that we should be the more strict upon
the Point of Examination. If we consider Faith as appearing in the Profession
of it, we find the Apostle accounting the Influences of the holy Spirit,
necessary to enable a Man to make such a Profession of the Faith, as was to be
admitted by Christians: "No Man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost." A Man may so explain himself about his Faith, and give such an Account
of his experimental Religion, and his Faith may have such Influence upon his
Conduct in Life, as to leave no reasonable Ground to suspect but that he
savingly knows the Lord. For a Man to appear free from those Sins, commonly
called openly scandalous, and to have a Life so harmless as to afford a Kind of
mere negative Charity, is not enough in the present Case: We therefore seek a
Profession of Faith, expressive of the Essentials of real Piety, or that the
Candidate give a rational, scriptural, and satisfying Account of a sanctifying
Work of God's Spirit upon his own Heart; and that his Belief, and Experience of
the Power of Divine Truth, influences him to live the Truth, so that his Light
shines before Men: These Things are included in the Nature of Evidence, in the
present Case, and therefore Ministers have full Authority, and just Right to
demand them, and are bound in Faithfulness so to do; and of Consequence the
Candidate is obliged to exhibit such Evidence, if it is in his Power honestly so
to do. Until we have sought and found such Evidence, as now mentioned, we have
not satisfying Evidence that a Man is qualified for the Gospel Ministry, nor
dare we separate him thereto. Let us then hear what the Candidate has to say
for himself, as clearing up his Call to enter upon the Work of the Holy
Ministry? What his Views and Aims are? What his Faith, and experimental
Acquaintance with Divine Truth, or Religion: With Tenderness and Candor, we
would gladly hear him upon these Points; and seek Satisfaction, as to the
Influence of his Faith upon his Conduct in Life.

IT IS verily to be feared, that many Candidates for the Gospel Ministry, were
they to be duly and properly examined as to Qualifications therefore, such as
the Gospel does require, would be found evidently deficient.

BUT we desire to bless the Lord, we sometimes find a hopeful Measure of all
Gospel Qualifications, in the Candidate under Examination; and thereupon, when
called, with unutterable solemn Pleasure, proceed to separate him to the Work
of the evangelical Ministry, according to Gospel Order. Sometimes the Candidate
appears possessed of a Measure of all necessary Qualifications, but it is dubious
whether in a Degree equal to what ought to be judged sufficient; -- sometimes
there may appear great Deficiency as to some one Qualification, ex.* gr.
aptness to teach; -- sometimes we are greatly exercised, as in Doubt, about the
Reality of the Candidate's experimental Religion: It may be, he has more
Confidence than Evidence, or honestly tells us, that he has near upon an equal
Measure of Fears and Hopes, as to his saving Knowledge of the Lord* and upon
due Examination of him, with Respect thereto, it is much so with us, so that our
judgment of Charity, seems in a Measure suspended. We are full of Tenderness
toward hopeful Youth, are unwilling to damp any agreeable Appearances, and to
prevent Usefulness; at the same Time, fear to run before the Call of
Providence, tremble at the Thought of giving the Ark a wrong touch; and upon
the Whole, are ready to say, we know not what to do! To which permit me to
reply, That when we know not what to do, we must not do we know not what. In
the present Case, our Hopes must exceed our Fears, or we cannot proceed to
promote the Candidate, with a good Conscience. He who supposes his Judgment in
equi-librio, is in the Quality of a non Liquet, and nothing can be done by him
actively: And should this be the Case with the greater Part of the Examiners,
the Candidate must stand by, 'till he becomes possessed of brighter Evidence of
Divine Grace. And now, where is the seemingly great Difficulty and Perplexity?
Does it not abate, or rather evanish? Is not Duty plain before us? Does our
Lord require more of us than is reasonable? He neither requires, nor expects
that we should be infallible Judges of the spiritual State of Men, but that we
exercise a rational, Christian Judgment, according to Light; and that we be
faithful to the Trust deposited in us, keeping our Consciences void of Offense
toward Him. I have spoken my Opinion the more freely, because I am well assured
that some of my Co^^al and younger Brethren, have been at Times greatly
exercised in Cases similar to these I have mentioned, and on the Account of the
too frequent superficial Examination of Candidates, as in their Opinion; whilst
the Situation of some of them, as amidst Diversity of Sentiment, renders the
Temptation additionally strong, not to act up to their Principles: I pray the
Lord, that they may be found faithful, and enjoy Peace of Conscience! Although
they should fall under the Censure of being rigid in Principle.
Our Lord has devolved upon us, the sacred Trust of putting Men into the holy
Ministry, "the same commit thou," thou Timothy, a Minister, a Man in Office:
And He has charged us, not only "to lay Hands suddenly on no Man;" but also "to
commit the Ministry to faithful Men;" and our Fidelity in this Case, is of the
highest Importance.

To commit the Ministry to an unconverted, an unexperienced Man, is to commit
it to a Man that is not likely to answer the important and excellent Designs
and Purposes of the Gospel Ministry. A very shocking Thought! He may indeed
help to keep up the Form of Religion for a Time; but if Religion should revive
and flourish, by the out-pouring of the holy Spirit from on high; partly
through Ignorance and Enmity, and partly from Pride and Envy, (which breed a
Hell in the Bosom where they dwell) at the Success of others; (unless he
receive Conviction of his awful State) he is quite likely to oppose, not only
some Imprudences, common in such a Day, but also the Essentials of the Work of
GOD.

HE will probably commit the Ministry to others, like himself; and in Process
of Time, now unborn Ages may feel, forever feel, the Weight of that HAND, which
we lay upon the Head of the Man that has an unsanctified HEART. And how
dangerous the Enterprise for the Man himself! Upon the dreadful Supposition,
that he should never be converted, what Tongue can express, what Thoughts
conceive the dreadful Aggravations that will attend his eternal Perdition! No
Doubt, if Ministers of the Gospel are finally found Christless and Graceless,
of all Men living they will be the most miserable. What Horror, Tribulation,
and Anguish, will seize upon their guilty Hearts? and what Shame and Confusion
will cover their Faces, when the dreadful Judge shall come in flaming Fire, to
take Vengeance upon the Disobedient, and the Blood of lost Souls shall cry for
Vengeance against them! In a Word, as we Regard the Lord's Honor, the
Prosperity of Zion, the Salvation of Men, and Peace of Conscience; let us take
Care that we commit the Ministry to faithful Men.

AND let us also be often engaged in an accurate Examination of our Knowledge
of the Lord Christ, and seek renewed Manifestations, and the fullest Assurances
thereof. And, oh! how importunate we should be in Prayer, for the gracious
Presence of the Lord with us, and for the divine Influences to accompany our
Ministrations. Let us labor to see and feel ourselves living in a State of
constant Dependence upon the Lord Christ, for the Reception of suitable,
seasonable, and sufficient Grace, for all present Needs and Duties. The
Purposes we serve are so high and God-like, our Work so important, so
spiritual, so difficult, and so much above our Strength; how is it possible to
go on in it, without much of the Presence of the Lord with us? Most of the Work
allotted us, is with God and Souls; it is about what is mysterious and
supernatural; it is of vast Compass and great Variety, and Eternity is concerned
in what we are about; we had need therefore to be filled with the Spirit of
Grace and Holiness, to have a double Portion of his Gifts and Graces, of his
Aid and Influence. Thereupon we shall become wise to win Souls, and hopefully
successful; and finally, shine as the Stars yea, as the Sun, in the Kingdom of
our GOD and Father, for ever and ever.

It Is more than Time to turn my Address, Secondly, to him who is now to be
consecrated to the immediate Service of Christ, and the Souls of Men.

My dear Brother,
UPON this solemn Occasion, you expected that "Man of GOD" would have spoken to
you, who has been as a Father to you from your early Days; and that he does
not, you are not more disappointed than I am. But inasmuch as it is a Service
assigned me, let me drop a few Words to you, by Way of Exhortation and
Encouragement, in the Work to which you are now to be consecrated.

WE are glad, and rejoice, that this Day the Lord Jesus Christ calls you to
bear his Name, plead his Cause, deliver his Message, spread his Fame, and
display his Glory among the Gentiles. We charitably hope and believe, it has
pleased GOD to reveal his Son in you; and we trust, not only that you may
finally be brought to eternal Glory, but also that you may preach him to the
Heathen. We adore the GOD of Nature and Grace, who has conferred upon you the
Gifts and Graces of his Spirit, and a hopeful Measure of Furniture for the Work
to which he calls you. We look upon it a Token for Good, that the Love of
Christ, constrains you to compassionate your Kindsmen after the Flesh, who
dwell in Darkness, and the Shadows of Death, so that you are a Volunteer in a
Mission among them. You need eminent Degrees of Wisdom, Patience, Self Denial,
Courage and Zeal, in the Prosecution of the Work assigned you. Perils,
Hardships, Fatigues, Labors and Sufferings, no Doubt, attend your important
Embassy. But, my dear Brother, let none of these Things affright you; remember,
always remember, who has called you to this Work; and that your Sufficiency is
of, and from Him, who is your GOD, and has said, I am that I am. His infinite
Wisdom will be your Guide, -- his almighty Power your Shield, -- and Himself
your exceeding great Reward. Take hold of that precious Promise by Faith; plead
it, live upon it for Protection, Light, Support, Strength, Success and Comfort,
"Lo, I am with you always." -- Often Refresh your Heart, with a believing
Remembrance of the many ample Promises, which have Respect to the magnificent
Enlargement, Light, Purity, Glory and Felicity, of the Divine Redeemer's
Kingdom, in these last Days. King Jesus shall have the Heathen for an
Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for his Possession. He shall
call a Nation that knew him not; and Nations that knew him not, shall run unto
him; his Dominions shall be from Sea to Sea; they that dwell in the Wilderness
shall bow before him; his Name shall be great among the Gentiles, to whom he is
given for a Light; there shall be one Lord, and his Name one; the Ends of the
Earth shall remember and turn to the Lord; all Nations shall flow unto the
Mountain of the Lord's House; the Knowledge of the Lord shall fill the Earth,
as the Waters do the Sea; and all Flesh shall come to him who hears Prayer."
-- You have heard how the GOD of Israel did not choose a Diffusion, but a
Confinement of his Name for Thousands of Years; as designing now, under the
Gospel Dispensation, amazingly to widen and extend the Knowledge of himself;
and to put that Honor upon his Son Jesus Christ, which he eternally designed
to confer upon him, by spreading his Name and Fame the World over. And this
Honor, he this Day confers upon you, SIR, of bearing his Name, and proclaiming
his Glory, divine and mediatorial, among the Gentiles. You are called to assist
in bringing in an immense Revenue of Honor and Glory to GOD, Father, Son, and
Spirit: And this too, in a Day in which we have Reason to believe from
Scripture Prophecy, and the present Aspect of Divine Providence, that the
Latter-Day Glory is dawning; a Day also, in which, by the Smiles of Heaven upon
our Forces, and the Success of our Armies in America, a joyous Prospect opens
to View, far beyond all that ever appeared before, for evangelizing the Heathen
in these Ends of the Earth. At this very Day of growing Wonder and refreshing
Hope, the Lord calls you to preach the Gospel to those, who from Time
immemorial, have been wandering out of the Way of Salvation, "without Christ,
and without GOD in the World." With Regard to the Mission before you, you may
say unto GOD, with Humility and adoring Thankfulness, as Samuel said, in
another Case, "Here I am, for thou do call me." Methinks there is now a Voice
uttered by the adorable Trinity, "whom shall I send, and who will go for us?"
(...) 6. 8.
And how should your Heart echo back, "Here I am, send me!" Has Jesus Christ
been revealed in and to you? And does the Lord now call you to preach the
Gospel to the Heathen? Surely you will not confer with Difficulties and
Dangers, or carnal Interest; but seek to be on your Way to the Heathen Nations
as soon as may be, to let them hear of your Lord and Savior. While you feel
the Love of our dear Immanuel glow in your Breast, how, oh, how! your Heart
aches and bleeds within you, for your poor benighted Kinsmen after the Flesh,
that are perishing for Lack of Vision! How long? How much? And how often it has
done so? I give you Joy, my dear Brother, for the Door of Hope for their
Salvation, opens to View with a promising Appearance. At one and the same Time,
Opportunity presents for you to vent your Love to the divine Jesus, and your
Compassion to the perishing Souls of your Nation.

NOW then, our dear Brother, go, go; and may the Lord go with you, and now send
Prosperity! Go in the Spirit of an Apostle, go do the Work of an Evangelist; Go
lift up your Voice in the Huts of Savages, and cry aloud to the People that
dwell in the gloomy Shades of Death! And let them "hear the joyful Sound." Go
tell them of Jesus, tell them who the Savior is; tell them, "He is GOD over
all, blessed forever more;" tell them of his divine and mediatorial Glory,
alluring Fullness, and perfect Excellence; tell them he is the only Mediator and
Savior, and that he is both able and willing to save them; tell them King
Jesus Reigns, God's own almighty Son, and they who dwell in the Wilderness must
bow before him, submit to him, believe in him, love, worship, and adore him, as
Lord of All. And whether they will hear or forbear, know thou, our dear
Brother, your Judgment will be with the Lord, and your Reward with your GOD;
glorious in full Proportion to your Diligence and Fidelity.

In the Third Place, as I observe at present, a Number of Candidates for the
Gospel Ministry, I take the Liberty of making an Address to them.

My young Friends,
I always feel great Tenderness toward hopeful Youth, who have serious Thoughts
toward engaging in the Gospel Ministry; especially toward you, who have most of
you, for a Time, sojourned under my Roof, principally pursuing Theological
Studies. Suffer me therefore to address you by Way of Exhortation, to see to it
that you know the Lord JESUS savingly. Presume not to rest in the charitable
Opinion of others, as your Evidence, that you savingly know the Lord: You may
have the Sanction of the charitable Hope and Judgment of Presbyteries, or
Associations, and yet be eternally rejected by the Lord. The eternal Judge,
"whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire," and whose Prerogative alone it is to
search the Heart; will one Day say to many, to Multitudes, that have
prophesied, that have preached in his Name, I approve you not, depart from me.
-- If they who have preached in his Name, may perish in his Wrath, how greatly
it concerns them that preach, to have satisfactory Evidence, by the Actings of
Grace, that they truly know the Lord! To some, it may possibly seem a very bold
Assertion, but I declare it in plain Terms, that no Man can ever prove to
himself, that he was called of GOD, to engage in the holy Ministry, who has
never been effectually called by divine Grace, so as to know the Lord savingly.
And unless you thus know the Lord, with what Heart, with what Confidence, can
you enter upon the sacred Ministry? If you should run the Risk, the awful Risk*
void of such Knowledge, what Comfort can you take therein? Or what of Success
can you expect thereupon? Without Controversy, it will one Day be a Soul
puzzling, Soul confounding Question to many, "Man, who made you a Minister?"
Who gave the Commission to treat for Christ? And to whom, but them, who preach
an unknown Christ, and and who run before they were sent, as regardless of
Gospel Order? I beseech you therefore, my young Friends, that in the first
Place you be well satisfied that you savingly know the Lord. Ply, warmly ply
the Throne of Grace, that you may become rich in Experience of divine Grace,
and that you may enjoy copious Measures of divine Influence. Go on indeed to
seek all useful and suitable Furniture for the great Work you have in View, and
never imagine you have come to a ne plus ultra. Amidst other Parts of useful
Learning, study Oratory, and artful Method of Address; but rest not here. If
you had all Knowledge, and understood all Mysteries, and could use all the
Force of Persuation, and Charms of Eloquence; were you furnished with all the
flowing Oratory of Cicero, and all the Thunder of Demosthenes; and could you
employ them in every Sermon you preach; yet, without the gracious Presence of
the Lord with you, you would in Reality be but as the sounding Brass and
tinkling Cymbal, that makes an empty Noise and useless Music. I pray GOD, that
the Day in which we live, may not be a Day in which the true Spirit of
preaching becomes lost, for want of due Regard to the Influences of the holy
Spirit. While the Study and Use of fine Language and Oratory are so much in
Vogue among Preachers, and so pleasing to many Hearers, as at this Day, and
tend so much to recommend the Preacher, and to promote his Reputation, the
Temptation, to the young Preacher especially, is prodigiously powerful to
substitute these Things in the Room of the Divine Presence and Assistance, and
to rest in them. But alas, for us that preach! alas for them that hear, when it
shall become thus! In the Eye of a judicious spiritual Hearer, can it look like
preaching the everlasting Gospel, and having to do with the eternal GOD, and
immortal Souls, for Time and endless Worlds, to make the Pulpit a mere Stage,
and just to flourish out a pretty pert Harrangue, top'd up with one or two
general jejune Inferences? How much soever this may please the vitiated Taste
and Humors of some, the two distant Poles are not more remote from each other,
than such Manner of Pulpit Work from a genuine Aptitude and Tendency to pierce
the Heart, to awaken the Conscience, and to do good to the Souls of Men. It Is
true indeed, Men have their various Gifts, Talents, and Turns of Mind; it is
natural to some Men to communicate their Thoughts in a correct, masculine,
nervous, striking and charming Style and Diction; as truly natural, it appears
beautiful. Some such there are, who from the spiritual Frame of their Hearts,
are zealous, lively and practical Preachers, and excel in making the most warm
Applications and earnest Addresses to the Hearts and Consciences of them that
hear. Their Delivery and Gestures are natural, grave and decent, Action is
lively and significant, void of Affectation; their Sermons are evidently
calculated, not to gratify Men's Curiosity with pleasing Speculations, but to
pierce their Hearts with pungent Convictions; not to please their Fances, but
to awaken their Consciences, and to convert and save their Souls. They appear
as Men who have been with GOD in private, and thereupon speak by his special
Assistance in public; these are doubtless justly celebrated Preachers of the
Gospel. If we would act the Orator, the Minister, or the Christian, we must
endeavor to know and to cultivate the peculiar Turn of our own Mind, and not
indulge a vain Affectation, nor Attempt a forced Imitation of any Man. It will
appear unnatural and disagreeable to a judicious Hearer, when it becomes too
evident, that the Preacher who has not a natural spontaneous flow of ready and
elegant Expressions, has labored hard to polish his little Composition, by the
constant Glitter of shining Phrases, by arranging his Words, beautifying his
Language, rounding his Periods, so as really to stiffen his Discourse: When by
minding little Things over much, he has betrayed the Want of a Heart deeply
awed and impress's with a Sense of what he is about, and the Want of a due
Regard to divine Influences, and a pointed Form of Address, such as is
generally to be found in the Sermons which our Lord Christ preached. While
loose and general Harangues are now grown so fashionable in Pulpits, that the
true Spirit of evangelical Preaching may not be lost, let young Preachers learn
true Oratory from Jesus Christ, and seek copious Measures of his gracious,
spiritual Presence with them. That Preacher has hit upon the true Master-Key of
sacred Eloquence, and obtained the best Part of a Pulpit Orator, who is Master
of a good Discourse, and is skilful in applying of it, in its full Weight home
upon the Consciences of Men, who knows how to lay open the human Heart, and
trace it is Windings, it is Disguises and Corruptions, and how to draw Voice and
Passion from the Heart, so that every one shall hear, see, and recognize
himself, and stand acquitted or condemned in his own Breast, according as he
deserves one or the other: But no Man is like to do this to Purpose, unless the
Lord is with him, and speaks by him. Labor and Art may make a Man an elegant
and correct Speaker, so as to be much admired by himself, and by those who seek
nothing farther; but I will be bold to say, that no Man can become a real
powerful Christian Orator, unless the Lord is with him, impresses divine Truth
upon his Heart, and helps him in some good Measure to preach as he ought, "even
in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power." I beseech you, Sirs, labor to be
Master of the Subject you handle, to be full of it, to be thoroughly
enlightened and warmed with it, to feel every Sentiment you deliver, and every
Passion you mean to inspire. Remember the Pulpit is a Place in which Men
ordinarily affect to shine, in Brightness of Sentiment, Fineness of
Composition, and a Gracefulness of Elocution; and if the Preacher does but
think, (and it is a Wonder if he don't) that he has obtained the Reputation of a
fine Speaker, great is the Force of Temptation, to bring him under the Power of
Pride and Self-Admiration. And that he may now despise the Smiles, as well as
Frowns of the People, and by Humility be kept safe, as not forming big Ideas of
his own Importance, and his own Performance; and that he may have a Mind
exalted in all Respects above this World, and above itself how much he needs a
Combination of grand and solemn Views of divine Objects, and Things Eternal, by
the gracious Presence of the Lord with him? The Lord being thus with you, you
will sink into Nothing; feel less than an Attom, as struck with the Majesty of
his Perfections, and transported with the Wonders of his Love: Now you will see
the Beauty, Glory, and Excellence, now Taste the Sweetness, and feel the Power
of divine Grace and Truth upon the Heart; and now you will be filled with
Bowels of Compassion and Godlike Pity toward the Souls of Men: And now your
Manner of Preaching, will necessarily be instructive, warm, casuistical and
pathetical; addressed often to the Consciences, and frequently to the
Affections of your Hearers; the most hopeful Method to enlighten and vivify
others. After all, ever remember, that the saving Efficacy of all Means,
depends upon the Cooperation of the holy Spirit; powerful Paul may plant, and
eloquent Apollos water, it is God gives the Increase: Therefore you must be
very conversant with Heaven, importunate, incessant at the Throne of Grace,
praying the Lord to grant divine Influences to the People, as well as to
yourselves: And if he so does, and works by you, ascribe all the Glory to him,
to his free and sovereign Grace. In fine, my dear Sirs, be sure that you always
give due Honors to the Aids and Influences of the holy Spirit; and thus, it is
hopeful, you will become powerful and successful Preachers of the Gospel; and
thus may the Lord be with you and bless you, and make you Blessings in your
Day, and finally Crown you with immortal Glory!

Fourthly and lastly, I turn the Address, in few Words, to the Body of the
People.

My Friends,
YOU have heard what for Preachers Men ought to be; and thereby what for a Man
you ought to choose, when Occasion calls for your choice, such a Man, who in a
Judgment of Charity savingly knows the Lord Jesus Christ: And does it not argue
the Worth of your Souls, and the Importance of your Salvation, that Men must be
endued with such rich Furniture, in order to preach the Gospel to you. As for
those of you, who savingly know the Lord Christ, and thereby have the first
Dawnings and Pledges of an immortal Day of Glory, shout forth the Praises of
sovereign Grace, and labor to grow in the Knowledge of him, and thereby to
increase in Holiness and Blessedness. Ye that are secure in Zion, know ye, that
to know the only true GOD, and Jesus Christ, is eternal Life; and that to
remain secure and ignorant, is eternal Death. Ye awakened Sinners, (for blessed
be the Lord there are some such) know ye, that the holy Spirit will strive with
you, but for a limited Time; your eternal All depends upon his Influence and
Agency, therefore grieve him not. You appear solicitous to know what you must
do to be saved, know ye, that you must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, so
shall ye be saved. -- In a Word, to conclude, may we All, Ministers, and
People, old and young, high and low, rich and poor, Negroes and Indians
together, One and All; account all Things but Loss and Damage, for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ; and thus become truly
blessed now, and be inconceivably blessed, through the unmeasurable Revolutions
of Eternity; which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant! For the divine Mediator's
Sake. AMEN, and AMEN.

FINIS.



