A Relation of the Opposition which some Baptist People met with at Norwich,
1761, by the Authority and Minister, when they went above ten Miles to confer
with the People between their Meeting about the Things of God, upon which
Opposition they went in the Middle of the Week on Purpose to desire said
Minister to appoint a Day to discourse with one of them before the People. In
particular they desired Liberty to show by the Scripture that the First Day of
the Week is not the Christian Sabbath, and to show by the Scripture what the
Christian Rest or Christian Sabbath is: And how Baptism and the Lord's Supper
ought to be administered, and what they are Figures of. And also to show some
Scripture Marks for People to know the Followers of Christ by, and some
Scripture Marks to know false Teachers by. But said Minister would not hear to
it, but instead, turned them cut of his House. Therefore they have here showed
in Print what they desired to show by disputing with him as follows.
WE appointed to go to Norwich Town, to have some Conference with the People
between their Meetings, about the Things of God, and it happened that some of
us came before the Forenoon Meeting began, and sat down near the Meeting House;
when a Constable came and asked us if we came to make a Disturbance, one of us
answered he came to testify against the Idol Sabbath; another said we did not
come to make any Disturbance. The Constable went away, and presently came
again, and made Prisoners of us, setting Men to keep us at the Tavern; and
before the Forenoon Meeting was done, the rest of us came to the Meeting House,
and when their Minister Lord had done speaking, we went within the Door and
desired them to hear us read a Paper, but one answered we don't want to hear
it; so we went out, and desired them to hear it there, but the Constable with
others laid hold of us, and set eighteen, and when it was dark Night the
Constable came and said, I have prevented your making a Disturbance Today, and
now you are at Liberty.

So we being disappointed of conferring with the People about the Things of God
this Time, we appointed to go again, but it being a stormy Day, but few went,
and the Forenoon Meeting was done, and the People gone before they came; so we
went to a Tavern where a Justice came to us before the Afternoon Meeting began,
and asked if we were going to the Meeting, we answered we did not know that we
should, and he immediately ordered Men to keep us, and when it was dark Night
he came again and told us we were at Liberty; and said you would not like we
should come to disturb you at your Meeting: We answered, it would be wrong to
come to disturb, but we should be glad if you would come to our Meeting as we
come to yours, to discourse of the Things of God; and we are willing to appoint
a Meeting in this Town on Purpose to discourse with us, and we went directly to
their Minister Lord's House, to desire him to discourse with us in the Week
Time before the People, about their Sabbath; but before we could well inform
him what we came for, he said I have nothing to do with you, and commanded us
out, calling us unreasonable Men, but which was the unreasonable Man, let the
Reader judge.

The next first Day of the Week we went again, and sat down in the Meeting
house 'till said Lord had done speaking, and one of us beginning to speak, a
Justice told the People to disperse, and said Lord their Minister told them it
would profane the Sabbath of the great God, for them to stop and hear us,
calling us Praters, and when one of us said it is not the Sabbath of God, he
answered, you are Madmen. And considering the Scripture teaches us to speak in
the Light which God has made known to us, and not to hide it under a Bushel,
we judged it best to dispute with this Minister before the People, that it
might be made manifest by the Scripture who were the Praters, that prate
contrary to Scripture, he or we, and accordingly our Request was written and
carried to his House by Joseph Bolles and others with him: and we told our
Business and read the Paper to several Justices and many others of his Society,
and many liked it very well, and not one was offended, while we came to him in
his House; and before said Bolles could half do this Errand to this pretended
Minister of Christ, he bid them go out, Bolles insisted to read said Paper to
inform what they desired, he said I will not hear it; and before Bolles could
read one Word, this pretended Minister of Christ, pushed him with both Hands
looking very angry, and so pusht the rest while he got them all out of his
House.

Now let us consider how unreasonable this pretended Minister of Christ was.
They had blamed us much for coming on their pretended Sabbath, saying we should
come another Day to speak to them, and every Time we came before this to speak
to them between their Meetings, we were carried Prisoners away from the People,
except when the People were ordered to go from us and not hear us. And now when
we came above ten Miles to speak with him in the Middle of the Week, he would
not suffer it, but commanded us out of the House, and pushed us with both Hands
while he got us out. Surely he was not able by sound Doctrine to exhort and
convince the Gainsayers according to Tit. i. 9. and therefore he took another
Course. If the Scripture was of his Side to confute us, why did he turn us out
of his House? Our Business was to have a Dispute with him before his own
People, that it might come to Light by the Scripture who followed Christ, he or
we; but he would not hear it because his Deeds were evil, as Christ affirms
John iii. 20, 21. Every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to
the Light lest his Deeds should be reproved: but he that does Truth comes to
the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. We
read that Paul disputed daily Months and Years, Acts ix, he disputed in the
Synagogue and in the Market daily with them that met with him, Acts xvii: 17.
Also he disputed against the Grecians, but they went about to slay him, Acts
ij. 29. Thus it was Paul's Manner to dispute, and it was the Practice of
Deceivers to persecute him, they went about to slay him. Paul disputed that it
might be made manifest that his Deeds were wrought in God; but he that does
Evil hates to dispute lest his evil Deeds should be reproved. Also 2 Timothy ii.
24. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to
teach, in Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. And 1 Pet. iii.
15. Be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks you a Reason of
the Hope that is in you. But this pretended Minister of Christ is never ready
to answer us as we can find, for we have lately been three Times at his House,
and he has commanded us out every Time, It was said of Nabal, 1 Samuel xxv. 17,
He is such a Son of Belial that a Man cannot speak to him. -- Paul dwelt two
whole Years in his own hired House, and received all that came in unto him.
Acts xxviii. 30. So that he turned none out of his House to shun a Dispute. And
Paul said Be ye Followers of me even as I am of Christ. So that Ministers of
Christ ought to be forward to dispute as Paul was, and not turn them out of his
House when they come to discourse with him.

And here follows a Copy of said Paper which said Lord said he would not hear.
Norwich, the 22d of the fourth Month, 1761. Considering we have sundry Times,
within six Weeks, traveled many Miles to this Town, to speak a few Words to
the People, between their Meetings, of Things that God has enlightened us, and
have been prevented by the Authority and Minister, twice we have been kept
Prisoners while dark Night, the next Time we waited in the Meeting House while
Benjamin Lord had done speaking, and one of us beginning to speak, said Lord
told the People it would profane the Sabbath of the great God for them to stop
and hear us, calling us Praters; and when one of us said this is not the
Sabbath of God, he said you are Madmen. Therefore seeing he does not allow the
People to hear us speak of the Things of God on his pretended Sabbath, we
desired Liberty to show by the Scripture that the first Day of the Week is not
the Christian Sabbath; and to show by the Scripture what the Christian Rest or
Sabbath is; and how Baptism and the Lord's Supper ought to be administered, and
what they are Figures of. And also to show some Scripture Marks, for People to
know the Followers of Christ by; and some Scripture Marks to know false
Teachers by. And if we say any thing contrary to Scripture, let him make it
manifest to the People before us.

First, we shall show that the first Day of the Week is not the Christian
Sabbath, whereas Friend Lord called the first Day of the Week the Sabbath of
the great God, he is under a gross Mistake, for the Scripture says, Romans iv.
15. where no Law is, there is no Transgression. And God has no Law in the
Scripture to keep that Day for a Sabbath, therefore it is not the Sabbath of
the great God, but only the Sabbath of the God of this World, as the Scripture
says, 2 Cor. iv. 4. The God of this World has blinded the Minds of them which
believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God, should shine unto them. Also the Confession of Faith of this Colony,
says in p. 7. Believe in all divine Worship, it is not enough that this or that
Act of Worship is not forbidden in the Word of God, if it be not commanded and
you perform it, you may fear you will be found guilty. So that Friend Lord may
fear he will be found guilty for keeping his pretended Sabbath himself,
according to his own Confession of Faith. Because it is not commanded in the
Word of God, Also it is impossible it should be the Christian Sabbath, because
it is no where called Sabbath in Scripture, but called the first Day of the
Week, in Acts xx. 7. 1 Cor. xvi. 2. and John xx. 1 and 19. And there is not one
Word about its being a Sabbath in Scripture, therefore it is evident they knew
not it was a Sabbath* for if they had known it was a Sabbath, they would have
called it so, and not always call it the first Day of the Week. Also Mat.
xxviii. when Christ left his Apostles, he charged them to teach all Nations, to
observe all Things whatsoever he had commanded them; and they have no where in
all the New Testament taught one of the Nations to observe this pretended
Sabbath: But, Romans xiv. the Apostle commanded the Church not to judge him that
esteemed one Day above another, considering he regarded it to the Lord. Yet he
was afraid of them that observe Days, least he had bestowed upon them Labor in
vain. Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe Days and Months, and Times and Years, and I
am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed Labor in vain. Observe, he was as much
against observing Days as he was against observing Months and Years; by all
which it is evident he did not observe Days himself. Doubtless it was Days
commanded in the Old Testament that some of the Church was ensnared about. But
the first Day of the Week was never commanded, nor nothing said about keeping
of it in all the Scripture. And the Apostle spoke against observing any Day.
And he also says, Gal. i. 8.9. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any Man preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed. Therefore how
can the pretended Minister of Christ, that preach that this pretended Sabbath
ought to be kept, in such a superstitious manner, escape this Curse. And is not
this pretended Sabbath an accursed Thing also; especially considering the
Persecution that is used to force the Children of God to keep it, by spoiling
their Goods, imprisoning and torturing their Bodies by whipping, not exceeding
twenty Stripes, if they refuse to pay ten Shillings for working on this
pretended Sabbath. And is not this Law a Work of the Devil, to torture the Body
with twenty Stripes, and to force a Person to pay ten shillings or comply with
this wicked Sabbath, against a Man's Conscience, when he knows it is not God's
Sabbath, and therefore it will be a great sin for him, either to keep it, or to
pay ten shillings. And we do esteem this Benjamin Lord to be a hardened
Persecutor; for while he has been a Preacher where he now is, we have been
cruelly whipped for pretended Breach of Sabbath, eight at one time, near his
House, and we understood he looked on and liked it very well; and smaller
Numbers have been whipped several other Times; and it was all for going through
Norwich to our appointed Meeting at Lebanon on the first Day of the Week, and
we endured it with the Help of God, while the Authority forbore whipping and
let us pass without. This might have been Conviction enough to him that God was
with us in our Sufferings, if he had been so much as a Babe in Christ, and he
has not showed us one Word of Scripture about keeping said pretended Sabbath to
this Day, and yet calls it the Sabbath of the great God. And when we go to
desire him to prove it by Scripture, he commands and pushes us out of his
House. Also he has proved himself to be such a one as we read of in Micah iii.
5. Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets that make my People err, that
bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace; and he that puts not into their Mouth,
they even prepare War against him. This appears by many that have been lain in
Prison, to force them to pay Money for his preaching when they did not hear
him, and professed it to be against their Consciences. If Benjamin Lord will
show us one Verse in the Bible that says one Word about keeping the first Day
of the Week for a Sabbath, he shall have ten Pounds lawful Money Reward for his
Trouble, paid by us or either of us, John Walterhouse, Joseph Bolles, John
Walterhouse, junr. John Rogers.


Now if said Lord does not show us one Word in the Bible about keeping his
pretended Sabbath, so as to recover said ten Pounds, then let all People
believe that it is the Sabbath of the God of this World. He will not dispute
with us by Word of Mouth, therefore we do it in Print, and so desire an Answer,
if he please. We desire Friend Lord may not pretend himself unwilling to take
ten Pounds for showing the Scripture for his pretended Sabbath, for it seems to
us he will earn his Money dear enough, and we will pay him honestly; if we
neglect, it will be more for his Honor to cast us into Prison, than many
others which have lain there when they owed him nothing, but only for vain
preaching or prating. He persuades People it is a Sabbath, but it is all vain
prating, no better than the Papists can prove any Idol they observe. God has
showed us that it is a great Idol in this Country, and all the Religion built
on the Holiness of this pretended Sabbath, is Hypocrisy, and he requires us to
publish it as Christ says, What ye hear in the Ear, preach on the House Top.
Mat. x. Idolatry and superstition carnal Ministers preach to the general Court
to make Laws and punish them that God sends to testify against this Idol.
Nathaniel Eells of Stonington, in his sermon preached to the general Court, May
12, 1748, says, As Christ is Lord of all, so you are his Vicegerents on Earth,
commissioned and sent to defend his Cause, and do his Work. So in this popish
Darkness they got into Christ's Seat, and made many Laws while it is got to be
such an Idol, that Friend Lord pretends it will profane it for his People to
hear us speak of the Things of God beween Meetings, though they came on Purpose
to hear of the Things of God. Also the Authority orders the People away; and
this is contrary to scripture, for Christians to exercise Authority over one
another in matters of Religion, Matt. xx. 25. Jesus called them unto him and
said, ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and
they that are great, exercise authority upon them: but it shall not be so among
you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; even as the son of
Man came not to be administered unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a
Ransom for many. Luke xxii. 25.

We know that God commanded Israel to keep the seventh Day for a Sign, Ex.
xxxi. 13 to 18. Verily my Sabbath ye shall keep, for it is a Sign between me
and you throughout your Generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord that
does sanctify you: ver. 16, 17. -- Wherefore the Children of Israel shall keep
the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath, throughout their Generations, for a
perpetual Covenant; it it a Sign between me and the Children of Israel for in
six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the seventh Day he rested and
was refreshed. Thus it appears it was the seventh Day Sabbath, God here
commanded to be kept for a Sign; and he also says, that ye may know that I am
the Lord that does sanctify (...) to know that the Lord did sanctify them, and
when the Lord came into the World, and suffered Death for our Sins, this Sign
as well as others was taken away and abolished, Col. 2.14 to 23. and now Christ
invites Sinners to come to him and receive the Substance which that seventh Day
rest was a Sign of; even to come to him and be sanctified, and find Rest to
their Souls, Matt. xi. 28 to 30. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you Rest; take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls: for my Yoke
is easy, and my Burden is light. So we are to forsake all and come to him, and
he will give us rest to our Souls. And whereas he says, take my Yoke upon you,
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart; that is, to take up our
Cross and follow him, and so learn to be meek and lowly in Heart, as he is, and
in so doing we shall find rest to our Souls. And further he says, for my Yoke
is easy and my Burden is light; that is, when we have taken up our Cross, as he
will teach us, and so learned of him, to be meek and lowly in Heart, then we
shall see, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light. And there is no
other Sabbath to be kept, since Christ suffered on the Cross, but this rest to
our Souls, which the seventh Day rest was the Sign of; and if we repent, and
seek him with the whole Heart, while we receive the remission of our Sins, and
the Gift of the Holy Ghost, we shall see it is a glorious Rest, which will
satisfy the hungry Soul. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. also, Isai. xi, 10. There shall
be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign to the People, to it shall
the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be glorious. Now, this Rest which Christ
gives his Children, far exceeds the seventh Day rest, which was only a Sign of
this glorious Rest or Sabbath; and all that worship God in Spirit and in Truth,
do find this Rest or Sabbath in their Souls. This Rest to our Souls in this
World, is the earnest of our Inheritance in the World to come. Ephesians. 1.13. After
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the
earnest of our Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession.
also, Heb. iv. 9, 10, 11. There remains therefore a rest to the People of
God; for he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own
Works, as God did from his. Now this Rest to the People of God, is the Rest
which Christ gives our Souls, and when his faithful Children receive this holy
Rest into their own Souls, then they cease from their own Works, as God did
from his; for they put off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ. Col. ii. 11. Also if any be in Christ, he is a new
Creature; old Things are past away, behold all Things are become new. 2 Cor. v.
17. And as to what he says in ver. 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into
that Rest, lest any Man fall after the same example of Unbelief. This shows it
is by believing in Christ that we must enter into th^^ holy Rest, and therefore
we ought to labor, even to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
lest we fall short, as Israel fell through Unbelief in the Wilderness, and
entered not into that Rest, which was a Figure of this Rest which we are
striving after, and if we do not keep this holy Rest or Sabbath in our Souls in
this Life, we shall fall short in the World to come. Therefore the Apostle
says, keep yourselves in the Love of God, and St. Paul says, 1 Cor. ix. 27. I
keep under my Body and bring it to Subjection, lest that by any Means, when I
have preached to others, I myself should be a Castaway.

Concerning Baptism. Baptism is called a Figure. 1 Pet. 3.18 to 22. Christ also
has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to
God; being put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. And he
further says, By which also he went and preached unto the Spirits in Prison,
which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in
the Days of Noah while the Ark was preparing. So it was by Virtue of Christ
suffering for our Sins, that he might bring us to God, that he preached or
strived by his Spirit, with the Spirits of Men, while the Ark was preparing;
and they are said to be in Prison, because God had said his Spirit should not
always strive with them, yet he allowed them an hundred and twenty Years, while
the Ark was preparing, and while his long suffering waited for them to repent,
and to have their Sins forgiven, that so he might bring them to God, that their
Spirits might be reconciled to him, before their Bodies were destroyed by the
Flood. And he further says, Wherein few, that is eight Souls, were saved by
Water; the like Figure, whereunto even Baptism does also now save us: not the
putting away the Filth of the Flesh; but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Whereas he says, the like
Figure, he aludes from the destruction of the old World, and the Salvation of
Noah and his House by Water, which was a Figure of the Churches Salvation by
Christ the promised Seed to come, who was to be her Head, and the Savior of
her Body: Baptism says he, is the like Figure, so that he speaks of Baptism, as
it is a Figure delivered to the Church, now saves us faith he: that is, it is
a Figure of our Salvation by Christ: he speaks by the Figure as Christ does in
the like Case, when he gave his Disciples the Bread and Wine, which were but
Figures, saying, This is my Body which is broken for you: And when he gave them
the Cup of Wine, he said, This is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed
for many. Yet they were but Figures of his Body and Blood, as Baptism is a
Figure of our Salvation by the resurrection of Jesus Christ; not, says Peter,
the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, that is, the Figure only washes the
outward Man, but we have the answer of a good Conscience by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, which Baptism is a Figure of. But the washing of the Filth of the
Flesh, is only the Work of the Figure, and the Figure is to point out how we
come by this Baptism, which cleanses us from our Sins; for it is not
sufficient for us to know that it is the Spirit that baptiseth us from our
Sins, but the main Thing is to know how we came by the Gift of the Spirit, and
this Knowledge is to be guided by the Figure; for Peter tells us in ver. 18.
that Christ was put to Death in the Flesh, that he might bring us to God. So we
come to cease from Sin by his suffering in the Flesh for us. 1 Pet. iv. 1. He
also being quickened by the Spirit, and so raised from the Dead by this
Resurrection of us: and thus we come to have a good Conscience toward God, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ; so that our good Conscience comes by our
Spiritual Baptism, and our spiritual Baptism comes by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. When Paul had received his Sight, and was filled with the Holy Ghost,
the Lord said by the Mouth of Ananias, why tarriest thou, arise and be
baptized. And when the Holy Ghost fell upon Cornelius and his House, the Lord
commanded them by the Mouth of Peter, whom he sent to teach them, to be
baptized: and Peter makes a Challenge by Way of question, saying, Can any Man
forbid Water, that these should not be baptized which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we. So he that the Lord sent to teach them what to do, upon
this very Reason, of seeing them baptized with the Holy Ghost, commands them to
be baptized, and it is evident with Water.

Baptism is a Figure that through the Death and Resurrection of Christ we die to
sin; and are raised up together with him to Newness of Life, having a sense and
feeling in ourselves of what the scriptures testify concerning Jesus Christ
being that one sacrifice for sin by the Effects of the suffering of of Jesus
Christ operating in us, which mortifies and kills sin in us, and in his Name
quickens and raises us up to Newness of Life. So the outward Figure represents,
that the Death and Burial of our Body of Sin comes by the Death of Christ for
our Sins: also the Resurrection of the Body, which also comes by Christ, is
held forth by this Ordinance, as appears Romans vi. 3, 4, 6. So many of us as
were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in Newness of Life; knowing this, that our old Man is crucified
with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve Sin. Also Col. ii. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein we are
also risen with him through the Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised
him from the Dead. As if he should say, we are risen with him to Newness of
Life by witnessing the Operation of God in us. Also 1 Cor. xv. 29. Else what
shall they do which are baptized for the Dead, if the Dead rise not at all, why
are they then baptized for the Dead. So Baptism signifies our rising from the
Dead. Thus it appears that the Figure should be administered by a Burial in the
Water, it being a Figure of our Death to Sin, by the Death of Christ for our
Sins; and also a Resurrection to Newness of Life, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, and a Figure also of the Death and Resurrection of our Body, which
comes by Christ. Paul says, 1 Cor. xi. 1, 2. Be ye Followers of me, even as I
also am of Christ. Now I pray you, Brethren, that you remember in all Things
and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them to you. And we read this Ordinance
of Baptism was delivered to the Church by administering where there was much
Water. Mark i. 5. There went out unto him all the Land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the River of Jordan, confessing
their Sins. Now let us consider what Need there was for all the Country to go
Jordan where there was much Water, if it would please God to sprinkle a little
Water in the Face, as the pretended Mininisters of Christ do now. The Scripture
says they were all baptized of John in Jordan. Baptize is a Greek Word, in
English it is wash or dip, as by the Dictionary appears. So they were all
washed or dipped in Water, even in Jordan. Acts viii. 38. They went down both
into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Also John iii.
23. John also was baptising in Enon near to Salem, because there was much Water
there; and Jesus was baptized of John in Jordan. Mark 1.9. And seeing they all
took the Pains to go where there was much Water, and were baptized in the
Water, and our Lord himself was baptized in Jordan, and came up out of the
Water; how can we think that we follow Christ, if we are ashamed to take up our
Cross and do as he has done; and how does it look for a pretended Minister of
Christ, to sprinkle a few Drops of Water in the Face, and say it will do as
well, and so conceit himself wiser than Christ and the Apostles; neither is it
a true Resemblance or Figure of the Spiritual Baptism, neither is it an
Institution of God, but rather a mocking of God, neither do we perceive that
God owns it by giving the Holy Ghost to them that come under that invented
Baptism; also to baptize Infants, that know not what they are about, without
Scripture Example. Christ said, Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and Holy
Ghost; teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded you, and
lo! I am with you always, even unto the End of the World, Amen. So that if his
Followers observe all Things whatsoever he has commanded, he has promised to be
with them always, even unto the End of the World: and also says Amen; that is,
verily so be it. Also Acts ii. 38. Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized
every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of Sins, and
ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. And we can truly testify that this
promise is fulfilled among us, as fully as it is written: And this we write for
the Honor of Christ, that we do know that he fulfils his Promise, made by the
Mouth of his Apostles, and for encouragement to all them that will take up
their Cross and follow him. Heb. xiii. 12, 13, 14. Wherefore Jesus also, that
he might sanctify the People with his own Blood, suffered without the Gate: let
us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach; for here
have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come. 2 Timothy iii. 12, 13. Yea,
and all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, but
evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

Concerning the Lord's Supper. When God delivered his People out of Egypt, he
ordained an Ordinance in his Church called the Lord's Passover, which Ordinance
did point at Christ, who was the real Lamb of God, figured out by that
Ordinance, which was to guide the Faith of God's Church to the promised Seed of
the Woman, till he should come. Which Ordinance continued in the Church, till
it was fulfilled in the Kingdom of God; for in that very Night in which Jesus
eat that Passover with his Disciples, he was betrayed, though he freely offered
up himself for our Sins, that he might redeem us from our vain Conversations:
And in the Time of his eating that Passover with his Disciples, he instituted a
new Gospel Ordinance, to guide the Faith of his Church in himself, as being
already come, as the Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. v. 7. For even Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. He having thus once appeared by the sacrifice of
himself, to put away sin, has left an Ordinance with his Church called the
Lord's supper, to be observed by his Church, till he shall appear a second
Time, without sin to salvation: in his first Appearance he was made sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, and all
the sacrifices for sin before his coming, was to guide the Faith of his Church
to this one sacrifice, which they all pointed at, that the Church of God might
believe and know by these Ordinances before appointed of God, that God had
ordained them another Head in the Room of Adam, who by his Disobedience brought
Death and Misery upon himself, and upon all his Posterity; but by the righteous
Life, bitter Death, and glorious Resurrection of this second Adam, a
resurrection from Sin, Misery and Death, is brought to Light: So that this Lamb
of God is the one and only Sacrifice for our Sins, as Peter says, 1 Pet. i. 18,
etc. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation, but with the precious Blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish, and without Spot; who verily was
foreordained before the foundation of the World. God chose us in him our Head,
before the Foundation of the World, and by his free Grace called us in him,
that we should be Holy, by being made Partaker of that Holiness, which was with
him before the Foundation of the World was laid; and therefore the Lamb of God
that was sacrificed for us, is worthy to receive Power, Riches, Wisdom, Honor,
Glory, and Strength, for he was slain for us, and has purchased for us the
true and living Bread of Life; and our Lord Jesus Christ, at the Cessation of
that Passover, which was to guide the Faith of his Church in him that was to
come, till he should come and fulfill that Ordinance, by the Sacrifice of
himself, has settled a New Testament Ordinance in his Church, to show forth
his Death, till he shall come a second Time in Glory: This Ordinance is to
show, that his Church has the Remission of Sins by shedding of his Blood, and
to show and to keep in Memory, that the Bread of Life which is given us, is
purchased for us by his bitter Death, that his Church may ascribe that Glory to
him which is due to him, who has purchased these Things for us at so dear a
Rate; so this Ordinance is not so much to set forth the Gift, as it is to set
forth the Price that purchased the Gift for us; for if a Man will give his own
Life to save the Life of his Friend, this is a Price of great Value worth the
Consideration; but Christ has laid down his Life to redeem ours while we were
his Enemies. 1 Cor. xi. 23, etc. I have received of the Lord, that which also I
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was
betrayed, took Bread, and when he had given Thanks, brake it, and said, take
eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.
After the same Manner also, he took the Cup after he had supped, saying, this
Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, this do as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lord's Death till he come.

Under the Old Testament they offered the Blood of Beasts, to guide the Faith
of God's Elect to this Blood of Christ, which is the Substance. And our Lord
Jesus has left this Ordinance with his Church, to guide her Faith in his Blood
already shed for us, saying, This do in Remembrance of me. And says the
Apostle, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show his
Death 'till he come. And this Coming the Apostle does not mean to be in his
divine Nature, but in our Nature as he offered himself. For it was the coming
of him who had been dead that this Ordinance directed their Faith to for a
second Time; for he says to those very Persons, 2 Cor. xiii. 5, Examine
yourselves whether you be in the Faith, prove your ownselves, know you not your
ownselves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? Here it
appears that Christ was with them and in them at this very Time of his divine
Nature, except such as were Reprobates. For it was his divine Nature in them
that brought them out of a Reprobates State, and made them worthy to partake
this Ordinance. For this Self-Examination was to be in a special Manner before
they came to this Table. 1 Cor. xi. 28. Let a Man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, for he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's
Body. Thus it appears, that they only who are Partakers of the Purchase of this
Sacrifice, can discern the Lord's Body offered for them, it being Christ's
divine Nature, manifested in our Nature; in which Nature our Election stands,
or our Justification, and our Sanctification stands in this Divine Nature,
which we are made Partakers of through Faith in Christ. And out of this Nature
we are in a Reprobate State, let our Conversation be never so blameless in the
Sight of Man. This Ordinance was attended at Supper Time; and they did not only
eat Bread, but they eat their Bread with their other Meat.

Some Scripture Marks to know the Followers of Christ by, and some scripture
Marks to know false Teachers by.

One principal Mark given by Christ, for all Men to know his Disciples, was by
their loving one another as he had loved them. John xiii. 34, 35. A new
Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you;
that ye also love one another; by this shall all Men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have Love one for another. And he calls this his new
Commandment, for them to love one another as he had loved them. We may observe,
that Christ gave his Disciples this new Commandment when the Hour was come that
he should depart out of this World unto the Father, as appears ver. 1. When
Jesus knew that his Hour was come, that he should depart out of this World unto
the Father. And in these xiii, xiv, and xv. Chapters, he several Times charged
them to love one another, and to bear Fruit also: but here first it says, When
Jesus knew that his Hour was come, that he should depart out of this World unto
the Father, having loved his own which were in the World, he loved them unto
the End. The End here spoken of, was the End of his being with them in the
World: for his Hour was come now to depart out of this World. And this Text
testifies that he loved them unto the End; meaning the End of his being with
them to the End of the World, And also informs us, how he taught them to bear
the Fruit of his Love one to another, after he departed from them out of this
World unto the Father, as appears ver. 3, 4, 5. Jesus knowing that the Father
had given all Things into his Hand, and that he was come from God, and went to
God, he rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garment, and took a Towel, and
girded himself; after that he pours Water into a Basin, and began to wash the
Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel wherewith he was girded. All
this was to teach them, or rather to teach us to be subject to and serve one
another in Meekness and Love, and especially in all Long-suffering and
Doctrine, to edify one another in the Ways of God, as he had done to them; as
appears ver. 12. And so after he had washed their Feet, and had taken his
Garments and was sat again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you;
ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for I am: if I then your Lord and
Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash one another's Feet; for I
have given you an Example that ye should do as I have done to you. And
considering Christ at his departing, has so much in these three Chapters
commanded his Disciples to love one another, as he had loved them, and gave
such an Example of serving them in the meanest service in the World, even to
wash their Feet; and afterward told them what he did it for; therefore we
ought to take this as a solemn Charge for us to love one another as he has
loved us, and serve one another, as he meant to teach us, by washing the
Disciples Feet. And if we serve and love one another, as he meant to teach us,
he affirms, that all Men shall know by this that we are his Disciples. Also 1
John iii. 16. Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his Life
for us, and we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren. The Scripture and
History also shows, that the Faithful did hazard and lay down their Lives one
for another, in Times of Persecution; and when Brethren hazard and lay down
their Lives one for another now, it is a Mark to know that they follow Christ,
as much as it was then. So then we ought not to refrain visiting, edifying,
communicating or speaking to the Children of God, if they are sick, or in
Prison, or at their Meeting House, for Fear of the Laws and Punishment of Men,
Matt. x. 39 to 42. Matt. xxv. 34 to 46. And in so doing, we bear the Fruit
which he requires of us, even the Fruit of his Commandment, to love one another
as he has loved us; and it is by the Fruit which we bear, that we are to know
ourselves, and also to know false Prophets. Mat. vii. 15. Beware of false
Prophets, which come to you in Sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves; ye shall know them by their Fruits ver. 20. Wherefore by their Fruits
ye shall know them. Therefore we are to try their Fruits by the (...), that we
may know what Sort it is, for Men do not gather Grapes of Thorns, etc. We read
that Paul taught the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, to feed the Church of
God, which he had purchased with his own Blood, and to labor with their Hands,
and to be rather Givers than Receivers. Acts xx. 17 to 38, he says, Take Heed
therefore unto yourselves, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Overseers to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own Blood. Again, You yourselves know that these Hands have administered to my
Necessities, and to them that were with me. I have showed you all Things, how
that so laboring, ye ought to support the Weak, and to remember the Words of
the Lord Jesus, how he said it is more blessed to give than to receive. Here
are two special Things for us to observe; the first is the Apostles's Command,
that so laboring, meaning as he had done, ye ought to support the Weak; also
to remember the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, it is more blessed to
give than to receive. Here we see, that settled Elders are taught to labor
with their Hands, and to give rather than receive. But traveling Ministers,
such as Paul and Barnabas, had Power to forbear working, and it is the Duty of
other Christians to be Fellow Helpers to the Truth by supplying such in their
Need, as appears 1 Cor. ix. We know that a traveling Minister such as Paul and
Barnabas are called from their Wives, Children, Houses and Lands if they have
any, and are sent from City to City, and over-Sea: They are not only taken from
their own Employment, but are sent upon Charges; their Condition is like that
of a Soldier, who is sent from his own Living upon Charges; and therefore is
maintained at the King's Charge. Ver. 6, 7, says he, I only and Barnabas, have
not we Power to forbear working? Who goes a Warfare at any Time at his own
Charges? But the Scripture shows, Paul labored with his Hands at all
Opportunities, to make the Gospel without Charge, and commanded other
Christians, saying, Be ye Followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. Also we
read Matt. x. with Luke x. that Christ sent forth his Apostles to preach, and
to heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, and to cast out Devil and
said unto them, Freely ye have received, freely give. So he forbid them taking
any thing for preaching or healing; for he commanded them to give it freely.
But as they were Traveling Ministers, he said unto them, Eat and drink such
Things as they give; and as he said, the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, we
ought to consider they were Christ's Laborers; he sent them to labor in his
Harvest, and they were to look to him for their Hire. They were to walk by
Faith and not by Sight, 2 Cor. v. 7. As they had freely received, they were
commanded freely to give their preaching and healing. Thus we may observe, that
both Christ and Paul commanded Teachers to receive nothing for teaching, they
received freely and they were freely to give; and so they were Followers of
Christ, and became Servants to all Men, in Love serving one another, and laid
down their Lives for the Brethren. Also their Kingdom is not of this World, and
they are forbidden to receive the Things of this World for preaching the
Gospel. When Christ and the Apostles went about healing and preaching, if it
had been right, and they had suffered themselves to receive Gifts, no Doubt but
they might have received much. But Christ was called a Carpenter, and had no
where to lay his Head; and Paul was a Tent-maker, and the Apostles were
Fishermen, and labored with their Hands, and had no certain Dewlling Place, as
appears 1 Cor. iv (...) from all Men, yet have I made myself Servant unto all,
that I might gain the more, 1 Cor. ix. 19. This was following Christ, as he
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom
for many. Also Elisha refused to take any thing for teaching, 2 Kings v. 16.
But Gehazi his Servant chose a Reward, as false Teachers always do. And though
the Teachers that Christ sends, are forbidden to receive a Reward of Men, yet
Necessity is laid on them to preach the Gospel, and woe is unto them if they
preach not the Gospel, though they are persecuted for their Pains, 1 Cor. ix. 16.
Yea, they take Pleasure in Persecution for Christ's Sake, as St. Paul says, 2
Cor. xii. 10. But the Teachers which the World heaps up to themselves, walk by
Sight (...) by Faith, and they have no Necessity to preach except it suits
their worldly Interest; for their Kingdom is of this World, and they must have
a Reward in this World for preaching, or else there is no Necessity laid on
them to preach. They serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies;
and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the simple, Romans xvi.
18. They may be hired by the Year, where they can make the best Bargain, and
perhaps go to another Place if they can get more. Judge. xvii. 10, 11, Micah
said, dwell with me, and be to me a Father and a Priest, and I will give thee
ten Sheckels of Silver by the Year, and a Suit of Apparel, and thy Victuals. So
the Levite went in and was content to dwell with the Man. Observe, he was
content while his worldly Interest might be better suited; for we read, Judge.
xviii. 19, 20. They said unto him, hold thy Peace, lay thine Hand upon thy
Mouth, and go with us, and be to us a Father and a Priest; is it better for
thee to be a Priest to the House of one Man, or that thou be a Priest to a
Tribe and a Family in Israel? and the Priest's Heart was glad, and he went with
them. They are such, that if a Man will not put into their Mouths, they will
prepare War against him, Mic. iii. 5. And if a Man will not give their Demand,
they will take it by Force, by their Servants or Collectors, 1 Samuel ii. 15, 16.
They live under that Woe, Luke vi. 26. Woe unto you, when all Men shall speak
well of you; for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets. Also 1 John iv. 5,
6, They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World, and the World
hears them. We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of
God, hears not us: hereby we know the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of
Error. Isai. lvi. 11. They are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough; and
they are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own Way,
every one for his Gain from his Quarter. He speaks as plain as if we had one in
every Town of New England. 2 Peter, ii. 3. Through Covetousness with feigned
Words shall they make Merchandise of you. Jer viii, 10. Every one from the
least even to the greatest is given to Covetousness, from the Prophet even unto
the Priest. And because they are thus greedy of Gain, (...) called greedy Dogs,
and ravening Wolves: Mat. ^i. 15. Acts xx, 29. But the true Ministers preach
the Gospel freely; Isai. lv. 1. He that has no Money, come ye. Mat. x, 8.
Freely ye have received, freely give. Mat. xi. 5. The Poor have the Gospel
preached to them. 2 Cor. xi. 7. I have preached to you the Gospel of God
freely. 2 Cor. xii. 18. I desired Titus, and with him I sent a Brother; walked
we not in the same Spirit? walked we not in the same Steps? 1 Cor. ix. 18. What
is my Reward then? verily that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel
of Christ without Charge. 1 Pet. v. 2. Feed the Flock of God, etc. not for
filthy Lucre. 2 Cor. xii. 14, 15. I will not be burdensome to you; for I seek
not yours, but you; for the Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but
the Parents for the Children: And, I will very gladly spend and be spent for
you. Yet they are judged by the World to be Deceivers and Heretics, because
they go contrary to their Forms, Inventions and Traditions, and testify against
the false Prophets which deceive the World. Mat. xxvii. 63. Sir, we remember
that that Deceiver. Here we see Christ was counted a Deceiver 2 Cor. vi. 8. As
Deceivers, and yet true. Here we may see the Apostles were counted Deceivers.
Jer. xviii, 18. Let us devise Devices against Jeremiah; for the Law shall not
perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the Wise, nor the Word from the
Prophet: Come let us smite him with the Tongue, and let us not give Heed to any
of his Words. Here we see they counted Jeremiah a Deceiver; concluding that one
Man in the Kingdom could not be right, and all their Priests, Prophets and wise
Men deceived. Acts xxiv. 14. This I confess, after the Way they call Heresy,
so worship I the God of my Fathers. And because the World judged them Deceivers
and Heretics, therefore they persecute and revile them. Mat. v. 11, 12.
Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you and persecute you, etc. for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. 1 Cor. iv. 12, 13. Being
reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat. 2
Cor. vi, 4, 5. In all Things approving ourselves as the Ministers of God in
much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Dist^^^^ in Imprisonments, in
Tumults. 2 Timothy iii. 10, to 13* Thou have fully known my Doctrine, Manner of
Life, Persecutions, Afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium,
etc. You and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution,
but Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Here is a
Promise, that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
Persecution; therefore we may expect it will be so. Also Christ's Words, John
xv. 20. Remember the Words that I said unto you, the Servant is not greater
than the Lord; if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. And as
the World chooses their wise, honorable and learned Men to be their Ministers,
so God for the most Part chooses such as are despised, ignorant and unlearned,
to be his Ministers: This appears by the following Scriptures, Acts iv. 13. Now
when they saw the Boldness of Peter and John, and perceived, that they were
unlearned and ignorant Men, they marvelled. 1 Cor. 26, 27. For ye see your
calling, Brethren, how that not many wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble, are called: but God has chosen the foolish Things of the
World, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak Things of the World,
to confound the mighty, and base Things of the World, and Things which are
despised has God chosen. Matt. xi. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, because thou have hid these Things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them to Babes. More Marks of false Teachers, Jude xi. Woe unto
them, for they are gone in the Way of Cain, and run greedily after the Error of
Balaam, for Reward. They are Persecutors, as Cain was, and it is they that have
stirred up Persecution in all Ages, to force the Witnesses that God sends, to
comply with their Institution of Men. And they have ran greedily after the
Error of Balaam, to get a Reward for Preaching, as Balaam did. 2 Timothy iii.
Having a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof; from such turn away.
They deny the Power of God in us, which cleanses us from all Uprighteousness.
1 John i. 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
Sins, and to cleanse us (...) all Unrighteousness. He says, from such turn
away, (...) 2 Cor. vi. 14 to 18. Be ye not unequally yoked together with
Unbelievers, for what Fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness, and
what Communion has Light with Darkness, and what Concord has Christ with
Belial, or what Part has he that believes, with an Infidel; and what
Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols, for ye are the Temple of the
living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People; wherefore come out from among them;
and (...) ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean (...), and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.


