The Vanity of every Man at his best Estate.

A FUNERAL SERMON On the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, ESQUIRE. Late Lieutenant
GOVERNOR and COMMANDER IN CHIEF, over the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, Who died OCTOBER 10, 1761. Aged 84 Years.

By Mr. BYLES.

Eccl. xii. 7, 8. Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the
Spirit shall return to God who gave it. Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher,
all is Vanity.

Printed by GREEN and RUSSELL, in BOSTON, 1761.

PSALM. XXXIX. 5. Verily every Man at his best state is altogether Vanity.


THESE words are very plain, and very full, and very mortifying. Man, a noble
and reasonable creature, of a curious body and an immortal spirit, may he not
be a little proud of his talents, his capacities, his enjoyments, and his
reversions? -- No; he is an empty and a brittle thing: Man is vanity. -- Yes,
some men: perhaps the generality. But are there not others exempted from the
character? The wise, the learned, the rich and noble, the beautiful and strong;
persons of wide fame or high authority, princes and emperors at the head of
mankind, are these so too? Yes; every man is vanity. -- Sometimes perhaps, in
some circumstances and at some certain seasons: But not in his fairest
appearance, and brightest glory. The king sick, or the scholar asleep may be
so: but is the rich in the midst of his possessions, the general at the head of
his army. -- Yes, every man at his best estate is vanity. -- Allow men; all
men, and all men in their best estate, are vain: a little vain it may be. Nay,
vanity itself, in the abstract. Well, granted, in a few things, perhaps in
many: But sure the idea may stop here. Nay he is altogether vanity. These are
assertions perhaps: a bear hypothesis: a speculation only, not well grounded. A
topic of amusement or dispute, but not demonstrated conclusion. -- Nay, it is
most certainly so. Verily every man at his best estate, is altogether vanity.

NEVER was a sentence more strong and forcible. Every word has an emphasis upon
it. Man, not barely vain, but in the abstract, vanity. Not in a little but
altogether vanity. Not in his worst condition; but in his best state. Not some
few; but every man. And all this not a precarious assertion, but a most certain
truth. VERILY every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. This lies
before us to illustrate and improve.

1st THEN; I am to illucidate and demonstrate the proposition, that every man
at his best estate, is altogether vanity. And here I might premise, that man,
at his first creation, was not vanity, in that complete sense, in which he is
since. He was made a little lower than the angels and crowned with glory and
honor. There was a real glory abiding on him: something solid and substantial;
till sin broke, and softened, and destroyed his frame. By his fall from GOD he
became vain in his imaginations: and hence he diffused vanity and the curse
through the lower creation. -- So was the creature made subject to vanity, by
the transgression of Adam, the lord of this subjected earth. He became vain
first, in that bold attempt after godhead, when he eat the forbidden fruit. The
vain man fancied that he had divinity within his reach: and the serpent fed the
illusion. Genesis iii. 5. For GOD does know, that in the day you eat thereof, that
your eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
Ravished with the gaudy phantom, the foolish, presumptuous creature caught at
it, tried to grasp it to his bosom, and hug and enjoy the bliss: But how
disappointed was he! It glided from his (...), it mocked his caress, it
appeared nothing but a gilded cloud, a fleeting shadow; mere vanity. So that
even then, at his best estate indeed; while he stood fair as a cedar in the
garden of GOD, he was deceived by vanity; and confessed himself vanity. Man being
in honor abides not. But since the fall, O what complete vanity is the race
of Adam? Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Let us, if
you please, instance a little, and see if the assertion cannot be made out.
Take the man in all the fine lights in which your fancy can place him, and let
us try what we can make of it.

1st IN his best estate of riches, he is no better than vanity. No worldly man
ever did arrive at all the riches which his vain mind wished for. But form the
idea better than the fact.

SUPPOSE a man possessed of all the wealth of the earth. -- Suppose him seated in
the midst of plenty, his tables covered with all kinds of luxuries, and all
round stand his unnumber'd slaves to execute his sovereign orders. His coffers
are mines of gold and silver. They teem with coin, and blaze with jewels. -- He
is clothed in purple and fine linen, he sets upon an ivory throne, in the
midst of a marble palace. Round about are his gardens, his orchards, his groves
and his fields spreading in an endless prospect. Issuing from these, he enters
into magnificent cities, and walks through streets of his own houses; every
one, as he passes, bringing in tribute and revenues. In a word, the treasures
of the world pour into his magazines, and he shall be the proprietor of all
regions where the sun visits.

WELL, here is an ideal rich man: such an one as never was really in the world:
but we set him in his best estate, that we may keep to the text, and attend to
the conclusion. See the overgrown wretch then: and what do you behold! Why
first of all, a huge lump of vanity, a proud, haughty, disdainful mortal,
valuing himself upon the most adventitious and exterior thing in the world. For
all this his riches, he may be an idiot, a sot, a villain without honor or
conscience. He may be sick and in pain; he may be despised and hated; no man
may have a good thought of him; and at last he may die young, after he has lost
all his wealth too, and not have a friend to close his eyes.

WHAT think you now? Is this best estate vanity or not? See the succeeding
verse of my context: Surely every man walks in a vain show: surely they are
disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches and knows not who shall gather them.

THUS you see the sacred conclusion of the HOLY GHOST upon riches, that they
also are vanity: That man at his best estate in these is no better himself than
vanity. Never let us call them substance any more.

2. CONSIDER the man at his best estate of honor, and lo! here he is also
vanity. Suppose he is lifted to the pinnacle of earthly dignity, seated upon
the supreme throne, and gazed up at by a whole world of conquered nations.
Suppose him rolling in his gilded chariot, through a range of triumphal arches,
with a thousand fettered monarchs marching in procession, before the ravished
victor. Round about are torn standards and broken armor, the trophies of his
success, and the monuments of his glory. And now, applauded by millions he
rides along, while the sky echoes with his name and his honors. But what is
this hero now, but another demonstration of my doctrine: Man at his best
estate, and vanity? Amidst all this vain pomp and glitter, may not his mind be
uneasy, and his body in pain. May he not think, These people who acclaim me to
day, may hiss me tomorrow. Or may he not remember amidst all, that in a few
hours more death will strip him of all, hurl him from all, and this poor shirt
be all the great conqueror carries away, and six foot of earth be all he takes
up. The dignity of this earth then is no security against this abasing
character inscribed upon it, vanity. The most honorable are no more secured
than the vilest and most abject: But of both alike it is the scripture
assertion, Psalm. lxii. 9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high
degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance they are altogether lighter than
vanity. Near o'kin to this is the next head.

3. AT his best estate of fame and reputation, man is altogether vanity.
Suppose the man not only to be raised above all in outward marks of respect and
dignity: but every one shall love him in their hearts; they shall respect and
admire him: They shall talk every where of his excellencies, and every one
believe what they say. They shall spread his fame far and wide, and he shall be
universally known, and as universally valued, from the most judicious critic
to the lowest plebean.

WELL; and what can be a fairer picture of vanity in the whole world? What is
more uncertain, than the esteem of men; the breath of common fame? What more
swelling and more empty? It Is vanity in the abstract: an idle bubble, blown up
by the uncertain breath of others, that breaks in the attempt to catch it.

A MAN the most applauded by others, may be the most miferable creature in the
world, in the sensations of his own mind. All the pompous titles of an oriental
monarch, are but great swelling words of vanity. A small transition will bring
us to say,

4. MAN at his best estate of power and authority, is altogether vanity. This
carries in it a distinct idea from honor and fame: For a man may receive the
highest marks of dignity, and titles of honor, and may be really esteemed, and
universally applauded, and yet his authority and command may be very small. He
may have great influence to attract, and but small power to oblige.

BUT suppose a man advanced to the throne of supreme empire; a sovereign
monarch, absolute and arbitrary in all his edicts. -- On his breath hang the
souls of millions. In his secret breast is deposited the march of armies, and
the fate of nations. Peace, or battles, retreat, or bloodshed, or safety, or
destruction, wait the mandates of his despotick voice.

SUPPOSE he has not a rebel in his vast empire; or if he had thousands he has
power to crush them in an instant, and only would appear the greater by the
bold, successless opposition. And now what is the consequence? why just the same
still, advanced to the best estate, he still remains vanity. Notwithstanding
all his authority, may he not be a slave to his own lusts? May not ambition,
revenge, luxury, presumption and despair tyranize over him by turns, and claim
a divided government in his soul? And after all, may he not, must he not resign
it in death! At once the blast is given, and the bubble breaks.

5. MAN at his best estate of pleasure is altogether vanity. -- Suppose him
surrounded with every object, fair to the eye, tuneful to the ear, delicate to
the touch, fragrant to the smell, and delightful to the taste. Suppose the
generous wines flow round; and the sprightly concert strikes up: wit and
laughter shall wake the genius and shake the hall. The gay turn, the sly
remark, the smart reply; ingenuity, mirth and good humor shall be heard from
all corners.

AND O what a scene of abundant vanity have I here opened! Here Is a room full
of dying creatures, upon the edges of eternity, just stepping into it, and O
how senseless! abandoned! frantic! Noise and clamor, thoughtless
impertinence, and empty jesting, sensual gratifications and idle game, make up
that strange monster called earthly pleasure. O how unfit for the choice of
such creatures as we! how unequal to the capacities of a reasonable soul! how
short-lived, and uncertain, and transient! The pleasures of sin are but for a
season: and even while they last, are vain and unsubstantial too. Eccle. ii. 1,
2, 3. I said in my heart, go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore
enjoy pleapleasure: and behold this also is vanity. I said of laughter, it is
mad: and of mirth, what does it? I sought in mine heart to give myself unto
wine, and to lay hold on folly.

6. MAN at his best estate of body is altogether vanity. -- In the former
trials, I supposed the man to have all exterior advantages: but now if you
please you shall approach to add interior to them. Suppose then amidst all this
plenty, this dignity, fame, power, and mirth, the man enjoys a strong and
regular gust of appetite, to taste the various delights. Suppose him strong,
lively, active, of a firm constitution and warm blood, glowing with the flush
of youth, and hardy in the vigor of health: yet in this sense is the
conclusion sacred, Eccl. xi. 9. Childhood and youth are vanity. Suppose him in
the bloom of years, beauty adorns his cheeks, and proportion shapes his limbs,
and every one gazes with eyes of approbation and love. Yet then is the
conclusion also true. Prove. xxxi. 30. Favor is deceitful, beauty is vain. Poor
vain creature, why are these conscious airs, and that fluttering attire? Must
not all this beauty fade? In a few moments more, will not those fair colors
vanish from your face, and the eyes fix, and the lips turn pale? So a bubble
shines, and dances upon the smiling surface of the flood, and in an instant
disappears, the beautiful round is lost, and its place is no more found.

7. MAN, at his best estate of soul is altogether vanity. The thought now
rises, and the conclusion grows strong. We may easily conceive a plentiful
estate, outward honors, scenes of mirth, and a healthy body, and yet pronounce
vanity upon all, while the mind was not adapted to taste the pleasure: But
suppose it is, yet sure now the point is made out, and the man is altogether
vanity. Suppose the owner of ten thousand volumes has rode post through his
pages, yet may not the fine library line the walls of a narrow soul? Has the
man a smattering of half a dozen languages; though he speaks in the tongues of
men and angels, and have not genius, he is but as sounding brass, and a
tinkling cymbal. Nothing so empty and noisy as a vain pedant.

BUT this reaches not the case neither; suppose then once more, a vast genius,
with all the ideas of learning and speculation laid up in its faithful memory.
Suppose a bright imagination, a quick invention, a penetrating sagacity, a
correct judgment; a mere SOLOMON, excelling all mortals in wisdom and knowledge
-- The first thing we observe upon this is, in his much wisdom is much grief,
and as he increases knowledge he increases sorrow. How vain must the wisest
man be, if he is puffed up with his own learning? After all his large
acquisitions, how much more remains unknown to him, than he already knows?
There Is hardly a fool upon earth, but would puzzle the conceited philosopher,
with questions upon the most common subject. And after all, one little turn of
brain; one small apartment disturbed, one minute cell overthrown, and down
falls all this stupendous fabric of intellect, and the poor creature becomes
stupid, or wanton, or raving. 1 Cor. iii. 20. And again, the LORD knows the
thoughts of the wise, that they are vain. Vain man would be wise! I shall
attempt but one labor more, and with this trial I shall form the conclusion of
the whole matter.

8. Consider man in his best estate of virtue and morality, destitute of the
principle of renewed nature, and here too the point will be given, he is
altogether vanity. You take notice, I here say, virtue and morality as
distinguished from holiness and true piety. It Is the pagan ethics and not the
christian sanctity that is the present subject. Well: but will not morality
make us happy? Is not virtue a real good; the summum bonum? The calm
philosopher; who could debate upon sensual pleasure, and deliberately pronounce
vanity upon it all: Yet even he, dazzied by false lights, and the appearance of
truth in his argument, will never consent to have his beloved virtue pronounced
vain too. Let us see a little then how far this conclusion will hold. Suppose a
moralist, who indulges no inordinate appetite or hurtful passion: Suppose he
endeavors after a generous love to mankind, and of all the second table of the
law can say, all these have I kept from my youth. Yet must it be said, there is
something wanting, vanity within, some chasm remaining unfill'd. The voice of
eternal truth himself pronounces, yet thou lackest one thing. Aye, but suppose
he is even superstitious in his regards to the first table too, so far as man
in a state of fallen nature proceeds unsanctified by the SPIRIT OF GOD, the
vanity shall only be better finished, and make a finer show. Would you see the
very picture of vanity; the very image and superscription of it, I Will show it
you. Look into Luke xviii. 11. The pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself;
GOD, I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
of all that I possess. If one was looking out for an emblem of vanity, I know
not how it were possible to find a better.

VIRTUE then, and morality, if it go no further is but a vain appearance of
good: this may puff a man up, but it can never be satisfying, because it can
never be complete. I know not how to help it, but till it is full it must be
hollow. Eccl. iv. 4. Again I considered every RIGHT WORK, this is also vanity
and vexation of spirit. The most accomplished philosopher among the heathen,
and the exactest moralists they could boast, were for the most part, the
vainest things under heaven. They almost lived wholly to themselves. Even their
pompous talk upon the public and the love of one's country, has such evident
marks of vain glory upon it, that it is discovered in almost every page by an
attentive eye. Is even the dying speech of a Socrates unstained with it? The
lust of fame seems to be the grand spring of their gaudy oratory, and hardy
undertakings in what they called the cause of virtue. The modest Virgil himself
is easily detected. He stumbles at the very threshold of his heroic lines, and
the vain egolist appears full. -- Ille ego qui quondam -- unless the vain
critics can prove the lines to be none of his: as some of them have attempted.

AND among those called christians, can the case be different? The bare moral
man may be lovely in his accomplishments, but morality alone will not save him.
He may here lose it totally, and all his hopes from it hereafter will prove as
the spider's web.

BUT I must do the argument justice. Man in his best estate of faith too, short
of saving, is still only vanity. He only seems to be religious, but that man's
religion is vain. If he have all faith, so as that he be able to remove
mountains, and it work not by love, it is but a thin appearance and empty
noise. Will thou know, O vain Man, that faith without works is dead! The soul
is wanting, and what you see is a vain phantom without substance. A dead thing
you know is vain. Hence the sacred phrase for the universal empire of death,
is, the creature also is subject to vanity. I have now considered man in his
best estate indeed, and lo, he is still vanity.

THUS you have run through the several divisions of mankind, and what is the
upshot of the matter? What a mortifying conclusion is drawn from the confessed
premises? At his best estate of riches he is vanity, for he may be despised:
add honor to his riches, and he is vanity still, for it may reach but a little
way. Add extent of fame to these, and he is still vanity for want of authority
to support it. If he has all these, he may still remain vanity, because he is
destitute of sensual pleaures. Let him be surrounded with joyous objects, yet
they will be in vain if he wants vigor of appetite, and health of body. If he
enjoys these, yet he misses the nobler enjoyments of the mind, and therefore is
wretched vanity. Suppose he has the highest pleasures of genius, yet he may be
a slave to vice: Or if he is a moral and a virtuous man, but not regenerated by
the Spirit of GOD; yet in vain does he look for happiness, when death shall
proclaim him a sinner against GOD. Upon the whole, man at his best estate, is
altogether vanity. So when our Father Adam had but two sons in the world, the
name of one of them, and the best of them too, was Abel, that is vanity. And
being dead he yet speaks this great truth, that the best of the sons of Adam
are vanity, that man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Vanity! that is a
bubble, a bladder of wind and water sluttering in the air, fair indeed, of most
correct and perfect shape, exactly round, high and shining: but hollow, frail,
easily and suddenly broken, gone in a moment, and remembered no more. And what
is your life but such a gilded vapor, appearing for a little time and then
vanishing away.

VANITY! what is that? In the language of scripture it is a strange sort of a
thing: I would rather say, of a word. A nonentity, more thin than a chimera,
more unsubstantial than a shadow: less than nothing and vanity. And yet this is
the condition of man; all nations of men! every man at his best estate! Are we
now ready to improve the doctrine? And from what we have heard, we infer,

1. IF in his best estate man is altogether vanity, no wonder he is so in his
common and his worst estate. In his sicknesses he may well possess months of
vanity. Job vii. 3. In pain, ignominy, and reproach; in the vicissitudes of
providence, and the little portions of comfort, with the deep mixtures of
afflictions, he may well be called vain, and see and acknowledge it himself.

2. Is every man at his best estate vanity -- O the mercy of GOD to regard man!
What are we before him? Worms! that is too much, dust and ashes! that is too
much; nothing! that is too much; less than nothing and vanity. What is man that
thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him? Even the
angels are little before him, and he charges them with foolishness: But man is
lower than they, nay altogether vanity: And yet, O the amazing notice he takes
of us! Herein is goodness and condescension mysterious and inconceivable!

3. Is man at his best estate vanity -- O the grace of CHRIST to become man!
What a wonder was it that he should take this nature into one person with the
Son of GOD! He took the nature, under all its vain circumstances, excepting
that one article, sin. He became the same frail, and brittle, and mortal man
that we now are. Here now was man at his best estate, and yet hear what he
says, Psalm. xxii. 6. But I am a worm and no man. How strange grace was this,
that he who was all the fullness of the godhead bodily, should thus empty
himself, and wear such an appearance of vanity, in the nature of man? And yet
so it was, and he cries out under it, Psalm. cii. 2. My days are like a shadow
that declineth. Thus our LORD made himself of no reputation, and took upon him
the form of a servant, and all this for our salvation.

4. From what we have heard, we infer, pride was not made for man. So empty, so
frail, so deceitful a thing, to boast and glory, and admire itself: This is
vanity with a witness! A creature dropping to dust, and falling into a filthy
grave, to set up for strength and beauty, honor and applause! Was ever any
thing more absurd and ridiculous? So might an emmit crawl in state, and value
itself upon its imaginary possessions, and conceited accomplishments: So might
a shadow, lengthened by the setting sun, admire to find itself grown so tall,
while in the same moment it was going to vanish, blended in the gathering
twilight, and lost in night and darkness. Far be from such thin appearances
pride, ambition, or vain glory.

5. WHAT a vain world is this, when man, the very head of it, is altogether
vanity? So some read the text: Surely all is vanity, every man at his best
estate.

AND methinks it is no unfair conclusion, if man, the noblest creature on the
earth, is altogether vanity, the earth itself must needs be a vain empty place.
There Is the appearance of good here: but it is not at all the less vain for
that; but rather the more so. -- So Satan showed our LORD all the kingdoms of
the world, and all the glory of them, in a moment of time; and it was well he
did so; for had he not seen them in a moment, the show would all have been
over. For the fashion of this world passes away.

6. AND to conclude: Let us not trust to any thing in this world. Trust not in
man: for wherein is he to be accounted of. Cursed be the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his arm. Not the wisest, the greatest, the best of men,
are fit for our steady confidence: Trust not in princes, whose breath is in
their nostrils. His breath goes forth, be returns to his earth, and in that
very day his thoughts perish. Trust not in uncertain riches, or in a frail
life. Jam. iv. 13, 14. Go to now ye that say, today or tomorrow we will go
into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain:
Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? It is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. O
awakened soul, look back, and reflect inward, and say, I have now seen an end
of all perfection. From this time will I seek a better country, that is an
heavenly. O blessed JESUS, from thy sulness let me receive, and grace upon
grace. These things are but for a season: But JESUS CHRIST, the same yesterday,
today, and forever.

THUS I have finished what I intend on my subject in general: But what an
illustration and example has the providence of heaven now given of it in the
funeral of the Honorable Mr. DUMMER. In him we have, in many respects, seen
man at his best estate: while the great GOD, has, by the dart of death, fixed on
it the inscription, VANITY. How nobly, for a shining course of years, did he
fill the first chair of government in the province, with superior wisdom, and,
I think, unrivalled acceptance and applause! How did he retire from it,
followed with the gratitude and blessings of a whole people! In the calm
leisure of his recess, in what amiable and venerable lights did he shine in his
domestic and amicable connections! His steady family devotions, his stated
retirements to his closet, his applications to the entertaining and pious pages
of various kinds, his friendly entertainments, and his works of piety and
charity, filled up his useful hours. This church can witness to the constancy
and solemnity of his exemplary attendance on the divine worship: while his
honors to CHRIST will be still seen here, on the communion table, and in the
costly volume from which the word of GOD is read every Lord's Day. His death
was of a piece with his life, in the large donations to public and pious uses
in his last will. So he shone living and dying: And what a striking instance of
man at his best estate! -- But lift up the lid of the coffin, and see what is
come of all that was mortal. Is this he whom we remember in the politeness and
dignity of former years! How broken with long disease! with excruciating pains!
with age! with death! Is this the unblemished magistrate, the PATRIOT GOVERNOR;
loyal to his prince, and the father to his country! How changed from him in the
busy scenes and enterprise of active life! now lying still and quiet, sleeping
and at rest; with kings and counselors of the earth, which built desolate
places for themselves. Deaf and unconscious is he to all the honors of his
applauding country. The immortal mind indeed remains, and remains to pronounce
vanity upon all that is not immortal. Duty and affection have obliged me thus
much to the deceased: But the business of the pulpit is with the living.

SEE, you in the elevated stations of life, the period of all your glory. So
you die like men, and fall as one of the princes. You in advanced years, if you
reach fourscore, see it is labor and sorrow: soon cut off and you fly away.
You, the mourning relatives of the departed, will you prepare to mingle your
dust with his? Will you be ambitious to meet him in a fairer inheritance? While
we who were happy in his friendship and affection, complain with you, lover and
friend have thou put far from me, and my acquaintance into darkness. Will you
all attend, my brethren, the high and the low, the rich and the poor together;
see the end of man, and the living lay it to heart: while the preacher himself,
upon the survey of the whole, now pronounces, and closes all the argument,
Eccl. the first and the last verses, Vanity of vanities, says the preacher,
vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter; fear GOD, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole of man.

FINIS.
EXTRACT from the BOSTON NEWSPAPERS, October 26th, 1761.
DEPARTED this life, the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire in the 84th year of his
age; and on the 16th his funeral was attended with every mark of respect due to
so eminent a person.

SCARCE any one ever passed through life with a more unspotted character, or
performed it is various duties with more universal esteem. In the gayest scenes
of youth, he was preserved from the destructive paths of vice; and in maturer
age, was a shining example of the most amiable virtues.

IN the beginning of the reign of GEORGE I. he was appointed our lieutenant
governor. Upon the return of Colonel SHUTE to Great Britain, the chief command
of the province devolved upon him. In this station he appeared with
distinguished luster. The wise, incorrupt, and successful administration of Mr.
DUMMER, will always be remembered with honor, and confider'd as a pattern worthy
of the imitation of all future governors. -- Uninfluenced by party prejudices,
superior to all mercenary attachments, he discovered no passion in his public
character, but love to his country, and fidelity to his royal master.

HAVING filled the chair for several years, with dignity and usefulness; when a
successor was appointed, he retired to enjoy the unenvied satisfactions of a
private life; with the approbation of a good conscience, and the applause of
his country.

IN his domestic character, he ever appeared the affectionate husband, -- the
indulgent master, -- the benevolent friend.

INSPIRED with a profound veneration of the supreme Being -- firmly attached to
the religion of JESUS: he received its doctrines with submission, attended its
institutions with reverence, and practiced its precepts with uniformity.

IN the midst of human grandeur, he discovered the vanity of the world, in its
brightest appearances; and made it the great business of life, to prepare for
an holy and happy death. -- He perceived his body sinking under the infirmities
of age, without amazement; and waited with patience for the appointed time,
when it should return to its original dust. -- He saw eternity approaching, and
redoubled his diligence, that he might be ready for the coming of his LORD. --
In health and sickness, he often declared his hope of the divine acceptance was
built upon the merits and mediation of JESUS CHRIST, whom he adored as the true
GOD, and only SAVIOR of men.

WHILE he lived, his prayers, and his alms, continually ascended for a memorial
before GOD: At his death, he left a great part of his estate to pious and
charitable uses. Having served his generation by the will of GOD, he fell
asleep, in a joyful expectation of a resurrection to etternal life.


