A SERMON ON THE BEAUTY of HOLINESS, IN THE WORSHIP of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
BEING A very brief Rationale on the LITURGY. Preached at Stratford in
Connecticut, and at the opening of Christ's Church at Guilford.

By SAMUEL JOHNSON, D. D. Sometime Missionary from the Society for Propagation
of the Gospel, etc. Now President of King's College at New York.

Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, forever.

Ps. xcvi. 6. Cujuscis hominis est errare, nullius nisi insipie^tis in errore
p^rseverare.

CIC. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER and CO^^ at the New
Printing-Office in (...) 1761

ADVERTISEMENT.
HAVING lately published a small Tract, on the Reasonableness and Importance of
the great Duty of Prayer, and a diligent Attendance on the public Worship;
(which, I thank God has been attended with some good Effect) it was thought
advisable, as a Sequel to that, to publish this short Rationale on the
Excellency and Beauty of our public Liturgy: And I beg Leave, as a Testimony of
my good Will, to recommend it to the Attention of the good People of
New England, and particularly of Stratford, to whom I administered for above
thirty Years; and also of West-Chester to whom I officiated for a considerable
Time, and those of New York, by whom I have been kindly accepted and treated as
their Lecturer for seven Years; that they may with the better Understanding and
Affections, offer up their Devotions, in the public Use of this excellent
Liturgy; being truly

Their affectionate Friend and Servant in Christ, S. J.
King's College, May 25, 1761.
Of the Beauty of HOLINESS in the WORSHIP of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
PSALM. XCVI. 9. O! worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, --


IT is a common Mistake which has too much prevailed in these Times, and in
this Country, and that even among some well-meaning People, that they seem to
account the Hearing of Sermons, to be the principal and most important and
edifying Part of the public Worship of GOD. Hence, as it is very likely that
Some, heretofore, left the Church under the Notion that they could elsewhere
meet with, what was then, though with very little Reason, called the most
powerful Preaching; so Others may have conformed to the Church, principally,
from being sensible (especially in the late Times of Confusion) that the
Doctrines of Christianity were more truly, more purely, and in a more
instructive Manner taught in the Church than out of it. In which they indeed
judged very rightly; and this was, among others, a very good Reason for their
conforming to it. And as this was the principal Occasion with Many, of their
coming over to us, so it is not unlikely that there may be Some, with whom the
Worship of the Church, after all, may seem but tolerable for the sake of the
Doctrine, and they may not, even yet, have any high Sense of the Excellency of
it, and its vast Preference to the extempore Way.

ON the other Hand, it is very probable, that there are but too many of Those
who have been bred up, and lived all their Days in the Bosom of the Church, and
in the Use of its public Worship; who, partly by Reason of the Commonness of
it, and partly their Negligence, and for Want of giving a due Attention to the
Propriety and Excellency of every Part of it; may not be sufficiently sensible
what a Pearl of inestimable Price they enjoy, nor duly thankful for it: As they
daily breathe in the Air, and enjoy the Sun, and the Beauties and Fruits of the
Earth, without being so deeply sensible of these wonderful Favors and
Blessings of Providence, (by Reason of the Commonness of them, and their own
strange Incogitancy) or being so affectionately thankful for them, as the vast
Worth and Importance of them do most reasonably deserve and require.

WHAT I aim at, therefore, in the following Discourse, is to awaken us all,
both of the one and the other Sort, to a just Sense of the intrinsic Worth and
Excellency of that Method of worshipping God our Heavenly Father, which we are
so happy as to enjoy in the Church of England; that we may be affectionately
thankful to his kind Providence for so ordering Things as to give us the
inestimable Advantage of it; that we may give the stronger Attention to the
Propriety and Usefulness of every Part of it; and that our Souls may be filled
with the greater Devotion and Edification in the Use of it; as being sensible
that we do truly worship God in the Beauty of Holiness, and are under the
greatest Advantage of growing up in Holiness and Comfort through Faith unto
eternal Salvation.

IT is indeed an unspeakable Advantage that we enjoy by the preaching of God's
Holy Word, and particularly in this excellent Church, in that we have it
explained to us in the clearest and most intelligible Manner, and that
according to the original Simplicity of the Gospel. That being freed from human
Schemes and Devices, we are set at Liberty from all those idle absurd and
groundless Notions of God and the Gospel, which, both tend to give us hard and
unworthy Apprehensions of the Father of Mercies, and to make his Gospel, (the
plainest and best Thing in the World) a mere unintelligible Riddle, almost void
of common Sense; and at the same Time, to weaken and enervate it is most
powerful Motives to the utmost Vigor and Activity on our Part, and to
discourage our earnest Prayers and Endeavors, by filling us with endless
Doubts and Fears, and dark Surmizes and Despondencies: For in the Church we are
led to attend to nothing but the plain Language and Meaning of the Holy Ghost;
and have all the most salutary Doctrines, Precepts, Promises and Threatenings of
the Gospel so clearly set before us, and the Way of our Duty and the Road to
everlasting Happiness made so plain, that he that ^u^s may read, and the
wayfaring Man though a Feel cannot err therein: This I say is an unspeakable
Happiness, and we ought to prize it beyond Gold, even the finest Gold, and to
taste a Sweetness in it beyond that of Honey, and the Honey Comb, and make
Conscience of diligently attending upon it; but yet strictly speaking,
preaching is not to be considered as being properly a Part of the public
Worship, but rather as an Appendage to it.

FOR the proper Notion of Worshipping God, consists in praising him for all his
Benefits, and praying to him for whatsoever we want both for Soul and Body, and
in devoting ourselves to his true and faithful Service: In all which we do, as
it were, converse with the great Father of our Spirits, and have the nearest
Intercourse with him that our Souls are capable of; and consequently should put
the greatest Value upon it, as the principal End of our meeting together at the
House of God; and that we may openly and jointly do all the Honor we can to
him our common heavenly Father. So that if there were no Sermon at all, we
should go together to the public Offices of Prayer and Praise, with not a Whit
the less Zeal and Forwardness; forasmuch as our Business there, is, not to hear
any new Thing, but to do our Duty to our great Creator, and Benefactor;
especially since the Reading of God's Holy Word is a great Part of our public
Worship, and that, vastly preferable to any human Composition or Preaching
whatsoever.

LET us then learn to value Things in Proportion to the real Worth of them, and
prefer the Worship of the Church, for the solid intrinsic Worth and Importance
of it, before any the most eloquent Preaching: Wh^^^, I (...) it there were no
Pre^hing, or ^one very g^od, (...) Many that would hardly think it worth their
While to go to Church merely to worship God, though that is by far the most
valuable and important Part of our public Service. And we ought to account it
a very great Advantage and Excellency of our Church, that her public Worship
is always the same, and equally excellent, even the best in the World,
howsoever indifferent the Capacity or Abilities of the Minister may be,
considered as a Preacher. In order therefore that we may highly prize it, and
make a serious and conscientious Use of it, and think ourselves very happy in
it; I proceed, from the Words I have read, to explain and point out to you, the
real Worth and Excellency of it; and in Conformity to it, call upon you all, as
I truly may, in the Words of the holy Psalmist, O! Worship the Lord in the
Beauty of Holiness.

KING David was one of the greatest Patterns of true Devotion that ever lived,
as well as one of the best Com^^ers of Public Forms for the right Exercise of
it: And it is to be remarked, that his admirable Compositions have stood the
Test of Time, and been constantly used both by the Jewish and Christian Church,
as forms of public Worship, for at least 2750 Years, which abundantly speaks
the Excellency of them. We indeed can use only a Translation of them, and that
we use, may (chiefly through Length of Time and Alteration in our Language,)
need a few Emendations; and those that know the Original, are very sensible
that no Translation can come up to the noble Simplicity and Grandeur of the
original Language: However the Translation we have, generally carries in it
such an inimitable Majesty, and intelligible Simplicity, that no modern
Compositions can be compared with it. I say this holy King was one of the
greatest Patterns of Devotion that ever lived.

FOR though the Materials for Devotion, then, were much short of what they are
now, under the more clear Christian Dispensation* yet he seems to have had such
a Spirit of Devotion, as put him into a Kind of Rapture at the Thoughts of it.
I was glad, says he, when they said, come let us go up to the House of the
Lord, etc. And again One Thing have I desired, and that will I seek after, that
I might dwell in the House of the Lord all the Days of my Life, to behold the
fair Beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple. And, Lord, says he, I
have l^ved the Habitation of thy House, and the Place where thine Honor
dwells; and again, One Day in thine House is bett^r than a Thousand: I had
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of
Wickedness; for the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, and he will give Grace and
Glory, and no good Thing will be withh^ld from them that w^^k uprightly. And as
his Soul was thus full of the Spirit of Devotion, which in^^ed appears every
where in his Psalms, so he takes Occasion from innumerable and various
Occurences to express it in these his divine O^^s: And never was Zeal and
Generosity like his in providing for building the House of God, and in framing
and establishing Orders for the decent Administration of the public Worship,
as appears from the latter Chapters of the ^d Book of Samuel, and the first
Book of Chronicles. And it is plain from this Psalm, compared with that
admirable Hymn in 1 Chronicles. xvi. given out on Occasion of his establishing the
public Worship, in which th^se very Words are contained, v. 29. that it is the
public Worship regularly established, that he means by the Beauty of Holiness.
We find these Words also in the 29th Psalm, which was doubtless made upon
Occasion of some remarkable Thunder Storm, wherein he does, in a most sublime
Manner, celebrate the Majesty and Glory of God, displaying itself in Thunder,
which he elegantly calls the Voice of the Lord, addressing himself to the great
People of the Earth, and calling upon them to admire and adore the Majesty of
the Divinity, Give unto the Lord, O ye Mighty! give unto the Lord Glory and
Strength. Give unto the Lord, the Gl^^^ due unto his Name, and worship the Lord
in the Beauty of Holiness. And in this Psalm, he does in the same Words call
upon all Nations, even the Heathen, as well as his own People, to celebrate the
Glory of the great Author o^ all Things, after a general Invitation to declare
his Glory among the Heathen, his Wonders among all People; very likely with a
prophetical View at the Propagation of Christianity* He adds, For the Lord is
great and greatly to (...) praised, It is (...) be feared abov^ all Gods: For
the Gods of the Nations are Idols, but the Lord made the Heavens; (...) and
Majesty are before (...), Strength and Beauty are in his Sanctuary; give unto
the Lord, O ye Kindreds of the People; give unto the Lord Glory and Strength;
give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, bring (...) and come into his
Presence; O wors^^p the Lord (...) Beauty of Holiness; fear before him all the
Earth. (...) these Words therefore, which thus a^^^ar to have ^n frequently
used in the most ancient public Worth^ of God appointed by David, and
continued down through such a vast Tract of Time, I shall take Occasion to
explain to you the Excellency of our Worship in the Church of England; which
follows the most ancient Church of God both Jewish and Christian, and many of
whose Forms are taken from the most pure and primitive Liturgies, and which
indeed, as Mr. Bingham shows ^
, obtained from the Beginning of Christianity; being on many Accounts the most
pure and primitive Church, at this Day upon the Face of the Earth. And as there
are three Things obvious in the Text, viz. 1. The Worship of God. 2, The
Holiness of that Worship. And, 3. The Beauty of that Holiness* I shall; I. Show
that in the Church of England we do most truly worship Almighty God. II. That
our Worship is a most holy Worship, and tends to promote Holiness in the best
Manner. And, III. That it is a most beautiful Worship, and is truly worshipping
God in the Beauty of Holiness.


I. In the Church of England we do most truly worship Almighty God. For Worship
consists in a most serious and s^l^mn Address to the great Creator, Preserver,
and Governor of the World; testifying from the Bottom of our Hearts our
Dependence upon Him, and Submission to Him; praising Him for every Thing we
enjoy, praying to Him for whatsoever we want, and devoting ourselves sincerely
and entirely to his Service Now all th^se Things are abundantly provided for in
our Forms, as I shall show you presently: And that in the best Manner, which is
certainly best done by public Forms, established by lawful Authority, and known
and agreed to by all the Worshippers. -- For how can I worship God with the
full Devotion of my Soul, unless I have beforehand satisfied myself with what I
am to offer up? -- And how can a worshipping Assembly jointly and with one
Heart and Soul, and with a full Assurance of Faith, offer up their Prayers and
Praises to God, unless they have properly a Common Prayer, and are beforehand
all satisfied that what is to be offered is both agreeable to the Will of God,
and suitable to their common Necessities and Occasions? And how can they
otherwise offer up their public Devotions agreeable to Christ's express
Instructions, who plainly requires, they should be agreed touching what they
would ask, as a Condition of their receiving it? Mat. xviii. 19. If two of you
shall agree on Earth, as touching any Thing they shall ask, it shall be done
for them of my Father which is in Heaven, If there were a Number of us to ask a
Favor of an earthly Prince or Governor, we should be very careful and exact in
composing our Address; we should take great Care that it be well worded, and
that we be all fully agreed beforehand, both in the Matter and Manner of our
Address: How much more when we are to address the great God of Heaven and
Earth, and that for the Life, even the eternal Life of our Souls? How fit and
necessary is it, that we should accurately compose our Address, and be
beforehand well agreed and satisfied, both in the Matter and Manner of it; so
as to have nothing to do when we come to offer it, but to offer up our whole
Souls with it, and make it our most devout free Act and Deed?

ON which Account, though I would by no Means uncharitably censure any, yet I
must think that the best that can be said of the extemporary Way used by our
Dissenting Brethren, is, that it is indeed a very imperfect Way of Worship, and
can never be justified. For as to him that offers it up, how can he perform it
with true Devotion, when he can scarce be said to be agreed beforehand with
himself what to offer; and the chief Force of his Mind which should be employed
in Devotion, must be taken up while he is speaking, in inventing what to say,
and how to express it? And it is much if he does not make some shocking
Blunders, besides the Loss of his Devotion. A great and good Man Mr. W^ (...).
, who was an excellent Judge in Things of this Nature, declared it his Opinion,
That a Prayer is one of the most difficult Compositions that a Man can set
himself about, (...) perform it with Just^^^s and Propriety; meaning only in
Composing it beforehand: How surprising a Thing then is it that any one can
have the Assurance to trust to unpre^^^^tated ^^^^sions on so serious and
solemn an Occasion as that of addressing the great and tremendous God? Who does
in effect, strictly forbid it, in Eccl. v. 2. Be not r^ thy Mouth, and let not
thy Heart be hasty to utter any Thing before God: For God is in Heaven, and
thou upon Earth, therefore let thy Words be (...).

AND then, as to the People who are to join in his Prayer, how can they be
agreed to join with it, when they know not what it will be? They cannot be
agreed in it, unless they have an implicit Faith in their Minister, like the
Roman Catholics, so as to think him in some Sort infallible. And indeed this
was the original Notion of what we call extemporary Prayer. It wa^ pretended
that their Prayers were immediately dictated by the Spirit of God, and
therefore they must be infallible. But there are Few, I trust now, that have
such an idle Notion of them; and how they should be so misled as to continue
the Use of them, I c^^not conceive. For as they do not now pretend to be (...),
the People must consider after the Minister (...) uttered each Petition,
whether they can agree to it before they can offer it up as their own Act,
without which it is no Act of Worship in them; and while they do this, he is
gone along in his Prayer, and they have lost what he has been uttering in the
Interim; which demonstrates that this is a very ill-judged and confused Way of
Worship, and i^ (...) being a Help, that it is a Hindrance to true Devotion,
which accordingly seems in great Danger of being (...) among them: while they
are apt to think it is the Minister's Business to pray, and their's only to
hear him, and not to pray themselves, and many are tempted to g^^e about
instead of praying.

BUT how happy are we, my Brethren, who have a most ^xcellent Form prepared for
us, by some of the wisest and ^est Men that ever lived, and many of whom
underwent ^he Fire of Martyrdom for what they did? I say, that we ^ave, by them
an excellent Form of public Devotion com^iled for us, chiefly out of the Word
of God, and conformed ^o it, in which, therefore, if we believe the Scriptures,
we must ^e perfectly agreed and satisfied; so that when we come to worship God
in public, we have nothing else to do but to ^^epare our Hearts, and give up
our whole Souls, and (...) the utmost Force of our Minds and Hearts in offering
(...) up to our Heavenly Father; and so can with one Mind and one Mouth,
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord jesus Christ, as St. Paul requires,
Romans xv. 16. (which is ^^rcely possible in the extempore Way) and which we
plainly see to be a true Method of Worship, as it contains ^raises to God for
every Thing we enjoy, both Temporal and Spiritual, and Prayers for every Thing
we can wa^, ^ther for Soul or Body, either for ourselves or others. Let us
therefore be heartily thankful to God's good Providence, that we have such an
excellent Method of public Worship, and let us make a faithful Use of it to
the best Purposes; in order to which, let each one have his Book, and keep it
in his Eye, the better to engage his Attention; that avoiding all indecent
gazing about, we may make it ^he Business of our Souls, in the House of God, to
offer it ^p with the sincerest and most intense Devotion; which we ^ay the
rather do, as knowing,

II. THAT our Worship is a most holy Worship, and ^nds in the best Manner to
promote Holiness, both in our Hearts and Lives: And Holiness becomes thy House,
O Lord, ^or ever. Now Holiness c^^sists in being heartily devoted to God, so as
to hate what he hates, and love what he loves; and in being concerned above all
Things to be conformed to his Purity, Righteousness, Goodness and Truth. As
therefore God hates all Sin and Wickedness, that must be a most ^oly Worship
that testifies the utmost Abhorrence of every Thing sinful, wicked and impure:
And as he loves (...) Purity, Righteousness, Truth, Goodness and Mercy, that
must be a most holy Worship that tends to make us love and practice every Thing
that is pure and holy, true and righteous, kind and merciful. And as the Love
of God is the Foundation of all Religion and Virtue, that must be a most holy
Worship that tends to inspire us with the supreme Love of God, which will
dispose us to do Him the utmost Honor, and make us like Him, and as obedient
to Him as ever we are able. By these Principles then let us try the Worship of
the Church of England.

1. AND first, as to the negative Part of Holiness, which consists in hating
and avoiding all Sin and Wickedness, which God hates; what can more effectually
tend to this, than to begin with those Declarations of holy Scripture, from
whence we may abundantly learn the Necessity of true Repentance, the
Impossibility of Pardon without it; and the Assurance of God's Pardon and Mercy
upon our true Repentance? And what can better tend to this Purpose, than the
excellent Exhortation which the Minister thereupon makes, to put us upon the
Exercise of such a Repentance, by confessing and forsaking our Sins that we may
obtain Mercy? And what can more effectually tend to make us abhor our Sins and
reform our Lives, than to begin our Worship with such a serious solemn Act of
Confession of Sin, and imploring God's Mercy and Pardon in Jesus Christ, as is
expressed in that exce^^^nt comprehensive Form, which our holy Mother the
Church has put into our Mouths; upon which the Minister is directed to declare
God's Pardon to every true Penitent. By which she teaches all her Children,
that if they would look for the Acceptance of all their following Prayers and
Praises, they should begin with such a solemn Act of renewing their Repentance,
in Order to obtain God's Pardon and Acceptance, without which their Worship
will be but mocking God: For if they regard Iniquity in their Hearts, the Lord
will not hear their Prayers; and if they persist in their Wickedness, without
Repentance, their Prayers and all their Services are an Abomination to (...) On
which Account I beseech you, as far as possible, to make Conscience of coming
in Season, that you may have Opportunity, by such an Act of Repentance, to
(...) your Pardon, and the Acceptance of your following Services to the other
Parts of Worship; and in order there^^to, to perf^rm this Confession in the
most serious and truly penitent Manner: And that you may be the more affected
with it, you are wisely directed, every one, to repeat it with his own Mouth,
that he may make it his own Act and Deed, recollecting in his Mind, with true
Contrition, his own particular Sins and Infirmities. And what is said of this,
is equally true of the Confession and Absolution in the Communion Office. And
as this must have the best Tendency to make us hate and avoid all Sin and
Wickedness; so the same is the Design of those Petitions in the Litany, wherein
we pray God to deliver us from the Power and Guilt of all those Sins that are
there particularly named; than all which, nothing can more effectually tend to
promote this Part of Holiness, which consists in hating and forsaking our Sins.

II. And then secondly, as to the positive Part of Holiness, which consists in
being devoted to God, to be like Him, and that from a Sense of Duty, and in
Submission and Obedience to his Will; what can more tend to promote this, than
all the other Parts of our Worship in their Order? Particularly,

1. The Lord's Prayer, which is the most wonderfully comprehensive, and on
every Account the most excellent Form of Prayer that was ever composed in the
World; and which our Lord has made, as it were, the Badge of his Disciples: On
which Account it cannot be sufficiently wondered at, that any that call
themselves his Disciples, should not think themselves obliged in Conscience to
use it, since he has expressly commanded us, when we pray to say, Our Father,
etc. especially since nothing can more effectually tend to promote universal
Holiness, than the frequent and serious offering it up in our Devotions. F^r
therein we address GOD, as our heavenly Father, which strongly teaches and
obliges us to be his holy and obedient Children. Therein we pray for whatever
may tend to promote his Glory, and our own best Good and Happiness, both
Temporal and Spiritual. Particularly, we pray that we and all the World may
Hallow, or do all the Honor we possibly can to his holy Name, both by Word and
Deed. That his Kingdom may come, and rule in all our Hearts, which is a Kingdom
of universal Holiness, into which no unclean or unholy Thing can ever enter.
And that we on Earth, may all, in every Thing, learn to do and submit to his
holy Will, as the Saints and Angels do in Heaven, that we may be forever holy
and happy with them. We next testify our entire Dependence upon God, by praying
for our daily Bread, i. e. for our Preservation, and whatsoever is needful for
our comfortable Subsistence; which Sense of our Dependence is a great Principle
of true Holiness. We next pray for the Forgiveness of all our Sins,
whereinsoever we have been unholy in Heart or Life; and that we may be
qualified for God's Pardon, it must be supposed that we have truly repented of
them; and we are here taught to testify our hearty Forgiveness of others,
without which we dare not look for Forgiveness from Him; which is another great
Article of that Holiness, in Imitation of him, without which no Man shall see
the Lord. We then pray that he would keep us from all Temptation, to every kind
of Sin or Unholiness; and that he would save and deliver us from all Evil; both
the Evil of Sin, and the Evil of Punishment; both from the Power and Guilt of
Sin here, and the Wrath and Displeasure of God hereafter, that we may be secure
of his everlasting Favor. And lastly, in Dependence upon Him, and
Acknowledgment to Him for all that we ask of Him, we ascribe unto Him, the
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever. To which, as to all our Prayers,
according to the Scripture Pattern we add a joint vocal Amen. Than all which,
nothing can more abundantly tend to promote universal Piety and Holiness.

2. HAVING made this Entrance on the public Worship of God, we proceed to the
Celebration of his Praises in the Psalms of holy David, and other devout Hymns,
taken out of the New Testament, and that admirable Christian Hymn called Te
Deum, between the Lessons; all which breathe nothing but Holiness, Devotion and
Purity. For they do either celebrate the Glories, Perfections, and Operations
of God, in his wonderful Works of Creation, Providence, or Redemption; or
express our Sense of our entire Dependence upon Him, and innumerable
Obligations to his infinite Goodness; our Abhorrence of every Thing displeasing
to Him, or our Resolution to be in all Things obedient to his Will; or explain
the Duty and Happiness of every Virtue, or the Baseness, Perverseness and
Misery of every Vice; or open the glorious Views both of God's Kingdom of
Grace, and his Kingdom of Glory, and teach us the Practice and Experience of
all those heavenly Graces which are necessary to qualify us for an Interest in
the Glories, and Felicities thereof. These, and such as these, are the noble
Subjects of those sublime Odes, all which are in effect, nothing else but
universal Holiness to the Lord. So that the Psalms are a most copious
Storehouse of Devotion, consisting of an endless and most beautiful Variety.

3. AFTER the Psalms, come the Lessons, taken out of the holy Scripture; and
under this Head, I may also mention the Epistles and Gospels, all being a
Variety of select and most instructive Portions of the holy Oracles, which are
best adapted to instruct the People in the Knowledge of Divine and Heavenly
Things, and to improve them in Devotion and Holiness; being all of them
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that not only the Man of God, but even every Christian, may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good Works. For in them, either some
Article of Faith, or Rule of Life is explained and inculcated; or some ancient
Prophesy, or some Gospel Fact correspondent to it, or some miraculous
Operation, or remarkable Providence, or Example is set before us, etc. all
tending to confirm our Faith and Hope, and to train us up in the blessed Trade
of holy Living, for a happy Immortality, which is the whole Design and Business
of this heavenly School, the House of God; to which the public Reading of the
Word of God is so admirably subservient, that it is extremely surprising that
any Christians, for the sake of tedious long Sermons, and extempore Prayers,
which are but mere human Performances, should justle out the Psalms, and
reading the Scriptures, except here and there a little Scrap of them. This
sure, if any Thing may be called imposing the Inventions of Men in the Worship
of God; for I believe it may be truly said, (with regard to many of their
Assemblies at least) that there are twenty Times as much Scripture in one of
our Services, as in one of theirs.

4. N^XT to the Lessons, I may mention the Creeds a^ another Part of our public
Worship, which also vastly tend to promote Piety and Holiness, and therefore
ought by all Means to be openly recited when we worship God. For as with the
Heart, Men bel^^veth unto Righteousness, so with the Mouth, Con^^ssion is made
unto Salvation. Th^^e Creeds are only brief Summaries of the Christian
Doctrine, so that nothing can seem more strange than that any Christian should
disapprove of them; and every Article (...) our most Holy Faith, is either a
Motive or Obligation to Holiness. -- For what can more tend to make us Holy,
than to believe that we and all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, do depend
entirely on God the Father Almighty, for both our Beings, and all we enjoy? --
What can more engage us to it, th^^ to believe in Jesus Christ; his only Son,
our Lord, who came in^^ our Nature, and taught us a most heavenly Doctrine, and
died a most bitter Death, to kill the Power and take away the Guilt of Sin; and
arose from the Dead, to confirm his Doctrine, and ascertain our Immortality,
and that we might thereby be induced to arise to a new and holy (...); and
ascended into Heaven, that we ^ight thereby be taught and obliged to mortify
our earthly Members, and (...) our Affections on Things above, where (...) the
right Hand of God? -- What can better tend (...) make us (...) of all our
Behavior, than to consider (...) give an Account of ourselves to him, when he
(...) to j^dge the Quick and the Dead? -- Especially if we consider f^rther,
that he has sent his Spirit, which is the Spirit of Holiness, to enable us to
mortify our Lusts and Passions, and to live as it becomes the redeemed of the
Lord, and to be as it were the universal Soul of his Church, and the Fountain
of all Spiritual Life to our Souls? -- And ho^ can we think of any Thing but
true Repentance, Faith (...) Holiness, when these are the Qualifications
indispensibly (...), to give us a Place in the holy Catholic Church of (...),
and to entitle us to the Forgiveness of our Sins, and ^^^^ling Life, and
Happiness in his heavenly Kingdom? -- (...) the Repetition of the several
Articles of our Holy (...) still d^^ve at the same blessed End, of promoting
Uni^^^^ Holi^^ss; whether it be done in that short Form of sound Winds, which
is called the Apostles' Creed, as being a Summary of the Apostles' Doctr^ne; or
in the Ni^^^^ Creed, which was agreed upon as a Summary of the Catholic
Doctrine, within 250 Years after the Apostles' Times, by a general Council of
Bishops from all Parts of the Christian Church; or in the other Creed which was
formed to bear Testimony against the chief Heresies, which in^^sted the Church
in those and the following Ages.

5. LET us in the next Place observe, that the same Design of promoting all
Manner of Holiness is the P^^se and Tendency of all our Prayers in our public
Off^^^, particularly the Collects and Litany. Every one of our Collects aim at
promoting true Holiness, either by praying for some particular Grace, or
Deliverance from some Temptation, Sin or Calamity. And as to the Litany, (which
Word means a Supplication) nothing can be devised or imagined more conducive to
promote Devotion and Holiness, than that most excellent, that most devout and
comprehensive Form of public Devotion. For therein we pray, not only for
Deliverance from every Sin and Calamity, but also for Grace to perform every
Duty; and we ^ot only testify and exercise our Devotion in praying for
ourselves, for every Thing needful both for our Souls and Bodies, but also our
Charity for others, in praying for them, even for all Men, whether Friends or
Enemies; and at the same Time we show our solicitious Concern for the public
Weal, in praying both for the whole Church, and for the King and all that are
in Authority, both in Church and State, that under them we may l^^d quiet and
peace^^^ Lives in all Godliness and Honesty; and our tender Con^^^^ for the
Distresses of our fellow Christians, in praying for (...) that are under any
kind of Affliction, Whether (...) Body or Estate. In a Word, therein we pray
for (...) of Men, whether they be Ministers of Religion or Just^^^ and for all
Conditions of Men, whether they be in Prosperity or Adversity; so very
particular and compreh^^sive are our Supplications in the Litany, together with
the Prayers and Thanksgiving annexed to it, both i^ gen^^^l, and for a Variety
of particular Occasions. So (...) that she has not done, in providing for the
public Devotions; especially since she has by the Canon allowed the Minister
a discretionary Liberty of expressing himself in the Prayer before the Sermon.

AND under this Head we may take Notice of the Wisdom and Goodness of the
Church, in the Appointment of the several Festivals and Pasts, and in the
Provision that is made for them: In which, once in the Course of every Year, we
commemorate each of the several Steps of our Redeemer, in the Restoration of
Mankind; his Incarnation, Birth, and Manifestation to the Gentiles; his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and the Mission of the Holy Ghost: For each of which,
there are suitable Prayers and Passages, collected from the Epistles and
Gospels. By which excellent Method we are led in the Course of each Year to
recollect ourselves more particularly upon each Article of our most holy Faith;
and moreover the Examples of the holy Apostles who propagated it through the
World, and suffered Martyrdom in Attestation to it. All which do evidently ^end
to the Advancement of Piety and Holiness.

6. THE same may be also most truly said of our Communion Office. In which,
what is there can more conduce to make us Holy in all Manner of Conversation,
than to have each of God's Holy Commandments rehearsed in a most grave and
solemn Manner, and for all the People, after every one of them, to pray for
God's Mercy to pardon their Offenses against it, and his Grace to incline their
Hearts to keep it for the future, and to write all his Laws in their Hearts?
And, as the Holy Sacrament is the most Divine and Heavenly Institution of our
Religion, and the most solemn Act of our Worship, the Design of which is, to
inspire our Souls with a most grateful Se^le of the mighty Love of our blessed
Lord and Master in dying for us, in order to destroy both the Power and Guilt
of Sin; and to seal a Pardon to us upon our true Repentance, and fill us with
the most ardent Devotion to God and our Lord Jesus, and the most affectionate
Charity one toward another; so the Manner of our administering and receiving
it in the Church is excellent beyond that of any others. For which we are
prepared, by a very suitable Exhortation and Confession of our Sins, with the
Declaration of our Pardon and the great and precious Promises whereof this
Sacrament is a Seal. We are then called upon to lift up our Hearts to God in
the most seraphic Form of Thanksgiving, wherein the Church militant on Earth
joins, and, as it were, ^^lds Communion with the holy Church triumphant which
is above; the Angels and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven; saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty; Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory;
Glory be to thee O Lord most High. Amen. The Elements are then consecrated or
set apart to represent the Body and Blood of Christ, in the gravest and most
solemn Manner, with the Words of our blessed Lord's Institution; and in the
Administration the inestimable Benefits of his Death are expressed in the
Delivery of them, to each particular Person, receiving the^ in the devoutest
Manner upon his Knees; which is the most decent Posture wherein to receive the
Seal of our Pardon. And lastly, the whole Office is concluded with devo^^ng
ourselves to God both in Body and Soul, in our Lord's Prayer and others, the
devoutest Prayers and Thanksgivings, and ends with an excellent Benediction;
than all which, I must think nothing can be imagined more conducive to train us
up in all Holiness, Devotion and Virtue for the Glories of the heavenly state.
I shall, for Brevity, add nothing here concerning the other Offices of our
public Worship; and will only say, that whoever will consider them with Candor
and Attention, will find them all, and especially those of Baptism,
Confirmation, and the Commination, abundantly conduce to the same blessed
Purpose. Thus I have briefly showed that our Worship is a most holy Worship, as
it abundantly provides for the promoting of Holiness. I proceed now to show,

III. THAT it is also a most beautiful Worship, and is truly worshipping God in
the Beauty of Holiness. i. e. That it not only every Way conduces to promote
all Manner of Holiness, but that it does it in the most beautiful and
advantageous Manner. For Beauty consists in the Fitness, Proportion, Variety
and Uniformity of Things with regard to the End designed in them. Now according
to this Definition, which, I think, expresses the true Notion of Beauty in all
other Things, our Worship in the Church of England m^st be allowed to be most
(...); particularly in the Fitness and Exc^^^^ry of its Language, -- the
Proportion of its Parts, -- the Variety of its (...), -- the Uniformity of its
Manner; -- the Gesture, (...), Poetry, and Music, all con^ributing to Devotion
and Holiness.

1. Our Worship is truly beautiful in its Language, which is very weighty and
expressive. It may, perhaps, be granted that in a few Passages it may be
capable of some Improvement; but in general, th^^ must be allowed to be the
Character of its Language, that is ^arrieth a great For^^ and Weight with it,
without either Deficiency or Redundancy, and is in the happy Me^^um between an
Affectation of Verbo^^ty, and high ^^own Figures, on the one Hand, and
Obscurity and Dullness, and a low, vulgar Meanness of Expression on the other.
It has a Grandeur and Majesty in i^, and at the same time, a most easy,
natural, intelligible Simplicity; always fitted to the Weight and Importance of
the Matter, and the Capacities of the whole Body of the Worshippers. If it
savours of Antiquity, and on that Account be thought not so polite to modern
Ears, yet this very Thing gives it an Air of the greater Gravity and
Importance, and there are but very few Expressions that are at all the less
intelligible, though it is nigh 200 Years old; and it adds much to its Beauty,
that it is expressed as far as it could well be, in the very Language of
Scripture, being an excellent Collection from the very Word of God, which is
ever full of Majesty and Grandeur. And as there cannot be a more decent and
beautiful Sight than to behold a great Number of intelligent Beings, the
Creatures and Children of God, jointly conspiring to do all the Honor they can
to him, their common Parent, in their (...) Adoration of him; so there is the
greatest Propriety and Fitness i^ it, and consequently the greatest Beauty,
that they should worship their heavenly Father in his own Language; in the
Words which he has put into their ^ouths. If therefore we love the Scriptures,
we cannot (...) to love the Worship of the Church of England, which is, for the
most Part, taken from them, and entirely conformed to them. But

^. It (...) to the Beauty of our excellent Liturgy, that (...) admirable
Proportion in all its Parts: insomuch that (...) so swelled or enlarged beyond
its Measure, as (...) out or starve another. There is a just Proportion of
(...) and Lessons, of Prayers and Praises, of Conf^^^^ and Dep^^cations, of
Supplications and Intercessions, of ^^^tions and Than^givings, for ourselves
and for all Men, the Kings, and all that are in Authority, and for all (...)
and Con^^tions of Men. -- And as all these Parts of (...), without Deficiency
or Redundancy, are thus so (...) fitted and proportioned one to the other, so
they (...) one End, to which they are no less aptly fitted and proportio^^d,
viz. to advance the Honor of God and the (...) Be^^fit of Mankind, and to
promote universal Ho^^ness and Righteousness among them; all which
Consider^tions abundantly speak their Harmony and Beauty. And

3. THIS Beauty is further mightily improved by that grateful Variety that
appears among them, which renders our Liturgy like a beautiful Garden, wherein
there is a delightful Variety of luxuriant Nature intermixed with curious Art^
of other various Plants with Trees; of Fruits with Flowers of diverse Sorts, all
ranged in a various and beautiful Order. In like Manner, in our Liturgy,
Devotions are gratefully intermixed with Lessons, and Prayers with Pr^^ses. The
People's Part is generally intermixed with the Minister's, and short Responses,
in the Form of Ejaculations, with set and continued Prayers, in which there is
an agreeable Variety, and the Prayers are each of them short, in Imitation of
our Lord's Prayer; and there is a correspondent Variety of Actions of the Body,
suited to this Variety of the Exercises of the Mind; all wisely contrived to
keep the Congregations wakeful, lively and attentive. This Method is therefore
vastly preferable to one tedious, long-continued Prayer, without any Variety,
as is the Case with our Neighbors, in which the People's Attention flags, and
they grow dull and heavy, and the Force of their Devotion is extremely
weakened. On which Account nothing should tempt me to exchange our beautiful
Variety of short Devotions, for their long, dull, and unva^ied Performances:
For such is our Frailty at best, that we need all the wise Precautions
imaginable to be used to keep our Minds vigorous, wakeful and attentive, both
by a Variety of Devotions and of bodily Worship, which is the true Intent of
all that beautiful Variety wherewith our Worship is attended; and which, in
Proportion as it attains those Ends, it may be truly styled, the Beauty of
Holiness. But,

4. Though there is such a grateful Variety in our Method of Worship, there is
nevertheless a most beautiful Uniformity therein prescribed, which if acted up
to, would vastly add to the Beauty and Excellency of it: Particularly in the
uniform Appearance and Gesture of the Body in the whole Assembly, prescribed to
each Part of Worship. This is made light of by many as a trivial Matter, but
herein they are certainly much in the wrong. St. Paul's reasoning is very
forcible to show the Necessity of bodily Worship, in 1 Cor. vi. 20. where he
tells us we are bought with a Price, meaning our Bodies as well as our Souls,
and that with no less a Price than the Blood of the Son of God, and therefore
it is most fit and reasonable that we should glorify God with our Bodies as
well as our Spirits, which are equally his; and of great Use is bodily
Adoration: The Eye is apt to affect the Heart, and the Liveliness and Activity
of our Bodies naturally awakens and enlivens our Minds. Hence the Church ha^
wisely thought fit to direct and prescribe the M^^^ons and Postures of our
Bodies as well as the Devotions of our Minds, that as St. Paul directs, 1 Cor.
xiv. 40, 26, all Things may be done decently and in Order. and for the Use of
edifying. Now the Postures of the Body I shall here mention are sitting,
standing and kneeling: Of these sitting is the farthest from betokening any
thing like Reverence or Devotion. For which Reason it is very strange that any
Christians should use that Posture either in Prayers or Sacraments, since
according to the common Acceptance of Mankind, nothing is understood to be
more disrespectful and irreverent, and therefore indecent and absurd. It is
indeed not improperly indulged while we are in a Condition of Hearers and
Learners, as in the Time of Sermon, but utterly inconsistent with the Condition
of Worshippers, in which Case standing or kneeling was always used by the
Church of God; and with good Reason; because the Posture or Action of the Body
was ever considered as a Kind of Language expressive of the inward Sense of the
Mind, and as such it is used in holy Scripture; where you observe that kneeling
is always the Posture of Prayer, and standing the Posture of Praise; which we
ought accordingly to observe, if we would express a due Regard to that glorious
Almighty Being whom we adore. For this Reason our Church, according to
Scripture, prescribes that we kneel at our Prayers and stand at our Praises.
Since therefore, Beauty implies Uniformity in the Midst of Variety, the Beauty
of Holiness in the Worship of God, must manifestly imply that according to the
Rules of the Church we should all act alike in one uniform Manner. If then,
there be not that Beauty of Uniformity in our Worship that were to be wished,
it is not because the Church does not prescribe it, but because we do not act
up to her Prescriptions. What can be more beautiful than a well-diciplined
Army, where all look one Way, all observe the same Motions, all act alike with
the utmost Exactness, according to the Word of Command. Now what is a Beauty
there, would be equally so in the public Worship, where, as well as in an Army,
all should be Life and Activity, Uniformity and Exactness, Decency and Order,
as if one Soul animated every Body. This would be indeed to worship God in the
Beauty of Holiness. Moreover,

5. As our Worship would be entirely beautiful if the Rules of it were observed
as to the Uniformity of Gesture; so I must think it another great Article in
its Beauty, that the People hear a uniform vocal Part in it, insomuch that we
do lit^erally, with one Mouth and Voice, as well as one Mind and Heart glorify
God our heavenly Father. For as there cannot be imagined a more beautiful Sight
than for a large Number of Worshippers to join together in Worship with one
Heart and Voice, like Children in doing Honor to a common Parent; so it looks
like a Kind of holy Strife, in our Method of joint vocal Worship, who shall do
the greatest Honor to our common heavenly Parent, while, keeping the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, we do, as it were, call upon one another, (the
Minister and the People interchangably) and admonish one another in the short
Responses, and in the Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, all with Life and
Spirit chaunting forth the high Praises of God. I am sensible, to those who
have been bred up in a contrary Way, this Method may seem at first to look like
Confusion; but let me assure those to whom it may so seem, that if they would
only have each his Book, and see every Thing with his own Eyes, and come a
little while into the Custom, this Objection would not only entirely vanish,
but soon turn into the Appearance of a very sensible Beauty, and be found to be
a solid Advantage. For not only the Eye, as I observed before, but also the Ear
would affect the Heart, and it would not only animate a Spirit of Devotion
toward God, but a Spirit of Charity toward one another, to find ourselves
surrounded with our Christian Neighbors and Brethren, all joining together,
and according to the Pattern of the holy Apostles, ( Acts iv. 24) lifting up
our Voices with one Accord in the Prayers and Praises offered up to Almighty
God. My Neighbor's Voice will be so far from interrupting, that it will rather
animate my Devotion, and give it the more Life and Spirit. This is what, I
assure you, I find to be the Case; and I believe I may appeal to the Experience
of all that have had an Opportunity of coming into a Habit of it. And let me
farther assure you, that now after near forty Years Use of our excellent Method
of Worship, upon this Account, as well as the other Reasons above mentioned, it
is so far from growing tedious or a Matter of Formality, as some imagine, that
every Opportunity seems to add fresh Life, and I see fresh Beauties, and find
further Advantages in it from Time to Time. And one Thing that makes it the
rather appear so amiable is, that in the Use of it I am off^ring up, not the
Devotions of this or that Assembly only, much less of this or that particular
Person or Minister, but the Prayers and Praises of the whole English Church and
Nation, enjoined by lawful Authority, and which every Assembly is jointly
offering up at the same Time. And moreover, that, I find I am worshipping God
according to the ancient Scripture Method, wherein it was the Manner for all
the People to lift up their Voice with one Accord, not only in Singing, but in
saying their Devotions. I find how this Method was established by David, 1 Chronicles. xvi. 4 -- 36, how it was continued by Ez^^ after the Captivity, Neh.
viii. 6. and ix. 5, etc. and still practiced by the Apostles in the Christian
Church, Acts iv. 24. So in other Places where we read how all the People said
Amen, and praised the Lord, 2 Chronicles. vii. 3. Ps. cvi. 48. 1 Cor. xiv. 16. And
as the Church militant, so the Church triumphant are represented by St. John in
the Revelation as worshipping in the same Manner, saying Salvation to our God
who sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb that was slain, and their Voice
was like the Noise of many (...) vii. 10. and xix. 6. Thus you see our Method
of Worship (...) according to the most ancient Scripture Pattern, and that in
Heaven as well as on Earth. And me thinks, as we would hope at length to join
with the heavenly Choir above, we should delight to worship God in this
beautiful Method while we are here on Earth, for this you must plainly see is
to worship him in the Beauty of Holiness.

6. And now lastly, I might, if there was Room, add a good deal more upon the
Beauty of our Poetry and Music. As to the Poetry of the Version of the Psalms
which we use, I must think it none of the least of the many Beauties and
Excellencies wherein we have vastly the Advantage of our Neighbors, that we
use such an excellent Version, which excels theirs beyond all Comparison. And
in the Harmony of our Music we generally excel, and should do so much more, if
we would more generally take a little Pains to be versed in the Tunes and Rules
of Singing. And truly it is very disagreeable to see so many sit down with
their Mouths shut, when the rest are engaged in so beautiful and amaiable a
Part of Worship, than which nothing can more contribute to the promoting of
Devotion and Holiness. How can it be, that any of you can sit as unconcerned
Spectators, while so heavenly and delightful a Part of Worship is carrying on;
especially those of the Fair Sex, whose Voices joined with ours, would mightily
add to the Beauty and Harmony of this melodious Part of Worship; in which,
methinks all should be active and forward to do what they can, and every one
might do something in bearing a Part in it. And if to our vocal, we add
instrumental Music; if according to the ancient Scripture Method, we add Organs
to our Voices, and if to both of them we would add the sincere and intense
Devotion of our Hearts, our Worship would then be a very Heaven upon Earth,
especially if we used the admirable Chaunt of the Cathedral.

Thus I have endeavored to demonstrate, not only that ours is the true genuine
Worship, and that it is adapted in the best Manner to promote Devotion and
Holiness, but that we do truly worship God in the Beauty of Holiness. Let us
therefore, my Brethren, rejoice and give Thanks to Almighty God for the
unspaekable Advantages we enjoy, and be zealous in our Attachment (...) this
our holy and beautiful Worship, and be steady and diligent in our Attendance on
it. We shall be inexcusable if we neglect it, or are cold, formal, dull and
lifeless in the Performance of (...) so right and reasonable, so beautiful and
amiable a Service. And above all, let us take great Care that we adorn our
Worship by living answerably to the mighty Obligations it lays us under; since
it is a most holy Worship, let us be holy in all Manner of Conversation, for it
is written, (...) ye holy, for I am holy. We have lately had an Adversary Mr
H^^^^.
who pretends to show, as an Argument against us, that where the Church
prevails, all Manner of (...) But how groundless and abusive is it to repr^^ch
the (...) with this, when, as I have abundantly shown you, nothing can more
tend to promote Holiness than our most holy Worship, and nothing can more
effectually tend to destroy the Power of Sin. If therefore Sin does any where
abound where the Church obtains, it must be ascribed to some other Cause; and
other Causes enough there are to account for it, without a^^^gning this; and
particularly, propagating licentious Principles. It cannot certainly be
occasioned by Conformity, but by teaching and acting in Disconformity, and
Opposition to all the Principles and Rules of the Church. Let it therefore be
seriously considered by every one whom it may concern, that a wicked Churchman
is the most inexcusable of all Creatures, for surely he is under much stronger
Obligations to Holiness than any other Christian w^^^soever. Let us then all
resolve that we will confute this Reproach by the Amendment of our Lives, and
do all we can to adorn the Religion we profess by the exemplary Holiness of our
Behavior, and so cause our Light to shine before Men, that all that are about
(...) may acknowledge that God is in us of a Truth, and beholding our good
Works, may heartily join with us in glorifying God our heavenly Father. And
left by neglecting this pure and holy Worship, we provoke him to abandon us,
let us by no Means forsake the assembling ourselves together as the Manner of
some is, but about one another daily, while it is called today, least any of
us be ^^rdened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. And finally, as our eternal
Interest lies at Stake, let us rouse up ourselves, and be all Life and Vigor
in the Performance of our Parts of this amiable Worship, that we may thereby
make all possible Proficiency in Devotion and Holiness; that being planted in
the House of the Lord, we may grow and ^^^^ish in the Courts of the House of
our God, and bring forth Fruit unto old Age, even all the Fruits of Holiness
and Righteousness whereby our heavenly Father may be gloryfied, and our
reasonable, active, and immortal Nature, as far as possible, improved and
perfected in all moral Graces and heavenly Virtues; so shall we be prepared*
when God calls, to quit this present Stage with Cheerfulness, and bear a Part
with the bles^^d Choir above, the innumerable Company of Angels and Spirits of
just Men made perfect, in all the Glories and Felicities of the heavenly State.

FINIS.

