The great Duty of public Worship, and of erecting and setting apart proper
Places for that Purpose. A SERMON, Preached in St. PETER'S Church,
Philadelphia. On FRIDAY, September 4th, 1761. Being the Day appointed for the
first Performance of Divine Worship in the said CHURCH. To which is prefixed,
An Account of the whole SERVICE used on that OCCASION. Published at the Desire
of the Churchwardens and Vestry.

BY WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. Provost of the College and Academy of PHILADELPHIA.

And the Lord said to Solomon, I have heard thy Prayers and thy Supplications
-- I have hallowed this House which thou have built to put my Name there for
ever; and mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be there continually.

1 K. Chapter ix. 3. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by W. Dunlap, M,DCC,LXI. Sold
also by the other Booksellers in Philadelphia, and by J. Rivington, in
New York, and A. Stuart, at Lancaster.

At a Meeting of Vestry, held at St. PETER'S Church, September 7th, 1761.
RESOLVED that the Thanks of this Board be given to the Rev. Dr. SMITH, for his
excellent Sermon preached at the Opening of St. PETER'S CHURCH, the 4th
Instant; and the Churchwardens are ordered to return him the Thanks of this
Board accordingly, and to request the Favor of him to furnish a Copy of the
said Sermon to be printed.

TRUE Copy from the Minutes. A. STEDMAN, C. Warden.

PREFACE.
IT was an ancient Custom not only among the Jews, but even among the Gentiles,
long before Christianity, to Separate from common Use, by certain formal Rites
of Dedication, their Temples, Altars and Places of religious Worship. And we
find God himself expressly approving this Custom in Respect to the Jews (who
were his peculiar People, and blessed with a more adequate Knowledge of his
Name) inasmuch as he vouchsafed his special Presence in the Places so separated
and dedicated by them. Of this, the Chapter, from which the Text of the
following Discourse is taken, furnishes sufficient Evidence; and in the third
Verse of the succeeding Chapter God expressly tells Solomon -- I have heard thy
Prayer and thy Supplication -- I have hallowed this House which thou have
built, to put my Name there for ever; and mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be
there continually.

AGREEABLE to this, the primitive Christians, even in the most difficult Times
(as we have the utmost Reason to believe) did not resort to any Place for
stated Worship, till they had first separated or set it apart, if not by public
Rites, yet at least by peculiar Thanksgivings, and Prayers for a sanctified Use
thereof. And in the more prosperous Days of Christianity, when Kings and
Potentates became Converts to its Truths, these Separations were performed with
far greater Ceremony, and distinguished by the more pompous Names of
Dedications, Consecrations, and the like; in all which acts, the common Prayers
of the Church were not looked upon as sufficient, without special Panegyrical
Orations, and Forms of Adoration and Praise more peculiar to the Occasion. SEE
Bingham's Eccles: Antiquities, who gathers this from Eusebius, who has
preserved an Oration delivered on one of these Occasions.


THIS Custom was very early introduced into our Mother Country; for we find
Austin himself, who has been styled the Apostle of our Ancestors, agreeable to
his Instructions, converting such Idol-temples, as were fit for Use, into
Christian Churches, by the Rites of Consecration. And in aftertimes it was
expressly provided, that all Churches etc. should be consecrated within two
Years after they were finished; -- ut omnes Cathedrales Ecclesiae, et
Conventuales, ac Parochiales, a tempore Perfectionis ipsarum, insia Diennuem,
per Dioecesanos ad quos pertinent, vel eorum Auctoritate per alios,
Consecrationes acciperent.
nor do our Laws take any Notice of Churches or Chapels, as such, till they are
formally consecrated. V. Coke Inst. 4.


NOW, it is to be presumed that, in these Laws and Regulations, our
Forefathers were actuated by the same pious Motives that influenced the
primitive Christians; namely the Hopes (grounded on the old Testament, and more
particularly on the new) that God would be specially present with them, to hear
their Prayers and pardon their Offenses, in those Places thus separated to his
Service, and dedicated to his Name. And thus run the Preambles of these very
Laws themselves -- " Domus Dei, materiali Subjecto non differens a privatis,
per Mysterium Dedicationis invisibile, fit Templum Domini, ad expiationem
Delictorum and divinam Misericordiam implorandam -- " Vid De Consecr. and
Reform. Stat. Eccles; 52 Hen. 3. (...) Cod.
And therefore it was but fit that the Performance of a Service so solemn and
ancient, agreeable to the same Laws, should be reserved to the highest
Dignitaries of the Church, namely the Bishops, or those having their immediate
Authority. --

IN this Country, then, where our Church is far removed from the Government of
her Bishops, and where it has not yet been the Method (nor indeed would
Circumstances always admit) before a stated Use of our newly-erected Places of
Worship, to solicit a special Authority for Separating them to God's Service,
in the express Manner of any approved Ritual; all we can do is to preserve so
much of the original Design of the Thing as Presbyters may warrantably perform,
and which, in such Circumstances, may be thought more immediately necessary for
Edification. We may meet on a fixed Day; and, in Conjunction with the common
Service of the Church, may use such particular Forms of Prayer, and Sermons, as
may be suitable to the Occasion; professing before God and the World, our
humble Desire of setting apart such Places to his Service, and keeping them
continually sacred to that pious End.

THUS much is in the Power of every religious Society; and thus much, at least,
as Members of the Church of England, it is our particular Duty to do, with all
possible Solemnity, Gravity, and Love to God, whenever we devote any
particular Place to his Service; in Order that for ever afterward, when we
enter therein, we may consider ourselves as entering into the Place where has
promised to manifest his more immediate Presence, and behave ourselves when
there (as the primitive Christians are Chrysostom.
said to have done in their Places of Worship) with the utmost Reverence and
Devotion, as in the Palace of the GREAT KING.

THESE were the Principles kept in View at the Opening of St. PETER'S CHURCH in
this City; and the best Testimony for the Conduct of that Solemnity, is the
Approbation it met with, even from some who came prejudiced against every Thing
of that Kind. And here it is but Justice to the officiating Ministers to set
down the whole Order and Choice of the Service, made by them on this Occasion.

1. A Beginning was made, with pronouncing the following Sentences.

Thus says the Lord: The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool.
Where is the House that ye build unto me? and where is the Place of my Rest?

Isaiah. From the rising of the Sun, to the Going down of the same, my Name
shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every Place Incense shall be offered
unto my Name, and a pure Offering; for my Name shall be great among the
Heathen, says the Lord of Hests.

Malachi. The Wilderness and the solitary Place shall be glad, and the Desert
shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose.

Isaiah, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them.

St. Matthew. 2. AN occasional Prayer from the Reading-Desk.

3. MORNING Prayer of the Church, as usual.

4. PROPER Psalms. 84th, 122d. 132d.

5. The Lessons, viz. 1 Kings, Chapter viii. St. Matthew, Chapter xxi to ver. 14th.


[N. B. Thus far (except reading the Absolution) by the youngest officiating
Minister. Rev. Mr. Duche.
]

6. AN occasional Prayer, with a Baptism, at the Fount. [By the Author of the
following Sermon.]

7. THE Remainder of the Morning Service (using only, instead of the Collect
for the Day, that for St. Peter's Day, and the last for good Friday) by the
rev. Mr. Neill.
eldest Missionary present.

8. OCCASIONAL Prayer, with the Communion Service.

9. THE Collects, as above.

10. THE Epistle. Haggai, Chapter 2d. to ver. 10th.

11. THE Gospel for St. Peter's Day.

[N. B. This part of the Service was performed at the Altar, by the rev. Mr.
Sturgeon.
eldest officiating Minister, except the Epistle, which was read by the
Youngest.]

TO this succeeded the following SERMON; and if a Judgment might be formed from
the Attention wherewith it was received by a very crowded Audience, and even by
some who have given but few other Instances of their PARTIALITY in the Author's
favor; he may flatter himself that now, when it appears from the Press, and
sollicits a candid Perusal in the Closet, it may be of some Service. Would to
God that, divested of every Prejudice, the Subject Matter alone might engage
the Reader's Attention; and more especially the Arguments used in Regard to our
neglected Sabbaths and public Ordinances.

THE Author's Situation allows him but few Opportunities of addressing the
World in this Way; and those hitherto have chiefly arisen out of public
Occasions, where the Calls were sudden, and where he has only had Leisure to
show the Warmth of the Heart, and not the Labor of the Head -- Happy always,
if with a Desire to serve his Friends, he can give any Testimony of a Zeal for
Truth, and for that Church whereof he is a Member!

HE returns his Thanks to the Churchwardens and Vestry, for the Honor done
him in requesting the Publication of this Sermon; and he now sends it into the
World entirely under their Patronage and Countenance.

SERMON.
1 KINGS, Chap. viii. 13, 27, 57, 60. I have surely built thee an House is
dwell in, a settled Place for thee to abide it for ever! -- But will GOD indeed
dwell on the Earth? Behold, the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens, cannot contain
thee; how much less this House that I have builded? --

The Lord our God be with us as he was with our Fathers: Let him not leave us,
nor forsake us -- That all the People of the Earth may know that the LORD is
GOD, and that there is none else.


My BRETHREN;
ALTHOUGH I have only read to you the foregoing Verses, as being those which I
am more immediately to insist upon, yet the greatest Part of the Chapter from
which they are taken, containing the History of Solomon's Dedication of the
Temple, and which has been already read to you as the first Lesson for this
Day's Service, will be the Subject of my following Discourse.

BUT, before I proceed, it may perhaps be expected that I should carry you back
into remote Antiquity, to investigate the Origin and show the Reasonableness of
CONSECRATING, DEDICATING, or SETTING APART, particular Places for the more
immediate and public Worship of the supreme God. And such an Enquiry, it must
be confessed, would furnish out a most interesting Detail; no way unsuitable to
this Day's Solemnity. But the Time being short, and having another Plan in
View, I shall touch but slightly on these Matters.

THE great Progenitors of our Race, ADAM and EVE, when they first sprung from
the forming Hand of their munificent Creator, no doubt, felt their Hearts bound
with Joy and Gratitude unutterable. Every Thing within and without them
contributed to heighten this Joy into the most transcendent Ecstasy. The
Curiosity of their own Structure, the Paradise that surrounded them, the
unfading Beauty, the' eternal Verdure and yet continual Novety, of its Scenes
(while they continued in their State of Innocence) led them, doubtless, at all
Times and in all Places, into the most fervent Acknowledgments of that Goodness
from whence the whole proceeded. Nevertheless, it is no way improbable but that
they had some consecrated Place, some chosen Bower, by Brook or by Fountain,
adorned with all the bloomy Honors of Paradise, whither (at stated Times, and
at proper Intervals) they might retire from the Heat of the Day, to offer up
their more immediate Praises for creating Love and preserving Goodness.

BUT whatever may be in this, one of the first Things we find their Descendents
employed in, after the Fall, was their solemn offering up "the Fruits of the
Earth, and the Firstlings of their Flocks", in Places set apart for that End;
and, after the Flood, NOAH no sooner descends from the Ark than he is found
erecting an Altar unto the Lord. Abraham too planted a Grove in Beersheba,
where he called on the Name of the everlasting God; and this God himself, through
four whole Chapters of Exodus, is found instructing Moses how to erect and
adorn that glorious Tabernacle that we read of there.

NOW these Places of Worship were agreeable to the State of a People, in those
early Ages, migrating from Place to Place. But when Nations were settled, and
distinct Societies formed, in the Place of Groves and temporary Tabernacles,
superb Temples were erected, And thus it was with the Jews, at the Time of
errecting that Temple of unparalled Magnificence and Architecture divine,
whose Dedication or Consecration my Text refers to.

AFTER journeying for many Years through the Wilderness, after sustaining many
bloody Wars with their fierce Enemies, that People had now got full Possession
of the Land of Promise, and enjoyed that happy Tranquillity, which their Souls
had long and earnestly wished for.

AND now what Improvement does their illustrious Monarch make of this Occasion?
Does he forget the GOD OF ISRAEL, that had led his People through so many
Dangers? Does he turn the Fruits of PEACE entirely to Works of secular Import,
or of low selfish Enjoyment? No! But he remembers the Intimation given by the
Prophet Nathan to his Father David, how that his Son after him should build an
House (not a moveable and temporary Tabernacle, but a fixed and settled House)
to the Name of the Lord for ever. 2 Samuel vii. 13.
Accordingly, with his whole Heart and Spirit, he sets about this divine Work,
and writes to distant Places, for an amazing Store of Materials of every Sort.
To this purport is his Letter to Hiram, King of Tire and Siden. 1 Kings v. 2 --
7


THOU know, says he, how that David my Father, could not build an House (or
fixed Temple) to the Name of the Lord his God, for the Wars that were about him
on every Side, until the Lord put them under the Soles of his Feet. And now the
Lord has given me Rest on every Side, so that there is neither Adversary nor
evil Occurrent: And behold, I purpose to build an House to the Name of the Lord
my God; as he spoke unto David my Father, saying, Thy Son, whom I will set upon
thy Throne in thy Room, he shall build an House unto my Name. Now therefore,
command them [thy Servants] to hew me Cedar Trees; for thou know that there
is not among us any that can skill to hew Timber like the Sidonians. Those
Sidonians are the very Same whom Homer calls (...), much skilled in diverse
Arts; to whom he ascribes all the neater Sort of Work, both in his Iliads and
Odyssey, as Bochartus observes of his Phaleg. Lib. 4. Chap. 3. By these Arts
they grew very rich, and are made an Example, in Judges xviii. 7. of those that
lived quietly and securely. See Bp. PATRICK'S Commentary.

THIS particular Character of the Sidonians, is mentioned to show that Solomon
sought out the most excellent Artists in the World for the Work of the Temple;
and that the Bible Character of these People corresponds exactly to the
Character given of them, in some of the most ancient profane Writings which we
now have.




SOLOMON having procured his Materials, and at length finished his House with
such a Profusion of Ornament and eastern Magnificence, as far excells all the
Pomp of modern Times; having been favored with the divine Direction in
planning and carrying on the Work; having built the Walls with hewn Stone, and
lined them with Cedar; having carved and adorned the Doors and Linings with
gilded Cherubims, and Palm Trees, and Knops and full-blown Flowers; having
overlaid the holiest Places, such as the Oracle, the Altar and the Sanctuary
with Plates of massy Gold; having furnished the whole House with Tables, and
Candlesticks, and Lamps, and Tongs, and Basins, and Bowls, and Censers, made
also of Gold, and curiously embossed with Flowers; together with such an
immense Quantity of Bases, and Lavers, and Pots, and other Vessels of polished
Brass-Work as was not to be weighed; 1 Kings, Chapter vi.vii.
-- the Day was now come when this superb Edifice, with all its costly
Apparatus of Furniture, was to be DEDICATED, CONSECRATED and SET APART for ever
to the Name of the Lord!

ON that memorable Day, the Elders and Judges of Cities, the Heads of Tribes
and Chiefs of Families, assembled themselves before King Solomon, and began the
Solemnity with a grand Procession from Jerusalem to Mount-Sion, in Order to
bring from thence the ARK OF THE COVENANT, containing the two TABLES of the
LAW; which had been deposited there by David (when he brought it from the House
2 Samuel vi. 12, 17.
of Obed, Edom) in a temporary Tabernacle, until a fixed House should be
prepared for its Reception.

IN the like solemn Manner did they return from Mount-Sion, to the Mount of the
Temple at Jerusalem, the Priests bearing the ARK with the LAW, and the Levites
the TABERNACLE in which it had been placed, with all the Holy Vessels of the
Sanctuary; 1 Kings, Chapter viii.
that there might remain, no Occasion for Idolatry, nor Pretense for Schism, or
Worship in any other Place save that which was now dedicated to the Lord.

SOLOMON and his grand Retinue being now arrived at the Temple, in the midst of
Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen innumerable; the Priests, whose Privilege it was
(leaving their Attendants in the outer Courts, and before the House) entered
first into the holy Place, and then into the most Holy, and there with solemn
Awe they deposited the Ark in the Place prepared for it, under the Wings of the
Golden Seraphims, that expanded themselves from Wall to Wall, shading the
MERCY-SEAT and the Cherubims of Moses.

BUT behold now a most stupendous Appearance! No sooner had the Priests retired
from the most holy Place to begin the Service at the Altar; no sooner had the
Trumpeters and Singers become as one, and lifted up the Voice in full Chorus
with 2 Chronicles. vi. 13.
Trumpets and Cymbals and Instruments of Music, to be heard in praising and
thanking God, than lo! a Cloud of thick Darkness, declaring the immediate
presence of the Glory of the Lord filled the whole House; so that the Priests
durst not stand to minister by Reason thereof, but retreated to the outer
Courts with the utmost Consternation.

AND here let us pause, ponder and reflect, on the Nature and Meaning of this
wonderful Phenomenon. Strange it may seem that a GOD who is LIGHT itself
should appear in thick Darkness. But let us not mistake the Nature of this
Darkness as any way similar to what we vulgarly call so. Nor let us think that
it was nothing more than the Pillar of Cloud, in which the SCHECHINAH, AS the
SON of GOD, when he came into the World to redeem Mankind, did, of his infinite
Condecension, take upon him their Nature as a Veil to his Divinity, that he
might thereby converse with them Face to Face; so the great JEHOVAH, in
conversing with the Israelites, did it by his divine SCHECHINAH, or the
Presence of his Glory, abiding under the Form of a Pillar of Cloud and Pillar
of Fire.

THIS well-known Appearance it was that went before the Israelites in the
Wilderness; that called Moses up into the Mount; that spoke to Numb. ^ii. 5.
Aaron and Miriam in the Door of the Tabernacle; and that finally rested "over
the most holy Place within the Veil; and thence spoke from off the Mercy-Seat,
that was upon the Ark of the Testimony, from between the two Cherubims." Numb.
vii. 8.
And this former Dwelling of God among the Israelites by the SCHECHINAH, was
all along a most luminous Type of his Son's future Dwelling in human Nature.

NOW, outwardly this Habitation of the Presence of the Divinity looked as a
Cloud, but inwardly as a FIRE; and the Fire, or inward Part, was that which was
more immediately termed the GLORY, and put on different Appearances according
to different Circumstances. Sometimes it shone through the Cloud in such serene
and softened Luster that it might be looked upon by common Eyes. Sometimes it
prevailed so much over the Cloud, that only the Eyes of a favored few could
behold it, and that too by repeated Efforts and by gradual Approaches. And
sometimes it broke out so intensely strong, eclipsing the Sun, the Cloud and
the whole Face of Things, that no human Eye could behold it, or any Thing else
that fell within its overwhelming Splendors.

BEAUTIFULLY has the Jewish Rabbi, Jehudah, expressed himself on this Subject,
as he is quoted by Bp. Patrick. Of the GLORY mentioned in Scripture, there is
one (says he) which all the ISRAELITES saw, such as the CLOUD and consuming
FIRE; another of such a Nature that [only] the Eyes of the Prophets could
sustain it; but another so pure, and bright to such a Degree, that no Prophet
is able to apprehend it, but if he venture too look on it, his Composition is
dissolved.

There are sublime Passages of Scripture, beautifully descriptive of these
several GLORIES. Of the FIRST, where the Cloud and Glory appear together, in
mild and softened Luster, I have already mentioned sundry Instances; and this
it is which the Psalmist describes, in Psalm xcvii. 2, 3. CLOUDS and DARKNESS
the round about him, and FIRE goes before him. -- Of the SECOND Kind, where
the FIRE or GLORY so far prevailed over the VEIL or CLOUD, that only a favored
Few could behold it and that at a Distance, or by gradual Approaches, we have a
most grand Description in Exodus xxiv. 10. as it was seen by Moses and Aaron,
Nadab and Abibu, and the seventy Elders -- And they saw the GOD OF ISRAEL, and
there was under (...), as it were a paved Work of Sapphire-Stone, and as it was
the Body of Heaven in his Clearness -- or the united Splendors of all the
heavenly Luminaries. And when Moses was to be called nearer to this glory, six
Days was he in his Approach to it, while the Lord kindly veiled it before him,
nor was it till the seventh Day that he was taken into the midst of it.

BUT as to the THIRD GLORY, which in its unveiled Splendour eclipses all the
created Luminaries of the Universe, seeing no human Eye has been able to behold
it, so no human Language has been able to describe it, otherwise than by the
Negative Terms of DARKNESS, or Light which no man can approach, or behold and
live. 1 Timothy vi. 16. Exodus xxxiii. 18.
For that which overwhelms and hides the view of all things else, and yet is
itself beyond the Power of all View, must, in respect to us, be the same as
total DARKNESS.

THIS high Degree of GLORY is that in which the more immediate presence of the
Godhead seems to have appeared on all special Occasions. This it was that broke
in upon St. Paul at Noonday, so intensely strong, that the Sun shone to him in
vain; for "he could not see for the Glory of that Light, but was led by the
Hand of those that were with him," who, it is presumed, saw only a lesser
Degree of this astonishing and overwhelming Light. This too it was that filled
the whole Body of the Tabernacle, at the Consecrating thereof, so that Moses,
who had entered into the second Glory and beheld it, was not able to enter into
this.

CAN we doubt, then, but that it was the same Superior GLORY, dazzling and
overwhelming, even to thick DARKNESS itself, that astonished the Priests at the
Consecration of the Temple? Had it been the more usual Appearance of the Cloud
and the Glory together, it is not to be imagined that they would have been
driven by it from the Service at the Altar as they now were; -- with a View, no
doubt, in the Conduct of Providence, to "intimate that their Ministry and Way
of Worship should cease when the Messiah came, in whom the Fullness of the
Godhead dwelt bodily." Indeed, we are expressly told that the Glory did, on this
Occasions, break entirely out of the Cloud; and after it had filled the whole
House, dazzling rather than enlightening (says the learned Bp. Patrick) so
that nothing else could be seen while it continued there, it settled at last in
the most holy Place.

THESE Remarks I thought necessary, in order to justify the Explanation that I
have ventured to give of the Phenomenon that astonished the Priests, at the
Dedication of Solomon's Temple.

NO Person seems to have and more beautiful and accurate Conceptives on this
Subject than our sublime Poet Milton, in the Passage already referred to --
"Fountain of Light! thyself invisible
"Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st
"Throned inaccessible, (...) when thou (...)
"The full Blaze of thy Beams, and through a Cloud,
"Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine,
"DARK WITH EXCESSIVE BRIGHT, thy Skirts appear,
"Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim
"Approach not, but with both Wings veil their Eyes!"



or presence of the divine Glory, usually dwelt. No, my Brethren, the GLORY, on
this Occasion, did undoubtedly burst through every Veil, and the DARKNESS here
spoken of seems to have been nothing else but the unsufferable Power of LIGHT
itself -- such a Darkness as our sublime Poet speaks of --

"DARK with excessive BR^^^T" -- a Darkness arising from a Deluge of Light that
could not be beheld!

SUPPOSE a Person long pent up in a gloomy Dungeon, where scarce a single Ray
had penetrated to cheer his lonely Hours; and suppose him liberated at once,
and turning his Eye to the Noonday Sun; would not the whole Face of Things
appear to him Dark and without Distinction, till by repeated Efforts he had
accustomed himself to bear the redundant Blaze? Or suppose ten thousand
Noonday Suns should now unite their Splendors, and burst instantaneously upon
us who enjoy but one, would not our weak Organs be wholly overpowered, and all
Things around us be lost in Darkness visible and sensible? And yet what are
these compared to the immediate Breaking in of the Presence of God's Glory,
before one single Ray of which ten thousand Noonday Suns themselves would hide
their diminished Heads, and be lost in total Obscurity? Could mortal Eye look
at this and live? Even the burning Seraphims cover themselves before it, and
"With both Wings veil their Eyes!"

THE wise Solomon, on this Occasion, having either more Presence of Mind than
the astonished Priests, or rather being the Instrument whom God had chosen to
proceed with the Remainder of this solemn Service, cries out -- The Lord has
said that he would dwell in thick Darkness; and no Man can behold his Glory
without a Vail. Be not afraid ye Priests and Ministers of God, at what has now
happened! Do you not know, from the Book of your own Law, that the high Priest
durst not approach the Mercy-Seat, without making a Cloud of Incense before
him, lest he should be struck blind, or lose his Life with the Splendour of the
divine Glory? Know ye not that at the Exodus xl. ^5.
Consecration of the Tabernacle, in like manner as now, the Majesty of the
divine Glory broke out so strong, beyond what ever it had done before, filling
the whole House, that " Moses was not able to enter into the Tent of the
Congregation." Look therefore on this sudden and alarming Appearance of
Darkness, that drove you from the Altar, as a sure Token of God's immediate
Presence, overwhelming with Light that cannot be beheld, accepting our solemn
Dedication of this House, and acknowledging it to be the Place where his Glory
will dwell for ever!

TRIUMPHING into Raptures divine, the pious Monarch now turns his speech from
the Priests and People immediately to JEHOVAH himself, in that sublime
Apostrophe of my Text. --

"I have surely built thee an House to dwell in, a settled Place for the to
abide in for ever?" --

Now do I assuredly know, O thou holy One of Israel! that my Labors of Love to
thee are not in vain! Now am I convinced that I enjoy that Honor which I have
long wished for -- that supreme Honor of building thee an House (not a
temporary Tabernacle, like those of former Times, in which thou will sojourn
only for a Season, but a fixed Place, an House of Ages) in which, I trust, thou will abide for ever!

THEN turning himself back to the People, he began to bless them, and to give
Thanks to God, and to recount before him the many Instances of his Kindness in
the carrying on this Work for the Reception of his Glory.

BUT suddenly recollecting himself, and being struck with the Vanity of
thinking that the tremendous Majesty of God could be confined to Time or Place,
he breaks out into a second Apostrophe more grand than the former still, and
exceeded by Nothing that is to be found in all the Volumes of the World!

"BUT will God indeed dwell on the Earth?" Will (...) at whose Footstool ten
thousand Worlds hang and are as Nothing -- will HE who walks on the Whirlwind's
Wing, and passes from one End of Creation to the other, swifter than the
Lightning's Glance -- will HE be limited to any particular abiding Place? How
vain the Thought, O thou being superlatively raised above all Beings! Behold!
the whole Immensity of Space, nay the very "Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain thee; how much less this House that I have builded?" Yet, though
in a literal and local Sense, thou will not be confined here, we know that thou will nevertheless in a special Manner be present -- "to have Respect to the
Supplication, and to hearken unto the Cry and to the Prayer which thy Servant
and thy People shall make toward thee in this Place." V. ^^. ^^.


CONVINCED, therefore, of this, the Rest of the Chapter and Service dedicatory,
is chiefly SUPPLICATION and PRAYER; two Verses of which I have also taken into
my Text as a Model for us on the present Occasion.

HAVING thus laid before you the Design and Occasion of the Text, with as much
Brevity as Circumstances would admit, I come now to make an Application of the
whole to the Purpose of this Day's Solemnity.

WE too, my Brethren, have been building a HOUSE to the Lord; not a superb and
magnificent ONE, fitted to the ostentatious Worship of the LAW; but a HOUSE
decently neat and elegantly plain, The House here spoken of well deserves the
above Character, being a very elegant Building, executed in the best Taste. Its
Dimensions are Ninty-one Feet by Sixty-one.
fitted to the Simplicity of that GOSPEL WORSHIP which must be performed in
Spirit and in Truth. We too are here assembled, in the Presence of Almighty
God, and in the Sight of Men and Angels, to make a solemn OFFERING of THIS
HOUSE to the Name of the Lord; and to set it apart to the Purposes of Religion
for ever.

BY this Work of ours, we pretend not to confer any peculiar Sanctity on
particular Places, or Portions of inanimate Nature. What we do is only
declarative of our own fixed Intention of endeavoring, through God's Grace, to
sanctify ourselves in this Place, in the full Hopes of meeting the spiritual
Consolation of his divine Presence therein; and entering into a solemn
Engagement, for ourselves and our Posterity, of keeping it for ever sacred to
these pious Uses, agreeable to the pure Model of that most excellent Church,
whereof we are Members.

THIS Labor of our Love, however unworthily performed, and by however mean
Instruments, we hope will be accepted in and through the Mediation of Christ
Jesus. A Sign from Heaven to confirm this Hope, we must not expect! a CLOUD OF
GLORY, declaring the immediate Presence of God among us, we look not to see!
Types and Shadows and the Burden of Ceremonies are done away. But behold, a
greater Evidence is here! The Son of God himself has been among us, and has
left in our Hands the GOSPEL of Salvation, the Words of eternal Truth,
declaring that -- "Where two or three are gathered together in God's Name,
there will he be in the midst of them." By the Eye of Scripture Faith, that
fast Anchor of the Soul, we can see him, we can feel him vitally present with
us! we can enjoy Union and Communion with him; and, in our most holy Placee, we
can behold him seated on another Mercy-Seat than that of the Temple and the
Law, and hear him speaking in another Manner than from within the Vail! We can
behold him seated on the Mercy-Seat of REDEEMING LOVE, and hear him speaking in
the comfortable Overtures of the Gospel of Peace!

THESE interesting Truths being premised, and having the well-grounded
Assurance that "God will indeed dwell on the Earth" -- even in the midst of the
truly religious Meetings or Societies of his People; it behooves us next to
consider what Conduct such Societies ought more especially to observe, in order
to expect so great a Blessing.

AND first, then, if we, as a religious Society, would hope that God would
continue among us in this Place which we have dedicated to his Name, we must be
careful to improve ourselves in "all Manner of holy Conversation and Godliness,
not forgetting the Assembling ourselves together, as the Manner of some is."
Heb. x. 25.


AND here, as this Neglect of "Assembling together," in the Place where God's
Honor more immediately dwells, is an Evil of the most ungrateful kind, and
which cannot but provoke him above any other, to withdraw his more immediate
Presence from a People, it may not be amiss, with all Candor and Affection, to
address a few Things to those whose "Manner" this is; although it must be
confessed that it is hard even for Charity herself to imagine any plausible
Pretext for their Conduct.

THERE is not, I am certain, a Person among us that will not acknowledge some
Sort of Homage to be due to the supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth. Even the
DEIST himself will be fond of owning this to be a natural Dictate of eternal
Reason, founded on the immutable Relation between the Creature and its Creator.
But then he will say that this Homage is a Tribute of the Heart, better to be
performed in the Retirements of the Closet, than amidst the Avocations of a
public Assembly. And the kindest Thing we can suggest is, that this Sentiment
(it is to be feared) is too much adopted by many Men, in other respects of
strict Honor, fair Morals and useful Members of Society, who, although they
profess to believe in the Religion of Jesus Christ, and would scorn the
Imputation of Deism, yet still continue in the Neglect of that public Worship
and those sacred Ordinances which this Religion has enjoined. Instead of
approaching the Courts of the Lord, with their respective Families, on those
Days that are consecrated to his more immediate Service, they either sequester
themselves from the rest of Mankind in unsocial Retirements; or, if Decency
obliges not to this, "one goes to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise."

NOW, we will allow such Persons, all that they themselves can ask. We will in
Charity suppose that they are as regular and fervent in private Devotion as
they can possibly pretend to be. Yet still we say that the Neglect of public
Worship contradicts their Profession of Christianity, and is a public Breach of
Duty to God, to Society and to their own Souls. And would to Heaven that what
may be offered on this Head might gain their Attention; seeing no Terms of
Asperity and Reproach shall be used, unbecoming the Spirit and Temper of that
Religion, to the public Exercise of which, we would woo and win them.

AND first they are entreated to consider that, from the whole Tenor of
Scripture, the public Observance of a Sabbath, in Places set apart for that
Purpose, appears to have been God's own Appointment, and has the Promise, both
of this Life, and that which is to come, annexed to it. Eternal Wisdom gave an
early Intimation of it, while our first Parents were yet in Paradise, by
blessing the Seventh Day. Our first Parents delivered it in Tradition to their
Posterity, who (as we have seen) had their Places of public Worship, approved
by God's immediate appearance among them; and at Length when these Traditions
were either darkened or destroyed, the Lord solemnly republished the same
Institution or Ordinance from mount Sinai, in the Law, saying -- "Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy."

JESUS CHRIST, who came not to destroy but to fulfill the Law, frequented the
Places of public Worship, and sanctified the Sabbath by his Example. The very
Form of Prayer, given by him to Mankind, at the Instance of his Disciples, is a
public Form. Nay the great Design of his Coming into this World and leaving his
Gospel behind him, was to accomplish a Plan of Redemption for lost Mankind, to
plant a CHURCH for himself upon Earth, and form his Disciples into one public
Body, whereof himself is the Head.

BUT how can there be a CHURCH, where there is no Membership, no Communion, no
" Assembling ourselves together," agreeable to his appointment? How can those
be his Disciples now, who do not imitate his first Disciples, and join together
"in Acts ii. 42.
Doctrine, in Fellowship, in Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers?" These first
Disciples certainly knew their Master's Will as well as we do now; and if one
Set of Men, who call themselves Christians, may (...) Circumstances, another
may do the same; and, as Example is powerful, the Time may fast come, when in
vain shall we build Churches -- nay, in vain should we open the Doors of those
that are already built!

WE do most readily allow the private Worship of a Man's own Heart, its full
Commendation; and God forbid that any Thing here said should be understood as
derogatory from that Worship, or tending to set in Opposition to that which is
public. It is most sincerely to be wished that no Man ever pretended to it, who
did not heartily practice it. All true Devotion must begin in the Heart; but
then it must not end there. God not only calls us to acknowledge him in our own
Minds, but openly and avowedly to acknowledge him before Men; that they, seeing
our good Works, may be stirred up to give him the greater Glory.

OPENLY do the CELESTIAL CHOIRS pour forth their triumphant HALLELUJAH'S to his
adorable Name! Openly do they cast their Crowns at his Feet, saying -- "Worthy
art thou, O Lord! to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power!"

AND shall MAN be silent, or wholly selfish, in his Worship? Man, so highly
favored! Man, the REDEEMED OF GOD! Man, made social in his Nature; endued with
Voice articulate, and appointed to lead the Chorus of this lower World! Shall
he forsake his Post, and neglect those public Praises, which his Tongue was
framed to utter? Should he do this, the very Brute, and even the inanimate
Creation, openly and incessantly declaring God's Glory Day and Night, would
shame him for his sad Desertion -- And shame him they do, while he confines
himself to a Worship merely selfish or solitary, hides himself from the THERE
have been Instances, where some of God's Servants have been suffered to
withdrawn from the World to a Life, merely solitary. But these are rare Cases.
not intended for common Use, or common Example: nor do we speak to any who
pretend to a Life of that Sort.
World, absents himself from the great Congregation of God's People, and
blushes to utter forth his Maker's Praises before Heaven and Earth!

BY a Worship merely solitary, a Man may perhaps somewhat improve the State of
his own Mind, and serve himself; but, by public Worship, a Man not only serves
himself, but, as far as poor Dust and Ashes can, promotes God's Glory also, by
acknowledging him before the whole World. The Height of religious Perfection is
when both Sorts of Worship have their due Place; and however much a Man may
boast of the Devotion of the Heart, if he keeps it there, the World will be apt
to suspect him, and to ask of him a Sign for the Edification of others.

UPON the whole then, it appears that a Neglect of the public Ordinances of
Religion, in one professing to believe the Gospel, is a plain Contradiction of
that Profession, and a Breach of that Duty which we owe to God. And Oh! That it
might never be forgotten by any one who names the Name of Christ, that it is
only to those who "confess him before Men," that he has given the most
comfortable Promise of "confessing them before his heavenly Father," in that
awful Day of Accounts, when he is to sit absolute Judge of their Conduct.

AND yet still, if such be the Case in Respect to those who, though they neglect
the public Worship of God, nevertheless pretend to a more private and spiritual
Worship of him; what must it be with them who are avowed Enemies to both? Would
to God that they would put the Matter to their own Souls in their serious
Moments; if, peradventure, they ever leave themselves Leisure to be serious.

BUT, to proceed -- we were next to show that the Neglect of public Worship is
also a Breach of Duty to Society. Much of what might be offered on this Head is
anticipated on the former; for so kind has God been to us, that whatever he
has commanded us to do for his Glory, is also for our own Good. Many Arguments
might also be drawn from the Nature of Society; our common Wants, our common
Dangers, our common Redemption, and our common Dependence for Happiness here
and hereafter, on the same Parent-God. But these may be passed over at present;
it being generally acknowledged that Government and Society cannot be
maintained on any other Principles than Justice, Sobriety and Obedience. And
these Principles cannot be maintained, in any tolerable Degree, but "for the
Lord's Sake," and by Means of Religion and its divine Sanctions. And Religion
cannot be maintained without a due Regard to its public Ordinances,

THERE is something as lovely and venerable, as it is truly ancient, in the
Appointment of a Sabbath, or one Day in Seven, for assembling ourselvs
together. By this Means, People are brought forth and associated in their most
decent Attire. They are humanized and polished and made better acquainted. They
provoke one another, as the Apostle expresses it, to Love and good Works. Nay,
as the same Apostle further testifies, much greater Fruits than these may be
expected. For, "if 1 Cor. xiv. 23
the whole Church be come together in one Place, and there come in one that
believes not, or one unlearned; he is convinced of all, he is judged of all;
and so, falling down on his Face, he will worship God, and report that God is
of a Truth" in that Place.

WHENCE it appears that the Neglect of public Worship is also a Breach of Duty
to Society, and a Bar to the Reformation and good Order of Mankind. It was next
to be proved a Breach of Duty to our own Souls. And here little need be said.

WHATEVER is a Neglect of Duty to God, whatever obstructs the good of Society,
must necessarily be prejudicial to the Individual. Were Men wholly composed of
Soul and made entirely for themselves, a refined selfish and Solitary Religion
might possibly suit them. But, as the Matter now is, they stand in Need of all
social Helps to inflame their Devotion; and it is found by Experience that the
Exercises of Religion are greatly quickened by friendly Communion with our
fellow Creatures. On such Occasions, when all Things are conducted with Decency
and Order, a kind of holy Fervor is apt to catch from Bosom to Bosom, rising to
Heights which the solitary Worshipper cannot easily reach or conceive. In a
Word, it is to social and public Worship, as has been already hinted, that our
blessed Savior has given many of the Gospel-Promises. For he has assured us
that if even so small a Number as "two shall agree on Earth, as touching any
Thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of his Father who is in
Heaven." Mat. xviii. 10.


THESE Arguments, it is to be hoped, may convince those who neglect or scorn our
Sabbaths and public Meetings, that they are, in Reality, acting contrary to
their Duty to God; to Society, and to themselves; and that if it were not for
the wise Ordinance of a Sabbath, true Religion would scarce be found upon
Earth. And if Religion were gone, Society could not long subsist, or at least
it could not subsist on the Principles of Virtue, Freedom and Safety.

AND this leads me to one Argument more, which, as it is of a worldly Nature,
may perhaps be better heard. If we would wish to live happy and see good Days;
if we would wish to see our Children dutiful, and our Families in Subordination
round us; if we would wish to have our Property safe, and our Persons free from
Violence; we ought to support the Credit of Religion, and set forward the
public Worship of God, by our whole Influence, our example, and every other
Means in our Power.

SO far in general. As to you, my Brethren, to whom this Discourse is more
particularly addressed, it is to be hoped that you will be persuaded to
conscientious attendance upon the public Worship, the Prayers, the Festivals
and the Sacraments of our Church, not only from the above Motives, but from the
nobler Motives first mentioned to you, namely as a Means of continuing the
divine Presence among you, and obtaining that spiritual Consolation and
Fellowship with God, which, it is to be believed, were your sincere Desire in
contributing of your Substance to the Erection of this Place.

ANOTHER Thing I must recommend to you, if you would expect God to dwell among
you, as a religious Society. It Is UNION and CHARITY with one Another. For St.
Paul tells the Corinthians, that where Divisions are among a People, they will
come together in the Church, "not for the better, but for the worse." 1 Cor.
xi. 1^.
It is impossible, indeed, in this World, while Men have their Passions, their
Vanities, their Interests, and their Ambitions, but such Offenses will come;
and a good Man will be apt to cry out -- "Is there no Balm in Gilead," no
sovereign Method to prevent or heal these painful Wounds? The best Way, indeed,
is to practice all Christian Forbearance, and to leave the Rest to God's
Providence; ever bearing in Mind that the Glory of a Church consists not in the
Ostentation of Numbers, but in the strict Union and Fellowship of its Members.

THE same Charity, Love and Candor, that you extend to one another, let me
beseech you, in a particular Manner, to extend to those who are appointed to
minister among you. Judge of them with Impartiality. Bear in Mind the
Difficulties of their Office. Consider that they are Men of like Infirmities
with yourselves, placed by their Station in a very public Point of View; and
thereby what Failings they may have are rendered the more conspicuous.

WHEN you enter God's House, let your Minds be impressed with deep Sense of his
awful Presence, and "keep your Feet with all Diligence." Examine carefully into
the Motives of your Appearing there; whether it be from an idle Curiosity, or
to have a momentary Warmth raised in you merely by Preaching; or whether it be,
in good Earnest, to humble yourselves before the Throne of God, and to join
with your fellow Christians in the Solemn Acts of Devotion; "in Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men," agreeable to the
most complete Form of our excellent Liturgy?

PREACHING, my Brethren, was originally a wise Institution, to instruct the
Ignorant, to rouse the Dull, to confirm the Wavering, and to animate all in the
Discharge of their Duty; and, as such, is still retained by our Church as a
very necessary Addition to her public Service, and is moreover warranted by the
Example of our Savior and his Apostles. But then, here lies the Fault, that
many will consider this Preaching as the principal Part of the public Worship
itself; and no Preaching will be acceptable to them that does not, as it were,
hurry them out of themselves, by captivating the Passions, as if that was a
nobler and more useful Work than to convince the Judgment. Preachers there are,
indeed, who can do both in an eminent Degree; and their Success in this Respect
is a Blessing to the Societies to which they belong. But what we complain of is
this -- that the excellent Liturgy of our Church should be no Motive, or only a
secondary Motive, for frequenting her Service; and that this wrong Taste of
Hearers is apt to lead to a wrong Taste in Preaching, and draws Men of warm
Tempers, small Abilities, and fond of Pleasing, into Extravagances of Heat and
Zeal, which Reason cannot justify, and Christianity requires not at their Hand.

AS the Result, therefore, of what has been said, let me, in the next Place
entreat you, as a religious Society, to "hold fast the Profession of your Faith
without Wavering," without Levity, and without being "blown about by every Wind
of Doctrine." I mean not, on this Occasion, the least Reflection against any of
those who differ from us in their Persuasion. They have, no Doubt, fully
examined and convinced themselves in the Faith they hold; and the same
Indulgence which we freely extend to them, we only crave for ourselves. Seeing
we also, as well as they, have embraced the Faith of a particular Church, we
also, must be allowed to have sufficient Conviction in our own Minds for the
Choice we have made. We must be allowed to think the Faith of our Church the
same that "was once delivered to the Saints." We must be allowed to consider
her Worship as social in its Nature; plain yet solemn, and keeping the golden
Mean betwixt those idle Pegeantries that distract the Attention to Things
purely sensible, and those illusive Reveries that pretend to Refinements which
human Nature cannot reach. We must be allowed to pay a due Regard to her
ancient Discipline, her venerable Order and her wise Constitutions, that were
planned by Men of superior Eminence, and have stood the Test of Ages. And,
lastly, we must be allowed to look upon these Things as Matters, not lightly,
wantonly, or rashly to be given up.

I shall only detain you while I recommend one thing more to you, as a
religious Society; and that is, a liberal and beneficent Spirit in contributing
to all Works of Charity and common Concern. And, on this Head, it is with
Pleasure that I confess myself almost absolved from the Necessity of saying any
Thing. I am rather called to congratulate you on the excellent Spirit that has
already been shown, than to doubt of its Continuance.

THIS House has been almost wholly built within yourselves; by the free,
voluntary and cheerful Contributions of your own Members. Some have spared in
their Exigence, and some out of their Abundance, and that ^o with surprising
Liberality. Blessed are ye for this Loan that ye have lent unto the Lord. 1 Samuel ii. 20.
May God remember you concerning this, and wipe not out your good Deeds that
you have done for the House of your God and for the Offices thereof. Nehem.
xiii. 14.


PROCEED with the same liberal and pious Spirit, in what remains of this good
Work. Remember that God has blessed you with every Instance of Prosperity, in
Times of extremest Danger. And surely, when our Harvests have been multiplied,
and our Cattle and our Fields increased; -- when we behold our Children growing
up and prospering round us, and even wanting Room in the House of the Lord, --
then, Oh then! it is one of the noblest Charities to offer back to God a Part
of what he has so liberally bestowed, and to make a Provision for continuing
the Worship of his adorable Name among our Posterity to the latest Generations!
Whatever we may give this Way, according to our best Abilities, God will accept
as an offering of our Love to him; and let us look what we lay out, and it
shall be returned to us "after many Days." Eccles. xi. 1.


I come now to the last Verses of my Text, which were these -- The Lord God be
with us, as he was with our Fathers. Let him not leave us nor forsake us --
That all the People of the Earth may know, that the Lord is God, and there is
none else. -- And the very Tenor of these Words, as well as the Nature of this
Occasion, calls us to conclude in the most humble and supplicant Manner with --

PRAYER.
AND now, O thou most holy and ever-adorable LORD GOD omnipotent! our GOD and
our Fathers GOD -- who inhabitest Eternity, and art the Life and Light of the
World! What shall we render unto thee for ten thousand times ten thousand
Mercies, which Language would fail us to express, and the whole Period of our
Lives to recount! But, above all, what shall we render unto thee for the
Knowledge of thine everlasting Gospel, and those glorious Privileges to which
we are called as Members of thy Church Militant on Earth -- even to that
exalted Privilege of Angels -- the Privilege of enjoying Union and Communion
with thee! O, then, that our Hearts could now conceive, and our Tongues could
utter, such Strains of Praise and Adoration and Thanksgiving so thee, as
Angels, and glorified Spirits, and the Church triumphant, pour forth to thee in
Heaven above!

IT is good for us, O Almighty Father, that thou have called us to this
Knowledge, and have vouchsafed us these Privileges! It is good for us that thou
did put it into our Minds to build thee an House to dwell in, and have
permitted us to dedicate and set it apart (as we hope) to the Glory of thy Name
for ever! Yet, inasmuch as we are taught not to put our Trust in these outward
marks of Devotion, but that each of us must prepare for thee an Habitation
inwardly, and a Temple in our Hearts; we do, therefore, now come to make a
nobler and more important DEDICATION unto thee! We come, as is our bounden
Duty, through the Merits and Intercession of our blessed REDEEMER, to dedicate
OURSELVES, our Souls and Bodies, our whole Lives, to thy Service. And, O thou
who art the Hearer of Prayer, "to whom Mercies and Forgivenesses belong, tho we
have rebelled against thee," we most earnestly pray that our past Offenses may
be blotted out, that we may be washed in the Blood of Christ, and that the Vows
and Offerings which we now make may be accepted in Him, and rendered effectual
to our everlasting Salvation.

For this End, O merciful God, let the Grace of thy holy Spirit assist and
strengthen us in all our Supplications and Prayers that we shall thenceforward
offer up to thee in this Place; and be thou graciously pleased to vouchsafe us
thy Presence therein continually. As thou were with our Fathers, O Lord our
God, so be thou with us. As thy mighty Power brought them (like the Israelites
of old) through the Perils of another raging Sea; as thou did support them in a
remote Land, while it was yet another Wilderness; as thou did at Length give
them goodly Habitations therein, and, in thy divine Favor, made Choice of them
and their Children after them, to plant and propagate thy everlasting Gospel
through Regions that sat in Darkness and the Shadow of Death -- as thou were with
them in these Things, so be thou with us. Let not our Unworthiness provoke thee
to leave us nor forsake us; but let our Light shine continually forth, till all
the People of the Earth shall know -- till the HEATHEN around us know -- that
the Lord is God, and there is none else; till they know and confess that the
Gods whom they have served are no Gods; that they and their Fathers have
inherited Lies and Vanity from the Beginning; and that there is none in whom
Salvation may be found, save in thee, O Lord most mighty and most high!

AND in Order to hasten this happy time, when all the Ends of the Earth shall
bow down before thee, and Kings and Princes cast their Crowns before the Throne
of the Lamb, we pray that thou would give Success to all Foundations of useful
Knowledge, and to the blessed GOSPEL, wheresoever and by whomsoever it is truly
preached. In a particular Manner, be pleased to give continual Success to the
Preaching thereof in this House, which we have now openly and solemnly set
apart to that sacred Purpose. May all who are called to minister therein, put
off their own Righteousness, nor seek the applause of Men; but may they be
clothed with the Humility of Christ, rightly and duly administer his
Sacraments, explain his Word, and be anxious for Nothing so much as to advance
his Glory, and preach him crucified. May this Place never be prostituted to the
Purposes of Vanity and Ambition, Error or Enthusiasm, Coldness or Lukewarmness.
May it continue the Habitation of the God of Jacob for ever; a Place where
Prayer shall ever be made unto him, and where daily shall he be praised! May it
continue a Place where the Service of our Church, the Preaching of the Word,
and the Administration of our Sacraments, may be rendered effectual, through the
atonement of Christ, to the Salvation of Thousands!

FINALLY, O Lord, we pray that Love and Union may prevail among all the Members
of this Church through Life; and, at their Death, may they be translated into the
general Assembly of the Church of the firstborn that are written in Heaven;
where, being freed from all human Frailties, and admitted to the beatific
Presence, they may offer up unwearied Hallelujahs to him that sits on the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever!

Amen!
N. B. Here a Conclusion was made by singing the Words of the Text, as an
Anthem.


