Dr. Mayhew's DISCOURSE ON THE Death of K. GEORGE II. And Accession of K.
GEORGE III.

A DISCOURSE Occasioned by the Death of King GEORGE II. AND THE Happy Accession
of His Majesty King GEORGE III. TO THE Imperial Throne of GREAT BRITAIN;
Delivered Jan. ^th 1761. AND Published at the Desire of the West Church and
Congregation in Boston, New England.

By Jonathan Mayhew, D. D. Pastor of the said Church.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND. Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL in Queen Street, M,
DCC, LXI.

TO the Christian, the Truly-Protestant, and very Loyal SOCIETY, who attend the
public Worship in the WESTERLY Part of Boston,

THIS DISCOURSE, published at their Desire signified by their Committee, is now
gratefully INSCRIBED, with the sincerest Wishes for their temporal and
spiritual Welfare, and with due Acknowledgments of the many Obligations by them
laid upon

The AUTHOR.

GOD rules in the Kingdom of Men.
DANIEL IV. 18. -- The most High rules in the Kingdom of Men --
THE present unusual and gloomy appearance of the place In allusion to the
pulpit hung with mourning on this occasion.
in which I now stand, may seem the natural presage of a discourse replete with
gloomy ideas, with lamentation and mourning. But yet methinks this is a season
adapted to awaken various, and even contrary passions in our breasts; a season
wherein we almost unavoidably mingle some of the tears of joy with those of
sorrow; and wherein wholly to indulge, or wholly to repress either of them,
would hardly be innocent; at least not very congruous. On one hand we justly
mourn the death of an excellent king, whom every good British subject was
habituated to consider rather under the amiable and endearing character of a
father, than the more awful one of a sovereign. And where is the heart so hard,
so unfeeling, so devoid of all sentiment, as to remain untouched, unaffected,
at the death of such a king, the common father of his people? What bosom does
not heave? What eye is not ready to overflow, on so melancholy an occasion?

BUT, on the other hand, have we not cause for gratitude, that heaven spared
him to us so long? and for joy, that his royal grandson and successor is
peaceably ascended the throne? And this at such a mature age, and adorned with
so many royal qualities, as give us the reasonable prospect of sitting under
his shadow with great delight; and, in a Word, of enjoying under his reign the
continuance of all those numerous blessings, which we so long enjoyed under the
auspicious reign of his late majesty. The same object has often both a bright
and a dark side; and, by being turned round, gives relief, or even pleasure, to
the pained eye of the spectator. As our felicity is never pure and unallayed in
this evil world; so neither is our sorrow ever, or hardly ever, unmixed; but
usually attended with some circumstances, which, being duly considered, may
administer comfort to us. This is our present case: That sovereign hand which
gave the wound to our hearts by the death of his late majesty, has almost
healed it the same hour, and turned our mourning into joy; or if not into joy,
has at least ministered the best consolation that the nature of the case would
admit of. For the loss of a good king cannot be any way so effectually made up,
or remedied, as by another, worthy to succeed him, reigning in his stead;
especially one descended, from him, and in whom he may be considered as, in
some sort, still living and reigning. Such is the consolation that gracious
heaven affords to us, and to three kingdoms, at this season of our common
mourning. And both reason and religion as much require that we gracefully
receive the consolation offered, as that we humbly lay to heart that event of
providence, by which we came to need it.

IT becomes us as men, and especially as christians, on this occasion to look
up to the sovereign ruler of the universe, who "removes kings and sets up
kings", as seems good in his sight. Him we are to consider as the author of
those revoltuions, and other great changes, which take place from age to age in
the kingdoms of this world; and should make a religious improvement of the
present dispensations of his providence toward us. It is with a view at
assisting you in so important a duty, that I have chosen the words just now
read, for the subject of my discourse at this time -- "The most High rules in
the kingdom of men." The words occur three several times in this fourth chapter
of Daniel; which consists of a manifesto, or solemn declaration, which
Nebuchadnezzar the great king of Babylon published "to all people, nations and
languages"; and which the prophet, for the honor of God's name, thought proper,
it seems, to preserve entire with his own writings, to be transmitted to future
generations. Nebuchadnezzar is spoken of in scripture as one of the greatest
monarchs that ever lived in the world. "Thou, O king", said Daniel to him, "art
a king of kings; for the God of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and
strength and glory. And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of
the field, and the fowls of heaven has he delivered into thy hand Chap. II.
ver. 37, 38.
". Profane history speaks of him conformably to this account He is said to
have held in subjection Syria, Phenicia, Arabia and Egypt. "Strabo likewise
asserts that this king among the Chaldeans was more celebrated than Hercules,
and that he proceeded as far as the pillars of Hercules [near the streights of
Gibralter] and led his army out of Spain into Thrace and Pontus." Vid. Dr.
Newton's XIIIth Dissertation on Prophecy.
. He was as proud and impious as he was great. And God seems to have raised him
up as he did Pharaoh, that he might "show his power in him, and that his name
might be declared throughout all the earth". It seems that he was for a time
much alarmed, and even convinced, by the miraculous deliverance of the three
pious Jews from the fiery furnace, whom he had ordered to be cast into it for
not worshipping the golden image which he had set up; and he made a decree,
that no one should speak against the God whom these men worshipped. Dan. C.
III. v. 29.
But his heart, like Pharaoh's, resumed its former hardness; and was so lifted
up with pride, that God resolved to humble him in a very signal manner. And the
main design of his manifesto, contained in this IVth Chapter of Daniel, is to
declare to all the world the wonderful means by which God did this; by which he
convinced him of his supreme dominion, his power and providence, and the wisdom
and justice of all his dealings with the children of men. So that this may be
called the proclamation whereby that mighty, and once impious monarch,
recognized God's universal dominion, as the King of kings and Lord of lords. "I
thought it good"," says he, "to show the signs and wonders that the high God
has wrought toward me. For how great are his signs? and how mighty are his
wonders? His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom", etc. He then proceeds
particularly to relate what had happened to him; the astonishing signs by which
God humbled his proud heart, and made him confess, that he indeed "rules in
the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will." What these signs and
wonders were, I now forbear particularly to mention, lest my discourse should
be drawn out to too great a length. But in general, he had a remarkable dream,
or vision, wherein, under the similitude of cutting down a mighty tree, was,
according to the prophet's interpretation, prefigured his own fall from his
greatness, and his being driven from men. And when the king said, "Is not this
great Babylon that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my majesty? While the word was in the kings
mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee
it is spoken, The kingdom is departed from thee," etc. And "the same hour was
the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar." Of which event we find the prophet
afterward giving the following account to his son Belshazzar -- "All people,
nations and languages trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew,
and whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would
he put down. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride,
he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him: And he
was driven from the sons of men -- till he knew that the most high God ruled in
the kingdom of men, and that he appoints over it whomsoever he will Chap. V.
ver. 19, 20, 21.
."

THUS wonderfully was this great king brought down, till at the end of the days
appointed, he lift up his eyes to heaven, and his understanding returned unto
him. And he concludes his proclamation in the strong and emphatical terms
following, which discover an heart very deeply impressed with what had befallen
him for his former pride, tyranny and impiety -- "Now I Nebuchadnezzar", says
he, "praise, and extol, and honor the king of heaven, all whose works are
truth, and his ways judgment; and those that walk in pride he is able to abase".

But to return; The words of the text may be considered as an entire,
independent sentence, though they indeed make but a part of one, as they stand in
the several places where they occur in this chapter. In this light it is
proposed to consider them; and they will, I suppose, be a proper introduction
to some reflections on the present occasion, as they assert God's supreme
dominion in and over the kingdoms of men.

FOR the illustration of this subject, it is to be observed first in general,

I. THAT all nations, all kingdoms, are in the hand of God, who has an original
right, and absolute power over them. He has made of one blood all nations for
to dwell upon the face of the earth; and has the entire disposal of them. The
absolute sovereignty of God over all nations, is represented in very strong and
sublime language by Nebuchadnezzar in this chapter, after his reason returned
to him. "His kingdom", says he, "is from generation to generation: And all the
inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he does according to his
will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou?" The prophet Isaiah
expresses himself upon this subject in language not less emphatical. "Behold,
the nations are as a drop of the bucket", says he, "and are counted as the
small dust of the balance: behold, he takes up the isles as a very little
thing -- all nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him as
less than nothing and vanity". And a little after in the same chapter -- "It is
he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are
as grasshoppers; that stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads
them out as a tent to dwell in; that brings the princes to nothing: He makes
the judges of the earth as vanity". [Chap. XL.]

NOW, God's ruling in the kingdom of men, expresses in general that supreme
power, that uncontrollable dominion, which he exercises over all nations from
one generation to another: Not only his right and power, but his actual
government over them. For his ruling in the kingdom of men, implies his
continual agency and providence therein, and his reigning over them as a
sovereign Lord; not merely his power and authority to do so. And accordingly,
whatever befalls states and kingdoms; their rise, enlargement and prosperity,
their fall, their declension, and the various calamities that happen to them,
are in scripture attributed to God's overruling providence, as the
accomplishment of his sovereign pleasure concerning them. And that these things
are justly ascribed to him, is evident from many considerations; particularly
from his having enabled his prophets to foretell, many ages beforehand, the
changes and revolutions which should take place among the nations of the earth:
Which predictions have been punctually verified by the event.

THUS the ancient prophecies respecting the Jews, the Egyptians, the
Babylonians, the Ninevites, the Trojans, and many other nations, have long
since had a most exact and surprising accomplishment; as any one, acquainted
with the prophecies, and with what has since actually befallen those nations,
must acknowledge Many of these predictions, together with their respective
accomplishments, are set in a clear and strong light in the Rev. and very
learned Dr. Newton's Dissertations on prophecy, Vol. I.
. And in this book of Daniel's prophecies, was foretold, with an astonishing
precision, though in figurative language, what should come to pass in the four
great successive monarchies, or empires of the world; the Assyrian or
Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, the Macedonian and the Roman; in, or during, the
latter of which, the God of heaven was to set up a kingdom of a peculiar kind,
which should never have an end, or be left to other people: "And the kingdom,
and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,
shall [at length] be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; and all dominions shall serve and obey him"
Chap. VII. ver. 27.
. Nor is the present state of the Jews, or indeed the general state of the
christian world at this day, any thing less than a demonstration of the truth
of prophecy: which is, at the same time, a kind of visible demonstration of the
truth and reality of God's ruling in the kingdom of men. For, certainly none
but he, who has the fates and fortunes of all nations in his own hand, and the
most absolute disposal of them, could possibly enable men so particularly and
exactly to foretell what should befall them in remote ages, as the prophets have
actually done. And the accomplishment of so many prophecies already, as it is
an undeniable proof that the world is governed by divine providence, so it
gives us an assurance, that those predictions in these sacred books, which
still remain unfulfilled, shall also have their accomplishment at the appointed
time; when "the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the prophets". But,

II. GOD's ruling in the kingdom of men, may express more particularly and
directly that authority and sovereign power, which he exercises from age to
age over the kings and potentates of the earth; and which truly denominate him
the King of kings and Lord of lords. That being may well be said to rule in the
kingdom of men, on whom all earthly kings are entirely dependent; who raises
one to a throne, and casts down another; who gives to all kings their
authority, and limits them in the exercise thereof; who gives them whatever
qualifications they have for ruling; who also gives to their lives and reigns,
either a shorter or longer term, as he pleases; who makes their reign either a
blessing to the kingdoms which they govern, or the contrary; and who will
finally judge even them in righteousness. With the greatest truth and propriety
may he be said to rule and govern in the kingdom of men, who exercises such a
dominion over the monarchs of the world. And to enlarge a little here cannot, I
suppose, be thought improper on the present occasion.

1. GOD rules in the kingdom of men, as all earthly kings derive their power
and authority originally from him; or as they reign by his permission and
providence, and as his ministers. This is in effect asserted in the words
immediately following the text -- "and gives it" [i.e. the kingdom] "to
whomsoever he will", in the exercise of that sovereign dominion which he has
over all. In conformity whereto, the prophet addresseth himself thus to
Belshazzar, the son and successor of Nebuchadnezzar. "O thou king, the most
high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory. and
honor Chap. V. ver. 18.
." And the apostle Paul asserts in a more general way, and without any
exception, that "there is no power but of God"; that "the powers that be are
ordained of God"; and that kings, and indeed other inferior rulers, are "God's
ministers", appointed to govern the world under him, the Lord of all; and to
carry on the designs of his providence therein. So that human government, being
duly administered, is in effect the government of God. For which reason we are
admonished to be subject "to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake,
whether it be to the king as supreme, or unto governors as unto them that are
sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well 1 Pet. II. 13, 14.
."

GOD does not indeed, by any immediate act of his own, place a crown upon the
head, and put a scepter in the hand of him, whom he has ordained to reign, and
seat him upon a royal throne. He leaves nations (ordinarily, I mean) to the
free exercise of their liberty and discretion, under the general law of reason,
to choose their own forms of government, and to model them as best suits them
respectively. Some nations neither have, nor are required to have, any kings at
all. Some crowns are, properly speaking, elective, by the fundamental laws of
the kingdom. In other kingdoms the crown is hereditary, either with certain
limitations and exceptions, or without any, according to the various
constitutions of different kingdoms; which constitutions themselves are not,
however, absolutely immutable. In all which respects it may truly be said, that
nations are left to the exercise of their natural discretion and liberty. But
still religion, and even reason, teaches us to acknowledge the hand and
providence of God in the exaltation of any particular person to a throne. In
elective kingdoms the thoughts and counsels of the electors are, though
imperceptibly, so overruled, that the choice falls at last upon him, whom God
had ordained to reign; and thus, without knowing his purpose, they fulfill his
sovereign pleasure. And where the crown is hereditary according to the
constitution, God in his providence often interrupts and defeats the
succession, either by the death of the presumptive heir, or by other means; and
sometimes the crown devolves at last to one, so remote from it by blood, that
he was very unlikely ever to wear it, according to human rules of judging; or
it is perhaps transferred to another race. These things are common, and well
known; by which God shows his own sovereignty in the kingdom of men, and makes
it manifest that he "gives it to whomsoever he will".

2. GOD rules in the kingdom of men, as all earthly kings derive from him
whatever qualifications and abilities they have for reigning, as well as their
authority. How great? how important, is the difference between a wise and good,
and a weak and bad king? The welfare of nations, under God, depends very much
upon the talents and character of the kings, whom he exalts to reign over
them. Nor is it less evident that he bestows the various gifts and talents by
which kings are distinguished from one another, than it is that they reign by
his permission, and providential ordination. Wisdom, magnanimity, and other
royal qualities, are the gift of God; of which none are possessed in any
greater degree, than he saw fit to bestow them, in order to accomplish his own
wise and holy purposes. And from some these qualities are withheld, with the
same general design. For, according to the holy scriptures, important events
are brought about in nations, and in the state of the world, as well by the
folly and infatuation of some kings, as by the wisdom of others; all in
conformity to the will and purposes of heaven. And this is one way, in which
God manifests his own sovereignty in the kingdom of men.

3. GOD rules in the kingdom of men, by succeeding the administration of
kings, and by making them great public blessings, or the contrary, according to
his own pleasure. Most commonly indeed, wise and good kings reign successfully,
while weak and wicked ones prove rather a curse than a blessing. This is not,
however, universally the case. It is obvious that the success or prosperity of
an administration, does not solely depend upon, nor is always in exact
proportion to, the wisdom, justice, fortitude, and other princely virtues of
him that sits upon the throne. The views and endeavors of the best kings are
sometimes frustrated; while those of far inferior ones are crowned with
success, both in peace and war. It is God that gives salvation unto kings, and
thereby to kingdoms: He it is, that brings them down. And both these he does,
in such ways, and by such means, as plainly evince his sovereignty in the
kingdom of men; and show to kings and kingdoms at once, their absolute
dependence upon him for prosperity. How many great and common calamities are
there, which befall nations from time to time, that the wisest and most powerful
monarchs can neither prevent nor remove? And how many public blessings are
there, which kings have little, or perhaps no hand at all, in procuring?
Riches, and honor, and power, and all national blessings, must be acknowledged
to come originally from God, sometimes by the instrumentality of kings, and
sometimes without it; and in his "hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all".

4. GOD rules in the kingdom of men, as he gives to the reign of earthly kings
either a shorter or longer term, as seems good in his sight. Mighty monarchs
are sometimes "deposed from their kingly thrones" for their sins, as
Nebuchadnezzar was. When his mind was hardened in pride, it was said unto him,
"The kingdom is departed from thee"; and instantly, his glory was taken away,
and he was "driven from men". Belshazzar his son did not profit by his example;
and therefore met with a still more fatal overthrow. No sooner had the hand
upon the wall written his doom, and Daniel interpreted it, -- "God has
numbered thy kingdom, and finished it", etc. than he was slain; "and Darius the
Median took the kingdom". How many other proud, arbitrary and tyrannical
princes, who have thought themselves above all control, have suddenly been
brought down to the dust? either expelled their kingdoms, or come to an
untimely end, and left their thrones to others? Nor is the sovereignty of God
in the kingdom of men, less manifested in depriving earthly kings of their
power and dominion, than in conferring them at first. In the language of the
royal psalmist, "Promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, not
from the south. But God is the judge: he puts down one, and sets up
another Psalm LXXV. 6, 7.
."

BESIDES: It is appointed unto all men, and no less to kings, even great and
good kings, than others, once to die; and to give an account of themselves to
God. Their greatness exempts them neither from the common mortality, nor from
the righteous judgment of God, in whose hand their breath is. From some the
great arbiter of life and death, soon takes away their breath, even in early
youth; so that they hardly know what it is to wear a crown, before they are
commanded to resign it; and called to appear before the high tribunal of him
that "regards not the persons of princes". Other kings are taken away in the
midst of their years; and all their devices, projections and designs, whether
good or bad, are at once brought to nothing; sometimes to the joy, and
sometimes to the sorrow of their subjects; and not only of their own subjects,
but of other nations. To other kings God is pleased to grant length of days,
and a reign of many years; so that they are satisfied with life, and see many
happy effects of their reign, before their days are numbered and finished. Now,
God manifests his sovereignty over the kings and potentates of the earth, by
cutting short, or protracting their life and reign, in this manner: And hereby,
in part, it appears, that he indeed rules in the kingdom of men.

It may, not improperly, be added here, that a great deal depends upon the
time, and particular circumstances, wherein kings are taken out of this world.
There are, with respect to their subjects at least, I might say with respect to
themselves also, both favorable and unfavourable conjunctures for them to die
in. As the case may be circumstanced, the death of a king, though of no very
eminent qualities and virtues, may be of fatal consequence to a kingdom: As,
for example, when the succession is left doubtful, different persons laying
claim to it, and each of them supported by powerful factions. In this case, how
often have nations been thrown into confusion, and involved in all the
calamities of a civil war? Or, though the succession is uncontroverted, yet if
the heir be not arrived at an age proper for governing a kingdom, the death of
a king in these circumstances is a great calamity: For "Woe to thee, O Land,"
says Solomon, "when thy king is a child." God sometimes chastizeth nations by
removing their kings at such unfavourable conjunctures as these, and others
that might easily be mentioned. And though the death of good kings will always be
sincerely lamented by good and dutiful subjects; yet it must be owned that, in
certain circumstances, the death even of such kings can hardly be looked upon
as a frown of divine providence, in any other sense than that, in which the
common mortality of mankind is so. As, for example, if they die when they are
far advanced in years; when they are almost past bearing the weight of
government; when their kingdoms are in flourishing circumstances; when the
succesion is undisputed; or there are no parties or factions powerful enough to
create public troubles and commotions; when the successor is of mature age for
wielding a scepter, and is endowed with such princely virtues, as naturally
inspire the hopes of great happiness under his reign: When all these
circumstances take place, they greatly alleviate that sorrow which all good
subjects must in some degree feel, on the death of a good king. And God's
sovereignty in the kingdoms of men plainly appears by the particular time and
conjuncture, wherein he removes kings out of this world: For, that these
circumstances, whether favorable or otherwise, together with the duration of
each monarch's life, and the length of his reign, are all fixed, all determined
by the most High, no man who believes a providence, can consistently doubt.

UPON the whole (for I must not enlarge): God does not only show himself
sovereign in the kingdom of men, by the persons whom he exalts to earthly
thrones, by the various qualifications which he bestows upon them, by
prospering or not prospering their reign, by sometimes casting them down from
their thrones before their lives are come to a period, and by the particular
time and circumstances wherein they are respectively taken out of this world by
death: He does not hereby only show his sovereign power in and over the kingdom
of men, but he also manifests hereby his favor and goodness toward nations, or
his righteous displeasure. He executes loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth, by the dispensations of his providence toward
kings and kingdoms. The welfare of nations immediately depends, in a great
measure, upon the kings whom God places over them. It is said of Israel, with
reference to Saul, that God "gave them a king in his anger" After a while, he
brought about a revolution in that kingdom, and gave them David in his
kindness, a man after his own heart, who was a great blessing to the nation.
And when David died in a good old age, after a prosperous reign, and when he
had in a manner subdued all their enemies, his son Solomon succeeded him in the
throne, whom the queen of Sheba addressed in the equally pious and courtly
terms following: Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in thee to set
thee upon his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God. Because thy God loved
Israel, to establish them forever, therefore made he thee king over them to do
judgment and justice.

IT being evident then, from what has been said, that God rules in the kingdom
of men, giving it to whomsoever he will; and also, that his favor and righteous
displeasure are manifested toward different nations; or toward the same
nations at different times, by the "manner of the kings that reign over them",
and by the time and circumstances of their removal out of this world: These
things being evident. I say, what still remains, is, that we apply this subject
to ourselves, and to the present occasion, by making some reflections on the
reign and death of his late majesty, and on the accession of George III. to the
imperial throne of Great Britain.

AND it will not, as is humbly conceived, be improper here, in the first place,
to take a cursory view of the providential means, by which the British crown
devolved to the illustrious house of Hanover, and consequently to his late, and
his present majesty. For such a retrospect on the events of divine providence,
at the same time that it will be a farther illustration of God's ruling in the
kingdom of men, and giving it to whomsoever he will, may also serve to
establish us in the principles of true British liberty, and of loyalty to his
present majesty, as founded in, and resulting from, those principles. Nor will
you, I am persuaded, think I go beyond my proper sphere, if, upon such an
occasion I inculcate loyalty, and obedience to the established government; and
this upon the very principles on which that government is founded, in
opposition to those of despotism and tyranny.

LET me remind you then, that after the death In the year 1603.
of queen Elizabeth, (the glory of whose reign, otherwise truly great, was
obscured and tarnished by religious persecution) it pleased God, doubtless for
the sins of the nation, to raise four princes successively to the throne, whose
reigns were all inglorious, and some of them infamous to the last degree;
princes of great pride and vanity, of arbitrary notions and practices, of
little wisdom, policy or discretion, and still less truth, sincerity and honor;
princes who were always the dupes of our ancient, enterprising and dangerous
enemies, of jesuits, popish ministers or popish wives; princes whose reigns
disgraced the nation abroad, and were sore visitations of divine providence
upon it.

THE last of these four kings whom the most High gave us in his anger, James
II, He succeeded his brother Charles II. in 1684.
was an open, professed and bigoted roman-catholic; who stuck at no measures
in order to introduce the religion of Rome, to despoil the British nations of
their ancient liberties, and to entail upon them the twofold curse of popery
and slavery; which have indeed a close connection one with the other. The king
daily made prodigious strides toward a despotic power; to establish which on
the ruins of the British constitution, was his manifest aim. And he doubtless
promised himself success in this execrable design, by reflecting on that series
of events in and after the reign of his father, from which he ought to have
drawn other conclusions. That unhappy prince, king Charles I. by favoring the
papists contrary to law, and many flagrant violations of the constitution, had
involved the nation in a civil war; a war entered into on one side, in defense
of public liberty, on the other, in the support of tyranny; and which did not
end but with the ruin, both of the constitution, and of the infatuated prince
who had been the blameable cause of it. King James seemed to take it for
granted, that the nation would never again, at least not so soon, have recourse
to arms, or resistance, in defense of its rights and liberties; but rather
submit to the most cruel tyranny, than attempt to rid itself of it by those
means which, however necessary, had been attended with such dismal
consequences: Especially as the doctrine of passive obedience and
non-resistance had, ever since the restoration, In 1660.
been the established doctrine, which no one could contradict with impunity. It
had, however, been a more just, as well as more safe inference, that the brave
people who had lately made such efforts in defense of their liberties, would
not now tamely submit to arbitrary sway; but again have recourse to some
extraordinary means of self-defence, if driven to extremities, whatever
doctrines they might profess to believe. But -- Quem Deus vult perdere, prius
dementat -- Those whom God designs to destroy, he first infatuates; so that
they resolutely persist in such measures, as must needs terminate in their
ruin. The king was deaf to all the remonstrances of reason and justice, of
policy and interest; and would suffer no check in his mad career to
destruction. Nor was there, perhaps, ever another king, to whom the words of
the prophet to Belshazzar, were more applicable than to this prince, whom
neither the fate of his unhappy father, nor any thing else, could keep from
destroying himself -- O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy
father a kingdom -- But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in
pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him.
And he was driven from the sons of men, and his heart was made like the beasts,
and his dwelling was with the wild asses -- And thou his son, O Belshazzar,
have not humbled thine heart, THOUGH THOU KNEW ALL THIS! But have lifted up
thy self, Dan. V. 18.
etc.

IN this critical conjuncture, it pleased him who rules in the kingdom of men,
not only to open the eyes of all the friends to public liberty and the
protestant religion, to see the common danger which threatened them, but also to
unite their hearts and counsels in an extraordinary manner to guard against it.
Party-distinctions, which had hitherto run very high, were now laid aside. The
illustrious prince of Orange, the king's son-in-law, who was known to be at
once a lover of liberty, a true protestant and an hero, was secretly applied to
for his advice and assistance, which he generously resolved to afford, to the
utmost of his ability. He accordingly, after mature deliberation, and by
concert with the leading and better part of the lords and commons of England,
arrived there with a very considerable armament Nov 5. 1688.
; but relying chiefly on the known good will and affection of the people in
general, whom a sense of their common danger had united. It was not long after
his arrival, that king James, conscious he had justly forfeited, and entirely
lost, the affections of all his subjects, except the romancatholic party;
seeing himself forsaken, and people of all ranks flocking to the standard of
the prince; calling to remembrance, doubtless, the tragedy of the 30th of
January 1648; and not being ambitious, it seems, to share with his father the
glory of martyrdom; This sort of martyrdom was very common in ancient times,
according to that of the poet -- -- "Sine caede et sanguine pauci
"Descendunt reges King and Tyrant were almost synonimous and convertible terms
with the Latin poets, orators and historians: For they hardly knew of any
kings, but what were also tyrants; and had scarely the idea of such a limited,
legal monarchy, as British subjects have the happiness of living under.
, et sicca morte tyranni."
Juv. Sat. X. Few tyrants to the grave in peace descend;
Abhorred they live, and bloody is their end.

thought proper to provide for his safety by a precipitate flight into France:
Which court had before graciously offered him her assistance in his design to
enslave the British nations. France had offered him 30,000 men to support his
tyranny.
Then it was, that the glorious REVOLUTION took place: For the throne being
declared vacant by two grand conventions of the lords and commons, by means of
the abdication, i. e. the running away of king James, the prince and princess
of Orange were elected, and invited into it; and soon proclaimed king and
queen, to the great joy of all the true friends to liberty. The administration
was, however, to be solely in the hands of the king, during his life. In
bringing about which happy revolution, even many of those, both clergy and
laity, heartily joined, who had before been loud and clamorous in asserting the
senseless, brutish principles of passive obedience and non-resistance, in
consequence of the supposed divine, indefeasable right of kings by inheritance:
Opinions now exploded by all men of sense. Mr. HAMPDEN. It is a disgrace to our
church to have taken up such opinions; and I will venture to prophesy, that in
future times our clergy must renounce them, or they will be turned against them
by those who mean their destruction. Suppose a popish king on the throne. Will
the clergy adhere to passive obedidence and non-resistance? If they do, they
deliver up their religion to Rome; if they do not, their practice will confute
their own doctrine.


Lord FAULKLAND. Nature, Sir, will in time be sure to set right whatever
opinion contradicts her great laws, let who will be the teacher. --


Dialogues of the Dead, Dial. I. Reputed Author, Ld. LYTTLETON.


THIS was a new and memorable era in the English history. The declaration of
rights presented and read to William and Mary, when they were invited into the
throne, ascertained the rights of the subject, and reduced the prerogative,
which had been extended beyond all bounds in many preceding reigns, to its
ancient limits. It was declared by the two conventions beforementioned, that
the kings of England held the crown by virtue of an "original contract," in
opposition to the notions of an indefeaseable hereditary right: And this was
the basis on which the government was settled. Provision was now made by many
parliamentary acts, for securing the public liberty, and the future peace and
prosperity of the nation. To which ends, amongst other things, the succession
to the crown was limited to the protestant line of the royal family, and all
romancatholics, however nearly related to it by blood, declared forever
incapable of reigning in England. The like was done in North-Britain, at that
time a distinct kingdom.

KING William and Queen Mary being dead without leaving issue, the princess
Ann, a protestant, and a daughter of the then lately outlawed king James,
ascended the throne in conformity to the parliamentary settlement of the
succession. In her reign the union between North and South-Britain, which king
William had zealously recommended before, was happily accomplished. An union,
which the author of nature had pointed out between two nations on the same
island; both lovers of liberty, both brave and warlike, both generally
protestant; mutually standing in need of one another's assistance against their
common enemies; and whose situation, and martial spirit, whenever they were at
variance, had rendered them sore scourges to each other. Queen Ann, though a
Stewart, reigned not without reputation and glory, till one or two of the last
years of her life, when she had fallen into the hands of bad ministers and
counselors. Her son, the duke of Gloucester, who was otherwise to have
succeeded her, died the year before she came to the throne. He died in 1700,
being in the 11th year of his age. He was a prince of great hopes, whose father
was prince George of Denmark, the queen's husband.
So that the elector of Hanover was now the presumptive heir to the crown. But
the queen was suspected, and not without some good reasons, of a design to set
aside, if possible, the protestant succession in that illustrious house, in
favor of her [doubtful] brother, the chevalier de St. George; who, whether he
were or were not, the son of the then late king James, was yet excluded from
the throne by law, as a romancatholic. Some, indeed, deny that the queen had
any such intention; and that, with as much confidence as others assert it. But
be that as it may, upon her death In 1714.
, the elector of Hanover (George I.) was immediately, and without opposition,
proclaimed king of Great Britain, in conformity to the parliamentary settlement
of the succession, confirmed by repeated acts in both the preceding reigns. He
was a protestant, nearly related to the crown by blood; at least nearer than
any other protestant prince, or princess, then living The mother of K. George
I. was a granddaughter of K. James I A princess of a very distinguished
character.
. And he reigned with wisdom, justice and clemency, though not without some
disturbances, and one open rebellion, raised in favor of the pretender. He
died in the 13th year of his reign, leaving behind him the character of one of
the wisest, justest, and most magnanimous princes of his age. And on the death
of this truly great and good king, the British crown devolved, by the right of
succession as limited by parliament, to his late majesty king George II. Anno
1727.


BY this brief deduction you see, on one hand, the repeated efforts of tyranny,
and on the other, the glorious struggles for liberty, of which Britain was the
scene for many years. You see how God rules in the kingdom of men, and gives
it to whomsoever he will. You see how mercifully he delivered the British
nations from one popish and arbitrary king at the revolution; and how he
preserved it once and again from another; I mean the pretender, whom many
persons were desirous of introducing, to the prejudice of the protestant
succession. You see how God has been the guardian of our liberties, civil and
sacred. You see that British subjects have the happiness of living under a
legal and limited monarchy; and, what are some of the fundamental principles,
on which the present government is established. In fine, you see by what right
the princes of the house of Hanover have ascended the British throne; not a
chimerical and imaginary, but a solid, legal and parliamentary one: The best
and most indisputable right, that any king can possibly reign by, unless God
himself should, by a voice from heaven, proclaim him king, or require us, by a
prophet, to pay our allegiance to him as such.

BUT some may possibly expect, that I should say something more particularly
concerning his late majesty. And indeed, though I cannot pretend to give his just
character, yet it would be hardly decent to pass over his many royal virtues in
silence; or to bury so good and venerable a king, without recollecting some of
those things, which ought to make us honor his memory.

HIS late majesty was unquestionably endowed with a brillant genius; with a
great share of natural penetration and sagacity Nor was that genius
uncultivated by learning; such learning especially as becomes a king. He is
said to have been extremely well versed in history, particularly that of
Europe; and to have had a very thorough understanding of the political
interests and connexions of all the kingdoms and states therein. Without which
it would indeed have been impossible for him to maintain his character as the
chief bulwark of its liberties, and of the protestant religion, as he actually
was. As he came into England at about thirty two years of age, and lived there
about twelve years before he came to the throne, he had, during that period, an
opportunity to acquaint himself, not only with the British constitution, but
with the peculiar temper and genius of the people. Nor could he fail to reap
great advantage from the institutions, the political maxims, and the example of
so wise a king, as his royal father. And he was, like him, what may be properly
called, a constitutional king: One who well knew both the extent of his own
prerogative, and the rights of the people; one who made the laws the rule of
his government, and whom even malice can hardly accuse of either doing, or
attempting to do, an arbitrary, illegal thing, during his whole reign. And it
should be remembered here, that the British constitution and laws are so wise,
so excellent, that he who uniformly makes them the rule of his administration,
must of consequence be a good king; at least he cannot easily be supposed to be
a bad one.

AND merely not to have been a bad king, is perhaps grater praise than is due
to far the most of those, who have reigned from the days of Nimrod to the
present time. But to stop here, would be very injurious to the character and
memory of his late majesty. He appeared, throughout his reign, to have the true
interest and honor of Great Britain at heart; knowing that kings, especially
British kings, are made for the people, and not people for kings.
Notwithstanding some [to us] unhappy, but yet necessary and unavoidable
connexions, we have reason to think that his majesty's uniform and great aim
was, to promote the good of his kingdoms. He was indeed indefatigable in his
endeavors to this end; and, in the language of the apostle, "attended
continually on this very thing". He was an encourager of learning, of
manufactures and commerce; the two latter of which, I suppose, never flourished
so much in Great-Britan, as under his auspicious reign.

HIS majesty was at once a prince of great justice and great clemency. The
former was evident from his care to have the laws duly executed, without
respect of persons; and his not allowing the meanest of his subjects to be
oppressed, so far as it was in the power of a British king to prevent it. Nor
were private property, the life and rights of the subject, ever more secure
perhaps, than under his administration. His majesty's clemency appeared in many
instances; but in none more conspicuously, than in his conduct toward those
who were engaged in the black rebellion of 1745. Very few examples were made of
royal justice, after that horrid rebellion was at a period. But how many
traitors, even obliged, and therefore ungrateful ones, were made examples of
the royal grace! His majesty had a greatness of mind, which made him choose
rather to reclaim his rebellious subjects by his lenity, than to rid himself of
them by a justifiable severity. And there is reason to think, that this truly
god-like method of proceeding had a great and happy effect; and was the means,
not only of reconciling, but strongly attaching to his person and government,
many people who had been unreasonably disaffected thereto before.

HIS majesty, like his royal father, was a prince of an heroic and martial
spirit: A lover, indeed, of peace; but one who would not suffer himself or his
subjects to be injured without taking up the sword, when that measure became
necessary. He was a king, not only of great spirit and resolution, and the most
undaunted fortitude; but one who well knew how to command armies in the field,
when there was occasion for it: Of which he gave some not inglorious proofs.

HIS majesty was a prince, even by the confession of his enemies, many of them
at least, of great sincerity and truth, of strict probity and honor, in all his
public transactions, both toward his own subjects and toward foreign states
and kingdom. He was far above that deceit, artifice, and low-cunning, for which
most of the Stewart race were so eminent, the royal martyr himself not
excepted. In short, his whole reign was a confutation of that infamous
Machiavellian maxim, "Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare" -- He that knows
not how to dissemble, is ignorant of the art of reigning.

IT was intimated above, that his majesty was a true protestant. As such he was
a friend to toleration, and religious liberty; which cannot indeed be violated
without violating the natural rights of mankind. His majesty did not affect, as
defender of the faith, to make his own private judgment and conscience a rule
to his subjects, or to tyrannize over their consciences. Nor did he, as head of
the church by law established in England, endeavor to destroy the church
equally established by law in Scotland; or desire to distress any of his good
protestant subjects, who might, in some respects, dissent from them both. Some
inconveniences and hardships, I mean legal ones, these latter might indeed be
subjected to; which there is ground to think, a prince of so great equity and
goodness, was so far from being pleased with, that he would have been glad to
see them wholly removed. Happy had it been for the British nations, if all his
predecessors in the throne had been of such generous and catholic principles --
The true church of Christ needs not to have her faith defended by any other
weapons, than those of sober reason and argument, unless it be against those
who attack it with carnal ones. Indeed wicked men and hypocrites can hardly
ever think their church secure, unless some other sword besides that of the
spirit, is drawn in her defense. Though she have kings for her nursing-fathers,
and queens for her nursing-mothers; though she be rocked in a princely cradle,
and sweetly charmed to her repose with royal lullabies; yet so perverse are
some of her children, that they can take no rest, unless others, out of her
pale, are put upon the rack, or otherwise harrassed with penal laws -- But,
blessed be God, all our royal defenders of the faith, since James II, have been
content to be nursing-fathers to the church, by preserving the public peace,
toleration, and liberty of conscience: The happy effects whereof have been very
apparent in many respects. And considering the known justice and moderation of
the royal house of Hanover, and also of other eminent and distinguished
personages in church and state, we need not wholly despair of seeing the time,
when all good protestants, and loyal subjects, shall have their share in the
honors and emoluments of the state, without being subjected to any
narrow-spirited, and injurious tests.

BUT not to digress. It may be said upon the whole, that the maxims of his late
majesty's government were wise, noble and truly heroic. And as his views were
in general pure, generous and sublime; so it pleased God to give him a
prosperous reign. During his reign, there have indeed been some domestic
troubles, as well as foreign wars; to prevent which, is not always in the power
of the wisest and best kings. Nor can it be denied without blindness, or
extreme prejudice, that some great and threatening evils, have been growing in
the nation ever since the revolution. Of which, however, those only ought to
bear the blame, who were the criminal causes of them. And even notwithstanding
these evils, it may be truly said, that all these reigns have been happy,
attended with national prosperity and glory; particularly that of his late
majesty. He ever exerted himself wisely and vigorously, and, by the blessing of
God, successfully, to promote the public good. The rebellion had a seasonable
stop put to it; and the prudent measures since used, have in some measure
allayed old animosities, and united parties. There has not, perhaps, been
greater harmony in the nation since the days of queen Elizabeth, if then, than
during some of the last years of his majesty's reign. During which time, his
majesty's counsels and arms have also been remarkably prospered, not only for
the defense of his own dominions, but also for reducing the pride and power of
France. Neither of the four quarters of the world is destitute of glorious
proofs hereof. Nor is it easy to mention any period, wherein the national honor
and prosperity were greater, than at the time of his majesty's decease: Even
though he left his subjects engaged in a war, which we could have wished him to
terminate with a glory and success, equal to that with which it had been
carried on for some years before. This would have completed both his and our
worldly felicity; and might have rendered the reign of king George II. the most
glorious period in the British annals: Yea, it may, perhaps, still be so,
notwithstanding this circumstance is wanting to complete the felicity of it.

GOD, indeed, blessed his majesty with a long life and reign, though not so long
as his good subjects desired. He was, I suppose, the oldest reigning prince in
Europe, at the time of his decease: And, for many ages past, no king of England
had attained to his years He was almost 77.
. Had God regarded the fond wishes of his loyal subjects, he might indeed have
been immortal: For the time would probably never have come, when they would
have parted with him without any reluctance. But the most High, who rules in
the kingdom of men, has seen meet to call him out of this world. And although we
cannot resign so good a king, our common father, without a degree of sorrow;
yet we have doubtless far more reason to bless God for sparing him to us so
long, than we have to murmur or complain at his taking him away from us at
last. And while we express such an ingenuous grief as becomes dutiful and
obliged subjects on this occasion, there are, as was intimated before, many
circumstances to console us under the loss, and make us acquiesce in this
dispensation of divine providence.

IT may truly be said of his late majesty, as it was of king David, that he
"died in a good old age, full of days, riches and honor" 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 28.
. He died as it were in the arms of victory; triumphing over his enemies,
foreign and domestic; over the former by his arms, and over the latter by his
goodness and clemency. He left the nation in as prosperous circumstances, as
could well be imagined in a time of war. He had not only lived longer, but done
more good, and therefore acquired more glory, than most kings, even good ones,
had done before him. Nor, which is a most material circumstance, did he die
till he saw his royal grandson and heir, trained up under his own eye, and that
of a princess of very distinguished merit, arrived at such a maturity of life
and judgment, as qualified him for taking the government immediately into his
own hands.

HOW much better has God been to us in this respect, than our fears sometime
since? not to say, than our deserts, which it were unnecessary to add. It is
now almost ten years since God, in his holy providence, put us into tears and
mourning, and awakened our serious apprehensions, by the untimely death of his
royal highness Frederic, prince of Wales, the then heir apparent, and father to
his present majesty. The late king was even then old and gray headed, and was
also said at that time to be infirm. The next heir to the throne, he who, by
the grace of God, now sits upon it, was but about twelve years of age. So that
we had great reason to fear, one of the woes would befall us, which Solomon
speaks of; that of having a child, or scarce more than a child, to reign over
us. His late majesty, in his great wisdom and goodness, took all possible care
and pains to guard against the inconveniences and hazards of this, if it should
please God to take him away during the minority, and tender age, of his royal
grandson. But, to our great joy, it has pleased the most High to lengthen out
his important life, till he beheld the heir of his kingdoms and dominions of
full age, and indeed more than full age, to govern them: And it is some time
since our just apprehensions above mentioned, were laid aside. Thus graciously
has he, who rules in the kingdom of men, provided for our welfare. And as his
present majesty is the first king of Great Britain, born therein, i. e. the
first born in the island of Britain, since the kingdoms of England and Scotland
were united, God grant he may prove a great and equal blessing to both: And
that the subjects of both, being now united in one kingdom as well as under one
king, may have no suspicions, no jealousies, no contentions among themselves,
unless it is a contention, who shall show at once the greatest loyalty to his
majesty, and the sincerest love to British liberty, as founded in, as
established and secured by, the British laws: Which ought indeed to be more
sacred with Britons, than the interest of any particular person or family
whatsoever. In saying which, I trust, I say nothing unbecoming a good subject,
in contradistinction to a slave.

ACCORDING to the latest advices from Britain, which came to town the last
evening, it seems that a very speedy peace is not now much expected, at least,
that it is not to be depended upon. We have indeed his majesty's declaration to
the court on the day of the late king's death, wherein, I think, this is
implied: A declaration conceived in such terms, as tend to raise our
expectations of great felicity under his reign. You will doubtless hear with
pleasure part of a sentence or two, extracted from it, as it has not been made
public amongst us -- After speaking of the great loss which he and the nation
had sustained in the sudden death of the king, his majesty proceeds thus: But
animated by the tenderest affections for this MY NATIVE COUNTRY, and depending
on the advice, the experience and abilities of your lordships, on the support
and assistance of every honest man, I enter with cheerfulness into this arduous
situation; and shall make it the business of my life to promote in every thing
the glory and interest of these kingdoms -- A declaration truly worthy a young
British monarch; which we ought to consider, not as words of course, but as
proceeding from the royal heart of him that made it. Since this discourse was
delivered, we have had his majesty's gracious, and most excellent speech from
the throne, to both houses of parliament: In one paragraph of which, he is
pleased to express himself thus -- Born and educated in this country, I glory
in the name of BRITON; and the peculiar happiness of my life will ever consist
in promoting the welfare of a people, whose loyalty, and warm affection to Me,
I consider as the greatest and most permanent security of My throne: And I
doubt not but their steadiness in those principles, will equal the firmness of
my invariable resolution to adhere to, and strengthen, this excellent
constitution --
May that God, who has the hearts of all kings, as well as of their subjects,
in his hand, confirm his majesty in these noble sentiments, these truly royal
purposes; and attach the hearts of all good men to his person, government and
family. May he cloth his enemies with shame, while the crown flourishes on his
head; and while three kingdoms with their dependencies, happy under his
auspicious reign, shall with one voice say, Long live king George III; and die
at least as old, as prosperous, as venerable, as much beloved, as much
honored, as George II! -- All this we sincerely hope for; and more than this
we could not, perhaps, very modestly desire --

THOUGH we ought always to remember our late sovereign with the greatest
veneration, our allegiance must now be, or rather is already, transferred to
his royal grandson and heir; in whom, in some sense, he still survives and
reigns. These Northern American colonies have indeed ever distinguished
themselves by their loyalty, and their zeal for the protestant succession in
the house of Hanover. We had accordingly a great share in the affections of his
late majesty; the happy fruits of whose royal care, and indefatigable
endeavors for our security and welfare, we now reap in some measure, and are
likely to reap in still greater abundance in future times. His royal highness,
the late prince Frederic, had also a great concern for the prosperity of the
colonies, as he well knew both their loyalty, and their importance to
Great Britain. And had he lived to ascend the throne, we should doubtless have
had in him such another friend and protector, as we have lost in his late
majesty. We have no reason to doubt, but that his present majesty will have the
same gracious regard for us; and, perhaps, perfect that deliverance so happily
begun, and carried on so far, for his American subjects, within these few years
past. May God give us favor in his eyes, as he did in the eyes, both of his
royal grandfather and father, that our great loss in them may be made up in
him! This we have reason humbly to hope, if we persevere in our accustomed
loyalty; and still conduct ourselves as dutiful subjects. And if our late,
ever-honoured king, could now speak to us, I am persuaded he would admonish us
to show our regard to his memory, not so much by fruitlesly lamenting his
death, as by a dutiful and loyal behavior toward his successor; as the
certain way to secure his royal favor, and, by the blessing of heaven, to
prolong, or even to increase, our tranquillity and happiness. I almost imagine I
hear him speaking to Us, in common with all our fellow subjects, in such terms
as these -- Alas! my children, why do you thus in vain lament my departure from
you? Was not man born to die? I was long happy in your affection, and dutiful
regard to me. You were also long happy under my government, though less so than I
sincerely desired to make you. The relation of king and subject no longer
subsists between us. But death, which has dissolved that relation, has not been
able to diminish my love to you, and concern for your happiness. I cannot
indeed now promote it myself: But, behold THAT ROYAL YOUTH, whom you lately
hailed to the British throne! -- Let all faction cease; be loyal; be
public-spirited. And in him, as you have another George, expect also another
friend to your liberties; another guardian of your laws; another father;
another victor over your enemies, with extended empire, and increasing glory!
--

BUT let me now close this discourse with some very short reflections of a
practical nature -- How transient is all worldly greatness and glory! Whose
death is it, my brethren, that we have been meditating upon? Is it not that of
a king? a great and prosperous king? one, whose fortune, whose riches and
honor, might at once excite the envy of most other monarchs, and leave them in
despair of ever attaining thereto. But, alas! what is worldly felicity, wordly
glory? a sudden gleam; a meteor darting along the sky, which is no sooner
beheld, than it falls, and disappears forever -- "Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity." --

IF kings, if great and good kings, such as the sovereign of the world has
dignified with the title of godsy must so soon "die like men," certainly we
common mortals should not either flatter ourselves with the hope of immortality
here, or place our supreme felicity in this world. Can any of us hope ever to
arrive at such worldly prosperity and greatness, as our late sovereign enjoyed?
Not, certainly, if we are in our right senses. But would even that satisfy us?
Not, unless we were more than mad. -- Alas! it is only a low ambition, a sordid
spirit, that could take up contented with such a portion, such an happiness,
without looking beyond the grave: For "man being in honor, abides not" --

WE are, moreover, admonished by this dispensation of providence, to place our
chief hope and confidence, not in man, not even in mighty kings, and
potentates, but in the most high God, who rules in the kingdom of men, and
has the breath of all kings in his own hand -- "Put not your trust in princes,
says the royal psalmist, nor in the son of man in whom there is no help. His
breath goes forth; he returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts
perish. Happy [then] is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope
is in the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
therein is; which keeps mercy forever." -- The Lord shall live and reign
forever: And the obedient subjects of his kingdom shall be ever secure, ever
happy, in his favor and protection, though the kingdoms of this world are moved
and overturned, or both earth heaven were dissolved!

TO conclude then: Let us all be admonished to put our trust in the great, the
eternal God; and, in the way of well-doing, to commit the keeping of our bodies
and souls to him, as unto a faithful creator. Let us both fear God, and honor
the king; which duties the apostle joins together. Let us endeavor to lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; "as free, and not using
our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God;" and, by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, honor and immortality. Let
us be faithful and diligent in discharging the duties of our several stations
in life; knowing that we are soon to pass off the stage of this world, and to
give an account of ourselves to God the judge of all. And let me remind you,
that in the judgment of the great day, it will be of far less importance, who
has been a king, or mighty monarch, and who a person of low degree, than it
will be, who has been a truly upright and good, and who a dishonest and wicked
man. For when the sea, death and hell [hades] shall deliver up the dead that
were in them, and the small and great shall stand together before God, they
shall be judged every man according to their works.

WHEREFORE now unto him, the king eternal, immortal, invisible, who has
prepared his throne in the heavens, and whose kingdom rules over all; unto him
be glory for ever and ever, AMEN.

Page 24, bottom, for 1684, read 1685.

THE END.

