A DISCOURSE ON THE CHRISTIAN UNION: The Substance of which was delivered
BEFORE The Reverend CONVENTION OF THE CONGREGATIONAL CLERGY In the Colony OF
RHODE ISLAND; Assembled at BRISTOL April 23, 1760.

By EZRA STYLES, A. M. PASTOR of the second Congregational Church in NEWPORT.

Thy FATHERS went down into Egypt with threescore and ten Persons, and now the
Lord thy GOD has made thee as the Stars of Heaven for Multitude.

Deuteronomy. X. 22. Four Thousand British Planters settled NEW ENGLAND, and in 120
Years their Posterity are increased to five hundred thousand Souls.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL. MDCCLXI.

THE CHRISTIAN UNION.
PHILIPPIANS III. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us
walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same Thing.


WHILE Paul continued at Rome the saints of Philippi raised a gratuity for his
relief, and sent Epaphroditus to present it to their suffering apostle.
Epaphroditus, after a dangerous sickness, returning home to Philippi, St. Paul
sent by him this letter of thanks to that beneficent assembly of christians,
who had liberally contributed to his relief. Though this incident was the
occasion of this epistle, yet the apostle takes this opportunity to impart some
good gifts to them of a spiritual nature, in return for their affection and
temporal relief. Besides some elucidations and bright touches on the peculiar
doctrines of the christian faith, doctrines however common to the church
universal in all ages; and besides some incidental reflections on the then
present states of the christian cause; -- he intersperses the whole with
observations adapted to the peculiar state of things at Philippi. If we
consider this, it will very much assist us in understanding (...) several parts
of this epistle. And indeed we shall find the apostle in all his letters his a
general eye to the particular circumstances of the church or person to whom he
writes -- and many sentences and allusions are restricted by these views. His
most extensive design, in all his epistles, was to confirm the faithful: to
which end he attentively inspected the state of the churches, and according to
their different exigences, he imparted his spiritual advice and apostolic
exhortation.

The saints at Philippi were united in a good opinion of saint Paul, their
spiritual father, and paid a high regard to his dictates and advice, whether
given by inspiration, or his own private judgment. And he made use of this
influence, nor to aggrandize himself, but to serve the cause of the redeemer,
by settling and reconciling differences and animosities, by cultivating that
fellowship and union; which being enlarged to the comprehension of a numerous
body of christians, was appointed to succeed the miraculous powers in
supporting and diffusing christianity through the world. God's ways are
consummately wise. In the infancy of the gospel, the miraculous powers
subserved two ends, the support and evidence, or verification, of christianity.
And having, demonstrably attested the cause, and supernaturally upheld it
against all opposition, till it had formed such an interest among men, as,
being cemented by the noble principle of union and benevolence, it might
support and propagate itself in a natural way, these powers were gradually
withdrawn, when effectual care had been taken for the security of the gospel.
The transmitting of it therefore in some measure devolved itself on its
converts, under the all-controlling, overruling providence of heaven. Though God
accomplishes his moral, as well as natural ends, by secondary causes and
subordinate means; yet there is room for the concurrent agency of these causes
-- and hence we are to work together with God. The apostles took early care, as
the number of the faithful increased, to recommend this useful principle of
union and benevolence, which, cementing the body of believers, should in due
time form an impregnable espirit du corpse to succeed the supernatural effusions
of the divine spirit, and cooperate with God in carrying on and supporting the
same great design. Even in the infancy of the churches -- while being too small
to form respectable unions; and consequently while yet they could not see and
feel the immediate use which was afterward to be made of the heavenly
principles of love and forgiveness taught by their divine master: -- The
apostles carefully watched this principle, took peculiar care to implant and
cultivate it, and used apostolic authority in recommending it.

And as the church multiplied, they were very attentive to extinguish
animosities and heal differences, in one part and another: which arose, not
from the nature of the christian institution, but from partial understanding of
it, and from early imbibed prejudices, not at once to be worn off, and which
the apostles treated with the utmost tenderness and wisdom. Besides what were
incidental to particular churches there were other mistakes of greater extent.
The Jews were dispersed throughout the Roman empire, and settled in great
numbers in Greece, Macedonia, and around the Archipelago. And though
christianity never made any great impression on the body of that people, yet a
few in almost every place became converts. These few nevertheless occasioned a
very capital controversy, not easily settled by apostolic authority, which
takes up some part of almost every book of the new testament, except the
evangelists: a controversy, which, being differently apprehended by christians
of succeeding ages, has given birth to polemical divinity or controversy on the
doctrines of faith. The few Jewish converts did at first receive Jesus Christ
as the Messiah on the evidence of his resurrection chiefly and other miracles,
and partly in fulfillment of prophecy: but did not imagine that either
circumcision or the law was to be abolished, They therefore used their
endeavors to bring the Gentile christians to the law; and though they received
Christ, yet their great dependence was on the law: They accordingly trusted for
acceptance and justification to the works of the law, of more importance with
them than that righteousness which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith. There were other Jewish converts, who
though they did not lay the chief stress on the deeds of the law, yet thought the
observance of it necessary, trusting nevertheless in the atonement of Christ,
and preferring the righteousness by faith. The former were dangerous, being
really enemies to the cross of Christ: the latter were tolerable, and might
safely be received into the fellowship of the gospel; it was necessary to act
in steady opposition to the one, with the utmost condescension and humanity to
the other.

The body of hebrew christians from the beginning retained circumcision and the
law, which St. Paul had declared to be right for them, though not for the
gentile christians. With difficulty the apostle kept them united in his day:
but soon after his death the Hebrew converts broke off all charity and
communion with the Gentile converts, because the latter would not observe
circumcision and the law. They were long after distinguished and known by the
name of Nazarene, or circumcised, christians. The Copti christians circumcise
to this day. Josephus the historian is said to have at last joined himself to
those believing Jews, who about his time broke off all communication with the
believing Gentiles. Epiphanius was acquainted with them, A. D. 370, and called
them heretics, "for no other reason that I can perceive, but that they together
with their christian faith, continued the use of circumcision and the jewish
law; which is a thing St. Paul never blamed in a jewish christian." He might
have censured St. James and those thousands of the Jerusalem and Galilee
christians for heretics, concerning whom St. James said to St. Paul, Acts
21.20. Thou see, br^ther, how many thousands of Jews there are, which
BELIEVE, and they are ALL zealous of the LAW.

This controversy had affected the church at Philippi; and perhaps Euodias and
Syntiche might be Jewish converts, and very much at the head of it; the apostle
says, with respect to those who were the most crafty and indefatigable in
proselyting the Gentile christians to the ceremonial, pompous, burdensome
institution of Moses, beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the
concision; which plainly shows they were in danger from the quarter of which I
have been speaking. The apostle therefore exhorts them to beware, to take heed,
to be on their guard with respect to those teachers who enjoin circumcision,
the ceremonial rites, the observation of Jewish holy days, new mons, and other
festivals, and place the essence of christianity in these things. And he takes
occasion to produce his own example in evidence -- by which it appeared that he
had been in every respect a Hebrew, stood complete in that righteousness which
was of the law: but since his soul had been enlightened with the in valuable
discoveries of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, he counted all
his boasted seize in judaism as a trifle, desiring henceforward to be
found in Christ, not having on his own righteousness, which was of the law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ. Having entirely broke off from
judaism, being convinced that it was superceded by a more perfect and sublime
and spiritual institution* he pressed forward to perfection in Christ -- and
being desirous to unite as many as possible with him, he was willing to walk
together with his brethren the Hebrew christians as far as they had attained,
who sincerely believed in Christ, yet thought themselves obliged to observe the
law. If they placed their dependence on Christ for acceptance, they might be
indulged their peculiar affection for the observance of their law, provided
they would be content that the Gentile converts should be at liberty on these
matters; it being far better for those that agreed in essentials, to live in
harmony and fellowship, than under the most specious pretexts to resolve
themselves into fruitless, undeterminable controversy and alienation. And then
the apostle introduces this general advice, equally applicable to all, whether
Jewish or Gentile converts, so far as they had attained, to walk by the same
rule, and mind the same thing. This harmony would cement them into a
respectable body, and perfect them in that benevolence and christian charity,
without which they were nothing.

Having thus finished the necessary illustration of the text; I proceed to what
I had principally in view, the application of it to us, my brethren, of the
congregational denomination, as well in New England in general, as the
particular district of this colony. And in order to proceed clearly, and
perceive that the principle of union recommended in the text, may be applicable
and take place among our churches, I shall

I. Enumerate some of those fundamental principles of christianity and
ecclesiastical polity, in which our churches are generally agreed.

II. I shall mention some things on which we differ in opinion, or are supposed
to differ; and show that this difference need not to obstruct the general
harmony and union -- and that these supposed differences might be greatly
lessened by benevolent and honorable concessions. And

III. Subjoin some reasons, taken from the importance of the common cause, and
the present state of our churches, to show the wisdom and advantage of union
and good fellowship, both among the ministers and the churches.

I. I shall enumerate some of the fundamental principles of revelation in which
we are generally agreed. I shall not confine myself to those things which
congregationalists particularly agree in -- but shall have occasion to mention
several things in which we have the happiness to agree with the protestant
churches throughout the world; as well as others more peculiar to our own
denomination.

1. We agree in the being and character of God. The author of the universe is
himself underived and independent: -- a being of absolute excellence and
dignity, eternally happy and glorious of himself: -- a being but imperfectly
apprehended, known but in part by man: -- a being in himself possessed of all
possible perfection in a degree incomprehensible by our limited apprehensions;
having besides those, whose illustrations we have the honor of perceiving,
perhaps many perfections unknown to us. The displays of Deity to our little
world lead our contemplations to four distinctions of perfection, which yet may
be but one principle in the divine essence, I mean omnipotence, wisdom,
goodness, mercy. His wisdom implies omniscience and personal rectitude with
respect to himself: -- With regard to the production and government of a
supposed dependent creation, his infinite wisdom must discern and project and
execute the wisest and best plan of a universe; -- wisest because infinite
discernment must perceive the only one, than which there is not another wiser,
and in which the most complicated various and noble ends are accomplished in
the shortest manner, according to the fewest simplest general laws; -- wisest
because admitting all possible subordinations and variety of action, happiness
and social connection; -- therefore lastly, wisest and best, because most
declarative of the divine glory, and eventually productive of the greatest
quantity of the universal happiness. -- I say, divine wisdom, of systems
possible, must choose that best one, which omnipotence prompted by infinite
goodness might give existence to and perpetuate. We view the Deity at the head
of the moral system as exercising a superintendant moral government, supreme
dominion, all-controlling and everlasting providence. And though the divine
complacency be apportioned to the degrees of native or acquired excellence of
every order and every individual; yet impartial equity takes place in the
divine dispensations and conduct toward all the subordinations of being from
infinite to nothing. This suggests the idea of divine justice, founded in and
flowing from infinite wisdom, which, with respect to the unhappy beings who
transgress the laws of eternal order, is exercised in connecting eventual
punishment with unamending impenitence. The exercise of goodness to a revolted
world is mercy: -- which, as the universe must be a production very generally
virtuous and right, is exercised that we know of toward no part of the
creation, but this unhappy region which we inhabit. This general idea of the
Deity and his character I suppose we are agreed in.

2. That notwithstanding God created this, as he did all other worlds, in order
and rectitude, yet that we are now in a fallen and universally depraved state.
I truly take this principle to be very generally agreeable to the opinion of
our churches -- however individuals may differ as to the origin and desert of
moral evil. Some may attribute it to vicious example, some to the disorder of
our external state, or the animal part of man, some to a principle of pollution
born in us, and derived from Adam. But however we may vary in our opinions as
to the cause of the present reigning universal depravity; yet two things I
suppose we agree in with respect to it -- one, that no blame is to be ascribed
to God as the author of it; the other, that it is fact. Observation on the
state of the world for 6000 years, or the review of it in history, show that in
fact disorder and vicious principle are predominant and reign with great
strength in human nature. The universality of the effect shows a tendency and
proclivity in our nature at present, howevever derived there; a proclivity
which may be termed a characteristic or general principle of our present
nature, even on allowance of the supposed exceptions, which in my opinion are
not to be admitted, since this vicious principle has not been in fact
controlled by the philosophers or their wisest moral systems, but has raged in
the most enlightened and improved nations, more than among the savages
themselves. From which there is reason to suspect that no one of the human race
is destitute of it. Our souls may come out of the hands of God pure and
unpolluted, and the pollution take place upon our entering this state. Nor is
it the result of personal action alone: it may perhaps be impossible for an
innocent and unexperienced mind, commencing its infant existence in a polluted
world, not to be very soon affected with the contagion. The great Mr. Lock has
resembled the infant mind to a rasa tabula, as he expresses it, a clean piece
of paper, with no inscriptions, though susceptible of them. This is equally true
of internal propensities, as of acquisitions in knowledge. Some indeed suppose
or speak, as if they supposed that the pure and holy God infused into the soul
at its first creation, and on its entrance into the world, the impure and
unholy propensities both of flesh and spirit, which we find to have usurped the
governing possession of us by the time we become capable of moral action; and
consequently that our natures, as they come out of the hand of the benevolent
creator, are corrupt, impure and unholy. But the learned president EDWARDS has
asserted, that the doctrine of original sin, according to the sense and
explication of the most orthodox divines, implies no such thing: -- but that,
we coming pure out of the hands of God, our impurity and moral defilement is
altogether consequential upon our entrance into this world. I beg leave to
subjoin his own words. Dr. Tailor supposes, says he, the doctrine of original
sin to imply that nature must be corrupted by some positive influence;
something by some means or other infused into the human nature; some quality or
other, not from the choice of our minds but like a teint, tincture or
infection, altering the natural constitution, faculties and dispositions of our
souls: -- that sin and evil dispositions are implanted in the foetus in the
womb. Whereas truly our doctrine, says Mr. Edwards, neither implies nor infers
any such thing. In order to account for a sinful corruption of nature, yea a
total native depravity of heart, there is not the least need of supposing any
evil quality infused, implanted, or wrought into the nature of man, by any
positive cause or influence whatsoever, either from God or the creature: or of
supposing that man is conceived and born with a fountain of evil in his heart,
such as is any thing properly positive. I think a little attention to the
nature of things will be sufficient to satisfy any impartial, considerate
inquirer, that the absence of positive good principles, and so the withholding
of a special divine influence to impart and maintain these good principles,
leaving the common natural principle of self-love, natural appetite, etc.
(which were in man in innocence) leaving these, I say, to themselves, without
the government of superior, divine principles, will certainly be followed with
the corruption, yea the total corruption of the heart, without occasion of any
positive influence at all: and that it was thus indeed that corruption of
nature came on Adam immediately on his fall, and comes on all his posterity, as
sinning in him, and falling with him. Edwards's Ans. to Tailor, p. 316
These observations appear to me to be very just. On which we may remark that
this author asserts, that no "evil quality" is infused, implanted, or wrought
into the nature of man by any positive cause or influence whatsoever, either
from God or the creature: And that there is no need of supposing that man is
conceived and born with a fountain of evil in his heart. Our souls were all
created by God pure and without stain, (with less perfection indeed than had
Adam successfully sustained the faederal trial,) but entering a corrupted and
disordered state destitute of a positive propensity to holiness, though with no
positive propensity to ill, the latter immediately takes place in our natures,
and by the time we arrive to the years of moral discretion, we find ourselves
one and all to have fallen a sacrifice to pollution. Jehovah could have
implanted in us a propensity or tendency to virtue of sufficient strength to
overcome the corruption of this state -- but he has not done it. The supposed
instinctive love of virtue, and the impulses of the moral sense, are evidently
too weak for eventual security. Why God did not infuse a controlling propensity
to holiness is to be resolved into his sovereignty and unfathomable councils;
which might with great justice, and agreeable to the analogy of nature and
daily experience, take occasion from Adam's offense, to withold from his
posterity a favor which he had granted to Adam himself, and most probably had
perpetuated to his posterity on the obedience of their faederal head. This is
an intricate subject -- the reconciling the permission of moral and natural ill
with the perfections of God -- let it be brought about in what manner soever,
since he had power to have prevented it. If therefore we should differ in our
manner of accounting for it, and even if we should misconceive the scripture
account of its origin (in which I apprehend it is clearly defined), and yet
agree in the fact that disorder and moral depravity now reign in this part of
God's universe, to a degree uncontrollable by man, perhaps we shall agree in
the main thing.

3. I take it that we further agree that it is beyond the power of man to
recover and save himself. Methinks a little attentive view of our state might
convince us not only that there is no probability, but that there is an
absolute impossibility of this worlds emerging from its disorder, and
recovering its original rectitude of itself. A spectator from yonder distant
dominions of Jehovah might lock down upon this world, and pronounce it utterly
lost and undone beyond any possibility of self-recovery. He might see the
principle of moral rectitude, even suppose it not quite extinct, yet so
embarrassed as not possibly to regain its dominion. In this attempt the most
enlightened and polished heathen nations, Greece and Rome, as well as the modern
refiners in reasoning, have entirely failed. And as no general successful
reformation, either of the moral principle or practice, is ever to be expected
from mankind considered as a collective body, while in a state of nature
unenlightened by a supernatural revelation; so there is but too much reason to
believe the same thing holds true of individuals. And if we should be inclined
to make an exception in favor of the pagan nations, we must have recourse to
the effect of the dispensation of grace, through which, though unknown to them, the
spirit might regenerate a principle of holiness in them. Patten's Apolo^^ ^ 16.
But even this would show that nature alone is utterly impotent to this great
change. With respect therefore to the recovery of the principle of holiness, as
well as the extirpation of the principle of pollution, our nature left to
itself is entirely impotent.

But toward our salvation, there is necessary another thing which I suppose we
all agree is absolutely beyond human power, even in full perfection, I mean
rendering atonement for sin. The economy of the kingdom of grace, and the
designation of the son of God to the sovereignty of this world, the
introduction of the offers of grace, the exhibition of an example of perfect
virtuous practice under all its embarrassment, the opening and setting up this
kingdom; infinite wisdom it seems saw could not be effected without that
humiliation of the son of God, his mediatorial obedience and vicarious
sufferings, on which the dispensation of grace is meritoriously founded. This
shows us that without the divine supernatural interposition, the world was
absolutely lost and undone. The true nature of atonement is perhaps but
imperfectly apprehended by us: -- but methinks we might all see that, in
whatever it consists, it is a thing beyond human power to render. Is it not
blasphemy for a depraved helpless being to say he can do aught of himself which
shall merit pardon of an offended God? Could he be perfect for the future, nay
perform an overplus of virtue of merit equal to the demerit of his offenses,
yet on the foot of justice he could have no demand on the sovereign mercy of
God. Divine justice is not thus to be bought and sold. But even Adam in
innocence could perform no works of supererrogation, or more than his duty: and
shall his impotent sons profanely boast that they can atchieve a surplus of
holiness for the satisfaction of divine justice? And consequently could we be
supposed to have power to become holy the rest of our lives, there remains a
load of past sins uncancelled, undischarged, whose penalties we are liable to.

It is beyond our power then to lay the foundation of our redemption, which
Jesus Christ has laid in the propitiatory sacrifice of himself. Equally unable
are we, without the divine assistance, to those terms and conditions appointed
to be found in us, toward our receiving the atonement and becoming entitled to
the blessings of this sacrifice. Otherwise the illuminations of the holy Ghost
had not been by infinite wisdom judged necessary to accomplish on the human
mind the great work of conviction, repentance, faith, and regeneration. As the
atonement is the foundation of our discharge from the future penalties of moral
evil; so faith is the appointed condition of limiting the atonement to us; and
renovation of nature is necessary to the enjoyment of the future blessedness.
Had I time I might enlarge on the description of this divine principle, its
formation and exercise, as it affects our spiritual powers and passions, which
are directed, restricted to and placed upon new moral objects, new pursuits,
new enjoyments.

4. We agree that JESUS CHRIST is the great redeemer, and that he is God as
well as man -- in a word, we agree is the doctrines of the divinity and
atonement of Jesus Christ. We agree in our idea of his person, offices and
mediation. However we may differ in explaining the mysteries of the hypostatic
union, yet we agree in the divinity of Christ to all practical purposes --
particularly in his omnipotence; and that religious honor and divine worship
are to be ascribed to the son, believing it to be the will of heaven that all
men honor the son, even as they do the father. We believe him according to the
scriptures to be the second person in the ever-adorable trinity, the brightness
of the father's glory, and the express image of his person: -- that he is the
eternal son of God, the only begotten of his father, full of grace and truth;
for in him dwelt the godhead bodily: -- that he is the eternal logos, who was
in the beginning with God, and who was God, by whom all things were made, and
without whom nothing was made that was made; -- that to him is committed all
power in heaven and earth, who therefore is God over all blessed forever: --
that his subordination in order of trinity is consistent with perfect equality
to the father, that so he and the father are one, partaking in and enjoying the
same essential glories and perfections: -- that he dwelt in eternal glory with
the father before the world was; -- that though he laid aside the peculiar
glories of divinity which he enjoyed in the bosom of the father upon his
condescending to appear in our nature; yet when he dwelt with us, he was God
manifest in the flesh, the representative and true exemplification of Deity,
particularly in his perfections of wisdom, infallibility and omnipotence.
Whence it appears that he was all-sufficient to the great undertaking, the work
of redemption.

On the foresight of the apostasy of man and his helpless ruin, the eternal son
is represented as saying to the father, Lo! here am I, ready to do thy will, O
God! ready on the part of mankind to perform that for their redemption, which
is necessary to be rendered to thy divine justice, and which they are totally
unable to render; -- ready to undertake, to suffer, and execute all that the
sovereignty of thy administration demands. both as to atoning for their revolt,
and recovering them to obedience and filial submission to thy will. In
consequence of this eternal covenant between the father and the son, Jesus the
great Emanuel laid aside the glory he had with the father, humbled himself to
appear in our nature, and performed that scene of illustrious obedience and
suffering, which, in the counsels of heaven, was stipulated the meritorious
foundation of deriving the most inestimable blessings to the true believer. He
rendered complete atonement for sin in the sacrifice of himself -- brought in
everlasting righteousness -- published the, joyful tidings of pardon and
reconciling grace -- gave a most wise and heavenly institution of morals --
brought life and immortality to light through his gospel -- appointed the
baptismal and sacramental rites -- commissioned his disciples, and then
ascended to the Father's presence, where he now exercises the intercessorial
part of his mediation, and will continue to exercise it till he shall return
and take upon him the more open and immediate dominion of the virtuous.

5. We agree in the influences and operations of the spirit, the third person
in the adorable trinity concerned in man's redemption, whose more immediate
province is the application of this redemption to the soul. Jesus Christ having
begun this good work, does not desert it. Had he forsaken it after his leaving
the world, it had proved abortive. He sowed the good seed in one part of the
great field of the world, and leaves it to propagate and spread as the spirit
breaks up the fallow ground, and prepares one nation after another to receive
it. The same thing is to be done for individuals as for nations: Though
evangelical truth is of a regenerating influence when brought home to the soul,
or as Lord Bacon expresses it, "to our bosoms;" yet the human mind is to be
first prepared and softened to the genial impressions of truth, which would be
inefficacious alone. By an access to, and operation on, the human intellect,
which we cannot define, the spirit, as we are informed by revelation, dispels
the mists which becloud and darken the understanding, and, being duly attended
to, leads us to discern and feel the force of the truth as it is in Jesus. And
thus he brings the soul, after a previous moral process, to two great
principles, distinct in their nature and connexions, though inseparably
conjoined in the soul of a christian, I mean, saving faith and the principle of
regeneration we have been speaking of. By the one I mean, not the lax
indefinite faith of a superficial education, though this must be allowed to have
had a good effect upon the world; -- not the cursory belief, or rather
non-disbelief, of Jesus and his reliligion, with which debauchees and devils
believe, tremble, and sin away; -- and least of all, not that deistical faith
by which we assent equally to the dictates of Jesus, of Plato, of Aristotle, of
Mahomet, and Bolingbroke, and to neither as supernaturally authorized to
instruct and govern man: -- but, besides the honest and sober belief of
revelation in general, I mean the affiance of the soul in Jesus Christ; that
act of the human mind, by which, in consequence of our being entirely convinced
that Jesus is appointed our redeemer and king, we humbly accept and submit to
him as such -- that act by which the soul, from a sense of its lost state and
inability to save itself, full of the ravishing views of the all sufficiency of
Jesus, and the benevolent invitations of the gospel, humbly comes to Christ,
repairs to him as the ark of safety, receives and embraces and lays hold on him
as the only hope set before it, in virtue of whose propitiation and meritorious
righteousness alone it trusts for acceptance with the father. The other
principle I mentioned was regeneration, in which the soul in all its powers and
affections is purified, refined and created anew in Christ Jesus: a love and
complacency in virtue is generated, a strong prevalent and governing affection
for holiness, a prevailing tendency to moral rectitude: in a word, a spark of
the divine nature is infused and lights up the principle of divine love and
benevolence, that distinguishing part of the moral image of God in which he
created man. These principles, faith and regeneration, are supported through the
whole course of the religious life, by the same energies of the holy spirit
that at first formed them. Again,

6. I suppose we are further agreed in the consequences and connexions of these
two principles -- the one in governing a holy life, and exemplifying or rather
diversifying itself in all the graces and ornaments of the moral behavior: --
the other in our justification, or intitling us, not by way of merit, but
according to the constitution of grace, to all the benefits of the mediatorial
atonement.

Faith is the appointed term in us which limits and appropriates the atonement.
But it must be sincere, unfeigned, and attended with a holy life. He that
believes shall be saved. It is through faith that we become so united to the
meritorious redeemer, as to receive and share in the benefits of his most
illustrious virtue: -- which, besides a discharge from punishment, entitles to
inestimable glories, privileges and happiness, over and above the peculiar
rewards which God will graciously bestow on our personal virtue and holiness --
These last are entirely distinct from the high privileges and glorious
beatifying dignity and advancement, which are derived to believers on account
of their connection with such an illustrious personage in the moral world, as
the eternal son of God. Thus they that receive abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. To these
glories justification opens the way. In the scriptures it is connected, not
with the principle of regeneration, not with its subsequent holy life, but with
faith only: not that faith is alone, but however attended with other good
principles, it is faith only with which justification is connected. This is the
appointed term, which, being found in us, enseals our redemption, on our part
compleats our title to all the benefits of the mediatorial obedience. There are
indeed some different apprehensions among us on this subject. We all agree that
Christ is the great propitiation: -- we do not place the propitiation in faith
or good works. The only question then is, what is the condition and appointed
term in us which entitles us to the benefits and fruits of Christ's
righteousness? It is agreed on all hands, that whatever it is, it is not
however meritorious; nor is the connection between this term and receiving the
atonement so necessary as to preclude the sovereignty of grace. Now to this
condition, whatever it is, as well as to the righteousness of Christ, and the
grace of God. the scripture indifferently gives the appellation "justifying."
The apostle Paul speaking of this conditional term in us, says, "being
justified by faith:" -- St. James speaking of the conditional term says, "ye
see then how by works a man is justified, and not by faith only:" -- the
apostle speaking of the procuring cause and meritorious foundation of
justification says, "being justified by his blood:" -- speaking of the source
and origin of it in the sovereign and free mercy of God, he says, ^ being
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ."
It is to be observed, that the Hebrew christians trusted for justification to
the works of the law. In opposition to this, the apostles endeavored to bring
them off from this vain trust, to place their sole dependence on Christ's
atonement and sacrifice once for all -- teaching them that faith was the only
term of being entitled to the benefits of this atonement, without the deeds of
the Mosaic law. Some Gentile converts seeing so much stress laid on faith, and
neglect of the law, forgot the distinction between the temporary and already
abrogated laws of Moses, and the perpetuity of the moral law, and so ran into
the extreme of trusting to faith alone, and by itself. This is the error saint
James corrects, by showing that faith being alone is dead; and that it is only
such a living faith as influences to virtue, which is justifying. Not that
faith is to be trusted to as meriting justification, any more than the good
works it produces. To rectify still further this early abuse of faith, the
apostle calls up the chief attention to a holy life or good works, not to the
works of the law, but of evangelical obedience, and speaks of them as a
condition of justification jointly with faith. It is evident indeed that a life
of good acts is preferable in point of excellence and value, to the one single
good act of faith: but as real faith opens the virtuous life, and determines
the future tendency of the character, infinite wisdom has seen fit to make it
on our part the characteristic condition or term of justification. These things
do not bow to our reason, much less to our revieries. The proper and indeed
only question is, what says the scripture? What is the term and condition
prescribed by God? If faith, or good works, separately or conjunctly -- we are
to submit. By good works it is to be remembered we agree to understand a holy
and godly life, a life governed by a real principle of grace; and whether this
good and pious life, or the faith which is the basis of it, be the term of
justification is the inquiry? And the doubt in this age arises from the
misconception of a controversy in the apostolic age. We apply what the apostle
spoke of the ceremonial temporary law of Moses, to the eternal laws of moral
virtue. It is granted when the apostle says, "by the deeds of the law there
shall no flesh be justified" that it is equally true in strictness both of the
laws of Moses and the laws of Jesus -- but upon the temporaneous laws of the
former only he had his eye. And when he is on the other hand showing that the
gentiles who had never practiced the rites of Moses, might yet be justified as
well as the jews, he says, "We conclude that a man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law." The laws of Moses are exempt in both cases -- it
was just a matter of indifference, whether they were jews or gentiles, whether
they practiced the law or not -- they were all to be justified by faith, and
not by the deeds of the law. In truth, I suppose faith alone is the condition
of justification, as good works are of the rewards, but neither meritorious.
The deeds of the law which St. Paul depreciates as of no value, not only in
point of justification, but in every other sense; and which he counts as dross
and dung, are evidently not that piety and moral virtue which he universally
inculcates. And as it is impossible to ascertain the genuineness of faith but
by revelation, or subsequent obedience, and revelations have now ceased; -- so
in effect, toward the moral comfort, a conscientious and virtuous life is to
be attended to and treated very much as if it was the condition of pardon. And
if any trust to good works for justification, in the same manner as others
trust to faith for justification, as a condition only of receiving the
atonement, it is not essentially erroneous, since in either case the trust and
dependence, with regard to the meritorious cause, is in the righteousness of
Christ, and this only. Did our trusting to good works or to faith alone lead
off our supreme dependence from the sacrifice and righteousness of Christ --
should we in our dependence substitute either faith or holiness in the stead of
Christ's atonement; or in the same sense trust to the merit of faith or
holiness for justification, as we all agree to trust to the merits of Christ;
it would be as essential a departure from the christian method of recovery, as
to trust to jewish sacrifices, and the righteousness which is of the law of
Moses. But there are no such notions or sentiments prevailing in this land.
Indeed we are a little puzzled about the term and condition in us of our being
entitled to the atonement; but we universally depend on the atonement as the
meritorious foundation of our acceptance and justification. Thus we have
considered the consequences by the grace of God connected with faith in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The consequences connected with the principle of virtue, begotten in
regeneration, are first, the subsequent life of virtue, and secondly its
rewards. This principle resembles the moral perfection of the supreme
intelligence, and is the basis of universal virtue and universal happiness
throughout the moral world. All pure intelligences of every subordination
partake of it in their measure, and are actuated by it. When prevalent in man,
it as necessarily and naturally influences and impels to a life of holiness, as
a polluted principle when prevalent impels to a life of vice. It naturally
tends to perpetuate itself; yet through the embarrassments of a corrupted
world, it would decline and come to nothing, if it was not upheld by its divine
author. Whence the perseverance of saints is not to be ascribed to the
indissoluble perpetuity of the principle of grace, but to the promise and
continually sustaining power of God. A course of holy obedience and heavenly
conduct is pleasureable and delightful, and evidential of the reality of grace
in the heart, and the steadiness of our faith: -- this is the present benefit
of good works: -- but besides this, their most essential connections are the
rewards. The good the gracious principle is not in any measure to be rewarded,
like the good works it produces. Hence the book of the revelation represents
that at the final adjustment, men are to be rewarded, not according to their
faith (this has quite a different connection, viz. justification), not according
to the principle of grace, but according to the good works which flow from it:
-- this not of merit, but of the free, rich and sovereign grace of God. In
God's administration, grace and reward are not inconsistent. The final rewards
of virtue are as much of grace, as the bestowment of justification on faith, or
the giving both faith, repentance, and regeneration. But though these rewards
are of grace, yet God has been pleased to inform us that the rule he prescribes
to himself, is to apportion them to the degrees of sanctity. Thus the whole of
our salvation is grace -- by grace are ye saved, through faith, that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God. Hence,

7. We agree in inculcating and recommending a life of practical religion, a
life of pu^^ty, holiness and moral virtue.

We earnestly recommend private and public devotion, family religion, and pious
education of children -- that the light of our good examples may shine around
us, and excite others to glorify our heavenly father. We endeavor to cultivate
a reverential and undissembled homage of the most high, together with
unconfined, generous and diffusive benevolence, which shall render this life
social and pleasant, and qualify us for the future association with the spirits
of just men made perfect. And to animate us to this, we fail not to paint the
glories of paradise and the charms of virtue, and to exhibit such sublime and
exalted views of the moral government of God, as may charm and allure us to
that conduct which is the supreme honor of our natures.

8. We further agree, that however impotent and helpless we are of ourselves,
yet if any sinner, even in an unregenerate state, will use the appointed means
of recovery, he may be encouraged to hope for that further aid and success
which will terminate in his final salvation. Not that the sinner can regenerate
himself: -- but instead of sitting down in sloth, as if he had nothing to do,
no encouragement to labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, he
ought to be up and doing, and work out his salvation with fear and trembling,
knowing, that on his faithful improvement of the talents and advantages he
enjoys, it is God that works in him both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure. He should use the appointed means of religious contemplation on his
state, and duly attend to the eternal consequences of moral action, whether
virtuous or vicious: like a rational and immortal being, he should deliberate
on the tendency, event and issue of his behavior. He should consider that, by
his almighty lawgiver and judge, he is placed on this theater of action to
sustain in the view of mortal and immortal beings a certain character, and that
the part he acts has final connexions of the most important moment. He should
read the scriptures to learn the way of life, the terms of acceptance. He
should not neglect the duty of attending and hearing the word, and above all of
humble prayer and supplication to the father of lights, for the illuminations
of his holy spirit, to enlighten his mind, that he may clearly discern those
rich and attracting discoveries of redeeming love, which may beget faith and
renovation of soul. He should labor for such just and affecting views of the
folly of vice, and the excellency and wisdom of virtue, as may terminate in
abhorrence of the one, and a complacency in the other. From the just humility
and self-abasement which attends a thorough conviction of sin, there will be an
easy and irresistible transition to that joyful and unreserved surrendery of
the soul to God, which on our part completes the title to blessedness.

Let no one then be discouraged and say, that he cannot pray to God acceptably,
or ask in sincerity. For though the pure and sublime sincerity exercised by a
soul under the full ravishing discoveries of the gospel, cannot be expected in
the unregenerate; yet if ever their prayers are answered, their imperfect
sincerity is accepted: and it is evident that they are, because with the last
humble aspiration of the soul antecedent to conversion, is connected the
imparting regenerating grace. In a word, God would not call upon us
indiscriminately to ask mercy of him, if he did not indiscriminately grant it.
The connection between our petitions and the imparting of grace to the
unregenerate, no more interferes with the sovereignty of God, than the
connexions of blessing with the petitions of the godly. All that man receives
is free, unmerited grace. And if the promises are a peculiar favor reserved for
the saints; there are encouragements however to the unregenerate, to turn from
their evil ways and seek God, who gives grace to the humble. Jesus Christ came
to call sinners to repentance; and with the gracious invitations he makes to
them, he says, ask and ye shall receive -- and again, whosoever will let him
come: -- the sealing the vision and the prophecy was with an universal
invitation to all freely to come and be happy in paradise, in that pathetic,
earnest and affectionate address to mortals, I Jesus have sent mine angel to
testify unto you these things -- and the spirit and the bride say, COME. And
let him that hears say, COME. And let him that is athirst, COME. And
whosoever will let him take the water of life freely. Come all mankind,
whosoever will let him come. These invitations are not to the virtuous only,
but to a whole wicked debauched world, whosoever will let him come to Jesus and
be happy: let him come and make a humble surrendery of himself to him whose
right it is to reign, whose is the sovereignty and just dominion of man, and he
shall be accepted. These invitations are conceived in language as strong as the
promises. However at least there are encouragements to sinners -- and the
encouragements of a God are as infallible and equally to be depended upon as
his promises.

The use of means is necessary in our beginning the religious life, for our
confirmation in faith, and for the subsequent culture in virtue.

9. To close our agreement in doctrinal principles we believe the resurrection
of the dead, the future judgment, and final retribution. The spirits of men
when separated from their bodies, will not drop into a state of inactivity,
insensibility: -- separate souls will pass into the unseen world of unbodied
spirits, and be subject to the laws and government, to the work and rewards of
that world: they will during that state of separation be either united to the
society of angels, and happy souls, or be h^rded with the degraded angels, and
unhappy spirits of dead men: they will during this state of death, either
tremble at the foresight of their reunion to their ancient bodies, or wait and
long in this state of expectancy for the redemption of their bodies.
Pemberton's Elect. Sermon.
I must beg leave to proceed a little further, and add,

10. That we agree in the two positive institutions of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper. As to the communion, we do not prostitute it to the vicious and
debauched, but restrict it to persons of sobriety, faith and virtue: and for
the posture, according to the example of Christ and his apostles, we celebrate
it sitting around the Lord's table. We agree not only in the baptism of adult
believers, but of their infant seed. However incapable they are of instruction
and faith, yet Jesus Christ in saying, of such is the kingdom of heaven, as we
take it, asserts that they are capable of enjoying the blessings of his
spiritual kingdom -- capable of admission into it -- and of consequence capable
of the initiatory seal by which all are to be received into his kingdom. They
may be entitled to great blessings, though not by their own act, yet by the seal
of initiation, by which they are embodied into that catholic community of the
virtuous, which having the patronage of Jesus will in the issue appear to be
not only the most honorable incorporation in this part of the moral world, but
to imply interests and connexions of great moment. As for the mode of baptism
we universally perform it by affusion or sprinkling -- but whether it be done
thus, or by immersion, we do not hold it essential. And as the chief difference
between the Baptists and us is respecting the subjects, viz. Infants, on which
good and sensible learned men have judged variously; so there begins to be a
good harmony and friendly correspondence between the catholic and charitable of
both denominations, which I hope will continue and increase; and this
benevolence is entirely consistent with our adhering to our respective
denominations.

11. We agree in the belief of the inspiration of the scriptures -- we believe
that they contain an authentic and the only infallible account of the whole
system of revelation made from Time to Time to mankind -- and that they are a
sufficient rule of faith and practice. Our churches, God be thanked, are not
yet deeply tinged with deism -- may God preserve them pure! And as they yet
retain the popular belief of revelation, which will abide the most severe
scrutiny, so they accept the scriptures as an infallible rule. It is indeed a
little unhappy, that, like others in the christian world, some of us are fond
of substituting human interpretations given by authority of councils and
learned men, exacting that the sacred scriptures be understood according to
senses fitted and defined in human tests, which all acknowledge to be fallible.
But it is to be hoped that we shall stand fast in the liberty wherewith the
gospel has made us free. There ought to be no restrictions on the conscience of
an honest and sober believer of revelation. The right of conscience and private
judgment is unalienable; and it is truly the interest of all mankind to unite
themselves into one body, for the liberty, free exercise and unmolested
enjoyment of this right, especially in religion. Not all the difference of
sentiment, not all the erroneous opinions that have yet been started, afford
just umbrage for its extinction, abridgement or embarrassment. Have the
protestant formularies subserved the defense of the truth as it is in Jesus? --
Rather have they not in event proved new sources of religious dispute and
undeterminable controversy? The churches of Geneva have long since had the
wisdom to drop their article of consensus, as the great disturbance of the
christian harmony. And the clergy have found themselves obliged to interpret
the Helvoetic, and all other protestant confessions, in the scripture sense,
with a divinis veritatibus in hoc libro contentis subscribo. -- I am satisfied
we shall err less if we make the scriptures the only rule of faith, than if we
depart from this, and substitute another; or as many do, who say they believe
the scriptures the only rule, and yet in all their judgments on scripture,
measure that only rule by another rule. Nor do substituted rules answer the
purpose of detecting heretics at all better than the primary rule, since on
experience it is found none more freely subscribe and swear to human tests than
deists, skeptics and the most debauched. If God's enclosure will not keep out
the erroneous, can it be expected that ours will? The universal pretext is a
preservation against heresy. But it is to be remarked, that human tests make
more heritics than the word of God -- all that the one determines to be heresy,
is not heresy by the scriptures. A man may be a very great heretic according to
the one, and an excellent christian according to the other at the same time.
St. Paul was one of the greatest heretics, and even gloried in his heresy, and
yet was one of the best of christians. The Waldenses were heretics. The
protestants are all heretics with the romanists, according to the council of
Trent. All that can be advanced for public human tests among protestants, can
and has been advanced with equal force for those of the romanists: for it is
not so much the real truth or error contained in these tests and formularies
that is contested, as the authority by which they are imposed, which is only
human, and therefore not obligatory on conscience. Though we have reason to be
thankful that all the protestant formularies Harmonia Confessionum.
are so agreeable to scripture as they are; yet they give decisions on some
things which the scripture has not determined, and on which not only the
heterodox, but the most orthodox and learned divines have different sentiments
-- and in other things they are too imperfect to be adopted by christians as a
standard and criterion of christian truth: and ever have been looked upon among
the sensible part of mankind, as having no more weight and authority in forming
our religious opinion, our judgment on true religion, than any other human
composition, as sermons, bodies of divinity, treatises on the great doctrines
of christa^ity -- and as having no more claim than these to infallibility. God
be thanked we are not embarrassed with subscriptions and oaths to uninspired
rules for defining truth, in this land of liberty, where the SCRIPTURES are
professedly our ONLY RULE.

12. Again, We agree in the sufficiency and validity of presbyterian
ordination. This was the ordination practiced by the apostles, and among the
primitive christians of the first and second centuries. -- This is agreeable to
scripture: -- was introduced into our churches at the beginning; -- and this
has continued our practice ever since. The apostolic order was appointed in
virtue of a supernatural commission and dispensation, which ceased at the death
of St. John. During these supernatural communications of the holy Ghost, many
were divinely, I mean supernaturally, called to the work of the ministry,
besides the apostles; and were to this end endowed with the gift of tongues and
other miraculous powers. As the converts multiplied and formed into religious
assemblies or meetings, the holy Ghost appointed overseers and pastors to
instruct and feed the flock of God, to perform baptisms and administer the
communion. And these were indifferently called presbyters or elders, teachers,
bishops, pastors. The elders of Ephesus are styled bishops, Acts 20.28. So the
elders of Philippi are called bishops, Philip. 1.1. The elders are to take the
oversight of the flock, episcopountes, doing the work of a bishop. It cannot be
supposed, that the city and church of Ephesus within the first three years had
sundry diocesan bishops; and yet the apostle calls the elders of that church
bishops. These things convince us that scripture bishops, and elders or
pastors, are of the same order and office. Dr. Hammond says, there were no
presbyters of an Inferior order instituted by the apostles. And the learned Dr.
Stillingfleet made this noble concession that there were no bishops during the
apostles life meaning no diocesan bishops in the sense of the latin church. We
are confirmed in this from considering what this office was in the synagogue,
from whence it was adopted into the church. The head or president of the
synagogues superintended the public reading and explications of the law and the
prophets, and performed the public offices of devotion and preaching Lewis
Antiq. Haeb. V. 2. p. 428 and Basnage.
. This officer in the hebrew synagogues was called Chazzan; and in the
hellenistic synagogues Episcopos, a bishop; and sometimes Sheliach Tsibbor,
angel of the church, who never had the charge of more than one congregation, so
that there was as many bishops as synagogues. In the first forming of a
synagogue, the Chazzan was elected by the members, and ordained by the
imposition of hands of the elders of the synagogue. Afterward the succession
obtained in the appointment of the Chuzan who ordained his successor by
imposition of hands, an ancient rite of consecration to a religious office. It
does not appear that the Chuzan was ever appointed by the Sanhedrin. Nor does
it appear that the synagogues or their officers were of divine appointment:
since the oracular responses of Urim and Thummim, and the other supernatural
communications ceased before their institution. The ceremonies of anointing and
imposition of hands originally implied an authorative designation from heaven.
The tribe of Levi was consecrated to the levitical office, and the family of
Aaron to the priestly office by imposition of hands, implying an authoratitive
designation from heaven. Saul and David were designated to the regal office by
the ceremony of anointing with Oil. Barnabas and Paul were separated to the
apostolic office by prayer and the imposition of hands. These were supernatural
designations, and clothed the respective officers with a proper divine
authority. And these rites of initiation into the real and pastoral office were
retained, and probably were set forth as examples, and intended by God to be
retained in the kingdoms and churches of succeeding ages, when the authorative
designation was left to men. The apostles took early care to furnish examples
for perpetual imitation in the churches, by leaving the designation of the
pastors to the free election of the churches -- using the same rites in setting
apart those appointed by the churches, as in consecrating those that were
supernaturally called and appointed by heaven. There is a great difference
between imitating the ancient divine appointments, and acting under a direct
divine appointment. Samuel and the prophets anointed kings jure divino: but we
do not now imagine that when a bishop anoints a king in these ages, that he
does it jure divino, or confers any divine authority on the regal character. It
is but imitative of the few instances of extraordinary regal appointment in the
jewish monarchy. So the imposition of hands in the ordination of pastors, which
is held indifferent in several reformed churches, implies no supernatural
appointment to the pastoral office; and is in like manner imitative only of the
ancient ceremonies of consecration, and the few instances of extraordinary
appointment in the apostolic age, and at the first setting up of christianity.
The period of extraordinary appointment to the regal office was at most from
Samuel to the dissolution of the hebrew monarchies in their respective
captivities. The period for like appointment of the pastors is limited to the
few instances of the first century, or at most to the period of miraculous
powers. Since these periods both have been imitative only.

The ceremony of pastoral investiture was from the beginning performed by
coordinate presbyters or pastors; with whom the apostles left the conferring
holy orders in all the succeeding ages of the church. Thus pure and uncorrupted
antiquity is on the side of ordination by coequal presbyters. Clemens Romanus
and Polycarp speak of bishops and elders as of the same order and office.
Jerome and Hilary are on our side, by the consent of all who are acquainted
with ecclesiastical antiquity. And in the church of Alexandria, presbyterian
ordination only was practiced for two hundred years.

Indeed, in justice and candor to our protestant episcopal brethren, it must be
acknowledged that the distinction between bishops and presbyters, both as to
order and powers, began early in some parts of the christian church. And the
antiquity and figure of diocesan episcopacy, which obtained for ages throughout
the christian church, would have been an argument invincible, were it not for
the total silence of SCRIPTURE, and the certainty that the scripture
ordinations were performed by presbyters, and its making no difference between
the of^^s and powers of bishops and elders. Bp. Downam on the Ministry, p 8.
St. Paul refers Timothy to the gift he had received by the laying on the hands
of the presbytery or elders, not to the power received from himself as an
apostle assisting in ordination as a superior officer. The elders who labored
in word and doctrine, assisted in the ordination of pastors in other churches
besides their own. The apostles, and Timothy and Titus, in ordaining elders in
every city, acted as elders only, not in virture of the supernatural
communication of miraculous gifts -- though these were frequently imparted in the
presbyterian ordinations of the apostolic age: -- This however did not
constitute any part of that pastoral character which was to be of standing
perpetuity in the church. The manner of the apostles and primitive presbyters
was this; when in their travels, or the vicinity of their stated labors, there
appeared a body of christians proselyted by themselves or the ancient
evangelists; some of the brotherhood were chosen to the pastoral office and
oversight or episcopacy of the congregation -- these the apostles or any other
presbyters consecrated in presbyterian ordinations as fellow laborers. Thus
Titus was left to travel Crete, and as a presbyter himself to ordain
presbyterian bishops, i e. pastors in every city. Thus the original episcopacy
was the pastorate of a single congregation. The hierarchy of the greek and
latin churches after the apostolic age resolved the body of ecclesiastics into
subordinations unknown to the apostles, who left but one order of instructors,
that of elders, with power to perpetuate themselves in the election of the
people to the second coming of Christ.

At the reformation it was so generally conceded that presbyterian ordination
was the original practice, that it had universally obtained but for the
dignities and revenues. As much as this, on the part of England, is implied in
the reasonings of Dr. MADDOX the late b^ of Worcester: -- upon whose reasonings
a parliamentar^ establishment of presbytery, in the reign of Q. Elizab^th, had
been as consonant to scripture and primitive antiquity, as that of prelacy, had
it been as agreeable to three-fourths of the body of the clergy as it was to
one fourth.

The judgment of the foreign churches of the reformed is evident from the
harmony of their confessions, which assert an equality in all gospel ministers.
The sense of the protestant churches of the german empire may be well known
from those articles called the Smalcaldic Sleiden.
; in which the equality of ordaining power by divine right is asserted to
belong to presbyters; which was subscribed by three electors, forty-five
noblemen, the consuls and senators of thirty-five cities, and a vast number of
divines. At home in our nation the reformers asserted the same equality of
power by divine right. We have Dr. Cranmer's judgment for it by Dr.
Stillingfleet: and in the book called the erudition of the christian man, which
was drawn up by the body of the clergy, approved by both houses of parliament,
and published by the King's command, it is asserted that priests and bishops by
God's law are one and the same, and that the power of ordination belongs
equally to both. Pemberton.


And as to the present practice of the protestant world Dissent. Gent. Ans. 84.
; the Lutheran superintendents are confessedly but primi inter pares, and
consequently their ordination is truly presbyterian. Lutheranism is the
establishment of the two sovereignties of Sweden and Denmark, which include the
kingdom of Norway. Two of the three religions, or rather forms of religion
established in the german empire at the treaty of Westphalia, A. D. 1648, were
Lutheranism and Calvinism. The superintendents were ordained by presbyters
only. Luther and Melancton, who were only presbyters, ordained several. And in
Denmark, Burgenhagius, who was the great instrument of the reformation in that
kingdom, ordained seven bishops or superintendents at one time; and yet he was
only a presbyter. Galvin headed the reformation in France; but being obliged to
flee persecution, he repaired to Geneva, and assisted in completing the work
begun by Zuinglius, among the h^lvaetic churches. The churches of France,
Geneva, and the Swiss can^ons all agreed in doctrine and the abolition of
prelacy and ecclesiastical subordation -- and from the commencement of the
reformation practiced ordination by presbyters. The Dutch and Walloon reformed
of the united provinces, which in the year 1560 amounted to 2190 churches, all
agree in presbyterian ordination; so do the 450 churches of the canton of
Berne, as well as the rest of the Swiss protestants: and so do the 938 churches
of Scotland. Our congregational brethren the dissenters in England, which at
the revolution are said to have composed a body of about 2000 churches: --
These I say, and the large body of our brethren the presbyterian and
congregational dissenters in the north of Ireland -- all agree in presbyterian
ordination: -- add to these our protestant brethren the Baptists, in Britain
and the United Provinces especially, with whom we have the happiness of
agreeing as to ordination by presbyters or elders. I have not collected the
numbers of the protestant churches in the world which practice ordination by
presbyters -- though it is certain they far excede in numbers that respectable
body in our own nation which retain and practice episcopal as distinguished
from presbyterian ordination. Nay, exclusive of the Lutherans who seem to
retain a species of episcopacy, the reformed presbyterian churches comprehend
double the number of souls to those of the british episcopacy. Though strictly
speaking, the whole protestant world, except the church of England, agree in
the validity of presbyterian ordination. If therefore the matter was to be
decided by numbers, it must resolve in our favor by a very ample majority --
though truly not numbers, but the scriptures alone ought to decide the truth. It
however must be confessed no small satisfaction to find the largest body of
protestants on our side, in imitating the apostolic practice in this as well as
some other things, of which we are sometimes upbraided -- as particularly to
mention but one more here, the omission or Liturgies and rendering our
addresses to God in that most natural as well as christian and apostolic manner
of free prayer and extemporaneous devotion. In these disquisitions we initiate
our posterity the rising generation, not with a view of interfering with any
protestant sect, but upon the principles of conscience and self-defence. We
desire to live in peace and harmony with all -- nor do we attempt to proselite
from any communion. We desire only equal protestant liberty. And even our
episcopal brethren must confess that we treat them with much greater lenity,
charity, and christian benevolence, than they treat our congregational brethren
in England. And in general the declamations on the superior excellency and
purity of the church established in south Britain, necessistate us to adduce
the equal excellency and purity of that established for north Britain, with
which we have the happiness so nearly to agree. And as the parliamentary
establishments of neither of these extend to the british American provinces, so
every sect have a right here to vindicate their peculiar forms. And though we
judge that the congregational is equal at least in excellency and purity to the
episcopal, presbyterian, classical or any other forms, with all which we agree
in essentials, yet we exercise this judgment and our defenses upon it, with the
most generous and perfect benevolence to all our protestant brethren,
especially those who are evidently sincere and conscientious; knowing that they
may be equally honest, and have equally the right of private judgment with
ourselves.

13. We agree that every voluntary christian assembly have an inherent right, a
power which ought neither to be surrendered nor controlled, of electing its own
officers, such as pastors, or elders, and deacons. Happily different from most
of the reformed churches, we are possessed of this most valuable privilege,
which though they asserted, they could not retain. Harm^nia Confessionum passi^n.
Ministers are not imposed upon our churches. It had been happy for all the
christian world, had the filling up of pastoral vacancies remained, as the
apostles settled it, and as our fathers wisely settled it for us, in the
uncontrollable election of the church and congregation. Our fathers would not
suffer a sister church, or body of sister churches, to lord it over one
another, or hold a negative on one another's elections and pastoral
investitures. In this they agreed with apostolic, uncorrupted antiquity. The
first vacancy in the apostleship was filled up by the election of the 120
brethren -- they, the brethren, appointed two; and they, the brethren, gave
forth the heavenly (...) lots. So the choice of deacons, as well as pastors,
was in fraternal election: The twelve called the multitude unto them and said,
brethren look you out seven men, whom we may appoint or ordain -- and the
saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Stephen Acts vi. 2.
. And in ordaining elders or stated pastors in every city, the universal custom
was to consecrate those whom the brethren first elected. Nor do we ever find
the apostles or neighboring pastors ever negatived a popular election; but
universally ordained such men to the ministry as by the choice of the
congregation appeared to be men of good report. So the churches of New England
choose their own pastors, who are ordained or consecrated* as Eusebius expresses
it, "with the common consent of the bishops of the vicinity." And it is greatly
to be desired that all newly introduced ministers be agreeable to the pastors of
the vicinity, as a mutual harmony among fellow laborers must greatly subserve
the common cause.

When it is said, Acts xiv. 23, they ordained them elders in every church, it
is evident from the known custom of the Keirotonia, in the athenian democracy,
that it ought to be rendered to this effect, leading the people to the choice
of elders in every church, by the lifting up of hands. The apostles, in the
opinion of Dr. Cotton Mather, only presided, and the people under their
inspection elected. This Keiretonia is the practice of our churches. The
ceremony of consecration was the imposition of hands with prayer. This simple
process completed the pastoral investiture, and made a minister of Jesus
Christ.

The original custom settled by the apostles, was not worn out in several
centuries: Ignatius writing to the church in Philadelphia, tells them, that it
belonged to them to choose their pastor. All antiquity confesses the part which
the people had in the election of their pastors. The council of Calcedon,
speaking of the church of Ephesus, said, that such a bishop should be given
them as should be elected by those whom he was to feed. Dupin's ecc. his. and
Ratio disciplinae Nov' Angl. p 27.
Constantine wrote to the people or Nicomedia, that it was in their power to
make choice of what pastor they pleased. It is a celebrated saying of Cyprian,
in explaining Acts i. 26. to confirm the power of the people in choosing and
refusing their officers, "Plebs christiana maxim protestatem habet vel dignos
facerdotes elegendi, vel indignos recusandi" -- the highest power of electing
worthy pastors, and rejecting the unworthy, is in the people. A council in the
VIIth century makes the ordination of a bishop to be void, when he is not
elected by the people. Even in Rome itself, the people elected their bishop
till the XIIth century. And popular elections of ministers continued 'till
Charlemagne. Before this time indeed the privilege was in a great measure
deforced from some churches. For after the miraculous powers, the clergy
encroached on this principle, especially as the benefices became oppulent. But
they did not complete the acquisition, 'till that immense wealth, which they
intrigued into their hands in the ecclesiastical revenues, gave them a weight
which could no longer be resisted. This sacerdotal ascendency, and irresistible
influence, commenced from small beginnings and gentle encroachments. From such
small beginnings, as recommending the advice of neighboring pastors in the
choice of a minister; they proceeded, as this custom obtained, to claim and
demand such application for advice, as a pastoral right; and from claiming it
as a right, advanced to hold a negative on the elections of neighboring
churches; and afterward in the light of councils, which have proved the grand
fources of corruption and tyranny, they beheld it for the public good and
conservation of the faith, that they should be vested with the sole disposal of
pastoral vacancies. In the subsequent ages of the church, those who founded the
revenues, whether states or private persons, affirmed a temporary right of
nomination or presentation to benefices. But the clergy piously prevailed on
the founders to designate this power to them in their last wills. Thus and by
mortmains which they devoutly procured in bequests and pious uses, subjected to
the direction and disposal of the religious, they had intrigued two thirds of
the property of southern and western Europe into their holy hands. Thus by the
XIVth century the european churches not only lost the liberty of pastoral
elections, but with it stupidly played away their property, and subjugated
themselves, their souls, bodies, and estates, to a plausibly usurped, because
spiritual dominion. Thus the churches at length lost the invaluable power of
pastoral election, which they have never been able to recover. This shows how
dangerous a thing it is to surrender liberty! In the reformation, the clergy
themselves lost that power which they had piously intrigued from the people in
the four preceding centuries. For upon secularizing the ecclesiastical
revenues, the protestant princes, nobility and oppulent founders, making
appropriations for the support of the clergy, deemed it wisdom to assume the
presentations into secular hands. And the nomination is now most generally in
patronages in all the protestant churches. Thus the power which the clergy in a
long struggle caught from the people, is at length lodged not in the people,
not in the clergy, but in secular patrons.

The brethren and congregation have lost their liberty, when the appointment or
nomination of a pastor is rested, 1. In the sovereignty, whether it reside in a
prince or a state. Thus the states of Holland, and the kings of Sardinia and
Sweden have the exclusive nomination to pastoral vacancies. 2. When it is in a
presbytery, consistory or consociation. This was originally the case with the
Lutheran and reformed churches in general, and continues so with respect to
some of the churches of Scotland. 3. When it is shared between the sovereignty
and consistory of the clergy, as in the duchy of Wurtemberg. In this duchy
are 450,000 inhabitants and 620 ministers, inclusive of the dignified clergy.
According to the old laws of the Wurtemberg dominions, the ecclesiastical
employments were entirely in the disposal of the consistory, but many
male-versations having for several years been observed to obtain under such a
power, the best living being bestowed on the members of the consistorial
council -- the duke thought fit to curtail this privilege of the consistory, so
that now his highness alone appoints the superintendants, prelates and abbots;
for the inferior parsonages, the consistory recommends three persons, of whom
the privy council nominates one. Keyster's trav. Vol. 1. p. 103.
4. When it is in patronages, whether the patrons be princes, nobility, bishops
and dignified clergy, pious benefactors, or provincial governors. One or other
of these have the advowson of by far the greater part of episcopal livings in
the british empire, and throughout the protestant world. The royal conge de
lire so restricts the election of the british bishops, as that their
appointment may be said to be in the crown. The episcopal livings in the
province of Maryland are in the gift of the proprietary governor, who has the
appointment and induction of all the clergy of the province. I am told that the
collation to all episcopal benefices in the plantations, excepting the
missions, is in the King's governors. In Demnark the power exclusive is in the
prince, nobility and other patrons. Patronages are also numerous in the church
of Scotland. All these are total deprivations of choice in the people: in some
instances they may perhaps be consulted, but have no determining voice, and in
point of power this is to have just nothing.

The powers of the brethren, on the case before us, are abridged and
embarrassed, and their liberty but partial. 1. When in virtue of a public
compact established among a body of churches, the churches of the vicinity have
a negative on a pastoral choice of a destitute congregation. Or 2. When in
virtue of such agreement the ministers of the vicinity are invested with such a
negative. So that there being two voices in the election -- the vacant
congregation have one, and the neighboring pastors another. I do not know that
this is the case in any part of the world. No one can dispute but that an
ecclesiastical community or combination of churches can form such a resolve and
enforce it, though not in virtue of any divine power: yet the wisdom of such a
measure may be questioned. 3. When the advowson or choice is in a vestry and
church wardens, or committee chosen by the congregation -- as in rectori^s.
This is a low species of liberty, and a restriction that almost amounts to
deprivation. But in truth the lowest species of real genuine liberty is, when
there is at least a negative in the congregation, as well as in a patron or
presbytery, or those who share part of the liberty. If there is a negative only
in the latter, even the indulgence of choice in the church is no real true
liberty. Again, 4. When among a body of free apostolic churches, a number of
neighboring churches take upon themselves to be displeased with the acts and
election of a sister church, and excommunicate or refuse christian fellowship
with that church -- if this should not in the event control the election and
introduce a negative on the church, yet it certainly has a tendency to it; and
at least shows, that that combination of churches are desirous of spiritual
dominion, and would if they had power introduce themselves to such a negative.
All pretexts are foreign; the question is solely upon the point of power --
whether it is solely in the church? or whether it shall be shared with the
churches of the vicinity? And such a practice is defensible only upon this
principle, that it is best for the whole body of churches to have this mutual
reciprocal control upon one another. Aad this principal is a fundamental
subversion of congregationalism. For if the transferring the whole power of
electing a pastor to the churches of the vicinity, would be a total deprivation
of power in the particular church; then the transferring half that power, would
be a partial a semi-deprivation. And if upon such a surrendery, in a vicinity
of 20 consociated churches, the consent of 10 besides the vacant church be
necessary, that church retains but one tenth of her power, and has given up and
lost nine tenths. Thus the introducing the consociation to a negative on
pastoral elections; is an abridgment and embarrassment, nearly amounting to a
total deprivation of power in particular churches and congregations: and is
^onsequently a fundamental subversion of congregationalism, according to which
every congregation is vested not with partial but plenary decisive power.

Churches can then alone be said to be perfectly free, when each congregation
has an unlimited, absolute and self-determining power in the choice of their
officers: -- such as british freemen enjoy and exercise uncontroulably ^n the
choice of a representative or member of assembly. When no pat^on, no
association, no consociation nor neighboring churches have any negative or
control on the pastoral choice; when the election originates and ends with the
church and congregation, acting as a sovereignty in this as well as all other
ecclesiastical matters. And when a body of churches, 500 for instance, subsist
in harmony and benevolence without infringing this fundamental principle of
universal liberty, that body may be said to enjoy the most free constitution,
the genuine apostolic police. It is further to be remarked, that the christian
congregations have sense and ability enough to choose their own pastors,
especially since the revival of learning among the laity and the vernacular
translations of the scriptures have rendered common christians good judges of
pastoral qualifications; besides that in many of our congregations are
gentlemen of liberal education and learned acquisitions, equal and even
superior to the generality of our clergy. And the present pious and learned
body of ministers (...) this land, perhaps as well adapted to inculcate piety
and virtue, and diffuse the knowledge of the great scheme of divine revelation,
as any body of pastors in the protestant world, do honor to congregational
elections: for it is questionable ^hether any body of protestants, especially
the com^^ people for whom the clergy are of principal use, are so generally and
thoroughly acquainted with their bibles, both the doctrinal and historical
parts of scripture: they are faithfully and thoroughly instructed.

(...) shall close this ^ead with mentioning some of those singular churches
among the happy few in the christian world, who have not had this inestimable
privilege deforced from them, or if once deforced have yet resumed and retained
it in opposition to even the pious attempts on the public liberty. Baron
Polnitz speaking of the republic of Venice, whose churches are of the romish
communion, says the inhabitants of every parish, choose their pastors. Let. 25.
Dr. Burnet says of the Grisons, in every league they have a synod, and -- the
people choose their ministers:" and that the synod was bound to receive them.
Travels Let. 2.
The three leagues consist of 63 communities, the protestants are two thirds,
the catholics one. And another author ^ys of them, as to the ecclesiastical
government, every protestant church has right of establishing its pastors, and
of deposing them too. Syst. Geog.
Add to these the remonstrants and other sectaries in Holland not of the
establishment; our brethren the Dissenters in England, and the baptist and
congregational churches in America.

14. We agree that every individual church has the sole power of judging and
determining its own controversies. Our churches to the purposes of discipline
are so many distinct, ecclesiastical, sovereignties, in point of power and
control, as independent of one another, as the united provinces of Holland to
purposes of civil government. So the thirteen provinces on this continent
subsist independent of one another as to jurisdiction and control over one
another -- yet in harmony. And one church or congregation has no more power
over another, than one province over another, and yet they may all subsist in
union and love. Union and harmony don't necessarily imply cessions of power, or
subjecting to mutual jurisdiction. And as the powers, liberties and
jurisdiction of each province may be saved harmless in a general alliance or
plan of confederacy, as in the united provinces or swiss cantons; so the
powers, liberties and jurisdictions of each congregational church may be saved
harmless in a general union and confederacy of churches. And the same
principles may take place in confederating a multitude of lesser bodies, as in
confederating larger bodies, such as provinces, cantons, kingdoms. But to
return,

Our churches acknowledge no jurisdiction of sister churches over them; but
hold themselves both capable, and to have power to determine all matters of
difference that arise in a particular church. For in truth, in religion we
ought all to be free; and consequently not the religious speculative opinions
of a christian, one that honestly believes revelation, ought to be deemed the
subject of ecclesiastical animadversion in a church, and little else besides
his morals. And this every church is a complete judge of, and perhaps is seldom
mistaken. And if we go beyond this, neither single churches, nor a body, nor
ecumenical councils can determine: as is evident from an experiment through the
long tract of time from the council of Nice to that of Trent. It must be
confessed indeed, that our churches have sometimes taken on them the decision
of matters, which all the power and wisdom on earth cannot determine till the
second coming of Christ. But whatever is within the capacity of mortals to
determine, respecting the christian discipline, the brethren are sufficient
judges of. Or if they may sometimes be at a loss, they have recourse to the
opinion and advice of such council as they think fit to consult, reserving to
themselves a liberty to receive or refuse such advice when given. And with this
assistance they can determine any thing and every thing that can be determined
by mortals -- whether they confine themselves to what properly belongs to them;
or whether they enlarge into things which God perhaps has nor determined for
us, and never intended mortals should determine for one another. And with
regard to these last, the church, with the assistance of council, can resolve
and decide just as wisely as the wisest body of men, and save to themselves the
power of deciding the lesser and yet more momentous differences which are truly
the subjects of their decision. Therefore though our churches, in forming their
decisions in matters of discipline, make application to a council of the
pastors and messengers of neighboring churches; yet the congregational
churches universally hold a negative on the result of that council -- or rather
the decision of such council is of no force till received and ratified by the
inviting church: nor does it render that church obnoxious to the vicinity, if
she recedes from the opinion of the council. So that congregational councils
are advisory only. And in this manner have subserved valuable purposes, not so
much by affording any new light, as by becoming peacemakers in their
connexions, influence and persuasions. Thus our churches are absolutely free
with respect to all foreign jurisdiction.

There was indeed in the year 1705, an attempt or proposal to subordinate the
whole body of our churches to the jurisdiction of consociation, with final
appeal to a general provincial consociation, in which all controversies were to
take an ultimate issue and decision. But these proposals met with insuperable
opposition, from the spirit of liberty. Dr. Cotton Mather speaking of them
says, "there were some very considerable persons among the ministers, as well
as brethren, who though it the liberties of particular churches to be in danger of
being too much limited and infringed in them. And in deference to these good
men, the proposals were never prosecuted." Ratio discipline. p. 184.
To these proposals of erecting spiritual judicatories, the reverend and
learned Mr. JOHN WISE of Ipswich made a very spirited reply, in a satyr
entitled "the churches quarrel espoused," in which he shows that the vesting of
consociations with judiciary and decisive powers, would in the issue be the
abolition of congregationalism. And there is no reason to think this gentleman
was an enemy to our churches. -- It was early seen to be important, that our
churches should be consociated; but whether for the purposes of harmony only,
or dominion, was as early the question. For it was seen that whatever power was
ceded to the standing council, just so much was taken away from particular
churches; and this clashed with the principle, that every church had power to
decide its own controversies. The contesting this claim, and opposing the
transferring of spiritual dominion from the church to a standing council, is
the true reason, as I apprehend, that all our congregational churches in
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, are not resolved into consociations; which
though not jure divino, are however excellent things. But to show that the
congregational churches are under no foreign jurisdiction of other churches
assembled in standing or occasional councils, we may recur to the answer given
by our churches assembled in Synod, A. D. 1662, to the question on the
expediency and manner of consociations, proposed by the assembly of
Massachusetts -- This Synod agreed that every church or particular congregation
has Result of 3d Synod. p. 88.
"full power and authority ecclesiastical within itself, regularly to
administer all the ordinances of Christ, and is not under any other
ecclesiastical jurisdiction whatsoever." Subordinate to this fundamental
principle is all to be interpreted in that answer relative the communion and
consociation of churches. Thus we see our churches are hitherto free. And the
use they make of councils, which they occasionally invite, is advisory only --
"when they have done all, the churches are at liberty to judge how far their
advice is to be followed." Ratio discpl. 173.
Thus strictly speaking, congregational councils have no power at all: and upon
this principle it is conceded that "ecclesiastical councils, undoubtedly, have
at least as large rights, and as extensive authority, in churches that are
united in consociation, as in those that are not." And this I take to be the
truth of the case, that the confederacy was not meant to vest the consociated
councils with any new powers, or indeed with any power at all, but leave them
as congregational councils advisory only. As to what authority any councils
have jure divino, or by divine right, I shall not enlarge upon in this age of
liberty and light. Doubtless whatever power the councils have from this
quarter, whether consociated, congregational or ecumenical, is to have
irresistible dominion over all the churches.

15. Although our churches be distinct, and therefore may not be confounded one
with another, and equal and therefore have not dominion one over another,
Platform c. 15.
yet they hold a christian fellowship and communion. Our pastors exchange
labors with one another, and on occasion administer both sacraments in one
another's congregations. Our churches admit to occasional communion the members
of other churches here; and also those who have been sober communicants in
Scotland, Holland, or any reforming churches in England or Ireland, or
elsewhere. Ratio. disc. 136.
The most of our ministers are resolved into friendly associations, in which
they assemble twice a year for fellowship and harmony, but not for tyranny and
dominion. The pastoral interviews at the annual convention at Boston, and on
the public commencements in our colleges, may subserve the purposes of union
and benevolence. Provincial conventions are excellent things, so long as they
continue only social interviews: but when they assume upon themselves the
lordly superintendence of the churches, as they did in the IVth and Vth
centuries, they degenerate into a spiritual dominion, unfriendly to liberty and
truth.

As communion among kingdoms and commonwealths hinders not the intireness of
jurisdiction in each kingdom and commonwealth, within itself, in its proper
concernments; so it is in the communion of churches. Therefore church communion
must be only in a way of brotherly association -- but not in way of
subordination or subjection of one church to the ecclesiastical government,
whether of another church, or of the elders of other churches assembled in
classes or synods. -- Communion of churches in the -- way of subordination or
subjection to other churches or synods -- the scripture no where approves. Not
of one church to another, for there is a parity among churches; -- nor of one
church to a synod made up of the elders of sundry neighbor churches.
Davenport's power of congregational churches in answer to Pages, p. 140.


The equality and independence of every congregational apostolic church, is in
part the essential basis of the general union and confederacy. The constitution
of our churches, like those in the apostolic age, are independent, free and
social: and our platforms were received by the body of the churches only as
plans of union and mutual fellowship; -- explicit agreements, in which,
reserving to themselves individually their independence, equality and
unaccountableness to one another, they united in general communion in
ordinances, pastoral labors, advice and council: -- But quite on a different
footing from the constitutions of the churches of Scotland or Holland, for both
of which however they always have deservedly entertained a very high esteem.
The jurisdictions of the presbyteries in the one, of the classes in the other,
and of the provincial synods in both, even the compilers of our platforms had
for some reasons of experience a disaffection to, and our churches much more.
They were willing and desirous to walk together as equal sister churches, not
in subordination and subjection, but in universal protestant liberty and
communion.

Having thus exhibited a summary view of the doctrine and polity on which our
churches have a very general agreement, I proceed

II. To mention some things on which there is among us some real or supposed
difference of opinion, and to show that these differences need not obstruct the
general harmony recommended in the text: and that these real and suppositious
differences may be lessened by benevolent and honorable concessions.

1. One source of different sentiment, were the unhappy excesses into which our
churches have been transported in the late enthusiasm that prevailed since the
year 1740. In the public mistaken zeal, religion was made to consist in
extravagancies and indecencies, which were not according to the faith once
delivered. Multitudes were seriously, soberly and solemnly out of their wits.
The scriptures were in danger of being neglected for the indistinguishable
impulses of the spirit of God; sober reason gave way to enthusiasm; the terrors
of eternal damnation, instead of subserving rational and sober convictions,
were improved to th^ow people into that confusion, frenzy and distraction,
which anfitted them for the genial illuminations of the holy spirit. Besides
this, the standing ministry were aspersed, and represented under abusive
suspicions of being unconverted, legalists, arminians. And as they were thus
publicly and indecently vilified, so it was taught as a duty to forsake their
ministrations, and form into separate assemblies. And as was natural to expect,
our churches were hereby rent and torn and thrown into convulsions and
confusions, to the great dishonor of the general cause. Much of this indeed was
piously meant, and honestly intended* and proceeded from a zeal for the cause of
God. Thus there was no doubt an intermixture of good, and it is to be hoped
many were savingly converted. Our churches have now in some measure cooled and
recovered themselves, though the spirit of enthusiasm is not altogether
extinguished as yet, but operates and influences under different pretexts, and
in a different form. But it is to be remarked with gratitude to the overruling
disposer of events, that amidst the religious convulsions which threatened the
subversion of congregationalism, an augmentation of above 150 new churches has
taken place in that period, founded not on the separations, but natural
increase into new towns and parishes. These differences into which good and
pious men were involved, have indeed made so deep an impression, as not to be
easily effaced in the present generation, notwithstanding it is so much our
interest to unite in love and harmony; nor can we so easily, heartily and
sincerely unite as if nothing of this nature had happened to disturb the common
benevolence. But it is to be hoped that the spirit of alienation will more and
more subside, and not be transmitted to succeeding generations. On all sides
there have doubtless been errors and indiscretions, let us put on condescension
and charity; and nobly forgive one another.

2. Another source of differences is that of calvinism and arminianism. Many
great and pious men are alarmed at a supposed prevalence of arminian principles
through the churches of New England: and others suppose calvinism greatly
erroneous. Under these banners they respectively enlist, combat, conquer, and
are conquered. The pretext of these names serves to legitimate mutual
aspersions which neither party deserve. To me it appears that these jealousies
are founded almost entirely on mistake: nor am I aware of any very essential or
general alteration of the public sentiment on what we all agree to be the
fundamental principles of revelation. From some considerable acquaintance with
the ministers of New England, I cannot perceive any very essential real
difference in their opinions respecting the fundamental principles of religion.
I may be mistaken -- but their different manner and phraseology in explaining
the same principles appears to me to be their chief difference. We are apt
indeed to attribute to one another consequences of our peculiar explanations
which (...) no means adopt. Thus those who are called ar^^^ans say of those
called calvinists, that their doctrine of original sin makes God the author of
moral evil -- of election implies, that we are to sit still and do nothing
toward our salvation -- of justification by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, that it precludes the necessity of faith, regeneration, inherent
righteousnes^ and good works, and so fa^ resolves this great affair into a
matter of strict justice, as to preclude the rich free grace and sovereign
mercy of the father -- of irresistible grace as destructive of and inconsistent
with the moral liberty and free agency of man. -- And so on for the rest of the
controverted points. And yet none that I ever conversed with who are called
calvinists, by any means admit these consequences from their principles. Again,
those reputed calvinists say of those reputed arminians, that their doctrine of
moral freedom implies a natural power to become good and do all that heaven
requires or man without the supernatural influence and power of the divine
spirit imparted to the soul -- that their interpretations of original sin
implies a denial of the universal depravity of human nature, universal
impotency and debilitation of the moral powers, and perversion of affection,
with loss of the image and communion of God -- that with them election is
founded on foreseen meritorious conditions in man -- that their idea of
Christ's atonement is destructive of the true nature of satisfaction and
atonement for sin in the propitiation of the obedience and death of Jesus --
that they trust to the works of the law for justification. -- that they
substitute our obedience instead of the obedience of Christ, for the basis and
meritorious foundation of justification -- in a word, that their notions and
sentiments imply that man is not totally depraved, and though fallen, yet by
Christ recovered to even a better state at present than Adam in innocence was
in; and that there is no need of atonement, renovation of nature, or of the
spirit's operation. But all reputed arminians I have conversed with strenuously
deny these consequences. And I find both reputed calvinists and arminians,
especially of the clergy, agree in admitting the depravity of human nature in
all its powers and affections -- the absolute inability to faith and holiness,
without the special influences, assistances and operations of the spirit on the
human mind, over and above the elucidated and inspired discoveries of
revelation, I do not mean to reveal new truths, but to enable us to an
efficacious apprehension and discernment of those already revealed -- that to
his enlightening energies is to be attributed the principle of regeneration --
that we are justified in the sight of God, not for good works, but alone for
the sake of Christ and his atonement: though they may differ in defining the
nature of atonement, yet all agree in making it the sole foundation of
justification -- that the benefits of Christ's righteousness are appropriated
to believers by faith, as the condition of our receiving the atonement.

Some perhaps entertain sentiments really different on these important
subjects. Their conviction however is not to be labored by the coertion of
civil or ecclesiastical punishment, but by the gentle force of persuasion and
truth -- not by appeals to the tenets of parties and great men; not by an
appeal to the positions of Arminius or Calvin; but by an appeal to the inspired
writings. And I am persuaded if all would freely and heartily compare their
sentiments to this rule, they would be very soon found not very variant. They
would find themselves to agree in the peculiar doctrines of christianity Cooper.
such as the apostasy of human nature, the guilt and condemnation into which
all men have fallen; the person and offices of the redeemer; our pardon and
justification through his obedience and sacrifice; the conditions of the covenant
of grace; the nature and extent of that holiness without which no man shall see
the Lord; and the necessity of the influences of the holy spirit to form us to
it.

On finding this great agreement, sameness and real harmony of sentiment, among
gentlemen reputed essentially to differ, I have often wondered whence could
arise such different reputations. And without charging it to the account of art
and policy to asperse one another's characters, I have been charitably obliged
to conceive this supposititious difference very like to that which arose on the
covenant of works and the covenant of grace, and produced a memorable
convulsion in our churches in their infancy about 123 years ago: of which Dr.
Cotton Mather has given us an account in his magnalia; where may be seen how
the great Mr. COTTON was aspersed and encompassed with the public jealousy. Mr.
Cotton's Ans. to Mr. Williams, p. 50.
Jealousies were raised between the best of divines and the best of christians.
It is remarkable how essentially they though it themselves to differ, and thought
the difference even damnable too. Mutual ecclesiastical anathemas were
denounced, civil discord ensued, till a dishonorable persecution satiated the
public spirit, and prepared the churches for the cool retrospect of 50 years,
when they found the whole was surmise, supposition and mistake. Dr. Cotton
Mather freely declares it his opinion, that the ministers of that day all very
nearly agreed in sentiment with Mr. Cotton at the same time, respecting those
very points on which they unhappily though it themselves to differ -- and that
their jealousies all proceeded from mutual concern for the welfare of the
churches, which led them to suspect and be alarmed at every thing that had the
aspect of tendency to their hurt. Posterity may make the same judgment
concerning us.

These things are unaccountable in human nature -- but have been facts in past
ages -- may be so in the present. The only way is to examine our sentiments by
scripture; then heartily and benevolently inquire how far we are agreed in
reality; to walk together by the same amiable rule so far as we have attained
to think alike; and to forbear real differences in love, where there appears a
sincere love of truth, candor and piety. Remembering we all have the
unalienable right of private judgment in religion; and that liberty of thinking
and choosing our religion, liberty of conscience was the great errand of our
pious forefathers into America. And as to real differences, I believe we might
amicably adjust them by honorable and benevolent concessions, by studying and
comparing the written word which we all agree to be a sufficient rule, instead
of human systems on which we all justly differ. In the search after truth it
should be our perpetual motto, "nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri." For
after all, the question ought not to be what is calvinism, or what arminianism?
-- what was the opinion of calvin, or what the opinion of arminius? but what is
real christianity? what is the truth as Jesus and his inspired apostles
delivered it?

3. There are some differences of opinion among us respecting the nature and
authority of ecclesiastical councils, and the powers of particular churches. If
I en^ somewhat minutely into this subject, it may not only (...) us to discern
the true source of these differences; (...) which I principally aim at, may
assist us in perceiving more accurately the nature and rationale of our
ecclesiastical polity.

In the first settlement of this country our churches were free, independent
and unsubordinate to one another. But though it was an agreed point that each
church had of itself plenary power in deciding all its controversies, and
issuing all matters of discipline: yet they also agreed in consulting and
advising with the churches of the vicinity, represented and assembled in
council on application of the consulting church. The advisory results of which
councils had, as they justly ought to have, considerable weight in healing
differences. In time it became the opinion of many of the clergy, that it was
best for the conservation of the faith and public order, that the advisory
influence of councils should be extended into juridical authority. There have
been formed two platforms for church discipline and policy: -- one in 1647,
before the notions of increasing or indeed of giving any authority at all to
councils began; the other not 'till 1708, when they run high. The first was
made at a general synod assembled at Cambridge, consisting of the pastors and
messengers of several churches. The latter at a synod consisting of the pastors
and messengers assembled at Saybrook, previously elected and delegated from the
four county conventions of the churches of Connecticut. After these platforms
were made, they were transmitted to the churches for their approbation. Those
of Connecticut, except perhaps 14 or 15 churches, have acceded at length to the
Say-brook agreement: in what sense, with respect to the authority of councils,
we shall afterward inquire. The rest of the congregational churches in
New England generally regulate themselves on this point, according to the
congregational platform, which is commonly called the congregational platform,
or rather on the purely scriptural model. Now the difference of sentiments
respecting the authority of councils, is almost entirely founded on some very
strong expressions in both platforms, respecting the powers and independency of
distinct unsubordinate churches; and other strong expressions, especially in
the Say-brook platform, importing the subjugation of our churches to the final
jurisdiction and authority of councils. It may facilitate our understanding
this matter, as well as the ecclesiastical polity of our churches in general,
to consider the sentiments of the compilers of these platforms, the public
spirit of liberty at the times of their respective formation, and the sense in
which they were received by the small body of churches at first, and lastly the
sense in which they are received and adopted by the present large body of
churches; most of which have been gathered since these regulations and
agreements of our ancestors. But before I proceed, let me just observe that our
ecclesiastical polity, at least so far as relates to councils, whatever it is,
like the polities and social confederacies of all other protestant churches,
takes origin and is founded in human wisdom, human agreement and confederacy,
having no claim to divine authority. It is only a wise measure which the
churches accede to for harmony, fellowship and union. Antecedent to which
agreement and confederacy the churches were ^n full life, in full possession of
all ecclesiastical power: and if they have imparted or delegated all or part of
this power to councils, the councils received just so much as the churches
covenanted to impart and no more: -- which the succeding acts of the churches
may resume, limit or continue.

In order to enter into the spirit of the congregational platform which we are
first to consider, it may be observed what is well known, that the first
ministers and churches were partly presbyterian, partly congregational -- both
independent. There seem to have been three opinions among the ministers. Three
or four were for having the whole rule transferred and ceded from the
fraternity to a standing eldership; the authorative act and concurrence of the
brethren to be taken in no cases but the choice of elders, and in ratifying the
sentence of excommunication. But of this opinion the churches could never be
persuaded. Most of the ministers were for an eldership elected by the
fraternity, with a negative on the church; and so all church acts to proceed on
the concurrence of the eldership and brethren in a mixed administration. Some
few churches acceded to this: and this is the highest sense in which
presbyterianism ever obtained among our churches. Others of the pastors agreed
with the almost universal sense of the brethren in the true and proper unmixt
idea of a congregational church, viz. that all disciplinary power vested in the
fraternity. All agreed in receiving the scriptures as their only rule in
religion: -- all very much agreed in their interpretation of the doctrinal
parts of scripture: -- differing in their notions of discipline in little more
than this, viz. that power of the keys, which the presbyterians would have
vested in the eldership, the congregationalists would have to vest and reside
in the body of the fraternity. Both agreed in the independency of each church.
Nor were the presbyterians i^clined to the mode of the Scottish or Holland
classical presbytery. While they were for the exclusive power of elders in
admissions to communion and disciplinary acts, that is for the authority of
presbytery in a particular church; they agreed in disclaiming the authority of
a presbytery out of the church, that is the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical
presbyteries of the vicinity. The congregationalists retained all the power in
the hands of the brethren conjunctly. Both agreed that the power of the keys
was in the church, whether exercised by the elders alone, or by the whole
church. This is a fundamental principle from which the churches never supposed
themselves to have departed. On these general principles the plan of union or
confederacy was conceived by the synod, A. D. 1646. assembled on the
recommendation of the legislature of Massachusetts. The synod thereupon
appointed two gentlemen of the Massachusetts, and one of the colony of
Plymouth, to draught each of them a model of discipline and polity for the
choice of the succeding session. The compilers were the reverend messieurs John
Cotton of Boston, Richard Mather of Dorchester, and Ralph Partridge of Duxbury.
Mr. Mather's model is said to have been chosen. Mr. Norton revised it, and with
such further amendments as the synod thought proper, it was finished. Now the
sentiments of these gentlemen are well known to have been presbyterian in the
second sense above defined. I imagine they were nearly in the same sentiments:
unless perhaps Mr. Cotton's notions of the authority and jurisdiction of
councils might be lower than the others, as that pious and learned man had
sustained an implied or oblique animadversion in the synod of 1637. So far as I
can learn, their notions of ecclesiastical polity were thus, that every church
should be furnished with a presbytery consisting of a pastor, teacher and one
or more ruling elders, all elected by the church, in whose hands should be the
discipline and governing, as well as instruction of the congregation. That in
matters of difficulty this presbytery might advise with a council consisting of
such a number of the triumvirate elderships in the vicinity or elsewhere, as
they should invite to assemble. That the churches properly congregational, and
which had no triumvirate, should instead of an eldership appear in council by
their pastors and messengers, as they had done in the synods of 1637 and 1646.
That the pastors, elders and messengers assemble in council in the capacity of
delegates from the churches -- and as pares or equals in council: -- not that
an occasional council or ecumenical synod should consist of two estates, the
clergy for one, and the lay-delegates for another; and so have distinct acts,
as in the upper and lower houses of convocation. That as an ecumenical council
might assemble at the invitation of the legislature; so an occasional council
might be assembled on the invitation of the church when a difficulty subsisted,
not authoritatively to decide and determine the difficulty, but to advise the
church how to decide and determine it. That they should be assembled only on
such occasions as the particular church thought proper, and consider such
matters only as the church laid before them, and would be advised in. That the
assemblings of provincial synods and of ordinary councils, be neither of them
stated, but both pro re nata occasional.

It is well known, as I have said, that however fond our fathers in the
ministry were of the power of presbyteries in churches, and of the advice of
councils, they were however very opposite to the powers of councils, classes or
synods out of the church. In opposition to this extraneous foreign
jurisdiction, many of them wrote largely, particularly the reverend Mr. Cotton:
so also the rev. Mr. Davenport in his answer to the rev. Mr. Paget of Holland:
so also the rev. Mr. Richard Mather, one of the compilers of the platform wrote
against Mr. Herle in 1644. in confutation of Mr. Herle's four arguments for the
government of synods over particular congregations. Hence these gentlemen were
entirely against the decisive authority of councils and synods when assembled:
or that they should be vested with power to enforce their decrees with a
penalty of non-communion to be declared by themselves authoritatively as a
council or synod. They would have them advisory only, to give their opinion and
advise on difficult cases, as readers of divinity in the university, or men
learned in the usages and customs of the churches. They were to the churches,
if I may borrow an illustration from high example, what the privy council are
to the king. On the matters laid before them they draw up their judgment and
result, which is remitted to the church, -- if the church received it, it had
force; not through the authority of the council or of the churches represented
in council, but of the church which receives and confirms it, and which has a
plenary power of governing itself, and deciding all its controversies. In like
manner the result of an ecumenical council or synod being remitted to the
churches, by the reception of the voting receiving churches to have authority,
and among these to have force over those only that explicitly receive it. Nor
was any church to be hereticated for not approving or receiving the result of a
synod or council. On the singular case of censuring a church as a church
(whether any thing of this nature be con^tent with the fundamental independency
and unsubordinate equality of churches, or not) it was the opinion of the
fathers that a synod as such, much less an ordinary occasional council
consisting of a few churches, had no authority, and ought not to be vested with
any, to excommunicate that offending sister church. But that the synod or
ecumenical council consisting of a representation of the whole body of the
churches, recommending non-communion in their result, excommunication should
proceed on the acts of particular churches, and be performed, not by the synod
jure synodali, but by the churches themselves to whom the excommunicatory
result should be remitted, or by so many as should see cause for the reasons
assigned in the result to withdraw communion: -- that no church or churches
were obliged to vote this result on the penalty of non-communion Non tamen sub
paeca^ censurae ecclesiasticae. Norton ad Apollon. p. 110.
: -- that so far as this sentence of non-communion proceeded in the churches,
the particular offending church should be and remain excommunicate till it
should render submission to the acceptance of each church reversing the
sentence: -- that if the act of non-communion passed in all the churches, said
church was absolutely and entirely excommunicate; if in 20 only, it was
excommunicate with respect to those 20 only and no more, and remained in order
and regular standing with those churches from which it was not cut off by an
express act. Thus in the opinion of these gentlemen, the highest act of
ecclesiastical censure, viz. excommunication, was to be guarded.

This I take to be a just summary of the opinion of the fathers on
ecclesiastical polity in general, and the constitution of councils in
particular -- as may be collected from their writings, especially Mr. Cotton's
book of the keys, and Mr. Norton's answer in the name of all the New England
pastors, to the questions on church polity sent over by some of the London
ministers from Appollonius, a dutch divine, in the name of the Zeland pastors
in 1644. This answer was wrote the year before the synod, which assembled first
in 1646, again 1647, and lastly in October 1648, when they presented the
platform to the legislature to be by them recommended to the churches. Mr.
Cotton in his elegant preface to Mr. Norton's answer. comparing the
ecclesiastical jurisdictions in the Holland and New England churches, sums up
his opinion on this subject thus, Synodos nos una vobiscum, cum opus fuerit,
and suscipimus and veneramur -- actus regiminis quos vos a synodis peragi
velletis, eos a synodis porrigi ecclesiis et ab ecclesiis ex synodali
diorthosei peragi peteremus. -- Petimus et illud etiam ut regimen omne
ecclesiasticum administratur a presbyteris cujusque ecclesiae in ecclesiae
facie; nec inscia nec invita ecclesia. Vos aliud quiddam vendicatis. -- Annon
satis tuto cautum fuerit nequid ecclesiae detrimenti capiat, si omnia a
presbyteris ecclesiae, ecclesia conscia and consentiente peragantur, modo nihil
arduum -- nisi ex consilio vicinorum compresbyterorum transigatur? We may
remark that ex synodis porrigi ecclesiis, et ab ecclesiis peragi gives the
entire idea of the power of councils and the power of churches: the councils
are to advise what is to be done, the churches are to do what is to be done.
Agreeable to this was the opinion of Mr. Hooker, President Chauncy, Mr.
Davenport, President Oaks. Mr. Hooker who died 1647, while the platform was
composing, speaking of synods says, they have no power of inflicting censures
or of imposing their conclusions and determinations upon others under pain of
censure. And again they set down their determinations -- and so return them to
the particular churches whence they came, and their determinations take place,
not because they concluded so, but because the churches approved of what they
have determined. Survey, part. 4. p. 47.
President Oaks was a great advocate for the ballancing power of elders in
mixed congregationalism, and for councils and synods, and the decisive power
thereof, as it has been stated by the leaders of the congregational way both
in Old and New England. Though he had no notion that the rule and authority of
the elders should be rendered an insignificant thing -- as in the way of the
Brownists; yet he was as careful that the liberties of the people may not be
overlaid and oppressed, as in the classical way. If presbyterianism in the
rigor of it should obtain among us, there will an oppression of the liberties
of the people. Comparing the forms of the several protestant churches, he says,
Great blindness had happened unto the world for many ages -- etc. The
reformation in K. Edward's days was then a blessed work; and the reformation of
Geneva and Scotland was a larger step; and for my part I fully believe that the
congregational way far excedes both, and for the substance of it is the very
way that was established and practiced in the primitive times, according to the
institution of Jesus Christ. -- And indeed it has been my persuasion from what
I have read and observed, that those that would forsake the congregational, and
pass over to the presbyterian way, because of some differences of notion among
our congregational divines, or difficulties in the practice and way of the
congregational churches, shall find that they make but a bad exchange; and that
there are as many or more differences, difficulties and entanglements in the
presbyterian principles and practice. And I must needs say, that I should look
upon it as a great degeneracy if we should leave the good old way so far as to
turn councils and synods into classes and provincial assemblies -- And elders
should manage all themselves in an autocratical absolute way, to the utter
subversion or overthrow of the liberty and privilege of the brethren.
President OAKES' Election Sermon, A. D. 1673.


The spirit of liberty at this time in the churches was such, that they were on
the subject of disciplinary power generally congregational, and in no wise fond
of the lower restrictions of the elderships: and with respect to admissions to
communion, they were so universally congregational, that I suppose there had
not been an instance of church admission sine fratrum suffragus, without the
votes of the brethren. This part of presbyterianism, viz. the elders admitting
to communion, without the explicit concurrence of the church, never obtained
among the first churches. Several churches in compliance with the sentiments of
their pastors, had the ruling and teaching elders at first, as Well as the
pastor: yet they at length disused the ruling elder; and the teaching elder as
distinct from pastor is now dropped. The authority of this triumvirate never rose
high; some few of our pious fathers early put in high claims for it, that it
should be vested with supreme rule and sole dominion. But the spirit of the
churches would not bear this. The generality of the clergy, not merely from
condescension, and being overpowered by the prevailing spirit of liberty, but I
believe from honest persuasion that it was the scripture model, were for
dividing all acts of rule and discipline between the eldership and fraternity,
and rendering the concurrence of both necessary. And here the churches closed,
only being at liberty to have, or not to have an eldership besides the pastor.
Though the churches would not bear an actual negative of the eldership, whether
in a single person or more. Nothing of moment was carried from the beginning,
without the explicit consent of the fraternity. Nor had they the least notion
of surrendering this privilege, much less of suffering sister churches either
distinctly or conjunctly to have any jurisdiction over them. So far from this,
and so full were they of the ideas of plenary congregational power, that it was
held a general principle, that individual churches had not only the
uncontrolled power of pastoral elections, but of the pastoral inves^ture
ordination or appointment; which even the first worthy ministers, as well as
^h^ches, held to be the lesser act.

Having taken this survey, we are prepared to judge on the platform itself, the
sense in when it was conceived, the amended sense in which it passed the synod
of 1648, and the sense in which it was, through the recommendation of the
general assembly, received by the churches, and lastly the sense in which, by
act of legislature, it in effect became the ecclesiastical provincial
establishment of Massachusetts and New Hampshire and Connecticut. For by acts
of legislature in these provinces parochial contracts for the support of the
congregational clergy are enforceable at law. And these acts having received
the royal sanction constitute congregationalism a legal establishment. As to
the platform itself, it is evident that it leaves the scriptures to be the sole
rule of faith, ordinances and discipline. As to what relates to authority and
polity, though the compilers hoped to have introduced a triumvirate presbytery in
each congregation to the reception of the churches, yet the authority of such
presbytery was confined to such churches as received it, all being at liberty
to use it or disuse it. That while the discipline and rule should at least in
part vest in the eldership of the presbyteriated churches, the whole should
vest in the fraternity of the congregational ones. And that no power should be
ceded to councils as such. Accordingly the platform leaves each church with
plenary unceded power, making the councils and synods advisory only and pro
remata or occasional: -- not excepting the extraordinary case of
excommunicating a whole church, for this is not to be done by the council, but
to obtain only upon the acts of particular churches. In the third way of
communion, the judgment of the synod or council for declaring non-communion
against an offending church is of no efficacy, but by particular churches
approving and accepting the judgment of the synod Platform.
, and respectively declaring the sentence of non-communion in each church. Thus
at length with a multitude of interspersions securing the independency and
uncontrolable power of the churches, it was passed and received as the plan of
public confederacy, which united the presbyterians and independents under the
one common title of congregationalists, before agreeing in doctrine, mode of
worship, ordinances, and the self-government of churches. This union did not
introduce either to a jurisdiction over one another, but left them the full
possession of their unceded peculiarities. They agreed that admissions should
be by the voice of the brotherhood -- differing in this, that the rule and
government should be divided between the elders and brethren in the one, and
vest wholly in the brotherhood of the other: and that the ceremonies of
pastoral investiture might be performed by the elders of the one, and by
delegated brethren of the other. The enjoyment of both these peculiarities was
covenanted to remain to both respectively, without breach of charity or the
union. It was a fundamental principle of the union, that every voluntary
assembly of christians had power to form, organize and govern themselves, and
in imitation of the apostolic churches to gather and incorporate themselves by
a public covenant, and to elect and ordain all their public officers. They held
communion with all protestant churches; yet held a peculiar fellowship with the
churches of their peculiar way and order: and thence the matters of principal
moment, such as the gathering of churches and ordinations of pastors, they
transacted in the presence of the delegates of other churches, whom they
invited and called in as witnesses of their says and order. The essence of
pastoral ordination they held to consist in the election and public covenant
between the pastor and the church. The ceremony of pastoral institution they
held to be the lesser act, which yet ought to be performed as the gathering of
a church with fasting and prayer. The conducting of which religious ceremony
was left to the elders in the presbyterian churches -- in churches where there
was no elder, the platform recommended the calling in and employing of the
neighboring pastors to assist in ordination; yet with an explicit concession
that even this might be performed by brethren orderly chosen out of the church
for this purpose. This insertion with others shows the popular sense of liberty
in our churches at that time: and the subsequent practice suggests the true
idea of ordination councils, as used in these churches.

The sense in which the platform was received may be further collected from the
effect with which it has obtained. The popular sense was too strong for the
plan conceived by the clergy. The churches were really congregational from the
beginning, and never fond of a presbytery for rule and government, nor were
they ever pleased with the idea of a mixed congregationalism devised by our
wise forefathers, in which the power was divided between the elders and the
brethren. Nor did the distinction of presbyterian and independent, and
differences thereon subsist so much among the churches, as between the churches
and the ministers -- the ministers were for presbytery, the churches for
congregationalism unmixt. It was natural then for them, being left at liberty,
to use it. Hence the distinctions have long since been lost in the one common
name of congregationalists. The lay-elder (if this be not a solecism) is almost
entirely droped Some few churches have two ruling elders, and some twelve.
; and the teaching elder as distinct from pastor has long since been disused.
Truly neither of these ever obtained in many of our churches after the first
generation. Two officers of the triumvirate ceasing, the disciplinary authority
of consequence vests in the fraternity: unless perhaps in the few churches
originally mixed (for I know of none, or not more than one of the first churches
purely presbyterian) where the pastor may continue to retain a negative on the
church, or in the language of our ancestors, where the power of rule is in the
elder, and the power of privilege only in the brethren. And under the umbrage
of those clauses securing this power to the elders of presbyteriated churches,
the pastors of some churches purely congregational have claimed and assumed
this power. But according to the true principles of congregationalism, the
pastor, besides being moderator of church meetings, or president of the
christian fraternity, has but the authority of a private brother in the rule
and government of the church. The platform happily succeeded in preventing
lay-ordinations. And as to councils, they stand just as the platform provided
at the invitation and election of the particular church, and in their decisions
advisory only. This is the polity on which the body of the New England churches
now stand, except a few who have formed themselves on the true presbyterian
model according to Scotland, consisting chiefly of accessions of the present
century, and a number of the Connecticut churches.

Having considered the nature of congregational councils. I proceed to show the
origin and nature of consociated councils, which obtain in Connecticut. So
early as 1662 there were proposals in the synod at Boston drawn up by Mr.
Shepard, for resolving the whole body of the churches into consociations, that
is, that each district of neighboring churches should by their pastors and
messengers assemble annually in a standing council to hear and give judgment
on ecclesiastical controversies. But this proposal dropped, not being acceded to
by the churches, but strongly opposed by them, as they judged themselves
possessed of sufficient power to govern themselves. A few years after this, the
ministers of several vicinities had formed themselves into associations or
pastoral meetings for prayer on occasion of the indian wars THE ASSOCIATIONS
begun about A. D. 1670: the first CONSOCIATIONS A. D. 1709.
: these associations having continued about 30 years, began to be desirous of
assuming the consociated form -- which might easily be done if the churches
could be prevailed on to delegate some of the brethren to accompany the
ministers and sit with them in their pastoral meeting, and withal prevail on
the churches to refer their difficulties to this annual or bisannual assembly.
Several of the ministers had urged all the specious arguments, but without
success. The early anticipated danger of introducing what might finally
terminate in foreign jurisdiction, prevented the churches from acceding to the
proposals of 1662. In 1700 these proposals were ripened into a formal plan for
erecting the associations into consociations or standing councils with the most
absolute power and jurisdiction over the churches; admitting appeals only to a
general consociation composed of delegates from the several particular
consociations, and vested with a definitive binding sentence. This plan begun
to pass the associations in 1705, as a previous step to its being recommended
and adopted by the churches. But the opposition it met with from most of the
associations, and the yet unassociated pastors again prevented its being
recommended to the churches, where it would have met with still greater
opposition through the spirit of liberty. Though it failed in the
Massachusetts, yet two years after, it was resumed and carried into execution
among the churches of Connecticut, which at this time were, as I take it,
universally congregationalists, though several of the principal ministers were
inclined to the presbyterian rule and government of churches. There were at
this time about 40 churches in that colony. On the recommendation of the
provincial legislature, which bad been previously procured, Very much through
the influences of the honorable Gordon Saltonstall, Esquire Governor of the colony,
a learned divine, who had been formerly one of the pastors.
the pastors and messengers of the churches in the four counties assembled in
four separate conventions, and draughted or passed four prepared models of
church discipline, as nearly resembling that of 1705 as the spirit of the
churches and pastors would admit, for several of the principal pastors were
truly congregational. These separate conventions delegated each perhaps two or
more pastors with their respective messengers, to meet in a general convention,
and compose out of the several remitted models a plan of discipline for public
establishment. These delegates from the county conventions assembled at
Saybrook in 1708, to the number of perhaps 10 or 12 pastors, and perhaps twice
as many messengers. This synod adopted the Savoy confession Formed and agreed
to by 120 congregational churches in England, assembled by their messengers in
the Savoy London 1658.
with the heads of agreement, which happily united the presbyterian and
congregational brethren in England. Had they stopped here, the liberty of the
churches had been secure. They also from the public sense collected as above,
composed articles for the administration of church discipline. I have been told
that the model from New Haven county, said to have been draughted principally
by the reverend Mr. James Pierpoint, was that which with some amendments passed
the synod. The synod having thus combined together the confession, heads of
agreement, and articles for discipline, as an ecclesiastical constitution; it
was recommended by the general assembly of the colony, and received by most of
the churches. A subsequent act of the general assembly has declared such
churches as accede to this constitution, to have a legal establishment in that
colony, not however exclusive of congregationalism, which has equally a legal
establishment. Thus there are three forms of religion established in the german
empire. In virtue of this agreement and constitution, the acceding churches
were resolved into four consociations, which are now increased to nine. These
consociations consist of two estates, the ministers, and messengers, in effect
separate in their acts; for though they sit, deliberate and vote together in
council, yet their acts are of separate import; for being two distinct bodies
in point of cognizance and jurisdiction, they are so vested with a negative on
each other, that the concurrence of both in a certain new manner is necessary
to complete an act of council This platform by implication vests a minister
with a negative on his church in all her acts. And in council it has thrown a
very great balance of power into the hands of the ministers, even to more than
a negative on the messengers. For a majority of the pastors with so many of the
messengers as make a majority of the council make a vote: but not a majority of
the messengers and so many of the pastors as make a majority of council. On the
present footing, the churches have not an equal active representation in
council: they may indeed send as many messengers as they please, and this is
the only way left them to retrieve the balance of power they lost in 1708. Thus
in a council of 20 pastors and 20 churches, if the 20 churches send but one
messenger each, then 15 pastors and 6 messengers may make an act contrary to
the sense of 14 churches. This agreement then possibly subjects three quarters
of the churches to the decision of the pastors and one quarter of the churches.
To restore the balance it is necessary to send three messengers at least from
each church. On the subject of power we are to consider all the possible
chances. Now though the churches have right to send three or more, yet it was
easily foreseen that there was no probability of their sending more than two,
and generally but one. Now on the whole two questions occur, whether the
pastors are vested with this particular degree of power and influence in the
rule of the churches by our Lord Jesus Christ? and whether this particular plan
of discipline and constitution of councils is prescribed in the scriptures? If
not, the whole is a human agreement and confederacy, not at all partaking of
the nature of a divine institution: and though it may subserve valuable
purposes, is not to be conceived as an ordinance of God.
. There at present subsists a difference of sentiment among worthy and pious
men, who are real friends to the churches, respecting the powers of churches,
and the powers of consociations, which shall subordinate when in competition.
This difference of sentiment I take to be very little among the churches, nor
between the pastors and churches in general, but chiefly among the venerable
clergy. The churches is I take it make no question with respect to their own
plenary and uncontrollable power. The present difference among the pastors
might be healed by charity and amicable condescentions, with the retention of
their respective judgments as was done the last century upon the differences
between the presbyterian and congregational pastors as to church power. The
litigation of pastoral controversies unespoused by the churches, especially on
the subject of the pastoral powers, excepting those with which they are
evidently invested by the great head of the church, is peculiarly unhappy in
the present rapid increase of our churches, when it is our true interest for
both pastors and churches to be cemented by benevolence and union. The pretext
on one side is heresy: but heresy is to be encountered in this age by reasoning
and appeals to the sacred oracles, not by the decisions of uninspired councils.
If councils were by the explicit voluntary act of the churches vested with ten
times more authority than is claimed for them by their warmest advocates, they
could never decide the point. The scriptures are the only rule of protestants.

But whatever be the pretexts on either sides, the powers of the consociations
being not known in the scriptures, are to be determined by an appeal to the
platform that constitutes them. And in order to judge of this we must enter
into the sense and design with which it was conceived, and that in which it was
adopted by the churches -- that we may reconcile those parts of it which
interfere with, if they do not contradict, one another. Taken literally, it in
the first place stipulates the absolute unsubbordinate power of particular
churches. It afterward vests the consociated council with authorative final
decision on all matters of discipline submitted to it by the churches of the
circuit. It at length vests the council with general and original jurisdiction
on "all occasions ecclesiastical." It should seem also by some expressions,
that it is vested with the power of the keys, the power of declaring
non-communion on a particular church, Now the question is, whether this amounts
to transferring the power out of the churches into the council, in which they
are thus represented? If it does, then there is a contradiction. And the next
question is, upon a competition, which shall loose their power, the particular
churches, or the consociation? The decisive power when assembled, and the power
to assemble uncalled upon "all occasions ecclesiastical," if bona fide ceded by
the churches, amounts in my opinion to an entire and absolute surrendery of all
power and liberty from the churches, and may in time be claimed and demanded.
For with such power the consociations may interdict any ecclesiastical process
in the churches on any ecclesiastical matter, and with such prohibition remove
it out of the hands of a particular church into the council. There remains then
but one w^ in which the liberties of the churches are by this constitution
secured, and if this be closed, their power and privilege is a cipher, viz.
that the standing council have no power but when called, and on the matters
only submitted by the church -- even this would be a surrendery of more power
than is ceded to congregational councils, which are advisory only in their
results; whereas the consociated councils are decisive in matters submitted by
the churches. Whatever was the sense of the churches in adopting it, it is
pretty evident that the platform itself is interlined with a clause vesting the
consociation, not only with the decision when called by the inviting church,
but with original jurisdiction upon "all matters ecclesiastical," unless the
phrase all occasions ecclesiastical" be limited to discipline, or interpreted
in subordination to the fundamental principle of the union, the uncontrollable
power of particular churches.

Let us then consider the sense in which it was received by the churches. And
here we are to remark that the platform itself provides and stipulates that
none of our particular churches shall be subordinate to one another, each being
endowed with equality of power from Jesus Christ: and that none of the said
particular churches, their officer or officers shall exercise power or have any
superiority over any other church or their officers. This was the basis of the
union -- securing this they agreed to unite in social confederacy and
fellowship. If any subsequent expressions intermixed in the articles of
agreement should seem to interfere with and contradict this principle, so as to
transfer eventually the power out of the particular church in its individuate
capacity -- is it to be supposed the churches ratified them? rather is it not
to be supposed the they interpreted them in a sense subordinate to the first
principle?

If the council has jurisdiction on all matters, whether submitted or not; then
the churches in their individual and separate capacities may possibly have none
at all, because the council may possibly take cognizance of all. But if the
council can take cognizance of one matter without the consent of the church;
then in that one case the church has no power. If it was first agreed that each
in their separate and individual capacities should take cognizance and
determine all matters within the church: and afterward it was restricted to
their representation in council, would not this subvert the first principle?
Was the thing so apprehended by the churches? Or can it be contended that the
churches power and consociations do not interfere, when the latter without the
consent of the former take a matter out of her hands and determine it? If the
church puts it into the consociation, her power is given up -- she has no
decision of her own, but must submit to the decision of the council, unless she
applied to the council for advice only, and not for a judicial decree. This is
a great surrendery. But to vest a foreign body with power to come and take a
matter regularly depending and issuable in the church, and determine upon it
contrary to the sense of the church, is a still greater, even an entire
surrendery of all power, or at least submitting to hold it of the consociation.
And was this the sense of the churches -- of the 30 that first received it --
and of the perhaps 100 new ones that have adopted it since? Is not this
effectually to subordinate particular churches to one another? and enabling a
number of churches and their officers to exercise power and have superiority
over another church and her officers? Or was it meant that truly one church
should not exercise dominion over another, unless she could gain a number of
her side, and then indeed she might? And was it indeed the design of the
churches to subordinate a particular church to the body? Would not each
embodied church thus derive an accession of power in her united capacity, and
thus become vested with an unavoidable superiority? And does not this mutual
accession of power destroy the individual equality of churches, and effectually
subordinate them to one another as well as to the body? If A B and C equal and
unsubordinate, vest one another with a controlling power, so that A cannot act
without the consent of B or C, and so for all -- this is a mutual transferring
of power; in which transferred or modeled power A B and C equally partake, and
thus become equal in power. But does not this equality of accessional and
interchangeable power destroy the first equality? and is not this peculiarly
modelled equality a mutual subordination of the whole? It is most certainly. If
so, the first or last must be given up. Liberty may infer equality of power;
all equalities of power do not infer liberty. But if A B and C covenant that
they will not act without the advice of one another, with reservation of power
to act contrary to advice, liberty and equality are saved. If they covenant
that when they submit a matter to one another it shall be final, and retain the
power of submitting, the liberty and equality are preserved. It is the last
sense only in which the stipulated equality and liberty of the churches can be
retained upon the Saybrook platform. In all other senses, equality may be
retained, but the liberty is lost. Equality of power to be obedient and assist
in inslaving others, remains when the power of self-government is lost. But it
is better to loose our liberty into domestic than foreign hands. There are
degrees in vassalage or subjection as well as of liberty. The fathers
stipulated for the churches the most perfect liberty. It is possible in time
there may be one or more provincial confederacies or generalities here, and an
audience or common council of state for civil administration standing on free
provincial elections, Even the consulate and senate of the roman empire
subsisted a long time on elections, and these not septonnial or triennial but
annual. There would be an essential difference between subordinating the
provinces to the resolutions of the supreme council of state, though of their own
electing; between this I say, and their reserving to themselves a power to
ratify or annual those resolutions. Even the first is preferable to foreign
appointments, and in a sense may be said to be a valuable liberty and
privilege: but true genuine liberty consists only with the last. The united
provinces of Holland have found they can subsist in this manner: and after all
that has been said, this form of polity is not more liable to convulsions and
revolutions than any other. But however it may be in other respects, it is
certain that with respect to LIBERTY, the provinces will prefer that plan of
confederacy which reserves to them in their separate capacities the approbation
or disapprobation of the plans or political measures conceived and remitted to
them from the supreme common council. And supposing the fundamental basis of
such a union, was the equality, uncontrollable power of self government in each
province, and that no province or provinces, or their officers, shall have any
power over any other province or its officers; And supposing while defining the
business of the common council, as how that it is to take cognizance of "all
matters political" in any or all the provinces, with power to assemble on "all
occasions political," there should also be intermixed some strong general
expressions respecting the power of the council amounting in their literal
senses and perhaps in the intended sense of those who inserted them, to an
absolute power and irresistible dominion: And after the council was introduced
to the reception of the provinces, chiefly through the stipulated security of
liberty; the council should undertake de novo to enforce some of their
resolutions by the unnoticed and liquidated clauses of the constitution: I say
supposing all this, would not the provinces feel their liberty touched? And
would it not be wisdom for them all to unite in opposition, unless the council
dropped their claims? Would not this be the event, unless the spirit of liberty
was extinguished or embarrassed by management? -- If this council of state be
by constitution vested with the judicial decision of all matters of difficulty
submitted to it by any of the provinces of the union, it will nearly resemble
the conseciations. If the council of state only deliberate for the public good
and remit such deliberations to the provinces, and on application of a province
upon difficult emergencies give their definitive sentence, i. e. the result of
their opinion and advice, it will nearly resemble the congregational councils.
If the council have absolute power over "all matters political" in all the
provinces, and in virtue of this can interdict all lower processes, and remove
all causes before it, without the consent of the province, and even contrary to
it take a matter out of its hands and judicially determine it, and enforce this
judicial decision on the province, on penalty of ejecting it from the union; it
will nearly resemble the consociations in the sense of some of the worthy
pastors.

The churches felt the importance of reserving to themselves the submission of
causes to the consociation. They at once perceived, that if the consociation
could of their own motion assemble upon a church and authoritatively take out
of her hands the judicial decision of causes, their liberty was gone.
Accordingly, when April 13, 1709 the churches of New Haven county, by their
patters and messengers first formed themselves into a consocia^on, in
consequence of the Saybrook agreement, they acceded to the agreement upon
certain restricting explanations, which show as well the public spirit of
liberty, as the sense in which they adopted the platform. In these explanations
it was stipulated that a majority, both of messengers and pastors was necessary
to an act -- that the sentence of non communion was not definitive, nor to be
declared till it had passed the approbation of particular churches -- that
churches may call a council before they proceed to censure, but without their
allowance no particular person shall have a council before excommunication:
Essentially agreeable to that fundamental principle of their union, "that none
of our particular churches shall be subordinate to one another, "nor exercise
power, or have any superiority over any other church, or their officers," No
subsequent expressions to be taken in a sense subversive of this, because in
themselves null and void.

On the whole, it seems to appear that however the power and subordinate
equality of churches is secured in the beginning of the platform, yet there are
afterward such insertions, which, if taken literally, would subvert the first
indispensable principle. In consequence and under the umbrage of which it is
demanded as a right that each consociation, charged with the inspection of its
churches, have power to arraign and depose a pastor without, and even contrary
to, the consent of his church, -- take "all causes ecclesiastical" out of the
hands of the church, and judicially decide them -- and if the church denies
this power and jurisdiction, to arraign the whole church, decisively judge upon
her, and enforce their decree with the sentence of non-communion. In this sense
it should seem that the constitution has established two powers inconsistent in
exercise, the uncontrolled power of particular churches, and the controlling
power of the consociations. And if the spirit of liberty did not prevent, it
may become a rule for the consociations in virtue of the clause, all occasions
ecclesiastical, The extensive jurisdiction of the High Commission subsisted on
a like comprehensive clause, "all affairs ecclesiastical." The force and
application of which was felt by the holy and venerable Cotton, Norton, Hooker.
See Hume's History of Britain, Vol. i. p. 37.
to issue prohibitions to the churches (which has been tried in one instance)
to remove such causes as they the consociation think proper, out of the hands
of the churches, by a certiorari into the supreme ecclesiastical tribunal. But
this was not the sense of the churches, when they received the platform. The
principal alteration which they deemed was this, that whereas the
congregational councils were elected promiscuously from the churches, the
churches were now limited to the consociated council as a standing council on
matters of discipline, which they vested with a decisive power on matters which
they submitted to them -- and which they might on all other matters repair to,
advise with and consult as congregational councils. A history of the
consociations from the beginning to this time, and the use which the churches
have made of the consociations, would abundantly evince this. It is further to
be remembered, that they never once thought of any alterations respecting
ordination councils, and least of all, that the consociation exclusive should
have the power of ordination in the circuit, as appears from the uninterrupted
usuage of the churches for the first 40 years after the platform, in which I
suppose there was not a single instance of consociated ordinations. All these
claims are of modern date, and defensible only upon those novel interpretations
which are subversive of the first grand fundamental principle of the union. The
Connecticut churches remain at liberty to choose what ministers they please, to
ordain their pastors elect, and what churches they please for a fraternal
witness of the solemnity, and from whom also to ask and receive the right hand
of fellowship. For the right hand of fellowship may either upon the principles
of christianity, or the platform, be as regularly received from the
congregational churches, as the consociated ones, even by the consociated
churches themselves, as has been repeatedly the fact. The fellowship and
communion is indiscriminately held among both. The pastors alone with the
consent of the electing church, ordain the pastor elect; and in the name of
themselves and the churches, give the right hand of hand of fellowship, to
denote their willingness to walk together in pastoral and church communion.

As the platforms are supposed to receive great efficacy from their becoming
provincial establishments, it is necessary to consider this also. Antecedent to
the platforms, the three colonies of Plymouth. Massachusetts and Connecticut,
made and continued to make parishes by acts of their respective assemblies, and
vested them with power to tax themselves for the support of such pastors and
teachers as they should elect. The same thing was continued after the platforms
were adopted by the respective acts of legislature as provincial
establishments, and especially after the present charters. Which acts in the
provinces of Massachusetts and New Hampshire, receiving the Royal sanction
after the revolution, as fully establish congregationalism in those two
provinces, as the acts of parliament and the union establish episcopacy in
South Britain, and presbytery in North Britain. And the assembly of Connecticut
being vested by royal charter with plenary legislative power, the religious
establishment of that colony is complete, as all her other legislative acts
are, without the royal sanction: especially as it is an establishment of the
same thing which has received the royal approbation in the neighboring
province, which gives a declared construction of that particular law or act, as
not being contrary to the acts of parliament; especially this is consentancous
to that part of the act of union which establishes a similar religious
institution for Scotland. Now all the force which a particular form of religion
receives from a civil establishment, whether national or provincial, is from
the temporalities and civil immunities annexed by the legislature. With regard
to immunities and public secular offices, all religious, protastant sects are
equally privileged in New England. But the legal power to tax a society for the
maintenance of ministers, and other parochial charges, belongs to but one
general denomination, the congregationalists, under their somewhat different
forms, excepting that the episcopalians in Connecticut, under certain
limitations, have power to tax themselves. And legally those churches or
assemblies that are independent presbyterians, or Scotch presbyterians, or
congregationalists truly such, or lastly congregationalists on the Saybrook
model, are congregational only in law. The law considers them, not is churches
purely, The churches, as distinct from the congregation, are bodies corporate
to the purpose of receiving and improving benefactions, and hol^^^ estates ad
pios usus; but not for taxing themselves for the support of the ministry.
but as as parochial congregations, allowed in their religious form to model
themselves as they please, as they judge most agreeable to the scriptures. The
legal efficacy of their acts results, not from the religious form, but from the
parochial powers with which they are endowed. The parishes are to certain
purposes incorporate, bodies known in the law; the efficacy of parochial
contracts all issue from the parochial powers; and the contracts with pastors
depend not at all for their validity in law upon any of the forms of
ordination, whether performed by elders in a church and pastors out of the
church, or whether indeed there be no ordination at all. For I suppose if a
parish in their parochial corporate capacity should contract with an unordained
preacher at an annual stipend for life, upon condition of his performing divine
service every Lord's Day, that it would be equally valid in law as if he was
ordained, or equally valid as if made with a schoolmaster for life or during
good behavior. And this seems still more evident, not only from the nature of
parochial powers, but from hence, that the pastoral contract of legal validity
antecedes ordination in all cases. Unless the parochial call and acceptance be
deemed only preparatory to the public ensealing and ratification of the
contract; yet even here, the transaction which induces legal obligation is only
that part of ordination in which the call and acceptance is publicly ratified
-- and yet as this is a covenant only between the pastor and church, and not
explicitly between the pastor and congregation, which is only ecclesiastical,
it should seem that that which has legal efficacy on the inhabitants of the
parish or congregation as such, is the antecedent contract. But supposing it
depends on ordination, and that the legal covenant is not perfected till the
solemnities of the investiture: yet by the universal practice of our churches,
the ordination may be performed by whomsoever the church desire to do it. And
in installments in particular, it is indifferent whether this antecedent
ordination has been performed by congregational pastors, or by those who have
had ordination according to the church of Scotland. All pastors have the power
of ordination, and can confer holy orders on whomsoever they judge qualified,
and at the desire of a particular church can give him the pastoral charge of
that church -- when such pastor is ordained, and such church organized with a
pastor to all purposes civil as well as ecclesiastical. And though it is always
desirable that there should be a harmony among the churches, and though perhaps
it would not be prudent for the church to desire it, or the pastors to perform
it upon the sure prospect of disunion, yet when it is done, whether agreeable
or disagreeable to sister churches and congregations, the parochial immunities
are unhurt, and the procedure valid both ecclesiastically and legally, so far
as the law takes any notice of it. This was early and all along the practice of
our churches, and the platforms have induced no alterations in it.

The whole religious establishment of New England is congregationalism, except
in the colony of Rhode Island, where the legislative establishment is universal
protestant liberty, but without annexing parochial privileges to any sect. Here
no religious congregations or societies are bodies known in the law, and all
benefactions, regularly ought to be made to seoffees in trust. In The three
other New England governments, all parochial congregations are bodies
corporate. The legislature of Connecticut in particular have enacted, that the
inhabitants of any town or society or parish constituted by this assembly who
are present at a town or society meeting legally warned, shall have power by
the major vote of those so met to call and settle a minister or ministers among
them -- and that the minister so called and settled shall be the minister of
such town or society. -- and all agreements -- made by the major part of the
inhabitants -- with such minister or ministers respecting his or their
settlement, etc. shall be binding and obligatory on all the inhabitants of such
town or society -- and their successors. And again, all such towns and
societies or parishes by their proper votes or acts shall annually -- grant a
tax for the purpose aforesaid, to be levied on their inhabitants according to
their respective lists. From hence it appears, that all which induces legal
obligations is to be done by the inhabitants or members of the congregation --
the act of the church in pastoral election as distinct from the congregation is
not necessary, though I suppose universally practiced, except in one instance.
The churches as such are legal bodies for receiving and holding estates, but
not for regulating the settlement of pastors. In this the laws universally
consider the parochial inhabitants in a congregational capacity, whether the
church in the parish be congregational, consociated, presbyterian or scriptural.

If a parish church on the congregational platform should for reasons renounce
it for the Saybrook, or lastly should renounce both for the purely scriptural
model; the parish is the same parish, amidst all the mutations of its church,
enjoying the same civil and legal immunities and powers, and is treated by the
legislature as all other parishes of the congregational platform. And however
the churches may have confederated among themselves and may be affected by the
decisions of council; yet the parish congregation, or the churches considered
as part of the parochial congregation are unaffected -- if in its ecclesiastic
capacity it is affected, in its congregational it is not: its spiritualities
may be touched, but not its temporalities. Whenever these shall be connected --
the affecting the one will sensibly affect the other. But as the case now
stands, if the consociation assume even the decision with which by the platform
it is vested (much more, should it happen to assume an unsurrendered
constitutional jurisdiction) and decree contrary to the sense of the
congregation and the parish church; the first is not touched -- and one vote
which they have power to make among themselves withdraws the latter from this
jurisdiction, without the least detriment to her temporalities or
ecclesiastical liberty: -- as has been repeatedly done: nay, if even
excommunicated by the whole body of churches, yet has she the same legal
privileges as all the others. When a church and congregation have become large,
they often on differences divide: the minor or withdrawing part form by
spontaneous voluntary act into a congregation, and gather a church, and elect a
pastor, whom they request some of the neighboring pastors to ordain and confer
holy orders upon. All this is done or may be done, for it has been often done
from the beginning, antecedent to the assembly's forming them into a parish.
Now whenever it has received parish powers, it is in all respects secure as to
its temporalities, whether the church be in followship with the body of
churches or not. A new parish may be erected in the old parochial bounds on the
application of aggrieved brethren: but the standing party remain and continue a
parish, and even the first parish and church as they hold under the first, and
not a subsequent appointment. And in all instances in Connecticut but one, the
two parishes formed within the same parochial bounds are of different forms as
to their churches. And the act of assembly incorporating a new parish into a
body known in the law, does not destroy the first parish, nor affect its
antecedent acts and agreements "made by the major vote of the inhabitants."
This whether the first parish church be consociated, congregational, or
presbyterian; whether this year the one, or by vote of itself the next year
another.

This being the state of the religious establishments in New England, and in
Connecticut in particular, it appears that all claims of councils or
consociations, with respect to jurisdictions and decisions in opposition to the
sense of particular churches and parochial congregations, may be fruitless and
to little purpose, besides a temporary embroiling of the churches. Besides,
that through some unhappy principles respecting the terms of communion and the
qualification of communicants, by which multitudes of sober, pious and virtuous
christians are deterred from the ordinances, our churches are often but a small
part of the parochial congregations. And it is the congregation in its
parochial congregational capacity that the law considers: And this as such does
not enough partake of an ecclesiastical nature to be subject to ecclesiastical
jurisdictions; or to have the validity of any of its acts dependent on the
decisions of an ecclesiastical council. And even at to the influence of these
decisions on the churches as such. they perhaps had better be left as those of
the congregational councils advisory only, according to the sense in which it
is probable that the Connecticut churches received their platform. All that is
beyond this, till the public spirit be subdued, must endanger contests and
oppositions, in which the public benevolence and liberty may suffer. And it is
to be remarked, that even consociated churches have often called in
congregational councils to advise on difficulties; which shows that they did
not understand themselves restricted to the consociated councils. And it is
further to be remarked, that the churches of the apostolic age knew nothing of
consociated or congregational councils, nor their powers; but subsisted in the
full enjoyment of unembarrassed liberty. No apostolic church had authority over
another, either in an individual or aggregate capacity. The claims of authority
in consociated councils over the churches, are not only contrary to the
primitive pattern, but probably will not prevail in New England, unless the
legislatures enact that no congregational churches shall have benefit of the
laws. It is said that there are several churches in Connecticut which have not
acceded to the platform, most of which are congregational; and yet have the
same immunities and privileges with the others. And any may renounce the
platform when they please, as has been done in some instances, and yet are in
full charity and communion with the consociated churches. It might be happy if
they could all walk together on the consociated form, as they probably would do
in time, if the consociation subsisted for fellowship only, and not for
dominion, which essentially interferes with the stipulated equality of
churches. Nor can the consociations regularly, I mean consistently, declare
non-communion with one of these congregational churches, unless they do with
all -- If the cause or crime be only their denial of their jurisdiction,
because they well know that all congregational churches agree in denying this
jurisdiction. Nor was it originally designed by the Saybrook council, or the
Connecticut Assembly, or lastly by the receiving churches, that all or any of
the uncomplying congregational churches, should for this be hereticated, or
held under the sentence of non-communion. Nor that every church acceding to the
union should be obliged to send delegates to the consociation in all causes: as
to this, they were at their liberty. And the churches have frequently omitted
this, as I am told. Nor can a consociation regularly by the platform declare
non-communion jure synodali, for this, or a real crime in the church supposed
offending, especially in New Haven county, because the churches of that
circuit, at their first forming into a consociation in 1709, expressly
covenanted that the sentence of non-communion should be referred back to the
particular churches of the circuit, and obtain on their particular acts. Hence
half a dozen churches may for present reasons decline sending their elders and
messengers to a consociation for such time as they please, and yet continue
members of the union, and remain upon the platform, and may afterward resume
their rights, till such time as they voluntarily renounce the union, or are
excommunicated by the acts of the particular churches of the circuit. In which
last case, and even before if they please, they may meet by their delegates and
form a new consociation, and become a true consociation of a new circuit, and
regular upon the platform -- not subject to the consociation of another circuit
-- unless in some future pregress of alteration in the policy, all the
consociation should be subjugated to the control of a general consociation. In
which case the new consociation might subsist a sovereignty of itself, denying
the jurisdiction of all foreign powers. New Haven consociation, when first
formed, consisted of but five churches.

The essential laws of ecclesiastical fellowship and the Saybrook platform
require that, in (...) excommunications, whether of persons or churches, this
measure is not to be gone into without giving opportunity to the persons or
churches to be hereticated to make their defense, and show their reasons to the
church or churches of the vicinity, that they may act on their own knowledge
and judgment, and not the report of others. If then they sustain
excommunication, they revert to the state of congregational churches; out of
union indeed with the consociated churches of the circuit, but holding all the
privileges of the legal establishment, and remaining in union and fellowship
with only the greatest body of churches in New England, I mean those on the
Cambridge platform, if not perhaps with those of the other consociated
circuits, that is, they will or may possibly be in unity, with about 400
churches, and out of unity with 100. perhaps not above 50. All this is said
upon supposition that the ejected church or churches be the same as to doctrine
and manner of worship with the generality of the churches, and that the denial
of foreign ecclesiastical jurisdiction be the only reason of non-communion. As
was the case in the only instance of hereticating a church in New England.

This is the case as matters now stand. We have seen what efficacy the
platforms have received from the legislative regulations about religion. And
that in effect they have not entered into any of the distinctions, but consider
all only as different species of congregationnalism. All that is done is only
to incorporate the congregation -- the congregations model themselves as they
please. No temporalities or immunities are annexed to any unions or combined
clusters of churches, or to any public resolutions issuing from such
combination. Perhaps it would be well if all our churches were resolved into
friendly consociations for mutual aid and fellowship. All unions indeed forming
an aggregate of powers, are liable, and too apt to terminate in jurisdictions.
Not that these coalitions are absolutely necessary. The apostolic churches
subsisted without either -- as I have said they knew not either consociations
or classes or their powers -- and whenever they take place they must obtain on
other prescriptions than those particularly specified by the apostles, or our
common Lord. But though the cantoning a body of churches into generalities and
circuits, be not absolutely necessary, and in no wise scriptural, yet it may
subserve valuable purposes. Many of these things, not entering into the essence
of religion, are left to human discretion. The late reverend Dr. COLMAN was a
friend to consociations of churches, but not in a sense subversive of
congregationalism, for he looked upon them not the destruction, but the "very
soul and life of the congregational scheme" -- Now they would prove the death
of the congregational scheme if the churches be subordinated to their
jurisdictions, for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
bondage 2 Pet. ii. 19.
, and this even while they promise themselves liberty. Fellowship and
benevolence, not dominion, was the great characteristic of this venerable
divine, whose praise is in all the churches. He patronized the most
congregational act which was ever practiced in these churches, in an instance
which posterity may see the wisdom of imitating. And he was too well acquainted
with antiquity not to be sensible that the grand defection of the latin church
took origin in those artfully deforced cessions which subverted the liberty,
independence and plenary power of churches So long as the power continued in
the hands of the churches, undelegated to representation by perpetual decree or
binding constitution, they were safe as the apostles planted and left them: --
but this ceded and given up, they passed into an intestine oppression, more
barbarous than the pagan persecutions.

The churches are at present above 500, and increasing amain. They might form
20 consociations besides those of Connecticut. And if formed without
jurisdiction, they would nobly subserve the purpose of cementing us together
into a respectable body. But the moment jurisdiction enters, like the creating
Caesar perpetual DICTATOR, the beginning of the absolute loss of liberty
commences. The procedure is gradual from artfully deforced surrenderies of
power to abridgments first, and afterward an entire abolition of liberty. The
roman and athenian senates were originally formed to deliberate and recommend
the best measures of public action. The senate conceived and prepared plans for
the public ratification of the people, with whom was the supreme aggregate
power. This origination in the senate was called autoritus, denoting still for
300 years no proper power. In time the senate shared half the power, the
ple^erars under different classes the other. At length the entire imperial
power was gained into representation; and when this was settled into a
perpetual constitution, it was finally in effect subjected to the control of a
perpetual dictatorship in one person; when liberty was lost, Then and even
before this authority and power became synonymous. So Results of councils and
power may import the same thing after proper stages.
Let the consociations be advisory only to the churches, as the privy council
to his majesty, the assembly of the states to the united provinces; even
general provincial consociations of the same import advisory only, might have a
friendly influence salva Liberate and Jure Ecclesiarum universalium. An
influence which one would think should content the ecclesiastical councils. But
even this, let it be remembered, would be but a human device of polity, neither
prescribed or suggested by Christ or his apostles; and having nothing of divine
in i^, not being so much as an ordinance of God, but a voluntary agreement only
of men. And consequently the decisions and results of councils ought not to be
put off upon the churches as an ordianance of the most high, who is never to be
brought in to patronize the fallible decrees of mortals uninspired, which are
sometimes delivered to the churches in the name of God, with strong expressions
importing that the contempt and disobedience of them is contempt and
disobedience of the most high. Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus.
There needs the utmost caution least the opinions and canons of councils be
conceived in this light For however in the commencement and infancy of a
policy, they are taken but advisory, they may be drawn into prescription and
precedent by subsequent generations and ages. Ancient customs become deemed to
be established constitutional powers and rights; and so the influence and
ascendency of a well constituted council or union of councils degenerate into
tyranny. And future priests may, through weakness and ignorance of history and
the love of dominion, imagine themselves, as members of an established council,
to hold those powers and influence jure divino, or by divine right, which a
constitution or policy by imperceptible steps and insensible transitions
acquires through a tract of time. In faithfulness therefore to posterity and
the truth, every present generation should teach their rising offspring the
essential difference between what arises from human policy, and the institutes
of heaven: and that as the most high has not vested any order of men since the
apostolic age, with divine i^fallible authority, so none of their decisions on
or about religion partake in the least degree of infallibility -- not even the
churches themselves in their particular or aggregate capacity: -- that
ecclesiastical councils have no authority unless imparted by the churches, and
this though ecclesiastical yet not divine: -- and that if ever this be ceded or
given up to the degree of controlling particular churches in a perpetual
constitution, posterity will again date the death of liberty from that unhappy
era -- till future vigorous struggles and united combined exertions of the
public spirit shall resume it into those hands where God and nature placed it.
The exigencies of the christian church can never be such as to legitimate, much
less render it wise, to erect any body of men into a standing judicatory over
the churches. If on some extraordinary occasions it may be necessary to cede up
the united power into an extraordinary commission: yet when the public work
designed is accomplished, let the commission end, the power revert and rest in
the bosom of the churches. Never suffer the united force and power of the
churches to be at the call, especially at the command of a standing body of
men, even if part subsist on constitutional delegates from the churches. The
ends of civil and ecclesiastical polity are so widely different, that however
this may be expedient in the one, it is by no means so in the other. If the
united force of the churches can be constitutionally collected and directed to
such objects and ends as a standing council (liable to corruption and undue
influence) shall command, without and contrary to the consent of individual
churches, whether the policy be a monarchy, or an oligarchy, it is indifferent
-- liberty is gone, tyranny and intestine oppression may be the fate of
succeeding generations. Our churches have not as yet given up their powers and
liberty into foreign hands, at least the main body have not, and it is
questionable whether any have designedly and bona fide done it. Let them be
taught to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free. Heaven
is giving us an opportunity to plant a noble body of free churches in America,
and has charged us with a part to act for posterity. The love of dominion which
reigns in every breast, and thus becomes a general principle, is almost too
mighty for that other general principle the love of liberty, which it is
designed to balance. Take either away out of human nature, and confusion
arises. There is no ^^d of cultivating the former, it is inextinguishable: but
there is great need of cultivating the latter, especially in religion. Liberty
and dominion are in opposite balances on the scale of human nature -- both
necessary: the latter is dangerous unless well guarded; the former generally
safe excepting when collecting for one public burst on tyranny. They are
designed by God to counterpoise and balance one another. There is no danger but
the wanton licentiousness of the one will be corrected by the artifice and
force of the other. Neither let liberty be extinguished nor dominion; both have
their proper spheres; when the one degenerates into tyranny and unnecessary
restraints, and when the other becomes anarchy, they are both equally
pernicious to society. The principles of both and their balance ought to be
well understood, settled and defined, and the fines quos ultra ^itraque neqait
be fixed on the public sense, and their rationale publicly taught and explained
through the community.

The body of the clergy in New England might easily adopt a system of
ecclesiastical management, which in a century or two, with moderation and
attention to the public spirit, would gently gain the submission of the
churches, and insensibly steal away their liberty. But I rejoice to believe
they are not inclined to it. Yet let me say that measures may be honestly, and
with pious intent, gone into, which effect this as surely as if with the design
and foresight of a Machiavel, a Richlica, or a Mazarine. The system adopted
designedly or undesignedly, however looks with undeviating operation to the
same end. Any thing of this nature may be wisely opposed. Let us remain true
and firm to our first principles, the unsurrendered power of the churches. And
indeed there is need of the exercise of but little power here; for christianity
is not a system of human power and dominion, but of liberty and benevolence.

To sum up the whole, it appears from above, 1. That our churches were
originally free and independent of one another. 2. That any plan of confederacy
is just what it was agreed, explicitly received and understood to be by the
confederating churches. 3. That such confederacy, whatever be its form, is not
jure divine, but entirely human and prudential: and was never designed to
interfere with the independence and prerogative powers of particular churches.
4. Least of all was it designed to regulate articles of faith, it being one of
the fundamental and explicit declarations of the churches, and even of the
platforms, that the SCRIPTURES alone are the ONLY RULE of FAITH. The founders
of our churches always professed to make the sacred scriptures the only rule in
matters of discipline and worship, as well as in articles of (...). Hobart's
Address. p. 36.
And 5. That such are the circumstances of ^ur ch^^ches, so intermixed with
sects of various communion, that it is impolitic to use extreme and c^ercive
measure; -- since the universal liberty permits the oppressed to form into
voluntary coalitions for religious worship. 6. That strong union being one main
thing during the infancy of the churches, uniformity in lesser matters is not
to be rigorously exacted; but healing and uniting measures being a first point
in view, many other things are to be subordinated to this. 7. That the spirit
of disunion is attended with more fatal prejudices in the swift growth of a
body of churches, than when they are arrived to maturity. To which we may add,
8. That many considerable errors, if let alone, will correct themselves in time
on free inquiry, deliberate and unheated disquisitions.

But if different usages and customs in ecclesiastical polity are finally
settled in different churches, agreeing in the essentials of christian doctrine
and worship: this need not disturb the general harmony. Men build their houses
differently, cultivate their lands differently, pursue the same employments in
different methods, and in different methods study the sciences -- yet if they
attain the end, it matters little as to the different means. An empire consists
of a multitude of cities, buroughs, towns and provinces, differently
constituted by accident, according to the course of events, or according to the
different geniuses of the people consociated. And yet in these different ways
arrive at individual and public felicity. The plan that happily cements and
unites all in one general confederacy and public union, reserving to each part
its power, liberty and proportionate influence in the mighty whole, is the
wisest and best Coercive uniformity is neither necessary in politics nor
religion I have no opinion of an exacted uniformity in religious
administrations. Dr. COLMAN.
. All the kingdoms of the earth are differently policied, and yet all in their
several ways subserve the public design of the supreme king. Churches have
subsisted well under all the limitations of liberty -- all have their
constitutional diseases. All protestant churches have different models under
the general profession, and yet we have charity for all. We are in full charity
with churches which have lost all their liberty, yet are ornaments to the
christian profession. And among ourselves, let it not break our communion if
any of our churches give up all their liberty, or retain it all in their own
hands. If the great end is an answered of making men virtuous and good, let us
rejoice, though the means are diversified. Particularly let us of the
congregational communion in New England, under the different forms of our
churches, cultivate a venerable regard for one another; rejoice that we are so
well agreed in purity of doctrine and worship, and walk together by the same
rule, so far as we are agreed: and for the rest, let us endeavor to hope and
think and speak the best of one another, in all our differences, putting on
forbearance, charity and a condescending benevolence.

III. I come now at length to consider the expediency of harmony and union,
especially among the congregational churches in New England. And,

1. The first argument may be taken from the importance of the cause in itself
considered, its purity, its friendly aspect on the public religious liberty,
and its utility to the state. I am persuaded from a very thorough disquisition
and search, that there is no body of churches in the protestant world more
nearly recovered to the simplicity and purity of the apostolic age. We need
indeed some further purifications and amendments; which will doubtless take
place in process of time on free inquiry and universal liberty, to the
prevailing of which it is already impossible to put a stop. But in general our
churches appear to me to be nearly on the same footing with the primitive
churches, as left by the apostles, who doubtless left them completely
instituted. Most other protestant churches are under embarrassments from which
we are free. If there be more liberty for free inquiry at present in some of
them, it does not flow from the nature of their policy, but from the laudable
moderation of their clergy, or other less honorable motives -- And besides, the
avenues to this liberty are embarrassed with dishonorable compliances and
submissions. Any embarrassments in our churches proceed not from the nature of
their policy, but from the spirit of the times, which must and will alter. If
there be any true way of worshipping the deity, the supreme Lord of nature, it
may be in our manner: even deists must confess that our way is or may be
natural and rational. And being possessed of the precious jewel of religious
liberty, a jewel of inestimable worth, let us prize it highly, and esteem it
too dear to be parted with on any terms; lest we be again entangled with that
yoke of bondage STAR CHAMBER and HIGH COMMISSION.
which our fathers could not, would not. and God grant we may never submit to
bear. The lesser differences among ourselves, which will at times unavoidably
spring up in this imperfect militant state, and afford a temporary disturbance
to the best constituted churches, will again subside, and finally terminate in
defining the limits of power, and in more accurately ascertaining the terms of
communion and universal benevolence. Providence has planted the british America
with a variety of sects, which will unavoidably become a mutual balance upon
one another. Their temporary collisions, like the action of acids and alcalies
after a short ebullition, will subside in harmony and union, not by the
destruction of either, but in the friendly cohabitation of all. An antecedent
fermentation may take place, as it his done in the philosophic world, but
generous inquiry and liberal disquisition will issue all in this. Resplendent
and all-prevailing TRUTH will terminate the whole in universal harmony. All
surreptitious efforts and attempts on the public liberty will unavoidably
excite the public vigilance of the sects, till the terms of general communion
be defined and honorably adjusted. The notion of erecting the polity of either
sect into universal dominion to the destruction of the rest, is but an airy
vision -- may serve to inflame a tempory enthusiasm -- but can never succeed --
all the present sects will subsist and increase into distinct respectable
bodies, continuing their distinctions for a long time yet to come in full life
and vigor. Indeed mutual oppression will more and more subside from their
mutual balance of one another. Union may subsist on these distinctions,
coalescence only on the sameness of public sentiment, which can again be
effected in the christian world only by the gentle, but almighty power of
truth. It has been effected in past ages, but can never be effected again on
the former measures -- so great an alteration is made among mankind by science
and letters. The sects cannot destroy one another: all attempts this way will
be fruitless -- they may affect a tempory disturbance, but cannot produce a
dissolution -- each one subserves the mutual security of all. The advantages
taken by any one sect over the security and indolence, or intestine broils of
another, will soon e^o' awaken its sensibility or moderation, and excite the
spirit of self-defence -- and so for the whole. Such is human nature,
especially enlightened with the pure light of revelation and sciences. Nothing
however will content us but actual experiment -- this experiment will be made
in one century, and then perhaps we shall be satisfied. But to return from this
digression.

In order to perceive what particular sect is most friendly to the public
liberty, we need only take a survey of the religious establishments in the
several british provinces on this continent. That civil establishment is
friendly to liberty, which either vests all sects with equal immunities, or
secures each sect from being obliged directly or indirectly to contribute to
the public support of others besides themselves. Where all sects are equally
established there is properly no toleration, all partaking in the benefit of
the establishment. Where one sect is invested with power to enforce taxes on
themselves for the support of their clergy, and all others exempted from such
tax, there is a true and proper toleration, but perfectly easy as such
dissenters are exempted from ministerial taxes. Where the established clergy
are supported by a branch of provincial revenues appropriated, and dissenters
are not exempted from contributing, and yet share no part of such
appropriation, such dissenters are tolerated in the lowest sense, viz. on
condition of their payment to the established clergy. And it may so happen that
the same sects may be established, or dissenters in different provinces. So a
scots presbyterian is a dissenter in England, and an episcopalian a dissenter
in Scotland. Let us now take a view of the provincial establishments. In Nova
Scotia it is episcopacy, though the public believe it to be equal protestant
liberty. In New Hampshire, Massachusetts and Connecticut, made under the
influence of congregationalists, it is congregationalism -- but all other sects
are exempted from taxes for the support of the congregational clergy. The
ministerial taxes of this sect are enforceable at law -- this is the principal
advantage they enjoy above the dissenters in those provinces. In Rhode Island
it is universal equal protestant liberty, no sect being enabled to enforce
their ministerial contracts at law. In New York episcopacy is established for
the four first counties, where all dissenters, ministers and people are obliged
to pay to the established clergy, except so far as the Dutch churches in virtue
of an original stipulation gained an exemption and establishment. For the other
counties of that province it is universal liberty. The religious establishment
of the Jersies and Pensylvania is universal liberty as in Rhode Island. In
Maryland and Virginia it is episcopacy, with appropriations of large revenu^
from tobacco for the established clergy only. And though a very considerable part
of those two provinces, according to Dr. Douglass and others, are presbyterian
and other dissenters, who contribute proportionably to this ecclesiastical
revenue, yet they are not allowed to share the least part of its appropriation.
As to the three southern provinces, their climate not suiting european
constitutions, they will not figure as to numbers for perhaps yet a century or
more, until the present race is hardened and get the better of a noxious
region. Episcopacy however is in effect their establishment, or perhaps will be
in time: But with this only difference at present, that the episcopalians in
South Carolina have gained of the legislature an appropriation of certain
duties on leather and skins. Excepting their proportion in this, the other
protestant sects are not yet obliged to contribute to the support of the
episcopal clergy in those three provinces.

From this view it appears, that in virtue of the religious establishment in
the three provinces of Pensylvania, the Jerseys and Rhode Island, there are no
dissenters, but all enjoy the same common immunities; excepting that some few
Dutch and perhaps other churches in the Jersies are created bodies corporate by
patents obtained from the governors. But the happy policy of establishing one
sect without infringing the essential rights of others is peculiar to the three
New England provinces, where congregationalism is the establishment,
CONGREGATIONALISTS are not DISSENTERS in New England.
with respect to two of which It is said to be confirmed by the royal assent.
Now though our churches and congregations are endowed with parochial immunities,
yet all not of our denomination, and particularly the episcopalian, are
exempted from parochial taxes to the established clergy -- for what is
collected of episcopalians in parochial assessments is paid to the episcopal
incumbent -- a favor which our numerous brethren the dissenters at home have
never gained. Nor is any such favor granted to our brethren the presbyterians
in Maryland and Virginia, whose religious establishment was made under
episcopal influence. -- But where we have power we grant liberty so abundantly,
that even in those parts of New England where congregationalism is the legal
establishment, other sects scarcely know that they are tolerated dissenters, so
happy and mild in our dominion. When by the establishment all the members of a
community are by law obliged to contribute to the support of the clergy of one
sect, whether in parochial taxes or appropriated revenues, all the other sects
suffer in their essential liberties. When every sect is free of one another, or
proportionably share the public revenues and offices, their essential liberties
are entire. Congregationalism being endowed with parochial powers over its own
members only, does not in the least interfere with the essential liberties of
the other sects. And further it is to be observed, that the peculiar tenets of
any religious protestant sect is not made a religious test of holding civil or
military offices in Pensylvania, the Jersies and New England.

Hence it appears, that congregationalism is friendly, I will not say more so,
but as friendly as any other sect to the public liberty civil and religious;
and does not in the least interfere with the liberty and essential rights of
other sect^. And besides, our peculiar forms do not prevent our distinguished
loyalty to our sovereign -- for we may boldly say his majesty has not a body of
more loyal and well affected subjects in his dominions. All the New England
sects are loyal; but the principles of loyalty to the illustrious house of
Hanover are inculcated on the people by the congregational clergy with peculiar
sincerity, faithfulness and constancy.

Again, our churches are well calculated for the good of a christian state.
There are two ends of churches in a state, instruction in christianity, and the
public offices of religion. Both these, and especially the former, are as well
performed in New England as in any part of the protestant world. And perhaps
the numerous body of our denomination may be justly distinguished for the
popular acquaintance with the sacred writings, and knowledge both of the
histories and great doctrines of revelation. Our clergy are not expensive, nor
are our people burdened with tenths, nor have we intrigued the ecclesiastical
appropriation of enormous impoverishing revenues. The landed estate in England
is computed at 20 millions per annum: of which 14 millions per annum were
dependent on the clergy at the reformation. In the time of Louis XIV. the
ecclesiastical revenues of France were 26 millions sterling, when at the same
time the civil revenue did not exceed 13 millions. The less expensive the
clergy, if a people be well instructed and the public offices of religion
faithfully and decently performed, the better for a state, because the richer
the people: and it is easier to raise a sum for public exigencies on an opulent
people, than on an opulent hierarchy. Besides, ecclesiastical opulence gives
the clergy a weight, which is apt to affect the civil administration.

It gives me peculiar pleasure that notwithstanding their many imperfections,
our churches afford such an agreeable review with respect to purity, liberty,
and utility. For the first, we are nearly recovered to the purity of the
primitive apostolic churches -- for the second, we oppress no other sect -- for
the last, the popular knowledge of revelation, the decency and solemnity of our
public offices of religion witness for us. And our imperfections admit
amendment on our present polity. We have reason to bless God, that when the
church was entirely corrupted in the papacy, he raised up and spirited the
reformation. But to me it appears, that he has reserved the honor of a most
purified reformation for our churches in New England. It is truly important
that this vine, which God has planted with a mighty hand in this american
wilderness, should be cultivated into confirmed maturity. You are very
sensible, that there is a formal attempt on the chastity and order of our
churches, which is vigilantly to be guarded against, at present, till our
churches grow into one cemented, large, pure, defensible body. It is incumbent
upon unto ^atch and guard their infancy with a paternal godlike fidelity. God
has betrusted us with a part to act for posterity and the public; let us not
supinely desert it, but act it well, consecrate and transmit the purity of
religion to generations yet unborn. It is evident nothing tends more to
enervate and moulder down our cause, than differences and animosities: nothing
tends to strengthen and font it to defensible maturity like union and
benevolence. If we have any public benevolence, any bowels of compassion, any
tender affection for pure and undefiled religion -- by the tender mercies of
Jehovah! by the love of Jesus! -- let us bury and lay aside our trifling
differences, and harmoniously unite in carrying on and perfecting the one same
great and noble work.

2. The second argument for union may be taken from the present state of our
churches. There is no body of christians on earth in such a rapid increase, and
in so flourishing a state, as the congregationalists of New England. The
present state of our denomination as to numbers, for the year 1760, is nearly
this -- in Massachusetts are above 300 congregational churches -- in
Connecticut 170 -- in New Hampshire 43 -- which, with those in this colony,
form a body of about 530 churches, In 1650 there were about 36 churches already
founded, several of which were small beginnings, requiring many years to fill
up. In 1696 were but 130 congregational churches in all New England. And being
A. D. 1760 increased to 530. the proportion of doubling is once in 30 years. A.
D. 1613 there had arrived is 298 transports, about 4200 planters with their
families, making about 21,200 people for all New England Sion's Savior in N.
E. p. 31.
. Since that time more have gone from us to Europe, than have arrived from
thence hither. The present inhabitants therefore of New England, are justly to
be estimated a natural increase by the blessing of heaven on the first 21,000
that arrived by the year 1643.

In new settled countries the transplanted colonies, by an established (...) of
nature, in a good climate, do increase to a certain patrial maturity, when they
begin to decline. At the beginning of this increase the period of doubling is
very short, and the augmentation rapid -- afterward the period of doubling is
extended till it gradually ceases, and is succeeded with a diminution, slow at
first, but rapid at last. The period of patrial maturity, as well as of patrial
doubling doubtless in some measure corresponds to the nature of the climate: --
the former in our climate may have been about 1000 or 1200 years; the latter 20
or 25 years. The period of rapid patrial doubling in 25 years may reach its
akme in one third of the (...) requisite to the final Akme of increase. The
ratio of patrial doubling continues equable for 3 or 400 years, when in
consequence of another law of nature, this ratio begins at once to be greatly
extended. Posterity alone can more accurately ascertain these things. If we
look into history we may perhaps be inclined to judge the period of patrial
maturity about 800 or 1000 years, perhaps more than less. It is probable that
the colonies transplanted from Shinar into Egypt -- and from Egypt afterward
into Greece, came to the maturity of their ^ litest ages about this period. The
same observation may hold of the Tyrian colonies at Carthage. Rather more
certainly we know that the fugitives from Troy peopled Italy at this period.
The few trojan exiles, who were transported in seven small ships, arrived into
Italy, according to Livy about 430 years before the foundation of Rome. And it
is probable the Romans had their akme of natural increase before U. C. 650,
that is within about 1100 years after their first plantation in Italy. But most
certainly of all, we know that the 70 souls, which sprang from JACOB's loins,
when transplanted into Egypt grew and multiplied in about 215 years to 603,550
sensible men of 20 years and upwards, exclusive of the levites: which,
considering the young men under 20 years, may imply above 3 million souls, an
increase on 70 souls only in 215 years. It is true, this public census was made
above a year after the exodus, but we are given to understand that there was no
increase in the wilderness. This is an unparralleled increase! the period of
doubling being about 14 years.

Joseph was 17 years old when he was sold into Egypt. He was 30 at his
advancement: 8 years after this Jacob came into Egypt with his family; after
which Joseph lived 72 years and died at the age of 110. Israel came out of
Egypt 143 years after Joseph's death and 215 after Jacob's coming into Egypt.
Moses was born 63 or 64 years after Joseph's death, spent 40 years at Pharaoh's
court and 40 years in exile in Midian; and at his return must have found Israel
increased in 40 years from about 400,000 to about 3 millions. Upon the view of
the hosts of Israel after his return from exile thy fathers went down into
Egypt with three score and ten persons; and now the Lord thy God has made thee
as the stars of heaven for multitude. All the souls that came out of Jacob's
loins, exclusive of his son's wives, were 70 at his arrival and settlement in
Egypt. If the period of doubling continued equable during the whole term of 215
years, the numbers of increase may be thus exhibited, Souls descended of Jacob
70 at his settling in (...) 140 14 years period of doubling. 280 28 17.5.
Jacob's ^h. 560 43 1,120 56 2,240 70 72. Joseph's Death. 4,480 84 8,960 98
17,920 112 35,840 120 135. Moses born. 71,680 140 143,360 154 280,720 108 175.
Moses exiled in Misias. 573,440 182 1,146,880 196 2,293,760 210 215. Exodus at
about 3 Million. 4,587,520 222 If we assume the period of doubling 14 years and
4 months, the 15th revolution would terminate at 215 years; but the number of
souls at the 15th doubling would be too small for 600,000 fensible men. So that
14 years is more probably the mean term. I say the mean term or period; for I
suppose the periods of doubling themselves varied, being longer at first and
shorter at last. The rapidity and greatness of the Hebrew increase in 215 years
renders not altogether incredible what is related of the "Isic of Pints" in an
account published in London, A. D. 1668. which, like many accidental
discoveries, from incredulity and contempt, passed into neglect and oblivion.
In this account it was said that certain English persons -- in the days of Q.
Elizabeth making a voyage to the East India, were cast away and wrecked upon
the island near the coast of Terra Australia Iocognita, and all drowned,
excepting one man and four women, whereof one was a negro. And now lately, A.
D. 1667. a Dutch ship driven by soul weather there by chance, have found their
posterity (speaking good english) to amount to ten or twelve thousand persons,
as they suppose. Q. Elizabeth was crowned A. D. 1558, whence the period of this
increase could be but, 109 years by A. D. 1667, and probably not so much. This
implies their period of doubling 13 years, which we have seen is possible in
the Hebrew posterity. One man and four women may be equal to four families for
the basis of increase. The Arabian females are Families 4 Years 16 13 32 26 64
39 128 52 256 65 512 78 1024 91 2^48 104 said to have children at 8 Act. The
ratio of increase which will augment them, from the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign to A. D. 1667, to 2000 families, will augment them by A. D.
1760. to above 500,000 families, or two millions and an half of souls, the
posterity of five persons in two hundred years. But half, nay one quarter of
this number, would be a great discovery. There are many reasons to believe
there is a southern continent.

2000 Families imply 10,000 Souls.


And if we consider that the fensible men were not reckoned from 16 aet. and
upwards, but from 20 aet. the total at the Exodus must be above three million
of souls; which will shorten the mean period of doubling to 13 years. Had this
rapid increase continued 40 years longer, 20 millions of souls might have
entered Canaan. Infinite wisdom however saw fit to take occasion from the sins
of the wilderness, to put a stop to it, perhaps at the time they had arrived at
the akme of rapid doubling: so that but about the number of the Exodus entered
on the possession of the promised land -- three million of people perishing in
the wilderness. A flagrant instance this of the public chastisement of the Most
High! -- which, with the fatal effects of the subsequent dissentions among the
chosen people of God, ought to influence us to public virtue and union.

Israel not increasing in the wilderness for 40 years, about the same number
entered Canaan that went out of Egypt. About 430 years after the entrance into
Canaan, Joab by order of David numbered the people. And though the amount of the
census which he returned and reported to David was but 1,300,000 fensible men,
800,000 for Israel and 500,000 for Judah: yet the true amount was for the
former 1,100,000. for the la^^er 470,000. But even in this account the tribes
of Benjamin and Levi were not included. The total of Joab's census of fencible
men of 20 aet. and upwards being 1,5^0,000, In the year 1533. Queen Elizabeth
caused to be made a review of all the men in England capable of bearing arms,
when they were found to amount to 1,172,000 men according to Raleigh. See
Hu^e's Hi^t. of Brit. Vol. 1. p. 119. According to Dr. Br^kenbridge, it should
seem that the total of inhabitants in England for the middle of the present
century, does not exceed FIVE MILLIONS AND AN HALF, and those of Scotland and
Ireland TWO MILLIONS AND AN HALF. So the total of inhabitants in the island of
Great Bri^ain and Ireland amount to EIGHT MILLIONS. He estimates the total of
France at FOURTEEN MILLIONS. Accurate searches show that former general
estimates have been greatly too large
implies 7,850,000 souls exclusive of Benjamin and Levi. Though the memorable
barbarity of the Benjamites cost them the loss of 25,100 men, and almost the
extinction of the tribe; yet we find that in about 60 years after David they
had recovered and increased to 280,000 fighting men implying 1,400,000 souls
for that tribe; which if not reckoned by Joab may augment the above numbers to
9,250,000 souls. The males of the tribe of Levi were 22,000 at the exodus, and
so the whole tribe about 40,000 (the males of 30 aet. were 38,000 in David's
time) -- which if augmented with the common national increase, and added to the
preceding numbers, may give 9 millions and an half for the total of souls of
the Hebrews about the times of David and Solomon. And perhaps they never
exeeded this. Though their numbers might continue much the same till beyond
Jehosaphat's times, and especially during Solomon's reign when the nation was
at its summit of glory, both for numbers, riches, policy and union: yet it is
probable they had reached the akme or height of patrial increase even before
David. Hence we see that they doubled not twice after the exodus; and that the
period of doubling was extended from 14 to 2 or 300 years. The seven nations of
Palaestine were said to be "greater and mightier" than Israel on their arrival
thither. They were so numerous and powerful as to subjugate Israel 40 years, so
long after their entrance into Canaan as the times of Sampson. But though the
Philistines might be 3 million at first, yet by exile and conquest they were so
diminished, that when Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land
of Israel -- they were found 153,600 only: which however implies three quarters
of a million of souls even in his time. Yet these with the children of Israel
to the total amount of 10 million of souls were subsisted in affluence upon a
territory, according to Dr. Pococke, not larger than the three governments of
Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island.

In more things than one, that of exile, our New England churches may resemble
God's ancient chosen people. I apprehend God has great things in design for
this vine which his irresistible arm has planted: and that he purposes to make
of us a great people and a pure and glorious church. To be sure he has already
wonderfully blessed the emigration of our forefathers into this wilderness,
and caused it to multiply abundantly. The Spanish and French emigrations into
America, for a well known reason, do not much increase upon the first settlers,
perhaps diminish: -- the estimated total of the Spaniards in South America,
according to Don Ullao, not exceeding some of the british provinces. The Dutch
in Batavia have, it is said, from small beginnings increased to two millions:
-- unhappy for them and their happily reformed churches, if heaven should take
occasion from their late public perfidy to blast their posterity, and set them
forth a public example in conjunction with ancient Israel for our admonition.
Happy for us if the admonitions of providence in ancient and modern example,
should secure our attachment and public obedience to Jehovah

New England has advanced 120 years in rapid increase, the term of doubling
being 20, or according to Dr. FRANKLIN 25 years. This is verified by reference
to the census for the colony of Rhode Island, by the King's order to 1730 and
1755.

Census for 1730 15,302 Whites. Ditto for 1755 35,939 Deduct for 5 Towns
annexed since 1730 4,910 31,029 Ditto. 31,029 15,727 Increase in 25 Years.

According to the reverend and ingenious Mr Callender (Hist. Discourse p. 9)
there were fewer than 200 families in the whole colony, about the year 1658.

The increase of the maritime towns is not equal to that of the inland ones.
Though the period of doubling for the whole colony is 25 years, now that the
maritime towns make so great a proportion of the inhabitants, yet the period is
different for different parts of the colony. While on the seacoast it is above
25 years, yet within land it is 20 and 15. The five towns of Gloucester,
Situate, Coventry, West-Greenwich and Exeter were 5033 A. D. 1748, and 6986, A.
D. 1755, which implies a period of doubling 15 years only. And the two inland
counties of Providence and Kent, double on a me^ in 20 years. And this I
believe is the full period for the inland towns of New England in general;
which might be ascertained by calculations on their census in 1730 and 1755.
The Ratio of increase for different parts of this colony thus appears A. D.
1730. A. D. 1755. Per. doubling. Island of Rhode Island, 4486 7372 35 years
Portsmouth alone, 643 1172 28 years Co. King's-County, 4460 9250 22 years Co
Kent. 2177 5000 20 years Co. Providence, 3843 9820 18 years 10,480 24,160 20
years.

Hence the mean period of doubling is 20 years for that part of the Colony,
which lies on the west side of the Narragansett-Bay.


As this is much slower than the increase of Israel, the period of rapid
increase, as distinguished from the ultimate period of patrial increase, may be
longer in the proportion of 14 to 25, or a rati^ formed of these numbers. If
Israel reached the first in 215 years, we may reach it in 384; of which, as I
said, 120 are already clapsed. Above 160 years of rapid increase yet remain, by
which time through the blessing of heaven we may become many Millions. After this
we may continue to increase in extended periods of doubling for 7 or 800 years,
till we shall have reached the Summit of the patrial increase in 11 or 1200
years from the first settlement of America: which, as it may have then advanced
us into the millennial times, preceding examples of the rise and decline of
empire may not be further applicable. And here I cannot but remark that the
maxim holds good of communities as of individuals "quo semel est imbuta recens
servabit odorem -- testa diu" -- that they receive their turn, their genius,
their manners, their political constitution, very much from their infant
education, the discipline and maxims infused in the infancy of the state: which
ought therefore to be carefully attended to. This is especially true of public
bodies of Mankind that grow up fast and in such quick successions, as not
easily to permit the ingrafting of capitally new customs. The Greeks,
Carthaginians and Romans retained the manners of Egypt, Tire and Troy: and
Israel retained the religion and polity which they received in Egypt and the
wilderness. But to return.

In order to form an idea of the future growth of New England, it will be
necessary to take a retrospect on the past. For the first 15 years from A D
1628 to 1643 -- "the number of ships that transported passengers in this space
of time is computed at 298 -- "Men, women and children passing over this wide
ocean as near as at present can be gathered, is also supposed to be 21,200 or
thereabouts." Wonder-working Providence of Sion's Savior in N. E. p. 31. London
Edit. A. D. 1658.
From thence to the beginning of the present century, there came not so many
from Europe as returned. Indeed at the restoration, on the ejection of 2000
ministers at the memorable black Bartholomew A. D. 1662, some few families with
14 ministers repaired hither; not enough however to balance the returns from
hence. It was computed in the year 1670 that of 94 ministers which came over,
31 were then living, 36 had died in the country, and 27 returned to europe. And
in this term went back many others, besides ministers. The principal foreign
augmentation since was by a body of protestants from the north of Ireland about
A D 1730 and onwards. This might be an accession of so few Families. Dr.
FRANKLIN says, "in fact there has not gone from Britain to our colonies these
20 years past to settle there, so many as 10 families a year."
It is to be remembered that part of the first planters settled on Long Island,
and that considerable numbers since 1731 have removed out of New England to the
confines of New York: a number of families also removed into New Jersey about A
D 1695. So that on the whole the amount of the public census A D 1755, taken by
order from the lords commissioners for trade and plantations, may be estimated
not to excede the natural increase of the original planters in the reign of
Charles the first.

Dr. Cotton Mather says, that A D 1696, in all New England were 100,000 Souls.
It is said there were A D 1691 about 16,000 militia which may imply 100,000;
according to the implication of a like account by governor Shute, who A D 1722
reported to the board of trade, that in the province of the Massachusetts were
94,000 people, whereof 15,000 were in the training list. The alarm list,
containing the fencible men, may be estimated at a third more. A. D. 1708, Mr,
Thomas Brattle estimated for all New England 100 or 120,000 souls, and 20 or
25,000 fighting men. In 1735 the provincial valuation for Massachusetts was
35,427 polls, whites of 16 aet. and upwards. In 1742 the valuation of whites
was 41,000 polls. The same year the rateable polls of the province of
New Hampshire were 6000. In the census of 1755, the colony of Connecticut
amounted to 133,000 souls, whites. In the census of 1730, the census of the
colony of Rhode Island and Providence plantations amounted to 15,302 whites.
The census within the same limits in 1755 amounted to 31,029; and for the whole
colony, inclusive of the annexed towns, 35,939 souls whites, the militia being
about a seventh part. Not having the census of 1755 for Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, I can only estimate them. I have been told that Massachusetts
then amounted to between 234 and 240,000. The provincial numbers A. D. 1755 may
have been nearly thus; Massachusetts 234,000 Connecticut 133,000 Rhode Island
35,939 New Hampshire 34,000 436,939 Souls. Increase in 5 Years 64,970

Total of Souls in New England 501,909 A. D. 1760. The omission in the census
of 1755 of those at sea and others, and the increase on those omissions will
more than balance the extraordinary loss of the war the last five years. At the
end of the campaign 1760, it was computed that about 21,000 had perished in the
war on this continent, from General Braddock's defeat in 1755 to 1760
inclusive. Of which perhaps 7000 were New England provincials.
We shall not be mistaken then if we assume the number of inhabitants at half a
million in the year 1760. We now commence an increase of 14,000 a year, which
in 25 years will be augmented to 28,000 a year: and if providence continues our
increase for 50 years, we shall have arrived to an annual increase of about
56,000.

It will be more difficult to estimate the proportion of the sects. Let it
suffice that I estimate all but the congregationalists to their full amount.
There may be about 70 souls of Jews in all New England, and as many Moravians.
From the most accurate account that I can collect the episcopalians do not
exceed 2100 families, or 12,600 souls, in all New England. There are 27
missions, inclusive of two itinerancies: the 27 missionaries, with three other
ministers, officiate in 47 churches and places of divine service. Six or seven
of these congregations are large; and 30 that are not equal to half of a common
presbyterian congregation a-piece: and several that do not excede 15 and 20
families each. Not exceeding in the whole 30 common presbyterian congregations,
which I estimate at 80 and 100 families, and yet at a mean they contain 140
families each. Though we have some under 50 and 60, yet we have many above 200
to 250, and some above 300. From several estimates procured from the friends. I
take their denomination to be about 16,000 souls in the four governments:
though I am assured by a very ingenious and observant friend that this estimate
is too large. From like estimates procured of the baptists I take their
denomination to be about 22,000 souls in the four governments. These estimates
cannot be supposed perfectly accurate, but I believe they are nearly the truth.
Besides these are to be reckoned about 10 000 reducible to no class. The total
amount of 60,000 subducted from half a million, the present total of
inhabitants in New England, leaves 440,000 souls for the denomination of
congregationalists. Of 175 whites in the town of Newport that died A. D. 1760,
41 were I^fants of the year, and inclusive of these 51 under 2 years old. The
total of whites in town A. D. 1755, was 5519 which might be increased to about
6000 at present. The maritime do not increase so fast as the inland towns. The
total of deaths A. D. 1700, if proportionate through New England, was about 14
500, added to 13 500 the increase of the year, gives 28,000 the number of
children born in New England in the year 1760: of which about 3000 died within
the year, and 25 000 survived. But I am inclined to believe the proportion of
deaths to be less in the country, though probably there were 25,000 children at
least born in the year. Ninev^h contained 120,000 infants.
This being nearly the true state of the sects as to numbers for the year 1760,
let us see what may be their respective increase in a century from this time,
supposing them to double once in 25 years only.

Episcopalians. Friends. Baptists. Congregationalists. A. D. 12,600 16 000
22,000 440,000 1760 23,200 32,000 44,000 880,000 1785 46,400 64,000 88,000
1,760,000 1810 92,800 128,000 176,000 3,520,000 1835 185,600 256,000 352,000 7
MILLIONS 1800

Hence it appears that without considering the augmentation of future
accessions from Europe, each of the four principal sects in New England may
greatly increase into large and respectable bodies, even with the most sanguine
allowances for proseliting. The natural increase on the present stock will in
half a century give 46,400 for the episcopalians, 64,000 for the friends,
88,000 for the baptists, and one million and three quarters for the
congregationalists. And in a century 185,600 for the first, 256000 for the
second, 352000 for the third, and seven millions for the last. I shall not
enter into the variations ^ch may arise on these numbers in this period from
proseliting and shifting communions, though we have sufficient data to form
pretty certain anticipations on this head.

The difficulty of breaking the ancestorial religion, unless the public
enthusiasm be excited, appears not only from the small impression made on the
sects here, where the amount of changes may not perhaps excede 5000 among all
the sects: but also from the small impressions made on the sects in Germany and
other parts of the protestant world with regard to their general forms -- and
particularly on the Irish catholics, when the result of the labors of a much
longer period is said not to have gained 200,000 protestants, excepting the
north of Ireland Scots presbyterians. The authors of the system of geography
say, it is computed that about 8 parts in 10 are papists, and that the
dissenters are double the memebers of the establishment. It is to be hoped that
the next capital change will be to a still greater purity both in doctrine and
worship. Our final dependence for the security and protection of truth is in
the irresistible dominion of Jesus Christ, who will eventually subdue all
things to himself.

At present the congregationalists have about 515 churches already gathered,
which double in less than 30 years. According to Dr. Douglass the Number of our
Churches A. D. 1759, was 407. Summary Hist. V. I. 542.
So that 60 years hence we may consist of 2000 churches; a remarkable increase,
which some of the present generation may live to see. The aged ministers now
living, have in their day seen 130 churches increase to 530. In a century from
this time we may have 5000 churches, even with allowances for emigrations to
new provinces. But in order to this the love of liberty, and a zeal for pure
and undefiled religion must be diffused and propagated with unremitted fidelity
and vigilance. Should our intestine dissentions unhinge the minds of the rising
generations, and disengage or render them indifferent to the cause, it might be
attended with unhappy consequences. Union and diffusive harmony are truly
important, during this infancy of the churches, and this period of rapid
increase. The error of Balaam in the snare he laid for Israel, effectually
wrought a confusion, from which omnipotence alone could recover them. Let us
not be caught by any similar error. If we adhere to our principles, even the
undefiled, the uncorrupted principles of revelation, with the utmost charity
and benevolence to others, and without encroaching upon, or intefering with,
the peculiarities of our protestant brethren of the other sects, if we are and
continue united in faith and fellowship -- providence is advancing us in a
swift progress to figure and defensible maturity. The present increasing state
of our churches, and the dependence of their future glory on harmonious union
in their increasing infancy, appear to me a very powerful recommendation to
walk together by the same rules, in love and harmony, so far as we have
attained and attentively to mind the same thimg; that is, ourselves to respect,
and to teach our children to mind the same great interest of the same common
cause -- never to defect it, but faithfully pursue it: that the public spirit
be animated, guided and governed by the same public principles which are our
common interest. It ought particularly to be inculcated upon our friends going
from us to the settlement of new towns or provinces, to carry religion with
them, to settle early in church order, and furnish themselves with a ministry
of the word and ordinances, for the benefit of themselves and their children.
Great encouragement should be given to our colleges and nurseries of
literature, which grow more and more important every day. We should often
relate to our posterity the history of the wonderful providence of God in the
settlement of this country; and remark the growth of our churches, and engage
them by all the honorable motives of christianity to steadfastness in the faith
once delivered to the saints, and in the liberty wherewith the gospel has made
us free. Let our children be often taught to read the sixth, seventh, eighth,
and ninth verses of the twenty-sixth chapter of Deuteronomy with parallel
application to the history of our ancestors. Let the great errand into America
never be forgotten. The plantation of Plymouth colony consisted of 300 souls A.
D. 1629; when the principal draught of our fathers from the mother country
commenced the settlement of the Massachusetts. And in the 10 following years
there were 21 churches gathered. About 16 churches planted by the time of the
first synod 1637, at which were present 25 ministers. I have observed that
there were arrived by A. D. 1643 about 2000 planters, besides 200 gentlemen of
fortune, merchants and ministers: which have been judged to imply 21,200 souls.
The first Plymouth settlement, A. D. 1620. consisted of 41 planters and but 101
souls, of which there were only 18 wives: and I suppose in all the future
acce^o^, there was a large proportion of adventurers single men without
families. The Ld. Treasurer's order, April 16, 1629. was for 60 adult females,
26 children and 300 men. A. D 1644 the militia of the Massachusetts consisted
of 26 bands, or perhaps 2600 soldiers, which if but a seventh part, imply but
about 16 000 souls: but probably the militia bore a greater proportion, if the
males exceded the females. The restoration of the balance of the sexes might
require that the first 15 or 20 years increase, should consist chiefly of
female children. From several computations of this nature I have been inclined
to believe, that the first 4000 planters did not imply above 15,000 souls to
have arrived by A. D. 1643; which were cantoned into 34 churches by A. D 1645.
increased to about 40 churches by A. D. 1650 -- when they contained 7750
communicants. Perhaps there may now be 60 or 70 thousand communicants. There
were 130 churches A. D. 1696, of which 35 in Connecticut: there are A. D. 17^0.
530 churches, of which 170 in Connecticut. Hence the period of doubling for the
churches is 30 years at farthest. In 115 years we have increased 500 churches
upon 34. -- This is the LORD's doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes!
Perhaps the multiplication of the primitive churches did not excede this in the
first 130 years from the crucifixion And it is to be remembered, that of the
first planters two churches are not reckoned, which were settled on
Long Island. The numbers of the planters might be accurately ascertained by
having recourse to the records of the first 30 or 40 towns. I have observed,
that as we are above 500 churches at present, so we may by the blessing of
heaven become above 1000 in 30. and 2000 in 60 years The renowned church of
Scotland consists of 938 churches -- those of the Dutch and Walloon, A. D.
1560. consisted of 2190 churches: to either of which we may be equal in 60 or
70 years.

And while we are anticipating the Growth and Multiplication of our churches in
New England -- we may with pleasure extend the Prospect to our brethren the
presbyterian churches in the other provinces. The wise and happy junction of
the two synods of Philadelphia and New York, A. D. 1758. formed a coalition of
above 100 Pastors with their churches under the rapid augmentation of the lite
natural increase with ou^s. In the province of Pennsylvania, inclusive of the
three Delaware counties, are 66 congregations, of which 41 are destitute of
Pastors. Our brethren are still more numerous in proportion in the province of
New Jersey, and I think also in that of New York. And there is a very
considerable body of them in the frontiers of Maryland and Virginia, where they
have already a presbytery formed. Also in New York and Jersey are two c^us of
our protestant brethren the Dutch reformed, consisting of 20 ministers: also
two churches of French protestants; and 3 congregational churches. All these
are peculiarly sister churches, with whom we have an entire harmony and
fellowship. Dr. Douglass says, "the three frontier counties in Virginia of
Frederic. Augusta and Lunenberg, are prodigiously large, and generally settled
by north of Ireland Scots presbyterians, as is also Amelia and Albemarle
counties." Though there are many vacant churches, which the colleges are
supplying a pace, yet the eight presbyteries, at the union of the synods in May
1758 consisted of 100 ministers. There have been some transpositions since; but
then they were nearly thus: Presbyteries. Ministers. Hanover 14 Donnegall 11
Lewistown 6 New Castle 11 Philadelphia 12 New-Brunswick 11 New York 22 Suffolk
13 -- 100


Let them be made well acquainted among other parts of sacred history, with the
history of the Hebrew nation; in which they will see examples of public reward
and public chastisement of providence in a very striking light. From the
ancient example let our churches be warned, very carefully to avoid the two
capital errors which proved the ruin of the Hebrew republic, and which will
never fail eventually to subvert the best constituted empire -- I mean
CORRUPTION in RELIGION and the public VIRTUE; and DISUNIONS. These two things
operated with full strength among God's ancient people, on the revolt of
Jeroboam and introduction of idolatry, upon which in a very little time there
were not found above 7 or 8000 men out of above a million who had not bowed the
knee to ba^l. The pure religion becoming thus corrupted, Israel was ripe for
that extirpation, which was effected upon their calling in the foreign aid of
Damascus and Assyria. See this in 2 Kings 17. And before this the immediate
effect of national dissension was the loss of half a million of men, being near
half the kingdom of Israel which fell in one day, the greatest battle that
history records. Even Judah forsook the law of the Lord; and within five years
after the death of Solomon, the corruption he introduced in complaisance to
foreign wives, had overspread the empire -- so fatal is the ill example of
princes. Judah also "built them high places and images, and graves, on every
high hill and under every green tree:" on which Shishak, with the Egyptian and
Ethiopian army, penetrated even to Jerusalem, and carried off the treasures of
the temple and the king's house, the opulence amassed by Solomon. What
prosperity attended God's people when they turned to the Lord and united in his
ways? The whole treatment of divine providence toward that people from Moses
to this day, has been exactly according to the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy. And
excepting in one thing, there may be an analogy between the divine treatment of
this and all other states, especially his conduct toward that kingdom wherein
dwells righteousness. We may then reap great advantage in consulting and duly
applying that history, which may be in some measure typical of our own. In a
word, we have in the sacred and common histories of providence assistance to
become assured in what point of view the PUBLIC VIRTUE and UNDEFILED RELIGION
appear to the sovereign mind. If we conform ourselves to these notices and
supernal assurances, we may depend with absolute certainty on the smiles and
defense of Jesus our omnipotent patron.

I have observed that our churches, in a distinguished sense from almost all
the protestant world, are founded on the bible. Our worthy and venerable
ancestors (be their memories dear to posterity) did not like other protestant
patrons, form a system of what they thought and judged to be the true sense of
revelation, and establish this for the truth: -- no -- it was eno' for them
that the bible was the inspired rule, and this they made the only rule. And
hence, if on examination we should find any of the received doctrines or usages
among the churches dissonant to the sacred oracles, -- if we only judge so --
if this on deliberation be our opinion -- we may freely enjoy and profess our
judgments, and oppose such doctrines or customs by alleging from the
SCRIPTURES ONLY; without appealing to human tests of ^ine truth, or
encountering the civil and ecclesiastical hostilities with which they have been
too generally enforced. And as our churches were thus planted in very great
purity, so we see they are in a very flourishing state considering their
infancy. The computations with respect to their future growth depend, by the
leave of providence, in some measure, on the supposition that we have room to
extend our settlements. Agriculture and the rural life are peculiarly friendly
to increase. Ten thousand families (not of an old, but even of a new race,
which makes a great difference) with means of affluent subsistence, dwelling
together in a populous herd, kept from vices but employed in handycraft
industry; will by no means equal the increase, which the same number of
families would afford if turned forth and dispersed in the wide world and
employed in agriculture in a new climate: there is a difference from the
employments, but the chief difference is from change of climate, dissipation
and the rural air. Farmers find it necessary to change their seed-corn, and
shift their herds and stocks. Hillocks of corn planted near together yield not
half the increase, as when planted at proper distances on the same ground. The
present bounds of New England (the greater part of which is yet a wilderness)
permit an increase of seven millions. If providence should complete the
reduction of Canada and an honorable peace annex it to the british crown, we
may extend our settlements into new provinces, or to the western part of those
provinces which by the charters cross the continent to the pacific ocean. With
pleasure we anticipate the rapid settlement of new towns and provinces around
us, and filling them up with millions of inhabitants. Table of increase upon
half a million inhabitants in the four New England governments for the present
period of doubling. By inspecting which may be seen the number of inhabitants
in New England for each year.

A. D. A. D. A. D. A. D. 1760 500*000 1767 607,090 1774 737 13^ 1781 895*025
1761 514 050 1768 624,170 1775 757 857 1782 920*185 1762 523 510 1769 641,710
1776 779 105 1783 946 060 1763 543,320 1770 659,760 1777 801,070 1784 972 655
1764 538 650 1771 678,305 1778 823,59^ 1785 1,000*000 1765 574 350 1772 697,370
1779 846,745 181^ 2,000,000 1766 590,500 1773 716,971 1780 870,550 1835 4 000
000

A draught of 4000 families from the beginning of this period for congration
and the settlement of new provinces, will put of the increase to a million but
three years. Above 2075 souls removed from hence to Nova Scotia in the year
1760: 4000 families will (...) 80 townships with 50 families a piece, which is
enough. There may probably remove into New Hampshire and out of New England in
50 years time 8 or 9000 families, eno' to settle 160 townships or about double
the number of new townships that have been settled the last 50 years. This
involving their increase may afford 00 or 70000 souls -- which number at the
end of the period will be replaced in less than two years increase. The main
body of the people may tarry behind, especially as the greatest part of our
present possessions are uncultivated. And only the provinces of Massachusetts,
Connecticut and Rhode Island will admit an increase to 6 or 8 millions. The
athenian lacedemonian and other territories of Greece were not much affected
with the colonization of Jo^i^ and the asiatic coasts. Though there was an
extended inland territory in the lesser Asia, the love of their coun^ ^etained
the main body in Greece, where they accumulated to prodigious numbers. Our
present territory bids fair for the place of accumulated population for the
first ages. One thing which in 20 or 30 years time will be found to give a
sensible shock to New England emigrations, will be the quitrents on new
provinces. Germans have been accustomed to them, but we have not. Free and
absolute tenure of land and unburdened property, as well as liberty in
religion, are necessary to tempt us. The new townships after 15 or 20 years
settlement are scarce able to bear a small part in the provincial taxes,
besides the support of the ministry, building meeting houses, etc. They would
s^y be able to bear a q^itrent over and above this in many years A township 6
miles square is charged with annual rent of L. 23 sterling. A province of 100
miles square admitting 280 such townships will be settled with 15 000 families,
implying 80 000 souls. The (...) on this province would be L. 6440 sterling
(...) 20^ a thousand acres, or L 23 a township The annual public charges of
Connecticut before the wa^ are said to have been "L 4000 to L. 5000 currency,
or L. 500 sterling only, when they were above 100 000 souls, and were possessed
of old and well cultivated plantations. It is for the interest of the crown of
the british merchants and manufacturers that the common people be rich, toward
the greater consumption of merchandise, as well as en^^ening industry. The
q^itrent, though a forming tri^^e, will at least procrassant the fruit of
colonization, and for a long time be an insupportable (...) -- which will be
felt not only by the planners, but as immediately in commerce. For the
circulation of that cash which pays this same tri^^ing (...) will absorb the
most that the farmer will be able to spare for super^^ities for a long time. A
reciprocation of interest as well as affection to an exiled and long despised
offspring, has doubtless engaged the mother country in our defense. The
importations from thence to the continental provinces only, are already arrived
to two millions sterling per annum; this is as much as the present numbers will
consume. This importation may increase with the inhabitants, if effectual
encouragement be given to the fishery, to the foreign trade, and the several
provincial staples in which remittances can be made. From 1744 to 1754 the
importation de^^ded: from 1748 to 1758 it more than doubled. But if instead of
10 years we suppose it next to double only in 25 years, or with the natural
increase of the people, the amount will be 34 millions sterling for the first
period, and proportionably greater for the next. The (...) of which to the
british merchants and manufacturers, that is to say, to the mother country,
will soon repay to her the expenses of the American war, even if estimated at
Four Millions per annum. Burdens on agriculture or the american commerce will
unavoidably affect the national interest, and more than balance the tri^^ing
revenue to the crown from q^^rents on a few provinces, especially if we
consider that a greater extent of territory would be settled under a free (...)
that under an embarrassed one. The experiment in New England, especially when
compared with several other provinces, under proper distinctions, appears to be
a good precedent. Plantation may be made with encouragements but cannot
successfully be forced. Free policy free religion, free property, and
matrimony, will soon populate a fertile country in a good climate. These have
been the basis of our increase.


We transport ourselves to the distance of 100 years forward, look over this
wide spread wilderness, see it blossom like the rose, and behold it planted
with churches and temples consecrate to the pure worship of the most High --
when our present plain edifices for public worship shall be succeeded with a
nobler species of building: not indeed with temples whose colonades are decked
with the gilt buits of angels winged; but temples adorned with all the decent
ornaments of the most sublime and august architecture -- when divinely
resplendent truth shall triumph, and our brethren of the congregational
communion may form a body of SEVEN MILLIONS! A glorious and respectable body
this, for TRUTH and LIBERTY! Well might our fathers die with pleasure, and
sacrifice their lives with joy to lay the foundation of such a name, of such a
peculiar people whose numbers so soon increase like the sand of the sea, or the
stars of heaven, and what is more, whose GOD is the LORD.

Thus I have considered the second argument for union taken from the state and
circumstances of the churches. I might have enlarged upon the unhappy
consequences of contentions and disunion, by showing more particularly how they
must, or might terminate in the utter subversion of the congregational
interest; which might show in another strong light the wisdom of coalition and
harmony. To sum up this argument -- if we love the cause; if it gives us
pleasure to be embarked in a cause which has Jesus Christ for its head and
omnipotent patron, and which under him we can foresee is rising into
distinction; ought we not with sincere affection to unite and harmonize, since
this union is the b^^^ of its rising into respectable figure?

3. And lastly. I just add a last reason for union, which more immediately
affects every one in his individual capacity, that it will afford a field for
the exercise of angelic benevolence and complacency. We can look upon the
cause, upon the state of the churches, with a complacency, which cannot be felt
in surveying intestine confusion. How good and pleasant a thing is it for
brethren to dwell together in unity. Living in peace and harmony tends
irresistably to humanize and soften the mind to the most generous and god-like
feelings -- delights unknown to sectarian contention or intestine variance. It
is a very happy circumstance to be situated among a friendly social people, we
are insensibly caught of the benevolence which union and peace diffuses. The
public love and harmony will enable us with serenity and more sacred
satisfaction to celebrate the offices of piety and devotion. Our religious
addresses and joyful homage undisturbed, unpolluted with the reluctant feelings
of variance, shall ascend as incense holy and acceptable to the Most High. And
in common life, instead of broken friendships, and family alienations, we
should become united brethren in the highest sense, harmoniously traveling
along together, and sweetning the trials of life with the animating complacency
of social virtue. Religious contests are apt to sour the temper, which is
greatly unhappy in a state preparatory to the communion of angels and glorious
beings above. The complacency and love for virtuous minds, like all other moral
affections are formed, at least strengthened by previous discipline. If we have
lived in serenity and associated with the good here, we shall have acquired the
principle of spiritual delight in good beings, which qualifies the soul to be
gathered (...) scraphs, and to be associated with the purified and refined
spirits of the upper world. We have unavoidable afflictions eno' without
coining new ones. It is greatly desirable toward our own felicity, to see the
churches in peace, to dwell together in love

Our churches afford a most agreeable review. We have lived to "see the sinking
church arise." Watts.
We may cast our eyes around us in a wide extended and still extending
prospect, and feast them with beautiful clusters of churches on this
flourishing vine which God almighty has planted. Let us accustom ourselves to
take an annual view, and carefully attend to the public exigencies of the
churches in the progress of increase or decline. Let us often tell these things
to our children, that with their own eyes they may see and admire the
wonder-working providence of ^od. That when they are convinced from an
inspection of the ways of God, that the cause they are embarked in flourishes
and is secure, and appears evidently emerging superior to all opposition, they
may give glory to God and take courage, never desert the cause, but adhere firm
and unmoved. I am in no doubt, as I have before said, but that the constitution
and general form of our churches is very nearly apostolical. And though there are
imperfections remaining -- yet they are much more easily amended than in any
other protestant church, as amendments would not be encountered with the like
opposition of authorities and unwieldy temporalities. If we oppress any, it is
ourselves only; our churches, and the secular power too much at their command,
formerly adopted those oppressive measures, which are always recollect with
regret, and disapprobation Such were the measures of 1637, 1656, 1692.
. But even the lower secular oppressions of other sects have long since been at
an end. And as by our principles we are not led to persecute others, so let us
entertain a manly charity for our protestant brethren of all denominations,
rejoicing that they are to a very great degree reformed: and as we believe they
respectively judge themselves, each more than others reformed to the scripture
rule; so (...) extensive charity and comprehensive benevolence, is no ways
inconsistent with our given the preference to congregationalism. We rejoice
that men may become good and holy in all communions: -- it will be admitted
that in different communions there may be different advantages for virtue and
piety; and though we think that our churches have the preference in this, as
well as in being resembled to primitive scripture model as to the ordinances
and forms of worship -- yet we doubt not the pious dying from every communion
will be received to glory. We are not so bigoted as to think that the tender
mercies of the Lord are limited to us, and that none can be saved out of our
churches. We rejoice to see men of virtue and true goodness; and it gives us
pleasure to view those persons as ornaments of the communions to which they
belong, though different from ours. Instead of wishing the extirpation of any
sect, we wish them all well and to abound in the knowledge and practice of
christianity, and to subsist on truth and honor. We stand firm and fast to the
constitution of liberty in our churches -- and as we do not oppress others, so
we hope not to be oppressed by others. On the footing of equality and universal
liberty we are friends to all, but submit not to be subordinate to any. Having
secured and fortified our own cause, we may sit down full of a joyful
self-complacency, and look around on our christian brethren of the other sects,
not with a view of sowing the seeds of discord, not to avail ourselves of their
differences, least of all to persecute and oppress them; but to exercise
good will and sincere christian love to them, to let off the emanations of
benevolence toward all that fear God and work righteousness.

We see my brethren, the arguments are strong for the congregational union in
every point of view. There are some peculiar reasons why the congregational
brethren and churches in this colony should be united. Our cause is one, and a
cause not in decline, not in disrepute, but in honor and a most flourishing
prosperity. Let us be cemented together by forbearance, fellowship, union. Let
us, my reverend FATHERS in the ministry give faithful attention to the pastoral
labors, and feed the flock of God, the churches over which the holy Ghost has
made us overseers. Let us teach for doctrines not the institutes of men, but
the pure word of God, that our congregations may grow in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It will be our wisdom to be united ourselves,
and to that end to avoid every thing by which we may unnecessarily offend one
another. Pastoral alienations are too often accompanied with alienations among
the churches. Our pastoral conventions First formed in this Colony August 25,
1756.
tend to harmony, and show that we are agreed in the principal matters, and
willing to walk together. Let the spirit of harmony extend to our churches and
congregations, among whom let us be careful to cultivate the principles of
harmony and goodwill to all: that our denomination may be distinguished by an
unbigotted, generous and diffusive charity to others. Let us animate them with
annual accounts of the state of the churches, and with this view let us keep
our eyes on the public state. We shall thus act the part assigned us by
providence under the general dominion of the mediator. We should account
ourselves happy in being charged with the ministry of reconciliation under the
prince of peace. Let us make full proof of our ministry: -- be the glory of God
in the reconciliation of men the great object of our attention. Let our
personal sanctity and public utility be animated by considering that the more
we have been inured in cultivating piety and love among men, the better shall
we be prepared to join the extensive plans of order and happiness on high. And
having in this manner been long employed in doing good, and become useful in
promoting peace and virtue on earth; we may not only reflect on our past lives
with serenity and triumph, but adopt with assurant hope and confidence those
divine promises made from the great Lord of the universe the head of the
church, in which our future reward is represented under the idea of receiving a
kingdom, being appointed to a heavenly ministration, being invested with a
larger sphere of action and power, and honored with more talents, more
opportunities of doing good; in a word, of being assigned to affairs of more
extended benevolence. Be our fidelity then inspired by the realizing
anticipation of the future honors, when they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that TURN MANY TO RIGHTEOUSNESS, as the
stars forever and ever.

AMEN.
APPENDIX, Containing a LIST of the NEW ENGLAND CHURCHES, A. D. 1760.
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES IN
MASSACHUSETTS 306 CONNECTICUT 170 NEW HAMPSHIRE 43 RHODE ISLAND 11 530

A LIST of the Ministers, Churches and religious Assemblies, especially of the
four Denominations of Congregationalists, Baptists, Friends, and Episcopalians,
as they lie interspersed in the four New England Governments, taken for the
Beginning of the Year 1760. --

In some few of these Congregations the Churches are not yet formed or
gathered. I have endeavored to make the Catalogue as accurate and perfect as I
could. Some Churches may have been omitted -- and there may be some
Transpositions. Any Mistakes of this Nature will be forgiven by a candid Mind.
It may suffice that I have inserted all that have come to my Knowledge: and
that the Number of the congregational Churches are not augmented beyond the
Truth.

E. Episcopalian. B. Baptist. P. Presbyterians, according to the Church of
Scotland. The numeral Figures denote the Number of congregational Churches in
each Town; the Total of which in New England appears to be about 530, inclusive
of the presbyterian Churches.

Province of the MASSACHUSETTS.
COUNTY of SUFFOLK.
REV Dr Joseph Sewall 12 BOSTON rev Dr Charles Chauncy rev Dr Jonathan Mayhew
rev Thomas Foxcroft rev Samuel Chec^^cy rev John Moorhead P. rev Ebenezer
Pemberton rev Mather Byles rev Samuel Mather rev Andrew Croswell rev Andrew
Eliot rev Samuel Cooper rev Samuel Checkley, jon. rev Jeremiah Condy B. rev
Ephraim Bawns B. Friends rev Dr Timothy Cutler E. rev James Greaton E. rev
Henry Caner E. rev John Troutback E. rev William Hooper E. rev Ebenezer Gay 3
Hingham rev John Brown rev Daniel Shute rev William Smith a Weymouth rev James
Bayley rev Samuel Niles P. 3 Brantree rev Anthony Wibert rev Moses Taft rev Dr
Miller E. rev Samuel Venzy 1 Hall rev Nathaniel Robbins 1 Milton rev Nathaniel
Bowman 1 Dorchester rev Samuel Dunbar 3 Stonghton -- E. rev Jedidiah Adams rev
Philip Curtiss rev Joseph Bean a Wrentham -- vacant rev Mr Barnum rev Nathan
Bucknam 2 Medway rev David Thurston rev Jonathan Townsend 1 Medfield rev
Phillips Payson 1 Walpole rev Thomas Balch 4 Dedham rev Andrew Tyler rev Jason
Haven -- vacant -- E. rev Nathaniel Walter 2 Roxbury rev Amos Adams rev
Jonathan Townsend 1 Needham rev Elnathan White 1 Bellingham -- H. rev Philip
Payson 1 Chelsea rev Joseph Jackson 1 Brookline rev John Phillips 1 Castle
William
43 COUNTY OF ESSEX.
Rev Peter Clark 5 Salem rev James Dimon rev Elias Smith rev Dudley Leavit rev
Nathan Holt rev Thomas Barnard rev William M'Gilchrist E. Friends -- B rev
Nathaniel Henchman 3 Lynn rev Joseph Roby rev Benjamin Adams Friends rev John
Barnard 2 Marblehead rev Simon Bradstreet rev Peter Boors E. rev Joseph Swain 1
Wenham rev John Chipman 2 Beverly rev Joseph Champney rev Sam'l Wigglesworth 7
Ipswich rev John Walley rev Nehemiah Porter rev -- Lesly rev Nathaniel Rogers
rev Alexander M'Dowall rev John Cleveland rev Jedidiah Jewet 2 Rowley rev James
handler rev John Emerson 1 Topsfield rev John Lowel 6 Newbury rev Jonathan
Parsons P. rev Edward Bass E. rev John Tucker rev Moses Parsons rev William
Johnson rev Moses Hale Friends rev Samuel Webster 2 Salisbury rev Edmund Noyes
rev Samuel Philips 2 Andover rev William Symms rev William Balch 2 Bradford rev
Joseph Parsons rev -- Bailey 2 Methuen rev Christopher Sargeant rev Edward
Barnard 6 Haverhill rev James Cushing rev Benjamin Parker rev Samuel Bachelor
-- vacant -- vacant rev John Cushing 2 Boxford rev Elizur Holyo^e rev Thomas
Hibbard 2 Amsbury rev Pain Wingat Friends * rev Joshua White Gloucester rev
Samuel Chandler Gloucester rev John Rogers rev Eberezer Cleveland rev --
Jaquish rev Brad^reet rev Benj Toppan 1 Manchester.
53 COUNTY of MIDDLESEX.
Rev Nath'l Appleton 3 Cambridge rev Samuel Cook rev Eilis Apthorp E. -- vacant
rev Hull Abbot Charlestown 1 rev Thomas Pre^tice Charlestown 1 rev Seth Storer
1 Watertown rev Daniel Bliss 1 Concord rev Josiah Sherman 2 Woburn rev Thomas
Jones rev William Hobby 2 Reading -- vacant rev Israel Loving 2 Sudbury rev
William Cook rev Aaron Smith 1 Marlborough rev Jonas Clark 1 Lexington rev
Jonas Miriam 1 Newtown rev Joseph Emerson 2 Malden rev Eliakiam Willis rev
Ebenezer Bridge 1 Chelmsford rev John Chandler 1 Billerica rev Samuel Lock 1
Sherburn rev Joshua Prentice 1 Holliston rev Caleb Trowbridge 3 Groton rev
Joseph Emerson -- vacant rev Matthew Bridge 1 Framingham rev Ebenezer Tureli 1
Medford rev Henry Gardnet 1 Stow rev Josiah Goodliuc 2 Dunstable -- vacant rev
Thomas Parker 1 Dracut rev John Searl 1 Stoneham rev Daniel Rogers 1 Littleton
rev Samuel Barrett P. 1 Hopkinton -- E. rev Nathaniel Sherman 1 Bedford rev
Willard Hall 1 Wesford rev Isaac Morrell 1 Wilmington rev Sampson Spauldin 1
Tewksoury rev John Swift 1 Acton rev Jacob ^ushing 1 Waltham * rev Phin.
Hemingway 1 Townsend rev Stephen Badger 2 Natick -- vacant rev William Lawrence
1 Lincoln
43 COUNTY OF WORCESTER.
Rev Thad. Maccarty 1 Worcester rev Isaac Jones 1 Western rev Eli Forbes 3
Brookfield rev Joseph Parsons rev Nathan Fisk rev Joseph Roberts 1 Leicester
rev Joshua Eaton 1 Spencer rev Thomas Green B. Friends rev Job Cushing 2
Shrewsbury rev Ebenezer Morse rev Ebenezer Parkman 2 Westboro' rev John Martyn
rev Nathan Stone 1 Southborough rev Charles Gleason 1 Dudley rev John Campbel 1
Oxford -- vacant 1 Ch^^lton -- vacant 1 Sturbridge rev Mr F^th B. rev David
Hall 2 Sutton rev James Welman rev Mr Marsh B. rev Aaron Hutchinson 1 Grafton
rev Nathan Webb 1 Uxbridge Friends rev Elisha Fish rev Joseph Dorr 2 Mendon
Friends. rev Amariah Frost -- B. rev William Phipps 1 Douglass rev David White
1 Hardwick rev Benj. Ruggles 1 New Brantree rev James Humphries 1 Perquiage rev
Aaron Whitney 1 Petersham rev Thomas Frink 2 Rutland rev Joseph Buckminster --
vacant 1 Princetown rev Joseph Davis 1 Holden -- vacant 1 Narraganset No. 6. --
vacan^ 1 Westminster rev Tim. Harrington 2 Lancaster rev John Mellen rev John
Rogers 1 Leominster rev Thomas Goss 1 Bolton rev Joseph Wheeler 1 Harvard * rev
David Stearns 1 Lunenburgh rev Jonathan Winchester 1 Dorchester-Canada --
vacant 1 Ipswich-Canada rev Lemuel Hedge 1 Roxbury-Canada
43 COUNTY of HAMPSHIRE.
Rev Jonathan ^shley 1 Deerfield * rev Mr Billings 1 Greenfield rev Joseph
Ashly 1 Sunderland rev Judah Nash 1 Montague rev Samuel Hopkins 1 Hadley rev
John Woodbridge 1 So Hadley rev Mr Parsons 1 ^mherst rev Tim Woodbridge 1
Hatfield rev John Hooker 2 Northampton rev Mr Judd rev Mr Cutler 1 Quobbin rev
Stephen Williams 6 Springfield rev Robert Breck rev Noah Merick rev John
M'Kinstry rev Elijah Lothrop -- vacant -- B. Rev John Ballantine 1 Westfield
rev Mr Bridgham 2 Brimfield -- vacant -- vacant B. rev Jedidiah Smith ^
Granville rev Mr Morton 1 Blanford rev Mr ^^^ng 1 New-Marlboro' rev Mr Jones 1
No. 3. rev Ebenezer Martin 1 No. 4. rev Stephen West 1 Stockbridge -- vacant 1
Falltown rev Jonathan Hubbard 2 Sheffield rev Samuel Hopkins rev Jesse Clark 1
Spencer -- vacant 1 Egremont rev Justus Forward 1 Coldspring rev Abraham Hill 1
Rhodetown rev Mr M'Dole 1 Colerane rev Ezra Thayer 1 Ware River rev Adonijah
Bidwel 1 No. 1. rev Mr Abercrombie 1 Pelham -- vacant 1 Westhosuck -- vacant 1
Pontoosac -- vacant 1 Palmer rev John Hubbard 1 Northfield
40 COUNTY of PLYMOUTH.
Rev Jacob Bacon 3 Plymouth rev Chandler Robbins -- vacant rev William Rand 1
Kingston rev Charles Turner 1 Duxbury rev Atherton Wales 2 Marshfield rev
Thomas Brown -- E. rev Sherjashub Bourn 2 Situate rev David Barns rev Mr
Thompson E. rev Samuel Baldwin 1 Hanover rev Gad Hitchcock rev Thomas Smith 1
Pembroke Friends rev Mr Dodge 1 Abington rev Daniel Perkins 5 Bridgwater rev
John Angier rev John Shaw rev John Porter rev Solomon Read rev Jonathan Parker
2 Plymtoo rev John Howland rev Sylvanus Conant 2 Middleboro' -- vacant rev
Ebenezer Hinds B. rev Isaac Backus B. rev Roland Thatcher 1 Wareham rev Timothy
Ruggles 3 Rochester rev Ivory Hovey rev Thomas West rev Mr Patten 1 Halifax
27 COUNTY of BRISTOL.
Rev Josiah Crocker 1 Taunton -- E. Friends * rev Mr White 3 Norton rev Joseph
Palmer rev Mr Carpenter -- vacant 2 Easton -- vacant -- vacant 1 Dartmouth
Friends 4 meetings rev Silas Brett 1 Freetown Friends rev Samuel Toby 1 Berkley
rev Nathan Fisher 1 Dighton rev John Wales 1 Raynham rev Mr Wood B. Swanzy rev
Job Mason B. rev Russel Mason B. Friends rev Abijah Weldr 2 Attleborough Rev
Peter T^cher rev Mr Carnes 3 Rehoboth rev Mr Rogerson rev Mr Peck rev Daniel
Martin B. rev Nathan Pierce B. rev Mr Rounds B.
16 COUNTY of BARNSTABLE.
Rev Caleb Upham 1 Truro -- B. rev Isaiah Lewis 3 Eastham rev Edward Cheever
rev Joseph Crocker rev Stephen Emery 1 Chatham rev Josiah Dennis 2 Yarmouth rev
Grindal Rawson rev Isaiah Dunstar 2 Harwich rev John Dennis -- vacant rev Mr
Chase B. rev Joseph Green 2 Barnstable rev Mr Shaw rev Abraham Williams 1
Sandwich Friends rev Gideon Hawley Mashpec 1 rev Sol. Bryant. Ind. Mashpec 1
rev Samuel Palmer 1 Falmouth Friends --
14 COUNTY of DUKES COUNTY.
Rev Andrew Boardman 1 Chilmark -- vacant Tisbury -- vacant 1 Edgarton Indian
Church 1 Gayhead rev Zech. Mayhew 1 Christiantown Friends -- Nantucket --
vacant 1
5 COUNTY of YORK.
Rev Isaac Lyman 2 York rev Samuel Lanckton rev Benjamin S^vrens 3 Kintery rev
John Rogers rev Josiah Chase rev Jacob Foster 2 Berwick rev John Morss Friends
rev Mr He^ing ^ay 2 Wells rev Mr Little rev John Hovey 1 Arundel rev Moses
Morrel 1 Biddeford
11 COUNTY of CUMBERLAND.
Rev Thomas Smith 3 Falmouth rev John Wiswall rev Ephraim Clark Friends rev
Nicholas Loring 2 Yarmouth rev Elisha Eaton Friends rev Richard Elvin 2
Scarborough -- vacant rev Mr Dunlap 1 Brunswick -- 1 Gorhamtown.
9 COUNTY of LINCOLN.
Rev Mr Bailey E. Pownalborough -- vacant 1 Georgetown -- vacant 1 Woolwic^ --
vacant 1 Newcastle.
3
Total of congregational churches in province of Massachusetts. 306. In year
1749 they were Summary hist. V. 1. P. 542.
250.
COLONY of CONNECTICUT.
COUNTY of NEW HAVEN.
Rev Joseph Noyes 8 New Haven rev Chauncy Whittelsey New Haven * Isaac Styles
-- E. rev Ebenezer Sunderson E. rev Benjamin Woodbridge rev Samuel Bird rev
Naphtali Dagget Nicholas Street rev Noah Williston -- E. vacant rev Samuel
Whittelsey 2 Milford rev Job Prudden P. rev Thomas Ruggles 5 Guilford rev Amos
Fowler 5 Guilford rev Jonathan Todd rev James Sprout rev John Richards rev
Richard Ely -- E. rev Jonathan Merick 3 Branford rev Philemon Robbins rev
Warham Williams rev Samuel Hall 4 Walingford rev Theophilus Hall rev James Dana
-- vacant -- E. -- B. rev Elizur Goodrich 1 Durham rev Daniel Humphry 2 Darby
rev Jonathan Lyman rev Richard Mansfield E. rev Samuel Todd 3 Waterbury -- E.
rev Mark Leavenworth rev James Scovel E. rev John Trumble --
28 COUNTY of HARTFORD.
Rev Elnathan Whitman 4 Hartford rev Edward Dorr rev Eliphalet Williams rev
Nathaniel Hooker rev Daniel Russel 3 Weathersfield rev James Lockwood rev
Joshua Belding rev Hezekiah Bissel 7 Windsor rev William Russel, jun. rev
Thomas Potwine rev Joseph Perry rev Seth Norton -- vacant -- vacant rev William
Russel 6 Middleton rev Moses Bartlin rev Edward Eells rev Benjamin Bowers rev
John Norton rev Ichabod Camp E. -- vacant rev Samuel Newel 7 Farmington -- E.
rev Timothy Pitkin rev Ebenezer Booge rev Samuel Clark rev Benjamin Chapman rev
John Smalley -- vacant rev William Gibbs E. Symsbury rev Joseph Strong 3 rev
Jesse Roots -- vacant rev Eleazar May 1 Haddam rev Grindal Rawson 3 E. Haddam
rev Hobart Eastabrook rev Joseph Fowler rev Ephraim Little 4 Colchester rev
Thomas Skinner Rev Elijah Mason -- vacant rev Benjamin Po^roy 3 Hebron rev
Samuel Lockwood rev Elijah Lothrop rev Samuel Peter's E rev Isaac Chalker 2
Glassenbury rev John Eclla rev Peter Raynolds 1 Enfield rev Ebenezer Gay 2
Suffield rev John Graham jun. rev Freegrace Leavitt 1 Summers rev Thomas White 1
Bolton rev Mr Willard 1 Stafford rev Gideon Noble 1 Willington rev Nathan
Williams 1 Tolland
51 COUNTY of FAIRFIELD.
Rev John Beach E Fairfield rev Noah Hob^rt 5 rev Joseph Lacson E rev Daniel
Buckingham rev Nathaniel B^r^^ rev Samuel Sherwood rev Seth Pomrey rev Jedidiah
Hills 4 Stratford rev Christopher Newman E rev James Beebee rev Izrahiah
Wetmore rev Edward Winslow E rev Robert Ross -- E rev Moses Di^kenson 3 Norwalk
rev Jeremiah Leaming E rev William Gaylord rev Robert Silliman rev Ebenezer
Dibble E Stanford rev Benjamin Strong 3 rev Moses Mather rev Noah Wells rev
Abraham Todd 2 Greenwich -- vacant rev Ebenezer White 1 Danbury rev David
Judson 2 Newtown rev Thomas Brooks rev Jonathan Ingersoll 1 Ridgfield rev
Elisha Kent 3 Newfairfield rev Elijah Sill rev James Tailor
24 COUNTY of NEW LONDON.
Rev Math Greaves E. N London rev David Jewit 2 rev Mather Byles -- E rev
Benjamin Lord 6 Norwick -- E rev Jabez Wight rev Benjamin Thraop rev Peter
Powers rev John Ellis -- vacant rev Jared Eliott 2 Killingworth rev William
Seward rev William Heart 4 Saybrook rev Stephen Holmes rev John Devotion rev
Simeon Stoddard rev George Griswold 3 Ly^e rev George Bec^^ith rev Stephen
Johnson rev Jacob Johnson ^ Gro^^ -- E rev Mr Barber rev Valentine Wightman B
rev Eben Rosseter 3 Stonington rev Nathaniel ^ells rev Joseph Fish rev Hezekiah
Lord 2 Preston rev Asher Rosser
COUNTY of WINDHAM.
Rev Samuel Mosely 3 Windham rev Ebenezer Devotion rev Stephen White rev
Solomon Williams 3 Lebanon rev Jacob Eliot rev Eleazer wheelock rev David
Rowland 1 Plainfield rev James Cogswell 1 Canterbury rev Richard Salter 2
Mansfield rev Daniel Welsh rev Nathan Strong 2 Coventry rev Oliver Noble rev
Abel Styles 3 Woodstock rev Stephen Williams, jun. -- vacant rev David Ripley 2
Pomfret rev Aaron Potnam rev Aaron Brown 3 Killingly rev Noadiah Russel rev
Eden Buroughs rev Timothy Allen 1 Ashford rev Samuel Durance P. 1 Volentown
rev Mr Horton 1 Union rev Josiah Whitney 1 Mortlake.
24 COUNTY OF LITCHFIELD.
Rev Judah Champion 1 Litchfield rev Solomon Palmer E. * rev. Anthony Stoddard
4 Woodbury rev John Graham rev Thomas Canfield rev Daniel Brinsmade rev
Nathaniel Tailor 2 New-Milford -- E. -- vacant Friends rev Andrew Bartholomew 1
Harwinton rev Jonathan Marsh 1 New Hartford rev Jesse Ives 1 Norfolk rev Daniel
Farrand 1 Canaan rev Jonathan Lee 1 Salisbury rev Noah Wadham 4 Kent rev Joel
Bardwell rev Mr Osborn rev Mr Tredwel rev Cotton Mather Smith 1 Sharon rev
Hezekiah Gould a Cornwall rev Abel Newel 1 Goshen rev Natha. Roberts 1
Torrington
20
Total of congregational churches in the colony of Connect. 170 A. D. 1749 said
to be about 120 But more probably 135
In the year 1760 died 10 of the pastors; 18 ordained, including one
instalment; and 6 new churches gathered, whose parishes are included in this
list. At the end of the year, I think there are 15 of these parochial
congregations whose churches are not formed, viz. 10 for Massachusetts, and 5
for Connecticut. So that while the total of parochial congregations is 530, the
total of churches is 515 for the end of the year 1760. If the total of churches
in 1749 was but 407, as Dr. Douglass asserts, we have multiplied 108 churches
in 12 years.

PROVINCE of NEW HAMPSHIRE.
REV. Arthur Brown E. Portsmouth. rev Samuel Langdon 2 rev Samuel Haven rev
Marmeduke Brown E rev Woodbridge Odlin 2 Exeter rev Daniel Rogers rev Ward
Cotton 4 Hampton rev Josiah Baily rev Jeremiah Fog rev Nathaniel Gookin Friends
* rev William Allen 1 Greenland rev Samuel M 'Clintoc 1 Greenland rev Stephen
Chase 1 Newcastle rev Samuel Parson 1 Rye rev Joseph Adams 1 Newington rev
Joseph Adams 1 Stratham * rev Joseph Secomb 2 Kingston rev Peter Coffin rev Wm.
Parsons 1 Southampton rev Josiah Cotton 1 Sandown rev Ebenezer Flagg 2 Chester
rev Mr Wilson P rev David M'Gregore P 2 Londonderry. rev Mr Davison P rev
Timothy Walker 1 Rumford rev Daniel Wilkins P 1 Sonhegan rev Daniel Emerson 1
Hollia. rev Mr. Merril 1 Nottingham rev Mr. Stearns 1 Eppen rev Nathaniel Trask
1 Brentwood rev Jonathan Cushing 1 Dover Friends rev John Tuck 1 Gosport rev Mr
Pike 1 Somersworth Friends rev Ezra Carpenter 1 Ashwelot rev John Moody 1
Newmarket rev John Adams 1 Durham rev Mr Prince 1 Madbury rev Jonathan Eam^^s 2
Newton rev Benjamin Butler rev Mr Hobbe 1 Pelham rev Mr Bailey 1 Salem rev Mr
Hughston P. 1 Merrimack rev Mr M'Dowal 1 Goffs-Town rev Mr Scales 1 Hopkinton
rev Mr Whittemore 1 Suncook rev Mr Kingaid P rev Mr Hill 1 Rochester
43
A. D. 1749 about 30
COLONY of RHODE ISLAND and PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS.
FRiends NEWPORT rev Thomas Pollen E. rev Edward Upham B. rev John Maxson B.
Sabb. rev William Vinel 1 rev Ezra Styles 1 rev Gardner Thurston B. Moravien
Synagogue rev Samuel Windsor B. PROVIDENCE rev Mr Greaves E. rev Joseph Snow 1
-- vacant 1 Friends Friends Portsmouth rev Charles Holden B. Warwick rev
Benjamin Pierce B. Friends -- E. rev Joseph Park 1 Westerly Friends rev Samuel
Aldborough B. North-Kingston Friends South-Kingston rev Joseph Torrey 1 rev
Samuel Fayerweather F. rev James Rogers B. -- vacant B. -- vacant 1
New-Shoreham rev John Gorton B. East-Greenwich Friends Friends Jamestown rev
John Windsor B. Smithfield Friends -- vacant B. Situate rev David Mitchel B.
Gloucester Friends Charlestown rev Benjamin Gardner B. West-Greenwich rev Peter
Worden B. Coventry -- vacant B. Exeter. rev John Usher E. Bristol rev John Burt
1 rev Othniel Campbell 1 Tiverton rev David Rounds B. Friends rev Jona. Ellis 1
little-Compton rev Timothy Brown 1 Friends rev Mr Townsend 1 Warren rev Mr
Maxwell rev Mr Cook B. Cumberland Friends Richmond rev Tho. Burlingham B.
Cranston Friends rev Thomas Hiscox B. Sabb. Hopkinton rev Thomas Clark B. Sabb.
Hopkinton Friends.

