LOTTERY, For EFFECTS to the full VALUE of 10,000 DOLLARS, or L. 3750, WITHOUT
ANY DEDUCTION.
MR. DUNLAP, begs leave to inform the Public, That he has, just arrived in the
last Vessels from LONDON, a large and very valuable Collection of Books, in
Classical Learning, History, Divinity, Physic, Law, Chemistry, natural History,
Voyages, Travels, and Entertainment; with several Sets of the genteelest
Pictures now in Taste in England, which, as they came unexpectedly, and he
still persists in his Intention of going to England, he proposes to dispose of
by Way of LOTTERY: And in Order the better to suit the various Tastes of the
Adventurers in this Undertaking, and render it still more extensively useful
and acceptable, especially to the Ladies, he proposes to intersperse among the
Prizes the undermentioned Articles, most of which are also just arrived from
London, and may be depended on, as being the best and genteelest of their Kind,
viz. several Cases of Silver-handled Knives and Forks, fine Silver-mounted cut
Glass Castors in Frames, several Dozen of Table and Tea-Spoons, Cream-Jugs and
Tea-Tongs, Silver Coffee-Pots and Stands, Punch and Soop-Ladles, several
Pinchbeck and Silver-Watches, Tweezer-Cases, Silver plated and gilt
Snuff-Boxes, Stone Jacket-Buttons set in Silver, Ladies best brillant Earrings
and Neck-laces, Diamond, Emerald, Sapphire, Stone and plain Rings, Gold and
Stone-Buttons, Silver Paste and Stone-Buckles, two Pieces of very rich Brocade,
several Sets of fine China, Cases of Chirurgical, Anatomical and other
Instruments, a curious large ORRERY with its Apparatus, being the most complete
Machine of this kind that has hitherto been seen in America: By it, may be
illustrated and explained, after the most easy and familiar Manner, the Motions
of all the Planets, Primary and Secondary, their Magnitudes and Distances,
Stations, Retrogradations, etc. The Increase and Decrease of Day and Night, the
grateful Variety of the Seasons, with the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, etc.
etc. An Air-Pump and its Apparatus, a large reflecting Telescope, and a Lot of
Ground, lying at Gloucester, called Lilliput, formerly belonging to Mr. D. I.
Dove, which has a most delightful and pleasant Situation, and contains about
two Acres of Garden-Ground, well improved, and fenced in with Boards; One Acre
is planted with fine Apple, Plum, Peach, and Cherry-Trees, which bear a great
Deal of choice Fruit: The other Acre, is almost all planted with the largest
Battersea Asparagus: There are on the Premises, a Dwelling House, and a very
large Barn, fit for storing Merchants Goods, designed either for Importation or
Exportation: Besides which, there is a Cellar already dug and walled up with
good Stone, about twenty Feet Square: Nigh which there is a Well of excellent
Water. There is a small Grove of Pine-Trees before the Garden, from which you
are entertained with a most beautiful Prospect of the City of Philadelphia, and
of the River, for four or five Miles downwards; so that no Ship can pass or
repass, but by hailing her, you may easily know from whence she came, or
whither she is going. N. B. Said Lot lets for Twelve Pounds a Year, and may be
entered on immediately.

The Prizes to be classed in such Order, that the Fortunat(...) may have as
complete a Variety as the Value of the Pri(...) he may draw, will admit of: The
whole Collection to be examined by four disinterested Persons, who are best
acquainted with the Worth of each Article, and their intrinsic Value
ascertained by them, that the Public may be s(...)tisfied there can be no Fraud
in this Undertaking: Aft(...) the Drawing is finished, Care will be taken to
forward the Prizes of the Fortunate, that are moveable, to any Part of the
Continent, in such Manner as they may please to order and it is not doubted but
the Whole will be conducted (...) the entire Satisfaction of the Public: The
Drawing t(...) commence on Tuesday, the Twenty-eighth Day of April next at a
House on Pettey's ISLAND, nearly opposite the City of Philadelphia, when Boats
shall be provided at my own Cost to bring over such as may choose to be present
at the drawing; and the Prizes published in the Pennsylvania GAZETT(...) and
the New York MERCURY: Prizes not demanded within Six Months after Publication
as aforesaid, will be given to the PENNSYLVANIA-HOSPITAL.

THE SCHEME.
Number of Prizes. Pieces of Eight. Total Value. 1 Collection valued at 700 is
700 1 at 400 is 400 1 at 200 is 200 1 at 100 is 100 2 at 51 is 102 10 at 25 is
250 15 at 15 is 225 480 at 6 is 2880 1262 at 4 is 5048 1773 Prizes. First
drawn, 25 3227 Blanks. Last drawn, 25 Ticket drawn before the 700, 15 Ticket
drawn after the 700, 15 Ticket drawn before the 400, 8 Ticket drawn after the
400, 7 5000 Tickets, at Two Dollars each, are 10,000

This Scheme may, without Exception, be said to b(...) the most favorable one
hitherto calculated for the Adventurers, as there are not near two Blanks to a
Prize* And, as I have no other View in making this Lottery, tha(...) purely to
bring my Affairs to a speedy Settlement ere (...) embark for England, there
will be no Deduction, and co(...)sequently the Lottery will be upwards of FIVE
HUNDRE(...) and SIXTY POUNDS richer on that Account.

TICKETS are now selling by Captain Thomas Glentworth Mr. Samuel Soumain, Mr.
Josiah Davenport, Mr. Benja(...) Loxley, and Mr. William Murray, who are
appointed Managers, and have given Bond for the faithful Discharge (...) their
Trust, as also by Joseph Pugh, Esquire in Lancaster Mr. Michael Swoap, in
York-Town, Mr. M'Intire, in Carlis(...) David Henderson, Esquire in Reading, Doctor
Iackson, in Chester and by said Dunlap, at the Post Office, Philadelphia


