RELATION OF A VOYAGE FROM BOSTON TO NEWFOUNDLAND, FOR THE OBSERVATION OF THE
TRANSIT OF VENUS, JUNE 6, 1761.

BY JOHN WINTHROP, ESQUIRE HOLLISIAN PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS AND PHILOSOPHY AT
CAMBRIDGE, N. E.

Omnes arts -- habent quoddam commune vinculum; et quasi cognatione quadam
inter se continentur.

CICERO. BOSTON: N. E. PRINTED AND SOLD BY EDES AND GILL, IN QUEEN STREET,
M,DCC,LXI.

RELATION OF A VOYAGE, etc.
THE TRANSIT of the Planet VENUS over the disc of the SUN, being a most
important as well as curious phenomenon, has for a long time employed the
consideration of Astronomers. The first notice that I find taken of it was by
the sagacious Kepler, who flourished not long after the revival of the true
astronomy by Copernicus: and in a work published in 1604, declared, that no
such thing could happen in that century; nor the next, till the year 1761. In
this, however, that great man was mistaken. For an English Astronomer, Jeremiah
Horrockes, then no more than 20 years of age, but of an admirable genius,
having corrected Kepler's Tables by some of his own observations, predicted and
soon after observed this most rare phenomenon, on the 24th of November O. S.
in the year 1639, at Hoole, a small village about 12 miles N. from Leverpool.
Having waited several hours with great impatience, he had at last the
satisfaction to see the Planet as a black spot, just entering on the Sun, at a
quarter past three in the afternoon. He made three observations of its
positions in half an hour, when he was deprived of a longer sight of it by the
setting of the Sun. He had given notice to an astronomical friend, Mr.
Crabtree, who, at a few miles distance just got a sight of it between the
clouds, before Sunset. These two were the only persons that ever saw Venus in
the Sun, before the present year.

THESE Transits became more generally known by a Series, which the late
Astronomer-Royal Dr. Halley published, of all in a thousand years; from which
it appears that none could happen between the years 1639 and 1761. But what
made this of June 6, 1761, most of all famous, was a paper of the same learned
author in the Philosophical Transactions for the year 1705, wherein he explains
an important use to be made of it. Some uses of the transits of the inferior
planets were obvious. They serve much better than any other phenomenon, to
perfect the theory of these planets, which is more difficult to be settled than
that of the superiors; and did they happen frequently, would be of admirable
use in ascertaining the longitude of places on this globe. They likewise
demonstrate the truth of the Copernican System, so far as it relates to these
Planets, by making it evident that they respect the Sun, and not the Earth, as
the center of their motions. But Dr. Halley pointed out a new and singular use
to be made of the Transit of Venus; and to which no other phenomenon in the
heavens is near so well adapted. This is, in finding the Parallax of the Sun;
which is so small that the Astronomers have never been able to discover it with
exactness in any other method. If this were once known, the distance of the
Sun, and of all the Planets, and of all the Comets, would be known too; and
their magnitudes would also be known, from their apparent diameters. This would
give us a just idea of the vast dimensions of the solar system, and of the
mighty globes which compose it. Nor can we, but by such observations, know
whether the Earth continues to revolve at the same distance from the Sun, or
whether it gradually approaches him, as there is some reason to suspect; nor
whether the Sun remains of the same magnitude, or consumes away and is
diminished by the light which he is incessantly sending forth. The Parallax of
the Sun is also an element that enters into the calculation of eclipses; and of
what use these are in Astronomy, in Geography, in History and Chronology, is
too well known to need being insisted on at this day. It would likewise
determine the quantity of matter in the Earth, or the proportion which this
bears to that in the Sun; and show us precisely the amazing velocity with which
light is darted from the Sun and other luminous Bodies; -- and probably give us
a deeper insight into many of the wonderful works of GOD. For such is the
relation of the several branches of natural Philosophy to each other, and of
all of them to moral Philosophy, that whatever tends to the perfection of one
tends to perfect the other, in proportion to the connection there is between
them. And a capital point once adjusted, may serve for the determination of
others, which were not at first thought of. Thus, the exact measure of a degree
on the meridian enabled Sir Isaac Newton to demonstrate his Theory of universal
Gravity, a scheme which had never entered into the minds of any, when the
degree was proposed to be measured; by which means that great man laid open the
constitution of the astronomical world, and pointed out the fundamental Law
which the alwise CREATOR has established for regulating the several movements
in this grand machine.

FROM a sense of the advantages to be derived from this Observation, Dr. Halley
recommended it in the most emphatical terms, and enforced it with all the
energy of language, on the Astronomers and others of the present day, that they
would by no means let slip an opportunity, which he then doubted whether it
would offer it self again to the people of this or the following age; and on
which depended the adequate solution of a Problem, in itself most noble, and
inaccessible any other way. And to put the matter beyond all hazard, he advised
to have a number of Observators station'd in different parts of the Earth, that
some of them might be sure to succeed; as a single person might be frustrated
by the intervention of clouds.

THESE pressing recommendations of the learned Doctor did not lose their
effect. The approach of this phenomenon was attended with a general curiosity:
It became a topic of conversation among Persons of every rank, of every
profession, of every taste. It could not escape the notice of some of the
greatest Monarchs of Europe, surrounded, as they were, with the tumults of war.
His late MAJESTY, of happy memory, attentive to the cultivation of the Arts and
Sciences, those great ornaments of civil Society; -- particularly of Astronomy,
on which he well knew Navigation, and of consequence the commerce and wealth of
his Kingdoms had a necessary dependence; was graciously pleased to provide for
having this observation made in the most distant parts of Africa and Asia, as
well as in his own Royal Observatory at home.

NOR was America inactive on this singular occasion. His Excellency FRANCIS
BERNARD, Esquire Governor of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, inspired with a
just zeal for the advancement of Literature, which he demonstrates on every
opportunity, exerted himself to procure an observation in this quarter of the
world. And as Newfoundland was the only British Plantation in which one could
be made, and indeed the most western part of the Earth where the end of the
Transit could be observed, for this was to happen before the Sun would be risen
to any other part of America, except the Savage coast of Labrador, he proposed
by a Message See the Appendix.
to the General Assembly of the Province then sitting at Boston, to make
provision for this purpose. The Assembly, animated with the same public Spirit,
and treading in the steps of their worthy Predecessors, who from the settlement
of the Country have eminently distinguished themselves among the other
Governments as the PATRONS OF LEARNING, readily entered into his Excellency's
views, and past a Vote See the Appendix.
requesting Him to order the Province-Sloop to convey me to Newfoundland on
this design. The orders were issued, agreeably; and his Excellency was pleased
to give me such Letters, directed to his Majesty's Officers, Commanders, and
other his Subjects, and likewise to those of the French King, as were proper to
facilitate the execution of the enterprise, and to secure it from
disappointment by the enemy. The Reverend the President and Fellows of Harvard
College, in order to promote so laudable an undertaking, granted their
Apparatus of astronomical instruments, to be employed in this affair.
Accordingly, I carried an excellent Pendulum clock; one of Hadley's Octants
with Nonius divisions, and sitted in a new manner to observe on shore as well
at sea Presented to the Apparatus last year by Ezekiel. Goldthwait, Esquire
; a refracting telescope with cross wires at half right angles, for taking
differences of Right Ascension and Declination; and a curious reflecting
telescope, adjusted with spirit-levels at right angles to each other, and
having horizontal and vertical wires for taking correspondent altitudes; or
differences of altitudes and azimuths Presented this year by the Hon. Thomas
Hancock, Esquire
. And taking with me for assistants two young Gentlemen my Pupils, Messr's
Williams and Rand.
who had made good proficiency in mathematical studies, I embarked at Boston,
on board the beforementioned vessel, commissioned by the Governor, May the
9th, and in 13 days arrived at St. John's, Newfoundland.

THE reception I met with there was suitable to the consequence of my
Commission, and the dignity of my Employers. Whatever was wanted, was supplied
in the most obliging manner by the Gentlemen of that place; amon whom, I am
under particular obligations to mention Capt. Ross, Commander of his Majesty's
Garrison, and Michael Gill, Esquire Chief Judge in the Courts. With their
assistance we were enabled to surmount the difficulties which must be expected
to attend an undertaking like ours, in a country unprovided with conveniences
for such operations. The town of St. John's being bounded with high mountains
toward the Sunrising, so that no house in it would answer our end, we were
obliged to seek farther; and, after a fatiguing and fruitless attempt or two,
fixed on an eminence at some distance, from whence we could have a view of the
Sun presently after his rising. As this place was open, and had no building
near it, we pitched some tents upon it for a shelter; which, together with our
Apparatus, and such materials as we had occasion to make use of, we conveyed up
thither, with the labor of several days. We secured the Clock to a pillar set
in the ground under a large tent. Near this tent, and within call of the Clock,
we fixed two others firmly in the ground; one, to mount the refracting
telescope upon; the other, which was above 8 feet high, for a Style, having at
top a plate of lead with a little hole for transmitting the Sun's rays; and we
laid a large horizontal Platform on the ground, to receive these rays. This
Platform we kept covered, to defend it from the Sun and the weather; and
examined its position every time we made use of it, by a very long level. On
this we carefully traced a meridian line, by correspondent altitudes of the
Sun, taken both with the Reflector, and by the Sun's image on the Platform.
And, in order fully to examine and verify the meridian and adjust our clock, we
repeated these operations every fair day, and many times in a day; and
continued them with an assiduity which the infinite swarms of insects, that
were in possession of the hill, were not able to abate, though they persecuted us
severely and without intermission, both by day and by night, with their
venomous stings. It would be tedious, as well as needless, to give a detail of
the observations we made with this intent: It Is sufficient, that we regulated
the clock with as much exactness as we could have done at home.

THUS prepared, we waited for the critical hour, which proved favorable to our
wishes. The morning of the 6th of June was serene and calm, We have since
learned, that all along shore, from Cape-Race to Halifax, there was a heavy
storm of rain that morning.
The Sun rose behind a cloud that lay along the horizon, but soon got above it;
and at 4h 18m we had the high satisfaction of seeing that most agreeable Sight,
VENUS ON THE SUN, and of showing it in our telescopes to the Gentlemen of the
place, who had assembled very early on the hill to behold so curious a
spectacle. The Planet at first appeared dim through the cloud, but in a short
time became more distinct and better defined. Upon this, I applied my self to
take the passage of the Sun's and Venus's preceding limbs by the vertical, and
of their lower limbs by the horizontal wires in the Reflector; and made the
following observations; one of my assistants counting the Clock, and the other
writing down the observations, as I made them.

Apparent Time.

At 4h 21m 16s The Sun at the vertical. 27 Venus at the same. 23 2 Venus at the
horizontal. 24 19 The Sun at the same. 27 25 Venus at the horizontal. 28 43 The
Sun at the same. 35 11 The Sun at the vertical. 17 Venus at the same. 37 45
Venus at the horizontal. 39 5 The Sun at the same.

AS Venus began now to draw near, the Sun's limb, I prepared to observe her
egress. The interior contact appeared at 4h 47m 17s, and the exterior at 5h 5m
46s. IN memory of so rare an observation, the Gentlemen present agreed to give
the hill, where our observatory was situated, the name of Venus's Hill,


THE above observations gave me so many differences between the Sun's and
Venus's altitudes and azimuths; from whence, by spherical trigonometry, I
deducd the Planet's right Ascensions and Declinations; and from them, in the
last place, her Longitudes and Latitudes. It would be neither of entertainment
nor use to the Reader, to insert the particulars of such tedious calculations:
It will be enough to give the result of the whole, or the Planet's difference
in Longitude from the Sun's center, and her Latitude, at the time of each
observation; which came out as follow.

Apparent Time. Diff. Long. Sun and Venus. Venus Lat. South. 4h 21m 27s 9m 2s
10m 47s 23 2 9 4 10 50 27 25 9 25 10 52 35 17 9 56 10 55 37 45 10 8 11 00

THUS in the short interval of Time that was permitted, I determined five
positions of the Planet on the Sun; and by laying off the differences of
Longitude and the Latitudes, the Planet's path over the Sun may be drawn, and
its situation determined in respect of the ecliptic, or any other circle of the
sphere; as is here done for the vertical through the rising Sun at St. John's. In
the Figure, the circle CZLN represents the Sun; the diameter ZN, the vertical
through his center S; CL, the ecliptic, in its due position with respect to this
vertical at the time of sunrising at St. John's. Then, laying off the first
observed difference of Longitude on the ecliptic from S to D, and the
corresponding Latitude in a perpendicular to the ecliptic from D to A, we have
the place of the Planet on the Sun at the time of the first observation;
represented here by the black spot at A; which also exhibits the apparent
bigness of Venus in proportion to the Sun's; their diameters being nearly as 1
to 33. In the same manner may the other observations be projected; and the
right line BE, drawn through the several points thus found, which there was not
room to set down in this Figure, will be the Planet's path on the Sun; in
which, B is its place at the beginning, M at the middle, and E at the end; the
numbers over the path showing Venus's place at the several hours of the night
between the 5th and 6th of June.

FROM hence we state the times of the Transit as it would have been seen at St.
John's, had the Sun been above the horizon during the whole continuance of it.
They are as follows, on supposition that the angle of Venus's visible way with
the ecliptic is 8o 28m, and her horary motion in that way, 4m; though indeed a
very small alteration in any of the elements will make a sensible one in the
time of the beginning.

Venus first touched the Sun's limb, June D. H. m. s. 5 10 24 14 her center
entered, 33 30 She was wholly within, 42 43 The middle, or Venus nearest the
Sun's center, 13 45 00 SINCE these papers were at the Press. I have learned,
that Venus's nearest distance from the center of the Sun, was found at Paris,
9m 33s; and at Middleburg in Zealand, 9m 5s.
the distance between them being then 9m 22s. Venus began to pass off the Sun
16 47 17 Her Center passed off 56 30 She wholly left the Sun, 17 5 46

IT may be further collected, that the conjunction in Longitude happened at 14h
4m 32s in 15d 35m 22s of Gemini; the Planet's Latitude being then 9m 28s. The
Longitude at this conjunction differs but 27s from the calcule I made by Dr.
Halley's Tables; and the Latitude but 23s. Which shows to what a degree of
perfection those tables are already carried.

BY several observations we found the Latitude of the place 47d 32m N; which
falls between the Latitudes set down in different books and maps. No eclipse of
the sun or moon happened while we were on the Island, by which we might have
determined the Longitude; and Jupiter's Satellites proved of no service in that
affair; as they were not risen high enough to be observed above an hour before
daylight came on. There were but two eclipses of them that could have been
visible during our stay there; and though I watched for both these, I was
disappointed of both by unfavourable weather. Neither was I fortunate enough to
get so much as one occultation of a fixed star by the moon, though I spared no
pains for it. On the 11th of June we made an observation for this purpose, by
taking the difference of right ascension of the moon's preceding limb, and the
middle star in the border of the garment of Virgo, the 82d of that
constellation in the Britannic Catalogue; which at 9h 29m 51s, we found to be
12d 7m 29s. Calculating from hence, the Longitude came out 50d 14m W. from
Greenwich; which is a little less than I had supposed it in my calculations.

THE variation of the needle we found to be 19d W. which is less than it is
marked on the charts.

IN the above calculations I took the semidiameter of the Sun to be 15m 50s;
and of Venus 29s. This last is less than Dr. Halley, after Mr. Horrockes,
supposed it; but it cannot be bigger, consistent with the foregoing
observation, which has convinced me, that Venus, instead of being equal in
diameter to the Earth, according to the common opinion, is less, in the
proportion of 5 to 4.

BY the foregoing observations we are now enabled to predict with certainty,
what Dr. Halley, in his paper beforementioned, only suspected, that Venus will
again pass over the Sun on the 3d of June in the year 1769; the former part of
which Transit will be visible in our horizon for about 5h in the afternoon, but
the Sun will set before it is ended. That Transit will be more convenient for
finding the Parallax than the present has been; but not because Venus will then
describe a line nearer the diameter of the Sun; which is the reason assigned in
the London Magazine for June 1761. The Planet will hardly come so near. The
true reason is, because Venus will then describe a more northerly path on the
Sun. After that, there will not be another Transit for above 100 years; viz.
not 'till the 8th of December in the year 1874. But the whole of that will be
invisible here; the middle happening about midnight. The next after that, will
not be in the year 1996, as it is in Dr. HALLEY's Series. This Series was
founded on the old hypothesis of the immobility of Venus's Nodes, which appears
to be erroneus. The observation of the late Transit has made it certain, that
these Nodes have a retrograde motion, though a very slow one; which is agreeable
also to the Theory of Gravity. And from hence it follows, that the next Transit
after that of 1874 will not be till the year 2004, on the 8th of June; the
latter part of which will be visible here after sunrise. How Astronomy
transports us into distant Futurity!

FROM these numbers a question naturally arises, How it comes to pass, that
there will be another Transit after so short a term as 8 years, when there has
not been one for above 120 years past, nor will there be another for above 100
years after the next? This question deserves an answer. I shall give it one,
deduced from the first principles, in as clear and succinct a manner as I am
able. It is to be observed then, that the Earth revolves round the Sun in 365
days; and Venus in 224; and moving in a smaller orbit included within the
Earth's, she may pass between the Sun and the Earth; which aspect is called an
inferior Conjunction. By reason of this quicker revolution, Venus must overtake
the Earth in certain intervals of time, which I find to contain 584 days; so
that Venus, having once passed between the Sun and the Earth, will return to
pass between them in 584 days. Now if her orbit lay in the same plane with the
Earth's, at every one of these inferior conjunctions Venus would pass between
the Sun and the Earth, in the strictest sense of the word; and, her
unilluminated side being then turned to the Earth, would appear to us like a
black spot passing over the dise of the Sun. Had this been the position of her
orbit, at the end of every period of 584 days there would have been a Transit
of Venus; and the Transits would all have been central, the Planet every time
describing a diameter of the Sun. But the plane of Venus's orbit is inclined to
the Earth's in an angle of (...) and so far might Venus be seen to the N. or S.
of the ecliptic, if viewed from the Sun; but viewed from the Earth, to which
she is much nearer in the inferior conjunctions, she may be seen above 9 d from
the ecliptic; and therefore, as the Sun's semidiameter is but of a degree,
Venus in her inferior conjunctions may pass 9d to the N. or S. of the Sun's
limbs. This Planet can appear on the face of the Sun, only in those inferior
conjunctions, when her distance from the ecliptic, as seen from the Earth, is
less than the semidiameter of the Sun. For this effect, she must be within 5d
of her Nodes, which are the two opposite points in which her orbit crosses the
ecliptic; and this are she describes in 3 days. About the present age, the Sun
is in one of these Nodes on the 5th of June, and in the other on the 6th of
December. So that the Transits must happen between the 2d and 8th of June; or
the 3d and 9th of December. To find at what intervals they may follow one
another, we must find when the aforesaid period of conjunctions, viz. 584 days,
taken some number of times will amount to some number or years, within 3 days
more or less: for that will bring the conjunctions to happen at the same time
of the year. Now five of these periods amount to eight years, wanting two days;
and this is shortest interval in which the Transits can follow one another. No
other number of these periods less than 147 will answer this condition; and
this number amounts to 235 years. -- At the end of the period of 8 years in
June, Venus passes almost 20m more northerly than before; and as the
semidiameter of the Sun is near 16m, if in a Transit in June Venus passes above
4m to the S. of the Sun's center, there will be another Transit in 8 years;
otherwise, not till 235 years. And from hence it appears, that these Transits
cannot succeed one another in two consecutive periods of 8 years; for in the
last of them, Venus will pass near 40m more northerly than in the first; which
is more than the whole diameter of the Sun. The like may be said of the
Transits at the other Node in December. -- The last time this period of 8 years
took place, was in 1631 and 1639; and the next time, after the present, will be
in 2004 and 2012.

AS there was some reason to suspect that Venus had a Satellite, partly from
two observations of M. Cassini at Paris in the years 1672 and 1686, but
principally from one that was made by Mr. Short at London on the 23d of October
1740, I entertained hopes of seeing it pass over the Sun; and with this
thought, viewed the Sun with great attention in the Reflector, both on the 5th
and 6th of June; but in vain. There were several spots then on the Sun, but
none that I saw could be a Satellite.

TO conclude. The path of Venus, above determined, is her visible path, as
affected by parallax at St. John's; which will be different from her visible
path in distant parts of the Earth, where parallax has a different effect. This
visible path, and the apparent motion of Venus in respect of the Sun, are here
rightly determined, even if the elements employed in the calculation, such as
the latitude and longitude of the place, and those supplied by the astronomical
tables, should not be exactly such as we supposed them. Any small difference in
these particulars must equally affect the motion both of the Sun and Venus; and
therefore, though it would alter their places in respect of the equinoctial
points, it would produce no sensible difference in the relative motion of one
to the other; nor any error in the situation of Venus in respect of the Sun.
The comparison of the observations made in the N. W. parts of the world with
those in the S. E. when all of them come to be laid together, will give the
true path of Venus, abstracted from parallax; by which means, the quantity of
the parallax will at length be discovered. The right determination of which
point will render this year 1761 an ever-memorable era in the annals of
astronomy.

END.
APPENDIX.
Extract from the Votes of the Hon. House of REPRESENTATIVES. Sabbati 18 Die
Aprilis, A. D. 1761. Message from the GOVERNOR.
MR. Secretary OLIVER, came down with a Message from His Excellency the
Governor; which he read and laid on the Table; His Excellency's Message is as
follows, viz. GENTLEMEN of the House of Representatives,
I Have received a Letter from Professor WINTHROP, wherein he offers his
Service to go to Newfoundland to observe the Transit of VENUS over the Sun on
the Sixth Day of June next. You must know that this Phenomenon, (which has been
observed but once before since the Creation of the World) will, in all
Probability, settle some Questions in Astronomy which may ultimately be very
serviceable to Navigation: For which Purpose, those Powers that are interested
in Navigation, have thought it their Business to send Mathematicians to
different Parts of the World to make Observations. And as the Comparisons of
the Observations in different Parts of the Earth will be the principal Means of
making the Discoveries useful, His Majesty has sent a Man of War with
Mathematicians, to be stationed in different Parts of the East Indies, etc. and
the French King and some other Powers, have done the same. It happens that this
Phenomenon is not to be seen in North America, except the most Northern Parts,
of which Newfoundland exhibits the best View; I cannot therefore excuse my self
recommending to you to enable Mr. WINTHROP to take a View from thence. The best
and least expensive Method I can think of, is this; That the Province Sloop,
which a little before that Time will be obliged to be sent to Penobscot, may
proceed from thence with the Professor to Newfoundland.

IF you will signify your Approbation of this, I will order it; and I can
assure you, that we shall hereby serve the Cause of Science, and do Credit to
the Province.

FRA. BERNARD.
Council Chamger, April 17, 1761.



HIS Excellency's foregoing Message was read again, and Ordered, That Mr.
Wells, Col. Clap, Col. Worthington, Mr. Foster, and Mr. Flucker, Consider and
report thereon.

Lunae 20 Die Aprilis A. D. 1761.
IN Answer to His Excellency the Governor's Message of the 18th Current,
proposing to the House to provide for Mr. WINTHROP'S going to observe the
Transit of the Planet VENUS over the Sun's Disk, on the 6th of June next:

VOTED, That His Excellency the Governor be humbly requested to direct Captain
Saunders, Master of the Sloop in the Province Service, to wait on JOHN
WINTHROP, Esquire Hollisian Professor of Mathematics and Philosophy at the College
in Cambridge, and him in said Sloop to attend and convey, with the Apparatus
and other Necessaries, to the Northeast Part of Newfoundland, or to such Places
as said Professor shall judge proper; and when his Observations are completed,
and Mr. Winthrop shall direct it, that Captain Saunders attend on and convey
Mr. Winthrop back to Boston.

Sent up for Concurrence.


