THE MECHANICK'S ADDRESS TO THE FARMER: Being a short REPLY to some of the
LAYMAN'S Remarks on the Eighteen Presbyterian Ministers Letter to the
Archbishop.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ANDREW STEUART, at the Bible-in-Heart, in
Second-street. 1761.

THE Mechanick's ADDRESS, etc.
SIR,
HAVING perused your wonderful Remarks on the Eighteen Presbyterian Ministers
Letter (...) the Archbishop, and therewith your Declaration of your Zeal for
the Cause of the LORD, and your Desire to open the Eyes of your
Fellow Christians; it kindled in me a Desire of Access to you, in Order to my
clearer Instruction: As I may venture to say, I have nothing more at Heart,
than to be truly enlightened in the Path of Duty. But as you are pleased to
conceal yourself under the general Characters of Layman and Farmer, of which
we have vast Numbers; I could devise no other Method to obtain my Desire, than
by sending out this Address among the Farmers, hoping thereby, to find out the
famous Farmer: For it is a Pity that so famous a Talent as his, should be hid;
or that such a Candle should be put under a Bushel.

As several strange Things are presented to me, dispersed here and there,
through your nonesuch Performance, and I intend to be very brief; I shall set
a few of those Mysteries in one View.

To begin then with your wonderful Arguments gathered from the aforesaid
Letter, you observe;

First, That the A -- hb -- p is a Prelate of the Church of England; therefore
he cannot be supposed to have any Grace.

Second, The Eighteen Presbyterian Ministers allow the A -- hb -- p to have
Grace, and the Church of England to be Christian; therefore they are secret
Enemies to Presbyterians.

Third, The A -- hb -- p denies a Parity of Gospel Ministers, and holds
Episcopal Ordination to be Apostolical, etc. therefore he can be no Friend at
all to Truth.

Fourth, These Eighteen Ministers say, they were providencially convened at
Philadelphia; therefore they insinuate to the A -- hb -- p, that the
Subscribing said Letter, was a Synodical Act.

Fifth, These Men signed that Letter; therefore they presumed to sap the very
^oundation of Presbyterian Discipline.

Sixth, They say, a very remarkable Blessing attended Mr. MecClanachan's
Ministry; therefore they bring a hard Charge against Presbyterianism in general.

Seventh, They assure the A -- hb -- p, that they will not be accountable for
any Man's Prudentials in every Part of his Conduct; therefore they insinuate,
that they think themselves qualified to be Bondsmen for other Peoples Goodness.

Eighth, They tell the A -- hb -- p, there are Fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Religion and Protestant Reformation professed by the Church of
England, in which they can agree with that Church; therefore they are
Church-Betrayers.

Ninth, They say, the A -- hb -- p presides over the English Church; therefore
they are hypocritical double-dealing Men, and allow him Precedence; whereas,
had they been Christians, they would have dealt plainly with him, -- and told
him, that he was in a damnable State, till he condescended to the Level of his
Brethren.

Tenth, These Men say, that a disinterested Regard to the Fundamentals of
Religion, and the Cause of Virtue and practical Piety, constrained them to
engage in this Affair; therefore they have given up with every Objection, that
has been advanced against the English Church; for which the Meeting House Doors
should be shut against them.

THESE, Sir, are some of your very rare Arguments, which, I confess, I should
never have thought of, being as little acquainted with the Subtilities of
School-learning as yourself, if not less.

I fear, all the Schools will deny, that such Logic is taught in them; so that
you are like to have the Honor of that noble Invention to your self. Besides,
I fear it will not find Credit among the greatest Part of those, you call dear
Fellow Christians, till you have afforded clearer Light to open their Eyes,
than you have yet done.

THE next Point I want Clearness in, is about those new Opinions you hold, of
the English Church; namely, that she is not Christian: That if she be possessed
of Truth, the Presbyterians must be possessed of Error: And finally, that the
Dragon and his Angels, spoken of in Revelation, are her Prelates and their
cursed Curates. These Things, Dear Sir, I am afraid will ruffle the Temper of
some of the angry Fellows of the English Church, and will not go well down with
the Bulk of Presbyterians, unless they are better proven; for we have been used
to think otherwise. You tell us, they are not new, but were held by Calvin and
Knox, and our Godly Reformers; but as we have nothing to support these
Assertions but your bare Word, they will hardly believe for us. They allow,
that some Ministers of that Church have been eminent and pious, and preached
and wrote soundly: such as Bishop Usher, Mr. Harvey, and others, that I might
mention; but I think, they have just Reason indeed to lament, that it is too
evident to be denied, that a great Number of them, especially in this Country,
are vain and vicious in their Lives, as well as insipid and unsound in their
Doctrine; by which Means many poor Souls have neither proper Example nor
Instruction to lead them in the Paths of Piety. The Presbyterians would be
glad, and I am well persuaded, the Eighteen Ministers are not of those among
them, who would be least glad, if all, or any of that Church, would truly
preach, and warmly inculcate those Articles of the Church of England, in which
they have the Happiness to agree with that Church; for they desire the Welfare
of others, as well as of themselves. And sundry of my Neighbors are of
Opinion, that [:let Mr. MecClanachan be what he will otherwise:] yet if he had
not preached and vindicated those Gospel-Doctrines so clearly, and inculcated
them so warmly as he did, there would not have been such an Uproar made about
him; nor would the Remarks on the Ministers Letter have had so many Abettors,
who secretly rejoice, that they have them to make a Handle of, to promote their
own low, and some perhaps, their malicious Designs, to blacken those Ministers
Characters, and destroy their Influence, if possible.

BUT I must proceed a little farther, and enquire with Respect to those
Eighteen Ministers Character, who, you say, are Hypocrites, false-hearted
Presbyterians, Churchmen in Heart, illeterate Mechanics, vainly expecting to
be noticed by Men of high Degree either in Church or State, and have been
boxing the Compass for a Living, etc. Will they not be apt to charge you with
Lying and Slander? And the Truth is, I know not how you will be able to free
yourself from the Charge, unless you can support your Allegations by some
better Proof than your bare SAYSO. Will they not be apt to tell you, that you
have not only belied them in saying, they denied, that their Brethren had
Grace, and that they had a Method of judging a Man's State by his Face? with
many other Things of like kind; but that you likewise belied Calvin and Knox,
and the whole Body of Presbyterians, in telling the World, that these never
believed, that the Church of England was Christian, etc. And yet you have not
produced one Proof for your Assertion, notwithstanding you said, you would give
an Hundred. But no Doubt you think your Word is sufficient Proof, being a Man
of such superior Abilities, as not only to judge a Man's State by his Face, but
to judge the A -- b -- ps State at some thousand Miles Distance. Will they not
be apt to enquire, who told you their Conduct in Synod last Year? and to charge
you with Slander in asserting, that they endeavored to introduce Innovations
into Synod? For I am well informed, they only attempted to have good
Regulations formed, in Order the better to preserve the Decorum of the Body, in
their judicial Transactions, which Regulations were at length agreed upon
without a Dissenting Vote. Will they not think that insatiable Malice, of some
ill Design or other, moves you and your Abettors, to stir up an ancient Spirit
of Partyism and Slander? Do not a Number of your Expressions too evidently lean
that Way? Will not they and the World judge, that they are as fit to send a
Letter to a Person in higher Sphere of Life, as a Number of weak and scandalous
Creatures have been to appear before such in Person, to receive Orders for the
holy Ministry? If these Men are so much inclined to the Church, as you would
represent them, why have not any of them, or of that Side they were formerly
united to, whom you seem to strike at through them, why, I say, have not one of
these gone to, and been received by the Church as well as other Presbyterians?
Is not a Gown as ready for them, as it was for Hindman, Bell, Lion, Evans and
Carlisle, Men of infamous Character, with sundry others that I might mention?
Except the Bishop would chose to reject Men of good Character, while he
received the weak and the wicked, which I believe you will not venture to
assert. You say they have been boxing the Compass for a Living. I believe you
did not consider, when you wrote these Expressions, nor do others, that are
fond to use them. What if these Gentlemen should enquire, who boxed the
Compass, when a Number of them left their native Land, not for their best
Deeds, and some not for their great Abilities, and boxed the Compass here to
screen themselves, and fish for a Living among Presbyterians? What would you
think, if they should ask, who boxed the Compass, when a certain Gentleman
wrote to England respecting his Exploits in defending our Frontiers? Exploits
done by others, which he called his own, [:as he did the Sermon he printed,
which was done by another Gentleman:] for which Lie he got Twenty Pounds
annexed to his Salary. What if they should farther enquire, who boxed the
Compass, when one of this Gentleman's Fraternity, being too vain and dull to be
acceptable to Presbyterians, applied to the Study and Practice of the Law; but
finding himself too great a Dunce for that Profession, he forged Credentials,
went and preached to an ignorant People, till he got some Money, after which he
marched to the Bishop for Orders. What if they should put these and many other
Questions, which I believe they might with Justice do, till I were weary
writing and you with reading them? You represent them as-illiterate Mechanics;
but the World is too well acquainted with their Abilities, to conclude them
such clownish scurrilous Flings, that they either want Sense or Learning. Were
an Acquaintance with Mechanism a Crime, by far the greatest Part of them are
innocent of it. If two or three did understand something of it, will this
prove, they had not a regular Education? Your clumsy Calumny equally strikes at
the great Apostle PAUL himself, as an illiterate Dunce; for he was a
Tent-maker. But perhaps if the Eighteen Ministers had been Dupes and Dunces, or
even Debauchees, they might have escaped all these Charges.

I would now conclude this Address, only I can not help taking Notice of the
prodigious Agitation you seemed to be put in by these Men praying the A -- hb
-- p. And I do not wonder at it, when you found out such horrible Idolatry in
it, as I know not, if ever any of the Children of Men made such a rare
Discovery of before your own penetrating self. The most of us used to think,
that they might pray a Man to grant a Favor, without so much as supposing,
they were chargeable with Idolatry. But then you have not only found these Men,
together with the greatest Part of the present Generation, guilty of this
horrible Crime, but your Assertion would involve the Patriarch ABRAHAM in the
same Guilt; for he not only prayed, but bowed down to the Children of HETH. But
may not some of them enquire, how much better is your Conduct, if it is not
much worse, in praying [:perhaps some may call it swearing:] in the Name of
Calvin and Knox, who are at best but departed Saints?

These are a few of the Things, that are so difficult to me, and to many
others, and if you do not come from your Concealment and explain them to us a
little better, I believe there will not be one real Presbyterian on your Side;
consequently you will lose your Labor in attempting to open Eyes. But that is
not all; for I fear, great Numbers will be tempted to think, that you are so
far from being a Friend to Presbyterians, that you are one of their most
inveterate Enemies, endeavoring to represent them as a very odious and
uncharitable Sort of People, scarcely fit to live in a civilized Nation. Or if
you are a Presbyterian by Profession, they will conclude, that you are an Enemy
to them in Practice, and that Malice has prompted you to write your Remarks;
and perhaps some Episcopal is joined with you in the Affair. I believe, many
will conclude, not only from these Gentlemen's apparent Disinterestedness in the
Affair, but from their thorough Acquaintance with them, that they had a single
View to promote Religion, however they may not have so duly considered all the
Circumstances of the Case, and particularly the ill Use that spightful Persons
would make of their Letter. But they will be obliged to conclude, that
pre-conceived Malice against these Men, because perhaps you did not find, that
they were Dunces, or willing to be Dupes to you, moved you to remark. Or
perhaps that you gladly and greedily snatched at this Opportunity; to prepare
the Way for carrying on some malicious Plot, by attempting to destroy, if
possible, these Men's Influence by Sophistry, Calumny and Lies. And if this be
the Case, have you not Reason to fear, that the Blast of Divine Providence will
consume your Designs, as Snow melts off the Fields by warm Sunbeams. But
whatever your Profession is, if this poor Attempt of mine, or any other
Invitation of like kind that may be given, may be a Means of bringing you forth
to Light, and you can confirm and establish these Remarks of yours, then I
doubt not, but you will meet with sufficient Encouragement to sweep you from
the Plough-Tail, seeing that is such a despicable Business, and without boxing
the Compass, set you in a Sphere large enough to employ your Talent of opening
Eyes.

IF you enquire after me, Sir, I can assure you, you will neither find me in
the Pulpits, nor in the Schools of Learning, nor have any of those employed in
such Places, moved me to this Attempt, or dictated to me while I wrote. The
Truth of what I now assert, the unpolished Plainness of my Address will
confirm. But you may find me among the Black-Smiths Shops, belonging to the
Presbyterians in Chester-County.

Sir, Your very humble Servant, MECHANIC.


