Mr. Stone's Two DISCOURSES,

I. A Thanksgiving Sermon.

II. A plain Discourse to little Children.

TWO DISCOURSES Delivered at Southborough: The First, On a Day of public
Thanksgiving, October 9th 1760. Occasioned by the entire Reduction of CANADA.
The Second, A plain and brief Discourse To little CHILDREN; with the Reasons of
it; On Lord's Day, October 26th 1760. By NATHAN STONE, A. M. Pastor of the
Church there. Published at the general Request of the Hearers.

Psalm lxix. 30. I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify
him, with thanksgiving. Ver. 31. This also shall please the Lord better than an
ox or bullock that has horns and hoofs. Psalm xc. 16. Let thy work appear unto
thy servants, and thy glory unto their children. Gal. iv. 19. My little
children of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ is formed in you.
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Q. Street, 1761.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
IF the publication of the following sermons is thought to need any apology,
the desire of the bearers, whom the author is under obligations to gratify and
please, if it may be to their edification, and the usefulness and
seasonableness of the subjects, must make it.

As to the first, it was preached upon a glorious and ever to be remembered
occasion; but indeed is not worthy to bring up the rere of so many better
discourses published before it, that were delivered the same day. The subject
must be acknowledged to be important; and though not well managed, yet this mite
cast into the treasury for a thank-offering to the Lord, for this wonderful
work of his, will add something thereto; especially if any are hereby prevailed
on to obey as well as sacrifice.

As to the last, it cannot be thought impertinent to address little children, if
we consider, that much of a pastor's business is with the lambs of the flock.
To lead and guide them a-right, requires tenderness and skill. Great concern is
to be had for childrens good, and much pains taken that they may be sober,
serious and religious. The corruption of their nature, and the times, require
it. The mavelous works of the Lord, both of Mercy, in the great things he
has done for us, whereof we are glad; and of Judgment, in that so many of our
chosen young men have been brought down to the sides of the pit, by the sword
of men, and the destroying angel, call aloud for it; and his word speaks the
same thing. They are the hopes of the flock. If religion does not revive with
the present rising generation, what will the next be?

This familiar composition was made, and delivered to stir up in young and
tender minds, consideration about the things of God, and an eternal world, in
such a way and manner as might be both profitable and pleasing. For to please,
is desirable; to profit is more so; but to be faithful, is most of all.

Finally, This little book cannot expect to gain applause, -- do good it may,
by the blessing of God; with this view it ventures abroad into the world, with
some little alterations and additions. If those that heard, or read the words
of it, are any thing bettered by it, and will pray for the author, that he may
obtain mercy from the Lord to be faithful, and have the pleasure of being
successful, he shall be satisfied.

Southborough, Dec. 18. 1760. Nathan Stone.

A Thanksgiving SERMON.
1 SAMUEL xv. 22. And Samuel said, Has the Lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey
is better than sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of rams.
THIS chapter gives the history of an important expedition undertaken by King
Saul, with a great army of Israel, and of the men of Judah, at the command of
God, by the mouth of Samuel his Prophet, against the Amalakites; their success,
-- their disobedience to the express command of God, -- his resentment, and the
sad effects thereof, to Saul, even his rejection from being King.

Amalek was Esau's grandson; from him descended the Amalakites. They had no
doubt heard how Jacob supplanted Esau his brother, and got the birthright;
blessing, and consequently the land of Canaan. For this they owed the
Israelites a grudge from generation to generation. Accordingly, when Israel was
in the wilderness, weak, unarmed, dispirited with long servitude, and marching
toward the land of Canaan, "They met them by the way, smote the hindmost of
them, even all the feeble behind them, when they were faint and weary, and they
feared not God." Deuteronomy. 25. 18. Joshua is directed to choose out men and go, and
fight with Amalek, and by means of Moses's faith and prayer, and Joshua's
sword, Amalek and his people are discomfited, and Israel delivered. Whereupon
God commands Moses to write this in a book, for a memorial, and rehearse it in
the ears of Joshua, for (says God) "I will utterly put out the remembrance of
Amalek from under heaven," Exodus 17, 14. -- not speedily and absolutely, but
comparatively. "For the Lord would have war with Amalek from generation to
generation," v. 16. Yea, he charges the Israelites when they should be in quiet
possession of the land, which he would give them, then "Thou shall blot out the
remembrance of Amalek from under heaven, thou shall not forget it". Deuteronomy. 25.
19. The special reason of this severity seems to be given in forementioned
Exodus 17. 16. which some translate thus, as being more agreeable to the Hebrew
words, because the hand (i. e. hand of Amalek) is upon, or against the Lord,
therefore the Lord will have war with Amalek etc. i. e. his hand was stretched
out against God himself, for so God esteems it, because it was done against
that people among whom he had placed his throne, his tabernacle and dwelling;
according to his covenant which he had made with them and their fathers, and
was now conducting to the land which he had promised, them; all which the
Amalekites were probably acquainted with, and was a great aggravation of their
sin.

Now, how great a resemblance is there between the case of Gods people Israel
of old and their Amalekitish enemies, and the case of his New-English Israel,
and their Indian and French adversaries?

Though God gave not this land to our forefathers by promise, yet it was upon
mature consideration, humble prayers to God, and for several weighty reasons,
that the first planters of New England at Plymouth came over; one of which, as
they express it, was -- From an inward zeal and great hope of laying some
foundation, or making way for propagating the kingdom of Christ to the remote
ends of the earth; though they should be but steping stones to others etc. Mr.
PRINCE'S New England Chronol. p. 49.
And it is observable, their design was for some unknown Country further
southward, about Hudson'sRiver; but God in his providence guided them to
Plymouth, where (as the same writer observes) they then unknowingly, escaped
the much greater danger of falling among the multitudes of savages, at that
time filling the countries about Hudson's-River, and are landed in a place of
greater safety; where a general pestilence had two or three years before,
exceedingly thinn'd the natives, and prepared the way for this feeble company.
Chronol. p. 84.
But although their savage enemies were comparatively few, yet there were more
than enough to distress them, and their posterity ever since. That we may well
say, as in Psalm. 44. 1, 2, 3. "We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers
have told us, what work thou did in their days, in the times of old. How thou
did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them: how thou did
afflict the people, and cast them out. For they got not the land in possession
by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: But thy right hand,
and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor to
them." We may also adopt that language, Psalm. 129. 1. 2. "Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say -- yet they have not prevailed
against me. If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel
say, -- when men rose up against us: then they had swallowed us up quick, when
their wrath was kindled against us".

Now, from the wonderful interpositions of God in his providence from time to
time, in favor of our forefathers, their enemies might plainly see, that the
Lord was on their side, fought for them, and intended this land for their
possession; which notwithstanding, as I suppose, was possessed with the
consent, or by purchase, from the Indian nations, as they increased and needed
it; and yet it is likely, if not certain, there has been injustice done them in
this matter; which may be one cause of their having been made such pricks in
our eyes, and such thorns in our sides. And there was no need of these our
enemies being rooted out, and destroyed, if they would but have been true and
faithful, and had not proved treacherous and persidious, fighting against God,
as well as men, as the Amalekites did.

And as to our French neighbors, they envied us this good land, which we were
in the rightful possession of. They have taken crafty counsel against this
people of God, (to allude to that in Psalm. 83.) "they consulted against his
hidden ones, they have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation,
that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have consulted
together with one consent, they are confederate against thee." The tabernacles
of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens. Gebal and Ammon, and
Amalek, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire. Assure also is joined
with them, they have helped the children of Lot." Those of every tribe and
nation, people and language, from east to west, from north to south have been
instigated, stired up, and called forth to help, to lie in wait by the way
side, as an adder in the path that biteth the horses heels, so that his rider
may fall backward, to smite the hindmost, to cut off the feeble and
defenseless, to carry into a doleful captivity the weak and helpless: Yea, the
young man, that glories in his strength, and the mighty man, and the man of
war, that is prepared to the battle, to butcher the innocent, and torture,
without distinction of sex or age, and even those whose lives have been given
them for a prey, in the sacred and most solemn treaties and capitulations. Such
are the cruelties of the subjects and allies of the Most Christian King.

Our Joshua's therefore, have often been called upon, to choose out men, to go
and fight with them; our Moses's, Aaron's and Hur's, to ascend the mount, and
lift their hearts with their hands, to God in the heavens, that they might
prevail against them. And although we have had no command from God to blot out
the remembrance of them from under heaven, yet we have had occasion to pray,
that He would bring them to reason, or to ruin; who have roared in the midst
of the congregations, cast fire into his sanctuary, have defiled by casting
down the dwelling place of his name to the ground; have said in their hearts,
let us destroy them together, and have burnt up the synagogues of God in the
land. -- But to return to the story of the ancient Amalekites.

In fulfillment of his threatening, God sends Saul, with a great host, saying,
"Go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them
not, but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and
ass." Context, v. 3. But Saul, from a foolish pity, or for fear of the people,
or from coveteousness, spares Agag, the King; and the best of the sheep and
oxen, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: v. 9. And yet
repeatedly insists upon it, that he had obeyed the voice of the Lord. v. 13 and
20. which, though he knew was not true, endeavors to justify himself.

First, By laying the blame on the people. " They have brought them from the
Amalekites;" -- " The people spared the best of the sheep etc. v. 15. -- A
common fault among men, ever since Adam's time to shift off blame from
themselves, to others; as if that would excuse them, for not doing what they
might and ought to have done.

Secondly, By hypocritically pretending a regard to the honor and service of
God. But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen; the chief of the things
which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in
Gilgal, v. 21. He acknowledges, they were devoted to destruction by God, but
takes upon him to say, when, and in what way, even by sacrificing them, when he
should come to Gilgal; which pretense of piety toward God, was only to cover
his impiety and avarice.

Now the words of the Text, are Samuel's answer to his fallacious reason, for
disobeying the command of God. "Has the Lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey,
is better than sacrifice, and to hearken, than the fat of rams."

For Readiness conviction, Samuel propounds a question, which admits of an easy
answer, that Saul could not fail to give at the first proposal; yet, that his
conviction might be more full and strong, he answers it himself, with a
"Behold" -- intimating that it was worthy of his particular notice and
observation.

From the words we may observe, First, That God has comparatively little
regard to the external and ceremonial part of the services performed in his
worship.

Secondly, It is obedience to the commands of God from the heart, yielded in
the life, that is pleasing to him.

Thirdly, This he would have well taken notice of, and practiced upon.

First, That God has comparatively little regard to the external and
ceremonial part of the services performed in his worship.

The worship and service of God may be distinguished into natural and
instituted, moral and ceremonial. That which the light of nature teaches, is
binding upon all; but that which is ceremonial and instituted, may be
obligatory only on some persons, places and ages. Much of the worship and
service of God under the Law was ceremonial; which stood only, in meats, and
drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them, until the
time of reformation." Great part of it, consisted in the offerings and
sacrifices that were brought to God's altar, -- in the birds and beasts that
were slain and offered unto God, particularly the burnt offerings. There were
wholly burnt upon the altar, -- were an acknowledgment that the offerers
deserved death -- to make atonement for their sins, -- to be offered with a
free heart, and to obtain the favor of God. So there were sacrifices of the
same kind of creatures, some of which were propitiatory, to procure pardon, and
were typical of Christ, and his sacrifice of himself; others, were gratulatory,
to give thanks and praise to God, for mercies received. Of this kind were those
spoken of in the text.

Now, these were of little account with God, though he had commanded them, and
the Jews were often condemned for them. Sometimes, because they brought only
their outward oblation, beasts; without the inward, their hearts; which were
not engaged therein, though this was their most reasonable service; and sometimes
because they used them to hide their hypocrisy and wickedness. Hence God says,
Psalm. 50. 8. "I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt
offerings; they have been continually before me." So Isai. 1. 13. "Bring no
more vain oblations, incense is an abomination to me," etc. So far was it from
being a sweet smelling savor to him, as they imagined, considering with what
an evil heart, and in what an unsanctified manner, they brought it. God's heart
was so little upon these things, that we find him saying, in Jer. 7. 22. "I
spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them, in the day that I brought them
out of the land of Egypt, conc^^^ing burnt offerings or sacrifices." God did
command them, and he does not deny it, but comparatively speaking. He did not
command them at all, in comparison with other things, which were of so much
more weight and worth with him. Agreeable to this, is that, Hos. 6. 6. "For I
desired mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God, more than burnt
offerings;" which shows, what is intended by God's desiring mercy, and not
sacrifice, i. e. rather than sacrifice; for men in misery, need mercy from
their fellowmen, but God does not need sacrifice. So that God had little
respect either to the offerings and sacrifices under the Law, or to the
offerers, merely on their own account; for, "They could not make him that did
the service, nor the comers thereunto perfect." Heb. 10. 1. And as little
delight has he in the external parts of worship, and attendance on ordinances
under the Gospel. For "bodily exercise profits little," 1. Tim. 4. 8. i. e.
fasting, praying, reading, etc. wherein the body is exercised, though it may be
of some use, it is little in compare with godliness, or the practice of true
piety.

How vain then is it, to make much account, of what God makes so little. It Is
what God esteems, and is delighted in, that will avail us any thing; and not
what we set an high value upon. Sometimes, "that which is highly esteemed
amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God." Luke 16. 15. Hence he said to
his people of old, Isai. 1. 10, 14. "To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices to me? I delight not in the blood of bullocks -- Incence is an
abomination to me, -- the new moons, and sabbaths, I cannot away with, -- your
appointed feasts, my soul hates etc. The sacrifice [or prayer] of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord," Prove. 15. 8. It cannot then be wise or safe for
persons to have any dependence upon the ceremonial, external parts of religion,
to bring them into favor with God. Which leads us to the next observation,
namely,

Secondly. That it is obedience to the commands of God from the heart, yielded
in the life, that is pleasing to him.

This is implied in Samuel's question, and expressed in his answer. He has not
so great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of
the Lord. This, is better than sacrifice. That, is good, so far as it goes, but
this is better: "And to hearken, than the fat of rams." The fat was the best
part of the sacrifice, and appropriated to God, to be burnt upon the altar.
"All the fat is the Lord's, Lev. 3. 16. That is "all the fat that is upon, and
covers the inwards, the fat that is upon the two kidneys, and the caul above
the liver," v. 14, 15. It is this kind of fat that was thus devoted. Neither he
that brought the offering, nor he that offered it, was to have any part of it.
This signified, that we ought to give the choicest and most excellent of our
services to God; and that our inward parts, our souls and spirits, are our
best. These are the fat of gospel sacrifices.

Now, "to hearken is better than the fat of rams." To hearken, supposes
attention of mind, and engagedness of heart; and if thereupon, obedience to the
voice of God in his commands is yielded, this is pleasing to him; this is his
delight, and better than the fat of fed beasts.

It Is the heart God requires in all religious services, -- is what he looks at,
and is well pleased with, in duties. His demand, is that, "My son, give me
thine heart." And when this is engaged in the performance of moral and
evangelical duties, he is more delighted, than with all the Levitical
ceremonies and services. Hence that direction, Eccl. 5. 1. "Keep thy foot," (i.
e. thy thoughts and affections) "when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools, for, they consider not
that they do evil." It Is not enough to hear, but it must be in order to
practice. "Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it," When God
testified against his people for trusting in their offerings and sacrifices, in
Psalm. 50. He lets them know what would answer their end, v. 14, 15. "Offer unto
God thanksgiving and pay thy vows unto the most High: And call upon me in the
day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me." So when he had
complained of their vain oblations, which were of no service to them, he puts
them in a way to please and pacify him, Isai. 1. 16. "Wash ye, make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well,' etc. Christ also says to the Pharisees, Mat. 9. 13. "Go ye and
learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice.' But he sets this
matter in a clear and strong light, Mat. 23. 23. "Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay tithe of mint, and annise, and cummin, and
have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith: these
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." God has some delight
in ceremonial observances, as they are of his instituting, but he has greater
in obedience to moral duties and gospel precepts. And Readiness disobedience to
the command of God, could not be compensated with burnt-offerings and
sacrifices; so neither can the want of acts of piety toward God, and justice
and charity toward men, be atoned for by a profession of religion, and
attending his worship and ordinances, though in a conscientious manner. The
penitent Psalmist says, Psalm. 51. 16, 17. "Thou delightest not in sacrifice,
else would I give it: Thou delightest not in burnt-offerings. The sacrifices of
God, are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise." And when an obedient, holy life is consequent thereupon, this is
eminently pleasing to God.

Thirdly, This he would have well taken notice of and practiced upon. Behold!
to obey is better than sacrifice etc.

Some times, this word is used as a note of admiration, when any thing strange
and surprising is spoken of; as in Isai. 7. 14. "Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son." Some times, as a note of attention, to quicken to
consideration, and to think upon a thing with due regard; as in Romans 11. 22.
"Behold therefore, the goodness and severity of God." And in this sense, Samuel
uses it here. "Behold, to obey," etc. q. d. take notice of it, consider it
well, impress it upon thy heart and mind, know thou it for thy good, Saul, that
the way to please God, is to obey his commands, and not disregard them under a
pretense of providing more plentifully for sacrificing on his altar. To obey
his voice, is better than to offer thousands of bullocks, and rams, and lambs
out of the fold and stall.

Now, this is a truth God would have us observe, and practice accordingly; even
this, that we regard not our own imaginations, inventions, nor indeed his
institutions, when we are about to attend on them out of season, or when he
calls us to other duties, that are more important and necessary; or when we lay
more weight upon them, than he allows us; or would show our regard to him in a
way which he does not so much require, and is not so much for his honor and
glory, as another; which he at this Time particularly, and on this great
Occasion calls us unto; Namely, to hearken to his voice, obey his commands, and
not formally, and hypocritically offer praise to him, with our mouths showing
much love, when our hearts are far from him, and our lives and conversation
contrary to his plainly revealed mind and will.

Thus much briefly for the doctrinal part of the words.

I come now to make some Improvement of them suitable to the present day.

The Great God, who rules in the world, and governs among the nations, in his
Providence; and our Gracious Sovereign, by his Commands, has called forth his
armies, to go and smite our worse than Amalekitish enemies, for what they have
done, and contrived against us; not indeed utterly to destroy all that they
have, and not spare them, slaying man and woman, infant and suckling, as they
too much endeavored to do by us: but to bring them to reasonable and righteous
terms of peace, that we might live quietly and safely in the land that God has
given us for a possession. We sought the Lord in the day of our distress, by
prayer, fasting and humbling our souls before him; and we trust he has regarded
us in our low estate: For through the good hand of our God upon our forces, and a
wonderful series of favorable providence, they have smitten and reduced them
from Cape-Breton to Quebec, and from Mont-Real, until thou come to Ohio, over
against Louisiana, and the great river Mississippi, even their whole country of
Canada, from one end thereof unto the other; and brought it under the dominion
of the King of Great Britain; but on the spoil laid they not their hand; nor
said, as did Edoms sons, "raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof;"
neither have they "rewarded them as they served us, taking and dashing their
little ones against the stones." But they have taken Vandreuil, their Governor;
who by all account, deserves to be "hewed in pieces before the Lord; and his
mother to be made childless among women; as his sword has made many women
childless."

Our armies having been thus successful, through the mercy of the Lord, we are
this day called upon to take the high praises of God into our mouths; while a
two-edged sword is in our hands.

I suppose, neither we, nor our Fathers, ever had such reason to keep a day of
thanksgiving, and which is so like the Jews days of Purim, wherein they rested
from their enemies; which were turned unto them, from sorrow to joy, and from
mourning into a good day, which they made days of feasting and joy, and of
sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor." Esth. 9. 22. Who among
the most sanguine, in their hopes, could a few years ago, have expected to see
such a day as this? Who is not surprised at it, when he considers our deserts?
-- How unfit and unprepared we are to receive, and how unworthy of such a
mercy! and who should not tremble for fear of the consequences. Indeed, "we are
like unto them that dream."

Now, what shall we render unto the Lord for these benefits? Will it suffice,
that we testify our joy and thankfulness by outward expressions of it (though
these in a manner and measure are proper) by ringing bells, making bon-fires,
illuminations, firing small arms and cannon, eating the fat, and drinking the
sweet, not to say, to excess? Will the Lord be pleased with this? Or shall it
be thought enough, that we offer a few burnt-offerings and sacrifices, and the
fat of rams? -- that we set apart a day for thanksgiving, -- come up to God's
house, -- are at the expense of a little lip-labor, or bodily exercise; in
singing his praises, speaking to the honor of his name etc.? Shall this be
thought a suitable return for his mavelous loving kindness, in thus
preserving and securing to us our habitations, possessions, properties, lives
and liberties, civil and religious? No, verily. To hearken to the voice of the
Lord, and to obey his commandments, which is better than all these
performances, is the least we can render to him; and if we don't, we shall be
guilty of rebellion, which is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness,
which is as iniquity and idolatry."

Well then, let us see that we do something that is in some degree answerable
to the expectations of God from us, under the great things he has done for us.

And here,

1. Let us see to get some sense of our utter unworthiness of such wonderful
deliverances from our enemies, and such victories obtained over them.

O what a sinful backsliding people are we? As we have increased, so we have
sinned. All the methods of God's providence and grace, have had an hardening,
instead of softning effect upon us. He has been proving and trying us with
judgments and mercies; but how little of our dross is purged away, and what
base metal do we come forth? Reprobate silver, which the Lord might have
justly rejected, instead of blessing and prospering us, as at this day.

2. We should repent of our past ingratitude and wickedness.

Is not that our character, Romans 1. 21.? -- "Neither were thankful.' Are we not
an unbelieving, disobedient people, that have grieved the Holy Spirit, despised
Christ, and his glorious gospel, and abused the goodness of God? What need then
of repentance! We might well repent of what we have done all our lives long,
against so compassionate a Savior, and so good and gracious a God, who has
not remembered our sins against us, nor dealt with us according to the deserving
of our hands. His goodness should lead every one of us, to unfeigned sorrow and
repentance. If we had any ingenuity, any sense of shame, any spark of
gratitude, our repentings would be kindled together, our hearts would be turned
in us unto the Lord, from whom we have departed, with whom we have dealt
treacherously, and in whose covenant we have been unfaithful.

3. Let us look to our hearts, that they now be right with God.

O what need is there to begin with them, and see that they are changed and
sanctified! Until that is done, how can the holy God accept an offering at our
hands? The sacrifice (whether of prayer or praise) of the wicked, is
abomination; how much more, when he brings it with a wicked mind? Prove. 21.
27. Let us see to get our hearts circumcised to love God; and keep them engaged
in his service; not suffering them to go after vanities and lies; things that
will not profit in the day of trouble and death.

4. Let us take heed to our ways and doings, that they may be good.

That they have not been good, is too evident. These works of the Lord, and
operations of his hands, call for a reformation; and woe will be unto us, if it
is not effected. Let us then break off from our sins, by repentance, and from
our iniquities, by turning to the Lord. And O that the time past of our lives
might suffice, wherein we have served diverse lusts and corruptions; and let us
now resolve, that as for us and our houses, we will serve the Lord. If not,
"and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and our great
trespasses, seeing that our God has punished us less than our iniquities
deserve, and has given us such deliverance as this; should we again break his
commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations, would
he not be angry with us, till he has consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping."

In a word and to conclude,

What obligations are we under, to be an holy, thankful and obedient people our
selves, and to desire that the conquests that have been made, may advance the
Kingdom of the Great Redeemer in this part of the world; and be a means to make
ready a people prepared for the Lord; that his name may be one throughout all
the earth!

THE END.
A Plain and brief Discourse TO Little CHILDREN.
1 JOHN ii. 1. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not.
THIS epistle was wrote by the same John, who is sometimes called the beloved
disciple, -- that wrote the gospel that bears his name, -- the book of
Revelations, and two other epistles that follow this. He lived the longest of
all the apostles, and was probably an old man now. Those to whom he wrote this
epistle, are thought to be Jews, scattered in a country distant from where he
was; so that he could not come to speak to them, and therefore from love to his
own people and kindred, he writes this letter to them: For he was the apostle
and minister of Jesus Christ, and had a concern for their good. And no doubt,
they were glad to receive and hear it, and attended carefully to what was in it.

In this chapter, we find, he writes to several sorts and ages of persons; as
to fathers, to young men, and in the text to little children.

"My little children, these things write I unto you." One upon the place
observes, He bespeaks them with a compellation, importing both authority and
love; well becoming him, as then an aged person, and apostle, their teacher,
and who was their most affectionate spiritual father.

What he writes to them about, is, not their temporal, but spiritual affairs;
not concerning the welfare of their bodies, but the safety of their souls. --
"That ye sin not." For sin is to the hurt and destruction of soul and body
both; in time, and to eternity. So that the apostle might well write to them,
not to sin. But he writes to them also about other things, as of Jesus Christ's
being their advocate with the Father; -- their knowing him; -- keeping his
commandments; -- walking as he walked; -- loving their brother, etc.

Now, as the apostle wrote unto his little children, so my little children of
this Congregation, I would speak unto you. -- To you that are fifteen years old
and under, who are capable of hearing, receiving, understanding and practicing,
what may be said to you from the word of the Lord; even, all of you, both male
and female, in what place, or part soever of the meeting house, you sit. I say,
to you particularly, I shall direct my speech at this time; but not exclusive
of others. To you, O children, I call; and my voice is to every one of you; as
if I called you by name.

Through the patience of a sovereign God, I have opportunity and ability to
speak to you, and you are alive, and have liberty to hear me. O that you might
so incline your ears and hear, what may be spoken, agreeable to the word and
will of God, as that your souls may live!

I have with much weakness and fear, been preaching to your grand-parents, and
parents, above thirty years. Some number of the latter, I baptized, catechized
and instructed, when they were young, as you are; and it would be a great
comfort to me now, and a great advantage to them, if I had done it more
faithfully, and they had lived more fruitfully.

But as I said, I am now speaking to you, my little Children.

If you ask me, why I speak to you about your souls, and serious things, now
you are so young, and well, like to live so many years, and have so little
inclination, thought and time, to spare for such things?

I answer; I will give you diverse reasons; and if you will but attend to them,
the youngest of you may see, that they are good and weighty.

And here,

1. The first reason is, You have immortal souls to be saved or damned, as well
as older persons.

Children do not die as the beasts do, whose spirits go downward to the earth;
and for ought that I know, die with their bodies; but Children have immortal
spirits that go upward, to God that gave them; to be sent to heaven or hell,
according as they have been good or wicked. Abijah, the good son of Jeroboam,
went to heaven when he died, because in him, there was found some good thing
toward the Lord God of Israel. But those forty-two Children that the She-bears
tare in pieces, most likely, went to hell; for they mocked an old man, and a
prophet of the Lord, out of contempt of God, and religion, and he cursed them
in the name of the Lord; not from sinful passion, but by the direction of the
Spirit of God; -- which is a warning to all Children, against any such conduct.
Now, to one of those two places, your souls will be carried when you die. Is it
not then needful you should be spoke to about soul concernments; one of which
Christ has taught us to think, is of more worth than the world?

2. Now, while you are living, you have time and opportunity to seek their
salvation.

It is in vain to speak to the dead. They are past heating, and receiving
instruction. They are gone into eternity, where no offers of salvation are made
to sinners; for it is in time, while they are in this world, that they are to
mind the things of their everlasting peace. But you are alive, in the world,
and may be spoke to, with hope that it may be for your soul's good. And it is a
great mercy to have time, to prepare for eternity in, though you spend so much
of it in sin and vanity; -- and opportunity, to pray, read, hear the word, and
to be instructed in your duty, and the way to escape the wrath and curse of
God. And don't you never think of it, that as young as you are, you must be
called to an account by God, how you have profited by these opportunities? If
you don't, it will be so. For do you not remember, that this same John, in a
vision in the Revelations, saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and
were judged according to their works? O, it is then fit, now to speak to you,
and for you to hear, that so you may give up your account with joy, and not
with grief.

3. Now you are not hardened in a way and course of sin, as you may be some
years hence, when there will be less encouragement to speak to you.

You are not got into the way of lying, or profane speaking, of going to
taverns, or into evil company, which dreadfully harden the heart, stupify the
conscience, and make it difficult to reform such persons. You know it is harder
to bend a tree, than a young plant. We read of young Josiah, that his heart was
tender; that he humbled himself before the Lord; wept before him, and rent his
clothes. But old hardened Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice? And ten dreadful plagues, made but little impression on him. And when
you grow up, and grow old, if God should leave you to yourselves, you would be
as bad as Pharaoh. But now, you are more afraid of sin, and may be more easily
brought to be sorry for it: And by being spoken to seasonably, it is hopeful,
you may be kept from evil ways, that lead to death and destruction.

4. Now God is calling upon you by his providence, and therefore I would speak
unto you at this time.

There is a voice in the providence of God. Therefore we read, "The Lord's
voice cries unto the city, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it." And
sometimes the Lord's voice is loud and terrible in this way; and they are
stupid, senseless creatures, that don't hear and regard it. Now God is calling
to you, Children, in the late deaths of a number of such as were about your
age. Six weeks ago, a little girl, Huldah Witherbe, who died Sept. 13.
about ten years old, was taken away from among you, by death. Last week,
another of about fifteen, Rebek^^ Newton, who died Oct. 20.
was laid in the grave close by one of the other sex, Thomas Wit, who was
drown^d in a pond, June. 12.
of the same age, who had not been there five months before her. Diverse others,
in their early youth, the summer past, have found their graves, at home, or
abroad in his Majesty's service; and possibly more than we at present know of.
By all which instances, God is calling upon you, Children, to get ready for
death and the grave.

And though ordinarily, it is not good manners to speak, when another,
especially a superior, is speaking; yet, it is decent and duty, for God's
ministers to second his call in his providence, with that of his word, that if
you will not hear the one, you may hear the other. For a word at one time, will
do a Child more good, than a blow at another. And some Children have so much
ingenuity, that they will regard a word of instruction, more than others will
the rod of correction. I hope, there are some of you, my little Children, that
are of this ingenuous temper. Is there never a little boy, or little girl here,
that will mind, and remember what I am saying? If I was telling a good, merry
story, you would hearken to it, with both ears; and why should you not, now I
am putting you in mind, how many of your age have lately been nailed up in a
dark coffin, and are gone into an amazing eternity, where you will soon follow
them?

5. Now, you have the greatest encouragement you ever will have, to hear for
your lives; and therefore I speak to you.

Christ, gives particular direction to his ministers, to feed his lambs. He
took little Children into his arms, when here on earth, and blessed them;
saying, "Suffer little Children, and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of
such is the kingdom of Heaven." And, "Except ye be converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven."

So, there are great Promises made to such as you are, to encourage you, to be
religious betimes, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things, shall be added unto you." "I love them, (says Wisdom)
that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me." And are not these
encouragements enough to you? They encourage me to speak, and why should they
not you to hear.

6. You have many examples to induce you.

When Josiah king of Judah, was but sixteen years old, he began to seek after
the God of David his father. And Edward the VI. king of England, died when he
was sixteen years of age, and yet, was an eminently pious prince. So there was
young Obadiah, and Timothy, and others on scripture record. There have been
many also in these days, that have been serious and religious in their
childhood and youth.

I remember, a few years ago, in the time of the great mortality, in this, and
some of the neighboring towns, In the beginning of the year 1754; when sixteen
persons, old and young, died in this town in less than seven weeks.
a Lad came to me, with that important enquiry, What he should do to be saved?
But it may be, he has too much forgot it now. And I heard a young man say,
the other day, that when he was twelve years old, he joined to the Church. But,
my little, Children, I am afraid there are few of you that have any thoughts
about that. And yet, is it not your duty as well as his? And are not you
obliged to walk in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless?
Who gave you, or indeed your fathers and mothers, liberty to disobey that
command of Christ, "Do this in remembrance of me?" If you say, you are not
serious and sober enough; Whose fault is that? Or, if you say, it is not the
custom, as it is to own the Covenant; and you shall have no company. You are
right in that; and the way you are in, you have company enough: But will that
be any comfort to you, when you, with the fearful, and unbelieving, and
disobedient, and abominable, shall have your part in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death? Surely, No! Will you follow a
multitude to do evil? Will you go to hell for company's sake? Would you creep
into a flaming oven? Or dance upon the mouth of a burning pit, because your
companions would do so? No, their shrieks would keep you back. But to follow
them, impenitently, in their evil courses, is ten thousand times more dreadful,
though you don't see it or believe it. What a pity is it, so many pretty
Children, as are now in this Assembly, should follow evil examples, to their
eternal ruin, when there are examples for them to follow, which would lead
them to everlasting blessedness!

7. The most that are converted, and shall be saved, began to be serious when
young.

Ask them, and they will tell you so. Few grow good, when they are grown old.
Many, many can tell you, they know from their own sad and sorrowful experience,
that it is so; and that they wish now they had begun to seek God in earnest,
when they were of your age. For as elderly men and women, never enter into
their mothers wombs, and are naturally born again, so they seldom are
spiritually born, or experience the new birth, by the special operations of the
Spirit of God. Such instances are very rare. Many are converted, when under
twenty, but few when they are above forty years of age,

Once more,

8. You don't know that you shall live to be men and women, and what will
become of you, if you should die while you are little Children?

There is not one of you, that know you shall live to grow old, or have longer
opportunity to prepare for death, than those Children, that have lately been
laid in their graves; and if you did, do you know that the Spirit of God will
strive with you then, convince, convert and save you, when as you will not cry
to him daily, now, and live soberly and religiously? No, you would have no
reason to expect it.

Well, for these, among other reasons, I thought to speak to you, my little
Children. And don't you think they are good reasons, and sufficient; and that
you need to be spoken to, though you are young and thoughtless, and set away
yonder, behind others, that are older, that know more than you do, that might
do better, and ought to live otherwise than they do.

Now then, you are to be spoken unto; a Sermon is made on purpose for you; and
should you not attend to it with diligence? Therefore, as Wisdom says "Hearken
unto me, now therefore, O ye Children, and attend to the words of my mouth."
And as David speaks, "Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the
fear of the Lord."

Now, what I shall speak to you about, is Sin, and then something of the
Savior therefrom.

First, About Sin. The Assembly's Chatechisin, agreably to the scriptures,
tells you, That "Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the
law of God." It came into the world of men, at Alam's fall. You have original
sin in you; -- are under guilt, because of it; -- are defiled with it, as you
descend from him, and are naturally inclined to sin. A clean thing, cannot come
out of an unclean. A corrupt fountain will send forth impure streams. The
holiest and best men find it in themselves, and therefore it must be in you;
for they and you descended from the same first parents. Because some don't see
it in themselves, or believe it is in all, it does not follow that it is not.
Negative evidence will not do, in this case. If you feel it, and know it to be
in yourselves, you will believe it, if twenty men tell you it is not. Hence it
is, that you are so inclined to evil, going astray as soon as you are born,
speaking lies, serving diverse Justs and corruptions. Now you must see this, and
lament it, if you would ever come to any saving good; so far as I can
understand the scripture.

So you are actual sinners; have sinned in thoughts, words and actions. O how
many vain thoughts lodge within you. How many idle, sinful words have you
spoken! And how many wicked things have you done against God, your parents,
your neighbors and your selves? Indeed the young man in the gospel thought he
had kept all the commands Christ mentioned to him, from his youth up, because
he did not know himself, and the breadth and spirituality of the law of God;
when as he had broken them all, and kept none of them right, because he had not
done it out of love to God, and Christ. And you must know it is so with you, if
you don't love the Lord with all your heart, soul and strength. And we read,
that "Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all."

You must also see what an evil and bitter thing it is, that you have sinned,
-- what wrath and curse from God you deserve, -- what misery and anguish you
are exposed to here, and for ever. This, is what you must be deeply sensible
of, and distressingly concerned about.

Further, you must be convinced, that you cannot make amends for your sins, or
pacify the anger of God, but must be everlastingly miserable, for all you can
do; and must expect no other, unless God has mercy on you, and freely pardons
you. But how little have you known, and how little concern have you had about
these things? Does not your thoughtlesness and inconsiderateness, convince you,
that so it is with you? And can it be safe, or how can you be easy, to live so,
in your sins, and in danger every moment of dropping into hell? But then,

Secondly, You must know, that there is, and be spoken to about, a Savior,
even Jesus Christ the Son of God, who saves his people from their sins.

He can help you, deliver you from sin, and the wrath to come; and make you
holy and happy. He was born of a woman, yielded perfect obedience to the whole
law, fulfilled all righteousness, suffered and died, that you might be saved.
But then, you must be interested in his justifying righteousness; be qualified
for his presence, and the enjoyment of him. And this must be by experiencing a
special work of the Holy Ghost, in your souls. You must be regenerated,
converted, and sanctified, -- be made to believe on him, to repent of all your
sins; abhor your selves, love God and Christ, his commands, his people, his
day, and all that whereby he makes himself and his will known unto you. Then
you will be new creatures, quite other Children than now you are; the Children
of God; and not of the devil; will be fit to live, and answer the end of
living; living in obedience to his will, and to his glory; then also, you will
be fit to die, let death come when it will.

Thus, my little Children; I have spoken a few things unto you, very briefly.
Now, will you, "Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you
this day?" Will you try to remember them, and live according to them? There is
that little Boy, and this little Girl; will not you mind them for your good, if
no body else will? If you will not mind them now, they will come into your mind
often enough in the other world. Now, you complain of your memories, that you
cannot remember what is said to you; but then, your memories will be strong and
tenacious. Probably, you will then be able to recollect and call to mind, all
the counsels, cautions and warnings that were ever given you, and your foolish
and obstinate refusal thereof; -- all the sermons you have heard; -- all your
neglected opportunities, and abused mercies, which you have now forgotten; Yea,
every sinful action you have done, and idle word you have spoken, and evil
thought that has past through your mind; these you will think of in that long
Eternity, over and over, a thousand, thousand times, to your unutterable shame,
confusion and anguish of spirit. O then, don't make light of them now!

My little Children, I speak to you, that ye sin not. I would persuade and
charge you, not to neglect any duty, or live in any known sin. Don't forget to
pray to God in secret, every day; if you would not go to hell. For God will
pour out his fury upon persons, as well as "families, that call not on his
name." Neglect not to read his holy word; and to hear it as often as you can,
with seriousness and reverence. Spend not your time idly, and sinfully, in vain
company, and carnal mirth; you will repent it, when it is too late. Don't
profane God's holy day. If you allow yourselves in playing on the Sabbath, and
at Meeting, you cannot be godly, and go to heaven. Sabbath Breakers, are wicked
people, though there are so many of them. Get out of the way and company of such,
and go not with them. Let them go to hell without you, if they will go in this
high-road thereunto; and shame older persons out of this evil, by your sober,
decent behavior.

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, nor any way of
wickedness be practiced in your life. Walk not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful. "My son,
if sinners entice thee, consent thou not." Flee youthful lusts. Shun the
appearance of evil. Quench not the Spirit. Rest not, till you come to see the
hatefulness of sin, and the excellency of Christ; to love God above all things,
and to have the fear of God, even always before your eyes.

But to draw to a close. -- I have done speaking to you for this time.

Now tell me, will any of you resolve, by the grace of God; to live soberly,
righteously and godly? -- to put away childish, sinful things, and choose the
ways of religion, and true holiness? If so, you will be a comfort and honor to
your father that begat you, and to your mother that bear, nourished and brought
you up; If not, you will be a grief of heart to all that love you, and have a
serious concern for you; and it will be good for you, if you had never been
born.

What remains, is to beg the blessing of God on you, and on what has been said;
and that the Spirit of God would accompany it with his effectual Operations;
otherwise, my speaking, and your hearing, will be to no profit; but we shall be
eventually the worse, instead of the better therefore.

FINIS.

