Mr. Stevens's ELECTION-SERMON,

May 27. 1761.

A SERMON Preached at BOSTON, BEFORE THE Great and General Court or Assembly.

OF THE PROVINCE OF THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY in NEW ENGLAND, May 27. 1761.

BEING the Day appointed by Royal Charter for the Election of His Majesty's
Council for said Province.

By BENJAMIN STEVENS, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in KITTERY.

N. B. Several Passages omitted in preaching are inserted.

BOSTON: Printed by JOHN DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the Governor and the
Honorable His Majesty's Council. 1761.

Province of MASSACHUSETTS BAY. In COUNCIL, 28 May, 1761.
ORDERED, THAT ANDREW OLIVER, ISAAC ROYAL, and NATHANIEL SPARHAWK, Esqrs. be a
Committee to wait upon the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN STEVENS, and return him the
Thanks of the Board for his Sermon preached Yesterday, being the Day appointed
by the Royal Charter for the Election of Counselors for the Province; and to
desire a Copy of the same for the Press.

Attest. A. OLIVER, Secr.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
2 COR. III. 17. -- WHERE the Spirit of the LORD is, there is LIBERTY.
THE glorious character, and the righteous, wise and good administration of the
Deity, lay the foundation of piety in all its branches. From the consideration
hereof internal worship as well as public and social, result: The latter, as
well as the former, is a rational act of homage paid to him who rules in the
kingdoms of men, and conducts the grand as well as minute affairs of the
universe: it is also a proper and natural expression of our belief of his
superintendency and government of all things: a firm and practical belief of
which fundamental truth of religion has a tendency to influence the whole
moral conduct. The practice therefore of assembling in the house of God upon
this day, as it is coeval with our civil establishment, is laudable, rational
and just; and may be considered as an act of homage paid by the whole community
to him who is the head of the social system, the bestower of every blessing,
and the supreme guardian of all our rights.

VARIOUS are the subjects relative to this occasion which are truly
interesting. But as we are just arrived at that happy period, in which by the
smiles of heaven on our just arms, we have obtained the entire conquest of
Canada; whereby we hope in God we are delivered from the tyranny and misery
which threatened us, "and the future security of our liberties civil and
religious put into our hands:" -- As it is also the happy day in which we are
called to improve some of the important privileges and liberties we enjoy by
his grant, who delivered us from arbitrary power both in church and state; I
could think of no subject which more justly claims our attention than that
which our text without any forced construction will suggest.

BUT without any farther introduction, after humbly imploring the spirit of
Christ which is a spirit of liberty -- and asking the candor and patience of
all present, I shall proceed to the consideration of my subject: -- My concern
shall be to speak with that freedom which the spirit of the divine Redeemer
inspires, and at the same time with that reverence and decency which is due to
so respectable an auditory.

WITHOUT spending time to review the whole passage of scripture to which our
text has reference, I shall consider the words as a general truth, laid down
upon a particular occasion; and similar in their intention to those of our
Lord, John VIII. 34, 36.
"Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free". -- And again "If
the Son of GOD make you free, ye shall be free indeed." Whether the apostle
here intends a liberty from that darkness which tyrannized over the
understanding of the Jews, or the liberty of the children of GOD in general, I
shall not pretend absolutely to determine: but say, that liberty in every
respect stands in connection with the Spirit of Christ. The gospel is styled "a
law of liberty." -- Being conformed to this, and animated and influenced by the
spirit of its divine author, we shall be free from the servitude of Satan the
grand tyrant, and the slavery of sin, which is the worst of servitude, and from
whence result all the tyrannies, disorders and confusions that have been in the
world.

As civil government, which was instituted for the preservation of civil
liberty, effects in an imperfect degree some of those designs in GOD's
righteous administration, which he is carrying on in the world by his word and
spirit; and as liberty in a political sense is mentioned by a sacred writer as
one of the privileges of christians, as well as other men; 1 Pet. II. 16.
and as christians are commanded to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made them free -- what I propose from these words of the apostle, is I. To
show, That liberty both civil and religious is the spirit and genius of the
sacred writings. II. THAT the spirit of Christ prevailing in the hearts, and
influencing the lives of mankind, is the greatest security of liberty in both
these respects.


NEITHER the time nor my strength will admit any thing more than a cursory and
imperfect consideration of these two particulars. But before I proceed to prove
the truth of these observations, it is necessary to premise a few things
relative to the nature of civil and religious liberty.

I WOULD premise in general, that to state the nature of each, and exactly
limit their bounds -- to say in all respects what prerogative and powers the
sovereign shall be vested with, excepting this in general, a power to do every
thing which is requisite for the preservation and happiness of the state: -- to
determine also what are the rights and privileges of the subject, and to fix
the measures of his submission -- I say, the determining these points with
precision, would be attempting what would be beyond my line, and would require
more time than the limits of a discourse upon this occasion would allow. --
Therefore I shall give you the definition of civil liberty from an approved
writer, -- (...) AMAQUI.
that it is natural liberty it self, divested of that part which constitutes
the independence of individuals by the authority it confers on sovereigns,
attended with a right of insisting on his making a good use of his authority,
and with a moral security this right will have it is effect. As civil liberty is
founded in civil government, a well constituted state requires that the
magistrate be secure of the allegiance of the subject, and the subject of the
protection of the magistrate: and civil liberty is in the greatest perfection,
and those are the freest governments, where, on the one hand, the sovereign is
secured from tyranny and an abuse of power, and the people from anarchy,
confusion and disobedience. And though in such a state natural liberty is in
many respects given up, yet if civil liberty, the liberty of civil society is
secured, considering the state of the world, it is vastly to be preferred: --
For hereby each one becomes secured of the protection and united force and
counsel of the whole state, whereby life, property and every thing else that is
valuable, is almost infinitely better secured, than in a state of natural
liberty.

I WOULD further premise, as civil authority extends to the good of the
community in all respects, it must extend to religion; piety and virtue being
connected with the good of civil societies as well as individuals: we may add,
how far soever civil authority may think it requisite to interpose in affairs
of religion, as the right of private judgment is unalienable -- and since it is
essential to true religion that we act from conscience and a conviction that
what we profess and practice is agreeable to the divine will -- religious
liberty ever supposes, and it is requisite to its being that the conscience be
lest free, and that none pretend to assume an empire over it. Religious liberty
supposes that there be not only free inquiry, but equal freedom of profession
and action, when thereby no disturbance is given to others. Indeed should any
under pretense of conscience, act in direct violation of the laws of GOD, to
the injury of the peace of civil or religious societies, they ought to be
restrained. -- For there is no liberty but what supposes our dependence upon
GOD, and our obligations to comply with his will. And under the pretense of
liberty to act as we list, or to disregard the dictates of reason or the will
of GOD, however made known, or any authority he has constituted, is libertinism
and licentiousness.

ONCE more, it may be premised, that although christianity was properly
established by GOD himself or his son Christ Jesus -- it being that kingdom
which the prophet Daniel foretold, "the GOD of heaven should set up, and shall
never be destroyed, but shall stand forever; Dan. ii. 44.
-- And although this kingdom was founded when the power of the civil
magistrate was armed for it is destruction: -- yet should the civil authority
think it necessary, as they have in almost all christian countries, to
establish any particular form of christianity, let it be considered that all
such establishments are evidently human; and unless there be a general
toleration, are inconsistent with religious liberty. It is a noble declaration
of a writer of the first class, Bp. BUTLER's Sermon. on 1 Timothy II. 1, 2.
that a religious establishment, without a toleration of such as think they
cannot in conscience conform to it, is it self a general tyranny, because it
claims absolute authority over conscience; and would soon beget particular
kinds of tyranny of the worst sort, tyranny over the mind, and various
superstitions, after the way should be paved for them, as it soon must by
ignorance.

THESE things being premised, I shall proceed to the proof of the first
observation I mentioned, viz. that liberty, both civil and religious, is the
spirit and genius of the sacred writings.

THE great design of infinite wisdom in the various revelations there have been
made in the different ages of the world, has been to promote the cause of
liberty in the noblest and most important sense. As accomplishing the amazing
plan of the redemption of a fallen world by the Son of God, and recovering us
from the penal effects of sin, which were a most terrible bondage and misery;
as this is the general intention of revelation, liberty, without any
impropriety, may be said to be the general intention of revelation. And although
something infinitely greater and more valuable than what relates to this world
is designed; yet we shall find that he who accomplishes various important ends
at the same time by the same means, consulted man's happiness in this as well
as the future state.

LIBERTY being the foundation of almost every temporal blessing, and also those
which are everlasting being in a near connection with it, upon an examination of
the sacred writings, we shall find through the whole, a particular regard to
this inestimable favor. Were we to trace the whole book of God, as every part
was wrote by the same unerring spirit of truth, we shall find nothing that
tends to countenance anarchy, or support tyranny either civil or religious; but
on the contrary a spirit of liberty breathing through the whole.

So large a field opens when we take a view of the sacred books, that I must
confine my self to a very few passages.

To begin with the writings of Moses, there we shall find that in the execution
of the grand plan beforementioned, heaven appears in a most signal manner to
rescue a particular people from a state of the most miserable tyranny and
servitude. The whole history of that important event, the deliverance of Israel
from their Egyptian bondage, shows in the strongest manner, God's tender
compassion for the rights of his people, and that he will sooner or later
appear to take vengeance on the tyrants and cruel oppressors of mankind. The
noblest eloquence, inspired by the warmest spirit of liberty, could not use
stronger expressions than are found in the sacred writers when they touch upon
this subject. The infinite Being is thus represented as speaking upon this
occasion, Exodus III. 7, 8. Acts VII. 24.
I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt: I have
heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. And he, who never
manifested his power in an extraordinary manner but for purposes becoming the
wisdom of the deity, by a series of most amazing miracles, set his people free.
And as the redemption of his people, and taking vengeance on his enemies stood
in connection, which has been the general course of the divine administration:
-- by the amazing destruction of the latter, the divine power was made known in
such a striking manner, as that hereby the remotest nations and distant ages
were taught God's righteous abhorrence of such oppressive measures, as Pharaoh
and his court impiously and cruelly pursued. -- God who displayed his power in
so remarkable a manner to vindicate the rights of his people, appears by the
sacred writings to have the greatest regard to proper government and order.
This people were not delivered from the tyranny of Egypt to be given up to a
state of anarchy or their own lawless lusts, nor to be delivered over into the
hands of tyrants of their own nation; but to be formed into a kingdom under the
government of the Lord Jehovah. -- He, whose right to dominion is
incontestible, and whose qualifications for government are unrivalled,
condescended to become in a political and peculiar sense their king. Their
state is therefore called, in scripture language, the kingdom of Jehovah: and
the LORD is said to be "their lawgiver, their king and judge": and he styles
them "my people" and "my nation": -- and their government is commonly called a
Theocracy. Not that we are to consider this as barely a political constitution.
The first and grand design of infinite wisdom was, to secure that people in
their allegiance to him as the moral governor of the world, and to redeem them
from idolatry and wickedness -- or, as the scripture expresses it, to be "a
kingdom of priests and a holy nation". But not only the recovery of that people
to the practice of true religion, the most effectual security of all
government, were in view, in the dispensations of heaven toward them, but
their happiness in every respect. Therefore he who had manifested his favor to
them, regarded with peculiar kindness their civil or political state.

THE time will not allow a particular examination of the civil government of
the Hebrews; therefore I shall only say in general, so far as the plan of this
government was of divine original, we shall not only find the highest marks of
political wisdom, but that it was a polity which with the utmost propriety
might be termed a free government; and was intended in the best manner to
secure the liberties, happiness, peace and prosperity of that people; had they
adhered to this excellent constitution, it would have secured them from all
tyranny, oppression and anarchy, and from foreign invaders.

THE right of legislation, the first branch of sovereignty, was in the Lord
Jehovah himself, All their laws as well civil as religious were from him --
"whatever he commanded, that they were to observe and do, and not to add
thereto or diminish from it Deuteronomy. XII. 32.
." And as good laws are one of the greatest securities of the civil liberties
of a people, we shall find such enacted by the Lord Jehovah, relative to their
constitution and form of government, and the private administration of justice,
as would in the most effectual manner have preserved the peace and happiness of
the community, and the liberty and property of each individual.

Again, THOUGH he who has an absolute and underived right to sovereignty, and to
whom all beings owe subjection, was at the head of this system; -- yet this
government, like all other free governments, was founded on compact. The whole
congregation of Israel, as a political body, acknowledged the Lord Jehovah to
be their king, took an oath of allegiance to him, and he receives them for a
people to himself Deuteronomy. XIX. 10, 17.
But although the Lord Jehovah was their king, and the power of legislation was
only in him; yet the executive part of government was put into the hands of
subordinate magistrates. Their supreme magistrate under the Lord Jehovah must
be considered as his Viceroy or deputy -- and Moses who was the first in this
office was commissioned immediately from God. Joshua who succeeded him was also
pointed out by the oracle; yet his authority was recognized by the people Josh.
1. 16, 17, 18.
. These judges or leaders in the jewish polity were possessed in a limited
sense of regal power -- though let it be observed, the appointment of a king
afterward was a deviation from their original constitution. But whatever was
the authority of their supreme magistrate, he could assume no arbitrary power;
and by this constitution there was the greatest security that the power would
be improved for the end for which it was given. The law was to be his rule in
all things -- the oracle was also to be consulted in the most important
affairs. There was also a national senate formed out of the princes of the
tribes and heads of families Josh, XXIII. 1, 2.
as his privy council, which was to be consulted; and the whole congregation of
Israel were by the constitution one branch of government, and were invested
with as many rights and privileges perhaps, as any of the most ancient and
freest governments.

FREEDOM and property stand in connection; property ever carrying power and
authority -- the grant of the land of Canaan, from the great and universal
Proprietor, being made to the whole nation of the Jews; each tribe (except that
of Levi) having an equal part, and each Israelite a certain proportion -- a
proportion sufficient with frugality and industry to maintain them in plenty --
and as these lands were to descend to their posterity, and were alienable but
for a limited time; a proper and natural foundation was hereby laid, for
keeping up the balance of power among the several tribes, the security of the
liberties of the body of the people, and the rights of each individual. In
arbritary governments there is no security of property, if there are
freeholders; but the Israelites, holding their lands of Jehovah their King, and
no subordinate magistrate however great, having power to invade the property of
the meanest of his subjects; the law also prohibiting the loan of money upon
interest, The peculiar plan of the Hebrew polity shows the reason of the law
prohibiting usury, and the loan of money upon interest not being forbid to
strangers, proves that law not to have been of a moral nature.
prevented any from engrossing large quantities of land; hereby all were
secured from a state of servitude. The spirit of freedom which appears in all
the Hebrew constitution, is likewise peculiarly manifested in the provision it
made for the preservation of the liberties of the lowest and poorest among
them. Providence having endued persons with different capacities and abilities,
and giving different success, even to the endeavors of honest industry, all
will never enjoy the same degree of freedom. But this constitution made
provision for the relief of the natural incapacities of persons, and the ill
success that might attend their endeavors. The poor were not only to be
relieved by charity, but no Israelite was to be sold as a bondman, or made a
slave Lev. 25. 42.
: -- every seventh year debtors were to be liberated Exodus 15. 1, 4.
-- and every, fiftieth year there was to be a general release of servants; and
a reversion of houses and lands to such original proprietors, or the heirs of
such, as through necessitous circumstances had been obliged to part with them
Lev. 25. 40.
. The year of jubilee, or proclamation of liberty among the Jews, being a grand
periodical festival, and ushered in with such solemn joy and pomp, was as well
calculated to inspire the whole nation with a love of liberty, as the Olympic
festival games were to inspire the Greeks with the love of glory.

MANY other things might be observed relative to the civil polity of the Jews,
pointing out its advantages, and showing the admirable provision there was
thereby made for the security of civil liberty, viz. the qualifications and
characters prescribed for their magistrates -- the obligations all in power
were under strictly to conform to law, in the execution of their office JEHOVAH
their supreme ruler enjoined that their kings when they set upon the throne of
his kingdom should write a copy of the law, etc. as in Deuteronomy. 17. 18. -- And
that there should be officers and judges in their gates throughout their
tribes. -- The God of Israel also said, he that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God -- he must not respect the person of the poor, nor
honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness judge his neighbor. Upon
which a late writer observes that they are called gods because, as our Savior
tells us, the word of God came to them, or rather because the word of God was
lodged with them; and from thence, as from the oracles of God, the people were
to fetch answers of justice: And indeed it is a god-like thing to sit in the
chair of justice with an equal hand, and an eye direct, dividing the word of
God deposited with them, unmoved by solicitation, friendship, respect or
compassion on one hand, and on the other by animosity and resentment. Not that
these passions are to be rooted up from us: They are of excellent use in
private life; and a man must be void of humanity that wants these affections:
But let them not appear in the seat of justice to pervert and darken it, and
let virtue have the benefit of them.
-- the provision that was also made to secure the authority of government, and
to prevent disobedience to the orders of the state: -- their military
establishment; -- their employment (which being chiefly that of husbandry) must
of course cultivate that simplicity and integrity of manners, so essential to
the preservation of liberty: -- These, I say, and more might be enlarged upon,
would the time allow; and if set in a just light would fully show the political
wisdom and freedom of this government. I WOULD refer the reader for an
enlargement upon these heads to Mr. Lowman's dissertation upon the Hebrew
government, wherein is fully shown the justice, wisdom and goodness of the
mosaical constitution.


IT is also worthy notice, that liberty and independance were expressly
promised to the Jews, upon adherence to their duty, and slavery threatened as a
punishment of apostasy. Deuteronomy. 28. 1, and 13.
If they hearkened diligently unto the voice of the Lord, and did his
commandments, the Lord their God (it is said) would set them high above all the
nations of the earth, and that they should be above only, and not beneath. --
But if disobedient and rebellious, that they should serve their enemies, and
that he would put a yoke of iron on their necks. Ver. 48.


FURTHERMORE, We find in proportion as the spirit of their religion influenced
those who were constituted guardians of their civil liberties, and the people
in general, they enjoyed the happy effects of this blessing. Moses, Joshua,
Samuel and others, who were supreme rulers in the Jewish state, and persons of
the first rank for piety and virtue, discovered the most tender regard for the
rights of that people; as appears not only from the writings of Moses, but the
other sacred historians who succeeded him. -- Instead of improving their power
to enslave them, they did every thing that the wisest and best of men could do
to preserve them from vassalage, and perpetuate their liberties. -- Joshua, as
well as Moses, was eminent for his fidelity in his high office; and left the
appointment of a successor to the divine determination, and the discretion of
the people; neither of them doing any thing to entail the advantages of it to
their posterity, or aggrandize their families. And Samuel appears worthy of
perpetual renown, not only for his great integrity, in the administration of
justice as chief magistrate in Israel; but his truly patriot zeal for their
sacred constitution, and the liberties of the people. How solemnly does he
protest against a change of government, when the people impiously and foolishly
proposed it to him? and how fully does he represent the slavery and misery that
would attend them in a state of monarchy, and having a king like the
neighboring nations? 1 Samuel 8th chap.


WERE we to proceed to a farther examination of the sacred history, after the
settlement of the Hebrew nation, in the land of Canaan, either before or after
their change of government, we should find many things which point out in the
clearest light the many and great advantages of civil liberty: -- As we should
see the many and fatal effects of a deviation from their original, sacred
constitution; how it at times involved them in a state of great confusion,
disorder and misery -- how it prevented their full and peaceable enjoyment of
the good land God had promised to them -- how it caused them to become an easy
prey to almost every invader -- how it exposed to civil dissentions, and all
the evils that arise from a state of anarchy, as well as the tyranny of
arbitrary power.

WERE we also to trace the writings of the prophets, we should find them
animated with a noble spirit of liberty: Inspired by the spirit of truth, they
characterize persecuting, oppressive and tyrannical powers in a manner that
proves they are detestable as well to God as man. Pharaoh king of Egypt is, by
the prophet Ezekiel, styled the great Dragon; Ezekiel. 29. 3.
a name often given in scripture to cruel tyrants, as they resemble the old
serpent the first deceiver, the grand adversary and destroyer of mankind. The
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires, as they were all tyrannical
and oppressive monarchies, are spoken of under the general denomination of
beasts; and represented to Daniel, Dan. 7. 3, -- 8.
by beasts of the most monstrous form and savage natures. And the manner in
which the prophets predict the fate, and future circumstances of these
arbitrary governments, plainly shows, how displeasing their tyrannies and
oppressions were to the universal sovereign, who executes righteousness and
judgment for all that are oppressed. But, besides these four grand monarchies,
all of which were oppressive to God's people, others of the like character are
destined to the righteous vengeance of heaven: And the prophets repeatedly
assure us from the mouth of HIM who declares the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times the things that are not yet done, Isai, 46 9, 10.
and whose counsel shall stand, and who will do all his pleasure that a period
is fixed in the counsels of infinite wisdom, for the exemplary destruction of
these destroyers of the earth.

IT is prophesied of Egypt one of the first and great oppressors of God's
people, that they should be given over into the hand of a cruel lord, and a
fierce king shall rule over them, says the Lord, the Lord of hosts; Isai. 19.
4.
and, that it should be a base or tributary kingdom; that it shall be the
basest of kingdoms; neither shall it exalt itself any more among the nations;
-- and that they shall no more rule over the nations. Ezekiel. 29, 14, 15. --
Nineveh, likewise, the metropolis of the Assyrian monarchy, built by that
mighty tyrant Nimrod; and which had been greatly afflictive to God's people, is
for its tyranny and other vices, doomed to final and perpetual destruction: It
is thus predicted of this once most famous city, with an overrunning flood,
will God make an utter end of the place thereof, he will make an utter end; its
place may be sought but it shall never be found. -- Many and remarkable also
are the prophesies respecting the destruction of Babylon, another enemy and
oppressor of God's people. -- Says the Lord of hosts, I will punish the king
of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria. Jer. 50. 18.
As her power had been abused to tyranny and the most cruel persecutions, the
prophets assure us, from the supreme Arbiter of kingdoms, and that God who
judges in the earth; "Babylon the glory of kingdoms and the beauty of the
Chaldees excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah: it
shall never be inhabited, -- but wild beasts of the desert shall lie there;
their houses shall be full of doleful creatures" Isai. 13. 19, --
that "it shall become heaps, a dwelling place for dragons, an astonishment and
a hissing without an inhabitant" -- And I will render unto Babylon, and to all
the inhabitants of Chaldea, all the evil they have done in Zion, says the
Lord." Jer. 51.
All which prophecies were remarkably and literally fulfilled.

"WHERE are now these great and famous Monarchies, (says a learned writer Dr.
THOMAS NEWTON.

THIS valuable writer in his dissertations on the prophecies, has shown by a
deduction of the history of Egypt, from the time of the abovementioned
prediction, that it should become "a base kingdom, etc." to the present time,
the exact fulfillment of this prophecy. -- He observes, "It is now above two
thousand years since the prophecy was first delivered: -- And what likelihood
or appearance was there, that the Egyptians should for so many ages bow under a
foreign yoke, and never in all that time be able to recover their liberties,
and have a prince of their own to reign over them? For not long after Egypt was
conquered by the Babylonians, after the Babylonians by the Persians, then by
the Macedonians, afterward by the Romans -- then by the Saracens, then by the
Mamalu^s, and is new a province of the Turkish empire." -- And from the
character given of the Egyptians by ancient and modern authors, has this
reflection -- "Such men are evidently born, not to command, but to serve and
obey. They are altogether unworthy of Eberty. Slavery is ^ittest for them, as
they are ^ittest for slavery." 1 Vol. 12 Disser.

THAT Nineveh was takes and destroyed, according to the prediction of Nahum,
etc. (i^ all probability by the Medes and Babylonians) this writer has also
proved -- and remarks, "that besides the fulfillment of the particular
circumstances relative to its destruction, so totally was it destroyed, that
the place is hardly known where it was situated; --." and that even the ruins
of old Nineveh have been long ago ruined and destroyed; such an utter end has
been made of it, and such is the truth of the divine predictions!

THIS author likewise, by a particular induction of facts, and comparing
history with prophecy, has pointed out the punctual fulfillment of the
predictions of the prophets, concerning the destruction of Babylon. -- And as
it is expressly foretold it should be reduced to desolation (he observes) when
it was converted into a chase for wild beasts, then were exactly accomplished
the words of the prophets, that the wild beasts of the desert, with the wild
beasts of the islands, shall dwell there, and cry in their desolate houses! One
part of the country was overflowed by the river's being turned out of its
course (by Cyrus, when he took the city) and never restored again to its former
channel, and thence became boggy and marshy, so that it might literally be said
to be a possession for the bittern, and pools of water. -- And when we find
that modern travelers cannot now certainly discover the spot of ground where
this renowned city once was Situated, we may properly say, Now is Babylon
become a desolation among the nations.

Vol. 1st. Disser. 10th.


) which in their turns subdued and oppressed the people of God? Are they not
vanished as a dream, and not only their power but their very names lost in the
earth? The Egyptians, Assyrians and Babylonians, were overthrown and entirely
subjugated by the Persians." -- And after having shown the exact fulfillment of
the prophecies, relative to the destruction of Babylon -- he adds, How
wonderful are such predictions, compared with the events; and what a convincing
argument of the truth and divinity of the holy scriptures! -- At the same time
it must afford all readers of an exalted taste, and generous sentiments, all
the friends and lovers of liberty, a very sensible pleasure to hear the
prophets exulting over such tyrants and oppressors as the kings of Assyria. In
the 14th Chapter of Isaiah there is an Epinikion, or a triumphant ode upon the
fall of Babylon. It represents the infernal mansions as moved, and the ghosts
of deceased tyrants as rising to meet the king of Babylon, and congratulate his
coming among them. It is really admirable for the severest strokes of irony, as
well as the sublimest strains of poetry. -- It justly deserves the character of
one of the most spirited, most sublime, and most perfect compositions of the
lyrick kind, superior to any of the productions of Greece or Rome.

BUT the prophets not only assure us, that the day of Vengeance shall come, and
the year for recompensing the controversies of Sion; or that great and amazing
destruction shall be brought upon all the enemies of God and his people; but
that a happy time shall take place, before the grand plan of the universal
Sovereign, respecting the government of the world, is accomplished; when
religion and liberty and all their amiable attendants, shall universally
prevail, and produce the most happy and glorious effects.

WERE we again to trace the writings of the old Testament, we should find them
equally friendly to religious, as has been briefly shown they were to civil
liberty -- But it can only be observed, that the civil and ecclesiastical
polity of the Jews, were in many respects united: Both are to be considered as
parts of the covenant, made between Jehovah their King and them. All their
laws, whether of a moral or positive nature, were from God. The legislative
authority, as has been before said, was solely in him; and no power was given
to any human authority in this respect. Even Moses, in every thing relative to
the ritual of their worship, was to conform to the pattern shown him in the
mount. And by that constitution there was no power, either ecclesiastical or
civil, given to men, inconsistent with the sacred rites of conscience, and the
exercise of private judgment. Nay, so far was it from this, that we find it
referred to the impartial judgment of that people to choose whom they would
serve, the gods of the heathen or the Lord Jehovah Joshua 24. 15.
; and in consequence hereof the people of Israel solemnly declare, "All the
Words which the Lord has said, we will do" Ver. 21.
. And although that dispensation was far less liberal, than the gospel; and the
numerous rites and ceremonies enjoined by their religion, are called "a yoke of
bondage"; yet it was what their own conduct, prevailing disposition, and
peculiar circumstances, as well as voluntary consent, subjugated them to. It is
not possible that we short-sighted mortals should fully understand all the
designs of infinite wisdom; and we may justly suppose, there were many reasons
for the institution of the hebrew ritual unknown to us; but as that nation was
to be kept a separate people, and to be retained in their allegiance to the
true God, many of their rites and ceremonies might be necessary, to answer
these ends; and to prevent their falling in with the idolatrous practices of
the neighboring nations, to which they were so greatly prone. -- But if, the
ecclesiastical polity, and religious institutions of the Jews, are compared
with that of all other nations, none will be found equally free. -- The
monstrous power even in things sacred, claimed by the civil magistrate and the
priesthood at that day; and the various superstitions and vices established by
authority, under the severest penalties, was a state of bondage almost
infinitely more grievous and intolerable, than that of the Jews. -- The
services which the Israelites were commanded to perform to the true God, and
the subjection they were under to any power, either civil or ecclesiastical,
was the perfection of liberty, compared with the state of the whole heathen
world at that time. -- For while the Jews were favored with a religion of
divine original, which though intermixed with a variety of positive Institutions,
yet required every thing that was of a moral nature; the Gentiles had religious
rites and ceremonies established by human authority, many of which were greatly
impure, barbarous, and immoral; and ignorance, superstition, idolatry and
wickedness tyrannized over those nations.

BUT to proceed to a brief examination of the writings of the new testament;
there we find the same spirit of liberty breathing through the whole, and there
we see an accomplishment of the prophecies respecting the redemption of
mankind. "Out of Zion is come a deliverer, to proclaim liberty to the captive,
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound." We do not find, indeed,
that temporal prince and mighty conqueror which the carnal Jews expected, to
free them from the Roman yoke, and to exalt them to universal dominion; but one
who came to procure benefits infinitely greater and more valuable to mankind.

OUR Lord when he first entered upon his public ministry declared, he came not
to destroy the law and the prophets: But as his kingdom was not of this world
he intermedled not with civil affairs, but left the Jewish polity as he found
it. The same may be said of all the other kingdoms of the earth: scarcely any
thing is recorded by the sacred writers as said by him relative to civil
government, excepting this; "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and
to God the things that are God's;" in which he not only discovered the most
consummate prudence and integrity in avoiding the snare laid for him, but has
given a direction which if attended to, will be the best security of liberty
both civil and sacred. For if rulers as well as people conform to this precept,
neither the prince will assume any undue prerogative, or abuse his power; nor
will the subject refuse that allegiance which is due to the prince, but perform
the duties which they respectively owe to each other; both keeping in mind the
superior obligations they are under to the universal sovereign.

THERE are but few passages in the writings of the apostles relative to this
subject. Religion and civil government being things entirely distinct in their
nature, however they may coincide in some respects in their design, the
apostles say but little concerning the civil rights of mankind -- intimating
that christianity makes no alteration in this respect -- and that christians
are under the same obligations, to the duties that result from civil relations,
with other men.

THE most remarkable passage upon this subject is the beginning of the 13th
chapter of the epistle to the Romans: -- a passage of Scripture which has been
most horridly perverted by the flatterers of tyrants, to establish a doctrine
contrary to reason, to the dictates of nature, and the general intention of
revelation. And the exorbitant power they pretend is hereby given to the civil
magistrates -- the unlimited and unresisting submission and passive obedience
required of the subject, is directly subversive of civil liberty. But after all
that the supporters of tyranny have been able to say, it is too evident to need
any labored proof, that St. Paul in this passage in such a manner points out
the origin and lays the foundation of civil government -- so particularly
limits and defines the nature and ends of political power -- and, from its
being exercised to that purpose and end, deduces the obligations of obedience:
And the Duties of the magistrate, as well as the correspondent duties of the
subject are so connected, and the latter so plainly intimated to result from
the due performance of the former, that it was scarcely possible more should be
said, in so short a compass in favor of civil liberty. -- The true principles
upon which it is founded, and upon which it will ever subsist and flourish, are
here briefly laid down, as might be shown at large, would the time allow THE
author thought it needless more particularly to consider this passage of
scripture, as it has been so fully vindicated by many able writers, from the
unjust interpretations of the friends of slavery and the abettors of tyranny,
either civil or ecclesiastical; and as it is so apparent to every unprejudiced
reader, that this general precept, of submission to the civil magistrate, is to
be taken with those limitations and exceptions, which other general precepts
and prohibitions in the sacred oracles are -- yea, that as the power of the
civil magistrate is limited, in all reason must the obedience of the subject.
-- But to imagine the apostle is speaking of the then form of government in the
Roman empire -- and of Nero the then reigning Emperor, who was not only a cruel
persecutor of Christians, but one whom the Senate had condemn^^ as a public
enemy, and the people hated, as a tyrant; or to suppose that the Apostle
designed to intimate that any form of civil polity, then in being, was of
divine original -- or that the civil magistrate received his power immediately
from God, -- and that tyrants were to be obeyed in all things -- and that the
most lawless acts of power were not to be resisted without exposing men to the
dreadful misery of eternal damnation, would be highly injurious to so excellent
as well as inspired a writer as St. Paul, -- and what we have reason to think
was as far from his mind, as any other subject, however absurd and wicked.
.

THERE is a passage in the writings of St. Peter similar in some respects to
this of St. Paul: the former as well as the latter is recommending the great
duty of subjection to the civil magistrate, (1 Ep. 2d Chap. 13. --) That which
St. Paul calls the ordinance of God, St. Peter styles the ordinance of man: As
all civil governments, the Jewish excepted, are human constitutions; that is,
their form whatever it be, is the institution and contrivance of men; but it is
the will of God, plainly made known by the make of man, and his circumstances
in the world, as well as by revelation, there should be civil government. And
the nature and end of political authority, and the design and business of the
magistrate's office, are by both these apostles said to be the same -- or the
great end of government, and the business of the magistrate's office is, "the
punishment of evildoers, and the praise and protection of them that do well."
When civil power is thus employed, it is necessary, as we would act up to our
sacred engagements as christians, and preserve the dignity of that honorable
character, as well as our civil rights, that we submit to it. The apostle
subjoins a caution and direction, a regard to which, will be of great use to
secure the blessings of the gospel, and the advantages of civil society, viz.
Although christians are "free, they are not to use their liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness," or wickedness; but ever act "as the servants of God." --
Christian liberty, instead of destroying our obligations to God, or any
authority he has instituted, rather increases it; and is never to be made use
of, for a pretense for rebellion, or sedition, or to palliate any other wicked
arts, whereby civil government may be disturbed.

WHATEVER else is recorded in the new testament, to have been said by our Lord
or his Apostles relative to civil government, either the exercise of it, or
submission to it, is friendly to civil liberty. Although they teach christians to
consider themselves as not of this world, but as subjects of the heavenly
kingdom, yet they prescribe to them a temper and behavior, which will make them
useful in the world, and good magistrates or good subjects of any earthly
kingdom.

As the conduct of our Lord and his Apostles was agreeable to their doctrine
and teaching, their behavior was such as becomes the friends of liberty. The
Son of God was a pattern of the most dutiful submission to all lawful
authority: And though meekness shone in his character with the greatest luster,
he speaks with some severity of that sub^le prince, Herod Luke 13. 32.
the then reigning king of Galilee: And no persons were reproved more sharply
by our Lord, than the scribes and pharisees, and upon no occasion did he use
greater severity of expression, than when he censured their undue claims of
power, and spiritual tyranny.

WERE we to trace the conduct of the apostles, we should find it becoming the
dignity of their character, and instructive to the lovers of liberty. Never in
any instance could they be justly accused of flattering tyrants, or stirring up
sedition and rebellion. And while they discovered a proper submission to those
in authority, at the same time we find them upon suitable occasions, claiming
their rights and privileges as men and christians. This was the principle they
ever acted upon, "that God was to be obeyed rather than man." How noble is
their conduct at one time and another, when brought before the Jewish
^an^edrim? and how freely do they speak the truth upon all occasions, however
offensive it might be to those in authority? Their behavior also before the
Roman governors and heathen magistrates, being influenced by the spirit of
Christ, was such as became the wisest and best of men, animated by a spirit of
liberty; such as discovered a regard to the rights of mankind in general, and
the public good, as well as a regard to the honor of christianity, and their
own privileges and security as members of a free state. The conduct of St. Paul
and Silas, when unjustly imprisoned at Philippi, Acts 16. 2^. 37.
their insisting upon their privileges as Romans, and the submission they
required of the magistrates for their rash and arbitrary proceedings* was
becoming the character of christians, and friends to civil liberty. And the
apostle's pleading again the same valuable privilege to the Roman officer, Acts
21. 25.
who to appease the rage and tumult of the Jews, gave orders to have this good
man scourged before legal trial and condemnation, as well as his appealing to
Caesar, proves that christians are not obliged to give up their civil rights,
or tamely to submit to every unjust invasion of them. The freedom also with
which this holy man St. Paul reproves (or as some suppose, the prophetic spirit
with which he denounces the judgments of heaven against) the high priest, when
in the execution of his office, as judge, he acted in violation of the law,
proves that he knew no power which was above law: Acts 23. 3.
And while one part of his conduct, upon this occasion, explaineth his doctrine
respecting "Subjection to the higher powers;" another Ver. 5.
teaches us to reverence those clothed with authority.

WHEN we read the acts of the apostles we not only find a spirit of liberty
animating their conduct, and their example instructive to us as christians and
subjects of a free state; but from their history the magistrate may learn many
useful lessons: To omit others that might be mentioned -- The conduct of that
wise and good magistrate Gallio, teaches them not to interfere in matters that
fall not within their cognizance ("questions of words and names") or in
religious disputes where civil rights are not affected. And from the behavior
of Felix toward Paul, they learn how dangerous it is to be influenced by an
undue regard either to riches, power or popularity; what temptations they are
to act contrary to equity, and the dictates of conscience. An imitation of the
former GALLIO is mentioned with great respect by his brother the famous Seneca;
and ancient writers* give him the character of a wise and equitable magistrate:
And it is the opinion of moderns, "that he judged well of the rights of civil
government and of the power of his office, and discountenanced civil
punishments on religious accounts." And "that he had more honor and generosity
than to make Paul answer under the notion of a criminal, when by the Roman law
the matter did not come within his cognizance, and there was nothing criminal
in the charge." -- DR. Dodderidge observes, That the prudence and moderation,
of Gallio is truly amiable. That wise Roman well knew the extent of his office,
as a magistrate, and was aware that it gave him no title, no pretense to
dictate in matters of conscience, or to restrain men's religious liberties, so
long as they abstained from injustice or mischievous licentiousness, by which
the public peace might be disturbed, and the rights of society invaded. May God
give to all the magistrates of the earth such a spirit! And the gospel under
the influence of divine grace, will soon become an universal religion, and show
the world how little need it has of being* supported by civil penalties."

Family Expositor, Vol. 3. Page 295.


will secure the religious rights of the subject; avoiding the latter his civil
rights.

UPON a view of the prophetic writings of the apostles we find the same spirit
of liberty breathing in them, as in the predictions of the former prophets --
St. Paul's portrait of the man of sin -- the hateful features with which he
delineates him -- the spirit of domination he would discover, and tyranny he
would exercise -- the wicked and delusive arts he would make use of to acquire
and support his unjust claims -- the apostle's stiling him "the wicked one,"
and "son of perdition" -- and assuring us, he is doomed by the righteous
vengeance of God to destruction, proves that such a character, let it be found
where it will, and however it may pretend to a divine right to such a plenitude
of power, is really in its nature directly opposite to the spirit and genius of
christianity: -- which is further proved by the apostle's intimations, that no
such person or power should appear in the christian church till there was a
great apostasy from its primitive purity -- and that the persons who should
submit to this wicked tyranny, were such as are "given up to strong delusions,"
and "have pleasure in unrighteousness."

IN the apocalypse of St. John we have a variety of striking emblems, or
hioroglyphic representations of those oppressive and persecuting powers that
were to arise to the disturbance of the church in future ages. But though there
are many express prophecies that such tyrannical powers should arise and
continue a long time -- that they should "blaspheme God," and "make war with
the saints, and overcome them," and "that none should be permitted to buy or
sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast;" yet for the support
of God's people under all, they are assured that when the mystery of God shall
be finished, in suffering such wickedness to prevail, the reign of the grand
tyrant, and of all the enemies and persecutors of God's people shall have an
end: And that all the opposers of religion and liberty shall finally meet with
a punishment, great in its extent, and lasting in its duration, adequate to the
enormity of their crimes. And the songs of triumph and victory with which the
most benevolent beings are represented celebrating the happiness of those, who
adhere with fidelity to their duty, notwithstanding the tyranny and opposition
they had to encounter; the hymns of praise, also, that are given to God for
executing judgment upon these cruel tyrants and oppressors, prove that the
cause of liberty is the cause of God.

BEFORE this head is dismissed, it may be proper to add a few words, more fully
to show that religious liberty is the spirit and genius of the new testament.
This is so apparent to every one who has read those writings with any
attention, that it seems little less than an affront offered to the
understanding to undertake a formal proof of this point.

ALTHOUGH in the new testament an entire assent and absolute submission is
required to be paid to what God has revealed as his will; (a belief and
practice of which is true liberty) yet we find no authority given to men to
employ force or compulsion in things solely religious; no authority over
conscience: -- yea, no power to men to make laws for the subjects of Christ's
kingdom, ALTHOUGH christians as members of civil society, owe the same subjection
to the civil magistrate with other men; yet as christians they are subjects of
Christ their only King. "Every society is subject only to its own legislature,
which holds equally in respect to religious as civil societies." And when it
was before said, the civil magistrates power extended to religion, it was
intended only as it stood in connection with the civil interests of the
community.

IT may be added, As the civil magistrate is to protect all in their just
rights; and as many invaluable privileges are granted by the gospel charter to
the church of Christ, as a religious society -- And as these rights are no ways
inconsistent with the civil rights of the rest of mankind; the church in
general, and each member of it, have the same claim to protection, and the
unmolested enjoyment of all their privileges, that any other society or
individual have in the enjoyment of their natural or civil rights.

AND it is humbly queried, whether if the civil magistrate was to grant this
protection and defense to christians, and christian societies, he would not
more effectually answer the character of a nursing father to the church, and be
less likely to invade the prerogative of the supreme head of the church, than
by decreeing articles of faith and modes of worship?


; or to enforce his laws, much less their own explanations of them, with civil
penalties. All power and authority is committed to Christ: (...). 1. 18.
He is the head of the body i. e. the sacred society, which is his church, and
king of that kingdom which is not of this world. There are no intimations in
the new testament that Christ has left any visible head of his church, or
vice^^^ent in his kingdom: -- And it is worthy our ^^tention, that our Lord
says to his disciples, Matt. 22. 8, --
Be ye not called Rabbi, for one is your master, even Christ, and ye are
brethren: and call no man father upon earth; for one is your father, which is
in heaven. Neither be ye called masters, for one is your master even Christ.
Matthew. 20. 25.
The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them; but it shall not be
so among you. -- As the power of legislation in the Jewish church was solely in
Jehovah their king, so in the christian, it is solely in Christ. Even the
commission of the apostles was to teach only what Christ had commanded them:
And St. Paul tells the Corinthians that 2 Cor. 4. 5.
they preached not themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. -- And instead of
claiming dominion over their faith, declares, they were helpers of their joy. 2
(...).
And the government which belongs to the christian church, is only that
authority which is given by the word of God.

FURTHERMORE, The scriptures are said to be sufficient for doctrine, and all
the purposes of religion: -- and no other rule of faith or practice is
prescribed -- and all are commanded "to search the scriptures," -- to "prove
all things and to try the spirits whether they be of God."

WE find also our Lord and his apostles in the course of their ministry,
referring religion to the free enquiry and impartial judgment of their hearers:
If there was not evidence for what they taught, they gave liberty to reject it;
but if truth, it was not to be disregarded under the severest penalties, not of
a civil kind, but the anger of God, and the effects thereof in the future
world. And although Christ forewarns his disciples to expect persecution, yet
there are the fullest intimations that every species and degrees of it are
directly opposite to the spirit of his religion. When his disciples, and as we
may justly suppose, from an affectionate regard for their master, and a zeal
for true religion, desired he would command fire from heaven, for the
destruction of the Samaritans Luke 9. 35.
; Christ rebuked them, telling them, they knew not what manner of spirit they
were of. -- And with what indignation and severity does St. Paul reflect upon
himself for persecuting the disciples of Christ?

IN a word, Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light: He abolished the
ceremonial law: -- He has also granted by his gospel invaluable privileges and
liberties to his church and people. His apostles also, when a spirit of bigotry
and domination early appeared in the christian church, discovered a tender
regard to the liberties of christians. And an adherence to those grand
apostolic canons, "to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free," -- and "let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind;" will ever
secure us from spiritual tyranny; and most effectually advance the peace of
Christ's church, and the interest of true religion.

BUT it is more than time to proceed to the consideration of the SECOND general
head; which was to show, That the spirit of Christ prevailing in the hearts and
influencing the lives of mankind, is the best security of liberty, both civil
and religious. Or, in other words, A conformity to the amiable and divine
character of Jesus Christ, or his holy religion having its due effect on our
hearts, influencing our tempers, and directing our whole conduct, will lead to
a behavior, which will most effectually secure these invaluable blessings.

As it is not sufficient to entitle us to the glorious blessings of Christ's
heavenly kingdom, that we profess his religion, or pay a regard to his positive
requirements; but our hearts and lives must be formed into a correspondence to
the holy example which he exhibited; for we are expressly assured "If any man
have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his;" and that "it is not every one
that says unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven:" So
neither will our bearing the sacred name and title of christians, if we are the
servants of sin, be any security of those best of temporal blessings, which any
earthly kingdom can enjoy.

BUT where there is the spirit of Christ, and that glorious liberty which
results therefrom, there is a conformity to Him, effected by the agency and
influence of his spirit, and by beholding his spotless and perfect character,
as it is reflected from the mirror of his gospel, transforming us into his
likeness. This the apostle plainly intimates in the verse following our text:
His words are, But we all, with open face, beholding [BEHOLDING -- the glory of
the Lord.] Here is one of the most beautiful contrasts that can be imagined.
Moses saw the Sh^^hina^, and it rendered his face resplendent, so that he
covered it with a vail, the Jews not being able to bear the reflected light: We
behold Christ as in the glass of his word; and, (as the reflection of a very
luminous object from a mirror, gilds the face on which the reverberated rays
fall) our faces shine too; and we vail them not, but diffuse the luster; which,
as we discover more and more of his glories in the gospel, is continually
increasing.

Dr. DODDRIDGE in L^C.


as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. Now where there is this
divine effect produced by the spirit of Christ, and his gospel, the vail of
ignorance being removed, and the tyranny of the passions occasioned by sin,
being destroyed; and having "the same mind which was in Christ Jesus," we shall
be led to such a conduct as will effectually maintain our independence, and
secure our liberty and happiness.

BUT as the spirit of Christ implies a conformity to him, it may not be
improper to give you a delineation of some parts of his character: Then little
need be said to prove, that our being transformed into his likeness, will lead
to a behavior most conducive to the advancement and security of civil and
religious liberty.

EVERY divine and social virtue shone with the greatest luster in his
character. The most exalted piety influencing his whole conduct, with the
greatest fidelity he discharged all the duties of his high office as mediator:
He has this character given him by the author of the epistle to the Hebrews,
that "he was faithful to him who had appointed him* Heb. 3. 2.
"* It might largely be shown, were it necessary, that Christ answered this
character in all respects. But I go on to say, that a conformity to this
example in civil rulers, whether supreme or subordinate, will lead them in
every office they sustain, to act in a regard to his will and authority who is
the supreme governor of all; and to whom all are accountable. As the Son of God
is represented in the sacred oracles, saying to his heavenly Father, upon his
making his entrance into this world, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God;" the
like temper prevailing in the sovereign, and in all inferior officers, will
lead them in the first place to make enquiry, what are the d^^ies of their
station, and what must be done to discharge them with fidelity. They will then
see that the more elevated their station, the greater the importance of acting
up to the design and dignity of it; and the more fatal and extensive the
consequences of a neglect. Which considerations will lead them with the
greatest care to learn, and faithfulness to discharge, the duties of every
trust. And if all in office, in any state, from the highest to the lowest,
exhibit this fidelity, and are just, ruling in the fear of God, none of the
rights of mankind will be invaded; but power and authority will be improved for
the honor of the supreme ruler, and the happiness and security of all. Then,
neither a love of power or interest, pleasure or ease, private animosities or
friendships, will tempt them from their integrity, or lead them to an omission
of the duties of their office.

ANOTHER shining part of our Lord's character was, the most noble and extensive
benevolence. The whole plan of our redemption, and the part which the Son of
God performed in the execution of it, discover unparrallelled goodness, grace
and compassion. Not only the most self-denying and disinterested benevolence,
productive of the most substantial blessings to mankind, appears in the
character of our divine Redeemer; but he ever showed a peculiar regard to the
interest of his own nation: His personal ministry was confined chiefly to the
Jews. How unweariedly did he exert himself in their service? How pathetically
did he lament the calamities he foresaw coming upon them? So that we may justly
say, that PATRIOTISM, as well as more extensive benevolence is recommended by
his example. And if we are taught of God to love one another, taught by the
example and spirit of Christ, there will not only be a love to the whole human
species, as children of the same parent with ourselves, and to all who are
disciples of the same master; but from social connections and engagements, and
one common interest, there will be a peculiar regard to the interest of our
country, -- or a fixed disposition of mind to promote the safety, reputation
and welfare of the community in which we are born, and the constitution under
which we are protected. -- And while a love to our country is accompanied with
a more extensive benevolence, it will lead to a conduct productive of the
independence and welfare of the community and each individual, as well as
prevent an invasion of the rights of others. Then, instead of seeking every one
his own, as is too commonly the case, the public good will be our main pursuit.

AGAIN, The spirit of Christ and his holy religion is a spirit of union and
peace. Our Lord is styled the prince of peace; and he came not only preaching
peace, but his whole behavior wa^ expressive of that blessing: And the
strongest expressions are used in the gospel to represent his union with his
disciples, and their near and intimate union one with another. Now this spirit
being found in all, will not only prevent those factions and divisions, which
are the bane of every society, and which have often destroyed the liberties of
a free people, but will beget harmony of councils, and joint endeavors for the
public tranquillity.

OTHER virtues might be mentioned which adorned the character of the Son of
God, and which are found in those who are possessed of his spirit. -- As the
^ost artless simplicity and sincerity: guile was not found in his mouth. To
which was added, dignity of design, and greatness* of intention: His whole
design was the most exalted that the heart of man can conceive; and not only
executed with an heroic fortitude and constancy, amidst opposition and
difficulties; but carried on with the greatest sincerity and openness. A
conformity to this example, and the universal prevalence of this spirit in a
community must advance its glory, promote its happiness, and secure its
liberties; as it will inspire those entrusted with the public interest with the
most noble designs and generous intentions; and lead them to prosecute them, if
called to it, at the expense of ease, interest and life; and as it will prevent
those political and factious views, cloaked with false pretenses to patriotism,
which lead to a conduct subversive of the liberties of a people.

IF these principles inspired all, and these virtues of the christian life, and
others which might be mentioned were practiced by all, such a state, whatever
was its form of government, must be free. Even in absolute monarchies, if the
sovereign is influenced by the spirit of Christ and his religion, without any
checks to his power, or fundamental laws or compact to regulate his conduct, he
will make the supreme law of all governments the safety and happiness of the
people, and not arbitrary will, his rule. Likewise in mixed governments,
however the sovereignty may be shared, these principles will lead all in their
respective stations and spheres to seek the public welfare. Then those who have
the power of legislation will enact such laws, and such only, as are agreeable
to the laws of the supreme Ruler, the genius and exigencies of the people, and
their safety and happiness. Those also in executive power will act in
conformity to law: And the salutary effects of government being experienced by
all, authority will be revered, and from principle and conscience submitted to.
Indeed, the universal prevalency and influence of the spirit of Christ and his
religion will in a great measure render human laws needless -- all being a law
to themselves, and from principle and conscience acting in conformity to the
laws of their great Lord and master. -- How happy must such a state be! To what
grandeur will it be advanced! And how secure will be its liberties!

THE virtue and happiness of that people would answer those strong and
beautiful descriptions we have in the prophetic writings, respecting the
glorious times, which are in some future period to take place under the reign
of the Messiah: When the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdom of
Christ. -- A belief of the accomplishment of which predictions may comfort and
support the mind under the gloomy prospect which the greatest part of this
world now affords, oppressed with tyranny, and overrun with wickedness. Those
times when all officers shall be peace and exactors righteousness. Violence
shall no more be heard in the land, nor wasting or destruction: -- The people
shall be all righteous, and inherit the land forever: -- The voice of weeping
shall no more be heard, nor the voice of crying: -- They shall build houses,
and inhabit them; and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them: -- They shall
not labor in vain, and bring forth for trouble (as those do now who are
groaning under tyranny;) and there shall be nothing to hurt or destroy in all
God's holy mountain. -- After which nothing can be added descriptive of the
liberty and happiness of such a people.

MANY useful reflections might be deduced from this subject, but my discourse
has already been protracted to such a length, that I may only hint at a few.

FIRST, THE spirit and genius of the sacred oracles may be considered as a
presumptive argument in favor of their truth and divine original. Not only the
external evidence, but the internal marks and characters of a revelation are to
be taken into consideration. -- The representation now made of the nature and
design of the scriptures, show them not to be unworthy of God, or unsuitable to
the state and circumstances of man. Had these writings been dictated by
imposture or enthusiasm, so great and good a design could not have been
expected.

WE may also infer, That those who plead for the divine right of absolute
monarchy, or of it is indefeasible lineal succession, and absolute submission to
arbitrary will and lawless sway -- or who would destroy all order and
government, and subject mankind to the confusions and miseries of anarchy, must
have some other support for their respective schemes than the word of God.

AGAIN, It may be inferred from this discourse, that the spirit of Domination,
that has appeared in the christian church, and the persecutions and cruelties,
with which it has been accompanied and supported, are truly antichristian.

THIS subject likewise teaches us, as we value our liberties, either civil or
sacred, to prize the gospel, and to seek and cultivate the spirit of it is
divine author. Not only those states that were once most famed for liberty, as
Greece and Rome, sunk into slavery when they lost their virtue; but when the
kingdom of God was taken from the Jews, they were given up to the oppressions
of the most cruel tyranny -- This also is in general the state of those places
who were once blessed with the gospel, but have now lost it.

BUT I must proceed to a more particular application of my subject -- And beg
leave upon this occasion, in the first place to address my self to THE
GUARDIANS OF OUR CIVIL LIBERTIES; under which denomination, I comprehend all
our honored Rulers and political Fathers, possessed either of legislative or
executive power. --

MY honored Fathers will permit me, with all due respect, to remind them of the
great and important trust committed to them by God and Man.

ALL power is originally from God, and civil government his institution, and is
designed to effect some of the great designs of his moral administration, and
to advance the happiness of his creatures. Civil power ought therefore ever to
be employed agreeable to the nature and will of the supreme Sovereign and
Guardian of all our rights.

BUT though civil power is the ordinance of heaven, yet is it to be considered as
granted also by the people -- and granted for very important ends: the natural
independence they give up, and liberty they part with, is for the security of
civil liberty. And civil society is a most salutary institution -- a state far
best adapted to the happiness of man, according to the present constitution of
things. Unnumber'd are the blessings that result from this state, when civil
authority is improved for the purposes for which it is granted. Then each
individual enjoys all those rights which are the gift of the universal Parent;
having also the protection of government, and the security of laws; from whence
result too many advantages to be now enumerated. But the enjoyment of these
Blessings mainly depend upon the conduct of those vested with civil power. It
is therefore a most important trust that such persons have committed to them:
and upon a faithful discharge of it, the happiness of the whole civil society
mainly, under God, depends. You do well therefore, Gentlemen, to consider the
happiness of this people, not only in the present time but in future
generations, (for few acts of government are limited in their operations to the
present time) committed to your care. Viewing things in this light, the duties
of your respective stations are important, and your obligat^^^ to perform them
apparent. To be constituted (...) by a Prince, whose glory is the happiness of
his subjects; or, to be chosen by a free people as protectors of their
privileges, and guardians of their rights and laws, -- how great are the
obligations to duty and fidelity?

BUT the following things, which you will suffer me to remind you of, give an
additional strength to your obligations, to act well your respective parts, to
secure to us our liberties, and advance our welfare.

WE have long had the happiness of enjoying a most excellent constitution of
government: A government in which the prerogative of the sovereign and the
privileges of the people are so tempered, that they mutually support one
another -- "A constitution formed on common reason, common consent, and common
good: A constitution of free and equal laws, secured against arbitrary will,
and popular license, by an admirable temperament of the governing powers,
controling and controled by one another". The English constitution is not only
the pride of Britons, but the envy of its neighbors. -- We have also through the
goodness of the Almighty, been favored with Princes, especially since the
accession of those of the illustrious house of Hanover, that have been
Guardians of our rights, and Fathers of the people. -- Indeed a renowned Prince
of the house of Orange is not to be forgotten, but ever to be remembered with
gratitude, as our Deliverer from tyranny.

BUT the goodness of that God, by whom kings reign, is not to be passed by
unnoticed, in having given us so excellent a Monarch, as his late illustrious
Majesty -- His goodness also in continuing him so long, and in making him so
great a Blessing to his wide extended dominion -- A monarch who reigned in the
hearts of his numerous subjects: -- A monarch who had repeatedly this honorable
testimony from the representative body of the nation, that he never, in one
instance, during the course of his long reign, violated the constitution, "but
that under his royal protection we had lived in an uninterrupted and secure
enjoyment of our religion, laws and liberties:" -- A monarch whose shining
virtues in private life, and whose public character, and many illustrious
deeds, will cause him ever to be numbered with the best of kings, that have
swa^'d the British Scepter, and to be remembered, (...) esteem and gratitude:
And whose paternal care of all his subjects, even those that were most distant
from the throne, and his attention to what was the common cause and the
interest of the whole, manifested in his wise measures and vigorous endeavors
to recover his rights, so unjustly invaded here in America, and to defend and
preserve the British colonies, will render the name of GEORGE the SECOND ever
sacred and dear to us.

AND although a succession of such Princes, seems a blessing almost too great to
be expected, yet that God "who removes Kings and sets up Kings", has
favored us with one to succeed him, formed by his gentle conducting hand, and
by the force of his attractive example, to the same happy temper. -- A Prince
possessed of such amiable virtues and excellent accomplishments, as give ground
to expect the continuance and advancement of all those blessings we enjoyed
under the reign of his royal grandfather. -- A Prince not only born and
educated in England, but who glories in the name of BRITON -- A Prince who has
most graciously assured us, that it is his firm and invariable resolution to
adhere to, and strengthen our excellent constitution, to maintain the
Toleration inviolable, and protect his faithful subjects in the greatest of
human blessings, the secure enjoyment of their civil and religious Rights.

I may add, To what height is the glory of the British Nation, at this time
advanced! How are the hearts of all united in loyalty and affection to a
sovereign, who esteems the happiness of his subjects the firmest stability of
his Throne! How great and almost unparalled are the successes of our fleets and
armies; and in all parts of the globe! What happy consequences have resulted
from the auspicious conduct of a truly patriot minister; and from the fidelity,
wisdom, and intrepidity, accompanied with the most generous humanity, of others
employed in public services! By this happy coincidence of affairs, the
reputation, grandeur and prosperity of the nation was never carried to a
greater pitch than at this Day.

BUT to bring our views near home, in this Province; -- We are blessed with a
constitution formed upon the model of the British Government: -- A
constitution, which if kept inviolate, will secure to us the blessings of civil
society, and the advantages of religious liberty. Under the protection of a
royal charter, many valuable privileges and immunities are vested in the body
of the people, their properties secured, and all the liberties of natural
subjects born in the realm of England, granted and affirmed to them. -- And
their religious privileges have ever been most dear to them.

IT IS also to be remembered, that to enjoy the blessings of christian liberty,
our pious ancestors left their pleasant native country, and came into an
inhospital wilderness: oppressed with ecclesiastical tyranny, they sought a
retreat in the wilds of America -- and through unnumbered difficulties, heaven
conducting, protecting and prospering them, they at length obtained an Asylum
here.

PLACED as we have been near a rival, perfidious power, with numerous savages
at it is command, we have struggled with many difficulties, ever since our first
settlement, to the last year, to maintain our independence and secure our
rights; and have now seen, through the tender mercy of our God, a most happy
result of this long contest -- the schemes of our enemies being defeated, their
designs blasted, and we delivered from the calamities that attended, and the
still greater miseries, that threatened us. -- Heaven has shown a most tender
regard for our welfare -- Heaven has been kind to us beyond our deserts -- and
bestowed its blessing with a most liberal hand.

BUT the security, the continuance, the improvement of these blessings, and
transmitting their salutary effects to posterity, may greatly depend, my
honored fathers, upon your wise and good conduct.

THE connection between religion and liberty is apparent, I trust, from what we
have heard at this time. Religion being the only solid basis of this
inestimable blessing, your first regard is due thereto. Religion, indeed, is
the first and principal concern of every man, as the favor of his maker, and
his happiness in time and through eternity depend upon it. No other principle
will so effectually secure the rectitude of your conduct, and lead you with
equal uniformity and ardor to seek the welfare of this people. Influenced by
the spirit of our holy religion, we may expect from a regard to the authority
of God, fidelity in the offices you sustain. Benevolence, which includes
patriotism, being also a distinguishing branch of the religion of Christ, as
this prevails in you, we may expect all those happy consequences, that result
from a patriot spirit, and patriot measures.

POSSESSED of the spirit of Christ, from a regard to the honor of God, a
sincere desire to comply with his will, and a tender concern for the happiness
of this people, you will be led seriously to consider, what is more especially
your duty at this time; and what the present conjuncture of affairs demands.
The dispensations of providence in particular in the signal successes granted
to our arms here in America, call for our attention and religious improvement.
It is not for me to say, what may be your duty, in all respects, in consequence
of these remarkable events. Should our valuable acquisitions for the future
remain a part of the British dominions (which God almighty grant!) new scenes
of duty, as well as happiness may open.

BUT as Peace, the great object of our pursuit, is not yet obtained, suffer me
to enquire, whether it is not incumbent upon us at this time, fully to comply
with the reasonable demands of his Majesty, to provide for the security of
those conquests already made, and for the farther prosecution of the war with
vigor? As we hereby shall testify our gratitude for what has been already done
for us, our loyalty to our new sovereign, and recommend our selves to his royal
favor, and possibly further contribute to the humbling our enemies, and the
procuring peace upon terms of glory and advantage, as well as manifest our deep
sense of the importance of these conquests being annexed to the British crown.
From these considerations, although our burdens are great, should we not be
excited once more to exert our selves with the utmost vigor and cheerfulness in
the important cause, upon which the interest of the whole British dominions,
and our future security and tranquillity so greatly depend?

To return, As no natural or civil advantages will secure the happiness of a
people without religion and public virtue, the connection between vice and
slavery being as natural and unavoidable to a community, as to an individual;
as he that commits sin, is a servant of sin, so the general prevalence of
vice in a state will bring on slavery: therefore as you would secure our
freedom, my Fathers, your regard is due to the moral and religious state of
this people.

THROUGH the pious care and wise conduct of the administration in times past,
good provision has been made by the legislature, to keep up the knowledge of
the gospel, and to bring men to the practice of it is precepts. We have also
many good laws for the promoting of piety and virtue, and the suppression of
vice and immorality: But it deserves consideration, whether a more vigorous
execution of these laws is not necessary. It is weakening the authority of
government and laws, to have any enacted and not put in execution. Among other
things that are recorded to the honor of one of the best of our ancient
Princes, ALFERD the great. Not less renowned for his delivering the Nation from
the oppression of a foreign enemy, than his wise institution for the security
of civil liberty.
it is said "his laws were mild but severely executed." And the majesty of laws
must be revered, where the liberties of a people are secured.

PERMIT me to enquire, as an Oath is such a solemn act of religion, and one of
the great securities of government; as our lives, property and liberty often
depend upon it; whether something further may not be requisite to render that
sacred obligation more to be depended on, and to bring all to pay the greatest
reverence to that most solemn tie? The following queries may not be unworthy
notice, --

1. Whether Oaths should be required where there are great temptations to
perjury, unless in cases of extreme necessity.

2. Whether the form of words ought not to be the most solemn and striking that
can be invented?

3. Whether an Oath ought not be administered with the greatest solemnity --
that so it might be considered as a religious act -- a solemn appeal to the
great God of truth, and avenger of falsehood?

AN approved writer upon Ethics has this observation, -- Where perjuries grow
frequent in any state, the magistrates or legislators are generally chargeable
with much of the guilt. If they frequently exact oaths without necessity; or
where oaths give no security in the point in view; or if oaths are required
where there are great temptations to perjury, with hopes of impunity from men.
-- They also do bad service to religion, who don't appoint an awful solemn form
of words, fit to strike the minds of men with reverence in such an action. --

HUTCHESON introd. to mor. phil.




AGAIN, As fathers of the people, whose duty it is to attend to the interest of
the whole family; the children and youth demand your attention: a due regard is
therefore to be paid to their education, early to form their minds to
knowledge, piety, virtue, industry, and a love of liberty. -- May not some
farther provision be made, more effectually to promote these ends? ALL wise
states have thought the good education of children and youth, to be connected
with the public welfare -- and it has ever been considered as one of the duties
of civil magistrates to make suitable provision for their becoming useful
members of society. -- And although we have a law which impowers the Select-men,
etc. to take effectual care -- that the children and youth (particularly of the
poor) do not live idly, etc. -- and although we have a law obliging towns of
fifty families to have a schoolmaster, to teach reading and writing, and towns
of one hundred families a grammar school. -- Query, Might the first of these
laws be made more extensive, or be better executed? -- And, secondly, Is there
not the same reason the other should be extended to parishes: And is it not
equally necessary in many cases to answer the salutary intentions of that law?


ONE thing more permit me to hint at. -- Our situation and circumstances demand
a particular attention to our husbandry and trade, THAT our lands in general
might be better cultivated -- and that we might do more toward raising the
provisions we consume in this Province, all will allow. To effect these ends
there are things pointed out worthy the public attentention, in a Pamphlet
lately reprinted, entitled, Essays upon Field-Husbandry in NEW ENGLAND. By
JARED ELIOT.

IT would be going out of my line, if not deemed arrogance, to pretend to point
out methods for the regulation or improvement of Trade: -- Or, by what means
our export might be brought to bear a greater proportion to our import: But the
following Reflections upon Trade in Dr. NEWTON's dissertations upon the
prophecies concerning TIRE, may not be unacceptable, or without use.

TRADE is a fluctuating thing: it passed from Tire to Alexandria, from
Alexandria to Venice, from Venice to Antwerp, from Antwerp to Amsterdam, and
London; the English rivalling the Dutch, as the French are now rivalling both.
All Nations almost are wisely applying themselves to trade; and it behooves
those who are in possession of it, to take the greatest care they do not lose
it. It is a plant of tender growth, and requires sun and soil and fine seasons
to make it thrive and flourish. It will not grow like the palm tree, which with
the more weight and pressure rises the more. Liberty is a friend to that, as
that is to liberty. But nothing will support it more than virtue, and what
virtue teaches, sobriety, industry, frugality, modesty, honesty, punctuality,
humanity, the love of our country, and the fear of God. The prophets will
inform us how the Tyreans lost it; and the like causes will always produce the
like effects. (Is. 23. 8, 9. Ezekiel. 27. 3, 4.)


as it is by our improvement of the advantages that result from those sources
of wealth, our independence is to be maintained: May not something further be
done for their advancement and encouragement -- as well as to discountenance
idleness and extravagance, vices that pave the way to slavery? ALTHOUGH it is
most agreeable to the genius of a free people to make all, if possible, feel
the happy effects of industry and ingenuity; and it may be of great use to
excite in laborers a spirit, of emulation, by bestowing honorary prizes or
premiums on those who distinguish themselves in any useful employments; -- yet
in free governments, not only sumptuary laws have been enacted -- but severity
to the idle and extravagant has been though it necessary. -- We are told, that the
Athenian republic, even at the time when its government was most free, had a
court that had a power of punishing idleness, and consequently sent for any
person they pleased, and examined him, what he spent, and how he came by it. So
that it was impracticable for a man to live dissolutely i^ Athens on ill-got
wealth, since on the first appearance of profusion, such a person would have
been convened before the Ar^opagi.


ALTHOUGH I fear I have already presumed too far on the candor and patience of my
hearers, yet I should not be excused were I not more particularly to apply my
discourse, to the much respected part of my auditory, who are more especially
concerned in the important business of this Day.

As one of our valuable charter-privileges is this afternoon to be exercised,
as it is value greatly depends upon it is being well improved, and as the liberty
and independency of a mixed government, and the preservation of the
constitution, result from each Branch discharging the duties of their
respective departments with fidelity, the affairs of this day are truly
interesting. It is of great consequence that your choice terminate on men of
approved worth. You will therefore, honored Gentlemen, be concerned to act with
deliberation, wisdom, great impartiality, and with that freedom which the
spirit of Christ and his religion require. -- Freedom of choice and action may
equally be destroyed or prevented by a corrupt bias on the mind, undue
influence, or sinister views, as by external force. The liberty now
recommended, and which will lead to freedom of election, requires that you do
what is most rational, what you think is most agreeable to the divine will,
what will be most conducive to the happiness of your constituents, and most
effectually secure the liberties of a free people: -- Then, neither the tyranny
of custom, the partialities of friendship, private animosities, or a regard to
any particular faction will influence your choice; but you will act with that
freedom, which becomes the Dignity of so respectable a Body.

So much has been said, and so often repeated, upon this occasion, poin^^^^ out
the qualifications of the persons requisite to fill this important office with
honor to themselves and advantage to the public, that I shall only say, -- Men
possessed of the Spirit of Christ -- Men that maintain their own independence,
or that are free from the tyranny of ambition, avarice and other lusts, having
other qualifications, ought to have the preference in your choice. These are
the persons that will have the votes of this day, if those entrusted with the
affairs of it, are influenced by the spirit of Christ, a spirit of freedom.

UNDER the influence of this spirit, their future conduct, in all
deliberations, through the approaching year, will be with that freedom and
integrity, that unanimity and patriotism, which might be expected from the
guardians of the liberties and legislators of a free state. And such as shall
most effectually secure to us all our liberties civil and sacred, and transmit
them with advantage to posterity.

OUR subject is instructive also to the ministers of Christ. -- It teaches us,
my reverend Fathers and Brethren, to seek and cultivate the spirit of that
divine master, whom it is our honor to serve, and that holy and excellent
religion which it is our business and happiness to promote among mankind.
Possessed of this spirit, we shall stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free. While on the one hand, it will prevent our claiming any undue
authority, or lording it over God's heritage* on the other hand, it will
prevent our calling any man master or father upon earth -- or submitting to any
authority in things of religion, but the word of God. This spirit also will
give us freedom of access in our addresses to the throne of grace -- and open
the mouth with boldness in making known the mystery of the gospel. -- Then
shall we by the manifestation of the truth commend ourselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God. -- This, as it will transform us into the
likeness of Christ, will make our example as well as doctrine instructive; and
give the most rational ground to expect our labors shall be crowned with
success: But if we should fail of this, we obtain the acceptance of our Lord,
and the reward, through grace, of faithful servants.

LET me add one word to the whole body of this people. As a people we have ever
been jealous of our liberties: While our subject teaches us to prize them, it
teaches the most effectual way to secure them. It is not by clamors for
liberty, or opposition to legal authority, that our invaluable privileges are
to be secured; but by seeking and cultivating the spirit of Christ, his holy
religion, and a sacred regard to all its requirements, and wise institutions.
-- This is the most certain way to secure to us our liberties, and to make us a
free and happy people. -- The excellent writer Dr. BUTLER.
before referred to, justly observes, -- Opposition in a legal, regular way, to
measures which a person thinks wrong, cannot but be allowed in a free
government: But opposition from indirect motives, to measures which he sees to
be necessary, is it self immoral: It keeps up the spirit of licentiousness; is
the greatest reproach of liberty, and in many ways most dangerous to it, and
has been the principal means of overturning free governments. -- Civil liberty,
I have already observed, is founded on civil government: -- Civil government
supposes subordination, obedience to laws, and due subjection to those in
authority. -- Titus was commanded in the discharge of his ministerial office,
to put the christians in mind "to be subject to principalities and powers, and
to obey magistrates": And St. Jude brands with infamy those that "despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities." -- It is our duty as friends to
liberty, and as christians, to "submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors."

I MAY add, The present administration of government is such as to challenge
our esteem, and to demand our reverence and submission; and under which we may
account ourselves happy. -- If the primitive christians were to obey the
heathen magistrates, that were in power; the Emperor as supreme, and Governors
or proconsuls sent by him; is it not then our duty to be loyal to the best of
Kings, and to testify our loyalty by paying all due honor and respect to his
worthy Representative? Having in the chief seat of government, a Gentleman His
Excellency FRANCIS BERNARD, Esquire;
of approved worth -- One who has adopted the maxims of government of our late,
as well as our present, illustrious Sovereign -- One who has generously
declared, that he will preserve to us our general rights as British subjects,
and our particular privileges granted us by royal charter -- And that religion
and morality shall be encouraged, and vice discountenanced under his
administration: And as his Excellency has hitherto exhibited such integrity of
conduct, and zeal to promote our welfare; it is to be hoped, that we in this
province, ever distinguished by our loyalty, shall by our dutiful and
affectionate carriage to our Governor, make his administration easy to himself,
as well as beneficial to the public.

IN a word, Let us revere civil government as the ordinance of God, and be
thankful for that which we enjoy, as it secures to us our Rights as men and
christians; and under it live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and
honesty -- Let us fear God and honor the King; and render to all, that honor
and tribute which is due -- Piety and loyalty stand in connection; and loyalty
or submission to lawful authority, is equally necessary for the preservation of
liberty, as opposition to corruption and resistance of tyranny.

BUT, Whatever civil or religious liberties and privileges we may glory in, if
we are the servants of sin, we are in a state of dishonorable servitude, and
cruel tyranny: but if the Son of God makes us free we shall be free indeed; and
shall enjoy the glorious liberty of the children of God. This which may be
called a moral liberty, which above all other is to be prized, is the glorious
effect of the spirit of Christ and his gospel. Then, the understanding is by
the spirit of light and truth freed from darkness and error -- or, as the
apostle expresses it, that God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, shines into the heart, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. -- Then the will and affections are
also freed from the dominion of sin, and brought to a subjection to his will; a
conformity to which is the perfection of liberty -- This also will give a
spirit of adoption, or the liberal disposition of the children of God. And as
Christ has abolished death, and obtained eternal redemption for us, this will
free the mind from the bondage which results from the fear of death, and
finally give a victory over the grave, and complete redemption -- or a
deliverance from all the destructive consequences of sin, and the perfection of
liberty and happiness in the Kingdom of God.

IN fine, Let it be the great concern of us all to be made free from sin, to
become the servants of God, and to have our fruit unto holiness, that so the
end may be everlasting life.

AMEN.
THE Delay of the Publication of this Discourse occasioned by the Author's ill
State of Health, it is hoped will be excused.

Besides some errors in poin^^^^, the following mistakes i^ printing, the
reader is desired to correct;

P Age 9, line 6, for the read this

Page 10, line 7, after religion, add yet

Page 27, line last but one from the bottom, in the marginal note, for Now read
How Last line, for Nations. read Nations!

Page 49, line 5 th from the bottom, after that add, temper and productive of
that

Page 63, line 1 st marginal note, for ALFERD read ALFRED -- line 3, of the
same note, for institution read institutions

Page 64. line 5 th from the bottom of the marginal note, after might, add not

Page 69, line 16, add shall after we


