A SERMON, On 1 CHRONICLES xxix. 28. Occasioned by the DEATH of KING GEORGE the
SECOND, Of happy Memory, who departed this Life on the 25th Day of OCTOBER, in
the Year of our LORD, 1760, in the 77th Year of his Age, and the 34th of his
Reign; beloved and honored by his Subjects, for his Eminent-Royal-Virtues.

TOGETHER, With some brief Hints, of the amiable CHARACTER of His Majesty KING
GEORGE the THIRD, Now seated on the British THRONE, and the auspicious OMENS,
that attend his Infant REIGN.

PREACHED At PHILADELPHIA, JANUARY 25th, 1761, and published at the request of
the Audience.

By GILBERT TENNENT, Minister of the Gospel of CHRIST.

PSALM cxlvi. 3, 4. Put not your Trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in
whom there is no Help: His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth; in
that very Day his Thoughts perish.

Pallida Mors,
Aequo pulsat Pede, pauperum Tabernas, Regumque Turres.
2 CHRONICLES i. 11, 12. And God said unto Solomon -- Wisdom and Knowledge is
granted unto thee. -- 2 Kings xxiii. 3. And the King made a Covenant to walk
after the Lord, and keep his Statutes with all their Heart. --

"Ad exemplum Regis, totus formatur orbis.
"Tu regere imperio, populos Brittane memento:
"Haec tibi erunt arts; pacisque impo nere morem,
"Parcerc Subjectis, et debellare Superbos.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. DUNLAP, MDCCLXI.

TO The HONORABLE JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire Lieutenant GOVERNOR, and Commander in
Chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent, and
Sussex, on Delaware.
THE following DISCOURSE is respectfully dedicated, by Your Honor's

Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, GILB. TENNENT.

A SERMON, etc.
1 CHRONICLES xxix, 28. And he died in a good old Age, full of Days, Riches,
and Honor; and Solomon his Son reigned in his Stead.


IN these Words, we have an Account of the respectable Circumstances, with
which David, the King of Israel and Judah, concluded his useful Life and Reign.

IN discoursing upon which, I shall offer some Considerations respecting the
Nature, Cause, and Aspect of Death, upon the present and future Life; tending
to repesent its Solemnity, and the Necessity and Importance of Preparation for
it, and so proceed to the Improvement.

DEATH is the Dissolution of the Union between Soul and Body, upon which our
animal Life depends, and though we have no Reason to conclude, that the Life of
our Soul is hereby annihilated; yet if we consider human Nature as compounded
of Soul and Body, Death may be, in some Sense, said to be the visible
Destruction of it, because it reduces all of Man, that is visible, to
deplorable Ruins! Reduces the active Creature full of anxious Thoughts, big
with great Projects and Designs, and laborious in the Pursuit of them, to a
breathless Mass, a ghastly Spectacle, devoid of Beauty and of Motion, which to
prevent being offensive, must soon be hid in the dark and silent Retreat of the
Grave, and become the Prey of Worms.

HOW this vital Union is dissolved, we know no more than how it is formed; that
Beings of so vastly different Natures as the Soul and Body are, should be
closely united is amazing, yet the Union appears to be as certain as it is
astonishing, from their Sympathy with, and Influence upon each other.

IN the mean Time this is apparent, that Death in its near Approaches,
generally offers Violence to the Frame of Nature; though in some Instances, the
Lamp of Life expires gently and gradually, like a Candle in the Socket; yet, in
most, human Nature does not yield to the last Enemy without Reluctance, which
as it manifests its deep Aversion to Death, so it proves Death to be the
Shipwreck of Nature: Our vital Parts being torn by the Violence of Diseases, as
a Vessel by the Rage of a Tempest, before it sinks into the Abyss of the Grave!

BUT whence is it that Death puts a Period to our present Existence, shall we
ascribe this entirely to the sovereign Pleasure of the supreme Being, which
without any regard to our Demerit, has subjected our Nature to such Mortality
and Corruption? No! the sacred Scriptures assert Death to be a penal Evil,
issuing not from the mere Sovereignty, but the Justice and Righteousness of God.

THOUGH Immortality was no Privilege that innocent Man could claim, by the
original Right of his Nature; yet it was graciously promised as the Reward of
his Obedience: It is true, the human Body was formed of the Dust, and that this
is not so adapted to an immortal Life as the Soul, and therefore could only
obtain and enjoy it by way of Gratuity, through the powerful Agency of a
particular Providence.

THE Almighty to excite Man to Obedience, promised this supernatural Privilege,
and to deter him from the Contrary, threatened Death as the Punishment of Sin:
Which necessarily supposes, that it would not have been his Lot, had he
persisted in his Obedience to his Creator and Sovereign: And hence the Apostle
Paul assures us, that The Wages of Sin is Death; and elsewhere, that By one Man
Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men,
for that all had SINNED: How? Virtually, in their federal Head the first Adam;
it was therefore at this Door, that Death and all its preceding Train of
Diseases and Miseries, has broke in upon and entirely inundated this lower
World, whereby it is rendered a Vale of Tears, a Scene of Woe: And indeed it is
congruous both to Reason and Justice, that the Empire of Death and Misery
should be parallel in Extent with the Dominion of Sin, the one as universal as
the other.

BUT what Aspect has this penal Evil, Death, upon the present Life? I answer,
It may be said in general to be the End of it, it puts a final Period to the
Drama of Life, whereby its shifting Scenes are quite shut up, and the Actors
hurried off the Stage into a State of Inactivity and Darkness, just as in the
dead of the Night, an entire stop is put to all the Business of the preceding
Day, and every Place of public Concourse wrapped up in solemn Silence and
Obscurity!

BUT in particular, Death puts a Period to all our worldly Schemes and Labors,
as well as to our secular State of Prosperity and Adversity, together with the
Seasons of Grace, and Opportunities of Service.

WHAT is said of Princes may be applied to Peasants, that Their Breath goes
out, and in that very Day their Thoughts perish: While the Statesman is forming
grand Projects, and imagines he has near compassed his Designs; Death, which
constantly lies in Ambush, frequently, and suddenly crushes his Schemes,
disappoints his Expectations, and blasts his Success: Death carries all off
from the Theater of Action, to the Prison of the Grave, where those, that a
little while before, made a great Noise and Bustle, are locked up in a profound
Sleep, out of which Nothing can awake them, but the loud Blast of the
Archangel's Trumpet.

DEATH likewise puts a Period to our outward State, whether prosperous or
afflicted; it concludes Prosperity by destroying Life, the Foundation of it,
and hurries the grandest Potentates, from the Pomp of a Throne, to the
Obscurity of the Grave, where no Traces of their former Grandeur appear, in the
ghastly Remains of their Mortality, and the Places that knew them on Earth
shall know them no more.

ON the other Hand, Death concludes all the Evils of an afflicted State, this
gives the Child of God a happy Discharge from all the Hardships of the
Christian Warfare, and brings to a Period the Cruelty of Enemies, whose Rage
can pursue us no further than the Grave, There the Wicked cease from troubling,
and the Weary are at Rest: In a Word, Death is a secure Retreat from all the
Calamities of Life, under the Pressure of which the whole Creation groans and
travels, and is therefore on this Account as acceptable to many, as the
Darkness of the Night to the wearied Hireling!

BUT this is not all, Death likewise puts a final Period to all our
Opportunities of Service; we have now many Advantages to do Good, and must
account for our Diligence and Fidelity in the Improvement of them; but these
will soon be over. Death will, in a little Time, bring every one of us that
awful Message, Give an Account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer
Steward.

BUT I proceed to consider the Aspect that Death has upon a future Life.

HERE observe, That by Death our Souls are brought to live in a State of
Separation from our Bodies, though the Dust returns to its original Earth, yet
our Spirits return to God who gave them. They become, by quitting these
Mansions, unembodied Spirits, and enter upon a new Scene of Life, in which they
have no Use for the Organs of Sense and Motion; Death liberates our Souls from
the Encumbrance of elementary Bodies, and thereby awakes their noble Powers to
greater Vigor and Sublimity in their Operations; it frees our Spirits from
their Dependence on animal Bodies, and from the Impressions made on them by
sensible Objects, so that the Pleasures thence issuing for ever terminate, and
are now derived from Objects better suited to the immaterial Nature of the
Soul. Further,

BY Death our Souls enter into an unseen World, and change their Place as well
as their Mode of living, we pass by Death into the vast HADES, or invisible
World; to us an undiscovered and untried Country, which neither our Senses can
give us any Notice of, or our Reason comprehend; and in which we shall meet
with new Society, and such a vast Variety of new Objects and Entertainments,
either in themselves, or in Respect of our Apprehension of them; (then
immediate and perfect) as will furnish a sufficient Fund for everlasting
Wonder, Love, and Praise! When our Spirits pass out of the narrow Current of
Time, they leave this minute Point of Earth on which we tread, and take their
Flight into those immense Territories, over which he presides who has the Keys
of Hell and Death.

FURTHER, our Souls pass from a State of Trial to a State of Rewards and
Punishments, as incomprehensible as excellent, satisfactory, eternal; Rewards
which the human Mind in its sublimest Flights cannot grasp, and which all
Language and Images fail adequately to express.

THOUGH the general Judgment be deferred till the Resurrection, yet the Soul
undergoes a particular Judgment, immediately after its Departure from the Body,
or something analogous to it, which is previously necessary to its being fixed
in a State of Bliss or Misery; and this the sacred Scriptures assure us is the
Case of all that depart this Life, as appears by the Parable of Dives and
Lazarus, the Promise of Christ to the Thief on the Cross, and the Desire of the
Apostle to be dissolved, that he might be with Jesus.

THE Improvement of this Subject now calls for your Attention.

DOES DEATH bring such visible Ruin upon our Nature, and is it the penal Fruit
of Sin? Then what Reason has any Man living to be proud, who constantly carries
about with him such poignant Incentives to Humility, in the Mortality of his
very Frame, which has in it the Seeds of innumerable Diseases, and of Death:
Should he boast of his Descent who must say of Corruption thou art my Father,
and to the Worm thou art my Mother and my Sister. -- Shall we glory in our
Strength which is crushed before the Moth? -- Or in our Beauty, whose Features
shall put on a ghastly Pale, and be stained with Putrefaction? -- Shall we be
puffed up with Wealth and Honor who must so soon leave them, and sink in
undistinguished Dust and deep Oblivion? -- And seeing Sin has intailed this
Curse of Mortality upon us, we may thence infer its great Malignity, and should
be thereby enduced to behave toward it accordingly, as the most odious
Deformity and fatal Source of all our Woes!

IS the Empire of Death absolute and universal? Then how little is Man to be
trusted in, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, continually exposed to innumerable
Accidents? Surely Men of low Condition are Vanity, and Men of high Degree a
Lie: Who may by corrupt Biases, inconstant Resolutions, or by sudden Death,
disappoint our Expectations from them; if any deserved our Confidence, it would
be the great and powerful, but even those we are cautioned against a Dependence
on: Trust not in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no Help, his
Breath goes out, he returns to his Earth; in that very Day his Thoughts perish.

DOES Death put a Period to all our secular Affairs, then how moderate should
we be in the Prosecution of them, inviolably observing the rational and
excellent Medium between Extremes, prescribed by the Apostle, Sorrowing as though
we sorrowed not, and rejoicing as though we rejoiced not, because the Fashion of
this World passes away. Death strips the World of its deceitful Charms, and
represents it in its native Dress of Emptiness and Vanity; The Grave sets
before our Eyes in a strong Point of Light, of how little Significancy human
Greatness and Prosperity are, to those who must in a short Space leave them all
behind, and go as naked out of the World as they came into it: Certainly
covetous Persons that make a great Noise and Bustle about their Projects and
Designs, Spend their Money for that which is not Bread, walk in a vain Show,
and vex themselves in vain.

WILL Death put a final Period to all the Sufferings of this Life and that to
come, with Respect to such as fear God and work Righteousness? Then let us
endure them with Patience and Fortitude, for they are light, and but for a
Moment, and therefore not worthy to be compared with the exceeding great and
eternal Weight of Glory before us! Death will send our pained Bodies to the
Dormitory of the Grave, and in Case we truly repent of Sin, and believe in
Jesus, translate our afflicted Souls to the Rest of God, where all Tears shall
be wiped away, and we shall enjoy a Felicity, large as our Desires, and lasting
as our Souls.

AND seeing Death concludes our gracious Seasons, and Opportunities of Service,
let us awake out of Sleep, and work while the Day lasts, for the Night comes
in which no Man can work.

BUT I proceed to speak a little on the melancholy Occasion of this Discourse,
viz. The Death of our late gracious Soverign, King GEORGE the Second, of happy
Memory; a Prince who may be in Justice denominated, the Father of his People: A
Prince who through the whole Course of his Reign aimed at no despotic tyrannical
Sway, but on the Contrary expressed due Respect to the representative Body of
the Nation, and made its Laws and Constitution the invariable Rule of his
Conduct: As he wronged no Man of his private Property, so he granted to all
that religious Liberty; which, as it is the Birthright of all, so it is the
greatest Support and Ornament of real Christianity, which is a reasonable
Service, founded on Argument, the Issue of impartial Enquiry and free Choice:
But the Reverse hereof, is built on the Ruins of every Thing that is valuable
in human Nature, and directly tends to destroy the Religion of Jesus entirely,
by setting up other Kings in his spiritual Kingdom, and claiming Allegiance to
them in Opposition to his Authority: In brief, it opposes Humanity and enslaves
Mankind.

HERE give me Leave transiently to observe, That there was a memorable
Resemblance or Analogy between the Hebrew Monarch David, and our deceased
Sovereign, in Respect of his heroic military Character, as appears particularly
from the intrepid Bravery of the latter at the famous Battle of DETTINGEN, the
Issue of which reflected as great Glory on the Arms of Britain, as it did
Scandal on those of France!

AS the Prosperity of his People was the principal Object of his Attention, so
he was anxious and unwearied in the Prosecution of it to the last Moments of
his Life; and hence the Nation's Esteem and Love increased with his growing
Years, which is not only evident from their public Declarations, but likewise
by their extraordinary Union among themselves; and, that even under the
prodigious Load of an expensive War, the great Variety of their Denominations,
religious Principles, and Party Views notwithstanding.

IN Consequence of the aforesaid Union, it pleased that divine Providence, by
which Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, to crown the latter Part of the
Administration of our deceased Sovereign with such an astonishing Train of
memorable Victories by Land and Sea, as will be the Wonder of Posterity, and
brighten the British Annals in all future Time: As this illustrious Era
reflects great Honor on the King, his Councils, and Arms, so if rightly
improved, it opens, under Providence, a Prospect of EMPIRE for the Nation,
beyond what the most sanguine Hopes would have sometime since dared to dictate;
an Empire that will give her vastly more Weight in the Scale of Europe, if not
(in a Course of Time) constitute her the Arbitress of it.

BUT in the midst of this surprising Series of the most important Events, in
this critical Conjuncture of a War with numerous and potent Nations, combined
in an unjust, extraordinary and formidable Confederacy, to ruin entirely a
Protestant Prince, and one of the most renowned, intrepid, and invincible
Heroes that the present or any past Age has produced; I mean his Prussian
Majesty: In this Situation of Things our successful Monarch dies, dies
suddenly, while beloved and revered, dies the Desire and Delight of his People;
while France, our artful implacable Enemy, who has so long insulted the Honor,
ensnared the Councils, and meditated the Ruin of our Nation: I say, while this
arogant Rival-Power is exceedingly humbled, and almost brought to Reason, while
France is stripped of many Fortresses and vast Domains in diverse Parts of the
World, especially in America and the East Indies; her Fleet broken, and her
Trade destroyed, our beloved Sovereign dies, and leaves his great and good
Designs, in Respect of War and Peace, on which his Heart was so much set,
unfinished: A melancholy Providence this! which should be laid to Heart, and
rightly improved; let us therefore humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of
God, that he may exalt us in due Time; let us implore Heaven that this Event
may be overruled to the Good of our NATION in particular, and of ZION in
general: Let us be hereby stirred up to prepare for our own Dissolution, which
how near it is, and how sudden it may be, we know not; as Horace justly
observes, Death makes no Distinction between the Cottages of Peasants and the
Palaces of Princes: -- And from hence let us likewise learn the extreme Vanity
of all human Greatness and Dignity, which cannot screen their Possessors from
the Stroke of a sudden Death.

IN the mean Time give me Leave to observe, that through divine Goodness, there
are some Circumstances attending this Gloom of Providence, which may allay our
Griefs and animate our Hopes, especially these following, viz. The MODE (or
Circumstances) of our late Sovereign's Exit, the Qualifications of his
MINISTRY, the promising Endowments of his SUCCESSOR, and the late famous
VICTORY of the King of Prussia, over the Austrian Army.

THE Circumstances of our late Sovereign's Exit were respectable, similar to
those of the Hebrew Hero in our Text, particularly, he died in a good old Age,
full of Days, being arrived to his Seventy-seventh Year, after a Reign of
Thirty-three, very near the same Space that David reigned over Jerusalem; it is
but a small Number of Mankind of any Order that live to such an Age, and very
few Princes in any Part of the World reign so long a Space. Certainly, my
Brethren, we have great Reason to adore the blessed God, with the most ardent
Gratitude, that so mild and equitable an Administration was continued with us
so long; which if compared with the arbitrary, popish, oppressive Reigns of the
Male Line of the STEWART Family, may in Reason accent the Gratitude of all
sincere Protestants, for so very valuable a Mercy.

BUT to proceed, our late Sovereign likewise died full of Riches and Honor, the
Legacies mentioned in his last Will prove the former, and the numerous
Addresses of the Nation confirm the latter, and both of them are valuable
Benefits, promised by the Almighty, to excite the Creatures Obedience.

IT is likewise an encouraging Circumstance, that our deceased Sovereign left
so able, faithful, and resolute a Ministry at the Helm of the Nation; among
which the truly Honorable Mr. PIT shines with distinguished Luster, a PATRIOT
of such surprising Capacity, such extraordinary Disinterestedness, and unshaken
Firmness, as no Artifice could elude, no Opposition intimidate, or Bribe
seduce, from his inviolable Adherence to such Measures as were necessary to
promote the Honor and Interest of the Nation; a Patriot this, who is, in very
Deed, the Guardian, Joy, and Glory of his Country: It is he who has roused the
sleeping Genius of the Nation from a State of inglorious Ease, sordid
Pusillanimity, and sorry Congresses, to War and Arms, to assert its just Rights
by numerous Acts of heroic Bravery, whereby the Honor of the British FLAG and
Land Forces is retrieved, vindicated from Contempt, made respectable in the
Esteem of all Nations, made the Joy of its Friends, and the Terror of its
Enemies: These glorious Designs were so far from being compassed by the
specious pacific Schemes and trifling Treaties, (with a Court inured to
Artifice and Chicane) which were proposed and pursued by a former Ministry,
that the Honor and Interest of the Nation were betrayed, its Possessions,
Trade, and Influence, by Degrees so impaired, that it was brought to the very
Brink of Ruin, a Plan to complete it was as artfully as confidently concerted,
and almost fully prepared for the fatal Execution: O dreadful, deplorable
Situation! (Quis talia fando, temperet a Lachrymis;) But blessed be God, through
the favorable Smiles of Providence upon the Conduct of a skilful, faithful
PILOT, the British Vessel almost shipwrecked, now emerges above the threatening
Waves, resumes its ancient Empire, and commands the Ocean.

IT IS He that has directed the Nation to its true and most important Interest,
as well as to the most probable and least expensive Measures to obtain and
preserve it, by annexing to the British Crown, through a proper Exertion of its
chief natural Strength (its superior naval Force) this Western EMPIRE, of vast,
yea, unknown Extent, and of immense Value.

AND it must needs give sensible Pleasure to every generous Mind, to see the
extraordinary Merit of this Gentleman, so publicly, so justly, and generally
acknowledged by the Nation, in Sentiments and Expressions of the most
passionate and permanent Gratitude, hereby nobly laboring to make the Memory of
his valuable Services as lasting as Time itself, as durable as they are
diffusive and truly noble: A Reward, which though it be most reasonable and
equitable, yet because of the prodigious Degeneracy of human Nature, is not
always the Attendant of the most noble Actions, the most distinguished Merit,
witness famous MARLBOROUGH, justly for some Time the Darling and Pride of the
Nation, the Wonder of Europe, and the Scourge of France, yet afterward, as
unjustly as ungratefully, reproached, rejected, and contemned: O Lamentable!
may that unhappy Fate be graciously prevented in the present Case, by that
Providence that presides over all!

BUT that which is still more animating in our present Situation, is the
amiable Character we have received of his present Majesty, King GEORGE the
Third, the Grandson of our deceased Sovereign, who now reigns in his Stead, a
Character which his early Instruction in the Principles of LIBERTY, enforced by
the amiable Examples of his famous Predecessors and Relatives, since the ever
memorable Revolution, under pious King William, of glorious Memory; King
WILLIAM, who in the midst of much Labor, eminent Hazard, and great
Discouragements, nobly laid, with a masterly Hand, the very Foundations of all
that is dear to us, as Men, as Christians, and as Protestants; LAID the Basis
of all our present inestimable Privileges of every Kind, Privileges that should
form such indelible Impressions of Gratitude upon our Minds, as no artful
Colorings of designing Men, or length of Time, should ever be able to
extinguish.

BUT to return from this Digression, what has been said concerning the reigning
Prince, considered in Connection with his religious and virtuous EDUCATION in
Protestant Principles, enforced by good Practice Precepta docent, Exempla
cogunt.
(under the Tuition of a Nobleman of distinguished Piety, a Preceptor of
superior Genius) and recommended by the Influence of his religious and
illustrious Parent, the PRINCESS DOWAGER of WALES, renders the aforesaid
Character highly probable, and gives us Reason to hope, that his tender opening
Mind has been early imbued with those noble and humane Sentiments, early
impressed with those devout Affections, which when habitual and prevalent, are
the true Genius and distinguishing Glory of vital Christianity, as necessary,
as ornamental, necessary both to private and public Life, for every Step of
Elevation in the Scale of Offices, Dignity and Dominion, from the lowest to the
highest of them (from the Nadir to the Zenith) to make them comfortable,
honorable, and useful here, and to make us meet for a future glorious State!

I MAY add, that the preceding CHARACTER of his present Majesty is confirmed
by the Beginnings of his Administration, especially by the PROCLAMATION for the
Encouragement of Virtue and Piety, and for preventing and punishing Vice,
Profaneness and Immorality; a PROCLAMATION worthy of the greatest and best of
Princes; a PROCLAMATION as necessary in these Times of Degeneracy and
Corruption, to promote the Safety and Weal of the Nation, as it is excellent in
Respect of its Matter, and elegant in Regard of its Form; the strong Terms in
which it is expressed, together with the Order to read it publicly in Courts
and Churches several Times a Year, have an excellent Tendency, a pious and
promising Aspect on the Church and Nation, and are an encouraging OMEN of Good
to come.

HEAR with Attention, Veneration, and grateful Love, what his gracious Majesty,
our young SOLOMON, our British JOSIAS, speaks from the THRONE!

GEORGE Rex,

We most seriously and religiously considering, that it is an indispensable
Duty on Us to be careful above all other Things, to preserve and advance the
Honor and Service of Almighty God, and to discourage and suppress all Vice,
Profaneness, Debauchery, and Immorality, which are so highly displeasing to God,
so great a Reproach to our Religion and Government, and by Means of the
frequent ill Examples of the Practices thereof, have so fatal a Tendency to the
Corruption of many of our loving Subjects, otherwise religiously and virtuously
disposed, and which (if not timely remedied) may justly draw down the divine
Vengeance on Us and our Kingdom: We also, humbly acknowledging, that we cannot
expect the Blessing and Goodness of Almighty God (by whom Kings reign, and on
which we entirely rely) to make our Reign happy and prosperous to ourself and
our People, without a religious Observance of God's holy Laws: To the Intent
therefore, that Religion, Piety, and good Manners may (according to our most
hearty Desire) flourish and increase under our Administration and Government,
we have thought fit, by the Advice of our Privy Council, to issue this our
Royal Proclamation, and do hereby declare our Royal Purpose and Resolution, to
discountenance and punish all Manner of Vice, Profaneness and Immorality, in all
Persons, of whatsoever Degree or Quality, within this our Realm, and
particularly, in such as are employed near our Royal Person; and that for the
Encouragement of Religion and Morality, we will upon all Occasions distinguish
Persons of Piety and Virtue, by Marks of our Royal Favor. And we do expect and
require that all Persons of Honor, or in Place of Authority, will give good
Example by their own Virtue and Piety, and to their utmost contribute to the
discountenancing Persons of dissolute and debauched Lives: And we do hereby
strictly enjoin and prohibit all our loving Subjects, of what Degree or Quality
soever, from playing on the Lord's Day, at Dice, Cards, or any other Game
whatsoever, either in public or private Houses, or other Place or Places
whatsoever: And we do hereby require and command them, and every of them,
decently and reverently, to attend the Worship of God on every Lord's Day, on
Pain of our highest Displeasure, and of being proceeded against with the utmost
Rigor that may be by Law. -- Thus far the KING.


HOW vastly different is this Specimen from that execrable Order, to read a
Book of Sports on the Lord's Day, which some Time since came from the British
THRONE; (O Tempora, O Mores!) I say the THRONE; but influenced by an infamous
PRELATE, who was as great a Curse to the NATION, as he was a Reproach to those
of his own Order, a popishly inclined CEREMONY-MONGER, who crammed down the
Throat of the NATION by mere Force, not of Argument, but of civil Power, the
pernicious Principles of ARMINIUS, before opposed by the Generality of the
CLERGY, as well as openly and expressly disclaimed and detested by the
PARLIAMENT, its representative Body, as the direct Road to POPERY; but have
ever since become prevalent in it I mean by the Word IT, the Nation.
among Persons of every Order: When I consider the persecuting Conduct of this
Man in general, and in particular the BOOK of SPORTS procured by him, to be
read by all the Ministers of the Churches on the Lord's Day, publicly, on Pain
of Exclusion from their Office and Support, I cannot help thinking on that
horrid Purpose of the PAGAN, which I tremble to relate. (Horresco referens.)
Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo. i. e. If I cannot incline the
Diety to favor my Designs, I will try what Assistance I can get from the Devil.
-- I will not presume to say that his GRACE had any Thoughts of Satan, or
knowingly harbored any bad Intentions in his severe and profane Management;
no Doubt he imagined that he did God Service by it, which doubtless lessened
the Degree of its Malignity in Respect of himself, but in the Mean Time, his
Practice was certainly worthy of the worst of Sentiments and Designs; and in
Regard of Matter, Tendency, and Issue (as to others) the same as if his had
been such.

IT is therefore unaccountable that any who wear a human Form, should pretend
to vindicate such horrid Iniquity in open Day, but these Men, if we may venture
to call them such, who scarce retain any Thing human but the Shape, glory in
their Shame, and while they profess themselves wise become Fools; as they
bewray awful Enmity against all Religion and Virtue, and hereby commence
Enemies to Mankind, and public Pests to civil Society; so they, with equal
Wisdom and Modesty, set themselves in Opposition against, and bid open Defiance
to, the plainest Dictates of Reason and common Sense: Tell it not in Gath, and
publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, that any Protestant has done this,
least the Uncircumcised triumph; be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this crimson
Impiety, and be horribly afraid!

BUT, blessed be JEHOVAH, we live in better Times, having the unspeakably
precious and important Privilege of a truly PIOUS PRINCE on the THRONE, who
may, with Justice and Propriety, be compared to King SOLOMON, in Respect of
Wisdom and Prudence as to the Affairs of Government and State, and to King
JOSIAS in Regard of Humility, Modesty, early and noble Zeal for Religion and
Virtue, so far as he has yet proceeded in his ADMINISTRATION, in which these
excellent Virtues and princely Endowments shine with such rival Luster, that
its hard to say which has the Pre-eminence: This real and reviving Verity
appears with a strong Glare of Light, from all the Transactions of his infant
Reign, whether considered singly, or in a complex View, and especially from the
PROCLAMATION (before mentioned) and his SPEECH to both Houses of Parliament,
which easily and evidently appear to every unprejudiced Mind, to be no Matter
of Form, Custom, or Compliment, but a candid, cordial Declaration, a determined
Resolution, and serious Endeavor to promote the Honor of God and the Good of
the Nation, by the Use of those Means which Revelation prescribes, and Reason
itself confirms; Means that only can, under Providence, secure and perpetuate
the Prosperity of any Nation, witness the four famous Monarchies, and the
Jewish Kingdom, who for the Neglect of them were brought to extreme Distress
and deplorable Ruin! These Specimens appear to proceed from a rational
consistent View of Things, and from a Heart tenderly touched, and intensely
engaged.

AS the Royal Writings (before mentioned) in Favor of Religion and Liberty, are
at least equal to any that ever came from the British Throne in any preceding
Period, in Respect of their important Matter, nervous Force of Argument, and
inimitable Beauty of Diction, as well as on Account of the superior Acumen,
distinguished Candor, Modesty and Affection with which they are formed; so it
is hoped they cannot fail of giving the highest Satisfaction to every Man, that
fears God and loves his Country, in every Part of the British EMPIRE, and of
exciting their Affection to their Sovereign, as well as their Gratitude to GOD,
on Account of this animating Prospect of national Weal, Prosperity and Glory,
in all valuable Respects, as well as the best Interest of Individuals, which
through the gracious Agency of his all-ruling Providence, now opens before us!

BUT to give Light and Force to this Argument, I must beg Leave, with all the
Veneration and Respect due from a Subject to his Sovereign, to borrow a few
Hints from the aforesaid Speech of his SACRED MAJESTY, to both Houses of
PARLIAMENT, which are as follows:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I need not tell you the Addition of Weight which immediately falls upon me, in
being called to the Government of this free and powerful Country at such a
Time, and under such Circumstances. My Consolation is the Uprightness of my own
Intentions, your faithful and united Assistance, and the Blessing of Heaven
upon our joint Endeavors, which I devoutly implore.

BORN and educated in this Country, I glory in the Name of Briton; and the
peculiar Happiness of my Life will ever consist in promoting the Welfare of a
People whose Loyalty and warm Affection to me, I consider as the greatest and
most permanent Security of my Throne: And I doubt not but their Steadiness in
those Principles, will equal the Firmness of my invariable Resolution to adhere
to, and strengthen this excellent Constitution in Church and State, and to
maintain the Toleration inviolable. The civil and religious Rights of my loving
Subjects are equally dear to me, with the most valuable Prerogatives of my
Crown; and as the surest Foundation of the whole, and the best Means to draw
down the divine Favor on my Reign, it is my fixed Purpose to countenance and
encourage the Practice of true Religion and Virtue.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

THE Eyes of all Europe are upon you, from your Resolutions, the Protestant
Interest hopes for Protection. --


AS this and the other Performance (before mentioned) of our PIOUS Sovereign,
As I Trust.
need no Commendation from any, so I freely acknowledge they are vastly above
mine, yet I hope I may be indulged the Pleasure of expressing the genuine
Sentiments of my Heart on so agreeable, yea glorious an Occasion, which
promises so great Good to the Church and State: O may the gracious God make us
deeply sensible of the unspeakable Moment of our present Advantages, both
religious and civil, and enable us to testify our Gratitude to God and Man for
them, by a conscientious Improvement; giving to Caesar the Things that are
Caesar's, and to God the Things that are God's; and may our gracious Sovereign,
who begins his Reign with such amiable Auspices of MODESTY, PRUDENCE, and
PIETY, live long a Comfort to himself, a Blessing to the Kingdoms, over which
he governs in particular, and to the Protestant Church in general; may he be in
Fact, what by his Royal Dignity he is in Title, a Defender of the Faith, and
this I verily hope will be the honorable and happy Attendant of his Reign; THE
great Influence of Authority properly exerted, and enforced by good Example
from the THRONE, to promote national REFORMATION, and the Power of the Contrary
to corrupt and deprave Communities, appear in Contrast with sufficient Light
and Evidence from the Narrative given in the sacred Pages respecting the KINGS
of JUDAH and ISRAEL.

AND the Necessity of a national REFORMATION to secure and perpetuate national
Prosperity and Glory, appears not only from express and repeated Promises
thereof in this Situation of Things, and as explicit Threatenings of the
Contrary in Case of a general Corruption of Manners; ( See Jer. xviii. 7 -- 11
--) but also from the Series of God's dealings with the People of Israel, and
other Nations in Conformity thereto. -- This divine Conduct Reason itself
approves, for seeing it is but right, just, and condecent, suitable to the
divine Character, suitable to the very Nature of Things, and necessary to
answer the Ends of Government; that the moral Governor of the World should
discountenance Vice, and encourage Virtue, by proper Punishments and Rewards:
And seeing Communities, as such, terminate with the present Life, of
Consequence the Members that compose them can only be treated as Individuals in
a future State, it is therefore necessary that BODIES POLITIC, he rewarded or
punished here according to their public MORAL CHARACTER. -- Some Peculiarities
of the Jewish State (under a Theocracy) in juridicial Matters, adapted to their
singular Circumstances, do not in any Measure militate against, or enervate
Arguments deduced from Reason and Equity, which equally affect all Nations in
all Cases that are similar and parallel; and hence the absolute Necessity of a
general REFORMATION of Manners, to promote national Weal and Prosperity, and
prevent Desolation and Ruin, is conspicuous and apparent: Without this, no
political PENETRATION, no martial FORTITUDE, however necessary and amiable, no
SUCCESSES, though numerous and glorious, no NAVAL ARMAMENTS and Land Forces,
however grand and formidable, no OPPULENCE, however immense, can secure guilty
Nations from Misery and Ruin, denounced by incensed Omnipotence, any more than
dry Stubble can defend itself in Contest with devouring Flames!


But to sum up the Desire of my Heart in one Word, give me Leave to say, God
Save the King; or, which is the same in other Words, in a different Language, a
little paraphrased: "Unum opto id, Princeps sit tibi certa Salus:
"Hoc satis unum: quoniam te Sospite nobis,
"Succedent Regno prospera cuneta tuo.
"Caltha suos nusquam Vultus a Sole reflectit,
"Illo orient patens, illo abeunte latens,
"Nos quoque pendemus de te Sal noster, ad omnes
"Expositi rerum te subeunte vices.


IN fine, when the State of the War in Germany very lately took an unpromising
Turn, by the Russian and Austrian Armies taking the Capital of Prussia, and by
the Defeat of the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick by the French, and every Thing
looked dark and distressing; then did divine Providence, when all was put to
the Risque, seasonably and graciously interpose in our Favor, by giving a
complete and decisive Victory over the Grand Austrian Army, under the Direction
of Marshal DAUN, to the brave, but oppressed and environed KING of PRUSSIA.

THIS Victory appears the more mavelous, affecting, and important, when we
consider the Superiority of the Austrian Army, in Respect of their Numbers, the
Freshness of their Troops, their Advantage in Respect of Situation, and the
great Experience, Skill, and Caution of their General, another FABIUS MAXIMUS,
The Roman General who conquered HANNIBAL, the Carthaginian, by Delays.
who having great Resources, has long sought by Delays to ruin his Prussian
Majesty, and had got considerable Advantage against him in two preceding
Battles, some Time ago, which must give fresh Spirit to his Forces; and on the
other Hand, when we at the same Time view our brave Allie under very
discouraging Circumstances, his Troops fatigued, deprived of many of his
experienced gallant Generals, and faithful Veteran Soldiers, in former bloody
Battles, who in Firmness equaled the Macedonian PHALANX, himself oppressed with
the Weight of an unequal War, at a Loss which Way to bend his Course, or which
of his numerous and potent Enemies to fight first; add to this that the End of
the Campaign was near, and that he had no Resource (no sufficient one) in Case
of a total Defeat, from hence I presume it appears, that his Fate and ours
turned in some Measure on the Issue of this BATTLE; there was a Danger either
of his losing his Crown, or our loosing our late Acquisitions to preserve it:
How great then is the Goodness of God in crowning the Scene thus far by this
surprising Success, when there was a Necessity of putting all to the Fortune of
War upon such unequal Terms, to prevent a sure but lingering Death: Surely this
gives Encouragement to expect the Continuance of the divine Favors, in Case we
faithfully improve, by Repentance and Reformation, the Mercies we have already
received, and resolutely prosecute the same political and martial Measures (to
which many sincere Friends of the Nation, heartily wish the Addition of another
Allie at least, to assist in the Land War, in Case the Peace is not concluded
this Winter) which have been hitherto favored by Providence, which may the good
God grant for Jesus Christ his Sake. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

