Dr. Mayhew's TWO SERMONS ON Striving to enter in at the strait Gate.

Striving to enter in at the strait Gate explained and inculcated; AND THE
Connection of Salvation therewith, PROVED FROM THE Holy Scriptures. IN TWO
SERMONS On Luke XIII. 24.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the West Church in BOSTON.

Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they
shall be filled. CHRIST'S Sermon on the Mount. BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed and
Sold by RICHARD DRAPER, in Newbury-Street, EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, and
THOMAS and JOHN FLEET in Cornhill. M,DCC,LXI.

SERMON I. Striving to enter in at the strait Gate explained and inculcated.
LUKE XIII. 24. STRIVE to enter in at the strait gate. --
THESE are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, occasioned by a question that
was proposed to him in the following terms: "Lord, are there few that be
saved?" Who it was that asked this question, or what his views therein were, we
are not particularly informed. However, it seems probable, by his addressing
our Savior under the title of "Lord," that this was one of his professed
disciples. But whoever he were, and whatever his particular views, this was
certainly rather a question of curiosity, than of real importance to the
inquirer. Our Lord therefore, instead of returning a direct answer to him, gave
him, in common with others that were present, this admonition; the observation
of which could not but be of solid advantage to them, as tending to their own
salvation respectively. And he said unto them, Strive [Strive ye] to enter, etc.

THE words, it is humbly conceived, may, without any impropriety, be considered
as an exhortation, admonition or precept, given to all those in general, who
hear the gospel of the kingdom preached; the duty enjoined therein being common
to all; to high and low, rich and poor, male and female: And, it may be added,
both to those who are, and who are not, already in a regenerate state: For, be
they in that happy estate or not, still they ought to use their utmost
diligence to obtain the salvation revealed in the gospel; or, which is the same
thing, to enter in at the strait gate.

BUT it may be proper to be a little more particular in explaining the
phraseology of the text; what is meant by the "strait gate," and what by
"striving" to enter in thereat.

BY the "strait gate," our Lord doubtless intends in general, the gate of
eternal life and happiness. This is put beyond all doubt by his own words in
his sermon on the mount; where he mentions the strait gate, and the narrow way,
as that which "leads unto life," and which "few find;" in opposition to the
wide gate, and the broad way, that "leads to destruction; and many there be,"
says he, "that go in thereat." Our Lord, in this manner of expression, seems to
consider the happiness of the heavenly state, under the notion of a glorious
mansion, or city; to which there lies one certain road, and the entrance into
which, is by a door or gate. In conformity to which manner of conception, he
says in the verse immediately following the text -- When once the master of the
house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without,
and to knock at the door, etc. And, in the revelation of St. John, it is said,
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree
of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. You see from hence, to
what our Savior alludes in the text, and why he uses this metaphor.

BUT why is this called a "strait" gate? Doubtless it is in respect of the many
obstructions and difficulties which attend the working out our salvation, or
finally gaining admission into the paradise of God. The way of error and vice
is said to be wide, and the gate of destruction broad; because it is so natural
and easy to walk in the one, and to enter in at the other. But the way of
truth, righteousness and life, is walked in, and the gate of heaven entered,
with difficulty: Whence it is, that they are described as narrow and strait, in
opposition to the former.

BY "striving" to enter in at the strait gate, is meant in general, exerting
ourselves with vigor, or using our earnest endeavors to that end; to obtain
the salvation of our souls, or finally to gain admission into the kingdom of
heaven. This is the proper notion and idea of striving. Agonizesthe.
It is opposed to indifference, negligence and sloth; and implies an intense
application of the mind and faculties, in order to effect what we have in view.
And striving thus, supposes two things. One is, that there is difficulty in the
way, or opposition to be overcome, which requires a vigorous effort. For if a
thing may be performed with great ease, there is no occasion, nor indeed any
room, for striving in order thereto. As, for example, a man in his full
strength can, with no propriety of language, be said to strive to lift a straw,
or a small pebble-stone; or to do any thing else, which may be done with
facility. But this is far from being the case, with respect to the matter now
before us. There are numerous and great difficulties in religion, as before
observed; with reference to which, the gate of life is said to be strait: So
that in this respect there is abundant occasion for striving. The world, the
flesh and the devil; principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in
high places, are not to be overcome, but by great resolution and vigor on our
own part, even though aided by Him, who is stronger than "the strong man armed."
-- The other thing supposed in striving, unless it be an irrational striving,
is, that the object thereof is a matter of importance. For the difficulty of a
thing, if it be of no consequence, is no proper reason for striving to
accomplish it: So far from it, that this will be a good reason for not
striving, or giving ourselves any trouble or concern about it. Men do indeed
often take great pains, without having any thing in view, really worthy of
them. In the language of the prophet, they "spend their money for that which is
not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not." These are certainly
ill-placed endeavors; striving to no good purpose, even though the ends aimed at
are attained. But when our Lord admonishes us to strive, that we may enter in
at the strait gate, this is a matter of infinite, eternal importance to us; and
so justly demands our utmost care and endeavors.

SOME may perhaps think, that striving to enter in at the strait gate, farther
implies some uncertainty as to the success of our endeavors; whether they
shall be effectual or not: And that our Lord designed to suggest this to us, by
such a manner of expression. But this is improbable for several reasons; and
particularly because, in his sermon on the mount, the precept is expressed
absolutely: "Enter in at the strait gate:" Not as it is here, "Strive," etc.
Which former manner of expression seems a much better argument for the certain
possibility of the thing, than the latter is for the doubtfulness of it.

BUT enough has been said to explain the phraseology, and general scope of this
precept. In farther discoursing upon the subject, it is proposed, by divine
assistance, more particularly to represent to you, What this striving implies
in it: The fatal consequences of not striving; together with the happiness and
glory which will accrue to us, if we strive effectually, or so as finally to
enter in at the strait gate: And lastly, What connection there is, according to
the word of God, between striving in the manner we may and ought to do, and
actually obtaining what we aim at therein, the salvation of our souls. It is
proposed to enlarge much more upon the last of these points, than upon any of
the others. In the first place it will be proper,

I. MORE particularly and distinctly to represent to you, what this striving
implies in it. For this is a very comprehensive duty, which presupposes some
things, and directly contains several others. And,

1st. IT presupposes a man to be at least a speculative believer of the gospel,
or of the christian revelation. For striving to enter in at the strait gate, is
the same thing, in other words, with endeavoring to obtain that salvation
which the gospel reveals. And it is evident, that no man can consistently be
supposed to do this, unless he is first convinced of the truth of the gospel in
general. So that whatever a mere heathen, one who has never heard of, or who
rejects the christian revelation, as an imposture, may be supposed to do with a
view to his future happiness; yet this does not come up to the proper notion
and idea of striving to enter in at the strait gate. But more particularly,

2dly. THIS striving presupposes a man to be awakened into some sense of his
sin, guilt, and misery; and into a serious concern for the welfare of his soul.
The salvation revealed through Jesus Christ, respects, or has for its object, not
the righteous, but sinners; not men, considered in a state of innocence, who
would need no such salvation, but apostate, degenerate and guilty creatures,
justly obnoxious to the wrath of God. It is in this view that mankind are
considered in the gospel; the very foundation of which is laid in, and the
whole superstructure built upon, the supposition that mankind in general are in
such a state of sin, condemnation and ruin. And no one can be supposed to use
his endeavors to obtain deliverance from this state, or to have a part in that
salvation which the gospel reveals, while he remains in a state of carnal
security; or has not an awakened sense of his misery, as lying under guilt, and
being in a state of alienation from God. The doing any thing at all, how little
soever it may be, with a view to obtain deliverance from sin and wrath,
supposes a person to be convinced, that he is really a sinner, and, as such,
liable to wrath.

3dly. THIS striving presupposes a person earnestly to desire the salvation
revealed through Christ; or to have his heart engaged in this matter, as a thing
of the last importance to him. Desires always preceed endeavors, or go before
striving, both in our spiritual and temporal concerns. A man's striving, or
using his endeavors, to obtain worldly riches, pleasures, power and
preferment, supposes his heart to be set upon these things: For if it were not,
he would not certainly be at any great pains to acquire them, or give himself
much concern about them. This is strictly and evidently true of all our
endeavors in religion, or striving to enter in at the strait gate. All
exertions, efforts and strivings to this end, suppose that we sincerely desire
to obtain salvation. Nor will any one strive as he ought to do, in order to
this, unless his desires are strong and vigorous, in some proportion to the
importance of it; at least, unless he considers this as a thing of more
consequence to him, than all worldly riches, pleasures and honors. For he that
postpones the salvation of his soul to any thing in this world, can, with no
propriety, be said to strive to enter in at the strait gate.

4thly. THIS striving implies in it, the use of proper care and diligence to be
rightly informed concerning the way of salvation, and to guard against error in
this respect. For surely, we cannot properly strive to enter in at the gate of
life, or of the kingdom of heaven, if we are unsollicitous to find that "narrow
way" that leads to it. And here there are two things to be particularly
observed. One is, that there is really but one way of life and salvation
revealed do us. The other is, that this is so narrow, that it may be fatally
mistaken, or not found, by those that are careless and negligent in their
inquiries after it. From whence arises the necessity of taking pains to this
end: For if the way of truth and life were so plain and wide, that it could not
possibly be misapprehended, all care and caution lest we should err from it,
would be superseded.

THERE is, as was just now observed, really but one way of life and salvation,
revealed in the gospel; and that is, the way which Jesus Christ himself taught;
the new and living way, which was both opened and pointed out by him. With
reference to which he says, "I am the way, the truth and the life: No man
comes unto the Father, but by me." His inspired apostles also taught the way
of life: Concerning whom it is said in the acts of the apostles, "These men are
the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation."
And that which they declared, was not a different way, but the same which
Christ himself taught; as is manifest by comparing their doctrine with his. So
that there is certainly a way, or one way of salvation, revealed. But is there
any more than one? If any person says, there are two, or more, it is incumbent
upon him to point them out; showing the difference which there is betwixt them;
and yet, that both are true and right, the ways of God's revealing. But this,
it is presumed, no man will attempt to do. It is in reference to the unity of
the way of life, that the apostle says, there is "one faith." -- "There is one
body and one spirit," says he, even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is
above all, etc. Ephesians. IV. 4. 5. 6.
There is therefore as certainly but one true faith, or one gospel, in the
faith of which we can be saved, as there is but one hope of our calling, but
one Lord or Christ, but one God and Father of all. And we might as well suppose
two Fathers of all, two Redeemers, and two gospels, as two ways of salvation,
that differ essentially from each other: And the same apostle denounces a
curse against whomsoever should preach another gospel, or another way of
salvation, even though it were himself, or an angel from heaven.

IT was farther observed above, that this one way of salvation may be fatally
mistaken by those, who are careless and negligent in their inquiries after it.
To which purpose it may suffice for the present, to remind you of two passages
of scripture only. One is in the 2 Epis. of Peter, chap. iii. "And account that
the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation, even as our beloved brother Paul,
according to the wisdom given unto him, has written unto you: As also in all
his epistles, speaking of these things; in which are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable" [men of an unteachable,
light and wavering mind] wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto
their own destruction -- Beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of
the wicked, etc." The other passage of scripture alluded to above, is in the 2 Thessalonians. chap. ii. where the apostle speaks of some, who "received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved." He immediately subjoins: "And for this
cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that
they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, etc." Now, if persons may
wrest the scriptures; not only those which are really "hard to be understood,"
but also the "other scriptures," to their own destruction; and if there are
some, who are given over to "strong delusion," and believe a lie, to their own
damnation; then it is certain, that men may err fatally concerning the way of
life. If there be any fundamental truths, there must of consequence be
fundamental errors; or such as shall be fatal in their consequences. And this
is evidently supposed, not only in these, but in many other passages of
scripture. From whence arises the necessity of great care in inquiring after
the way of life, and caution against deception with reference thereto. Nor can
any man be supposed heartily to desire, and earnestly to strive, that he may
enter in at the strait gate, unless he exercises care and diligence in this
respect.

IF it should be demanded here, What errors are fatal? this, it is conceived,
ought to be left to the judgment of God. No man can presume, without arogance,
pride and impiety, particularly to run the line between essential and
non-essential articles of faith; or, which comes to the same thing, between
such errors as shall be absolutely fatal, and such as shall not. If God himself
has not explicitly determined these questions, as he has not, what
unwarrantable presumption is it in men to do it; as the manner of some is! Though
the way of salvation revealed, be but one; though this may be fatally
misapprehended by the careless and negligent; and though, for this reason, we
ought to use diligence that we may be rightly informed; yet it is certain, that
all mistakes and errors respecting the way of life, are not fatal: For who then
could be saved! It may be subjoined here, that though the careless and slothful
may err fatally; yet it will by no means follow from hence, that those may also
err thus, who are seriously inquisitive; those who take Jesus Christ for their
guide, and heartily desire to know the truth as it is in him. It would be a
great reflection on the goodness and mercy of God, and on the holy scriptures,
to suppose, either that every mistake in such fallible creatures respecting the
way of life, should be damning; or, that we might sincerely and earnestly
endeavor, in the use of proper means, to learn the way of salvation from Jesus
Christ, or the scriptures of truth, and yet not find it, but err from it in any
essential point. The former of these suppositions would in effect divest God of
his mercy; and the latter of them would infer the scriptures to be inadequate
to the declared design of them, which is, to guide our feet into the way of
peace, and make us "wise unto salvation;" which the apostle asserts, they are
"able" to do. And whosoever denies this protestant, and truly apostolic
doctrine, ought to go to Rome for a living, visible and infallible guide;
unless, perhaps, he had rather set up to be one himself.

IN fine here: Striving to enter into life, manifestly implies great care in
seeking the way that leads thereto. In all the concerns of this mortal life,
when we are heartily engaged in any pursuit, or endeavor to accomplish any
end, we are careful lest we should take some wrong step to our prejudice;
except in such cases as we apprehend admit of no doubt or uncertainty. And we
do, or at least we ought to, act from the same general principle in the
infinitely higher concerns of religion. Neither can we be supposed really to
strive, that we may enter in at the strait gate, unless we are sollicitous to
know the truth as it is in Jesus, in some proportion to the importance of it,
as it relates to our eternal salvation.

5thly. THIS striving implies in it, earnest prayer to God for the illumination
of his holy spirit; for his guidance and direction in the way of life; for the
pardon of our sins; for a new heart, and right spirit; and that he would purge
our consciences from dead works, to serve him in newness of life. Prayer is
one, and indeed a most important way, of striving; to the use of which means,
there are so many exhortations and injunctions in the holy scriptures, and
which are so generally known, that it seems unnecessary at present to refer you
to any in particular. And certainly no person who neglects this, can be
supposed to strive as he ought to do.

6thly. THIS undoubtedly implies in it, striving against sin; watchfulness
against temptation; a resolute opposition to the lusts and corruptions of our
own hearts; and an endeavor to forsake and avoid all those evil practices
which God has forbidden in his word; and for the sake of which, his wrath
comes on the children of disobedience. For surely that man cannot be said to
strive to obtain salvation, who does not endeavor to avoid those sins, and
unrighteous deeds, against which he knows the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven.

7thly. THIS implies a real endeavor, not only to abstain from what God has
forbidden; but to do whatsoever he has required, or to obey all his known
commandments. For our blessed Savior has said, "Not every one that says unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does the
will of my father which is in heaven." And one would think it hardly possible
for any man to deceive himself so much, as to imagine that he really strives to
enter in at the strait gate, without endeavoring to comply with the known will
of God. This striving plainly implies a sincere desire to avoid every thing in
general that may obstruct, and to do every thing in general which may promote,
a man's future well-being. -- It is, however, very far from being the design of
what is here said, that we should do thus under the notion of meriting
salvation thereby; or performing such a righteousness as God is obliged in
justice to accept. This were the greatest folly. Whatever we do, we are
unprofitable servants; yea, worse than unprofitable; for we are still sinful
creatures: And being such, can reasonably hope for eternal life, only as the
gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, who has redeemed us from the curse of
the law. And a dependence upon him, as the mediator between God and men, is
implied in the very notion of striving to obtain salvation through him.

8thly. THE striving here enjoined, must be supposed to intend striving with
perseverance; not for a month, a year, or any definite, given time; but as long
as it shall please God to continue us in the world. For if any, after striving
thus for a time, and in some measure escaping the pollutions of the world,
relapse into their former careless and sinful way of life, the apostle compares
them to a "dog that returns to his vomit, and a sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire." Yea, he says of such persons that it "had been better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than thus to turn from the
holy commandment delivered unto them."

IF it should be asked, Whether any unregenerate sinner can be supposed to
strive in the manner represented above? I answer, Yes; at least in general.
There is very little, if any thing, in this account of striving, etc. which
would necessarily suppose a person to be already born of the Spirit. But if it
should be farther demanded, Whether a sinner can be supposed to strive thus,
antecedent to any influence or operation of the good spirit of God upon his
heart? The answer is, By no means. God undoubtedly strives with sinful men, by
his word, his spirit, and the dispensations of his providence; awakening them
to a sense of their guilt, misery and danger, antecedently to their striving,
or doing any thing tending to their salvation: So that when any are finally
brought to love him, it is "because he first loved them." But yet such
influences of the word and spirit of God upon the hearts of men, as serve to
awaken in them a serious concern about their salvation, and excite them to
strive in order thereto, do not infer them to be new creatures in Christ Jesus.
My meaning is, that there may be, and always are, such awakenings and
strivings, prior to that thorough change of disposition and affections, which
the scriptures express by a new heart, the new creature, and being born of God.
-- It may be subjoined here, to prevent misconstruction, that though no sinner
strives, but with whom God strives first; yet it will not from hence follow,
that God strives with none, besides those who strive in consequence thereof.
God is represented as striving with many, who, instead of yielding to the
impressions of his grace, resist, grieve and quench his good spirit; till they
are utterly forsaken of him, and given over to a reprobate mind: In conformity
to his own threatening, that his "Spirit shall not always strive with man." Though
the scriptures speak of God as striving; yet this seems not literally and
strictly ascribed to him. For striving, in the ordinary import of the word,
connotes weakness, or a limited power, which meets with opposition,
obstructions and difficulties: Whereas God is almighty; a being, to whom
nothing is hard, nothing difficult, which he resolves to do.


II. I WAS, in the next place, to show you the fatal consequences of not
striving to enter in at the strait gate: Or, in other words, of not using your
endeavors to obtain eternal life, in the manner represented above. And here it
is to be observed in general, that striving is indispensably necessary; so
necessary, that without it we can never see the kingdom of God. It is not now
asserted, that if we strive aright, we shall certainly be succeeded in our
endeavors: But let the success of our endeavors be ever so uncertain; let it
be supposed altogether doubtful, whether our striving shall issue in our
salvation, or not; yet it is certain, on the other hand, that if we do not
strive, we shall never obtain eternal life. This is no doubtful point, whatever
the other may be. That the consequences of our negligence in this respect, will
be fatal, is infallibly certain, though the happy consequences of using our
endeavors, should be ever so problematical, or precarious. However free the
grace of God is, it is manifest that he has required something of us in order
to our salvation. And our Lord here enjoins us to strive to this end: Which is
a general command, comprehending various things in it, as we have seen above.
And can we suppose that our Savior would have commanded us to strive, if
striving were unnecessary to the end proposed? or, if we might finally enter in
at the strait gate without striving? This cannot be reasonably supposed.

BESIDES: If any should imagine that striving is unnecessary, this would be to
suppose that every thing is unnecessary, which properly comes under the head of
striving; every thing which is presupposed and implied therein, according to
the account already given of it, supposing that to be a just one. For example:
It would be to suppose that sinners, to whom the gospel is preached, may
inherit eternal life without giving any credit thereto; without being awakened
into a sense of their guilt and misery; without desiring to be saved; without
endeavoring to learn the way of life; without prayer to God; without
endeavoring to forsake their sins; and without endeavoring to do the will of
God. All these things are presupposed and implied in striving; and
consequently, if striving be unnecessary, these are unnecessary. But can any
man who believes the holy scriptures to be the word of God, (and to such only I
am speaking) possibly imagine that these things are unnecessary! -- That a man
may finally obtain the salvation revealed through Christ, although he rejects the
revelation thereof; although he continues hardened in his sins; although he has no
desire to obtain eternal life; although he never seriously enquires the way that
leads thereto; although he never prays to God for his pardon, Spirit and grace;
although he freely indulges, instead of mortifying his lusts; and in fine, though
he takes no pains, uses no endeavors, to keep God's commandments, but wilfully
violates them from day to day; and continues so to do to the end of his life!
It is so manifest from the whole tenor of scripture, that such a man cannot be
saved, but must perish in his sins, that it were a mis-spence of time to prove
it, by an induction of particular passages.

IT being certain then, and most manifest from the holy scriptures, that we
cannot finally enter in at the strait gate, unless we exert our selves, and
strive in order thereto; from hence appear the fatal consequences of negligence
in this respect. I say consequences, and fatal consequences; for these three
things are evidently contained, or implied, in being excluded from the kingdom
of heaven: The loss, or falling short of eternal life, glory and happiness;
suffering the punishment, to which we are justly liable as sinners; and an
additional weight of woe and misery due to us, as despisers of the mercy and
grace of God.

BEING excluded from the kingdom of heaven, implies in it the loss, or falling
short of eternal life, glory and happiness. The strait gate is the gate of
life, of joy, of glory, honor and immortality: So that, not to enter in
thereat, is to be forever excluded from these blessings; from the favor of
God, and from the everlasting joys that are in his presence; an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away; for it is in heaven, that
this inheritance is reserved; and it can be enjoyed only by those, who shall
finally enter in at the strait gate.

THIS farther implies, the suffering of that punishment, to which we are justly
liable as sinners. For, to be excluded from heaven, is in effect to be thrust
down to hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched; there
being no medium, no middle way for us, between being saved and damned. As
sinful creatures, we are already exposed to perdition from the avenging justice
of God: yea, we are actually under a sentence of condemnation and death, till
such time as we are delivered therefrom, by having an interest in the
redemption wrought out by Christ. For, it is to them only that are in Christ
Jesus, and so in him as to walk, not after the flesh, but after the spirit,
that there is no condemnation. Now, how terrible a thing is it to lie forever
under guilt, the condemnation of God? How holy a being is he? how great his
hatred of sin? how unlimited his power to punish it? how awful his threatenings,
and how sure the execution of them upon finally-hardened and irreclaimable
transgressors? Is it not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God! Is not destruction from the Almighty a terror to us! -- especially such an
everlasting destruction from his presence, and the glory of his power, as is
threatened in his word! And whatever, foolish, false-hearted men may imagine, or
however flatter themselves with the hopes of impunity, "God is not a man that
he should lie, or the son of man that he should repent."

IT is farther to be observed here, that those who are favored with the
gospel, and yet neglect to strive after the salvation revealed therein, will
incur an additional weight of woe and misery, as despisers of the grace and
mercy of God. He has provided and revealed a way of salvation, for sinful,
guilty and lost creatures, through the mediation, the sufferings and death of his
own dear Son; and says, "Whosoever will, let him come," etc. God exercises
patience and forbearance toward his sinful creatures; thereby giving them time
and opportunity for repentance, and working out their salvation. Now, if you
should neglect this method of deliverance from condemnation, and think
everlasting life not worth your striving after; you will not only remain under
the guilt of your other sins, but will be justly chargeable also with despising
the goodness of God; even the "riches of his goodness, forbearance and
long-suffering": And if you do so, you must needs "treasure up unto your selves
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God." Your guilt and punishment will be greatly aggravated in this respect. You
will not only be condemned as sinners in the day of judgment; but as the most
heinous sinners: you will not only be cast into the place of torments; but have
your part amongst the most wretched that suffer there. In conformity hereto,
our Lord himself denounced a peculiar woe against the inhabitants of Corazin,
Bethsaida and Capernaum, where he had preached the gospel of the kingdom,
because they repented not; assuring them, that it should be more tolerable for
those of Tire and Sydon, for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of judgment, than
for them. Thus also it is said in the epistle to the Hebrews: "If the word
spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord," etc.? And
again: "If he that despised Moses' law, died without mercy, -- of how much
sorer punishment suppose ye, shall they be thought worthy, who have trodden
under foot the Son of God," etc.?

YOU see then, what is to be the portion of those who neglect, instead of
striving to obtain, the salvation revealed in the gospel. They will not only be
excluded from eternal glory and happiness in the kingdom of God, continue under
wrath, and suffer as transgressors of God's law; but also incur a peculiarly
aggravated condemnation, as despisers of that mercy, which provided and
revealed a method of salvation for sinners. Such will be the fatal consequences
of not striving. And I am, in the next place,

III. To represent to you the happy and glorious consequences of striving
successfully, or so as finally to enter in at the strait gate; without
pretending to determine at present, whether your endeavors to this end will
certainly be effectual, or not. But this is at least a possible supposition:
And, O! what would you gain, if your endeavors should actually be crowned with
success! This appears, in some measure, from what has been said under the
preceding head of discourse; so that there will be the less occasion, as
indeed there is not time, for much enlargement here. Success in these endeavors
will be abundantly sufficient, yea, infinitely more than sufficient, to reward
all the pains you take, or can take, even though you should spend a thousand, or
ten million years, in the most intense application; and allow yourselves no
rest day or night. For, on this supposition, you will obtain eternal
deliverance from guilt, condemnation and wrath: And not only so, but be
completely and everlastingly blessed.

YOU will obtain eternal deliverance from guilt, condemnation and wrath. The
wages of sin, you know, is death; or everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord. Now a primary, or main end of the striving enjoined upon us in the
text, is, obtaining deliverance from a state of guilt, misery and ruin; or from
the wrath which is to come upon the world of the ungodly; as appears from what
has been discoursed above. So that success in these endeavors, or in this
striving, implies in the very notion of it, obtaining a full and final release
from all our sins, and from the punishment due to them. And how glorious a
privilege is this! Blessed indeed is he, whose transgressions are thus
forgiven, and whose sin is covered; yea, thrice blessed is that man, unto whom
the Lord will not impute iniquity! -- who shall never come into condemnation!
If it should be said, that to be exempted from punishment, is but a negative
happiness; or that it implies no positive good in it; be it so. Yet surely,
deliverance from evil is worth striving for; especially, from so great an evil,
as the damnation of hell. Though this were all that we could hope to obtain by
striving; yet, doubtless, our endeavors to this end would be well bestowed.

BUT, as was before observed, if you strive effectually, you will not only
obtain deliverance from sin and death; but be the heirs of eternal life and
glory. That narrow gate, into which you strive to enter, is the gate of life,
the gate of heaven. And consequently, if you strive effectually, you will gain
admission into the mansions of everlasting joy. "Eye has not indeed seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him." But, from what he has revealed unto us
by his Spirit, we know in general that the heavenly state is a state of perfect
holiness and happiness; an happiness adapted to the rational nature of man;
adequate to his most exalted wishes; yea, far surpassing all his present
conceptions; an happiness which will never be interrupted or diminished; but
constant, immutable and eternal. And if there were but a bare possibility of
obtaining such an happiness as this, what reasonable man would not strive in
order to it? especially when the certain consequences of neglecting to do so,
are taken into consideration!

WHAT connection there is between our striving, and actually obtaining the
salvation of our souls, according to the holy scriptures, is, by divine
permission and assistance, to be considered in another discourse. But the
present must not be concluded without some short reflections on what has been
said already.

And,

1. IT appears, that there is something required of, and to be done by sinful
men, in order to their salvation. Our Lord commands us to strive to enter in at
the strait gate; and certainly this implies the doing something; yea, of many
things, with a view to obtaining eternal life. Nor is there a single command of
Christ in the gospel, but what ought to be obeyed, partly with this view;
though not indeed, under the notion of meriting salvation thereby. How strange?
how unnaccountable is it then, that any should assert, as some have done, that
there is nothing to be done by sinners, in order to their salvation; or at
least, nothing besides believing! And some there are, who have gone so far as
to say, that the very inquiry, What men are to do to obtain eternal life, is an
indication of a self-righteous spirit; and a proof, that the person who makes
it, knows nothing of the gospel dispensation! What strange infatuation is this!
And with how much truth and propriety might it be retorted, that those who have
such a conception of the gospel, are themselves grossly ignorant of it; and need
to be taught, even the first principles of the oracles of God?

2. IT farther appears, how much those are mistaken, who suppose that the
working out their salvation is an easy matter; attended with few or no
difficulties; and rather a matter of amusement, than of great pains, labor and
self-denial; of the most intense application, and vigorous exertions. Our
Savior, who certainly knew every thing relating to this affair, enjoins us to
"strive;" or, if the word may may be allowed, to "agonize," that we may enter
into life: Plainly importing, that the business of religion is at once of such
vast importance, and attended with such difficulties, as to call for the most
anxious concern, the most fixed resolutions, and unwearied endeavors. And
there are diverse metaphors used in scripture, relative to this matter, which
naturally suggest the same thing to us: Particularly those of "wrestling,"
"running," and "fighting;" which express efforts of strength and activity,
joined with wariness and circumspection. These are all applied to the
exercises, duties and employments of the christian life; as if a man were to be
almost continually exerting himself, and upon his guard, as in a race, a fight,
or some other exercise, which at once requires care, dexterity, and a vigorous
exertion of strength: And surely heaven is not prepared as a receptacle, or
mighty hive, for the drones of the earth! But if we were to judge by the
conduct of some professed christians, and those, perhaps, not the worst that
the world affords, we should be apt to think, that to be, and to live the life
of, a christian, was a thing of the greatest ease: and, as was intimated
before, rather a matter of amusement, than of habitual care, pains and labor.
For how many are there, who apparently, instead of making the salvation of
their souls their grand concern, the object of their most earnest endeavors,
consider it rather as something which is beside the main business of life;
something subordinate, not only to the getting riches or power, but even to
their other diversions and pastimes? There are many persons of this character
in the world; who may yet think themselves in the way of salvation, because
they make a profession of religion; because they attend the public worship --
when it suits their humor; and are not openly vicious in their lives. But such
persons will be certainly disappointed, if they expect, in this way, ever to
get admission into the kingdom of heaven. For can they, with any propriety of
language, be said to strive to enter in at the strait gate? or can they enter
there, without striving? What they really strive for, is to obtain wealth,
worldly honors, worldly pleasures, and the meat that perishes; not the pearl
of great price, not that honor that comes from God, not those pleasures that
are at his right hand, not the meat that endures unto everlasting life. Let
none delude themselves with an imagination, that they are in that "narrow way"
that leads unto life everlasting, while they live after this thoughtless,
negligent and loose manner; nor unless they strive in earnest to enter in at
the strait gate, as a matter of infinite concernment to them; in comparison of
which, all other things are of trivial consequence, hardly worth a serious
thought. This is indeed, what our Lord intends when he says, "one thing is
needful." And blessed are they, who are so wise as, with Mary, to "choose that
good part, that shall not be taken away from them."

3. YOU may see, by what has been said, not only that striving is necessary in
order to entering into life; but also, that the manner of striving is of great
importance. People may take considerable pains in religion, with a view to
their future happiness; and yet, through criminal inattention, not "strive
lawfully," or in the manner they ought to do; and so never enter into life. To
strive to enter in at the strait gate, is an injunction of Jesus Christ; and
therefore must be supposed to mean, striving in a way that is in general
agreeable to the plan of the gospel, the doctrine of our redemption. And if,
through vicious prejudice, or even through want of such attention as might be
reasonably expected of us, we should wholly mistake in this matter; whatever we
do, must, on the most favorable supposition, go for nothing. Unless we strive,
in general, in the manner we ought to do, allowing for involuntary mistakes, we
are not in the way that leads unto life. And if we are not in that narrow
way, we are of consequence traveling toward the wide gate of destruction; and
shall unquestionably, unless we alter our course, increase the vast and
wretched number of those, that go in thereat! -- Of this, however, there is no
real danger, if we earnestly endeavor to be rightly informed: For, of those
who are favored with the gospel, if there be few that find the way of life, it
must be, because there are but few who seasonably and diligently inquire after
it: Though this is certainly one thing implied in striving.

4. LET me earnestly exhort all to strive. Though your endeavors should prove
ineffectual; yet, as that is supposed at present to be an uncertainty, you are
obliged in all reason to do your best, leaving the event with God. For this is
the situation, the dilemma you are in, as guilty creatures: If you do not
strive to obtain deliverance from condemnation, you will, you must, continue
under it, and be miserable hereafter. But if you strive, it is at least
possible that you may obtain deliverance from the wrath to come, and be
eternally happy. And can you hesitate, in this situation, which is the wiser
part to take! Do you not strive, in your worldly concernments, when at as great
uncertainty about the success of your endeavors? And yet those are matters of
no importance, in comparison with this: "For what is a man profited, if he gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul?" In those affairs, though you did not
exert yourselves with vigor, the damage could be but small, comparatively
speaking; and the gain is but small and temporary, when your endeavors are
successful. But in this, if you are careless and negligent, you perish in your
sins, and are ruined forever: And if you strive successfully, as perhaps you
may, your gain is infinite; a treasure that fails not, a kingdom that has
foundations, a crown of glory that fades not away.

BUT to conclude: If there are any who will not strive to enter in at the
strait gate of life, let them be persuaded at least, not to take pains to go in
at that which leads to destruction; which is altogether needless. For this
gate is wide, ready to receive all that come; the way thereto is broad, so that
it can hardly be missed; and there are many who, even without taking pains for
it, go in thereat. But yet there are some persons, who seem to strive, and take
great pains, to enter in at this wide gate: I mean all such as endeavor to
stifle the convictions of their own consciences; to persuade themselves, that
the christian revelation is a fable, and to quench the Spirit of God, that
striveth with them. There are undoubtedly some, who really take pains to rid
themselves of every religious and moral principle; of all the restraints of
conscience, which they find troublesome to them; which is no easy thing,
especially for those who have had a religious education. Some there are, who
seem to endeavor to excel in wickedness; who pride themselves in impiety and
vice; in profane cursing and swearing, in drinking, wantonness and riot: Who
even "weary themselves to do iniquity;" and afterward glory in their shame.
Now, all such persons may be said to strive, not to save, but to destroy their
own souls. But how unnecessary a labor is this! And if even the righteous
scarcely are saved, where shall such ungodly sinners appear! -- "Woe unto him
that striveth [thus] with his MAKER: Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds
of the earth." -- Do not, I beseech you, so foolishly, so wickedly, as to "seek
death in the error of your life!" Our Lord says, in allusion to the taking a
city by storm, that the "kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force." The kingdom of heaven is thus to be taken; and there is at
once glory and gain in such a conquest. But what occasion is there, so to
express it, for storming hell, whose gates are ever wide extended, to receive
every comer! There is no occasion for any formal siege, for any assault or
violence, in order to get admittance into that place of torments: And though
there were, yet there would be neither honor nor advantage to reward the
exploit. -- But why do I speak thus to you, my friends and brethren? I hope in
God, there are no such abandoned sinners amongst my hearers; though there may
probably be some persons, who take little or no pains to obtain salvation; and
who are therefore particularly concerned in this admonition: -- "Strive to
enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in,
and shall not be able."

SERMON II. The Connection between striving after, and obtaining Salvation,
proved from the holy Scriptures.
LUKE XIII. 24. STRIVE to enter in at the strait gate. --
BY the strait gate is intended, the gate of life, or of the kingdom of heaven.
It is called strait, in respect of the difficulties which attend gaining
admission into those blessed mansions. By striving to enter at this gate, is
meant in general, using our sincere endeavors to obtain eternal life. But,
more particularly, this striving presupposes and comprehends in it, a
speculative belief of the christian revelation; a sense of our sinful,
perishing condition; an earnest desire to obtain the salvation revealed through
Christ; serious and diligent inquiry after the way of life; prayer to God for
the pardon of sin, for his spirit and grace; striving against sin, with an
endeavor to keep all God's commandments; still relying, not on any supposed
merit in what we do, but on the mercy of God in Christ, for acceptance with
him. All which implies a partial reformation, or a good work begun in the
sinner, by the word and spirit of God; though it does not necessarily imply that
thorough change, which the scriptures express by a new and clean heart, by the
new creature, and by being born of the Spirit. -- Striving to enter in at the
strait gate, is indispensably necessary in order to our salvation. Without it
we shall certainly fall short of eternal life, continue under condemnation, and
incur an additional degree of guilt and misery, as despisers of the grace of
God. Such will be the consequences of not striving. On the other hand, if we
strive effectually, we shall obtain deliverance from the wrath to come; and be
inexpressibly and eternally happy in the kingdom, presence and enjoyment of
God, the supreme good. So that we have great reason to strive, though there were
but a bare possibility, that our endeavors may be crowned with success.

THE several things here mentioned in a cursory manner, were enlarged on in the
preceding discourse, under three general heads. And there now remains only one
point to be considered, in order to finish the design which I had, when I
entered on this subject. And that is,

IV. WHAT connection there is, according to the word of God, betwixt our
striving, and finally obtaining what is the grand one and object of our
endeavors, the salvation of our souls.

SOME persons, and indeed not a few, have supposed that there is no certain
connection between any strivings or endeavors of sinners, and their obtaining
eternal life: While others have supposed that our success is certain, provided
we strive as we may and ought to do, to enter in at the strait gate. To
consider this matter, by the light of God's holy word, and by his assistance,
is proposed as the business of this discourse. And I shall beg leave to
introduce what I have to offer upon it, with some short remarks, tending to a
just and clear stating of the point. The first of which is,

1. THAT the question does not relate to the striving, or endeavors, of the
regenerate; of those that are already born of God, or such as are, in the most
proper sense, true believers and real christians. The question is not, Whether
the endeavors of such, to obtain salvation, shall be effectual or not? For it
is allowed on all hands, that they shall infallibly be so. All acknowledge,
that the gospel plainly and directly promises eternal life to persons of this
character. So that the present inquiry has no relation to such. And
consequently, it must relate wholly to the endeavors of the unregenerate.

2dly. THE question is not, Whether sinners can be finally saved, without
becoming true believers, or real christians, in the most proper sense?
Concerning this matter, there is no more controversy, than there is about the
point last mentioned. For it is allowed on all hands, that without holiness no
man shall see the Lord; or ever gain admission into the kingdom of heaven. This
is therefore no part of the question before us. Neither,

3dly. Is the question, Whether a sinful creature can attain to true holiness,
and so be entitled to eternal life, merely by any endeavors of his own, or
without the renewing and sanctifying influences of the Spirit of God? It is
generally, if not universally, agreed amongst professed christians, that
repentance unto life, and evangelical holiness, are not attainable without the
gracious operations of God's holy Spirit; and consequently, that without these
divine influences, all the endeavors of sinners to attain to holiness, and so
to eternal life, must be ineffectual. Which indeed amounts to neither more nor
less, than what our Lord himself declares, -- That "except a man be born again,
he cannot see the kingdom of God." Christians do indeed differ considerably in
their manner of explaining themselves upon this subject: But there are few or
none, but what do in general assert the necessity of divine grace, or the
influences of God's Spirit, in order to a saving conversion; or in order to a
sinner's attaining to holiness here, and happiness hereafter. And this is now
taken for granted, as a certain and important truth. So that it is no part of
the present question, whether the endeavors of sinners will be effectual to
their salvation, without the grace of God vouchsafed to them, so as to create
in them clean hearts, and right spirits? For it is certain, they will not.
Neither,

4thly. Is the present question, Whether God is obliged, in justice, to renew
or change the heart of a sinner, in consequence of his endeavors, prayers, or
any thing which he can be supposed to do? Or, in other words, is obliged, in
point of justice, to succeed the endeavors of sinners, in order to their
attaining to holiness and eternal life? It is generally allowed, that God is
not bound in justice thus to succeed a sinner's endeavors; at least, this is
now taken for granted. And to suppose that God is obliged, in point of equity,
to do this, would be most absurd, not to say impious. For, as sinners, we have
forfeited all right to God's favor; to any good whatsoever; and are justly
liable to wrath and punishment. And if so, it is a manifest inconsistency to
suppose, that any thing which a sinner does, or can do, should merit his
favorable regards; or justly entitle him to those influences of the holy
Spirit, which are necessary, and which will be effectual, to the sinner's
salvation. This would be, to suppose him justly liable to wrath for his sins,
and at the same time to have a just claim to salvation on account of his
endeavors: For to have a just claim to salvation, and to have a claim of right
to those renewing influences of God's Spirit, which have salvation connected
with them, amount to the same thing at last; And so the suppositions are
equally irrational, From whence it follows,

5thly. THAT if there be any certain connection between the endeavors of sinful
creatures to obtain eternal life, and their actually obtaining it, this is a
connection which the free grace, or unmerited goodness of God, has made and
established: And so can be known, only by the gracious promises or declarations
of his word: For, between God's justice and his grace there is no medium. If
there be such a connection, which does not arise from the former, as certainly
it cannot; it must of consequence flow from the latter. And this can be known
only from divine revelation: For it is only from the word, declarations and
promises of God, that we can certainly know, to what particular objects, in
what manner and measure, when, and under what circumstances, God will exercise
grace, or show mercy to the guilty. Wherefore,

6thly. UPON laying these several things together, you will please to observe,
that the inquiry before us really comes to this at last, viz. Whether there are
in the word of God, any gracious promises, invitations, or declarations,
respecting unregenerate sinners, to whom the gospel is preached, from whence it
may be clearly inferred, that if they strive in the manner they may and ought
to do, to attain to holiness and eternal life, God will certainly afford them
all the influences of his Spirit and grace, which are necessary to that end: So
that their endeavors shall not be in vain, but succeeded by him, and rendered
effectual to their salvation? This, it is humbly conceived, is a fair, just and
plain state of the important question proposed. -- It may, however, be stated
somewhat differently thus, without altering the true import of it, viz. Whether
the gracious declarations and promises of God in his word, are such as will in
any measure admit of the supposition, that unregenerate sinners, to whom the
gospel is preached, may desire, strive, and earnestly endeavor, in the use of
proper means, to obtain the salvation revealed therein, seeking to God for his
grace and assistance; and yet possibly fall short of eternal life, and perish
in their sins, by reason that God withholds his Spirit and grace from them?
The question thus stated, comes precisely to the same thing, as in the former
way. Or it may be reduced to another form, and still narrower compass, thus:
viz. Whether unregenerate sinners, under the dispensation of the Gospel, have
any day of grace and salvation afforded to them; in such a sense, that they
shall certainly obtain eternal life, provided they heartily desire it, and
strive to that end? -- I have expressed the true point in question, in these
several ways, not merely for the sake of having it clearly understood; but
partly, because I supposed, that the bare stating it thus, would go a
considerable ways toward a proper resolution of it, with those that are
tolerably acquainted with the general tenor of holy scripture; unless their
minds are unhappily prepossessed in favor of some unscriptural scheme of
systematical divinity.

HAVING prepared the way by these previous remarks, I shall now proceed more
directly to what I had principally in view; which was to prove, by arguments
drawn from the holy scriptures, That there is a certain connection between
sinners striving to obtain the salvation which God has revealed, and their
actually obtaining it. To avoid unnecessary repetitions, the reader is desired
to remember, (1.) That, in this discourse, by sinners, unregenerate sinners are
always meant. And (2.) That when their strivings, or endeavoure, are spoken of,
this must be understood in general of such strivings, or endeavors, as are
described in the preceding discourse. I say, in general: for possibly one or
two expressions used in that description, are in strictness applicable to the
endeavors of the regenerate only; though I am not at present sensible of any
such.
By arguments drawn from holy scripture, are not, however, intended, only such
as are drawn from scripture-promises; but also from any doctrine or declaration
of scripture: For if arguments are fairly and justly deduced from the word of
God, or are conclusive, it is immaterial from what particular topic they are
taken. And you are desired to observe, that I do not put the entire decision of
this point, upon the absolute conclusiveness of every single argument, or
passage of scripture, that shall be alleged; but upon the joint force, the
concurring evidence, and result of all. For it will be sufficient, if the
conclusion fairly results from them all, considered collectively, although it
should not, from any one of them separately taken. Accordingly, it is to be
observed here,

(1.) THAT mankind being considered in scripture, as in a state of sin and
death, it is declared that Jesus Christ came into the world to save them; to
"save sinners" to "seek and to save that which was lost." In conformity
whereto, the angel that appeared to the terrified shepherds on the night of his
nativity, comforted them with the following words: -- "Behold, I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people: For unto you is born -- a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord." "And suddenly there was with the angel a
multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men" [indefinitely.] Agreeably
hereto it is declared, that Christ "gave himself a ransom for all"; that he
"died for all;" and that he "tasted death for every man." And our Lord
commanded his apostles to preach the gospel, or these glad tidings, to "every
creature." This is called the "gospel of the grace of God;" and professes to
point out a method of salvation for sinners. The apostle Paul says, with
reference hereto: "The grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto
all men Tit. II. 11. THE original words might, perhaps, be translated with more
propriety -- "The grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has
appeared; teaching us," etc. So they are rendered in the margin of some of our
bibles. And being thus understood, they will be rather more direct and full to
the point in view.
; teaching us," etc. Now, from such declarations of holy scripture, we may
fairly infer, that all those, to whom the gospel is preached, have therein an
offer of salvation made to them. For in what other view can it be considered,
as glad tidings of great joy to all that hear In what other view can it be
properly called, the grace of God that brings salvation to all men? And if it
really makes an offer, or points out a method of salvation to all; can it be
supposed that any sinner, who is willing, and desirous, and strives, to obtain
the salvation thus revealed, should yet be rejected of God, and finally perish?
Certainly it cannot.

(2.) GOD has declared in the most solemn manner, that he has no pleasure in
the death of sinners: "As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live." Yea, it
is declared, that God "will have all men to be saved." Now, if what these
declarations most obviously and strongly import, be true; surely all who really
desire and strive to obtain eternal life, will certainly obtain it. For if God
himself has no pleasure in their death, but the contrary; and if they
themselves desire life, and endeavor to obtain it, what should hinder their
salvation? Can the devil be supposed to prevent it, on these suppositions? He
cannot, unless he is stronger, not only than man, but than God himself!

(3.) ACCORDING to the representations of scripture, God affords to sinners a
space for repentance, a day of grace and salvation; or a season for making
their peace with him; during which time, he is said to be "near", so that he
"may be found" by them that seek him. Yea, God is represented as long-suffering
toward them, being unwilling that they should perish. To which purpose are the
following passages, amongst innumerable others. "Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found; call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way;"
Isai. LV. 7
etc. "To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart, as in the day
of temptation -- Forty years was I grieved with this generation," Psalm. XCV. 7.
etc. "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him;
lest," etc. "He beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace!
but now," Luke XIX. 41. 42.
etc. "I gave her a space to repent -- and she repented not" Rev. 11. 21.
. -- "Receive not the grace of God in vain -- For he says, I have heard thee
in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: Behold
now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation 2 Cor. VI. 1, 2.
". "The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness;
but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that ANY should perish, but that
ALL should come to repentance 2 Pet. III. 9.
." Now, is it consistent with these repeated declarations, to suppose that
sinners, during this time of their visitation, may really desire and strive to
enter in at the strait gate; and yet fall short of salvation? If God is
long-suffering, "not willing that any" of those sinners, to whom the gospel is
preached, should perish, but that "all" should come to repentance; certainly he
puts them all into a capacity for attaining salvation. To suppose that any are
left in such a state, that they cannot avoid perishing, though they desire it; or
in such a state, as renders repentance impossible for them; manifestly
supposes, that God wills them to perish, that he would not have them come to
repentance; not really allows them a space for it, in any proper sense: And so
is directly contrary to the doctrine of scripture -- But let the unbiassed
judge.

(4.) IT is farther to be remarked, that during this space given for
repentance, or that day of salvation, which the scriptures so plainly assert;
sinners are earnestly admonished, exhorted and commanded, to seek God, to be
reconciled to him, and to work out their salvation. Thus in some of the
passages but just now quoted -- "Seek the Lord while he may be found," etc. "To
day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts." So in Prove I. "Wisdom
cries without -- How long. ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the
scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my
reproof," etc. And still more emphatical are the words of the apostle, in his
second epistle to the Corinthians; a part of which passage was quoted before.
But you may please to consider it more at large, as it here follows. "All
things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has
given to us the ministry of reconciliation: To wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling THE WORLD unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them;
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. For he has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. We then
as workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace"
[the gospel] "of God in vain. For he says, I have heard thee in a time
accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: behold, now is the
accepted time," etc. These exhortations, and commands, are all directed more
especially to sinners; to "the wicked"; to "simple ones, "scorners", and
"fools"; to such as were not yet "reconciled to God". And can any unprejudiced
man think it consistent with them, to suppose, that sinners may be awakened to
such a sense of their misery in being in a state of alienation from God, as to
desire to be reconciled to him, and really strive to obtain a part in the
salvation thus revealed; and yet fail of it! Judge for yourselves --

(5.) CONFORMABLY hereto, life and death, blessing and cursing, are said to be
set before sinners, in the word of God; and they are admonished to choose life
-- "I call heaven and earth to record this day -- that I have set before you
life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life", Deuteronomy. XXX. 19.
etc. But, with what truth or propriety could life and death be said to be set
before sinners, if though they desired life, and heartily endeavored to obtain
it, they might yet fail thereof? On this supposition, it is only death that is
really set before them, in any proper, consistent sense; without any life or
blessing, in opposition thereto -- It were but a cavil to say, that Moses, or
God by him, here addresses himself to the people of Israel upon the footing of
mere law; enjoining upon them perfect obedience thereto, as the condition of
their attaining life; and denouncing death against them in case of the least
failure. They were already sinners, transgressors of the law, and are spoken of
as such, in the verse immediately foregoing. So that in respect of mere law,
they were under a curse already; and were utterly incapacitated to obtain life
on the footing of law. Nothing but death was before them in that respect, though
they had desired life. And yet life and blessing are said that day to have been
set before them, as well as death and cursing: And they are admonished to
choose life, as what was, at that time, attainable, if chosen; for it is added,
-- that thou and thy seed may live." It is manifest therefore, that they were
not here treated with upon the footing of mere law; life being offered to, or
set before them, for their choice, considered as sinners. And if so, the
obtaining it depended on their choice, or was connected therewith. And
doubtless, it is not less truly and properly set before sinners now, under the
gospel dispensation, that it was before the Is^^^lites in the time of Moses.
From whence we may conclude, that if we really desire, and strive to enter into
life, we shall not fall short of it.

(6.) THE scriptures speak of some sinners as wholly left, and forsaken of God,
in this world; given up to their own heart's lust, to incureable blindness, to
strong delusion, etc. that they "might be damned." Now if there is any such
thing as suchlike passages of scripture seem to assert, and as they are
usually understood; it will even from hence follow, that the persons thus given
up of God, were, antecedently hereto, in a salvable state; that they had in
some measure the restraints and strivings of God's spirit; that they were
really put into a capacity for obtaining salvation, had they desired it; and
that their not doing so, was the reason of their being thus forsaken. And this
is agreeable to the representations of scripture, in those very passages, which
are here alluded to -- "My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel
would none of me: So I gave them up," etc. -- "If thou had known, even thou,
in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace! but now they are hidden
from thine eyes" -- "They received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion -- that they
all might be damned." Their case is represented as being made desperate, by
their being thus given up of God; and this is ascribed to their neglect of a
former opportunity, in which they were in a capacity for attaining salvation.
And indeed, if they were not, the "things which belonged unto their peace",
were really hid from their eyes before, as truly as afterward. If God gave
them up, because they would not hearken to his voice; then they were not given
up before they refused to do so; but might have obtained life, had they sought
after it: without which supposition, there seems to be no ground for any such
distinction as is apparently made between their state before, and their state
after, God thus gave them over.

(7.) THE scriptures speak plainly and directly of sinners neglecting the
opportunity allowed them for obtaining life, as the real cause of their death
or destruction. -- "Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out
my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel -- I
also will laugh at your calamity -- when distress and anguish comes upon you.
THEN shall they call upon me; but I will not answer: they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me." Prove. XXIV -- 28.
"Forty years long was I grieved with his generation, and said, It is a people
that do err in their hearts -- unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should
not enter into my rest." Psalm. XCV. 10. 11
"How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation," Heb. 11. 3.
etc. "Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life." John V. 40.
"O Jerusalem -- how often would I have gathered thy children -- and ye would
not!" Matt. XXIII 37.
These, with innumerable other passages of scripture, most clearly and strongly
express this sentiment; That the true and only reason why sinners perish, is,
that they do not "regard" the hand of God, stretched out to save them; that
they "grieve" him by their obduracy in sin; that they "neglect" the great
salvation offered to them; and "will not" come to Jesus Christ for life. But
neither of these things can be truly and properly said of those persons, who
are awakened to such a sense of their sins, as really to desire the salvation
revealed, and to strive in order thereto; even though they are not (which is very
supposeable) already in a regenerate state. And therefore all such persons,
unless they cease to desire and strive thus, shall be saved; not, to be sure,
without being born of God; but they shall be "renewed in the spirit of their
minds;" and consequently enter into life.

(8.) SINNERS have a promise of the spirit of wisdom, or of spiritual wisdom,
with which eternal life is connected, if they hearken to God's reproof, and
diligently seek it. "Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit
unto you I will make known my words unto you." Prove. 1. 23.
"Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that
hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors."
Chap. VII 33. 34.
That what is here promised, is spiritual wisdom and understanding, such as
shall be saving, is not, I suppose, denied by any. But it will perhaps be said,
that none but a regenerate man, can be supposed to "turn at God's, or wisdom's,
reproof," or to "wait at the posts of her doors," in the sense here intended:
and consequently, that none but such can be entitled to the promise, or
blessing. But this were an arbitrary assertion; one, for which there is not the
least color or foundation. For the persons here addressed, are spoken to under
the character of "simple ones," "scorners," and "fools"; who certainly need
wisdom the most of any. And the promise is apparently made for the
encouragement of such, to turn at her reproof, and to watch daily at her gates;
that they might find her, and thereby "find life." This was therefore to be
done by them, antecedently to their obtaining spiritual wisdom; not in the
actual exercise of it, as the regenerate, who are already wise unto salvation,
are to seek for more wisdom. And unless these passages are so understood, the
promise will really amount to this, and no more than this; viz. "If ye who are
now fools, and cannot be truly wise, but by turning at my reproof, shall first
attain this wisdom some other way, and then turn in the exercise thereof, being
actually possessed of wisdom; then shall you find it, in consequence of such a
turning, waiting and watching: behold, then will I pour out my spirit unto you;
then will I make known my words unto you." This must really be the whole amount
of this promise, unless it is supposed to be made to the turning, waiting and
watching of an unregenerate man: But I may venture to appeal to any wise man,
whether such a promise would be agreeable to the wisdom of God!

(9.) IN Ezekiel [chap. xxxvi.] God declares his purpose to do many things for
the people of Israel; and, amongst the rest, to give them a "new heart" and a
"new spirit". Ver. 26.
But he adds afterward, "I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of
Israel, to do it for them Ver. 37.
": which unquestionably relates in part, to the new heart and new spirit,
spoken of before. Upon which we may briefly remark, That eternal life, or
salvation, is connected in scripture with the having a new heart: That such an
heart is the gift of God: That he gives such an heart, not prior to, but in
consequence of, being inquired of, or sought to, for it: And consequently, That
the inquiring of God, here intended, is the act, not of the regenerate, but the
unregenerate; who are awakened to desire, and seek after it. So that although this
is not expressed in the form of a conditional promise; yet it amounts to one:
at least it implies, that the obtaining a new heart, has some connection with
inquiring after it; and that, in a manner in which an unregenerate man may be
supposed to do. For it were highly absurd to suppose, that a man must have a
new heart, in order to his inquiring of, or seeking God, in such a manner as to
obtain such an heart of him!

(10.) OUR Savior pronounces a blessing on those that "hunger and thirst after
righteousness;" adding, that "they shall be filled." Matt. V. 6.
By which metaphors of hungring and thirsting after righteousness, our Lord
unquestionably designed to express the strong and ardent desires of sinful
creatures to attain the righteousness, and so the salvation, revealed in the
gospel; desires arising from a sense of their misery without it; such desires
as put them upon using their endeavors after it: Even as men who are ready to
perish with hunger and thirst in a literal sense, will of course endeavor to
obtain meat and drink. All such persons our Lord pronounces blessed: "for,"
says he, "they shall be filled." Which promise, or declaration, can intend
nothing less, than that they shall actually attain to that righteousness and
salvation, which they desire, and strive after. Now, there is not the least
ground to doubt, but that convinced, awakened sinners, may and do often, thus
hunger and thirst after righteousness. And if any should say, that the
regenerate only, or such as have already attained unto righteousness, can be
supposed to do so; this were altogether as contrary to reason and good sense,
as to say, that a man must eat a good meal, in order to be hungry in a literal
sense; and that he must drink an hearty draught, in order to be a-thirst --
This benediction and promise, more especially respect unregenerate, heavy-laden
sinners: as do also such gracious invitations and promises as these -- "Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters -- Wherefore do ye spend your
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies
not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your
soul delight itself in fatness." Isa. LV. 1. 2.
"Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst;
but -- it shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life."
John IV. 14.
"I am the bread of life: he that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me, shall never thirst." Chap. VI. 35.
"If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink -- this he spoke of the
spirit, which they that believe on him should receive" -- Chap. VII. ^7 ^9.
"And the spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears say, Come:
and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." Rev. XXII. 17.
How unreasonable? how unscriptural, were it to suppose, that, by those who
hunger and thirst after righteousness, our Lord intends only the regenerate; or
such as have already eaten and drank of that spiritual bread and water, which
he gives? -- Especially when he declares above, that such persons shall
neither hunger nor thirst again! "I am the bread of life; he that comes unto
me shall never hunger; -- shall never thirst." Can any man read this, and yet
suppose, that hungring and thirsting after righteousness, in the sense of our
savior, to which the promise is made, is always subsequent, never prior, to
coming to him, or to regeneration? If he can, however good his heart may be, no
one has much reason to envy him his head.

(11.) TO this promise of our Lord, another may be subjoined, which is also
found in his sermon on the mount. "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks,
receives, etc. What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone? -- If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven, give good
things to them that ask him" Matt. VII. 7 -- 11.
? Here you will observe, that the "good things" promised, are spiritual
blessings; such as have eternal life connected with them; as is manifest from a
parallel place in another evangelist, where these good things are explained to
mean, the Holy Spirit -- "How much more shall your heavenly Father give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" You will farther observe, that the obtaining
these spiritual blessings is expressly connected with, and promised to, asking,
seeking, knocking. But then it will perhaps be said, that this must be supposed
to mean, the asking, etc. of the regenerate; and that it cannot be intended of
the desires, prayers and endeavors of the unregenerate. But does there appear
any good reason for limiting the promise in this manner? It is humbly
conceived, there is none: But that it ought to be understood conformably to
what our Lord had said before -- that they who hunger and thirst after
righteousness, shall be filled. The words were spoken by him to the promiscuous
multitude of his professed followers: and there is no reason to suppose, that
all these were then in a regenerate state. That any of them were so, cannot be
inferred merely from God's being spoken of in this passage, under the
character, or title, of their "Father" in heaven. For he is said to be the "God
and Father of ALL"; not only of the regenerate, though they are in a peculiar
sense his children, his sons and daughters. This common Father has many evil
and disobedient, as well as good and obedient children. And the persons here
spoken to, are spoken to as evil. "If ye then, being evil", etc. From whence it
might be at least as fairly argued, that they were not in a regenerate state,
as it could, that they were, from God's being styled their Father. For where do
you find those that are born of God, his sons by adoption, and spiritual
renovation, called evil in scripture? However, no great stress ought to be laid
upon this: for even such persons may doubtless be styled evil in a comparative
sense; as our Lord says, "There is none good but One, that is God." But there
is still less reason to conclude these persons were born of God, from his being
spoken of as their Father: For, as before observed, he is the Father of ALL:
And all in common are directed to pray to him under this very character -- "Our
Father which art in heaven" -- Had not this cavil been produced as a serious
argument, and much insisted on by some, it would have been a shame to say so
much about it: which must be my apology -- I would farther observe here, that
these promises of our Savior to such as ask, seek and knock, seem to be more
especially designed and calculated for the encouragement of the unregenerate to
seek God, and spiritual blessings. For the "good things" promised, as explained
by St. Luke, are such as are comprehended in the "gift of the holy spirit:" The
promise of which, in consequence of asking, seeking and knocking, is so far
from supposing that the persons who do so, are already regenerate, or that the
spirit is given to them prior to their asking; that it rather implies the
direct contrary; viz. that they had not the spirit, in the sense here intended
by our Savior. For if they are supposed, at the time of their asking, to have
the spirit of God dwelling in them, to "abide with them for ever," as all the
sons of God by regeneration and adoption have, what becomes of the promise?
What are they to have in consequence of asking, etc? Is it only the continuance
of the spirit, or larger measures of it? -- But these are, I think, never
called, giving the spirit, in the language of scripture: which means the
original bestowment of it [or him] on such as were destitute of it; in
consequence of which, they are said to be born of the spirit, or of God. As a
man is but once born of God, or of the Spirit, so the Spirit is, properly
speaking, never given more than once: For being once given, he is to "be in,
and to abide with believers for ever." So that to say, as some have done, that
they who have already the spirit of God, have indeed here a promise of his
continuance, or of larger measures thereof; but that those who ask, being
destitute of the spirit, have no promise of him made to them, is a most
arbitrary, irrational construction of this promise: A promise, which our
blessed and merciful Redeemer particularly designed for the encouragement of
those to ask, who most need the Spirit; -- "heavy-laden" sinners; that so,
applying themselves to God in their extremity, "they may be made free from the
law of sin and death, by the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus; and for
the future walk, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." Romans VIII. 1, 2.


IT will greatly confirm what has been said upon this point, if we consider,

(12.) THAT the apostle Peter speaks of God, as having "given unto us all
things pertaining unto life and godliness," by calling us to the knowledge of
the gospel; and particularly, certain "great and precious promises, that by
these, "says he, "you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped
the corruption that is in the world through lust." 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
Where you will observe, That all things pertaining to "godliness," are given
in and by the gospel: That there are in it more particularly, "great and
precious promises:" That the end of these promises, is, our being made
"partakers of the divine nature"; by which is doubtless meant, the Spirit of
God, with a new heart: That those who are made partakers of this divine nature,
are not unconvinced, hardened sinners, going on without check or restraint in
their evil courses; but such as are in some degree reformed; or such as "have
escaped the [gross] corruptions that are in the world through lust:" By whom we
may fairly understand, such as strive to enter in at the strait gate. And
lastly, That this divine nature, or new heart, is given in the way of promise,
or in fulfillment of the promises -- So that this exactly coincides with what
our Lord says in the passages considered above, respecting those that hunger
and thirst after righteousness; that ask, etc. Nor is it unlikely, that the
apostle Peter had these, and suchlike promises of our Savior, particularly in
his mind, when he speaks of the great and precious promises given to us, that
by these we might be partakers of the divine nature.

(13.) IT is very generally allowed (though denied by some men of a disordered
mind, hardly fit to be reasoned with,) that all those in general, who hear the
gospel, are invited and required, not only to believe it, but to repent of
their sins, and to become the true disciples of Jesus Christ. It is moreover
universally acknowledged, that the gospel promises eternal life to all who do
thus, or to all real christians: And it is represented as a wonderful
manifestation of the goodness of God to men, that he should, in this way,
promise salvation to them. Now, if these conceptions and representations are
just, as they unquestionably are; it may from hence be clearly inferred, that
there is grace accompanying the dispensation of the gospel, sufficient to
render it effectual to the salvation of those who hear it, provided they are
really desirous of, and endeavor after it: Or, in other words, that God will
certainly afford to such persons, all needful influences of his Spirit to this
end; and consequently, for their renovation and sanctification: For unless
there is such grace attending this dispensation, or actually attainable by all
in general who hear the gospel, and desire the salvation therein revealed,
where is the goodness of God to them in this dispensation? What becomes of
these "good tidings of great joy to all people?" or how can this revelation,
with any propriety, be called good tidings to all? Is there any real kindness,
mercy or goodness, in offering salvation to guilty creatures, and inviting them
to accept it, on such terms as are to them impracticable, though they desire it,
and strive to this end? -- impracticable, I mean, with all the helps and
advantages that God affords, or will afford to them, though they seek them in the
best manner their circumstances will admit of? I must confess, I cannot see any
goodness herein. There seems to be no real difference between, not offering
them salvation to all, and offering it on such terms as these; unless it be in
this respect, viz. That, upon the former supposition, sinners would have no
just cause for complaint; They could only say, that God had dealt in a way of
strict justice with them; not showing, nor even seeming to show, any mercy to
them. Whereas, on the latter supposition, that the terms proposed are really
impracticable, by any who desire, and endeavor to obtain salvation, they would
seem to have some ground to complain, that they were insulted in their misery,
under the fallacious pretext of "rich goodness, forbearance and
long-suffering". -- God might, indeed, have justly left guilty mankind to
perish in their sins, without providing a Redeemer for them, or proposing any
terms of reconciliation with them. But if he is pleased as it were to enter
into a treaty with them; to make overtures of peace to them; and sends
ambassadors to beseech them in his name to be reconciled to him; not only
goodness, but even natural justice, seems then to require, that the terms
proposed should be such, as creatures in their situation, all things
considered, may comply with, and so receive the benefit offered, provided they
really desire it. For otherwise, as was intimated before, such proposals seem a
real insult on the miserable, under the pretext of wonderful goodness and
grace. We may from hence therefore clearly infer, that God will give his holy
Spirit to those who, sensible of their need thereof, have recourse to him; and
really strive to obtain life; -- unless you will suppose, that we may see the
kingdom of God, or finally enter in at the strait gate, without being born of
the Spirit.

(14.) IT is very generally allowed, that those who, having had the gospel
preached to them, do not actually comply with the method of salvation revealed
therein, and so finally obtain eternal life, will have an aggravated
condemnation at the last day. This is agreeable to the representations of
scripture in many places. But what reason? what justice, would there be in
this, if these sinful and unhappy men were never really put into a capacity for
obtaining this salvation? or never had it made possible to them, though they
desired and endeavored to become partakers of it? Are men, even though guilty,
and deserving of wrath, to be first mocked with the offers of salvation by
Jesus Christ, upon terms really impracticable to them, though they desire to
comply with them; and afterward to receive a condemnation peculiarly
aggravated, on account of their noncompliance with these offers! -- "Far be it
from God that he should do wickedly; and from the Almighty, that he should
pervert judgment"! Are not his ways equal! -- But this were contrary to our
clearest ideas of equity, of just and fair dealing: It were not only void of
all goodness; but so cruel and tyrannical, that it would be highly blasphemous
to attribute such a conduct to God; who is not only infinitely removed from all
unrighteousness, but "good unto all, and his tender mercies over all his
works." And yet such a conduct must be ascribed to him, unless we suppose, that
the salvation revealed is actually attainable, (and consequently the gift of
the holy Spirit) by all those who desire, and use their endeavors to this end
-- I speak upon the supposition mentioned above, in which christians are very
generally agreed; viz. that all those who do not actually comply with this
method of salvation, so as at last to obtain eternal life, are, for such
noncompliance, to receive a very aggravated condemnation. And those who
pretend to reconcile such a method of conduct with justice, seem properly to
fall under the censure of "speaking wickedly for God."

I HUMBLY conceive, that there is not one of the above arguments, but what is
strictly conclusive, even when taken separately. However, as was intimated
before, the absolute decision of this question is not rested upon any one of
them, exclusively of the rest; but upon the joint force and result of all. And
being thus considered, there appears to me, not only satisfactory and
conclusive evidence in favor of the doctrine proposed to be proved: but a full
blaze of it, so as to take away even the possibility of doubt, from any person
of a tolerable comprehension of mind, who seriously attends to it; -- unless he
is under the influence of some very unhappy, though I do not say, criminal
prejudices -- But you are to judge for your selves.

IF it should be said, that some difficulty arises from the latter part of the
same verse, of which my text is a part; -- "For many, I say unto you, shall
seek to enter in, and shall not be able": a clear and full solution of this, is
contained in the verses following. From whence it is manifest, that our Lord
does not mean, that they "shall not be able", though they strive during the time
of their visitation; but after it is elapsed. For he proceeds thus: "When once
the master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; and he
shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are: Then shall ye
begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence," etc. Here you see, when
it is that many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; viz. when the
master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door: Which, by the way,
is so far from implying, that they shall not be able to enter in, though they
strive during the day of their visitation, that it implies the direct contrary,
viz. that the door is not then shut, but open; and that they are able, all
things being considered, to enter in thereat, if they really strive to this
end. So that these words are plainly parallel with those in Proverbs --
"Because I have called, and ye refused; -- I also will laugh at your calamity
-- when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. THEN shall they call upon
me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me." In which words it is also clearly implied, that if sinners strive, call on
God, and seek him diligently, before that time comes, he will surely answer,
and be found of them.

IF it should be farther said, that an unregenerate man cannot be supposed to
strive, seek, or do any thing else, in a truly holy manner, so as to be
pleasing to God; and consequently, that God cannot be supposed to have
connected the attaining of eternal life with their endeavors: It is answered,
That what God has connected eternal life with, can be known only from his own
word. To that we have been appealing; and have found, that he has therein
actually connected salvation with the endeavors of sinners. And there is some
real difference between the temper and actions of awakened sinners; -- awakened
by God's own word and spirit; hungring and thirsting after righteousness, and
striving to enter in at the strait gate; and the temper and actions of those,
who are proceeding headlong in their criminal courses. Though the actions of the
former are no ways meritorious, yet they are certainly, to say the least, not
so displeasing to God, as those of the latter. Yea; since God has commanded the
unregenerate, while and as such, to strive, seek, etc. it must be supposed,
that he requires them to strive in the exercise of such faculties as they have,
not of such as they have not. Their striving in the exercise of these powers,
may therefore properly be called obedience to him, or said to partake of the
nature thereof. And if there be in it any thing of the nature of obedience, it
has also something of the nature of good; and so cannot be wholly unpleasing to
God. It must therefore render those who perform it, more suitable objects of
his favor and mercy than those are, who do not strive; but commit iniquity
with greadiness. And if such sinners are in the least degree more suitable
objects of mercy, than the thoughtless and hardened, this affords an
intelligible reason why God, willing to show his mercy, should connect eternal
life with the striving of the former; at least in preference to the crimes of
the latter: -- Though it is by no means under the notion of any real merit, or
good desert in those who strive, that God has promised his holy Spirit, and
therewith, eternal life to them. Besides: In the way of objecting
abovementioned, it might be thought irrational to suppose, that God had
connected eternal salvation with any thing in, or done by, the regenerate
themselves. For is there not imperfection and sin attending even them, and
whatever they do? And yet it is acknowledged, that God has connected eternal
life with their says, love, etc. though it is for Christ's sake, that these
promises are made to them; not on account of any merit in themselves. To sum up
all in a word: Those who object in this manner, seem to forget, that in the
gospel God is professedly treating with us as degenerate, sinful creatures, who
can do nothing that is perfectly holy, and who deserve wrath; -- that he is
treating with us about our eternal happiness, upon quite another footing than
that of law or justice, for the manifestation of his goodness and grace; --
upon the footing of a new covenant established in a Mediator, who died for all,
the just for the unjust; in whom, all the promises of God to sinners are made,
and in whom they are all "yea and amen." Had these things been duly considered,
surely we should not have had this objection so much insisted on as it has
been, That no actions of the unregenerate are truly good and holy; and
therefore, that no promises of good can be supposed annexed to their
endeavors; to any thing that they can do. Which objection is entirely grounded
on a false hypothesis; a feeble support, which being taken away, the objection
falls of course; and appears, as it really is, weak and unsolid, though insisted
on by some worthy men.

IF it should be farther objected, that this doctrine of a certain connection
between striving, and obtaining salvation, has a tendency to give ease to the
minds of sinners; and to make them rest satisfied with something short of
regeneration, under a notion that they are already in a safe estate, in respect
of their endeavors; and so may be a means of destroying, instead of saving
their souls: It is answered, That if it ministers hope to awakened sinners, and
no more than the gospel affords; so much the better: and, that it really
affords them no more, has been fully shown. Our merciful Redeemer designed that
such persons should have comfort and hope; he gives it to them himself; in
which respect they have a right to it: And what the Lord gives, his servants
should not take away. -- As to the tendency of this doctrine to lull sinners
into a state of security, or to make them cease striving; this is quite remote
from good sense. What! does telling them, that they must strive with
perseverance; that this is absolutely necessary; and that if they continue to
strive, it shall not be in vain; does this tend to make them remiss, and think
themselves safe without striving! How absurd is this! But this objection may be
retorted with unanswerable force, against the contrary doctrine. For if sinners
are told, that there is no sort of connection between any of their endeavors,
and obtaining eternal life; but that they may perish after all; this has a
direct and manifest tendency to dishearten them; and make them give over those
endeavors, which, they suppose, may be thus fruitless. For hope is one of the
most powerful springs of action; and endeavors are incompatible with despair.
-- In short: the doctrine of this discourse, which affords so much consolation
to heavy-laden sinners, is no other than the good tidings of great joy, which
were to be unto all people; the very doctrine of Him who said -- The Spirit of
the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound: To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord -- to comfort all that
mourn: To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion; to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness: that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, that he might be glorified. Isai. LXI. 1, 2, 3.


THIS subject suggests numerous, and very important reflections; but there is
time only for the few which follow.

1st. WE see from hence the wonderful goodness and mercy of God; inasmuch as he
has given us the strongest assurances of pardon and eternal life, on such terms
as, by his offered grace, we may all comply with, if we really desire to do it:
Which ought to be acknowledged with the warmest gratitude, to the glory of his
name. And how justly is the revelation which discovers this grace, and unfolds
the mysteries of it; which dispels our anxious fears, and raises guilty worms
to the hopes of glory, honor and immortality: How justly is this called, "good
tidings of great joy!" -- What manner of love has the Father bestowed upon us!

2dly. IT appears, that though the salvation of those that are saved, is entirely
of grace; yet the destruction of all who perish under the dispensation of the
gospel, will be entirely of themselves; as being owing, not so properly to
this, that they were sinful creatures, (for that is common to them with those
that are saved) as to their neglect and contempt of that method of salvation
from sin, which was revealed to them. Nor will one of these miserable men be
able to plead in the judgment of the great day -- "Lord, I carefully attended
to thy gospel, and heartily strove, according to thy command, to enter in at
the strait gate: Do not therefore, I beseech thee by the bowels of thy mercy,
now shut it against me! -- Lord, Lord, open unto me; for I believed thy words;
and earnestly endeavored to walk in that path of life, which was marked out by
thee." -- Many, we know, will be able to plead, "We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence; and thou have taught in our streets." But this is a very different
thing; a plea of no real force, as the other would evidently be. And if none
will be able to make the former, as they certainly will not; what can they say
against the righteousness of such a sentence as this? -- "Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels."

3dly. LET all therefore be exhorted to strive, now they are "able" to enter in
at the strait gate; lest they should thus seek to enter in hereafter, and "not
be able." Is it not worth while, my brethren, to strive, that you may escape
the wrath to come? that you may receive a crown of righteousness and glory from
the Lord's hand; and be admitted to "sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God?" Is it not, that you may be
admitted to sit with Christ on his throne, "even as he also overcame, and is
set down with his Father on his throne!" What great pains do you take to avoid
some inconsiderable evil, and to obtain some inconsiderable good, even when the
success of your endeavors is uncertain? And will you not endeavor to avoid so
great an evil as "everlasting destruction?" and to obtain so inestimable a
prize as is now set before you; -- "the prize of our high calling of God in
Christ Jesus?" -- especially when you are assured by the word and promise of
God, that he will render your endeavors effectual to these important ends?
Will you not strive, when He invites? when He commands, who has both "the key
of David," of the kingdom of heaven; and the "keys of hell and of death!" --
who opens and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens! Do not, I
beseech you, delay: For human life is precarious; and although your own should be
prolonged, yet if you go on to provoke God by your sins, he may perhaps give
you over to a reprobate mind; so that you will only live to fill up the measure
of your sins. "To day then, if you will hear his voice!" --

4thly. LET me exhort all those, who may imagine that they strive to enter in
at the strait gate; and so, that they are in the way that leads unto life, to
examine themselves seriously as to this point. There are many persons who think
of this matter, and do something with a view to their future happiness; who
cannot yet be said to strive in the sense of our Savior. Have you ever been
awakened to a sense of your sins? Are your desires to obtain the "great
salvation," strong in some proportion to its importance? stronger than, to
obtain any worldly good? Do you diligently inquire after the way of life, which
God has revealed? Do you make it your practice to pray to him? Do you endeavor
to mortify your lusts? Do you strive to keep his known commandments; still
acknowledging that you are unprofitable servants; and saying with the publican,
"God be merciful to me a a sinner?" If you do not strive, after some such
manner as this, you cannot be thought to strive in the way which Christ
commands: And you know the consequence. -- But if you do thus, I may safely
tell you at least, that you are not far from the kingdom of God; that you are
in the way of his blessing; and that "in due time you shall reap, if you faint
not."

5thly. IT appears, I think, that the main point which I have endeavored to
establish in this discourse, is not only a certain truth, but a very important
one. It is so, particularly in two respects. It is a clear and full
vindication, both of the justice and goodness of God, in his dealings with men:
As it shows, that he has actually put those who live under the gospel, into a
capacity of obtaining salvation, if they desire it; and consequently, that
those who perish, will be, in a strictly proper sense, their own destroyers.
Whereas, if this doctrine is denied, it will not be so easy to make these
things appear. Such a denial will bear hard on the veracity and sincerity of
God in his word, wherein he declares his great love and compassion to sinful
men: And it will be impossible on this supposition, (that we may strive, and
yet not obtain) to show the justice of punishing all such as fall short of this
salvation, in a signal, exemplary manner, as despisers of God's grace. But all
this will be clear and manifest, if eternal life is really connected with
striving -- This is an important doctrine in another respect: Sinners ought to
have all the encouragement to strive, which can be given them according to the
word of God. We know, alas! how backward men generally are to take pains in
religion; how difficultly they are persuaded to forsake their wicked practices;
and to labor here, that they may finally enter into rest. All possible
encouragement, therefore, ought to be given them, in order to overcome this
reluctance. And it is plain, that there is far greater encouragement, on the
supposition that there is a certain connection between their striving and
obtaining, than on the contrary, that all their endeavors, however diligent,
uninterrupted, and of long continuance, may perhaps be in vain. Be the
salvation of their souls of ever so much importance; yet if they suppose that
this may be the case, it must needs prove a great discouragement to them. Such
doubt, or uncertainty, has a direct tendency to dishearten them; to damp their
endeavors: Though it is allowed, that we ought in reason to strive, even upon
the supposition of such uncertainty.

WE see then, my brethren, how much those who deny, there is any sort of
connection between the most earnest endeavors of sinners, and their obtaining
eternal life, dishonor God, by denying his grace in one material point; we see
how their doctrine tends to discourage those, who are really "seeking the way
to Zion;" how, to "break the bruised reed, and quench the smoking flax"; and,
in fine, how it tends rather to excuse those who fall short of salvation, than
to justify the ways of God to men. All this is manifest: Though, by the way, I am
far from charging any ill intention on those who deny such a connection as has
been spoken of. But their doctrine is certainly bad, however good their designs
be; of which God is the only proper judge -- But some there are, who go much
further: They not only deny any certain connection; but assert that a person,
going on in his sins without remorse, is altogether as likely to obtain
salvation at last, as one who is convinced of his sinful state, and uses his
utmost endeavors to obtain eternal life! Yea, there are, who go beyond this;
asserting that all an unregenerate man does, or can do, is so far from having
any real tendency to promote his salvation, that it is but rebellion against
God, and so sets him at a still greater distance from Him! To such lengths as
these, some men have gone, in pursuance of certain false principles which they
have unhappily imbibed, as principles of christianity: Yea, and have
represented the belief of these impious notions, as essential articles of
faith; as if those who denied them, were both strangers and enemies to the
grace of God! Now, if only the denial of any certain connection between the
endeavors of sinners, and their obtaining eternal life, is in some measure to
dishonor God; to throw needless discouragements in the way of those who strive
to obtain salvation, and to prevent others from striving; what shall we say of
this other doctrine, which supposes all the endeavors of the unregenerate,
rather to aggravate their guilt, and so, their damnation, than to promote their
future well-being! What is the result of such doctrine as this, but that
sinners should keep themselves as secure and unconcerned as possible, instead
of striving to enter in at the strait gate? the former being, of the two, more
likely to issue in their salvation, than the latter. Whatever apology may be
made for those, who only deny a connection; it is extremely difficult to make
any tolerable one, for these other persons mentioned, unless it be this, that
they are beside themselves, and know not what they say. For these notions are
so opposite to reason, and the whole tenor of scripture; they tend so directly
to make, or to keep men, wicked; that if any one, in his senses, could be
supposed to advance them, we could hardly put any other construction upon his
doing so, than that he designed to represent the ever good and glorious God in
the most odious light possible; to bring a reproach upon the christian
religion; to discourage sinners from endeavoring to obtain the salvation
revealed therein; and even to fill the world with all manner of impiety and
vice. Which God forbid any man should really design! And rather than believe,
any are so abandoned, we ought charitably to hope that those who teach such
doctrines, are only out of their wits --

How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation! -- But what if one of those, who should be the bearers of
these tidings, should bring only such as these? -- Men and brethren! You are
all in a state of sin and death; justly liable to the damnation of hell. But
God, who is rich in mercy, has provided a way of salvation for sinners: He
has sent his Son into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved. O unspeakable goodness! Grace! Grace! Glory to God in
the highest, on earth peace, goodwill will toward men; -- sinful, guilty,
miserable men! -- However, do not mistake me, my friends, as if I supposed you
were all, or indeed any of you, really put into a capacity for obtaining
salvation by Christ, although you should desire it, and use your utmost
endeavors to that end. No! in order to your escaping eternal damnation, and
entering into the kingdom of heaven, it is necessary that you should become
true christians, or new creatures. But this is as much out of your power, as to
create new worlds, or to annihilate the old: Neither may you depend on the
grace of God to renew and sanctify you, though you should cry day and night unto
him, and strive to put yourselves in the way of his blessing. All this may
prove in vain. Yea, those persons who are going on in their sins without any
remorse, are at least as likely (if not more so) to become subjects of the
special, saving grace of God, as you will be with all your strivings, while in
an unregenerate state. You need spiritual wisdom; and are indeed directed to
pray for it: but unless this wisdom is first given to you, you cannot pray for
it so as to obtain it. You need a new heart; but you must first have such an
heart, before you can "inquire" of God aright, to bestow it on you. You need
the pardon of sin, for which you are also to pray; but unless you are first in
a regenerate, and therefore fore in a pardoned state, God may not hear your
prayers, and pardon your sins. You need a principle of spiritual life; for
which you are to apply yourselves to God in Christ; but then you are to
remember, that you are to carry this same principle with you, in going to God
for it; or to pray in the actual exercise of it, when you pray for it:
Otherwise you cannot expect that God will give it to you -- You see plainly
then, that all your prayers and endeavors, while unregenerate, may be to no
purpose -- Yea, farther: To deal plainly and sincerely with you, I must tell
you, that all such prayers and strivings, instead of having the least tendency
to promote your salvation, are but rebellion against God; and so may, not
improbably, be a means of increasing your damnation. -- Such duties are more to
be feared than your other sins -- It is, however, possible that God may save
some of you, by a sovereign, irresistible act of his grace, instantaneously
changing your hearts; whether you do, or do not seek him. -- These are the good
tidings of great joy, which I bring you in the name of my divine MASTER. And
now, O what mavelous love is manifested to a guilty world, in the redemption
thereof by Jesus Christ! How rich, how abundant is this goodness! Take heed
therefore, that you do not receive the grace of God in vain. For as to those of
you, (perhaps the far greater number) who shall not finally be made partakers
of this great salvation; how justly will you be thought worthy of an aggravated
condemnation, as despisers of it? even though you have desired it, and
endeavored to obtain it; striving to enter in at the strait gate!

Now, would this be gospel-preaching? Would a sermon in this strain, be really
"good tidings of great joy to all people"? Are wandering prodigals, perishing
in a strange land, to be brought home to their Father's house? is the body of
Christ to be edified? are Jews, Mahometans and Pagans, to be taught to conceive
highly of the wisdom, goodness and grace of the christian dispensation, by such
representations as this? Are the "feet" of those who bring such tidings, really
"shod with the preparation of the gospel; of peace"; or are they "beautiful on
the mountains"? Notwithstanding the cry of, "Grace! Grace!" does not this
doctrine favor much more of Ebal, the mount of cursing, than of Gerizzim,
Deuteronomy. Chap. XXVII. 12, 13. "These shall stand upon mount Gerizzim to bless the
people -- and these shall stand upon mount Ebal TO CURSE" --
the mount of blessing? -- but more especially, than of that "holy mount," to
which HE, who came to seek and to save that which was lost, used to resort with
his disciples; and where such truly "gracious words" as these, used to proceed
out of his sacred mouth? -- Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness; for they shall be filled -- Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For EVERY ONE that
asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, IT
SHALL BE OPENED. -- AMEN!

THE END.
PSALM XL. BRADY and TATE's Version.
1 I Waited meekly for the Lord,
'till he vouchsafed a kind Reply;
Who did his gracious Ear afford,
and heard from Heaven my humble Cry.
2 He took me from the dismal Pit,
when foundered deep in miry Clay;
On solid Ground he placed my Feet,
and suffered not my Steps to stray.
3 The wonders he for me has wrought
shall fill my Mouth with Songs of Praise;
And others, to his Worship brought,
in Hopes of like Deliverance raise.
9 In full Assemblies I have told
thy Truth and Righteousness at large:
Nor did, thou know, my Lips withhold
from utt'ring what thou gav'st in charge:
10 Nor kept within my Breast confined
thy faithfulness, and saving Grace;
But preached thy Love, for all designed,
that all might That and Truth embrace.
11 Then let those Mercies I declared
to others, Lord, extend to me;
Thy Loving Kindness my Reward,
thy Truth my safe Protection be.
Page 64, line 4 from the bottom, for countenance, read continuance.


