THE Well-Ordered Family: WHEREIN The Duties of it is various Members are
described and urged.

A small, but very comprehensive Piece, suitable to be in the Hand of every
Householder; and may be especially seasonable in the present Day.

By that eminently pious and learned Divine, Mr. ISAAC AMBROSE, Minister of the
Gospel at Preston.

But as for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

Josh. xxiv. 15. BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite the
Probate-Office in Queen Street. 1762.

The Well-Ordered Family.
SECTION I. Of the Preparatives to Family Duties.
NOW that we may more comfortably carry on these Family Duties, observe we, 1.
Our Entrance into them, and 2. Our Proceedings in them.

1. For Entrance, we must lay a good Foundation for Tractableness unto Religion
in those that belong to the Family.

As, 1. In the Governor. 2. In the Governed.

1. In the Governor; whose Duty it is,

1. To endeavor in a special Manner for Knowledge in God's Word; and for
Holiness of Conversation in a Christian Walking. This would tend much to the
Preservation of his Authority; who otherwise will be slighted and disregarded,
through an aptness in Inferiors to take Occasion therefrom.

2. To marry in the Lord; and then to live chastely in Wedlock, that there may
be a holy Seed: Now that he may marry in the Lord, 1. Let Piety be the mover of
his Affection; and Personage, Parentage, and Portion, be only as a comfortable
accessory, considerable in a second Place: Christianity and Grace, is the chief
golden Link and noble Tie, which has the Power and Privilege to make Marriage
a lovely and everlasting Bond. 2. Let him ply the Throne of Grace with fervency
of Prayer: A good Wife is a more immediate Gift of God. Whence Solomon could
say, Houses and Riches are the Inheritance of Fathers; but a prudent Wife is
from the Lord: Such a rare and precious Jewel is to be sued and sought for at
God's Mercy Seat, with extraordinary Importunity and Zeal; and it she be
procured at God's Hand by Prayer, he shall find a thousand Times more Sweetness
and Comfort, then if she be cast on him by an ordinary Providence. 3. Let him
observe and mark these six Points in his Choice: As, 1. The Report: 2. The
Looks: 3. The Speech: 4. The Apparel: 5. The Companions: 6. The Education:
These are like the Pulses; that show the fitness and goodliness of any Party
with whom he ought to marry.

3. To beware whom he admits to dwell with him; that they be tractable unto
religious Courses. See David's Resolution herein: Mine Eye shall be upon the
faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect
Way shall serve me: He that works Deceit shall not dwell within my House: He
that tells Lies, shall not tarry in my Sight.

2. In the Governed; whose Duty it is both to join together in the Performance
of Family Duties with their Governor, and to submit to his Government: My Son,
here the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother; for
they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about thy Neck.

These Preparatives I pin upon the Front or Porch of this Family: Now to the
Family Duties themselves, and how they must be exercised.

SECTION II. Of the Duties of Governors in general.
IN the Proceedings of these Family Duties, we are to consider the Duties, 1.
Of the Governors. 2. Of the Governed.

1. The Governors; if (as it is in Marriage) there be more than one; as first,
the chief Governor, viz. the Husband: secondly, the Helper, viz. the Wife;
both these owe Duties to their Families, and Duties to one another.

1. The Duties they owe to their Families, are either, In general to the whole;
or, in particular, according to their several Relations.

1. That which in general they owe to the whole Family, is either, to their
Bodies, or to their Souls.

1. To their Bodies: Concerning which, says the Apostle, He that provideth not
for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he has denied the
Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5.8. Now as the Spirit of God
charge us with this Duty, so he sets us about such Things whereby this may
be compassed; as, 1. That every one should have some honest and good Calling,
and walk diligently in it: Let him that stole, steal no more, (says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.28.) but rather let him labor, working with his Hands the
Thing which is good. 2. That he bear a low Sail, and keep within Compass;
remembering that of Solomon; He that is despised, and has a Servant, is better
than he that honors himself, and lacks Bread.

2. To their Souls: Concerning which, some Duties, they are to perform to the
Family; and others, to require of the Family.

1. The Duties they must perform to them, are --

1. To provide that they may live under the public Ministry; for otherwise how
should they be brought into the Sheepfold of Christ, if they hear not the Voice
of the chief Shepherd speaking unto them by those whom he has sent?

2. To oversee the Ways of their Families; that they serve God: and as in all
other Duties, so especially in sanctifying the Sabbath: To this the very Words
in the fourth Commandment do bind all Masters of Families: Remember, thou and
thy Son, and thy Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maid; -- Where the Lord
speaks by Name to the Governors, as if he would make them Overseers of this
Work of sanctifying his Sabbaths.

3. To set their House in order for the Service of God, to offer Prayers and
Praises to the Lord Morning and Evening. To this Purpose, Pray continually
(says the Apostle) 1 These. 5.17. which we must not understand of uninterrupted
and incessant pouring out of Prayers, as the Mussalians or Euchitae did; but of
Morning and Evening Prayers; the Apostle here speaking in Reference and in
Analogy to the continual, or daily Sacrifices. This was David's Practice,
Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear
my Voice, Psalm. 55.17. And this was Job's Practice, who sent for, and
sanctified his Sons and Daughters; and rose up early in the Morning, and
offered Burnt-offerings according to the Number of them all: -- Thus did Job
continually, Job 1.5. And this was Abraham's Practice wherever he came, to
build an Altar to God, where God should be worshipped jointly by turn and his
Family: Genesis 12.7. and 13.4. and 21.33. And this was Christ's Practice for
himself and his Family, Mat. 14.19. Joh 17.1.

4. To instruct their Families privately in Matters of Religion, that they may
not only profess, but feel the Power of Religion in their Lives and
Conversations. This Duty has these Specials belonging to it.

1. A familiar Catechizing of them in the Principles of Religion. Thus were
Parents commanded of old; Thou shall teach these Words diligently unto thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou set in thine House, and when
thou walk by the Way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Prove. 22.6.

2. A daily reading of the Scriptures in their hearing, directing them to mark
and to make Use of them: So Timothy was trained up by his Parents, and that
from his Childhood, 1 Timothy 3.15.

3. A careful endeavoring that they may profit by the public Ministry: To
this end: 1 They must prepare them to hear the Word, by considering God's
Ordinances, Promises, and their own Necessities. 2. They must remember them to
look in the Word for a Christ, and for Communion with him. 3. They must examine
them after the Ordinances, what they have learned, and what Use they make of
it: Thus Christ, after he had preached a Parable to his Disciples, he said unto
them, Know you not this Parable, and how then will you know all Parables? and
then he expounds the Parable to them. Mark 4.13.

2. The Duties they are to require of the Family, are both carefully to
frequent the public Ministry, and diligenly to be conversant in the private
Worship of God, and constantly to practice all holy and Christian Duties
comprised briefly in the Commandments of God; and they are to require these
Things, not only by telling them, calling on them, catechizing them,
admonishing them; but if they be negligent, by correcting them.

Now this Correction must be ministered both in Wisdom and in Patience.

1. In Wisdom; whose Property it is to find out the right Party that committed
the Fault, to consider of what Sort and Nature, the Fault is, to weigh
Circumstances of Age, Discretion and Occasions; and to look to the Mind of the
Doer, whether Negligence or mere Simplicity brought him to it.

2. In Patience; whose Property it is to make the Fault manifest to the
Offender, that his Conscience may be touched therewith; to hear what the
Offender can say in his own Defense, and accordingly to allow or disallow; to
avoid Bitterness, which sooner will harden the Heart, then reform the Manners
of the Offender: These Rules being observed, and the Heart lifted up in Prayer
to God for Direction and blessing, this Correction is necessary; as is evident
in Genesis 30.2. Prove. 13.24. and 19.18.

These are the Duties that Governors owe to their Families in respect of their
Souls; to correct them, catechize them, admonish them, call on them, read to
them, pray for them, etc. only with these Limitations.

1. That they presume not above their Callings: This was Paul's Exhortation,
That no Man take this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron: The Honor here, is the Honor of the public Ministry; except that, and
I know not but that every Governor of a Family, who has special Abilities,
Utterance, Memory, may read Scriptures, repeat Sermons, pray, teach and
instruct out of the the Scriptures. 1 Pet. 4.10. Thus Jacob said to his
Household, Put away the strange Gods that are among you. Genesis 35.2. And without
all Contradiction (says the Apostle) the less is blessed of the better, Heb.
7.7. And if the Woman would learn any Thing, let them ask their Husbands at
Home, 1 Cor. 14.35. Thus Origin would have the Word expounded in Christian
Families: and Augustine says, That which the Preacher is in the Pulpit, the
same is the Householder in the House.

2. That they presume not above their Gifts: This was Paul's Exhortation to
every Man, Not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think; but to
think soberly, as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith; yet I deny
not but in some Cases they may lawfully depute or substitute some one in the
Family, whom they judge fittest unto the Service and Employment, which they
themselves should ordinarily perform: as in Case of old Age and weakness of
Body: Thus Samuel being old, made his Sons Judges: Or in want of good Utterance
or Expression of what is to be said: Thus Aaron was Moses his Spokesman, and in
stead of a Mouth: or in want of Boldness and Audacity, arising from a
consciousness of Weakness: Thus the good Centurion sent the Elders of the Jews
to Christ to intercede for him: or in Case that a Minister of the Gospel do
sojourn in ones Family, as Archippus did in Philemon his House: or in Case of
necessary Absence: Thus the Apostle Paul made Timothy his Deputy to the
Christian Thessalonians: Or in Case the Lord has bestowed more of his Gifts
and Graces to one than another: I know not in this Case, but that we may covet
earnestly the best Gifts in others, as well as in our own selves.

SECTION III. Of the Duties of Parents to their Children.
THE Duties in particular which Governors owe to the Family, according to
their Relations, are either

As Parents to their Children: Or, as Masters to their Servants.

The Duties of Parents to their Children, are either to their Bodies, or to
their Souls.

1. The Duties of Parents to the Bodies of their Children, are in many
Particulars, but may be all comprised under this one Head, A provident Care for
their temporal Good; and this extends it self to all Times, as 1. To their
Infancy. 2. To their Youth. 3. To the Time of Parents Departure out of this
World.

1. The first Age of a Child is his Infancy, and the first Part of its Infancy,
is while it remains in the Mother's Womb. Here the Duty lies principally upon
the Mother, to have a special Care of it, that it may be safely brought forth.
Why was the Charge of abstaining from Wine, strong Drink, and unclean Things,
given to Manoah's Wife, but because of the Child which she had conceived?

The next Degree of a Child's Infancy, is while it is in the Swadling-band, and
remains a sucking Child; in this also the Care more especially lies on the
Mother, whose Duty it is to take all the pains she possibly may, for the
Education of her Child; and especially to give her Child suck, if she be able
thereto: This not only Nature, but Scripture sets forth;

1. By Consequence, Genesis 49.25. Hos. 9.14. 1 Timothy 5.10.

2. By Example, Genesis 21.7. 1 Samuel 1.23. Psalm. 22 9.

3. By Grant, the Word giving it as a ruled Case not to be denied, Genesis 21.7.
Cant. 8.1. Luke 11.27.

2. The second Age of a Child is its Youth, from the Time it begins to be of
any Discretion, till it be fit to be placed forth: Now the Duty of Parents at
this Time is,

1. To nourish. 2. To nurture their Children.

Under Nourishment, are comprised Food, Apparel, Recreation, Means for Recovery
of Health when they are sick: In which, if Parents provide not for their
Children, they are worse than Infidels. And under Nurture, are comprised, good
Manners, a good Calling, frequent Admonition, Reprehension, Correction, the
last Remedy, which may do good when nothing else can. Prove. 19.18. -- 23.13,
14. -- 29.17.

3. The last Time to which Parents provident Care extends it self, is the
Time of their Departure out of the World; and then they are to set their House
in Order, and to leave their Estates to their Children.

2. The Duty of Parents to the Souls of their Children extends it self also to
all Times: As

1. To their Infancy. 2. To their Youth. 3. To the Time of Parents Departure
out of this World.

1. The first Age of a Child, is his Infancy; and the first Part of it is
Infancy, is while it remains in the Mother's Womb. Now the Duty of Parents at
that Time are these: 1. That they pray for their Children: Thus did Rebeckah,
while the Children were quick in her Womb. Those Parents that neglect this Duty
to their Children, consider not rightly that they are conceived in Sin: 2. That
they make sure (so much as in them lies) that their Children be born under the
Promise, or under the Covenant, in respect of the spiritual Part of it: How? by
making sure that they be under the Promise or Covenant themselves: If God in
Christ be their God, they may have a comfortable Hope, that God will be the God
of their Seed, according to the Promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
Seed, Genesis 17.7.

The next Degree of a Child's Infancy, is when it is born: and the Duty of
Parents then is, to give up their Children unto God, casting them into the
Hands of his Providence, into the Arms of his Mercy, begging for them a
gracious Acceptance with God; and to tender them to the Ordinance, The
Sacrament of Baptism, to get the Seal of the Covenant set upon them, to get
them marked out for Salvation.

2. The second Age of a Child, is it is Youth: Now the Duty of Parents to their
Children at this Time, is to train them up in true Piety: To bring them up in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. To this end,

1. When Children begin to read, let them read the holy Scriptures: so was
Timothy trained up from a Child; and thus will Children suck in Religion with
learning.

2. Let Children be Catechized constantly from Day to Day; only with this
Caveat, that Parents deal with their Children, as skilful Nurses and Mothers do
in feeding their Children, not to give them too much at once: over much dulls a
Child's Understanding, and breeds Wearisomeness to it; it is most suitable to
give them Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line, Line upon
Line, here a little, and there a little, Isai. 28.10. Thus shall they learn
with Ease and Delight, and in Time a great Measure of Knowledge will be gained
thereby.

3. Let Parents declare to their Children, the admirable Works that God in
former Times has done for his Church, especially such Works as he has done in
their Time: outward sensible Things do best work upon Children, and therefore
this Direction was given under the Law, Josh. 4.6.21.

4. Let Parents be to their Children a good Pattern in Piety, leading them to
Christ by their Examples: This will take Place with Children, more than all
Precepts or parental Instructions: But as for me (said Joshua) and my House, we
will serve the Lord: Josh. 14.13. He sets himself first, as a Guide to the rest.

5. Let Parents reprove and correct their Children for Sin; and that the Lord
may sanctify this Correction unto them; Consider this, O ye Parents, Do you
observe such and such Sins in your Children? Enter into your own Hearts,
examine your selves, whether they come not from you: Consider, how justly the
Hand of God may be upon you: and when you are angry with your Children, have an
holy Anger with your selves, and use this or the like Meditation with your own
Souls, Lord, shall I thus punish my own Sin in mine own Child? Shall I thus
persecute the Corruptions of mine own Ancestors? How then may thou be
displeased with me for the too carnal Conception of my own Child: It may be, I
then lay in some Sin, or I asked it not of thee by Prayer: Be merciful to me, O
Lord; and in thy good Time, show thou pity on me and my Child!

6. As Children grow in Years, and in the Knowledge of Christ, and of
Justification by Christ, let Parents train them up in the Exercise of all
Duties, as Prayer, Meditation, Self-Examination, Watchfulness, and all Means
public and private: If this be done, the World to come may reap the Benefit of
their Education; such Children as you bring up, such Parents will they be (when
you are gone) to their Children; and such Children shall they have, who are
Parents in the next Generation, etc. You then are the very making or marring of
the World: but on the contrary, if this be neglected, the rich Man will rise up
against you in the Day of Judgment, and condemn you; for he being in Hell, had
a Care of his Father's House, that they might be forewarned; he desired Abraham
to send Lazarus to his Brethren, to testify unto them that they came not to
that Place of Torment; but you will not admonish your Children, you will not
teach them Moses and the Prophets; you will not show them the Danger of God's
heavy Displeasure hanging over their Heads; you will not, whilst you live,
lead a good Example before them: O you may fear that your Children shall be
Furies of Hell to torment you. Now the Lord open your Eyes to foresee, and to
fly these Judgments to come.

3. The last Time to which the Duty of Parents extends it self, is the Time of
their Departure out of the World; and then they owe to their Children:

Good Direction. Faithful Prayer.

1. For Direction: When Parents observe their Time to draw near, it is their
Duty then especially, to commend some wise and wholesome Precepts unto their
Children, the better to direct them in their Christian Course; so did Isaac,
and Jacob, and David: The Words of a dying Parent are especially regarded, and
make a deeper Impression.

2. For Prayer: then is the most proper Time for Parents to pray and to bless
all their Children. As they commend their own Souls unto God's Grace: God's
Providence and Promises are the best Inheritance in the World; and if Parents
(in their Prayers) leave these to their Children, they can never want any Thing
that is good. O the faithful Prayers of Parents for their Children (especially
when they are leaving their Children, and going to God) must needs, in, for,
and through Christ, prevail mightily with God.

SECTION IV. Of the Duties of Masters to Servants.
THE Duty of Masters to their Servants is either to their Bodies, or to their
Souls.

1. The Duty of Masters to the Bodies of their Servants, consists in these
Particulars; viz. In a due Provision of Food for them, Prove. 31.15. and 27.27.
In a wise Care for their Clothing, Prove. 31.21. In a well-ordering of their
Labor, so as they may be able to undergo it: In their Ease, Rest, and
Intermission from Labor at seasonable Times: In paying them sufficient Wages,
Deuteronomy. 24.14. In a careful preserving of their Health, and using Means for their
Recovery in Case of Sickness, Mat. 8.6. and that not of the Servants Wages, but
of the Master's own Charge, otherwise they undo not the heavy Burden, but
rather lay Burden upon Burden.

2. The Duty of Masters to the Souls of their Servants, consist in these
Particulars, viz. In teaching them the Principles of Religion, and all Duties
of Piety: In causing them to go to the public Ministry of the Word and Worship
of God: In taking an Account of their prositing by the public and private
Means of Edification: In praying for them; and as they observe any Grace
wrought in them, in praising God for it, and praying for the increase of it:
Nothing so much wins a Servant's Heart, or the Affections of any gracious
Heart, as the edifying of it in Grace.

SECTION V. Of the Duties of the Husband and Wife.
THE Duties which the chief Governor and his Helper owe to one another, are
either

Common and mutual; or proper and peculiar to each severally:

1. The common mutual Duties betwixt Man and Wife, are either

Of Necessity to the being of Marriage; as Matrimonial Unity; or Matrimonial
Chastity:

Of Honesty to the well-being of Marriage; as a loving Affection of one
another; Provident Care for one another. Mat. 19.6. Tit. 2.5. Mal. 2.15.

The former Duties presupposed: there ought to be --

1. A sweet, loving, and tenderhearted pouring out of their Hearts, with much
affectionate Dearness into one another's Bosoms. This
mutual-melting-heartedness, being preserved fresh and fruitful, will infinitely
sweeten and beautify the Marriage State. Now for the Preservation of this Love,
let them consider

1. The compassionate and melting Compellations which Christ and his Spouse
exchange in the Canticles, My fair one, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, my
well-beloved, the chief of ten Thousand: Such a fervent and chaste Love as
this, all married Couples should resemble and imitate.

2. The Command of God to this Purpose, Husbands love your Wives, Ephesians. 5.25.
and Wives (or young Women) love your Husbands, Tit. 2.4. Methinks this Charge
often remembered, should ever beat back all Heart-rising and Bitterness, all
wicked Wishes, that they had never met together, that they had never seen one
another's Faces. When the Knot is tied, every Man should think his Wife the
fittest for him, and every Wife should think her Husband the fittest for her of
any other in the World.

2. A provident Care of one for another; which extends to the Body: No Man
hates his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it: and to the good Name:
Joseph was not willing to make Mary a public Example: and to the Goods of this
World; in which if there fall out any cross Providence, they are both to join
with Job's Spirit, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken etc. But
especially to the Soul; in praying together, for, and with one another: in
taking Notice of the Beginning and least Measure of Grace, and approving the
same; in conferring about such Things as concern the same, mutually propounding
Questions, and giving Answers one to another; in maintaining holy and religious
Exercises in the Family, and betwixt their own selves, in stirring up one
another to hear the Word, to receive the Sacraments, and conscionably to
perform all the Parts of God's public Worship: In case the one prove
unconverted, let the other wait, and pray, and expect God's good Time: or in
Case the one be a Babe in Christ, or weak in Christianity, let the other deal
fairly, lovingly, meekly, and let our Lord Jesus his tender-heartedness to
spiritual Younglings, teach us Mercy this Way, who is said to gather the Lambs
with his Arms, and to carry them in his Bosom, and gently to lead those that
are with young.

2. The proper and peculiar Duties to each severally, are --

1. Of the Husband, whose Duty it is, 1. That he dearly love his Wife. 2. That
he wisely maintain and manage his Authority over her.

For the former, 1. The Matter of it is a dear Love, a special Love, and a more
special then that common mutual Love to one another: No question the Wife is to
love her Husband, and a Brother to love his Brother, and a Friend to love his
Friend; but more especially, or with a more special Love, is the Husband to
love his Wife. To this Purpose she is called, The Wife of his Bosom; to show,
that she ought to be as his Heart in his Bosom. He must love her at all Times,
he must love her in all Things: Love must season and sweeten his Speech,
Carriage, and Actions toward her: Love must show it self in his Commands,
Reproofs, Admonitions, Instructions, Authority, Familiarity with her, the Rise
of which Love must not be from her Beauty, Nobility, or because she contents
and pleases her Husband; but especially because she is his Sister in the
Profession of Christian Religion, and an Inheritor with him of the Kingdom of
Heaven: because of her Graces, and Virtues, as Modesty, Chastity, Diligence,
Patience, Temperance, Faithfulness, Secrecy, Obedience, etc. because she bears
and brings him forth Children, the Heirs of his Name and Substance, and the
Upholder of his Family; and because of the Union and Conjunction of Marriage.
Love growing on Beauty, Riches, Lust, or any other slight Grounds, is but a
Blaze, and soon vanishes, but if grounded on these Considerations, and
especially on this Union of Marriage, it is lasting and true: The want hereof
is the Fountain of Strife, Quarelling, Debate; which converts the Paradise of
Marriage, into an Hell.

2. For the manner of this Love; the Apostle gives it thus, Husbands love your
own Wives even as Christ also loved the Church. Now the Love of Christ to his
Church, is commended to us in these Particulars: --

1. In the Case of his Love, which is his Love: He set his Love on you, because
he loved you: his Love arose wholly and solely from himself, and was every Way
free: so should Husbands love their Wives, though there be nothing in Wives to
move them, but merely because they are Wives.

2. In the Order of his Love: Christ began it to the Church, before the Church
could love him: And as a Wall is first smitten on by the Sunbeams, before it
give a Reflection of her Heat back again: so the Church is first heated and
warmed at Heart by the Sense of Christ's Love, before she love him again: We
love him, because he loved us first: -- Because of the Savor of thy Ointments,
therefore do the Virgins love thee: So should Husbands begin to love their own
Wives. I know some Wives prevent their Husbands herein, and there may be Reason
for it; but the greater is their Glory. This Pattern of Christ should rather
stir up the Husbands to go before them.

3. In the Truth of Christ's Love: This was manifested by the Fruits thereof to
his Church: He gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it. and cleanse it,
and present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle: So
must Husbands love their Wives in Truth and indeed, by guiding them in the Way
of Life, and Path that is holy; for this is the truest Character of a sincere
Love.

4. In the Quality of his Love: Christ's Love is an holy, pure, and chaste
Love; as he himself is, so is his Love; such must be the love of Husbands, an
holy, pure, and chaste Love. Away with all intemperate, excessive, or any Ways
exorbitant Pollutions of the Marriage Bed! from which, if the fear of God,
imitation of Christ, love of Purity, awfulness of God's all-seeing Eye cannot
draw, yet that flavish Horror, lest God should punish such a Couple with no
Children, or with misshapen Children, or with Idiots, or with prodigious wicked
Children, or with some other heavy Cross; one would think should be able to
affright them.

5. In the Continuance of Christ's Love? Having loved his own, he loved them to
the End. His Love is a constant Love, an everlasting Love. No Provocation or
Transgressions could ever make him forget his Love. Thou have played the Harlot
with many Lovers, yet return unto me. Jer. 3.1. Such must be the Love of
Husbands, affirm Love, an inviolable Love: The Ground of it must be God's
Ordinance, and the Support of it must be an inviolable Resolution, that no
Provocation shall ever change or alter it. Husbands must pass by all
Infirmities, endeavoring in Love to redress them, if possibly they can; or if
not, to bear with them.

2. Duty of an Husband, is, wisely to maintain and manage his Authority. Now
the managing of it consists in two Things:

1. That he tenderly respect her.

2. That he carefully provide for her.

1. He must tenderly respect her, as his Wife, Companion, Yoke Fellow, as his
very Delight; and the Desire of his Eyes, and never be bitter against her. This
Bitterness ordinarily turns the Edge of his Authority. If therefore any
Matter of Unkindness arise (as sometimes certainly will) then must he carefully
with all Lenity, Gentleness and Patience quiet all, and never suffer himself
nor his Wife to sleep in Displeasure: Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath;
or if he shall have Occasion to reprove her, he must keep his Words until a
convenient time, and not do it in Presence of others; and then utter them in
the Spirit of Meekness and Love. Surely if she be not corrected by a Word of
Wisdom and Discretion, she will never amend by Threats, or any hasty, rigorous
Carriage: and if she once begin to lose her Shamefacedness in the Presence of
her Husband, it is likely there will be often Brawlings and Quarellings betwixt
them, and the House will be full of Disquietness: It is best therefore to deal
wisely with her, to admonish her often, to reprehend her seldom, never to lay
violent Hands on her; and if she be dutiful, to cherish her, that she may so
continue; if wayward, mildly to suffer her, that she wax not worse.

2. He must carefully provide for her: To this purpose he is called her Head,
and Savior, as Christ is the Head of his Church, and the Savior of the Body:
The Head (you know) is the Fountain of Motion, Quickening, Life, Sense, and
Lightsomeness to the body; so should the Husband be as the Wellspring of
Liveliness, Lightsomeness, Light heartedness to his Wife; she has forsook all
for him, and therefore she should receive from him a continual Influence of
cheerful Walking, and comfortable enjoying of herself. And a Savior (you know)
both provides for, and protects the saved: Christ thus saved his Church; he is
every Way a sufficient Savior, able perfectly to save, even to the very
uttermost; he saves Soul and Body, he saves from all Manner of Misery, from the
Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law, the Venom of all outward Crosses, the
Tyranny of Satan, the Sting of Death, the Power of the Grave, the Torments of
Hell; or, if Sin be the greatest Evil, (as indeed it is) he will save his
People from their Sins; Mat. 1.21. I cannot say thus of the Husband; yet an
Husband carries a Resemblance of Christ, and is after a Manner a Savior to
his Wife, to protect her and to provide for her. David compares her to a Vine,
intimating that as a Vine is underpropped and raised by some Tree or Frame near
to which it is planted; so is the Wife raised to the Height of Honor by Virtue
of her Relation to her Husband; by his Wealth she is enriched; by his Honor
she is dignified: he is under God and Christ, all in all to her. In the Family,
he is a King, to govern and aid her; a Priest, to pray with her and for her; a
Prophet, to teach and instruct her; a Savior to provide for, and protect her
to his utmost, if not to the utmost; which indeed is proper and peculiar to the
Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The Duties proper to the Wife, are these, viz.

1. That she be in Submission to her Husband. 2. That she be an Helper to him
all her Days.
1. Wives must he in subjection to their own Husbands: Sarah obeyed Abraham,
and called him Lord: Genesis 3.16. Ephesians. 5.22. 1 Pet. 3.16. But here is a Case of
Conscience, --

1. What if her Husband be a Son of Belial, an Enemy to Christ? Must she then
yield Subjection? -- Yes: because in his Office her Husband is as in Christ
Stead: The Church is compared to a Lilly among Thorns, she remains Lilly-like;
white, soft, pleasant, and amiable, though she be joined with Thorns, which are
prickly and sharp: So a Wife must be meek, mild, gentle, obedient, though she be
matched with a crooked, perverse, profane and wicked Husband: She must in this
Cale remove her Eyes from the Disposition of her Husband's Person, to the
Condition of his Place; and by Virtue thereof (seeing he bears Christ's
Image) be subject unto him as unto Christ.

2. What if her Husband command Things contrary to Christ? Must she therein be
subject? -- No: Submit, etc. How? as unto the Lord: if she submits to Things
contrary to Christ, she submits not as to the Lord. Conscientious Wives must
remember, they have an Husband in Heaven, as well as on Earth, betwixt whom
there is a greater difference, than betwixt Heaven and Earth; and therefore in
Case they bid contrary Things, they must prefer God before Man, Christ before
all Men.

2. Wives must be helpers to their Husbands. Now this Helpfulness consists in
these Things:

1. That she be careful to preserve his Person, in Sickness or in Health, in
Adversity, or Prosperity, in Youth or old Age.

A most memorable and famous Pattern for this Purpose, is recorded by Lib. 2.
de Christiana faem. p. 360.
Uves: A young, tender, and beautiful Maid; was matched to a Man stricken in
Years, whom after Marriage she found to have a very diseased Body, full of
loathful Diseases: yet notwithstanding, out of Sense and Conscience, that by
God's Providence she was become his Wife, she most worthily digested all with
incredible Patience: Friends and Physicians advised her by no Means to come
near him; and for their Parts, they utterly forsook him; but she (passing by
with a loving Disdain those unkind Disswasions) becomes to him in their Stead,
Friend, Physician, Nurse, Mother, Sister, Daughter, Servant, every Thing, any
Thing to do him Good any manner of way. At last by extraordinary Expense, and
excessive Charges about him, she came to some want of some Necessaries;
whereupon she sold her Rings, Chains, richest Attire, Plate, and choicest
Jewels: and when he was dead, and Friends came about her, rather to
congratulate her happy Riddance, than to bewail her Widowhood; she not only
abhorred all Speeches tending that Way, but protested, if it were possible, she
would willingly redeem her Husband's Life with the loss of her five dearest
Children. Whence it appears that this worthy Woman was wedded to her Husband's
Soul, not to his Body; seeing no Infirmity or Deformity thereof, could cool or
weaken the fervency of her Love.

2. That she learn and labor to forecast, contrive and manage Household
Affairs, and Business within Doors, as they say: for which see a right noble
glorious Pattern in Prove. 31.

3. That she help her Husband, in setting forward the rich and royal Trade of
Grace, in erecting and establishing Christ's glorious Kingdom in their House,
and especially in their own Hearts. This is that one necessary Thing, without
which their Family is but Satan's Seminary, and a Nursery for Hell: This will
marvellously sweeten all Reproaches, cast upon them by envenomed Tongues: This
will sweetly seal unto them their Assurance of meeting together hereafter in
Heaven, -- Where the Husbband and Wife perform these and the like Duties;
there is an happy Family, there is a College of Quietness; where these are
neglected, we may term it an Hell,

Thus much of the Duties of Governors; we now come to the Governed.

SECTION VI. Of the Duties of Children to Parents.
DUties of Children to Parents, are either inward, as Love and Fear; or
outward, as Reverence, Obedience, and Recompense.

1. The inward Duties which Children owe to their Parents, are Love and Fear:
Love like Sugar, sweetens Fear, and Fear like Salt, seasons Love; there must be
a loving Fear, and a fearing Love. Hence the Fear of a Child is opposed to the
Fear of a Slave; for a Child's Fear being mixed with Love, has respect to the
Offense which a Parent may take: But a Slaves Fear, which is ordinarily mixed
with Hatred, has respect to nothing but the Punishment which his Master may
inflict upon him. This love-like Fear is so proper to Children, as that the
awful Respect which the Saints bear to God, is called a filial Fear; Children
have received their Substance, from the very Substance of their Parents, and
therefore they are to perform this Duty of Love and Fear to them.

2. The outward Duties, or the Manifestation of this Love and Fear in Children,
appears;

1. In their Reverence, in Speech and Carriage: They must give to their Parents
reverent and honorable Titles, meek and humble Speeches, Obedience, as becomes
their Age and Sex: Thus Joseph and Solomon bowed, the one to his Father, the
other to his Mother, Genesis 48.12. 1 Kin. 2.19. Contrary hereto is mocking and
despising Father and Mother: of which, said Solomon, The Eye that mocketh at
his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall
pick it out; Prove. 13.17. A Phrase that sets forth the End of a notorious
Malefactor, that is hanged in the Air till the Ravens pick out his Eyes.

2. In their Obedience to their Commands, Instructions, Reproofs and Corections
of their Parents, Ephesians. 6.1. Prove. 1.8, 9. The Reason is, because of God, whom
the Father represents: Children must remember, that whatever they do to their
Parents, they do it to God; when they please them, they please God; when their
Parents are justly angry with them, God is angry with them: nor can they
recover God's Favor (though all the Saints of Heaven should entreat for them)
till they have submitted themselves to their own Parents; only with this
Limitation, that they submit or obey them in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1.

3. In their Recompense: This is a Duty whereby Children endeavor (as much as
in them lies) to repay what they can for the Parents Kindness, Care and Cost
toward them, in way of Thankfulness: If any Widow have Children, or Nephews,
let them first learn to show Kindness at Home, and to requite their Parents, 1 Timothy 5.4. In Sickness, they must visit them, in the time of Mourning, they must
comfort them; in Want, they must provide for them: As the Children of Jacob,
who visited, comforted, and went to buy Food for their Father, Genesis 48.1. and
37.35. and 42.3. In time of Danger, they must endeavor their Protection; as
David did, 1 Samuel 22.3, 4. Let my Father and Mother (said he to the King of
Moab) I pray thee, come forth and be with you, till I know what God will do for
me: And he brought them before the King of Moab, and they dwelt with him all
the while that David was in the hold.

If God please to take Children out of this World before their Parents, and
their Parents be succourless, they must (as they can) provide for their
well-being after their Deaths: Thus Christ commended his Mother to his Disciple
John, a little before he gave up the Ghost. It is recorded of the Stork, that
when the Dams are old, the young Ones feed them; and when through Age they are
ready to faint in their flying, the young Ones help them; and when they are
past flying, the young Ones carry them on their weak Backs. Thus Nature teaches
Children their Duty, how much more should Grace.?

SECTION VII. Of the Duties of Servants to their Masters.
DUties of Servants to their Masters, are either inward, as Fear, outward, as
Reverence, Obedience.

1. The inward Duty is Fear: Servants be subject to your Masters with all Fear,
and account them worthy of all Honor: So proper is this Fear to a Servant, as
where it is wanting, there is a plain denial of his Master's Place and Power:
If I be a Master, where is my Fear? said God. Observe, I mean not an excessive
slavish Fear; as when a Servant fears nothing but the revenging Power of his
Master (such was the Fear of that unprofitable Servant, who could say to his
Master, I knew that thou were an hard Man, and I was afraid) but I mean an
awful Fear of Provoking his Master's Wrath, so as it makes him cast every Way,
how he may please his Master, and such a Fear draws him on cheerfully to
perform his Duty.

2. Outward Duties which issue from this Fear, are Reverence, Obedience.

1. Reverence, which is manifested in Speech and Carriage. Thus Servants must
give reverend Titles to their Masters, as Father, Lord, and Master, etc. They
must yield Obeisance to them; as The Children of the Prophets, when they saw
that the Spirit of Elijah rested on Elisha, they came to meet him, and bowed
themselves to the Ground before him.

2. Obedience; which has Respect to the Commands, Instructions, Reproofs and
Corrections of their Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. But here is a Case or two of
Conscience:

1. How far they must obey; or what is the extent of Servants Obedience to
Masters? -- The Apostle answers, Servants obey in all Things your Masters
according to the Flesh, Col. 3.22. It is not sufficient that Servants perform
well their Duties in some Things; they must do it in all Things; yea in Things
that may be against their own Mind and Liking, if their Masters will have it
so: This is clear in the Example of Joab, the King commands him to number the
People: Joab declares himself, that he thinks it a very unmeet Thing. Why does
my Lord the King delight (says he) in this Thing? 2 Samuel 24.2, etc. Yet
against his Judgment he yields unto the King's peremptory Command, The King's
Word prevailed against Joab. Look as Peter, when Christ bid him launch out into
the Deep, and let down his Net for a Draught, He answered and said, Master, We
have toiled all the Night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy Word, I
will let down the Net. So must Servants say, when they have a peremptory
Command, though contrary to their own Judgments, this or that in all Humility, I
suppose, or I propound to you; Nevertheless, at your Word I will let down the
Net; I will do as you please.

2. But what if God and Master should command contrary Things? In such a Case
the Apostle sets down an excellent Limitation in these four Phrases, [1. As
unto Christ. 2. As the Servants of Christ. 3. Doing the Will of God. 4. As to
the Lord.] All these imply, That if Masters command their Servants any Thing
contrary to Christ, they may not yield to it: Upon this Ground the Midwives of
the Hebrew Women, would not kill the Hebrew Children, They feared God (says
the Text) and did not as the King commanded them, Exodus 1.17. In this Case,
Joseph is commended, in not hearkening to his Mistress; and the Servants of
Saul are commended, for refusing to slay the Lord's Priests, at their Masters
Command. When Masters Command or forbid any Thing against God and Christ, they
go therein beyond their Commission, and their Authority cease; so that
Servants may say, We ought to obey God rather than Men, Act. 5.29.

5. Objct. But some may object, That all Men are alike, and that there is no
Difference as betwixt Masters and Servants; nay, it is expressly forbidden to be
Servants of Men. 1 Cor. 7.23.

I answer, To be a Servant, in that Place, is not simply to be in Subjection
under another, but to be so obsequious to Man, as to prefer him before God:
Hence the Apostle elsewhere in the Duties of Servants, lays down this
Antithesis, Not as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ; again, doing
Service as to the Lord, and not to Men: The meaning is, That we must do Duty to
a Master, not as merely to a Man, but as to one in Christ's Stead. Masters, by
virtue of their Office and Place, bear the Image of Christ; Christ communicates
his Authority unto them, and so in performing Duty to Masters, we perform Duty
to Christ, and in denying Duty to Masters, we deny Duty to Christ: Thus the
Lord said to Samuel, when the People rejected his Government, They have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.
Consider this, all ye that are Servants, though Masters should neither reward
your good Service, nor revenge your ill Service, yet Christ will do both: This
is your Prerogative that fear God, above all other Servants; others may serve
their Masters with Fear and Trembling, in Singleness of Heart, and with good
Will, but only Christians and Saints do Service as to Christ; and this makes
them not content themselves with doing the Thing, but to endeavor to do it
after the best Manner they can, so as God and Christ may accept of it.

I have now run through the Family, and informed you of the Duties both of
Governors and Governed. Christians, look within you, look about you: That Man
is not a good Man, that is not good in all his Relations. The same God that
requires us to serve him as private Persons, requires us to serve him in our
Relations: And therefore, though you be never so careful of your Duty in the
former Respect, yet you may go to Hell for neglecting your Duties, as Masters,
Servants, Husbands, Wives, Parents, or Children: Nay, I Will say a little more,
that though you should be good in one Relation, yet if you endeavor not to be
good in every Relation, you shall never go to Heaven: for the same God that
commands you to serve him as a Master, commands you to serve him as a Father,
as an Husband, etc. And he that keeps the whole Law, and offends in one Point,
is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10.

FINIS.

