Dr. Chauncy's SERMON AT THE ORDINATION of the Rev. Mr. JOSEPH BOWMAN to the
Work of Gospelising the INDIANS.

ALL Nations of the Earth blessed in CHRIST, the Seed of ABRAHAM.

A SERMON PREACHED AT BOSTON, AT THE ORDINATION OF THE Rev. Mr. JOSEPH BOWMAN,
TO THE WORK of the Gospel Ministry, MORE ESPECIALLY Among the Mohawk-Indians,
on the Western Borders of NEW ENGLAND. AUGUST 31. 1762.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. One of the Pastors of the First Church in BOSTON.

"ASK of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession."

The inspired DAVID. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN DRAPER, 1762.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE WILLIAM, MARQUIS of LOTHIAN, PRESIDENT, AND The other
Members of the honorable Society in SCOTLAND for propagating Christian
Knowledge.
THE following sermon was preached at the desire of your correspondent members
in New England; and as they, in their candor, though it it adapted to serve the
noble design of the commission with which you had honored them, it was their
pleasure to depute me, with all humble deference, to inscribe it to you in
their name.

THE power communicated to us, in virtue of the Royal charter granted to you,
gave rise to those endeavors, which have, under the Divine smiles, obtained
considerable sums toward the support of the missions to the western Indians,
of which you will have some account in these papers: And we doubt not, it will
be a satisfaction to you, if you should find, that a fair prospect is opened to
diffuse the knowledge of Christ in these uttermost parts of the earth.

WE bow the knee in grateful acknowledgements to the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has made you successful instruments in cultivating the minds,
and rectifying the manners, of such multitudes in the isles and highlands of
Scotland: at the same time, we remember with regret, that your kind and
generous attempt, some years ago, to christianise the Indians on the eastern
borders of this province, was not prospered according to your pious wishes.
Your missionaries then went to Indians, who had been strongly prepossessed in
favor of the idolatries and superstitions of Rome. They are now gone to
Indian-nations, who have not been under management by popish priests: and if
they are faithful in their labors, and wise to conduct them, it may reasonably
be expected, that they will, with the concurring blessing of God, be happily
instrumental in spreading the name, and settling the kingdom, of the Redeemer,
in this remote corner of the world.

IT was with a special view to the gospelising these Indians, that you were
pleased to constitute us your correspondent members: and as, in prosecution of
so benevolent a design, we have been generously helped by public bodies, as
well as private persons; we promise ourselves we shall not want your kind
assistance: especially, as we herein act by delegation from you. The income of
your funds may not be more than sufficient to answer the calls from those
numerous schools, and important missions, which are supported at your charge:
but we question not your wisdom to devise, or readiness to carry into effect,
such measures as shall put it in your power to encourage us, as far as may
reasonably be expected, in going on with that work of pious charity in which we
are engaged, and not without some hope of success.

I NEED not ask your prayers for the missionaries gone forth on the service of
Christ to people of a strange speech, and rude manners; or for your
commissioners, as they are, in this business, your servants for Christ's sake:
And God forbid, that they should cease praying for you, that your wise and
faithful endeavors to promote christian knowledge and virtue may be blessed
yet more abundantly, to the honor of God, and the good of men, even to the ends
of the earth.

I am, with great respect, your most obedient, and humble servant, Charles
Chauncy. In the name, and at the desire, of the correspondent members in the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, NEW ENGLAND.
Boston, September 7. 1762.
AN ORDINATION SERMON.
GENESIS XXII. 18. "AND in thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed."
--


THESE words, with the immediately foregoing ones, exhibit an account of the
promise which God made, more than three thousand years ago, to the memorable
Patriarch, who is set forth as a pattern of faith to all after-generations of
men: And it summarily contains the whole scheme of the divine conduct,
respecting both the nation of the Jews, and the other nations of the earth.

IT is obviously divisible into two parts. The former relates to Abraham
himself, and his natural posterity through Isaac and Jacob; and may justly be
esteemed the true basis of the Jewish church, and of all the means, privileges,
dignities and prerogatives, they were favored with, distinguishing them from
every other people. The latter respects the nations in common; pointing our
view to Christ, and to the enlargement of God's kingdom under his
administration, when there should be no more any difference between "Jew and
Greek," but all kindreds, languages and people under the whole heaven, upon
their faith in the promised seed, should make one body, be fellowheirs, and
partakers in common of the same gospel-salvation.

THIS latter part of the promise, which concerns the nations of the world in
general, is comprehended in the words I have selected to employ our thoughts at
this time, In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. An
interesting promise! No one in the sacred books is more so. It was accordingly,
upon several occasions besides that in my context, expressly made to Abraham by
name; and afterward, in like explicit form, renewed both to Isaac and Jacob:
Nor is there a promise of God more frequently refered to by the inspired
writers. This is the promise, in special, which the apostle Paul so often takes
rise from in his reasonings, particularly, in favor of the Gentile nations.

WHAT I have in view, at present, is to let you into a clear conception of the
meaning, importance and extent of this divine promise; the doing of which will
very obviously prepare the way for the reflections that are proper upon such an
occasion as this.

THE following things then are to be considered and explained, the seed in whom
this promise is made; the just import of the blessing promised; and finally,
the extent of the object of the promise.

AS to the first of these particulars, the seed in whom the promise is made,
it is evident we are to understand by it, not the posterity of Abraham in
general, either by Isaac or Jacob; but a SINGLE PERSON proceeding from him
through them. The word "seed" is not used here as a name of multitude; but as
denoting ONE, by whom, as descending from Abraham, the blessing should be
conveyed. Thus the promise seems to have been understood by Abraham himself.
How else shall we explain that address of our Lord to the Jews, John VIII.56.
"Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and saw it, and was glad?" It was
in the lively exercise of faith and hope, as grounded on the "seed" promised in
my text, that he was filled with holy joy, while he looked forward to the time,
when this glorious Savior would appear in the world to be a blessing to it.
And this same promised "seed" was ultimately the ground of the universal
expectation there was among the Jews, particularly about the time of our
Savior's manifestation in human flesh, that a "deliverer would come out of
Zion," as proceeding from Abraham. -- They entertained, it is true, wrong
notions of this deliverer, and of the salvation he would effect: But they
rightly construed the promise so far as they were led, in virtue of it, to
expect, that some extraordinary person would, in God's time, come into the
world under the character of a mighty Redeemer. To be sure, this is the
construction the new-testament-writers put upon the word, "seed," in the
promise to Abraham. The apostle Paul, while treating upon this matter ex
professo, has thus explained the term in Gal. 3.16. His words are, "He says
not," that is, God, in the promises he made to Abraham, says not, "and to
seeds, as of many; but as of one, to thy seed; which seed (as he goes on to
assure us) is Christ." He accordingly, in the following 19th v. uses the word,
seed, in this personal sense. For, speaking there of the law that was given by
Moses, he says, "it was added because of transgressions, till the seed should
come," that is, till the appearing of Christ, the seed it was promised should
come. In agreement with this interpretation, Christ is represented Heb. II.16.
as having "took on him the seed of Abraham." -- And his birth into the world
is spoken of Luke I.75.
as "the mercy promised in the covenant, the oath which God swear to Abraham,"
that is, the promise he solemnly made to him, and confirmed by his oath, in the
words of my text. The short of the matter is, the seed here promised to Abraham
is the same seed that was promised to Adam soon after his fall; meaning Christ,
the Savior it pleased the all-merciful God early to provide for a perishing
world, through whom alone any of the race of men could be delivered from sin and
wrath, and obtain salvation with eternal glory. And it is accordingly the truth
of fact, that Christ is the glorious person, to whose mediatory undertaking, in
our nature, it is every where ascribed, in the inspired writings of the
new testament, "that the serpent's head has been bruised;" or, what means
precisely the same thing, that "the nations of the earth" have been, and "shall
be blessed."

THUS the "seed," promised in my text, means a single person, one only, even
Jesus Christ, the alone constituted savior of men; and so I gone on, as was
nextly proposed,

TO ascertain the sense in which we are to understand the blessing that is
promised through him.

AND it means, without all doubt, the same thing with gospel-salvation. Abraham
entertained this thought of it. I don't say, that he had so full and distinct
an idea of the salvation by Christ as we have, whose lot it is to live in the
world since the incarnation of the son of God, and the clear discovery he has
made of the counsels of heaven with reference to the great affair of man's
redemption, as grounded on the merit of his life and death: But he was led, in
consequence of this promise, into an expectation of good things far more
excellent than temporal ones, and as designed for other nations besides the
Jewish, who could boast of having him for their head and father according to
the flesh. Hence our Savior speaks of him John VIII.56.
as having by faith, "seen his day," the day of his appearing, the gospel day.
And hence the author of the epistle to the Hebrews declares, Heb. IX.10.
that Abraham "looked for a city which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God." The same city is here meant which the apostle John calls "the
new Jerusalem," and saw in his visions, "coming down from God out of heaven."
Nor could Abraham have looked for such a city as this in any way but that of
faith, taking rise from the promise God had now made to him.

AND it is abundantly evident, that the new testament writings do every where
understand this BLESSING, which was to be conveyed through the seed of Abraham,
in the above spiritual sense. Hence Zacharias, in his prophetic song, Luke I.
69th to the 75th.
makes "God's granting to us to serve him in holiness and righteousness" one
thing included in "the mercy promised in the covenant with Abraham." Hence the
apostle Peter tells the Jews, Acts III.25.26.
that "the mission of Christ to bless them by turning them from their
iniquities," was comprehended in those words of God to Abraham of old, "in thy
seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." Hence the apostle Paul
declares, Gal. III.8.
that "the gospel was preached to Abraham," when it was said to him, "in thee
shall all nations be blessed;" and again, v. 18.
that "the inheritance," the incorruptible, undefiled and eternal inheritance,
as it is sometimes called, was "given to Abraham by promise," that is, the
promise in my text. Hence the author of the epistle to the Hebrews speaks of
God Heb. IX.16.
as "not ashamed to be called their God," the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob, "because he has prepared for them a city," the same city of which he
had before v. 10.
said, "whose builder and maker is God." In fine, it was because this, and the
similar promises, looked beyond the present world, engaging blessedness in some
future one, that our Savior argues therefrom in proof of the resurrection from
the dead. His words are, Luke XX 37.
"that the dead shall be raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he called
the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For
he is not a God of the dead, but of the living." It Is certain, from these
passages, if we may rely on the authority of the new testament writers, that
the blessing promised through the seed of Abraham was virtually, seminally and
implicitly, that same salvation which has since, as the apostle Paul speaks,
Romans XVI.26.
"been made known, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, to all
nations for the obedience of faith."

BUT besides this salvation, wherein the blessing promised principally
consists, the way and means of its bestowment are included also; such as the
manifestation of Jesus Christ in our flesh, as proceeding from Abraham; his
sufferings and death; his resurrection from the dead; ascension to heaven, and
exaltation at the right hand of God; and that settlement of God's visible
kingdom, in consequence hereof, which now takes place in the world, with him at
it is head. Not that Abraham, or any of his posterity in former ages, were led,
by these general words, "in thy seed shall all nations be blessed," into a
particular knowledge of these things. It Is probable, neither he, nor they,
understood any more by them than this, that some glorious personage, springing
from him, should, in God's time, in ways untho't of by them, be the instrument
in spiritually "blessing all nations of the earth." But still, the whole work
of Christ, as Savior of the world, was virtually contained in this promise,
that is to say, all that he was to be, to do, and to suffer, while on earth;
and, all that he was afterward to transact in heaven, in order to his bringing
into effect the design of his mediatory undertaking for sinners. The inspired
writers certainly teach us to conceive thus of the matter. Hence they speak of
the incarnation of Christ, which was an essential preparative in the plan of
God in order to the salvation of men, as an accomplishment, in part, of this
blessing promised in the covenant with Abraham. Thus Mary, the mother of our
Lord, is introduced in her prophetic song. Luke I.54, 55.
as "rejoicing in God" upon his birth into the world, and for this special
reason, "because he had helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy,
as he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed forever." And
Zecharias, upon this same occasion, being "filled with the Holy Ghost" is
brought in opening his lips in those words of praise, Luke I.6^, 72, 73.
"blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, and raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant
David, -- to perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his
holy covenant, the oath which he swear to our father Abraham." And as the
incarnation of Christ, so his obedience in our nature even to the death of the
cross, which ought always to be esteemed the true and only moral ground of the
bestowment of spiritual and heavenly blessings, is particularly and expressly
represented as that by which also the promise to Abraham was in part fulfilled.
Hence that passage in the apostle Paul's epistle to the Galations, Gal. III.13,
14.
"Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,
-- that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ."
In like manner, the resurrection of our Lord, the first step to his exalted
state in heaven, and sometimes put in scripture for the whole of it, is
directly mentioned as effected to make good the promise to Abraham. Hence those
words in Paul's speech to the men of Antioch, Acts XIII. 32, 33.
"We declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise, which was made unto
the fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he
has raised up Jesus again." In fine, that advantageous state of things, under
the gospel dispensation, which was set up by Jesus Christ, and has him for its
supreme director and Lord, was likewise included in this promise: So though it the
great apostle of the Gentiles; for one of the main things he had in view,
especially in his epistles to the Romans, Galatians, and Ephesians, was to
illustrate and prove this point.

THE sum of the matter is, by the blessing promised through the seed of Abraham,
we are to understand spiritual and eternal salvation, together with the way and
means of its communication; Christ's becoming a partaker of flesh and blood in
the fullness of time, through the loins of Abraham; his dying to make
reconciliation for iniquity; his rising from the dead, and going up to heaven
to sit there at the right hand of God's power; and in consequence of this, his
erecting a kingdom, wisely and mercifully furnished with all desirable means,
motives, and advantages, in order to deliver the nations from the power of sin
and Satan, and to form them to a meetness in this world for the glory, honor
and immortality of the coming better world.

WE go on, in the last place, to consider the OBJECT of the promise; which is
nobly extensive, taking in "all nations," yea "all families of the earth," as
it is elsewhere expressed. Not that "all nations and families," viewed either
as collective bodies, or individuals, shall be blessed in Christ, whether they
are believers in him or not. Such an interpretation would be contrary to the
truth of fact, as well as scripture: But the meaning is, that in Christ, the
promised seed, there is no difference between Jew and Gentile; between one
nation and another; but in every nation under the whole heaven, whoesover
believe in the only begotten Son of God, they are "heirs of the promise, and
shall be savingly "blessed with faithful Abraham."

THE apostle Paul expressly assures us, Ephesians. II 13th to the 18th.
that the nations of men, which "sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ; for he is our peace," the common peace of Jews and Gentiles,
"having broke down the wall of partition between us, and reconciled us both to
God in one body by the cross:" In consequence whereof believing Gentiles "are
no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints and
household of God." Accordingly, that is his doctrine, Romans X.12, 13.
There is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord over
all is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved." And again, Gal. III.28, 29.
"There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: And if ye are
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise."

CONSONANT hereto was the commission our Lord gave his apostles to preach the
gospel, the glad tidings of the accomplishment of the "blessing promised to
Abraham." That was their order, Mat. XXVIII.19.
"Go ye, and teach ALL NATIONS, baptising them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." It is elsewhere Mark XVI.15.
worded, "Go ye into ALL THE WORLD, and preach the gospel to EVERY CREATURE,"
the whole human race. And it is in fact true, that they preached the gospel,
salvation by Jesus Christ, not to the Jews only, but to the Gentiles also,
without discrimination, that is, to all nations and families of the earth, so
far as they were able, making no difference.

THE Jewish nation, it is true, were to have the precedence. The gospel was
first to be preached to them; but not to the exclusion of the other nations.
They also were comprehended, yea, expressly mentioned, in the promise to
Abraham: And, in fulfillment of this promise, the gospel ought to be, and
actually was, preached to them. A specimen of this we meet with immediately
upon the Spirit's being poured out upon the apostles on the day of Pentecost;
for "devout men, out of every nation under heaven," being now at Jerusalem, the
"blessing," contained in the "promise to Abraham," was offered to them in the
name of Jesus Acts II.
Christ. And it is evident, from the preaching, especially of the apostle Paul,
that no distinction was made between one nation and another, between one man
and another; but in all places, and to all persons, as there was opportunity,
the way to salvation by Jesus Christ was impartially made known.

THE language, in which the actually blessed by Jesus Christ, the promised
seed, are spoken of in scripture, is a further observable proof, that the
nations, in all corners of the earth, in all ages, without distinction or
limitation, are the object of the promise in my text. They are introduced in
the book of the Revelation, Rev. V.9, 10.
"Singing a new song to Jesus the lamb of God," and saying, "Thou art worthy to
take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou have redeemed us to God,
by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and
have made us unto God kings and priests." And the apostle John "beheld in
vision. Rev. VII 9, 10.
and lo, a great multitude of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, -- and cried with a loud
voice, saying, Salvation to our God, -- and unto the Lamb." And no wonder this
is the representation; for the "blessed in Jesus Christ," in the coming state,
will be a collection of all sorts and conditions of men, out of all nations, in
all parts and ages of the world, even from the days of Adam, till time shall be
no more. It is accordingly to be remarked here, the "blessing" promised to "all
nations" looks backwards as well as forwards; taking in all believers, like
Abraham, from the beginning of the world to that day, as well as from that day
to the end of the world. Hence Christ, the promised seed, is spoken of, in the
revelation to John, Rev. XIII.8.
as "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," that is, in the purpose,
and according to the counsel of God; and so as that obedient believers of all
nations of the earth, even from the day that God promised and said, "the seed
of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head," might be admitted to the benefit
of "redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of their sins, according to the
riches of God's grace."

THUS gloriously extensive is the OBJECT of the blessing through the promised
seed. It Is not confined to the nation of the Jews in distinction from the
Gentiles; neither is it limited to some Gentile-nations to the exclusion of
others: But "all nations of the earth," from the beginning of the world to the
end of it, are comprehended in it.

I HAVE now said what may be though it sufficient to illustrate the promise in my
text. It remains to make what has been offered useful, by calling your
attention to some suitable reflections. And,

THE first thing obviously perceivable is, that the blessing mankind in Jesus
Christ was the aim of God, and what he has been prosecuting, all along from the
beginning of the world. This was at first suggested only in general promises
and predictions, and these so worded as that Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, and
the Prophets, had not a clear and comprehensive understanding of the things
virtually and really intended by them. And, perhaps, it would not have
consisted with the grand intermediate step in the affair of man's salvation,
the sufferings and death of Jesus Christ, to have spoken more explicitly upon
the matter, till this had been accomplished. But still, so much was said in the
promises of God to Adam and Abraham, and in the prophesies he inspired his
prophets to deliver, that it was known in general, that some great design of
mercy, by some extraordinary person that should be born of a woman, and proceed
from Abraham, was in prosecution; though they could not particularly say, what
this mercy was, or how it would be accomplished through this "seed of the woman,"
and "of Abraham." The clear and full knowledge of these things was reserved to
aftertimes, and has accordingly been revealed in these "last days." And to us,
who are able to view the scheme of God, as it has been explained by the birth,
life, death, resurrection and exaltation of Jesus Christ, and the settlement of
the gospel-kingdom in the world, with its means, motives, and advantages, in
order to effect men's salvation, it very evidently appears to be one uniform
consistent design, begun in the days of Adam, and carried on through the times of
Abraham, Moses, and the prophets, till the coming of Jesus Christ; who, in
consequence of his humiliation to death, went up to heaven, and sets there at
the right hand of God, clothed with all power, that he might finish this plan,
and finally bring it into effect. And it is, with me, one of the strongest
evidences of the truth of the gospel, and the revelation contained in it, that
the promise to Abraham, as well as that to Adam, and the other similar promises
and predictions, are so expressed as that the scheme of salvation by Jesus
Christ, as unfolded in the new testament writings, is very obviously, however
summarily, pointed out in them; insomuch that a sober enquirer can scarce fail
of being satisfied, that one and the same plan has been in prosecution from the
beginning; which plan, however dark to former ages, as to it is particulars, is
now, in the times of the gospel, made sufficiently manifest to all men.

IT is likewise natural to expect, from what has been said, that great
multitudes will be blessed in Jesus Christ. For the blessing through him is
promised to "all nations and families of the earth." And can it be supposed,
when the promise is thus gloriously extensive, as to its object, that a few
only will be blessed in consequence of it?

WHETHER we understand by this blessing, gospel means and advantages, under the
administration of God's visible kingdom by his Son Jesus Christ: or the end
these means are designed to effect, the bringing men to heavenly happiness: --
it will not be confined to a small number, but comprehend a vast multitude.

THE gospel has already been preached to, and the kingdom of the Son of God in
fact settled among, a great many nations of the earth: insomuch that if we
reckon the individuals that now constitute these collective bodies of men, and
have been their constituent parts through the several successive ages, since
Christ was made known to them, they will be vastly numerous: And the account
will still increase, and rise almost beyond imagination, if we carry our
thoughts to those numberless individuals who may yet be brought into existence,
and form these communities in all future ages.

AND the number of those, who have not only had the kingdom of God among them,
but (...) in them to their being made meet for the heavenly kingdom, and
actually admitted into it will be vastly great likewise. To this purpose "the
redeemed to God, by the blood of Christ, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
nation," is said, in the book of the Revelation, Rev. V.2.
to be "ten-thousand times ten-thousand, and thousand of thousands." And the
individuals out of "all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues," who
shall finally "stand before the throne, and cry, salvation to our God and to
the Lamb," are again represented Rev. VII.4, 10.
as "a great multitude which no man can number." From which sacred declarations
we have full warrant to say, that the blessed by Christ the promised seed of
Abraham, considered as one collective body, made up of all the individuals that
will be saved, out of all nations, and in all ages from the days of Adam, will
be an inconceivably great multitude! Nor is this any other than the fulfillment
of the word, which God spoke of old to his servant Abraham, when, upon bidding
him "look toward heaven, and tell the stars if he were able to number them,"
he said, Genesis XV.5
"SO SHALL THY SEED-BE."

IT may pertinently also be recommended to us, from the preceding discourse, to
exert ourselves, in all proper ways, that the barbarous nations, inhabiting
these American lands, may become partakers of the salvation by Jesus Christ. --
This salvation is the subject matter of my text, the blessing it promises; and
it is justly applicable to these tribes of men. As they are comprehended in the
"all nations" who shall be "blessed in the seed of Abraham," they constitute a
part of the OBJECT of this divine engagement, and as truly so as any other
communities of the human race. And, it may be, they were particularly ranked,
in the counsels of God, among the nations that should eventually be blessed
through the seed here promised; though it was not till after-ages that they were
bro't into actual existence. We have such an observable passage as that in the
book of Psalms, Psalm LXXIV.20.
"Have respect unto the covenant; for the dark places of the earth are full of
the habitations of cruelty." The words may be looked upon as a prophetic
prayer, looking forward to the times of Christ, when the covenant-promise to
Abraham should be fulfilled: And the argument enforcing the prayer is, that
there were places in "the earth covered with darkness," whose inhabitants were,
in a singular sense, "barbarous and cruel." Perhaps, no places in the earth
were ever more dark, and at the same time more given to cruelty, than these
American regions, as possessed by the ab-originals. The Spirit who spoke through
David might have in view the nations in these parts of the earth, and, upon the
foresight of their deplorably sad condition, pray God to "respect the
covenant," his covenant with Abraham, which promised a blessing to these, among
the other nations; a blessing that would "turn them from darkness to light,"
and of savage and cruel, make them the peaceable, kind and tenderhearted
disciples of the meek and compassionate Jesus. And these nations also might be
especially meant in that grant to the Son of God and seed of Abraham, Psalm
II.8.
"I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the UTTERMOST PARTS
OF THE EARTH for thy possession." It may be, the epithet, UTTERMOST, can be
applied to no parts of the earth with more propriety, than to these American
lands. But whether they are particularly intended, or not; it is as certain the
tribes of men inhabiting here are included in the promise to Abraham, as that
they are nations existing on the earth; for the promise extends to all such
without limitation.

AND it has, in fact, with respect to some of these tribes of men, been happily
fulfilled. The "glad tidings of joy to all people," salvation by Jesus Christ,
has been made known to, and embraced by, them. It is freely owned, neither our
fathers, who came over to this American wilderness for the sake of enjoying
themselves, and transmitting to their posterity, the gospel worship in its
purity and simplicity; nor we their children have exerted ourselves, as we
might and ought to have done, to propagate the knowledge of the one true and
living God, and his only begotten Son, among the ignorant and savage people in
these "regions of the shadow of death:" Yet, something has been done both by
them and us, though more from abroad, to effect this blessed purpose: Nor have
these doings for the Lord been wholly in vain. The sacred books of the old and
new testament have, by the skill and labor of the memorable ELIOT, been
translated into the Indian language, and charitably put into their hands, for
their instruction in the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and of
Christ: And through his assiduous endeavors, with those of the renowned MAYHEWS,
and other worthies, a considerable number of churches, under the divine
blessing, have been gathered, consisting of Indian members, many of whom have
given proof of the reality of their conversion, by their walking in the faith
and order of the gospel, so as to "adorn the doctrine of the Savior Jesus
Christ." And some of these churches are remaining to this day, with English or
Indian pastors at their head; though they are, it must be confessed and lamented,
in a declining state. And, in truth, the Indians, within this and the
neighboring colonies of Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire, are
strangely diminished. A few only are left; and it looks as though, in time not
far distant, their race would be extinct. Within my remembrance, the Indians at
Natick and Punkapog [two ancient Indian settlements within 15 miles of Boston]
were considerably numerous; but there are few now remaining. I can assign no
other natural cause of this strange fact, than the necessity these Indians were
under, by being surrounded by English towns, to change their simple plain way
of living for our's. And if this should be the true natural cause, it affords a
very powerful reason, why, in order to christianize the Indian nations, we
should not think ourselves obliged to conce^t measures to effect an alteration
in that way of civil life they have been used to for ages immemorial. If they
should not dwell in such houses, or wear such clothes, or labor in such
employments, or come into the use of such modes of civility, as are common
among us, I know not that it would be any hindrance to the Gospel among them.
Perhaps, the method they are in of providing for themselves and families by
hunting* fishing, and fowling, is as innocent, and free from temptation, as any
they could change it for. I am persuaded, should they change it for that
CIVILIZED ONE, which some are ready to think so highly necessary, their danger
of being enticed and drawn aside of their own lusts would be vastly increased.
Where they now have one temptation to play upon their passions, to sooth their
affections, and inordinately to gratify their natural appetites, they would
then have a great many. The plain truth is, if the Gospel once takes place
among them in its power, it will effect the best change in them we can desire.
The spiritual, and it may be the true, meaning of Isai. xi.6 -- 9. would then
have a glorious and happy accomplishment. They who were ravenous in their
disposition would undergo a transformation, as if a wolf should change his
nature, and of savage become gentle so as to feed with lambs; or as if the
leopard should put off his fierceness, and lie down with the kids. The
roughness of their temper would be smoothed, their passions softened and
refined, and they would be prompted, from the change introduced in them, to the
exercise not only of humanity, but true christian meekness, kindness,
gentleness and goodness, as occasion might be offered therefore in the
providence of God. -- It may be worth remembering here. The French never used
any endeavors to change the Indian's mode of civil life; and yet, they have
found ways to attach many tribes of them very strongly to the religion of Rome.
And why may not we, in like manner, attach them to the religion of Christ?
Should we expend as much zeal and pains to make them Christians, as the French
have done to make them Catholics, we should, I doubt not, soon see the happy
fruits of it; though no care should be taken to bring them into our way of (...)
life.


THEY are more numerous, and at the same time more savage, on our northern and
eastern borders; for which reason, about nine and twenty years ago, three
missionaries, under the influence, and at the charge, of the honorable society
in Scotland for propagating christian knowledge, in concurrence with the
honorable general assembly of this province, were employed to use their best
endeavors to convert them to the faith of Christ. They were "separated to
their work," and "commended to the grace of God," in this house, in the
presence of a great multitude of pious good people. But, upon trial, they found
themselves unable to serve the ends of the gospel among these Indians; as they
had been previously corrupted by p^pish priests: Nor may it be expected, that
any attempts to indoctrine them in the principles of pure and undefiled
religion will meet with success, while they are so deeply tinctured with romish
superstition, and absolutely governed by Jesuits sent to them from Canada.

THE Indian tribes, in our western parts, are yet more numerous and
considerable, and as they are in heathen darkness, unmixt with popish
corruption, there is reason to hope, if suitable means are used with them, that
they may, under the divine influence, be savingly enlightened in "the knowledge
of the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, whom to know is life
eternal."

AND the providence of God, by so succeeding his Britannic Majesty's Arms as to
put Canada into English hands, seems evidently to point our view to these
tribes of Indians, making it our duty to endeavor to carry the gospel to them;
since that, which has all along been the "let," is now "taken out of the way."
And may I not say, that the Spirit of grace concurs with divine providence in
calling upon us to exert ourselves in all wise methods, within our respective
spheres, that "God's King in Sion" may have these "uttermost parts of the earth
for his possession?" To what else can we so justly attribute the serious
concern, relative to the spreading the gospel among these Indians, which has
been so generally awakened in the minds of people, upon occasion of the
mavelous victories the right hand of the most high has given us over our
French enemies, subjecting their country to the crown of England? Never did
there appear before so strong and general a disposition to encourage the
sending "the word of salvation" to them.

IT IS in consequence of this good disposition, and the charitable effects of
it, that we have now two Missionaries in the MOHAWK-country; one, the worthy
pastor of the church at Brookfield, who is gone for a time only: The other, a
promising young man, who went with a view to spend his life in the service, if
God should be pleased to give any comfortable prospect of success. We have
lately heard from them, and the news they send us is such as will give joy to
all who truly love the Redeemer, and dispose them to open their lips in praises
to God.

THEY write, that, soon after their arrival at Onoquage, they assembled the
chief men of the tribe in this place, informing them of their business, and by
whom they were sent: That, with great solemnity, they returned their hearty
thanks to the honorable commissioners, and to them for undertaking so difficult
and arduous a work. -- But, as three of their principal men were absent, they
concluded with saying, they spoke and acted only for themselves and families;
adding, that when these three should return, they would meet again, when they
should be glad to hear again of this matter, and would return a more complete
answer. Upon the whole, they all appeared very cordial as well as thankful.

MR. FORBES writes in another letter, The Indians appear very cordial and
well-disposed. The last sabbath [the sabbath preceding the 29th of June] we had
a very full and attentive assembly, as devout as ever I saw, and properly
raised with a well-tempered zeal. The whole assembly was moved -- many
discovered a deep sorrow for sin, and were all attention to the word spoken.
Some wept and covered their faces. In short, it seemed as if God was moving by
his Spirit upon the whole assembly. On monday we visited most of the families
in town, conversed with the heads of them upon the things of religion, and
exhorted the youth and children to the practicing early piety. We found several
under a very serious concern about their souls and the future world, and very
desirous to know what they should do to be saved. Others we found [it is to be
remarked here, Mr. Hawley had spent some time with this tribe of Indians before
the war] well established in the christian faith, and zealously engaged in the
practice of sober godliness. -- Every thing looks encouraging here on the part
of the beneficent design of our mission: and I cannot but think, (if we are not
greatly wanting) that great things may be effected in favor of the Redeemer's
kingdom.

He writes in another letter still, The Indians desire to have a church
gathered, and to have the sacrament of the Lord's supper administered before I
leave them. I have discoursed with a number with this view, and find that
several are well-established in the essential doctrines of christianity, and
have a uniform practical sense of religion upon their minds. -- We have set up
a school here, The Indian children might be instructed in their own towns at a
much less expense, than if they were brought to live among us. The cost of
bringing them would be very considerable; and they must be permitted every
now-and-then to make a visit to their parents and friends, which would be a
great additional charge. They must also be boarded and clothed, which would run
the expense very high. Whereas, if they were taught where they now live, they
might be maintained by their parents; and the only charge worth mentioning
would be that of supporting schoolmasters. More, it may be, would be required
for the support of instructors among the Indians, than among ourselves; but
this greater charge would be small in comparison with me charge the other way.
And the children might, in their own towns, as conveniently come to school, as
if they were among us; for the Indian wigwams are every where nearer to one
another, than the English houses in any of our villages. One school in a town
would therefore very well answer all the ends we have in view, as none of the
towns are so large, but the children in all of them might easily meet together
every day for instruction. For these reasons, one of the principal things
entrusted with our missionaries is, to endeavor to prepare the way for setting
up schools for the education of Indian children in whatever it may be proper to
instruct them. And by thus providing for their instruction, we shall avoid much
needless expense. The education of one Indian (...) among us will probably cost
more than the education of twenty in their own country. And they may, if it be
not our own fault, be as well educated there, as here; at least till they are
fitted for that higher instruction, which there would be no need of giving to
more than one in an hundred.
at which we are instructing the children in the knowledge of the English
language. We have had about a dozen a day for about twenty days, and find the
children are very much pleased with it, and give their constant and seasonable
attendance, without any constraint from their parents. Some of them make
surprising proficiency, pronounce the whole alphabet well, and know each
letter; and four have got to pronunce distinct syllables properly. They appear
to be, in general, very promising children. The inhabitants are vastly pleased,
that two of our lads These lads are about 12 years of age, and as promising as
any among us. They are, with their own free consent, devoted to the
Indian-service for life, if God, in his providence, shall please to make way
for their being useful. It Is designed they should continue with the Indians,
till they have learned their language. Care is taken that they may be under
proper tuition in the Indian country; and when they can converse in their
tongue with the same freedom as in their own, they will be brought from thence,
and put under the best means of education we have, in order to their being
qualified for missionary preachers, or schoolmasters, or whatever else they
may be most turned for. I may add, besides these lads we have a young man under
education at our College in Cambridge; who will, we trust, be fit for service,
as a schoolmaster, if not as a missionary-preacher, as soon as there will be
occasion for him.
are come to be with them to learn their language; and have, of their own
accord, offered three of their's, whom they would send to New England to learn
our language; but I told them, I must wait the pleasure of the commissioners,
before I could give any encouragement to take them with me. We have not
encouraged the sending these boys; and, as we imagine, for very good reasons.
The charge of bringing them from their own homes, and educating them among us,
would be very great. We have felt the truth of this, as we lately found
ourselves obliged to pay nearly 60 l. sterling in less than one year for three
boys only: on which account we thought ourselves bound, in faithfulness to
those who have entrusted their money with us, not to spend any more of it in
this way, which appears to us enormously expensive. There are other
inconveniences in taking lads from the Indian-country; -- We can have no
security, whatever expense is laid out upon them, that they shall be afterward
employed in such service as we judge proper: Neither can we know, previously to
their coming to us, whether their capacities, temper, and inclination to learn,
are such as we should choose in the children we would be at the charge to
educate; and, after all the pains and expense in educating them, they may be
viciously turned, or their character otherwise such as would unfit them to be
employed by us in the service for which they might be especially intended and
wanted. Whereas, by educating Indian-children in their own towns, these
inconveniences will all be avoided. The charge will be reduced to a small thing
comparatively; -- we may select out of a whole school the most promising youth
for natural powers, good temper, and a pious disposition; -- and we might get
security from their parents, that they shall be employed in the service their
education is designed to fit them for. -- Besides all this, English lads will
be far the likeliest, when their education is finished, to serve as
interpreters, schoolmasters, or missionary-preachers. Indians, though fitted,
in a good measure, for these employments, will not have that honor in their own
country, and among their own people, which is highly expedient in order to
their being useful; nor can they with desirable confidence be relied on.
Perhaps, two or three Indians at most, and the^e such as have been found, upon
trial, to be steady, prudent, sober and virtuous, will suffice for all the
purposes to which we shall have occasion to employ them. A school therefore for
the education of Indian children in any of our English towns may reasonably be
looked upon as a needless burden; and, if encouraged, will run into an
expense, which may soon cool that charity which would be the support, not only
of that, but of all attempts to promote the spiritual good (...) those, whose
lot is cast in heathen darkness.
He adds, We have got all our matters ripe to make proposals to the Indians,
and wait only the return of Adam, their chief, who is now expected. The Indians
are of a very obliging disposition, and well-disposed toward religion. --
Thomas King made a speech in the name of two or three, (who had not been
present at any of their former councils) in which he expressed a very grateful
sense of the care the commissioners have taken of the most important interest
among them, and, for his own part, he greatly rejoiced that they were once more
likely to enjoy the gospel. He was ready to promise all that lay in his power,
that the glorious design should meet with success. -- He wanted some more
effectual measures might be taken to prevent the sin of drunkeness; and hoped,
till some way was found out, we would pity and pray for them; for they were so
addicted to that sin, that they could not refrain when Rum was brought among
them. -- All the Chiefs are desirous, that some effectual way may be taken that
no Rum be brought among them; for they say, they plainly see, that Rum is
destructive both to soul and body.

LET me digress here a moment to lament the excessive love and immoderate use
of strong drink, so universal among the Indians. And is it not to be lamented
also, and more bitterly, that RUM, which is so bewitching to them, should be
put into their hands, in such quantities, by Christians, so called, while they
know, at the same time, the mischief it does among them. Shall men, professing
christianity, for the sake of a little sordid gain, be instrumental in
destroying both the bodies and souls of those, who, in common with themselves,
are the off spring of God? How great is their guilt! They may justly expect
being doomed to the forest punishment, when Christ, the judge, shall "come in
the glory of his father, and of the holy angels, to render to every man
according to his deeds." If neither love to God nor their neighbor will
restrain these Traders with the Indians from this great wickedness, it is pity
but it should be put out of their power to go on any longer in the practice of
it. It may be, no effectual restraints can be laid upon them but from HOME; and
it would not be below the dignity of the BRITISH MONARCH to devise some
expedient, and carry it into effect, that would powerfully tend to save this
unhappy people from this "snare of the Devil." We might then hope for success
in our endeavors to settle the gospel among them: Otherwise, there may be
reason to fear, that the good end proposed by our missions to them will be, in
a great measure, defeated. -- But to return,

He further writes, it will be best Mr. Bowman (the missionary here present)
should come as soon as he can, and that he be ordained that he may administer
the ordinances here.

IN compliance with this desire, and in consequence of the encouraging prospect
there is of doing good among the Indians, we judged we were called of God to
send Mr. Bowman to them. We also though it it proper he should first be ordained,
that he might be qualified to act, in all respects, as a gospel-minister among
them. And it is to separate him to the service of Christ, more especially among
these Indians, that we are now in the house of the Lord.

WE rejoice, Sir, that you find within your self a willingness to engage in
this self-denying work; and would hope it has been excited in you by the God of
all grace, in compassion to the souls of many who are perishing in the darkness
of heathenism.

THE service you are going upon is difficult. It will call you to give up your
ease, to undergo hardships, and to endure trials of various kinds: Nor would it
be strange, if you should meet with opposition from "the powers of darkness,"
while you are laboring to "enlighten those in the knowledge of Christ," who
have long been "alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, by reason of the blindness of their minds." But you have no reason to be
discouraged. The cause you are engaged in is nobly great and good. It is the
cause of God; it is the cause of Christ; it is the cause, the promoting of
which lies in "showing men the way of salvation," through the atoning blood of
the once crucified, but now exalted and glorified Jesus. The design of your
mission nearly resembles that of the apostles of our Lord. You are "set," as
they were, "a light to the "Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation to
the ends of the earth;" you are to go, as they did, to nations whose "minds the
god of this world has blinded, that the light of the glorious gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, might shine unto them." And you may humbly
hope, Christ will be with you, as he was with them, by the special influences
of his Spirit, to comfort your heart, to invigorate your faith, to animate your
zeal, to strengthen your resolution, and, in a word, to enable you to surmount
all the difficulties that may attend the execution of the trust to be committed
to you.

LET your dependence be on Christ. -- Seek to him, in the ways of his
appointment, for those measures of knowledge, prudence, fortitude, and all that
grace and strength, the service you are called to may make necessary.

AND you should be encouraged to trust in him both for help and success, when
you remember and consider, that the tribes of men you are going to, make a part
of "the nations," concerning whom the divine promise is, that they "shall be
blessed in the seed of Abraham," our Lord Jesus Christ. And as the chief design
of your mission is, that "this blessing" may be extended to these people, in
accomplishment of the promise of God, will he be wanting in any thing proper,
on his part, in order to your being succeeded in a design so beneficial in it is
nature, and that tends so much to the glory of his name, and the enlargement of
the kingdom of his dear Son? It cannot be supposed. It may rather be hoped,
that he will fulfill in you that which is written, Jer. LV.5.
"Behold, thou shall call a nation thou know not; and nations that know not
thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God; for he has glorified
thee."

AND if this should be the happy effect of your mission to the Indian nations,
how signally would you serve your country, as well as your God and Savior?
What honor would it reflect on you; what a blessing would you be to these
lands, if you should be the chosen instrument in subduing the Savages of the
wilderness to our Lord Jesus Christ, making them his willing and obedient
subjects? Your service herein would be far more important than the victories
over them in war, which have cost so much blood and treasure; as they would now
be good neighbors to us, and dwell by us in love and peace, being, in common
with ourselves, heirs of the same hope of eternal life.

I CANNOT, in consideration of such service, however important, ensure you an
adequate reward from men; but as this service done for them will, at the same
time, be a service done for God and Christ, "great shall be your reward in
heaven." Having, by your faithful labors, under the influence of the Spirit of
grace, turned these heathen people from "darkness to light," you shall "shine
in the kingdom of your father, as the brightness of the firmament, and as the
stars forever and ever." Yea, should the design of your mission fail of being
answered; should "you labor in vain, and spend your strength for naught and in
vain;" yet, if you are faithful, you shall "in no wise lose your reward." Even
in case of fruitless labor, "your judgment is with the Lord, and your work
with your God;" and he will render to you, at the appearing of Jesus Christ,
not according to the success you have met with, but according to the integrity
of your heart, and the greatness of the trials you have gone through in your
upright endeavors to promote the good of perishing souls. And, having "been
faithful to death," he will, of his rich grace, through the merits of the
Redeemer's blood, bestow upon you "the crown that fades not away," a glorious
immortality in the heavenly world.

I NOW turn myself to this great assembly, and would bespeak your prayers for
"this man of God," who is about to devout himself to the service of Christ
among a people of a "strange speech and hard language," and who, at the same
time, are invelop'd with gross darkness. "Brethren, pray for him," and for his
"companion also in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ," gone before on
this difficult business, that "the word of the Lord," dispensed by them, "may
have free course, and be glorified" among the Indian nations, as it has been
among us, and much more abundantly: Pray for them, that "utterance may be given
to them," so as "that they may open their mouths boldly to make known the
mystery of the gospel" to these ignorant Gentiles: Pray for them, that God
would "cause them to triumph in Christ," while they "make manifest the favor
of his knowledge in every place" they may be called to; and that they "may be
unto God a sweet savor of Christ, a savor of life unto life" to many who, at
present, are "dead in trespasses and sins." And "pray with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, watching thereunto with all perseverance." Pray and
cease not, "always making mention of them in your prayers," that they may be
strengthened with all might, according to God's glorious power, unto all
patience and long-suffering, with joyfulness" in beholding these unhappy people
"delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of God's
dear Son."

AND together with your prayers, let me invite you to give of your substance
for their bodily support and comfort. Some of you, thanks be to God, have very
liberally subscribed toward a FUND that is intended, if the Lord pleases, to
yield a perpetual income for the service of Christ among the Indians; as also
toward bearing the expense we may be called to in our endeavors, for the
three or four first years, to carry the gospel to them: But, as the
subscription toward the FUND will not take place till the late INCORPORATING
ACT shall receive the ROYAL SANCTION; and as the temporary subscription, though
kindly assisted by the commissioners from the LONDON-SOCIETY, and by the
CORPORATION OF HARVARD-COLLEGE, who are entrusted with the disposal of Dr.
WILLIAMS's legacy for the instruction of the Indians: I say, as this temporary
subscription, with the aids afforded to it, is for the present, insufficient to
answer the necessary demands, we think it our duty to call upon those, who have
not yet had opportunity therefore, to express their regards to Christ by now
offering freely to promote his cause.

AND were our views, in this matter, confined to this world only, there would
not be wanting powerful inducements to prompt us to liberality. We should
hereby attach the Indians to our interest; at least, we should do that which
would happily tend to answer so good a purpose. Had we, in times past, been at
the expense that was necessary in order to their instruction in the things of
God and Jesus Christ, instead of "snares and traps to us, scourges in our sides
and thorns in our eyes," they might have been our fast friends, and maintained
a correspondence with us to our advantage as well as their own. The French
nation have taught us this to our sorrow as well as cost. -- They have all
along made it a point to support missionaries among the Indians, wherever they
could; and to this chiefly it is owing, that they have had such power over
them. By the pains they have taken to convert them, not to the faith of Christ,
but to the religion of Rome, they have been able to use them as instruments in
bringing into effect their mischievous designs against us; and by them they
have committed those barbarities we should never have felt, could they not have
excused themselves by transferring the shame of them to these savages in
alliance with them. And as there are numerous tribes of them untainted as yet
with Romish superstition, would it not be wise policy to use all proper
endeavors to bring them to the faith, not "of a lie," but "of the truth as it
is in Jesus?" Would not this, in the end, be the least expensive method to make
and keep them our good friends and peaceable neighbors?

BUT there are much higher motives to excite in us a zeal to promote the
interest of Christ among the Indian tribes, and much nobler principles to act
from in the charitable expressions of it. -- We should be constrained from
gratitude to God; that God, who, by crowning the British arms, in these
American lands, with success beyond even our biggest expectations, has opened a
wide door for sending the gospel to the Gentiles inhabiting here. And in what
more proper way can we manifest the sense we have of our obligations to the
supreme Ruler, than by taking occasion from the signal victories he has given
us to contribute to the enlargement of the kingdom of his son Jesus Christ? If
our MOTHER-COUNTY, and HE THAT SWAYS THE SCEPTER THERE, should, by pious
donations, encourage such measures as are wisely concerted to spread the
religion of Jesus in these distant and dark corners of the world, would it be
an unsuitable acknowledgment to "the King of Kings" for the great things he has
done for them, as well as us? May we not rather say, thus "to do good and
communicate" would be "an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable,
well-pleasing to God"? -- Love to Christ should likewise open our hearts and
hands upon this occasion. It Is in his cause, and to promote the honor of his
name, that we are urged to bountifulness: And how powerfully is this motive
adapted to work upon us? Shall we pretend an affection to the Savior of men,
and not exert ourselves, as we are able, and have opportunity, to spread the
knowledge of his religion, and extend the borders of his kingdom? If we hang
back, or discover a niggardly disposition, "how dwells the love of Christ in
us"? It may be feared, it does not "in deed and in truth," though it should "in
word and in tongue." -- Love also to the souls of our fellowmen, blinded by the
God of this world, and perishing in the darkness of ignorance and sin, should
move our hearts. Who among the sons of Adam are more proper objects of our
christian compassion? And how should it operate, if not in charitable
endeavors, that they may be "translated into the light of the glorious
gospel"? With what face of truth can we profess religious kindness toward
them, if we cannot find without ourselves a disposition to be at some small
expense to encourage the use of means to prevent their being "hurt of the
second death"?

THERE are, I trust, a good number here present, who "love Christ that first
loved them," and those also who are "ungodly and without strength," as they
were themselves when Christ died "for them." And will such be straightened in
their own bowels, when they have a fair opportunity to assist in enlarging the
interest of Christ, and saving the souls of those who are in a lost condition?
They will rather exert themselves with all cheerfulness and liberality in
carrying so noble a design into execution.

I CANNOT wish any thing better for the people here assembled, or for the
people in this town, and throughout the land, than that Christ and immortal
souls may be precious to them, as they are to those that believe. They would
not then spend their money in that furniture for their houses, or attendance on
their persons, or ornament to their bodies, which the distinction God has made
between them and others does not call for, but is the fruit of pride and
vainglory: they would not spend it in supporting criminal amusements and
inglorious pastimes, which dissipate the mind, and indispose it to the
exercises of piety and devotion; and are besides greatly hurtful to society:
much less would they spend it in that luxurious intemperate way of living,
which tends to pamper lust, and render it headstrong and impetuous. They would
rather be inclined, not only to refrain from these extravagancies, but to deny
themselves, at least for a time, and in some instances, as there might be
occasion, even the conveniences of life, that they might be better able to
distribute to the purposes of charity, especially to the souls of men: Nor
should we, if this love to Christ and souls was generally prevalent, be at any
loss for a sufficiency to prosecute the great and good design that is now
happily begun.

MAY it be abundantly prospered, and in the hands of those who are, at present,
employed in carrying it on! And may the time be hastened, when the Son of God,
and Savior of men, "shall have dominion from sea to sea," and be "King over
all the earth"! when "men shall be blessed in him, and all nations shall call
him blessed"!

"BLESSED be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things:
And blessed be his glorious name forever; and let the whole earth be filled
with his glory: AMEN, and AMEN"

ERRATA.
Page 6. line 16, for gone read go.

Page 11. l. 6 from the bottom, read Galatians.

Page 4^. l. 6. for COUNTY read COUNTRY.

Page 48. l. 14, for without read within.


