A Mathematical Question, Propounded by the VICEGERENT of the World; Answered
by the KING of GLORY. Enigmatically represented, and Demonstratively opened, By
JOHN JOHNSON.

I will incline mine Ear to a Parable, etc.

Psalm. xlix. 4. The THIRD EDITION, Corrected.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND, Reprinted: And Sold by GREEN and
RUSSELL, at their Printing-Office in Queen Street; and by PHILIP FREEMAN at his
Shop in Union-street. MDCCLXII.

A Mathematical Question.
AMONGST a variety of pleasing curiosities, which, in the bloom of youth,
attracted my attention, I found a peculiar taste to mathematical studies. I
fancied myself qualified to answer hard questions, solve difficulties, and
determine things abstruse; but, in the course of my pursuits, I was accosted by
an accomplished mathematician, who confounded all my skill, by propounding to
me a question, stated in the following order.

There is a certain large country, formerly a kingdom, so rich and flourishing,
that for excellency and dignity, it was the second in the universe; an island,
situate in the midst of the temperate zone, and surrounded with the pacific
ocean; free from all scorching heat, chilling cold, or molestation by storms;
no barren land, unhealthful waters, or infectious air, were found therein; no
prickling bramble, poisonous herb, or unhwholsome fruit, grew therein; no
ravenous bird, voracious beast, or venomous reptile, infested the land: it
abounded with all the substantial blessings of life: and was embellished with
all the beauties and decorations of nature. There was no deficiency of any
thing that might conduce to the felicity of the inhabitants, who enjoyed
uninterrupted health and peace, liberty and plenty.

This delightful realm was subject to the grand Monarch of the world, who
honored it with many gracious visits, conferred on it many royal favors, and
granted the inhabitants all the privileges that were necessary to constitute
them a free and happy people: and, to consummate their glory, a king of their
own nation; he dignified in the throne, and crowned with glory had honor, the
eldest prince of the blood; a person endued with amplitude of all natural
perfections, a noble genius, untainted virtue, and of perfect stature, without
blemish; and gave him to wife a royal princess, a perfect virgin, of exquisite
beauty, accomplished with all the virtues, and amiable qualities, which adorn
the female sex.

And for the safety of the state, because the coasts were not inaccessible,
neither were the fortifications impregnable, and the prince was but young;
therefore, the universal Sovereign recommended him, and all his subjects, to
the super-intendency of his grand Geometrician; by whose infallible directions
the universal empire is justly proportioned, and all the affairs thereof
accurately regulated; whose representations are all the stated in the exactest
manner; his descriptions appear in the most curious figures, and all his rules
are models of perfection: his draughts are a complete system of rectitude and
harmony, and his instructions are perfectly refined; so that he is a consummate
pattern of absolute infallibility. No cause can miscarry that is directed by
his council, nor can any people cease to be happy, so long as they yield ample
subjection to his dictates. -- This great master of science was appointed
guardian, regent, vicegerent, or governor of the whole realm, to preside over,
and inspect all the affairs of the prince and the people: to him they were
accountable for all their actions; and, to prevent any infraction or confusion
in the land, every circumstance was subject to his cognizance; and the tenure
whereby all the Inhabitants held their estates and enjoyments, was, conformity
to his most excellent prescriptions. Thus this beatific region was amply
accommodated with every enjoyment that was necessary to perpetuate its felicity.

But a foreigner, of the race of the giants, who, for their rebellion against
the King of kings, were banished from the royal palace, into the unilluminable
desert, found means, in disguise, to enter this spacious country; and, by false
pretenses, and feigned address, obtained access to the princess; until, by
subtle arts, and delusive flatteries, he prevailed against her chastity: so
she committed adultery with him, and conceived by him. And, while she was
advancing in her pregnancy, she prevailed against the virtue of the prince, so
that he polluted himself, by committing adultery with her. For, though she was
his wife, it was adultery for a person in his station to have conversation with
her, since she was so basely deflowered. And so it was, that he conceived by
her, and they both became pregnant with the same thing, and brought forth a
monster. As soon as this monster was born, the prince and princess fell from
the throne, and had no more capacity to sway the scepter, or maintain their
dignity; for he poisoned, with his first breath, the man and the woman who
brought him forth: all their excellent qualities were corrupted, all their
beauties deformed, and all their glory laid in the dust. They died a lingering
death, in exile, shame, and sorrow; and their names have been had in execration
throughout the world ever since.

The form of this unnatural production was so horrible, as astonished every eye
that beheld him; his roaring so hideous, as made every ear tingle (...) every
one sick where the scent came; and he grew to such an enormous size, that his
shadow filled the whole land with darkness; and so invincible in his power,
that no army upon earth was able to withstand him; and he became so voracious,
that he spread death and destruction wherever he came; swallowing up men and
women alive, devouring every living creature, and making the whole land a
desolate wilderness.

But, notwithstanding the horrors that appear in this monster, the mischief
done, and misery introduced by him, which manifestly proves him to be an enemy
to nature; yet, he is such a master of enchantments, and has the delusive art
of disguising himself, and infatuating the people, that he has drawn all the
inhabitants of the land into a consederacy with him, to break all the measures
of the governor: and they accordingly have cast off all allegiance to, and
despised all the admonitions of, their faithful guardian, and are in open
rebellion against him. They, like a distracted banditti, follow their mortal
foe, and execute his cursed projects; while he is sporting himself with their
wretchedness; distressing them with all kinds of torture, and destroying them
by all kinds of death. None escape him, of whatever condition, age, or sex they
be; he tyrannizes over all. And every creature, that is subjugated by him, must
fall a prey to his rapacious fury, and is destined to inevitable destruction.
-- And, if he be permitted thus to proceed, there will not be left alive a soul
to breathe in the whole land.

Wherefore, the design of the ensuing question is, to discover, whether there
be a possibility of any expedient being found, to stop the ravage of this
horrible monster, to prevent the direful effects of his tyranny, and save the
country from total ruin.

The QUESTION stated.
The first part,
Is to give an ample description of this monster, in those particulars wherein
he appears formidable,

1. His dewlling place. 2. His form. 3. The number of his limbs, and members of
his body. 4. His measure, in height and thickness. 5. The weight of his whole
massy bulk. 6. His strength, what it is, and where it lies. 7. The loudness of
his voice. 8. His poisonous nature. 9. The depth of his crafty policy. 10. His
weapons, and manner of fighting. 11. The victories he has gained, and the
dominions he holds. 12. His age, how long he has lived, and shall yet live.
The second part,
Is to give a just estimate of all the mischief done, and all the damage
sustained through his usurpation.

The third part,
Is to find a person of accomplished merit, and perfect qualifications,
sufficient to attack, vanquish, and totally destroy this monster.

The Fourth part,
Is to demonstrate how full reparation may be made, for all the injury done,
and all the misery brought in by him; so as that the governor of the country
may sustain no loss or dishonor thereby.



When this master of skill, first laid before me this question. I looked upon
it with an air of disdain, as being matter too easy to be made the subject of
serious attention; and thought to solve it, as a diversion only: but, having
pondered a while thereon, and finding some difficulties arise, I asked him,
whether he himself was the projector?

But (in reply) he asked me what conceptions I formed concerning it?

I told him, I took it to be an enigmatical problem, proposed to puzzle, or try
the skill of the ingenious.

But he gravely replied, that it was not fiction, but reality; that the matter
was too serious to be made a droll of wit; and that a determinate solution was
a concern of the utmost consequence.

I asked him, whether it immediately concerned himself?

He told me, he himself was the rightful governor of the country, which this
monster had so long infested; and that all the damage done, was against his
honor; to the injury of his government, and the destruction of subjects, under
his jurisdiction.

I asked him (since he was governor) if it was not in his power to resist, and
expel the monster out of his dominions?

He told me, it was utterly out of his power to destroy him, to stop his
progress, or prevent the effects of his fury; otherwise he would not have
suffered him to proceed in his violence, to that outrageous degree as he had
done: for, before this monster was born, he took all proper measures to prevent
any such unnatural birth; and, as soon as he was brought forth, he pursued him
with the utmost diligence, to seize and destroy him, but unsuccessfully; and,
since he grew so formidable, he had still continued to use all possible means,
both offensive and defensive, to prevent his destructive measures; but the
utmost success he had ever been able to obtain against this deadly enemy, was
only, at some times, a little to retard his rapidity, but never to withstand
his force; but, in spite of all his endeavors, the whole land was become a
prey to this tyrant; not a creature had escaped, but what either followed him
as a willing slave, groaned under thraldom to his merciless cruelty, or had
already perished by his insatiable voracity. And since it appeared utterly
impossible for the governor to save the life of one of his subjects, he was
determined to vindicate his honor, and defend his right some other way; for
which reason he presented to me this question, requiring a determinate answer.

Upon this, I began to deliberate on the question with more close attention:
but the more I examined it, the more difficult it appeared; and I began to be
convinced of my mistake, in imagining it a mere puff of pedantry: for I found
it truly intricate; not only far surpassing my capacity, but astonishing to my
Mind whereupon, I offered to return it again to the governor, desiring to be
excused.

But he told me, he could not accept any excuse, for he was determined to have
justice.

I asked him, how he could expect justice, where a tyrannical and invincible
monster reigned.

But, with a fire in his countenance, which made my heart tremble, he replied,
that although he had not power to withstand the ravenous destroyer, he had power
to deal with his own subjects, who had rebelled against him, in giving succor
to, and forming alliance with, such an enemy; and inasmuch as I was one, that
did of right belong to his jurisdiction, but had been found in those
treasonable practices, I might expect condign punishment, if I did not give a
definitive answer to the question.

At this sentence I began to be seized with an uncommon horror; for I was aware
that I was conversing with a person, not of a common character; and though I
could not form any just conception of his meaning, yet my heart smote me, upon
the remembrance of some past transactions; so that I was convinced, it was
something more than fiction; and I set myself to ponder the matters laid before
me, with the utmost seriousness: but, in ruminating on this deep question, I
found the more I attempted to find a solution, the more I was embarrassed; the
more expedients I tried to discover the mystery, the more I began to despair of
a possibility. My heart fainted, my flesh trembled, and my countenance was
turned to paleness; I was filled with a multitude of strange conjectures, all
which turned to my confusion, but none to my relief. The sublimity, and
tremedousness of the subject, overpowered my mind, so that I was obliged (for
while) to quit the study, endeavoring to relax, and compose my mind as well as
I could, but the impression it had made upon me, prevented me from having much
repose.

In this distress, I began to reflect on my former vanity, in imagining myself
able to number the sand, to weigh the mountains, to sound the depth of the
seas, and to measure the heavens; to describe the magnitudes, distances, and
revolutions of the planets; and to solve the most abstruse problems, relating
to terrestrial operations, or celestial signs; which was (now) an extreme
mortification. But the most piercing, was the levity and contempt with which I
first looked on the question before me; by which I found my understanding
confounded, and my pride laid in the dust.

Bye and bye, I made another essay, to work out a solution, but finding myself
at the greatest nonplus, my mind began to be filled with resentment, and I
complained of the governor's severity, to insist on my performing a task
impracticable.

Then the governor turning upon me, with lightening in his his eyes, challenged
me to prove my charge against him: telling me, that tyranny was not in his
nature, but justice was his element; and he would convince me, that his demand
was just and reasonable; and, if I failed in the preformance, I had nothing to
expect but death, by a most righteous and unalterable determination.

Upon this I trembled and fell at his feet, confessing the injustice of my
complaint; entreating him to allow me time, promising the utmost application. I
also earnestly requested his assistance, for my better information into the
nature of these things, hoping I should be able to satisfy his demand.

But, concerning the time, he gave me no answer at all; concerning the state of
the question, he told me, the two last branches could never be solved, unless
the two first were duly understood; notwithstanding, the solving of the former
would not be of any benefit, unless the latter could be fully demonstrated;
that, as to the first two parts, he was perfectly acquainted with them, in
every punctilio; nor was it possible for any thing relating thereto, to escape
his cognizance. And according to the best rules of calculation, he had stated
the whole account, in the most accurate order, in his book of records, and
tables of proportion; which, for my better information, I was at fully liberty
to peruse. But as to the last two parts, (though it would be greatly to his
honor and satisfaction, to have them solved) they were utterly beyond his
line. He had never been able to penetrate into the least, branch thereof, or to
discover whether a solution was possible, or not; nor could he give me the
least assistance therein.

This answer was so pathetic and circumstantial, that, in deliberating thereon,
it made my heart faint, my blood chill, and all my bones to shiver. Howbeit, I
pretended great submission to the governor, (for though I loved him not, I
dreaded his resentment) and feignedly set myself upon a very diligent search
into all the rules he gave me; but I was prepossessed with such despairing
thoughts, that I made very little proficiency; even in those things which were
stated in a very intelligible light.

But a conceit came into my head, (which, for a while, yielded some relief to
my imagination,) viz. that he was only a subordinate governor, with a limited
power, and that his threatenings might exceed his authority, and that by
appealing to superior authority I might find redress, so as to escape his
severity, although I did not answer his demand; whereupon, I began to make such
enquiries as these, concerning him: viz. Who is this governor? Whence did he
receive his authority? How far does his power extend? etc. To which I was
answered, that he was the king's vicegerent, once of his household, and
inseparable from his family; that he had full power of life and death, and from
him there was no appeal.

Then the governor, with all the serenity of a judge, and with such majesty as
seemed to spread death through all my powers, told me, I should know his
authority; then calling for his secretary, I felt a shock like that of an
earthquake; and immediately the door of a certain apartment was burst open,
from whence a certain person sprang forth and made obeisance to his highness,
who familiarly received him. This person was my domestic companion, whom I had
formerly treated with much insolence, using him as a slave to bear my burdens:
and when he protested against my proceedings, I would not suffer him to speak,
but often attempted to strangle him; and, at last, found means to confine him
in a dark vault, having fastened the door with bars of iron. It is not to be
expressed, nor scarcely to be conceived, how surprising this shock was! But
much more so, when I observed how his mien was altered, and perceived that he
was the governor's secretary. -- Then he bid him produce his accounts, and he
laid open a train of accusations against me, conceived in terms so strong, and
delivered in expressions so emphatical, that it was like so many arrows of fire
piercing my heart. Likewise, the burden which I formerly obliged him to bear,
he now fixed unmovable upon me, which I found an insupportable weight; I
trembled under it, and was not able to stand, and to remove it I found
impossible. -- The governor also called his executioner, who took and bound me
with chains, beat me with many stripes, and cast me into a horrible dungeon:
during these proceedings, I cried for mercy, but in vain; for the governor
assured me, that as his authority did not admit of any appeal, so neither did
his severity admit of any mitigation: therefore, I was committed to the
vigilant inspection of the secretary, and the unrelenting rigor of the
executioner; confined in a dark prison, bound in strong chains, and crushed
under the weight of an insupportable burden, which did not admit me to move any
way, to get a little ease. And if I made any complaint, the secretary, would
silence me, by reminding me of my former conduct; upbraiding me in the most
piercing manner, and galling me with such grinding accusations, as even to tear
my heart to pieces: and then I was sure to feel most dreadful lashes from the
executioner, so stinging as none can describe, but those that have felt his
stripes.

In this deplorable condition I sustained a variety of inexpressible tortures;
sometimes wrecked with anxious thoughts concerning the question proposed,
debating in my mind whether there was any hope, or possibility of finding an
answer, thereby to obtain my liberty; sometimes sinking down in distress,
weariness, and despair; sometimes swelling with rancour against the governor,
and sometimes restlessly desiring to abandon my mind to an insensibility,
thereby to forget my wretchedness: but the most distracting thought, was an
apprehension of the governor's return, to call me before him, concerning which
I was in perpetual suspense, as I could not obtain the least hint of certainty
relating to the time; nor had I any room to expect any further respite; but
that the indictment exhibited against me by the secretary being fully proved in
open court, I should receive the sentence of the governor, be cut asunder by
the executioner, and my carcass cast out to be devoured by the monster; for
that is the law of the country.

In these circumstances I continued, till my spirit was exhausted with anguish
and distraction, and my heart was hardened through vexation and horror: and I
began to conceive hopes of obtaining relief by the assistance of the monster,
inasmuch as the governor had not power to destroy him. And as I had formerly
been strongly attached to his interest, and had never violated my allegiance to
him, he was ready to give me all the aid in his power; but it was thought
expedient to be done without noise; therefore he sent me his apothecary with
some mollifying ointments, hoping thereby to enable me to slip my chains. And
by these I found some present ease, so that I began to fancy I should outwit my
keepers, and creep away; but, after all endeavors, I found my chains
inextricable.

Thus disappointed, he sent me a cunning picklock, with some instruments very
artfully contrived, to loose my chains; when I saw the subtilties of these
inventions, I thought the right expedient was found imagining the device
sufficient to unravel the most intricate gordian knot; but, upon trial, I found
my expectations disappointed, for my chains were cemented beyond the reach of
art.

Then I began to be in deep despair, but my master encouraged me once more to
try another stratagem; so he prepared me an anvil, and chose some of his own
servants (who appeared best qualified for such an enterprise) to attend me in
disguise, as often as possible, with files, and sometimes with hammers, or
other instruments, as opportunity should serve, hoping to wear off my chains in
time: but all means were ineffectual, for my chains proved infrangible. Neither
could this work be done so silently, as to escape the vigilant observation of
the secretary, whose accusations were like the stinging of an adder, and his
rebukes like the biting of a serpent: and whenever I awaked his resentment,
he awaked the executioner, whose strokes were like the torments of a scorpion.

At last, finding all stratagems vain, and being quite tired out with pains and
disappointments, I began to grow desperate; and the monster, flaming with
malice against the governor, hoping (by open force) to vanquish my keepers,
break the prison, and carry me away in triumph, resolved to appear in person,
with all his might; which he did, and approached in the most formidable manner,
and proceeded to the attack with the utmost fury, and with great success; for
the cast up such banks that the secretary was buried under them, and made such
a terrible fire, that I imagined the foundations of the prison gave way, and
the smoke darkened the air, so that the executioner was obscured from my sight,
and I thought he had been fled: I also fancied my chains had been broken, and
was ready to shout for victory. But on a sudden the governor appeared with a
glittering sword in his hand, and with a voice like thunder, called the
secretary, who straight arose out of the rubbish, and the executioner appearing
close by me, struck me such a blow, as made me lie like one dead, expecting
instantaneous destruction: then the monster appearing disconcerted, marched
off; but I remained in the most invincible fetters, under the most pungent
torture, encompassed with the most amazing horrors.

I now gave up all hope; all thoughts of finding an answer to the governor's
question ceased, and all expectation of deliverance vanished; nothing but
apprehensions of inevitable ruin possessed my breast. But, after some time, my
old master proposed another expedient for my relief, by sending his orator, in
disguise, as an ambassador, to entreat, or negotiate with the governor, for my
deliverance. This orator interceded for me like an accomplished rhetorician,
with all the alluring terms of sophistry, with many specious promises and
proposals to make, or comply with any conditions that should be required; and
delivered himself with so much eloquence, good temper, and pompous appearance,
as seemed to attract the attention of the secretary; and I fancied he began to
look favorable upon me, which I took for an indication, that the governor
inclined to accept of terms. I likewise imagined, that the executioner began to
treat me with more gentleness, which I conceived must proceed from some milder
orders from the governor. Thus I sunk into a fond dream; for being brought so
low by the fatigues I had suffered, a little relaxation easily composed me to
sleep: but upon my awaking, I heard the governor reply to the ambassador, that
all proposals were vain; for justice was his province, and he should for ever
be found inexorable. But this ambassador (with all elegance of style, and
softness of address) continuing to urge for further audience; the governor
stepping to him, plucked off his garment, whereby his nakedness was discovered,
and he appeared such an ugly deformed creature, as fully betrayed him to be a
limb of the monster: when finding himself exposed, he sculked behind a thicket,
like a dog that had done some mischief.

Upon this sight I fainted away, being fully convinced of the justice,
penetration and inflexibility of the governor; knowing, that to escape from him
is impracticable, and to answer his demand is, to me, impossible; and unless
some deliverer, or deliverance, should appear, which to me is yet unknown, I
have no resource left, but am inevitably bound over to destruction;
inextricable bondage, exquisite pains, and insupportable terrors, are now my
fixed portion, where I lie comfortless, friendless, helpless, and hopeless.

Now, my confinement was more severe than ever; I was deprived of all liberty
or power to act or move, only to gnash my teeth, gnaw my tongue, and torture my
own mind: I saw nothing but darkness and dismal specter; I heard nothing but
roarings, thunders, and doleful groans; I felt nothing but chains, bars,
sickness, and pain; I smelled nothing but stench and nauseousness; I tasted
nothing but gall and wormwood: in this condition, without relaxation, I
languished many days, perpetually expecting my final execution. At last I was
alarmed with something, which I apprehended like music, at a great distance,
which attracted my attention, and awaked some sensation of pleasure; though I
could not understand the sound distinctly; but as I listened to hear it, it
seemed to draw nearer, and I plainly perceived it was the sound of a trumpet.
The meaning of it I could not conceive, but I found the nearer it approached,
the more my passion was excited into an ardent desire to know whence it came,
and what it might portend. While my soul was thus alert in attending, the found
continued advancing, and raising some faint joy in my heart, rather from the
sweetness of the melody, than any reason I could render for my taking comfort;
until it approached so near, that I heard three blasts distinctly sounded, and
in the sounds I heard these words pronounced, GOOD WILL, PEACE, PARDON: these
words seemed to give some reviving to my soul, I lifted up myself to hearken if
any thing further would be expressed; when the trumpet seeming still nearer, I
heard three blasts more, pronouncing these words, LOVE, WISDOM, POWER. Upon
this I found a sweetness of joy seize my heart, though I understood not the
meaning, but still gladly attended to hear the sound repeated: bye-and-bye I
heard the trumpet exceeding loud, as it were, just before the prison-gate,
sounding three alarms expressing these words, REDEMPTION, RECONCILIATION,
SALVATION.

These words came with so much power, that they spread new life through all my
faculties; I felt the foundation of the prison shake, and a window (which
before was close shut up) burst open, whereby light shined into the prison; for
I perceived a strong wind joined with the voice, which made way wherever it
touched, though I knew not whence it came, nor whither it went; but by this
means I enjoyed some light, and found opportunity to look about, to see whence
the joyful sound proceeded; and seeing a man standing before the gate, with a
banner displayed in one hand, and a trumpet in the other; I asked him who he
was, and what his design?

He told me, he was the king's messenger, sent to proclaim good tidings.

I asked, What king?

He answered, King SHILOH,

I did not know any king of that name; therefore I desired to be informed who
he was, of what line or family, in what realm was his dominion.

He told me, that he was the only son of the universal sovereign; a prince of
such excellent dignity and merit, that he was made lord-chancellor in his
father's court, and entrusted with the direction of all the affairs of the
empire; and his mother being a native of that (once happy, though now
miserable) country, he had a natural indubitable right to the sovereignty of
the realm; which, since the other prince had lost, and the governor was not
able to recover, his father had appointed him, to take into his own hand.

Then I enquired what good news he brought?

He answered, healing to the broken hearted, liberty to the captives, opening
of the prison to those that are bound, relief to them that are ready to perish,
comfort to all that mourn, and to proclaim the joyful year.

The balsamic influence which these words had upon my soul none can know, but
such as have been in the like condition, and favored with something of the
like kind!

I asked him, if he had authority to perform such great things?

He answered, that he was the king's herald sent to publish the glad tidings of
his good pleasure, in those places where his majesty designed himself to come,
in whose hand alone the power was reserved.

I asked, if the king was come that way?

He told me, it was the king's delightful employ, to visit the most desolate
places, to seek out such as were in distress, and to deliver them; and for that
purpose had sent his royal proclamation, that every poor wretched prisoner that
should hear the news, and wait for his salvation, might be delivered from all
bondage or misery whatsoever.

Then I asked, if the king did not insist on some conditions, to be performed
by the persons to whom he would grant such favors? for I knew it was not in my
power to do any thing, but must perish.

But the messenger told me, the redemption was free to such as have no power,
wisdom, riches, or any thing to recommend them; it being beneath the honor of
his majesty to make terms with poor miserable slaves, but to deliver them
freely, of his own royal beneficence.

I further enquired, if his royal bounty was not confined to some particular
favorites, so as that many may wait for it and not be disappointed?

He replied, that such blessings as the king bestowed might well be esteemed
peculiar favors; but that none was ever rejected who gladly accepted his
bounty: and if there were any who were not favored with it, they were such
(only) as did not seek it. But that it was reasonable to suppose, his majesty's
wisdom would bestow his favors where they would be received with gratitude,
and upon such persons whose circumstances rendered the benefit necessary and
acceptable; as gifts, not to the rich, but to the poor; deliverance, not to
persons at liberty, but to those that were bound; healing, not to the whole,
but the sick; provisions, not to the full, but to the hungry; and there was no
other restriction in the king's bounty. That is, though it is not given to such
as never saw their need, and consequently do not desire, but despise it; it is
richly extended to every one, who (through his majesty's goodness) is made
willing to wait for, and thankfully receive, such bounty; so that none ever was
denied, who earnestly desired the blessing.

-- Therefore, as no person ever had reason to complain of injustice in the
governor; neither had any person the least reason to complain of the want of
generosity in the king.

I gave audience to this word with all my external and internal powers; and as
I found the words, I eat them; for they were as cold water to a thirsty soul:
but when I heard mention made of the governor, I made a pause, and asked him,
if there was any intimacy between the governor and the king his master?

He told me, there was an inviolable friendship between them inasmuch as that
the one never did any thing in opposition to the other. But the king ratified
all the acts of the governor, and the governor approved all the edicts of the
king.

I replied, how then can the king set any one at liberty from his bondage?

The herald answered though the king is an invincible warrior against his
enemies, he never uses hostilities against the governor of this country; but
all things are done by means so amicable, as to issue in their mutual honor
and satisfaction.

I then enquired whether the king had so much influence, or interest in the
governor, to bring his inexorable disposition to become flexible? or had the
governor a right to resign his commission into his majesty's hand during his
stay.

He replied, that the governor's authority was perpetual; nor would the king
ever offer him such an indignity as to recall his commission for a moment;
neither would he ever attempt to obtain the least mitigation of justice from
his hand, which would be a dishonor to the king himself, since all the rules
and decrees of the governor are according to the king's own heart; and
whatsoever is done by either of them, is for the reciprocal honor of them both.

I asked him, how this could be, and yet that the king should deliver a
condemned wretch out of such a deplorable condition as mine was?

He answered, by making ample satisfaction to all, and every individual, of the
governor's demands; so as that the governor himself should acquit, and
honorably discharge, the criminal from all his offenses, and fully cancel
every indictment exhibited against him, and at the same time secure his own
prerogitive, his honor, and his justice, inviolate.

In this declaration I apprehended such a beauty, that it was like the most
salutary cordial to me; and I began to enquire when the king would arrive?

He answered, that the precise time was in his majesty's own breast; but that
he was well acquainted with my condition, and never made any delay in time of
necessity, or ever suffered any one to perish that waited for his salvation.

I told him my case was so desperate, that if I had not speedy relief, I could
not live.

He encouraged me not to fear, but wait for the arrival of his majesty, who
perhaps, might be nearer than I conceived; and, probably, I might observe
something to my consolation, if I pleased to take a deliberate view through a
perspective, which he presented to me.

With eager joy, and intense application, I endeavored to look, according to
his direction. I found the telescope exceeding clear, and curiously fixed; and
though it was too extensive for my hand to guide, it was directed to my eye
with surprising exactness, by an invisible hand, (which afterward was matter
of much contemplation and admiration, though at the time it almost escaped my
observation through the amazing prospect which saluted my eyes, and the
delightful entertainment I found therein;) and, upon a very delectable mountain
I saw a person of a most splended appearance and exquisite beauty: such a sight
my eyes never beheld before; nor is it possible for any to describe it, except
such as can speak with new tongues; and such a transport of joy was raised in
my soul as I never felt before; nor is it possible for any to feel the same,
but those that have seen the same sight! and such a flame of love arose in my
breast toward the person, as I had never felt; nor can any soul feel the same
love, unless it be to the same object.

When I had beheld this sight, and feasted my eyes and all my passions, with
the effulgent glories and inestable beauties of this shining one, and had
considered the amity between the governor and this glorious prince, all my old
enmity against the governor vanished away: for as the flame of love kindled
more and more in my heart toward the king of glory, it also produced sincere
regard, and high veneration toward the governor. I thought of him with
delight, and fully convinced, that all was equal just, and good, that he had
done to me; yea, I was satisfied, that if was to die by his hand I must justify
him and love him; for I could not desire to live at the expense of his glory.

Then I laid before the messenger all my case, how I had been embarrassed with
that intricate fourfold question, and the misery which had ensued; increating
the best advice in my present circumstance.

To which he replied, that as to the two last parts of the problem, none in
heaven or earth could touch upon them, save that king of glory. But respecting
the first parts, the governor had rules to illustrate them, which I might have
had opportunity to have seen already; though none were able to form such just
conceptions of those rules, or understand them in a such a perspicuous light,
as those who had their intellectuals enlarged, through acquaintance with the
glorious prince.

I told him I had seen those rules, and wearied myself with poring on them, but
could make very little of them, only what quite puzzled my understanding.

He told me, that it was my enmity to the governor that prevented success in my
searches; but that he could appeal to myself if I did not find much pride,
enmity, murmuring, and reluctance, and that I wanted a good will in my
enquities.

I confessed, what he said was true, but that I now found a real change in my
disposition.

He told me, that since I found my mind well affected to the governor, the
study of his records would become pleasant; and that while I waited for the
king's approach, it would be necessary for me to inform myself the best I
could, in those things wherein I had opportunity to be instructed; for the more
I was acquainted with those two first branches, the better I might understand,
and with more pleasure take in, the solution of the other parts, whenever it
should be the king's pleasure to favor me with it.

I was fully persuaded of the seasonableness of this advice, and I set myself
(in earnest) to examine the rules given me by the governor; and when I began to
attend to it with affection, approbation, and cheerfulness, I found the
paradoxes open, with an intelligible consistency, through the whole system.

But when I entered into a close perusal of these records, and began to form
just conceptions of the things therein contained, to view them in a true light,
and deliberate thereon with understanding; I found it not only the deepest
study, but attended with the most awful considerations, that ever my thoughts
had been employed in. All the anguish and terror which had distressed me
heretofore, did scarce bear any comparison with the tremendous aspect now
before me; the hideousness of the monster! the devastation made by him! the
majesty and justice of the governor! and the inexpressible misery of my own
condition! appeared so amazing as no heart can conceive, save those who have
had a distinct view of these things: and had it not been for the comfort I had
received from the king's messenger, the light which was opened into my dark
situation, and the prospect I had of the king's person, it had been impossible
for me to have survived, without falling into distraction or desperation. --
And frequently, when my very soul was overwhelmed with deep enquiries and
shocking discoveries, I should be roused up by the melodious sound of the
trumpet, which would transport my mind, and relieve my weary spirits: for the
herald continued often to pass that way, with whom I had frequent conferences
concerning the king, his person, grace, glory and expected approach. And
sometimes I had the prospect of his beauties and excellencies repeated to me,
which afforded comfortable meditations in my weary hours. Thus I was refreshed
and supported, while searching into the profound rules of justice, and dark
abyss of misery.

I found the questions and solutions stated with the utmost accuracy and
coherence, but so deep and extensive, that all my powers were absorbed in the
discoveries; for my faculties had never been expanded to a capacity for
receiving things so sublime. And I was convinced, that the most profound
problems I had ever exercised myself upon were mere childish toys, in
comparison of this: yet, by diligent application I arrived at a considerable
degree of distinct understanding, both in the description of the monster, and
the effects of his outrages: but a perfect knowledge I could not obtain; for I
continually found, the more discoveries I made, the more profound and
unsearchable the mystery appeared.

In this condition I continued for a season, sometimes close engaged in this
necessary study, and sometimes seized with fear, and crushed down with dark
apprehensions: for though I had received much comfort. I was still in bondages,
and I began to think the time very long, insomuch, that I was often ready to
give up all hope. (...) the manifest tokens of (...), which I would not forget,
yet, I was frequently much (...) with suspicion of its being a deception
especially, when my mind was fatigued, and my (...) low; or when I had
continued some (...) repetition of my former comforts; than I should be ready
to draw the most uncomfortable conclusions; for my mind was too weak, to retain
the satisfaction which I received at one time, so as to be a support to me at
another. -- At some seasons, all my fears would be dissipated, and my mind
elevated with great joy; both upon the remembrance of the first joyful
discoveries, fresh soundings of the trumpet, and fresh views of the king's
majesty. And as the sound grew more clear, and the prospect still more distinct
and glorious, I judged the king was making some nearer advances; so that my joy
would be unspeakable, until some dusky cloud would overspread my mind, and cast
a gloom upon all my conceptions; or, some fresh discovery of the monster's
horrible aspects, would arise before me; which would chill my very heart, and
strike a piercing shock through all my powers Thus my soul would be filled with
fears, doubts, and questionings; but when I could enjoy a fresh manifestation
of the king's beauty, grace, and near approach, all my fears would vanish away.

The reason of these waverings and hesitations, I conceive to proceed, both
from the weakness of my judgment, and the instability, or imbecility of my
inward powers. -- As to the former, the discoveries I had of the king, and his
designs, carried such demonstration of love, mercy, faithfulness, and
sufficiency, that there was not the least to distrust the accomplishment of all
that the herald declared; but the darkness, and contractedness of my
understanding, prevented me from forming clear and distinct conceptions, or
digesting those things in due order. -- As to the latter, my mind was so weak,
that when I was favored with those manifestations, I found myself filled with
such exstatick joy, that at these seasons, I had not the least suspicion of a
delusion: therefore, I did not employ my understanding, (as I ought to have
done) in scrutinizing into the nature of what I heard and saw; whereby, I might
have been better established; but taking all for undeniable fact, (nor
apprehending any need of close enquiry, concerning the reality, or
fictitiousness thereof) while I found myself in the enjoyment; I should find
myself quite at a loss at other times, when those enjoyments were withdrawn:
and some horrible appearance presented itself; and I was fainting with
weariness and impatience; I was not able to form any just conceptions, nor make
any proper reflections upon those things which had formerly given me comfort,
but were not present before my eyes. For then I should be filled with a
multitude of thoughts, of the possibility, and probability of a deception; and
of the miserable mistakes which many have fallen into, by taking fancies for
realities, etc. And I should fall into doubts and questionings, concerning the
propriety, or ambiguity of the things which I had seen and heard; as, whether
the blessing I had hoped for, were only for others, and not for me; whether the
good news brought by the herald, were to be confided in; whether my miserable
state and earnest desire of deliverance, had not induced me to impose upon
myself, by construing things in my own favor, contrary to their natural
intentions; whether the real favors which I did enjoy, ever since the light
was opened into my apartment, were granted by the king's order, as a
preparative to my full deliverance, or only a relaxaction granted by the
jailer, before my final sentence, etc. And amidst these mutual debates, all my
faculties would be so inveloped, that I could not come to any fixed
determination, nor reason conclusively upon any thing, relating to my present
circumstances; nay, sometimes my spirits would be so far exhausted, that I was
ready to doubt, whether all that I had seen and heard, from whence I had
conceived hope or comfort, was any more than a fond dream. -- Thus for want of
clearness in judgment, and fortitude in mind, I should be in the greatest
suspense, even, after receiving the fullest demonstrations, and after enjoying
the richest consolations.

But, in all my doubts and waverings, I never wavered in this one thing, that
if ever I must find relief, it must be by the king alone; and that there was no
possibility of help in any other. Therefore, whether my hope was stronger or
weaker, or my comfort more or less, it was only according to the encouragement
I received, or the discouragement I formed to myself, concerning his majesty's
sufficiency, good will, near approach, etc. For I neither expected, sought, nor
desired deliverance from any other. Yea, I found such a flame of love, and soul
so powerfully drawn toward him, that I should sooner have chose to perish at
his feet, than that any other should claim the glory of my deliverance; and in
my most joyful hours, the height of my ambition, was to wait on his majesty all
the days of my life; for I thought, if I was at full liberty, and must not
enjoy the favor to attend on the king, it would be as great a distress to me,
as any thing I ever underwent, for he had truly conquered my heart with his
love; and if I did not enjoy comfort and satisfaction in him, I enjoyed it no
where at all: for though my spirits would sometimes grow flat, and exceeding
low, through drowsiness, weariness, and discouragement; whenever I received any
fresh consolation, it was from him alone: and whenever I enjoyed any good
degree of vivacity, I still found my mind intensely fixed upon the glorious
prince, waiting for the happy hour of his arrival, to see his beauty, and enjoy
his salvation.

At last the trumpet sounded exceeding loud and distinct, as it had been
talking to the intellectual powers of my soul; and light shined around me
exceeding clear; as it had been the beams of the sun in the meredian altitude;
my soul became exceeding alert, all my faculties were expanded, and all my
passions took fire! and I saw the king himself approaching the prison-gate. --
The appearance was superlatively glorious, that I melted away, and there
remained no spirit in me: I was not able to sustain such a conjunction of joy
and glory, and I fell at his feet as dead. But he laid his right hand upon me,
and said, I am the first and the last. -- I have the key of David, I open and
no man shuts, I shut and no man opens. -- I say to the prisoners, go
forth; to them that are in darkness, show yourselves.

Then I was strengthened and arose and stood upon my feet, but I was not able
to behold his glory; for his beauty, and the majesty of his countenance were so
overcoming, that I was obliged to turn away my eyes. -- But there was a person
along with him, (whom for quality, was equal with his majesty, but not clothed
in the same garments,) whose office is, to attend the king in all his
enterprises; to attest and seal all his edicts, to dispense all his royal
bounties, to illustrate the glory of his majesty, and his kingdom, and to
interpret all mysteries belonging to the state; whose dignity and authority, I
cannot find words to express: but, because all the counsels of the court, all
the circumstances of the subject, and all transactions in the state, came under
his recognizance; I shall call him the king's secretary. This is the person who
directed the king's trumpet to my dismal cell, and directed my eyes to take a
prospect of his majesty; with many other kind offices, which I have been
favored with, though I know not whence they came. He now anointed my eyes and my
ears, and gave me a strengthening cordial; whereby my eyes were enabled to
behold the king in his beauty, my ears to hear tremendous voices, and my heart
to meditate terror. And, I lift up my face and looked steadfastly upon the king.

Then the king asked, what was my request?

I answered, that it might please his majesty, to consider my condition, and
deliver me from my bondage.

He asked me, whether I understood my own condition?

Then I laid before him my distress, as far as I was capable of describing it,
and told him I had no expectation from any, but himself; being sensible, that I
must either be saved by his goodness, or inevitably perish. And, therefore, I
earnestly implored his compassion, in case he did not find my condition too
hopeless to admit of relief; but, if that should be the case, I was willing to
die at his feet.

To which he replied, Is there any thing too hard for me?

From this word I took courage, drew near, and took hold of his girdle; and
falling down at his feet, besought him, to get himself honor in my deliverance.

Then he asked me, which way I expected to be set at liberty?

I told him, I was very sensible of the justice of my confinement, and the
direful sentence past upon me, and did not desire liberty upon any other terms,
but what might be to the honor of the governor, and of his majesty; but that I
was informed by his own messenger, that he undertook to satisfy all the demands
of the governor, on behalf of such helpless wretches as I was.

He asked, what were those demands, which his excellency the governor made upon
me?

Upon this, I produced all the accounts which I had gathered from the tables
and records laid before me.

Then the king's herald told me, my calculations were very just in many
particulars, but in many things deficient. That it was well for me to have a
competent understanding in those things, that I might know the necessity, the
nature, and the greatness of the king'salvation; but, that it was not
sufficient, that his majesty should answer the question according to my
accounts; but according to the governor's perfect description, which was
already completely done betwixt the king and the governor, and therefore the
king had a right to demand my liberty when he pleased. And that as I had been
embarrassed with those hard questions, and had borne the distress of seeing my
own calamity; it was his majesty's will, that I should enjoy the pleasure of
beholding the whole transaction, wherein all things had been adjusted between
the king and the governor; and that I might peruse all his majesty's solutions
to my full contentment, and ample satisfaction.

I heard these words with earnest attention, and drank them in with eagerness;
and being strengthened by what the king's secretary had done to me, I was able
to understand in a distinct light, and ruminate upon what was spoken with such
serenity of mind, as I never felt before; and it was attended with such
attactive power, as if my very soul had gone out of myself, into the bosom of
the king; or, as if I had ceased to be, and I had found myself become a member
of his body; or, as if my life had expired, and I had been inspired with new
life from his breath. Therefore, I further enquired, if there were any hopes
that I might enjoy such a blessing, when set at liberty, as to dwell in his
dominion, or become one of his attendants; for to be wholly denied in this, I
thought would be a grief equal to my present confinement.

He told me, all that the king redeemed were his own property, and he would
take care to have them duly qualified for, and securely fixed in the station
for which he designed them; which was to attend his person and continue his
domestics for ever.

This declaration was adequate to my ultimate wishes and spread tranquillity
through my faculties; and I found my soul filled with such composure,
satisfaction, and delight in the king, as if every thing in the universe had
been dead but himself; or as if every excellency in the creation had
disappeared, and all their glories centered in him alone. Then I had such a
view of the beauties, and perfections of his majesty, as my eyes had never
seen; for though the former discoveries were transcendently striking and
glorious, so as to raise the highest raptures in my soul, yet I was too weak to
view his glory in a distinct light; but now I had strength to make deliberate
observations, and form just conceptions of what my eyes beheld; but the
perfection of his person, the light of his countenance, the luster of his
garments, the splendour of his throne, the glory of his crown, the rectitude of
his scepter, etc. were such, as nothing but the new strength I had received
could have enabled me to behold; nor shall I ever be able fully to describe
them.

After my eyes were feasted, and my soul satiated with this incomparable
vision, the king took a key in his hand, which the herald very amply described
to me; and the secretary directed my eyes to behold the curious make of it,
that I might understand the form and powers thereof. And with this key he
opened every lock belonging to the prison, and to my chains; and did it in such
an open, deliberate manner, as gave me opportunity to observe by what power he
removed every bar, disengaged every ward, and turned every spring. Thus I was
brought out of prison, set at full liberty, and found myself made free indeed.
I now rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory to see my long expected
deliverance consummate in such a perfect, undeniable manner: I can scarcely
say, whether I was more delighted with my ever memorable, and unspeakably happy
deliverance, or with the mysterious excellency of his majesty's performance.
But I confess, that till this time, I had never so clearly understood, as now I
did, how inexplicable the depth and nature of my misery, and how absolutely
inextricable my bondage were, to any but him that understood all mysteries, and
possessed invicible power; for an operation so masterly and curious I had never
seen before.

Then the herald informed me, it was the king's pleasure that I should have a
satisfactory demonstration, how complete and honorable my deliverance was; and
therefore, I should be admitted to take a deliberate view of the transactions
relative to my acquittance, and the decisive stroke whereby all the demands of
the governor were undeniably satisfied by the king's majesty: whereupon he led
me to a spacious plain where I saw the governor walking in a garment white as
snow, and his secretary familiarly walking by his side; and when he came to a
certain place, he put upon his white raiment a vesture of flaming scarlet, and
called his executioner, who immediately came with a glittering sword in his
hand. Thus he stood with a countenance full of terrible majesty, having his
secretary on his right hand, and his executioner on his left; and immediately I
saw the king upon the distant mountains riding in a glorious chariot, swift as
lightning; and when he came near, he alighted and made very low obeisance to
the governor, but the governor did not move, or made any obeisance to the king.
Then the king placed himself over against the governor, having his secretary on
his right hand, and his herald on his left; and here I had an opportunity to
behold the majesty of two courts, disposed in the most regular order. So awful
was the appearance! so grave the mien! it spread silence and had serenity
through the whole plan; there was neither voice nor motion to be heard or seen,
till the court was opened; nor during, the whole process did the wind blow, or
a leaf shake; but all the elements appeared in a total stagnation. So I saw,
and heard the whole procedure.

The governor first sounded a trumpet exceeding loud, which made the earth
tremble; then he proclaimed his great authority, the extensiveness of his
commission, and the justice of his government, which the king acknowledged by a
very low bow, and all the king's court made their proper signals of respect;
and audience was given while he distinctly opened the two first branches of the
question, and gave a very accurate description of the monster in all his
unbounded enormities; and an ample definition of the mischief done, and damage
sustained, by him; with a just representation of the heinous and aggravated
crimes of those who had entered into alliance with such an enemy. When he spoke
of these things, his voice was like thunder, his breath was flames of fire, and
a cloud of smoke darkened the air round about him; from his breath, the
executioner's sword took fire, and burnt with a vehement flame; and when he had
ended every paragraph, his secretary attested the truth thereof, and signed it
with a pen of brass; then his executioner brandished his flaming sword over the
whole plain. -- And all the king's court kept silence, and gave audience, till
the governor had finished all his declarations. -- And when he had made an end,
having demonstrated every thing in a distinct and obvious light, he again
sounded a trumpet, and made proclamation; That if any one had any objection
against the light in which these things were represented; or any reason to
render, why vengeance should not be taken on all those rebellious subjects, who
had committed treason against their rightful governor, and joined with the
destroyer of their country, Let him draw near. -- But no answer was made. --
Then he commanded his executioner to go forth and slay, without mercy or
distinction, every creature that was found in rebellion, or had deserted his
allegiance to his serene highness. -- Then the executioner rendezvoused a
formidable host, mounted a pale horse, lifted up a black flag, and began his
march, with all the ensigns and terrors of death; and his fiery sword shot
darts of lightning through all the land.

Upon this, the king's herald sounded his trumpet so loud, that it not only
made the earth shake, but the heavens also, and proclaimed his majesty umpire.
And there was profound silence.

Then his majesty spoke, with a serene voice, to the governor, and bid him stay
his hand; for he had undertaken to save those offenders, and they should be
saved; and on them no vengeance should be taken.

The governor replied, that vengeance against rebels was inevitable.

The king told him, he was not come to offer violence to his honor, nor
entrench upon his authority, neither to entreat any favor, nor yet to abett,
or excuse offenses; but to be the representative of those miserable offenders;
having engaged in their behalf, and made their case his own, he would stand in
their place; therefore, whatsoever his highness found against them, lay it to
his charge, impute all their transgressions to him, and deal with him as the
very criminal; spare him not, but let all the deserved vengeance fall upon him.

This declaration of his majesty, struck a total silence, and stagnation,
through all the plain; there was neither voice nor motion; the heaven and the
earth stood in astonishment, and amazement appeared in every countenance, for
about an hour; during which period, the two potentates stood unmovable, having
their eyes fixed upon one another, without the least change of countenance in
either.

Then the governor made a signal to the executioner to bend all his force
against the king's person, which he accordingly did; whereupon all the king's
guards, and attendants, opened to the right and left, leaving his majesty
exposed; and the executioner marched against him, with such tremendous fury, as
I never beheld before, nor was ever the like seen under heaven. The sun closed
his eyes, the world shook, the rocks burst asunder, and the whole frame of
nature was distorted; and he came upon his majesty like a torrent, and (without
ceremony, or resistance) pierced him through the heart, with his flaming sword.

This was the most awful sight that my eyes ever saw; nor did I ever hear of
any that had seen the like. The blood gushed out; his countenance turned to
paleness; all his powers trembled; he fainted away, and resigned his life. --
Thus fell the prince of perfect glory and merit; and the most valuable of all
lives was taken away?

But what tongue can declare? What pen can describe? What heart can conceive?
the effects of this stupendous stroke! the world was in astonishment; the
heavens stood amazed; celestial angels came down to behold the wonder; infernal
angels felt the tremor, through all the coasts of hell; living men trembled, and
became as dead; and dead men came out of their graves to see what was done!
None can express the love, compassion, humility, patience, justice, goodness,
veracity, fortitude, etc. which this meritorious prince manifested in this
action! Nor can all the annals of time furnish us with an instance, worthy to
be named in comparison with this!

By this surprising sight my soul was absorbed, all my mental powers were
exhausted, and there remained no more spirit in me; I was fainting away; but
the king's secretary sustained me; and, directing my eyes to behold this
dreadful catastrophe, he gave me a distinct view of the most surpassing
glorious and indelible trophy, arising from thence.

The blood that issued from the prince's wound, quenched the flame of the
sword; and the executioner (without any violence offered to him) expired upon
the spot; the moment he struck his majesty the last stroke, all his army
vanished away, all appearance of hostility ceased; and what remained was a most
shocking aspect like unto a field of battle, where two armies had destroyed one
another, 'till nothing remained alive. Thus all things continued in a total
stagnation for a certain space; but quickly a troop of guards arrived from the
palace, and placed themselves in order about their prince's dead body; and his
secretary embraced him, and he revived, and appeared alive, in his full vigor.
-- This stupendous victory inspired all nature with exstatick joy; the heavens
rejoiced; the morning stars sang together; the earth was full of gladness; the
mountains dropped new wine; the trees clapped their hands; the flowers appeared
all in bloom; the birds warbid all around; the sea roared with joyful murmurs;
and shouts of triumph ran through all the host. -- I was attentive to this
unparalleled transaction, till my soul was swallowed up in exstacy, and lost in
wonder; I was transported into such raptures of joy, that it had almost
overcome all my intellectual powers, and elevated my mind into a stupefaction;
but my comforting sustainer strengthened my heart with a vivifying cordial,
whereby I was enabled to retain the use of my faculties; and my mind was much
alert, to attend to the whole scene. -- The king, seeing the executioner dead
at his feet, asked the governor, if he had any more hosts to send forth; and he
answered, no. He asked again, if he had any more vengeance, or any thing to lay
to the charge of those persons whose cause the king had espoused; and the
governor answered, no. Again he asked, if what had been done was sufficient
satisfaction to his justice, and adequate to his honor; and he answered, yes.

Then the king and the governor saluted one another, with all the tokens of
friendship; and all the nobles and attendants, in each court, kissed and
embraced one another; there appeared such perfect amity, and every thing so
harmonious, as far exceeded any thing I had ever seen; the two courts became
one: the governor acknowledged the king's supremacy, gave him his right hand,
and the pre-eminence in all things, yet abated nothing of his own dignity;
likewise the governor's secretary, and all his retinue (only his executioner
who was dead) kept every one his proper station; and without compulsion or
reluctance, were entirely subservient to his majesty's pleasure. -- Now I saw
the splendour of a king's court indeed! The majesty, the unanimity, the
similarity, the regularity, and the harmony of this court! with the refulgent
rays of glory, shining in the king's person, and reflecting luster upon every
face! did excel all the glorious appearances that ever my eyes beheld; nor had
I ever heard, or read, of the like, or ever conceived in my heart, any thing
equal to what I now saw! -- For, though the glory proceeded from the king alone,
yet it had such an extensive influence, that it poured an incomparable
brilliancy upon all around him; every object took the reflection, and every
face shone with peculiar beauty; and, among the rest, I found myself
illucidated within and without: my vital parts were in a flame, illuminating my
whole body; and my garments glittered like beams of light; my heart was
abundantly enlarged, and the faculties of my soul strengthened, more than ever
I had found them before; and I was inspired with such vivacity and agility,
that I became as sprightly as a roe, or a young heart. -- Here my soul regaled
itself in unspeakable pleasure, bathed in fountains of inexpressible delight,
and floated in the midst of an ocean of inconceivable joy; for the king's
secretary anointed my eyes to make my sight clear and strong; and directed me
to behold such a variety of splendid objects, in such harmonious contexture,
and exquisite order; all shining in the radiancy of the supreme origin of
glory; until my soul was so expanded, that I scarcely knew whether I was on
earth, or in heaven.

But when my soul was largely satiated with these extatic delights, and my mind
returned to a settled composure, I still found incessant desires to hear the
king's solution to the governor's propositions.

Then the king's herald sounded his trumpet so loud, that it echoed through all
the celestial orbs: the mountains trembled and melted away; the valleys arose,
and were exalted; springs dried up, and dry land flowed with waters; fruitful
ground withered, and barren deserts appeared in bloom; the sea dried up, and
the heavens opened; all the glory of man totally subsided; and there was
profound silence.

And he proclaimed the glory of the king's majesty, the rectitude of his
kingdom, his ample perfections, and his immense riches; whereby he is
sufficient to subdue every enemy, to complete every work he pleases to
undertake, to bless all his subjects with every enjoyment which their hearts
can desire, and to maintain their happy state for ever.

Then he distinctly answered to all the particulars, which were contained in
the governor's question. He fully demonstrated the qualifications of his
majesty to be far superior to all the formidable appearances of the hideous
monster; sufficient to destroy his reign, and extirpate his being; and also to
make ample reparation of all the damage done by him; so as that the governor
should neither suffer loss or dishonor, nor his subjects suffer distress or
disgrace, no more than if the monster had never been born.

But in the opening of these things, there was such a display of wisdom, love,
and power; such excellency, glory, and majesty; that it frequently exhilarated
my soul into rapturous agitation; but the secretary stayed my passions, and
would not suffer me to give way to too much extacy, because the importance, and
sublimity of the subject, required the most fixed attention. So I was favored
with a full, distinct, and accurate manifestation, of that which had filled my
mind with so much anxiety; and which I had so long, and so earnestly desired to
see. But the comfort, satisfaction, enlargedness, establishment, solid peace,
and serenity of mind, which I enjoyed, in seeing and hearing the explication of
those deep mysteries, did excel all that ever I had experienced before, or
what I shall ever be able to describe.

Now when the herald had spoken every particular paragraph, relating to the
excellencies, or wonderful performances of the king; his secretary attested the
truth thereof; inscribed it upon living tables, and sealed it with the king's
immutable signet. And when he had made an end, his majesty stood up, and made
proclamation, that if any person in heaven, or in earth, or under the earth,
would contend with him, undertake to accuse him in any thing, or found any
thing to object against his proceedings in any punctilio; let him draw near. --
But no answer was made. Then the trumpet sounded, and all the harps answered in
chorus; and the harmonious noise resounded through all the heavenly domes;
triumphal acclamations ran through all the court; and all the kingdom was filled
with shouts of joy; which made the earth and the heavens ring: the royal
standard was erected; and all the ensigns of majesty, victory, peace, and
glory, were displayed; the mountains and forests broke forth into singing, the
lower parts of the earth shouted; and the morning stars sang together; the
light of the moon became as the light of the sun; and the light of the sun was
sevenfold, as the light of seven days; and rays of stupendous glory shined
through the whole creation. -- Now my soul was absorbed with wonder; lost in
admiration; I was obliged to give way to the overcoming rapture, and indulge my
exstatick passions; for I could not refrain from songs of gladness, shouts of
joy, and all the demonstrations of delight, that my soul was able to express.
And still, whenever I recollect the magnificence of this triumph, I cannot
refrain being transported with pleasure, and crying out with unspeakable joy;
HOW GLORIOUS LOOKED THE KING OF ISRAEL THAT DAY!

Then the king called me unto him, and told me, he accepted me as his son; that
he had prepared all things necessary to give me a princely education; and as
soon as I had attained to the due qualifications, he would take me to his royal
palace; where I should abide in his presence for ever; and enjoy all the
delights that my heart could desire. And in the mean time, I should have free
access to him, in every thing that might be needful to call upon him for. --
The king's secretary told me, he would always continue present with me, to
assist, instruct, and comfort me; to introduce me into the king's presence, and
communicate to me his bounties; and to improve me in every thing that might be
conducive to my felicity. -- The king's herald assured me, he would be ready at
all seasons, to inform me in all matters that could be necessary for my
instruction relating to the king, his excellencies, his riches, his government,
the orders of his house, my relation to him, and interest in him. -- Also the
governor told me, he should no more exercise jurisdiction over me; but, as it
would be for my benefit to receive his instructions, he would always attend me
in quality of a counselor; and I should always find an equal pleasure and
profit in all his admonitions. -- Also the governor's secretary told me, he
should no more act toward me in the same character as he did before; since I
now belonged to another prince; but seeing I still might be liable to many
inconveniences, through my own instability, or want of presence of mind; to
prevent which, his assistance might be very useful; he should continue my
constant companion, under the king's direction, in the capacity of a monitor.
-- Then all the king's guards, and nobles of the court, saluted me in the
quality of a prince. And the herald further informed me, that I was to remain
at his majesty's country-seat, (with others of the king's children) where I
should enjoy all accommodations fit for a prince; and might expect frequent
visits from his majesty; having princes for my companions, and the royal guards
for my attendants; till the king should come, and carry me in triumph, and
state, to his royal city.

Then the king wrote me a discharge from all offenses, past, present, and to
come; with an acquittance from all servitude, or allegiance, to any lord, or
governor, but himself: he also bestowed on me an instrument of adoption;
whereby he acknowledged, and declared me to be his own son, and to have a right
to all the enjoyments in his kingdom. And also promised me every necessary
accommodation, during my stay at his lower house; and that he would be
expeditious in returning to fetch me to himself, in his serene palace. -- These
things he signed, sealed, and delivered to me, in the presence of three
faithful witnesses; assuring me they were enrolled in the council chamger, by
three infallible recorders.

And when his majesty had regularly stationed me in his inferior palace, and
given proper directions for my education, and noble accomplishment; he mounted
his triumphal chariot, and hasted with all his train, to the imperial city;
where he was received with all the demonstrations of joy, and triumph; and
where he reigns supreme King of kings, and Lord of lords; to whom every
creature yields subjection, every knee bows, and every tongue ascribes praise
and glory.

I find this country-palace is the king's academy; where the royal sciences are
taught; which are not to be learned in any school in the universe beside; nor
can be taught by any but the king's instructors; who are his herald, and his
secretary. For notwithstanding the governor and his secretary remain with us,
and are of special use among us, in their own province (being well skilled in
other sciences) they are entire strangers to the sciences peculiar to the
palace. Nor can any man learn, or is it possible for them to be taught these
things, so long as they dwell in any part of universe, save in the king's own
country. All other climates are incompatible with these sciences; the air they
breathe in, and the food they live upon, render them incapable of receiving the
instructions; yea, the very nature, and complexion of the inhabitants of all
other realms, are foreign, and indocible to any of these things.

The sciences taught in this school, and learned by all the royal princes, are
chiefly four, viz.

1. The nature, extensiveness, and perfection of his majesty's answers, to the
governor's problems; for though we had heard them published, we were far from
apprehending them in their fullest extent; they being of so sublime a nature,
as require the closest application, and deepest penetration, to conceive of
them in a distinct light. These are much deeper studies than the tables of the
governor (notwithstanding the intricacy, and amazing depths thereof;) for the
perfections, and performances of the king, do far outvie all descriptions of
the monster, and the mischief done by him; and do abound beyond all that ever
was required, or mentioned by the governor: and notwithstanding we have
opportunity to peruse all the herald's curious descriptions, drawn in the most
lively figures, and apt representations, as well as hearing his excellent
lectures, upon the great qualities, undertakings, performances, and victories,
of his majesty; they so far transcend any thing that ever was presented to our
eyes, or ears, or that ever our minds were exercised in before; that our
capacities could never conceive of the dephs thereof, were it not that the
king's secretary opens, interprets, and guides our understandings into these
mysteries. He not only leads to the true chain, directing us to compare one
thing with another, so as to see the consistency, and perfection of the whole
system; but also anoints our eyes and ears, with an unction peculiar to his
excellency; and refreshes us with vivifying cordials, to keep our minds, and
senses alert. Thus the study becomes delightful; both as it is most excellent
in its own nature, and as ourselves are so much interested therein: and we make
a comfortable proficiency; notwithstanding the knowledge is unattainable by any
creature that is not instructed the same way.

2. To understand the foundation, constitution, economy, and privileges of the
kingdom; the relation between the king and his subjects; the royal grant
whereby they hold their title to all the rich blessings of the kingdom; with
the glory and dignity wherein they stand, etc. This is study more sublime than
the former. But as it bears some relation to it, it becomes more easy, when the
other is well understood; especially as they both depend upon the perfections
of the king. And we have the same instructors, and the same advantages in this,
as in the former branch; but the stupendous depths, and glories, that do herein
appear, are sufficient to astonish the most enlarged and most established mind;
nor is it possible for any one to form just conceptions thereof, without such
preparations as we are favored with, through the bounty of the secretary, our
grand tutor.

3. To learn the court-language. As this is the most elegant of all languages,
so the study of it is most excellent and curious. It is a language which no
person was ever able to learn, who lived under the governor's jurisdiction, or
in any other realm, but in the king's proper dominions only; consequently, this
language never could be carried into any foreign country. It has no affinity
with any other language in the universe; nor is it (like all other languages)
subject to any mutations; but continues one pure language through all ages. The
grounds of it are amply laid down by the king's herald, with all necessary
instructions therein; but the pronunciation can never be attained but by the
most refined and immediate crudition received from the king's secretary, in
which he is always ready to assist us.

4. To learn the behavior of the court. This science (like the rest) is what
none can learn in any other school. The herald lays down proper directions for
this branch of learning; but the secretary alone can inspire us with the
princely mein, to adorn our behavior with a becoming grace. -- Some persons
confound the demeanor of the king's court, with that of the governor's court;
but it is a gross mistake: for, though all the excellency of the governor's
court is common to the king's court, there is a peculiarity attending the
palace, both in language and mein, which none of the proper subjects of the
governor were ever able to learn: for, when his court was in its utmost
splendour, these peculiar excellencies were utterly unknown in his dominion;
and, since the glory of his court was ruined, by the inroads of the monster, he
has not a loyal subject in the universe, properly belonging to himself. For
those that are in league with the monster, are rebellious subjects, whatever
pretenses they make of loyalty: and those that have been brought back to give
due honor to his excellency the governor, (as it was not his, but the king's
power and goodness, whereby they were reclaimed) they are not properly his, but
the king's subjects. And though many of those pretendedly loyal, but really
rebellious subjects of the governor (confounding the two courts, one with the
other, through there being real strangers to both) have imagined, they had
attained to the accomplishments of the palace; and could mimick the king's
subjects, so far as to impose upon the ignorant; yet, in reality, they were as
far from attaining to the truth thereof, as parrots, monkeys, etc. are from
attaining to the proper actions of men. -- But the king's sons (and they only)
being endowed with privileges peculiar to themselves, are capable of learning
the royal sciences, which are peculiar to their dignity. For, the air they
breathe in; the waters they drink, and bathe in; the food they live upon; the
clothing they wear; the clear and large prospects they view; the ground they
walk upon; with the society they converse with, etc. are so many preparatives
to qualify them for receiving those sublime instructions. And thus they become
proficients to those profound sciences, which remain impenetrable secrets to
the most learned, wise, and ingenious of all other nations.

But we differ much from some celebrated bands, who have been much gazed at by
the world, and much valued by themselves, on account of their keeping some
branches of knowledge secret from the vulgar; for we never use art to conceal
our learning and knowledge, nor amuse persons by evasions; but, in a sincere
open manner, are ready to give an answer to any one that asks us a reason, of
any thing that we profess; yea, we are glad to inform any person as far as we
can; and rejoice to find any desirous or capable of receiving instruction.
Therefore, it is not want to public spirit, in them that are initiated into
these mysteries, that they are kept secret from all other people; (for all the
grounds, and rules, belonging to each of these sciences, are made public, to be
seen by all) but it is owing to the rudeness of their capacities, the grossness
of their taste, and indocibleness of their natures, that things so refined are
too sublime for their conceptions. And all the nations upon earth are strangers
to the king's secretary; (who alone can inspire persons with an apt genius for
learning the royal sciences) except those in his majesty's own realm. Some are
insensible, and unconcerned; some despise and contemn him; and others give him
nominal honors, but esteem him as a being merely ideal. And while it is thus
with them, they must remain strangers to the excellencies of the kingdom; for
the knowledge thereof, is, to them, impossible.

In this college we remain students, and become true mathematicians; our
studies being all upon substantial things, and all our solutions grounded upon
facts. We practice no chimera nor exercise ourselves in empty flights of fancy,
only those things which are useful and durable, and admit of just
demonstration, are objects of our re-searches. Our pursuits are not follies of
speculation, but true wisdom and reality; so that however useful other
sciences, and the instructions given in other schools, may be, in their proper
place; there is not any learning in the world that is worthy to be esteemed any
more than chaff or dung, when compared with the profound wisdom, taught by the
great master of our assembly -- And we pursue the study of these things with
great delight, not only as they yield us much pleasure and profit, in our
present situation; but as they inspire our hearts with future hopes of solid
and everlasting felicity. For we are assured, that when we are arrived to such
a degree of learning, and accomplished with those qualifications, which the
king designs for us, he will come in the glory of his majesty, and carry us
home in triumph, and make us fellows of the royal society, at his imperial
court, where we shall be blessed with the knowledge of such mysteries, as never
yet entered into the heart of man.

Glory to the KING of KINGS.
THE ANSWER TO THE Mathematical Question.
The ALLEGORY Explained.
THE universal monarch, The most high God.

The spacious country, Human nature, in its paradisaical perfection.

The prince and princess, Our first parents.

The governor, The holy law of God.

The foreigner, The devil.

The destructive monster, Sin.

The young man to whom the question was propounded, A soul in its sins.

His levity, when the question was proposed, The depravity of the mind.

The inflexible severity of the governor, The majesty, authority, and
immutableness of God's law.

Murmurings and resentments against the governor, The sinner's enmity against
God.

Terrors which seized the parson, Legal convictions.

The appearance of submission, and attention to the governor's directions,
Hypocrisy.

The governor's knowledge of the former parts of the question, and ignorance of
the latter, The perfection of the law, relating to the evil and demerit of sin;
but its utter insufficiency, relating to salvation.

The person disputing the governor's authority, The sinner's ignorance,
diffidence, and contempt of God's law.

The governor's secretary, Natural conscience.

The burden which he returned upon the person, Guilt.

The executioner, The curse of the law.

Chains in which they bound him, Fixed apprehensions of wrath, and condemnation.

The prison, A helpless hopeless state, of misery and desparation; which is the
case of every soul, whose eyes are open to see sin, and remain ignorant of the
Savior.

The expected return of the governor, The day of judgment.

Relief sought from the monster, The dominion, and infection of sin, in the
heart of every unregenerate person.

The apothecary, etc. An artful delusion, forming excuses for sin.

The pick-lock, etc. Damnable heresies, subtly contrived, to elude the
sentence of the law, by corrupting the word of God.

The anvil, etc. A hard heart; and companions having a form of godliness,
without the power; insensibly drawing into secret sins, and proceedings to
those more open, as the heart grows more obdurate.

The monster's open attempt, The infatuation, which a soul under distress, but
destitute of the love of God, may fall into, to abandon himself to sin, in
order to forget his misery.

The sophistical ambassador, A hypocritical deception; or a form of godliness,
beguiling the mind into an insensibility.

King Shiloh, The Messiah, the promised seed, the Son of God.

The king's herald, The gospel of the grace of God.

The sounding trumpet, The free proclamation of life and peace.

The banner displayed, A representation of the all sufficiency of the divine
incarnate Mediator.

The wind that went along with the voice, and made way into the prison, The
power of the spirit of God, attending the gospel.

The prospective telescope, A manifestation of the excellencies, beauties,
glories, and perfections of Emmanuel, opened unto us in the gospel.

The tender compassion, and rich bounty of the king. The sovereign, free,
boundless grace, that is in Christ Jesus.

Amity between the king and the governor, Perfect harmony between the law of
God, and the grace that is in Christ.

The young man's strong attraction to the king, The genuine effect of the love
of Jesus, to a lost sinner.

His love to the governor, The law written in the heart, through the influence of
divine grace.

His composure, and success in searching the records of the governor, The
power, wisdom, and enlargement, which a soul receives through a spiritual
manifestation of Christ.

His doubts and fears, during his waiting for the king, The darkness,
faintings, and legal apprehensions, which frequently attend young believers,
until they be led into the clear distinguishing light of the gospel; and
blessed with established assurance by the Holy Ghost.

His earnest longing, and diligent waiting for his majesty's approach, The
spirit of grace and supplication given to the believer.

The king's coming, A full manifestation of Christ, with such power as to
extirpate all legal bondage, doubts and fears, by an undeniable display of
sovereign grace.

The king's secretary, The Holy Ghost.

The king's girdle, The power, righteousness, and faithfulness of Christ; from
whence his people receive support and consolation.

The key in his hand, The mediation, redeeming blood, and perfect righteousness
of Christ; whereby every demand of the law is answered, every indictment
cancelled, and every sin blotted out, for every believer.

The plain to which the soul was led after his deliverance, The opening of
light and truth; or a representation of the great mystery of godliness.

The remaining part, being a representation of the perfection of God's law, the
aboundings of grace in Christ, and the benefits of the children of God, it will
naturally open to the intelligent reader, who has but a tolerable acquaintance
with the scriptures; especially when compared with the following solutions.

But as the main thing in view is an answer to the proposed question, it is
necessary to be a little more particular concerning the production of the
monster.

This monster, being the natural offspring of the devil, can be no other than
that evil genius which is in the fallen race; or that fatal degeneracy into
which mankind is sunk; or that enmity against God's holy law, which is in every
unregenerate soul.

And the nature of the infection, or the thing brought forth, must be according
to the seed of which it is engendered; which appears in these three things:

First, The seed injected.
1. Atheism, in denying the truth of God; Ye shall not surely die. 2.
Ingratitude, charging God with unkindness, or taxing him with prohibiting some
good thing; For God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened. 3. Pride; Ye shall be as gods. 4. Vain wandering; Knowing good
and evil.
Secondly. The conception formed.
1. Depravity, taking evil for good; And when the woman saw that the tree was
good for food. 2. Corruption, taking pleasure in the evil; And that it was
pleasant to the eyes. 3. Alienating from God, in placing the desire contrary to
his will; And a tree to be desired to make one wise.
Thirdly, The production brought forth.
1. Revolt, departing from God, to sensual gratification; She took of the fruit
thereof. 2. Transgression, violating God's law; And did eat. 3. Rebellion,
hardening against God; She gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat.
By these, as so many letters, we may spell out the monster's name; and it will
stand thus:

Specifick-name,

Atheism, Ingratitude, Pride, Vanity. -- Evil.

Surname,

Depravity, Corruption, Alienation. -- Lust.

Proper-name,

Revolt, Transgression, Rebellion. -- Sin.

This is that abominable name, whose accursed nature estranged our first
parents from God, and poluted all their internal faculties; as appears by their
hiding themselves from the face of their Creator, and the prevaricating excuses
they made for their crime. And the contagion has so diffused itself through
all their posterity, that the same seed has been received, the same
conceptions formed, and the same productions brought forth, in every individual
of the human species, ever since; and has been the bane of mankind, the cause
of all the mischief that ever was in the world; having utterly ruined all the
virtues, all the beauties, all the enjoyments, and all the comforts of all the
sons and daughters of Adam, internal, and external, for time and for eternity.

This is that horrible unnatural production, whereby souls, bodies, cities,
armies, nations, yea, the whole world, have been filled with all kinds of
misery and destruction.

Yet, so far as means, or moral suasion were praticable, God has not been
wanting in instructions, warnings, counsel, admonitions, mercies, threatenings,
etc. if by any means the evil might have been prevented, or the malady healed;
but all has proved ineffectual.

Therefore, the intrinsic evil of sin, and its dreadful effects, the
perfection that is in Christ, and his great salvation, are the subjects of all
our enquiries.

The first part of the question answered; or a description of sin.
1. Where is the dewlling place of sin?

Answer. Nothing can operate where it is not, or has no existence; consequently
sin can have no influence where it has no residence; therefore, wherever its
effects appear, there is its dewlling place. -- In heaven it has no place at
all. -- In hell it has an an unbounded habitation. -- In earth sin virtually
dwells in all inanimate and irrational beings; for every thing pernicious in
the creation, is the effect of the curse, which is universal, (excepting so
far, and so long, as God in mercy is pleased to restrain its effects;
preserving the natural virtues of the creatures for the use of man) and shall
issue in the final destruction of the whole. -- In mankind it dwells
essentially with unlimited extension, (excepting so far as God's universal
goodness is pleased to restrain it, to preserve the world from utter confusion)
and its strong hold, and fixed residence, is in the heart; from whence it
diffuseth itself through every faculty of soul and body; the hands, the feet,
the mouth, the eyes, etc. the understanding, the will, the affections, the
conscience, etc. yea, every thought, word, and action, are tainted with sin;
whereby total ruin is become inevitable to the whole man.

2. What form does sin bear?

A. Wheresoever sin prevails, it communicates its own likeness; therefore,
whatever image is impressed upon any creature thereby, that is its resemblance.
-- By sin, angels became devils; therefore, whatever is horrible in the devil
(his nature, his works, or his condition) is the manifestation, or real
appearance of sin, in that abandoned creature; for the devil is the most
finished image of sin. -- The curse introduced by sin, caused all the antipathy
that appears in the irrational part of the creation; therefore, whatever is
frightful in beasts, detestable in reptiles, irksome in vegetables, or
inclement in any of the elements, is the similitude of sin. -- Sin produced all
the evil that is in mankind: therefore, all internal wickedness, whether
spiritual; as atheism, hypocrisy, murmuring, hatred against God, etc. or
natural; as pride, envy, malice, deceit, etc. and all external wickedness,
whether verbal; as profaning the name of God, blasphemy, cursing, threatening,
defaming, lying, filthy communication, etc. or actual; as murder, adultery,
theft, drunkenness, and all abominations, are the image of sin. -- Likewise,
sin is its own punishment; or all punishment is its natural production:
therefore, all internal grief, distraction, and horror of mind; all external
pain, sickness, sorrow, anguish, and misery; all the ghastly appearances of
death, and all the dark horrors of hell and damnation, do bear the very image
and true representation of sin.

3. What number of limbs, and members, pertain to sin?

A. They are called a multitude. -- But to form a judgment of their number, we
must consider their modifications and operations. The former appears in the
numbers of sinful actions; which actions are multiplied by the number of sinful
words attending every action; which words are again multiplied by the number of
sinful thoughts from whence those words proceed; which thoughts are also
multiplied by the number of sinful principles, from whence they are produced.
For instance, Jeroboam's wicked thought sprang from a number of sinful
principles; as, contempt of the pure worship of God, despising his commandment,
distrusting his faithfulness, ingratitude to his great benefactor,
covetousness, pride, slavish fear, etc. And, as it was supported by so many
roots, it diffused itself into as great a number of sinful branches. Thus sin
is multiplied into itself. -- The latter appears in the opposition which sin
makes against God. For sin causes a disregard of all the rich discoveries which
God gives of himself; an abuse of the multitude of his mercies; a breach of all
his commandments; a despising of all his counsels; a misimprovement of all
gracious opportunities; and a corruption of all the powers of nature, etc.
Thus, the numbers of sins are increased, by the multiplication of all these,
one into another. For every command of God which we break, is attended with so
many aggravations, as we had been favored with discoveries of the will of God,
to inform us; mercies to engage us; counsels to guide us; powers and
opportunities to prevent the evil; etc. And all these are enrolled in the
books, which shall be opened at the last day

4. What is the measure of sin?

A. It is said of sin, that is reaches to heaven. -- But to find the true
dimension of its stature, we must enquire how high it has prevailed: for no
effect can be greater than its cause; and all defection, misery, and
destruction, are the effects of sin; therefore, wheresoever any of these
effects have prevailed, so high sin has ascended. -- In the creation it has
prevailed, over the ground, in bringing a curse; over the mountains, in
bringing a deluge; over the vegetables, in destroying their beauty and virtue;
over the animals, in causing them pain and sorrow; over the clouds, in causing
restraint; over the sun, moon, heavens, and stars, in bringing darkness upon
them; over angels, in casting them down to hell; over all the excellencies of
human nature, in bringing corruption, misery, and death; yea (so far as he is a
creature) over the son of God himself, in subjecting him to death. -- Also the
height of sin appears in its attempts and designs. For, whether they be carried
into execution, or not, the malignity, the guilt, and just desert of sin, are
equal to the design; and the heinousness is aggravated, according to the
excellency of the being, against whom the design is formed -- Against the
eternal perfections of God; against his omniscience; against his omnipotence;
against his holiness; against his righteousness; against his goodness; against
his faithfulness, etc. -- Likewise the extent of sin appears in the depth of
the misery which ensues; for so low as any creature is cast down thereby, so
deep does sin extend: -- to the lowest hell, beneath all the rays of light;
beneath all comfort; beneath all mercy; beneath all hope, etc.

As to the breadth of sin; it is as the thick cloud. -- But the extent is best
understood, by the distance it separates one being from another, wheresoever it
comes between. It separates creatures from God; it has fixed such ignorance,
alienation, and enmity in all mankind, that they can neither know, desire, nor
seek after God: it has filled the consciences of men with guilt, so that they
cannot enjoy peace with God, nor have courage to approach his presence; but
find themselves held in exile, by an unpassable gulf. -- It separates man from
his original purity: he was made upright, in the image of God, but by sin is
become altogether vanity; made very good, but by sin degenerated, to be only
evil. The heart is become as adamant; and the whole constitution of nature is
corrupted. Thus, so far as the east is from the west, sin has separate man
from God; and, so far as the south is from the north, sin has separated man
from his original purity. -- Sin is not infinite in his existence, for it
resides in finite beings; nor in its prevalency, for God restrains it. But as
it is against the infinite perfections of God, as it tends to an infinite
separation from God, and so to the creature's infinite loss and misery; it
contains infinite hatefulness, and deserves infinite punishment.

5. What is the weight of sin?

A. This appears in its insupportableness. -- The earth is not able to bear it;
the pillars of heaven tremble, and cannot sustain it; the angels that sinned,
are eternally sunk under it; the corporeal constitution of man cannot sustain,
but is consumed and crushed to dust by it; the soul of man is not able to
support itself under sin, but is utterly overwhelmed; the human nature of
Christ was not able to sustain the load of sin, but alone through the power of
the Godhead.

Again, it appears in its unmoveableness. -- The law being the strength of sin,
it is easier to remove heaven and earth: all the improvements that can possibly
be made of earthly riches are of no avail; no legal sacrifices can take away
sin; all moral obedience cannot justify a soul from it; no prayers, or
religious performances, can procure remission of it; the greatest abundance of
oblations, or event the fruit of a man's body, cannot atone for the sin of his
soul: therefore, it is heavier than the whole creation, since all the creation
shall be crushed to pieces by it. Jesus Christ sustains the whole creation by
his word; but could not remove sin, without pouring out his soul unto death.

6. What is, and wherein lies, the strength of sin?

A. This may be understood by its number, weight and measure: for, as the man
is, so is his strength. -- But, in particular, its power appears in its
operations. -- Every creature that enters the paths of sin, is made captive
thereby, and held in perpetual bondage. Nor was it ever known that any created
being (when once ensnared) was able (in the least degree) to extricate himself
out of the chains of sin. They may shift hands, and by changing the forms of
sin, may impose upon themselves, to fancy they obtain liberty; but they that
think themselves most at liberty, are frequently most in bondage. Likewise, sin
has power to fill the soul with distress and anguish; to kill and destroy all
its hope and comfort; to bring natural death upon all mankind universally; and
to torment both soul and body in hell, to all eternity.

And the strength of sin centers in carnality of mind; whereby all the powers
are held in bondage: in guilt and horror of conscience, whereby the soul is
filled with anguish and distress; and in alienation from God, whereby all
blessings are abdicated, life, and all enjoyments forfeited, and death and
misery become inevitable. -- Also the damnatory power of sin, is the law. And
the power of damnation, or misery of the damned, lies in a restless desire
after self-sufficiency, or seeking satisfaction in something that is not God;
which is that gnawing worm that never dies. -- In enmity against God; which is
an unquenchable fire in the soul. And in rebellion against God; which provokes
the burning wrath of God; and brings it down upon the soul, unquenchable and
eternal. Therefore, sin is invincible in its power, to every created being.

7. What is the loudness of the voice of sin?

A. This is to be conceived of, by the distance at which it may be heard; which
is from earth to heaven. And it has been found by many, that neither distance
of place, or time, nor change of company, or circumstances, could silence or
allay the dreadful sound, which sin causes in the ears. -- Also by the
piercing shocks it gives where the sound comes; causing every ear to tingle;
and every heart to tremble. -- It was sin that caused all the camp of Israel to
tremble at mount Sinai. The law could not have caused terror, had it not been
joined by the echo of sin in their consciences. For there is nothing terrible
to any creature, but where there is antipathy; and there is no antipathy
between the law of God, and the creatures of God, only so far as sin has
prevailed in them. No terror attended the giving of the law, when man was in
sinless state. And every voice that proceeds from God, or manifestation of God,
that raises terror in men's hearts, it is sin alone that is that cause. -- It
is impossible there should be fear, sorrow, or shame, where there is no guilt;
or guilt where there is no sin. Though guilt in the conscience, frequently
brings fear, etc. concerning things which have no real existence, -- And the
strength of the voice of sin may be judged of, from the obstacles it pierces
through: through the shade of the trees of Eden: through the courage of armies;
through the grandeur of monarchs; through the religion of the strictest
Pharisees, etc. -- Thus, the voice of sin appears to be so loud as to alarm and
shake the whole creation.

8. How poisonous is the nature of sin?

A. This is manifest in four things: -- The spreading contagion. The woman
caught it from the serpent, and the man from the woman, by conversation; and it
descended to all posterity, by generation. And where sin prevails, in any
particular form, it will communicate itself in the same form, if there be a
conversation, or so much as an inspection. -- The depth of the infection. It
has penetrated through all the powers of nature, the head, heart, mind,
conscience, etc. yea, it has overspread all the faculties of the soul, and all
the members of the body; so that no part is free from the most mortal disease.
-- That rankling inflammation. It continually burns with restless torture,
raging, and distraction. -- The irrevokeableness of the plague thereof. No
antidote in nature can eradicate, no medicine in the creation of God can remove
it; the hurt is utterly incurable; so that all the balm in Gilead (that is, all
the excellency in man) is not sufficient to yield the least relief.

9. How deep are the deceits and subtilties of sin?

A. This is to be learned by the persons which are beguiled thereby, which, in
general, are the whole world; and in particular the innocent, the wise, and the
religious. -- The means whereby sin deceives souls: imaginary pleasure, which
infatuates the mind; imaginary hopes, which encourage them to persist; pride of
heart, which makes despise submission to the most high; and vainglory, which
fills them with imaginations of self-sufficiency. -- The things wherein they
are deceived; the most excellent things appear in a base light: they imagine
God to be like themselves; Christ a vile person; the Holy Ghost a demon; the
law of God unjust; the gospel a delusion; the worship of God contemptible; and
his people a reproach, etc. And the basest things appear in a commendable
light; evil like good; darkness like light; sinners like saints; and devils
like angels of light, etc. -- The effects of the these deceptions: hardening
men's hearts; stupifying their minds; s;ettling them in a form of godliness,
without the power; deluding them with imaginary peace, and safety, till eternal
destruction come upon them. -- Besides, the deceit that dwells in the servants
of sin. Their heart is replete with hypocrisy; their practices are with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness; and their subtle devices, artful inventions,
and delusive schemes, are contrived with design (if it were possible) to
deceive the very elect. -- Therefore, sin is mystery of iniquity, too deep for
any to fathom, but he alone who searches the hearts, and tries the reins.

10. With what weapons, and in what manner, does sin fight?

A. The weapons of sin, are, first, Offensive; whereby iniquity prevails, souls
are overcome, and satan's kingdom is enlarged: which, when he attacks in front,
to carry souls headlong from God, to destroy all virtue and morality, are the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. But when he
charges in flank, or fights in ambuscade, to break the lines of reason, or
surprise the guards of conscience; then his weapons are a corrupt mind,
selfwill, and unbelief. -- Secondly, Defensive weapons; whereby sinners are
held in bondage, and defended against repentance or conviction: which are,
hardness of heart, blindness of mind, stupefaction, pride, carnal-reasoning,
self-righteousness, hypocrisy, enmity against God, etc. By these, sin maintains
his residence in the soul; they being the armor wherein he trusts. But when
the soul is so closely besieged with light and conviction, that any of these
ramparts give way, then sin prepares a murdering-piece [despair] by which he
rends all to pieces. For the mind being distracted with despair, is frequently
thrown into a stagnation; which terminates in a kind of lethargy, and so all
remorse ceases. Or else the person gets the storm allayed by a form of
religion, and settles there; and purposely avoids any further searches into his
state, lest it should cast him into despair again. -- And as to his way of
fighting, sin has two engines, with which he manages all his weapons, in every
engagement, [deceit and violence] and by these, the soul is drawn away, and
entangled in the snare; or driven, with rapid force, into excess and misery; so
that the wisest man cannot escape, nor is the strongest able to withstand.

11. What are the victories and dominions of sin?

A. Respecting his victories; sin has triumphed over all the fallen angels;
over every individual of the human race; over every power, passion, and member
of of soul and body; and has reduced all mankind to the utmost degree of
slavery, so as to be taken captive by satan at his will, brought into
subjection to every particular sinful thought, word and action, whenever it
becomes suitable to their taste and constitution. Having divested them of every
thing that is substantially good; and brought them into the most extreme
poverty and wrethchedness, and deprived them of all solid consolation; and
reduced them to the utmost depth of anguish and misery; having introduced death
unavoidable, upon every creature in this world, and damnation in the world to
come. -- And according to his victories, so are his dominions. The whole world,
and every creature therein, with every member and faculty of those creatures,
are held in total subjection to his tyranny; and in them he reigns with
despotick power, proclaiming himself, The invincible universal monarch.

12. What is the age and duration of sin?

A. Sin has had an existence from the beginning; ever since creatures chose
their own ways: for it entered into the world by the first man. -- Sin must
have a duration of absolute necessity, wheresoever it has once had a being;
until the Son of God shall be pleased to take to him his great power, and
reign, to the destruction of his enemies. For sin is not a creature: if it was,
it must be dependent on God to sustain it in being; or otherwise it must
naturally and unavoidably cease to be. But it is the privation, or ruin, of the
creature's excellency; and, therefore, cannot possibly come to a period, any
other way, than by the restoration of the creature to its primitive rectitude.
Therefore, wheresoever Christ does not assert his authority, to rescue the
captive soul, and destroy sin, it will survive the earth the heavens, and
retain its full strength to all eternity. For sin, is a fire, which none but
Jesus can quench; and the soul is fuel, on which it will feed, as long as the
creature has any existence. -- The provocation can never be forgotten; the
infection can never cease; the worm of guilt can never die; nor the fire of
enmity be quenched. -- The wrath of God is unquenchable, and eternal; the gulf
of misery is impassable; and the torments due to sin, can have no end.

The second part if the question answered; or a description of the damage done
by sin.
In order to a discovery of the damage done, it is necessary to understand, who
are the sufferers, and wherein they have suffered by sin. The sufferers are,
the holy law of God, and the creature, man. And the things wherein they have
suffered, will appear by comparing their original station, with their present
position.

Concerning the law of God, it is undeniably manifest, that the whole world is
under it; and every son and daughter of Adam, is indispensably bound to live in
subjection, and perpetual conformity to it. And that the law is absolutely
inviolable, appears from a two fold consideration.

First, The natural and necessary obligation, which all creatures are under to
God, as their creator, sustainer, and benefactor. This is founded in the nature
and fitness of things. For as we have received our being, and every degree of
well-being, from him alone; we are under a natural, and indispensible
obligation, in point of gratitude, to live to his glory, and to devote all the
powers of soul and body, to the will of him, in whom we live, move, and exist.
All just laws are originally founded upon natural obligations; and all
reasonable obedience to superiors, is no other than strict gratitude; which
becomes their proper due, in consequence of favor received from them. This is
the true ground of the moral law, and so long as God is God, and creatures
continue to be intelligent beings, the obligation can never cease; nor is it
possible for any circumstance to make it void. -- The angels of glory are
debtors to JEHOVAH, for all their excellencies; consequently they are bound in
duty to show forth his praise. The devil is a creature, and every creature of
God is good; therefore (notwithstanding the evil he has contracted) so long as
he has a being, he enjoys some good from God; and consequently continues under
an obligation, or law of gratitude. The devil sins from the beginning; but
if he were not under a law, he could not sin; for, Where there is no law, there
is no transgression. -- Likewise, among the sons of men, every creature is
under obligations to God, according to the favors he enjoys: the greater the
favors, the greater the obligations. So that saints in glory will eternally
remain under the highest obligations of gratitude; that is, under the law of
God, considered simply as a law, not as a covenant.

Secondly, The divine authority stamped upon the simple law of nature, gives
sanction to this obligation. And this authority consists in three things: -- 1.
Doctrine whereby God has revealed to mankind his will, concerning the way in
which they are to show their gratitude to him; having taught and instructed
them, how they might obey him in an acceptable manner. -- 2. The commandment
whereby God requires from the creature that obedience, submission, and
conformity to his will, which his goodness to that creature justly deserved;
which, therefore, that creature is under a native obligation to perform; and
God has a native right to demand. -- 3. A covenant, stipulating the conditions
of obedience, and disobedience, to the holy precept; with promises and
threatenings, blessings and curses, annexed thereto.

From these two fountains, the law of God receives sovereign power over all
creatures. For all that God enjoins, is purely natural; as, To love God and our
neighbor, is an obligation inseparable from our being, our relation to God,
and to our fellow creatures. And whatsoever is a concomitant of the natural
obligation, is included in the injunction, With all thy heart, -- soul, --
strength, -- mind, -- and as thyself. So that a natural obligation, founded on
our very being, and enforced by the divine sanction, must be superlatively,
universally, and eternally binding, to every intelligent being in the creation.
Therefore, the authoritative power of the holy law, extends to every creature,
in every capacity; whilst innocent, to command, to promise and to threaten; and
when sinful, to convince, to condemn, and to curse; but is not invested with
any influential power, either to prevent, or remove sin. Notwithstanding, the
law is not deficient in all suasive means, warnings, instructions, admonitions,
reproofs, threatenings, etc. But inasmuch as its power is only mandatory, not
physical; judicial not operative; all its measures to prevent the evil, to heal
the plague, or repair the damage, have proved abortive. Therefore, the law has
no other way to do itself justice, or vindicate its honor, but by the
destruction of the sinner; for it cannot possibly recover what it has lost by
sin. Which is,

1. All mankind have revolted from under the jurisdiction of the holy law, and
become the servants of sin; and hereby the law is spoiled in its dominion; its
authority is wrongfully taken away; its government wrested from it; and it is
deprived of its right and property in its subjects.

2. Perfect and perpetual obedience is due to God's law; but all the children
of Adam, are become children of disobedience: being the servants of sin, and
yielding obedience thereto, whereby the law of God is injuriously deprived of
all its just revenue.

3. The heart is the proper residence, or dewlling place, of God's law. But by
sin it has been violently ejected, and every apartment in its palace, possessed
by its implacable enemy: the will, the understanding, the affections, the
conscience, etc. inhabited with rebellion, darkness, enmity, and pollution; so
that the holy law is banished from its indubitable right, and from its native
habitation.

4. The holy law of God is worthy of the highest honor, profound reverence,
sacred regard, and humble obedience, from every rational being; but, through the
prevalence of sin, is esteemed a stranger, stubbornly rejected, violently
treated, and contemptuously despised; insomuch that all its honor and dignity
are taken away, and trampled in the dust.

Concerning mankind, it is certain, that his primitive state was perfection,
unblemished beauty, excellent dignity, and princely glory; which, compared with
the wretched depravity, in which his whole nature is now involved, discovers
the damage it has sustained by sin.

1. Man was made upright. As he came out of the hands of his Maker, very good,
he must be perfect in purity; but, by sin, he is become altogether filthy, only
evil continually, no part clean; nor can any clean thing be produced from him;
for all his original purity is perished.

2. Man was made in the image of God: therefore he was crowned with glory and
honor; being the most excellent piece of God's handiwork, beneath the stars;
but, by sin, he is degraded to a level with the beasts and worms; and all his
dignity is perished in the dust.

3. Man was placed in the imperial throne, having sovereign dominion over all
the works of God, in this world; but, by sin, this dominion is lost: the
creatures now yield obedience no farther than they are tamed by force, to fear
and dread; or soothed by art, to become gentle. And by turns they rebel, and
put mankind in the greatest fear. Yea man has lost the dominion over himself,
and is enslaved to a brutish appetite; and captivated under subjection to the
devil himself, who has usurped the throne, which man abdicated, and is become
the prince of this world.

4. Man was perfectly free from evil: but, by sin, he is subjected to all
manner of evil. His body is subject to every sickness, and every sore; to every
painful, and every loathsome disease. His soul is subject to every wicked
conception; and to every miserable distraction. So that all he is, all he does,
and all he enjoys, is perpetually attended with some plague, or annoyance.

5. Man was blessed with complete enjoyment of all good things which the earth
could produce, or whereby his nature might be made happy. But, by sin, all
things in the world are become subject to corruption. Every blessing beneath
the sun is altogether uncertain, and mixed with bitterness; so that in all
terrestrial excellencies, nothing remains but the shadow; the real substantial
enjoyment is vanished away.

6. Man was free from all guilt, fear, or shame, before God. But, by sin, all
his powers are filled with guilt, horror, and confusion. For a sinful man is
not able to endure the majesty of the Lord. They cannot bear the signs of
heaven, or meditate on the omniscience of God; nor think of his approach in
death, in judgment, but it fills their hearts with amazement.

7. Man in his primitive state, had frequent visits from God, and enjoyed
communion with his Maker. But, through sin, he was banished from God's presence,
and is become an alien and stranger to God; being far off, without hope, and
without God in the world.

For, by sin, the greatness of God, as creator, has been contemned; his power,
as sustainer, has been despised; his goodness, as benefactor, has been
ungratefully disregarded; his majesty, as governor, has been insulted; his
holiness, as lawgiver, has been profaned; his justice, as judge, has been
provoked; and his wrath, as executioner, incensed. So that man has entirely
cut himself off from all property in God. He has no right to any favor or
blessing whatsoever; nor has he any way to escape divine vengeance; nor is it
possible for a sinner to approach the holy God; or to form any just conceptions
of the eternal Jehovah, but as a consuming fire.

The third part of the question answered; or a description of Christ, and his
sufficiency.
The only glimpse of hope that remains for mankind, is in the revelation which
God has made of himself, in his sacred word; or in the gospel of his son Jesus
Christ. Wherein he has revealed himself under a different character from any
thing that could be discovered by the law, or with which the law could have any
concern; and wherein he is manifestly declared to stand in a different
capacity, and relation; that is, a FATHER. This is a peculiar name; expressing
the nearness of the relation, between God and his only begotten son, Jesus
Christ; and also the nearness of the relation betwixt him and his peculiar
people, as they stand adopted in Christ; as well as the riches of his love and
grace, freely flowing through his beloved Son, to all the heirs of God. This
appellation is never used in scripture, to express God's relation to mankind,
as the creator, or God of nature; nor does God ever give the appellation of
sons, or children, to any, but in consideration of their being the peculiar
objects of his love, in Christ Jesus; or at least, professors, associating with
his people, and externally separated from the world; to such (if hypocrites)
the term may be used ironically. In the same peculiar sense, his name GOD is
always to be understood, when used with terms of appropriation; as, thy God, my
God, etc. This is that inseparable relation, which no power in heaven, earth,
or hell, can break; nor can time, or eternity, wear it away; neither can sin,
or death, or guilt, or enmity, or darkness, or wrath, or misery, penetrate
between God and the objects of his love in Christ Jesus. This is the alone
foundation of hope to sinners; and the alone source of grace and mercy.

The love of God the Father, to his elect, did not cease, when the obedience of
the creature ceased; and therefore he undertook to provide deliverance for
sinners; he laid help upon one that is mighty; and promised, that he should not
fail, nor be discouraged; -- that he should make an end of sin; and should be
the salvation of God; in whom his people should be eternally saved.

This great deliverer proceeded forth, and came from God. He, therefore, is
God, equal with the Father, having in himself all the divine perfections: or
all the glorious attributes of deity.

He is infinite, eternal, immortal, immutable, self-existent, independent,
incomprehensible, invisible, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent,
all-sufficient, holy, just, good, etc.

This divine Word was made flesh. Conceived in the virgin's womb; made of a
woman; took on him the seed of Abraham; was made of the seed of David according
to the flesh; and is declared to be the son of God. -- Therefore, his name is
JEHOVAH THE MAN; Emmanuel, or God manifest in the flesh.

With God, he is the brightness of the Father's glory, and the express of his
person. And is called, THE HOLY ONE. -- Between God and man, he is the center
of amity; having, in his divine nature, all incommunicable perfections; and, in
his human nature, (through its consummate union with the divine) a perfect
fullness of all communicable grace. That is, he is replete with all the
excellencies, glories, and perfections, wherewith it is possible for any being
to abound; whereby God can be pleased, or man can be blessed; and is called the
MEDIATOR. -- To his people he is wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption; and is called THE SAVIOR. -- And when he is beheld in an extensive
light; in the relation in which he stands to God; in all his counsels,
purposes, promises, works, and manifestations of himself; and in the relation
in which he stands to his church; in all the blessings of nature, grace, and
glory: his name stands thus:

His specific name is -- LORD.

His surname is -- CHRIST.

His proper name is -- JESUS.

Or it may stand thus:

Essential name -- I AM.

Relative name -- ALL IN ALL.

Dispensatory name -- ALPHA AND OMEGA.

This is he, whom God, the Father, sanctified, and sent into the world, to save
his people from their sins; which leads to the particular enquiries, whether he
be sufficient to undertake and accomplished such a work.

1. Where is Christ's dewlling place?

A. He dwells in God the Father; in his essence; in his will; in his love; in
his counsels and purposes; in all his perfections; and all the perfections of
God dwell in him. Therefore, as Christ is God, he dwells in all created beings;
and all created beings dwell in him. Yea, he fills infinite space, and eternal
duration.

His presence is universally manifest, by his sustaining power, in every
creature, time, and place: in heaven; where sin is not, he appears in his
glory; in earth, where sin is permitted, so far as he pleases, and restrained
when he pleases, he appears in his goodness; in hell, where sin rages without
control, he appears in his terror. His presence is manifest in all inanimate
creatures, as they possess virtues; in all animals, as they are endued with
usefulness; in the devil, as he is possessed with intelligence and activity; in
the angels of God, in holiness, power, wisdom, and vivacity in obeying his
will; in wicked men, by intelligence in their souls, and power of action in
their bodies; in his saints, in quickening, transforming, and comforting grace;
and will dwell in them, by communications of his glory, to all eternity.

Now be it observed, That all that has an existence, is of God, the creator of
all things; to whom infinity of space, and eternity of duration, are absolutely
necessary. -- Creatures are the work of his hands. -- Sin is the corruption or
privation of the creature's purity. -- And it is impossible that Christ should
dwell in sin, or sin in him; but he dwells in every other being. -- He dwells
in God, where sin never did, or ever can exist; he inhabits eternal duration,
and fills infinite space; but sin cannot possibly subsist, either in duration
or space, only so far as it possesses some creature. And in those creatures,
where sin has no residence, there Christ dwells in his uprightness, and in
those creatures, where sin prevails, Christ must reside in his sustaining
power; otherwise the creature could not subsist, and consequently sin could
have no being. Therefore, he is sufficient to dispossess sin.

2. What form does Christ bear?

A. He is the express image, and form of God. -- Therefore, all the glories,
beauties, and excellencies, that ever were beheld by men or angels, shine in
him. For all that is precious, or desirable, must either be in God, or in some
part of the creation; but there never was any discovery of the glory of God,
but as it shined in the face of Jesus Christ; nor was there ever any beauty, or
excellency in any creature, but what was received from him. Therefore, Christ
is the perfection of beauty; the glorious mirror of all perfection, created
and uncreated; the glory-sun, in whom meet, and center, all the refulgent rays
of light and glory.

Wherefore, those bright beams of holiness, which proceed from Christ, are
sufficient to swallow up all the horrible appearances of sin; the glory of his
grace is able to dispel every terrible aspect of wrath and damnation; his
perfection of rectitude (from whom every creature received its original beauty)
is sufficient to restore the native excellency of any creature, how far soever
it has been ruined; or to communicate an excellency, equal, or superior, to
what was lost by sin. And the rays of divine glory, that shine in the Son of
God, are sufficient to transform, into his own likeness, every creature on whom
he is pleased to reflect the luster of his perfections; so that Christ is able
to dissipate all the deformity bro't by sin.

3. What number is contained in Christ?

A. His number is One, without division; his number contains Three, without
multiplication. -- And, in this number are contained all that is in God, and
all that is in the creation of God.

All the divine perfections, all the wise counsels, all the immuteable
purposes, yea, all the thoughts, words, and works of God, are in Christ. In him
are opened all the testimonies relating to the nature and will of God; by him
are performed all the commandments of God; in him are fulfilled all the
promises of God. -- Christ gives being, every creature in heaven, earth, and
hell. And every thought, word, and action, of every creature (whether they be
innocent and holy, or whether they be sinful) are performed by power and
wisdom, or permitted from the Son of God. Therefore, suppose the number of his
divine dispensations, multiplied into the number of creature- operations, it
must infinitely exceed all the numbers of sin. -- And further, to prove that
Jesus is more than a match, to cope with all the numbers of sin; there has been
a general rendezvous of all the infernal host; and the captain of salvation has
been attacked, and closely encountered by every warrior, both in the right and
left wing; that is, every temptation to sin, and every punishment merited by
sin. -- And having spoiled all principalities and powers, and led captivity
captive, he now abounds with all rich mercies, and all spiritual blessings, for
his people.

4. What is the measure of Christ?

A. He cannot be described by any measure. For he is incomprehensible,
infinite, and eternal. And as his nature is divine, and his glory cannot
possibly be circumscribed, nor does his perfection come within the reach of any
dimension, so is his love and grace, passing all the knowledge of men and
angels.

In height, he is far above all heavens, and above every creature, thing, or
name; he reigns invincible, above all the attempts or designs of sin, in the
midst of the throne, where sin never was, or ever shall be, able to ascend. --
In depth, below all the deeps of sin and misery; below all the deeps of death
and hell. Therefore, is able to sustain his people in the utmost distress; to
raise them up from the utmost depths of darkness; and to save them from sin's
lowest abyss. -- In length, from everlasting to everlasting. The new covenant,
of which he is mediator, and all the blessing thereof, are everlasting;
therefore, it is not possible that sin should ever extend itself beyond the
limits of his grace; because his grace is boundless, without beginning and
without end: or that it should find a vacancy in his goodness; because that is
perpetual and immutable. -- In breath, beyond all the aboundings of sin. And
therefore, how far soever sin has separated any creature from God, from their
primitive excellency, or from the enjoyment of any blessing; Christ is
all-sufficient to bring them near, and to remove sin as far off.

5. What weight does Christ bear?

A. He is not to be described by any balance. -- Nothing can ponderate against
him, to whom all creatures are lighter than vanity, or like the small dust,
whose weight is imperceptible; at whose approach the earth and the heavens fly
away.

And as for the weight of sin, it has been laid upon Christ, in all its heinous
nature, aggravations, guilt, condemning power, just deservings, and dreadful
effects; with whatsoever is ponderous, piercing, or offensive in it; it came
upon him in all its force, like thick clouds, with hailstones, and coals of
fire; and he did actually bear it, in his soul, and in his body. He sustained
the curse due to sin, like an impregnable rock. His dying for sin, did not show
any want of power, (but depth of love) since he had power to lay down his life,
and power to take it again.

And Christ has removed sin: he had taken away and extinguished it; yea, he
has so far vanquished, and extirpated it, that the curse, and condemnation
thereof, can no more be found; the aggravation, and guilt thereof, can no more
be remembered. -- And he is purging out, and will effectually eradicate, from
his people, all the pollution, and all the concomitants of sin, so as nothing
of the nature, nor any remains of the effect, nor any consequence, or
production of it, shall have a being any more.

6. What is (and wherein lies) the power of Christ?

A. He has all power in heaven and in earth; which nothing can destroy, repel,
or withstand. He is the creator, sustainer, benefactor, and sovereign disposer
of every creature that has a being. -- He has power over all his enemies, to
destroy their being; to reduce them to subjection, though against their wills;
to punish them with everlasting destruction from his presence; or to convert
them from their rebellions, and make them willing subjects. -- And he has
power to extirpate sin out of the souls of his people; to deliver from every
malady that it has brought; to secure from all the evils, from all the dangers,
and from all the fears of it, to all eternity. -- Yea, has power to enrich his
saints with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places; to dignify their
natures, and raise them to the highest degree of perfection; and to communicate
to them the brightest rays of heavenly glory, in immortality.

The power of Christ consists in his divine omnipotence, or being God over all,
etc. All things are in his hands, hence he has a despotick power; he is
mediator of the better covenant, hence he has a saving power; he is head over
all things to his church, hence he has a communicative power, to bless his
elect with grace and glory.

7. What is the loudness of the voice of Christ?

A. This is known by its effects. -- 1. The powerful voice of Christ moves all
the powers of nature; the heavens shake, and the earth melts. -- 2. It brings
vengeance and destruction upon all his enemies. -- 3. It sounds to the
uttermost bounds of the creation; none of his chosen people can be so far off,
but his voice can reach them. -- 4. His voice pierces through every intervening
obstacle; no depth of misery, no grave of sin, no hardness of heart, no
blindness of mind, no enmity against God, no hellish tumult in the soul, no
worldly temptation, no vanity of mind, no plague of the heart, nor any terrors
of wrath, or any thing that can possibly interpose, are able to hinder the
joyful sound of grace from the soul, when Jesus speaks, and the Lord opens the
heart. -- 5. The effects, or operations, wrought by the voice of Christ, are
many; it is so powerful, as to raise dead souls out of their sins, and dead
bodies out of their graves; so clear and distinct, as to be understood by all
his people; and so sweet and pleasant, as to ravish their hearts, and spread
joy through all their powers. -- 6. His voice is so loud, that it enters into
the ears, and into the bosom of his Father; so as it is always heard, and
always answered. -- 7. So loud is the voice of his redeeming blood, and his
prevailing intercession, and the peace that resounds from it, that the clamours
of sin cannot be heard, either before the throne of God, or in the conscience.

8. What is the nature of Jesus Christ?

A. It is perfect abstracted holiness; or superlative purity, and excellency;
such as no creature in heaven or earth can claim, or pretend to vie with. The
brightest luminaries are dark before him; the most exalted intelligences are
conscious of imperfection, and vail their faces in his presence, with profound
reverence, crying, Holy, Holy, Holy. -- So holy is his nature, that no poison
or impurity can possibly touch him; nor any uncleanness abide in his presence.
He cannot look upon an unclean thing; nor can any unclean thing look upon him.
-- The holiness of his nature sanctifies every person, place, or thing, where
he pleases to manifest his presence. -- And his purifying virtue cannot fail to
be a sufficient antidote against all the poison of sin, to heal every disease,
and remove every plague thereof; since his grace is so diffusive, and it is his
delight, and constant employ, to save his people from their sins. -- His
healing and cleansing grace, is so influential, that a touch (even of the hem
of his garment) produces a cure; so penetrating, as to reach the deepest
retreats of the soul; so balsamic, as to cool every inflammation, and remove
every torture of sin; and so efficacious in its operation, as no malignant
humor, nor mortal potion, can prevent its effect. This is that infallible
medicine, which suceeds, when all other things fail.

9. What is the depth of the wisdom of Christ?

A. He is God only wise, the true wisdom of God; to whom all the craft and
subtilty of creatures is mere folly. -- Christ is omniscient, to know all
things that are: His Father's whole will; all that has any existence in every
creature; and all the deep machinations, delusive forms, and dark haunts of
sin, with all the progress and effects thereof. -- He is wise, to search out,
and unravel all the subtilties and deceits of sin; to disconcert all its
measures; and to deliver his people from all its enchantments: by pure light to
expel the darkness, and by truth to expose falsehood; to distinguish between
truth and error; and separate the precious from the vile. -- He (...) prudent
to determine, and dispose all things that shall be; to bring his people out of
darkness, and illuminate them with the light of life; to cause them to know
themselves, and their miseries by sin; to bless them with the knowledge of the
only true God, and the blessings freely given them in him; to prevent the
deceptions of sin from seducing their minds, or bringing them any more under
its dominion; to direct the communications of his grace in season; to answer
their necessities; to order his providential dispensations to work together for
good; and to conduct all his little ones with honor and safety to his eternal
kingdom. -- His wisdom is unsearchable; no design can be formed to frustrate
any of his purposes; for his counsel shall stand.

10. What are Christ's weapons; and in what manner does he fight?

A. The alone weapon with which he makes war, is his word. -- Christ is
represented on horseback, to show his swiftness and warlike appearance; with a
bow, to show his strength; with arrows, to show how exactly he hits the mark,
striking the heart; and with a sword, to show how sharp he cuts, dividing one
thing from another: but all these are but emblems of that one irresistible
weapon, The word of God.

By his quick and powerful word he vanquishes all enemies; and, by the same
word, he will judge all creatures, and consume all that dare rebel against him.
This word endures for ever; and no adverse power can destroy or wear it out;
nor is any creature able to withstand it: for, by this sword of the Spirit,
Christ breaks through all the opposition, and destroys all the power of sin;
drives it out of its close quarters, and delivers his children from its
tyranny. And the same word, being full of grace, is a preservative from all the
attacks of horror and despair; and a defense against all the fiery darts of
satan.

The way of Christ's making war, is in righteousness and judgment. -- And
herein his prowess, conduct, and dexterity; for when he comes to rescue his
people, he finds them coupled with sin, cemented as closed as the flesh and
bone, joints and marrow, or soul and spirit; yet, he manages his weapons with
that masterly skill, as never to strike a stroke in vain; or by an inadvertant
shot to annoy any of his friends, while he wounds his enemies. He never fails
to save the soul, and destroy the sin. No obstacle can be so difficult as to
baffle him; nor so intricate as to confound him; nor any enemy so powerful as
to withstand him, nor so subtle as to escape him. -- They that experience the
power of his word in their hearts, can witness the convincing, humbling,
quickening, attracting, transforming, comforting, and establishing power
thereof.

11. What are the victories, and dominions of Christ?

A. His right hand his holy arm has gotten him the victory. -- He has broken
the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder. -- He has triumphed
gloriously. -- Every thing within the creation of God is subjected (or in
subjection) to his sovereign disposal; for he must reign, till he has put all
enemies under his feet. -- He has bruised the serpent's head; he has spoiled
principalities and powers; he has swallowed up death in victory; he has
trampled on all the power of the enemy; he has destroyed all the works of the
devil; he has taken away the dominion of sin; he has led captivity captive.

And now he proclaims liberty to the captives, freedom to the prisoners, and
deliverance to them that are bound. And all the powers of earth and sin, death
and hell, are not able to detain them; for Jesus has gained the victory, and
he gives the victory to all his chosen; and causes them to triumph over all
enemies, infernal, external, internal, and eternal. And henceforth all his
children wear this motto, More than conquerors, through him that loved us.

And as for his dominion, God the Father has (without reserve) given all
things into his hands; and he rules with despotick power over every thing in
heaven, earth, and hell. He holds all his elect in his hand, as jewels in his
crown; and all other parts of the creation he holds at his command, in actual
readiness to serve his church; and the subjects of sin (who are not willing
that he should reign over them) he holds in chains, and makes them his
footstool. -- Therefore, there is no enchantment against Christ, or against his
children; nor can the gates of hell prevail against his church, or against any
individual soul that flies to the Son of God for refuge. For he is absolute
sovereign in all the creation of God, and his elect are his peculiar treasure.

12. What is the age, or duration of Christ?

A. In his divine nature he is absolutely eternal; for the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost -- are one. Whose name alone is JEHOVAH, the everlasting
God, who only has immortality. -- And the essential living God, who is
self-existent, independent of all beings, the life and being of all creatures,
and in himself unchangeable, must be without beginning, eternally enjoying
himself, when neither sin had a being, nor any creature did exist.

And in his human nature he is the firstborn of every creature, set up from
everlasting, possessed of God in the beginning of his way; the beginning of the
creation of God. -- These things cannot be spoken of his divine nature; whose
essential perfection admits of no advancement or progression; nor can be set
up, or born. Neither of the open, and actual existence of his human nature;
which, so considered, is really a work of God; whereas Jehovah possessed him
before his works of old. But the mystery of his will, the fellowship between
the divine and human natures, or the dignity of his human nature, in union with
the divine, are here intended. In which capacity he was conceived, brought
forth, and set up, in the infinite mind, and eternal counsel of God; wherein he
was beheld in the perfect view of his Father, as his everlasting delight; being
the very original in Jehovah's grand design, and the foundation of all his
works; whose purposes being unchangeable, and his decrees unfrustrable; he
beholds all things immediately present with himself; therefore, in the infinite
perfection of the divine mind, Christ stood, prior to all sin and misery. --
From which unconceivable period or rather eternal duration, he was (in the same
mysterious design) the head of his church; the dewlling place of his people;
the inexhaustible treasury of grace; the vital fountain through whom all
blessings flow to God's elect; who, being the image and delight of the Godhead,
is the center of love; through whom the love of God proceeds; and in whom the
Father delights in his children: for it is to be observed, that the human
nature of the Son of God never was alone, but always stands in the eternal
word; and all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him: neither is his divine
nature manifested to us alone; but all his goings forth are in the woman's
seed. He, therefore, was the life and glory of his people; and they were his
portion and delight; the objects of his unchanging love before they became
objects of wrath by sin. -- And forasmuch as God, in his eternal omniscience,
foresaw the introduction, progress, and dreadful effects of sin, he did verily
foreordain before the foundation of the world, that his beloved Son should
stand as mediator between God and men; that he should (according to the tenor
of his suretiship) bear and iniquities of his people; that he should be their
redeemer, their righteousness, and their eternal salvation; That whosoever
believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Therefore, the
salvation of God's elect was secure, in Christ, before sin had so much as a
conception. -- And as to his continuance, in his mediatorial office, it is
for-ever, unchangeable; or, 'till time shall be no more; when sin shall be
extinct; and his whole church shall be presented, in the perfection of the Son
of God, complete, without blemish, in the presence of the Father's glory: and,
from thenceforth, he shall shine in his essential glory; and his church, shall
shine in his communicated glory; and he shall reign with his saints, and they
with him, world without end. Amen.

The fourth part of the question answered; or the reparation made by Christ,
for the damage done by sin.
It appears undeniable, in every description given of the monster, sin, that
Christ is superior to it; and, consequently, he must be able to destroy it. And
as he is the author and maintainer of the holy law (of which sin is the
transgression) he is sufficient to restore the honor of his own law. And as he
is not only superior to sin, but to every created being; and the essence of
every creature subsists in himself; he certainly is able to distinguish, and
divide, between the nature, and the putrefaction of the creature. Therefore, he
is undeniably sufficient, with respect to his own perfection, to extinguish all
the mischief done by sin. The only remaining enquiry is, Whether he has done,
or certainly undertaken to do it?

1. Christ has done the greatest honor to the holy law, in regard to its
authority; in that he, who is the Holy One of God, became subject to it: he
recognized the law in all its holy commandments; and he himself is become
guarantee, to see due honor done to all the precepts of it. -- And he has
engaged to bring to all his people in proper subjection to it. For, though the
word says, to believers, Ye are not under the law; the meaning cannot be, Ye
are not under the obligation of it; but, Ye are not under it as a legal
covenant. For all the children of God are under the law, as creatures, but not
under it, as believers; because Christ has made atonement for their sin. So
long as they remain creatures of God; they must be under his law, considered
simply as a law but not as a broken law, since Christ has fulfilled it for
them. They are under the commandment, but not under the curse; for Christ has
redeemed them from it. They are under its direction, but not under a spirit of
bondage; for Christ has made them free. So then, it is only those concomitants
of the law, relative to sin, which the saints are not under; nor it is possible
they should be under them, considered as believers in Jesus; for sin being
taken away by Christ, there is nothing for the condemnatory part to take place
upon. But, whatsoever is essential to the law itself, the heaven-born soul is
under; and it is his delight so to be.

2. Christ has rendered ample obedience to the whole law: his whole life was
perfectly conformable to every command and precept of it; he also yielded
obedience unto death, subjected himself to the curse, and suffered all the
penalties that the sins of his people did deserve, or the just law did require.
-- And he has likewise undertaken to bring all his people to a practical
obedience to the holy law.

3. Christ has always retained the righteousness of the law in his heart; his
mind did never deviate from it; nor did any pollution ever enter his soul; but
his whole nature perpetually remains an unmolested habitation of God's holy
law. -- And he has engaged to put it in the hearts of his children, and to
write it in their minds; and so to impress it upon their souls, that it shall
abide forever. And it is the experience of God's chosen, that, by his grace,
their wills are wrought into a holy conformity to the will of God.

4. Christ has honored and magnified the law to the highest degree that is
possible for its glory to be advance: for, whatsoever was its proper due, from
creatures, has been fully rendered unto it, by him that made all creatures. --
His nature is a lively representation of the perfection of its holiness; or
rather, the law is a representation of the holiness of his nature. His life was
one continued course of ample conformity to all its requirements; his death was
a complete surrender of himself to its just severity; his exalted station,
before the throne of God, as advocate for his people, is a continued
vindication of the honor and glory of the law; inasmuch as it is his own
perfect satisfaction, made to the law, which he there pleads as the justifying
righteousness of his people. And, when he comes in his glory, at the great day,
it will be to display the ensigns of the glory of the righteous law, by which
he will judge the world. -- And, in honor of this righteous Governor of the
creation, Christ (by his special grace in the hearts of his children) renews
and purifies them, and makes them love, desire, and rejoice in the holy law,
with all their souls; and to delight in the excellencies thereof, more than in
any thing they can enjoy, behold, or desire, below the sun: and they shall
continue to delight therein, for ever and ever.

Thus the honor, glory, and dignity, of this perfect system of rectitude, the
divine law, does, and will shine much more conspicuous, through Christ, than if
it had never been violated by sin.

And concerning the loss sustained, and ruin bro't upon mankind by sin,

1. Christ restores, to his elect, perfect purity, and uprightness; and will
perform his work in them, until he has completely made them free from all
filthiness, pollution, irregularity, or depravity whatsoever; and will so
perfectly finish his work, that they shall stand complete in holiness; adequate
to the ultimate perfection of the holy law, and without fault before God.

2. Christ shall bring all his children to bear his own image; not only his
image of moral rectitude, but his image of heavenly glory; and crown them with
glory and honor; not only in setting them over the works of his hands, in this
lower world, but in making them kings, and priests, unto God: and shall make
them the most excellent of all beings; not only to exceed all things in this
world, but surpassing all the glory of the angelick hosts, and all the
dignities in the regions of light. -- Thus the saints shall be raised to a
dignity, far more excellent than what man possessed before his fall.

3. Christ is set at God's right hand, supreme Lord and Governor of all things;
not only in this world, but in the world to come. And whatsoever has an
existence in the creation of God, is made subject to him. And the glory which
Christ himself is possessed of, he gives to his church; and they shall reign
together with him. For he makes them victorious over all their enemies; and
every thing whereby they have been led captive, shall be led captive by them:
through his Spirit, they mortify their corrupt passions; through the faith of
Jesus, they overcome the world; and, by the blood of the Lamb, they vanguish
the prince of darkness. And, when the Captain of salvation, shall have
completed his conquests, for them, and in them, they shall sit with him, as
joint-heirs in his throne, and his crown shall flourish on their heads for ever.

4. Christ is the great deliverer, who sets his children free from every evil,
and every plague: for he took upon himself their sins, and their sorrows; and
in his own soul, and body, he finally bare them away from all his people. The
effect whereof, will issue in their perfect freedom, from every grief, bondage,
or incommodity whatsoever; and the salvation shall be eternal. Their souls
shall be perfect in light; their bodies shall be incorruptible; and whatsoever
they are, do, or enjoy, shall be perpetual delight.

5. Christ is the alone center, and repository of all good, not only natural,
but spiritual, and eternal; and all the plenitude of blessedness dwells in him,
in the highest perfection; and through vital union with him, and spiritual
communications from him, his children are enriched with more exalted natures,
and more enlarged capacities, than what the human nature was possessed of,
before the fall. And for their accommodation, he will appoint to them a
kingdom, replete with all rich blessings, and abundantly stored with every good
thing; which their more elevated natures can possibly enjoy, or desire. And
these new enjoyments shall be free from all corruption; and all his saints
shall regale themselves therein, to the days of eternity.

6. Christ has already removed sin, in its condemning power, from all his
elect, by the blood of his cross; and, from all his called he has taken away
sin, in its reinging power, by regeneration; and, in all the regenerate, he
ceases not to pursue the destruction of sin, in its defiling power, by the
sanctification of the Spirit; and, in all the sanctified, he will put a final
period to sin, in all its appearances and consequences, at his second coming.
-- All guilt, fear, and shame, are the effects of sin; and must necessarily
cease, when the cause is taken away: therefore, the disciples of the Lord have
boldness now, before the throne of grace; they have courage to confess his
name, before all adversaries; and shall boldly stand before God, in the day of
judgment: nothing in heaven, earth, or hell, can confound their countenances,
nor dismay their hearts, for Jesus is their confidence.

7. Christ is the man of God's right hand, his fellow, his delight, his equal,
and his counselor. He also is head over all things to this church; the
husband, the portion, the life, and glory of his chosen. The union between him
and his Father, is so absolute, and indivisible, that he must inherit all his
Father's perfections and glories; and the relation between him and his people,
is so close, and inseparable, that they must partake of all his fullness and
enjoyments. Therefore, in the Lord Jesus, they are made nigh to God; he dwells
among them, and they dwell in his presence; all distances are removed; all
interposing clouds are dispersed; and they enjoy sweet communion with JEHOVAH.
Yea, he is their God, and their Father; and nothing can be able to separate
them from his love; but they shall dwell in his bosom for evermore.

Thus, through the infinite fullness of divine grace, and the mediatorial
performances of EMMANUEL, there is a total extirpation of sin. Wrath is no
more; death is vanguished; misery has no place; for there is no more curse. --
The honor of the divine law is amply restored, and abundantly magnified, and
established, in all its rights; with the utmost excellency, glory, dignity, and
authority. -- All that believe in Jesus, shall possess a far richer
inheritance, than Adam did in Paradise: their relation to God is more near;
their natures more dignified; their faculties more enlarged; their knowledge
more extensive; their view of God's glory more clear; their enjoyment of God
more abundant; and their standing more secure. -- And they shall breathe in the
pure air of divine love; regale themselves in the glories of everlasting light;
and bathe in the uninterrupted streams of immortality, which proceed out of the
throne of God, and of the Lamb. -- And songs of adoration, joy, and triumph,
shall sound from all the church, and resound through all the celestial domes,
to the INFINITY, ETERNAL, THREE-ONE, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

