A RELATION OF THE Fearful Estate OF Francis Spira, After he turned Apostate
from the Protestant Church to Popery. In the YEAR, 1548.

Compiled by NATH. BACON, Esquire

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by FOUL and DRAPER, at their Office opposite the
Founder's-Arms, Marlborough-street. M.DCC.LXII.

[Price 6 Pence.]

An Introduction.
FOR the Truth of this History ensuing, besides circumstances of place, person,
time, occasion, so exactly observed; I refer myself to the Relation of those
godly men, who in several languages have manifested to the world the several
passages thereof; and although I am not ignorant, that at the first they were
not only not credited, but also discredited and slandered by such as found them
to be a blur to the Roman profession, yet they lost not their luster thereby;
but being acquitted by many compurgators of several nations, and some of the
Romish religion, being all of them spectators of this tragedy; it occasioned
not only a further manifestation and confirmation of the truth, but also a
large and more frequent confluence to see that which they had formerly only
heard of. This partly appears out of the succeeding story; but more fully out
of an apology written by Vergerius bishop of Justinople, who was accused for
dispersing the fame of this example to the stain of Popery, in which apology to
N. Rotan, suffragan of Padua, is shortly and plainly declared, what was said,
what was done, and who were present. If it be demanded, what moved me to
compile this treatise? Spira, tell them, that it should teach fear and
reverence: and indeed among all those that came to see him, few or none
returned unshaken. Vergerius in his first epistle says; I would fain go see
him again, but I exceedingly fear and tremble:" and in his apology says, It is
such a rare example, as I would willingly go to the furthest parts of the world
to hear or see the like. The lady Jane to her father's chaplain (who had fallen
into Spira's sin) says, Remember the lamentable state of Spira. I acknowledge
that there has been formerly a book published in our mother tongue, concerning
this subject, but as far as I can learn (for I could never yet obtain to see
any one of them) it was nothing so large and various as this present treatise:
and as I have heard, a translation of only one of the tractates, from whence I
have gathered this present discourse in part. Concerning my care and fidelity
in this business, it is such as I may truly say without changing of color,
that there is not one sentence of all this work attributed unto the person of
Spira, but it has its warrant, either from the epistles of Vergerius and
Geribaldus, professors of the law in Padua, or from the discourses of Henry
Scringer, a Scotchman, Sigismund Gelons, a Transylvanian, and Mart. Bocha a
divine of Basil: neither have I taken any other liberty than as a relation to
wave the aforesaid discourses one within another, so as those which under
several writers, were before counted several, are now by my endeavors reduced
into one entire history, connexed by due succession of time and occasion, as
punctually as could be aimed at, by the circumstances noted in the writings of
those holy and learned men before named.

N.B. EXtraordinary examples of divine justice God never intended for a nine
days wonder, else would he, when he exemplified Lot's wife have turned her into
a statue of melting snow, not of lasting salt; which stood, as Josephus tells
us, till his age, after the destruction of Jerusalem; and as some travelers
report, till at this day, Ut quoddam hominibus praestaret condimentum; quo
sapiant unde illud caveatur exemplum. Aug. de civit dei, lib. 6 cap. 30. for a
season against corruption, a preservative against apostasy. This tragedy, when
fresh and new, was the conversion and confirmation of sundry worthies:
Vergerius, a daily spectator thereof, forsaking a rich bishopric of
Justinopolis and tents of Antichrist; went to Basil, and died a worthy
Protestant: many nations had eyewitnesses of their own students (...) the
university of Padua, who penned the story* the copies whereof are frequently
revived: our English ones were very defective, and now worn out of shops and
hands sundry manuscrips of this abroad imperfect; which moved me to compare
this labor of a worthy gentleman (who faithfully translated it out of Italian,
French, and Dutch letters) with the latin of Caelius Secundus Curi^, Mattheus
Gribauldus, professors of the civil law in Padua; Sigismund Gelons, a
Transylvanian, Henricus Scotus, all daily visitors of Spira, and find it accord
with them. Touching Spira's person, I find most learned writers do incline to
the right and hopeful hand: moved by his sweet, humble, and charitable
speeches: some few desperate ones excepted, that fell from him in some little
agonies, which kept him fasting and watching about six months space, eating
nothing but what was forced down his throat. The sum of Calvin's and Borthaus's
counsels (who write largely of the use of this pattern) is, that all learn to
take heed of backsliding, which God's soul abhors, and not to dally with
conscience, an hell on earth if justly incensed; more to be feared than the
Spanish inquisition, or all the strappadoes and torments in the world; and take
heed of Spira's principal errors; which were to dispute with Satan over busily
in time of weakness: especially to reason, and conclude from present sense to
God's past reprobation, and future damnation: both which is hard, if possible
for any man to determine in his own, much more in others cases. So commending
thee to his grace who is able to establish thee to the end, I bid thee
farewell, and hope well, while the space of grace lasts, Dum spiras spera: so
may thou take good and no hurt by the reading of this terrible example.

Impriamatur Tho's. Wykes R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

A RELATION of the fearful Estate of Francis Spira.
IN the Year 1548, when the glorious Sun of the Gospel was but newly risen in
Europe, in the days of the reign of Edward the Sixth of that name King of
England: In the territory, and under the jurisdiction of the city of Venice,
being the very border of Italy, in the town of Citadella, lived one Francis
Spira, a civil lawyer, an advocate of great rank and esteem, being of known
learning, and eloquence; of great experience; of carriage circumspect and
severe; his speech grave and composed, his countenance sharp austere; every way
befitting that authority whereunto he was advanced, endowed with outward
blessings, of wife and eleven children, and wealth in abundance: what his worst
parts were, I have no other warrant, than his own words, which (if not tainted
overmuch with the bitterness of a desperate mind, and bearing the countenance
rather of passion, than of sober confession) may seem to add a period to all
further commendations.

I was (said he) excessively covetous of money, and accordingly I applied my
self to get by injustice, corrupting justice by deceit, inventing tricks to
elude justice: good causes I either defended deceitfully or sold them to the
adversary perfidiously; ill causes I maintained with all my might; I wittingly
opposed the known truth; and the first committed unto me, I either betrayed or
perverted. Thus having worn out forty four years, or there abouts, and the news
of the new, or rather newly revived opinions of Luther coming unto those parts,
represented an object of novelty unto him; who being as desirous to know as he
was famous for knowledge; suffered not these wandering opinions to pass
unexamined, but searching into the scriptures, and into all books of
controversy that he could get, both old and new, and finding more than fame or
opinion, he began to taste their nature so well as that he entertains, loves
and owns them at length; and with such zeal, as he became a professor; yea a
teacher of them, first to his wife, children, and family, and after to his
friends, and familiar acquaintance; and in comparison, seemed to neglect all
other affairs; intending ever to press this main point, that We must wholly,
and only depend on the free, and unchangeable love of God in the death of
Christ, as the only sure way to salvation: And this was the sum of all his
discourse, and this continued for the space of six years, or there-abouts; even
so long that this fire could not keep itself within private walls, but at
length it brake forth unto public meetings; so that the whole province of Padua
dawned with the luster thereof. The clergy finding the trade of their pardons
to decay; and their purgatory to wax cold, began to stir themselves: glosing
their actions first with calumnious aspersions upon the whole profession, then
more plainly striking at Spira with grievous accusations: And to effect their
purpose, some promise labor, others favor, some advice, others maintenance;
all join to divide, either his soul from his body, or both from God.

Now as John Casa the Pope's legate resident at Venice, by birth a Florentine;
and one that wanted neither malice against those of this way, nor craftines to
effect his malicious purposes: To him these men repair with outcries against
Spira; that he was the man that condemned the received rights of the Church,
eluded the Ecclesiastical power, and scandalized the policy thereof; one of no
mean rank; being a man of account and authority, and thereunto, learned in the
scriptures, elegant in speech; and in one word, a dangerous Lutheran; having
also many disciples, and therefore not to be despised.

At this began the legate to cast his eye on the terrible alteration that
lately had happened in Germany; where, by the means of only one Luther, the
Romish religion had suffered such a blow, as that it could neither be cured by
dissimulation, nor defended by power; but the clergy must either mend their
manners, or lose their dignities: on the other side, when he saw how propense
the common people inhabiting in the bordering countries of Italy were to
entertain those new opinions, he now thought it no time to dispute, or
persuade, but with speed repairs to the senate, and procures authority from
them to send for Spira.

Spira by this time had considered with himself of the nature of his carriage,
how evident and notorious it was and therefore subject to be envied by such as
neither liked his person nor religion, he perceived that his opinions were
neither retired nor speculative, but such as aimed at the overthrow of the
Romish fiction, and a change of policy, (wherein at the best he could expect
but a bloody victory,) and that his enemies wanted neither power nor occasion
to call him to account in public, when he must either apostatize, and
shamefully give his former life, yea his own conscience the lie, or endure the
utmost malice of his deadly enemies, or forsake his wife, children, friends,
goods, authority, yea, his dear country, and betake himself to a foreign
people, there to endure a thousand miseries, that do continually wait upon a
voluntary exile. Being thus distracted, and tossed in the restless waves of
doubt without guide to trust to, or haven to fly to for succor; on a sudden,
God's Spirit assisting, he felt a calm, and began to discourse with himself in
this manner:

Why wonderest thou thus in uncertainties, unhappy man; cast away fear, put on
thy shield, the shield of faith: Where is thy wonted courage, thy goodness, thy
constancy? remember that Christ's glory lies at the stake, suffer thou without
fear, and he will defend thee, he will tell thee what thou shall answer; he can
beat down all danger, bring thee out of prison, raise thee from the dead:
consider Peter in the dungeon, the martyrs in the fire, if thou make a good
confession, thou may indeed go to prison, or death, but an eternal reward in
heaven remains for thee; what have thou in this world comparable to eternal
life, to everlasting happiness? if thou do otherwise think of the scandal;
(common people live by example, thinking whatever is done, is well done) fear
the loss of peace and joy, fear hell, death, and eternal wrath; or if thy flesh
be so strong, as to cause thee to doubt of the issue, fly thy country; get thee
away, though never so far, rather than deny the Lord of Life.

Now was Spira in reasonable quiet, being resolved to yield to these weighty
reasons; yet holding it wisdom to examine all things, he consults also with
flesh and blood; thus the battle does renew, and the flesh begins in this
manner:

Be well advised, fond man, consider reasons on both sides, and then judge; how
can thou thus overween thine own sufficiency, as thou neither regardest the
examples of thy progenitors; nor the judgments of the whole Church; do thou
not consider what misery this thy rashness will bring thee unto? thou shall
lose all thy substance, gotten with so much care and travel, thou shall undergo
the most exquisite torments that malice itself can devise, thou shall be
counted an heretic of all: and to close up all thou shall die shamefully. What
think thou of the loathsome stinking dungeon, of the bloody ax, the burning
faggot, are they delightful? Be wise at length, and keep thy life and honor;
thou may live to do much good to good men, as God commands thee, thou may
be an ornament to thy country: and put the case thy country's loss will be of
small esteem with the, Will thou bring thy friends also into danger? thou have
begotten children, will thou now cut their throats, and inhumanly butcher them,
which may in time bring honor to their country, glory to God, help and
furtherance to his Church? go to the legate, weak man, freely confess thy fault
and help all these miseries. Thus did the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, choke the good seed that was was formerly sown; so as
fearing, he faints, and yields to the allurements of this present world, and
being thus blinded he goes to the legate at Venice, and salutes him with this
news.

Having for these diverse years entertained an opinion concerning some articles
of faith, contrary to the orthodox and received judgment of the church; and
uttered many things against the authority of the Church of Rome, and the
universal Bishop, I humbly acknowledge my fault, and error, and my folly in
misleading others: I therefore yield myself in all obedience to the supreme
bishop, into the bosom of the church of Rome; never to depart again from the
traditions and decrees of the holy See; I am heartily sorry for what is past;
and I humbly beg pardon for so great an offense.

The legate perceiving Spira to faint, he pursues him to the utmost; he causes
a recitation of all his errors to be drawn in writing, together with the
confession annexed to it, and commands Spira to subscribe his name there, which
accordingly he did; then the legate commands him to return to his own town; and
there to declare this confession of his, and to acknowledge the whole doctrine
of the Church of Rome to be holy, and true; and to abjure the opinions of
Luther, and other such teachers, as false and heretical: Man knows the
beginning of sin, but who bounds the issues thereof? Spira having once lost
footing, goes down amain, he cannot stay, nor gainsay the legate; but
promises to accomplish his whole will and pleasure; he soon addresseth himself
for his journey, and being onward in the way, bethinks himself of large spoils
he had brought away from the conflict with the legate; what glorious testimony
he had given of his great faith, and constancy in Christ's cause: and to be
plain, how impiously he had denied Christ, and his gospel at Venice; and what
he promised to do further in his own country; and thus partly with fear, and
partly with shame, being confounded; he thought he heard a voice speaking unto
him in this manner:

Spira, What do thou here? whither go thou? have thou unhappy man, given
thy handwriting to the legate at Venice; yet see thou do not seal it in
thine own country: do thou indeed think eternal life so mean, as that thou
preferrest this present life before it? do thou well in preferring wife and
children before Christ? is the windy applause of the people, better indeed than
the glory of God: and the possession of this world's good more dear to thee,
than the salvation of thine own soul? is the small use of a moment of time more
desirable, than eternal wrath is dreadful? Think with thyself what Christ
endured for thy sake; is it not equal that thou should suffer somewhat for
him? Remember, man, that the sufferings of this present life, are not
comparable to the glory that shall be revealed: if thou suffer with him,
thou shall also reign with him: thou can not answer for what thou have
already done; nevertheless, the gate of mercy is not quite shut, take heed that
thou heapest not sin upon sin, least thou repent when it will be too late.

Now was Spira in a wilderness of doubts, not knowing which way to turn him,
nor what to do, yet being arrived in his own country, and amongst his friends,
with shame enough he relates what he had done, and what he had further promised
to do; and now the terrors of God on the one side, and the terrors of this
world on the other side, did continually rack him; and therefore he desired of
them advice in this so doubtful a case; his friends upon small deliberation
answered; that it was requisite he should take heed that he did not in any wise
betray his wife and children, and all his friends into danger, seeing that by
so small a matter as the reciting of a little schedule, which might be done in
less space than half an hour, he might both free himself from present danger,
and preserve many that depended upon him; adding moreover, that he could get no
credit in relenting from that which he had already in greatest part performed
before the legate at Venice, and that in the perfect accomplishing thereof,
little or no discredit could arise more than what by the former action already
he had sustained: on the other side, if he did not perform his promise made to
the legate, he could neither discharge himself of the shame which he had
already incurred; nor avoid far more heavy and insupportable injuries, than
probably he should have endured, if he had persisted obstinately in his former
opinions.

This was the last blow of the battle, and Spira utterly overcome, goes to the
Praetor, and proffers to perform his 'foresaid promise made to the legate, who
in the mean time had taken order to have all things ready, and had sent the
instrument of abjuration signed by Spira, to the Praetor, by the hands of a
certain priest. All that night the miserable man wears out with restless cares,
without any minute of rest; the next morning being come, he gets up, and being
ready, he desperately enters into the public congregation, where mass being
finished, in the presence of friends and enemies, and of the whole assembly;
being by estimation near two thousand people; yea, and of heaven itself, he
recites that infamous abjuration, word for word, as it was written: it being
done, he was fined at thirty pieces of gold, which he presently paid: five
whereof were given to the priest that brought the abjuration, the other
twenty-five were employed toward the making of a shrine to put the eucharist
in; then was he sent home restored to his dignities; goods, wife and children:
No sooner was he departed, but he thought he heard a direful voice, saying to
him; Thou wicked wretch, thou have denied me, thou have renounced the Covenant
of thy Obedience, thou have broken thy vow; hence Apostate bear with thee the
sentence of thy eternal damnation: he trembling and quaking in body and mind,
fell down in a swoon; relief was at hand for the body, but from that time
forwards he never found any peace or ease of his mind; but continuing in
incessant torments, he professed that he was captivated under the revenging
hand of the great God: that he heard continually that fearful sentence of
Christ, that just Judge: that he knew he was utterly undone: that he could
neither hope for grace, nor Christ's intercession with God the Father in his
behalf, thus was his fault ever heavy in his heart, and ever his judgment
before his eyes.

Now began his friends some of them to repent too late of his rash counsel;
others not looking so high as the judgment of God, laid all the blame upon his
melancholic constitution; that overshadowed his judgment, wrought in him a kind
of madness: every one censured as his fancy led him, yet for remedy all agreed
in this, to use both the wholesome help of physicians, and the pious advice of
divines, and therefore thought it meet to convey him to Padua, an university of
note, where plenty of all manner of means was to be had: this they accordingly
did, both with his wife, children, and whole family; others also of his friends
accompanied him: and being arrived at the house of one James Ardin, in St.
Leonard's parish, they sent for three physicians of most note, who upon due
observation of the effects, and of other symptoms of his disease, and some
private conference one with another, among themselves, returned their verdict
in this manner, viz. That they could not discern that his body was afflicted
with any danger or distemper originally from itself, by reason of the
overruling of any humor; but that this malady of his did arise from some
grief, or passion of his mind, which being overburdened, did so oppress the
spirits, as they wanting free passage, stirred up many ill humors whereof the
body of man is full; and these ascending up into the brain, troubled the fancy,
shadowed the seat of the judgment, and so corrupted it: this was the state of
his disease, and that outward part that was visible to the eye of nature, this
they endeavored to reform by purgation, either to consume, or at least to
divert the course of these humors from the brain; but all their skill effected
nothing, upon which Spira said: Alas poor men how far wide are you; do you
think that this disease is to be cured by potions? believe me there must be
another manner of medicine, it is neither potions, plasters, nor druggs, that
can help a fainting soul cast down with sense of sin and the wrath of God; it
is only Christ that must be the physician, and the Gospel the sole antidote.

The physicians easily believed him after they had understood the whole truth
of the matter, and therefore they wished him to seek some spiritual comfort. By
this time the fame of this man was spread over all Padua, and the neighboring
country, partly for that he was a man of esteem, partly because as the disease,
so the occasion was especially remarkable; for this was not done in a corner:
so as daily there came multitudes of all sorts to see him: some out of
curiosity only to see and discourse; some out of a pious desire to try all
means that might reduce him to comfort again; or at least to benefit themselves
by such a spectacle of misery, and of the justice of God. Amongst these Paulus
Vergerius, bishop of Justinopolis, and Mattheus Gribauldus deserve especially
to be named as the most principal laborers for this man's comfort. They find
him now about fifty years of age, neither affected with the dotage of old age,
nor with the unconstant headstrong passion of youth, but in the strength of
his experience and judgment; in a burning heat, calling excessively for drink;
yet his understanding active, quick of apprehension, witty in discourse, above
his ordinary manner, and judiciously opposite; his friends labored him by all
fair means to receive some nourishment, which he obstinately gainsaying, they
forcibly infused some liquid sustenance into his mouth, most of which he spit
out again; exceedingly chaffing, and in this fretting mood of his; As it is
true, that all things work for the best to those that love God, so to the
wicked all are contrary; for whereas a plentiful offspring is the blessing of
God, and his reward being a stay to the weak estate of their aged parents, to
me they are a cause of bitterness and vexation; they do strive to make me tire
out this misery: I would fain be at an end, I deserve not this dealing at their
hands; Oh! that I were gone from hence, that somebody would let out this weary
soul.

His friends saluted him, and asked him, what he conceived to be the cause of
his disease; forthwith he brake out into a lamentable discourse of the passages
formerly related, and that with such passionate elocution, that he caused many
to weep, and most to tremble. They contrarily to comfort him propounded many of
God's promises recorded in the scripture, and many examples of God's mercy: My
sin (said he) is greater than the mercy of God. Nay, answered they, the mercy
of God is above all sin: God would have all men to be saved: It is true (quoth
he) he would have all that he has elected to be saved; he would not have
damned reprobates to be saved: I am one of that number; I know it, for I
willingly and against my knowledge denied Christ, and I feel that He hardens,
and will not suffer me to hope.

After some silence, one asked him whether he did not believe that doctrine to
be true, for which he was accused before the legate? he answered; I did believe
it when I denied it, but now I neither believe that, nor the doctrine of the
Romish Church; I believe nothing, I have no faith, no trust, no hope: I am a
reprobate like Cain or Judas who casting away all hope of mercy fell into
despair, and my friends do me great wrong, that they suffer me not to go to the
place of unbelievers, as I justly deserve.

Here they began sharply to rebuke him; requiring, and charging him that in any
ways he did not violate the mercy of God, to which he answered; The mercy of
God is exceeding large, and extends to all the elect, but not to me, or any
like to me, who are ^ea^ed up to wrath, I tell you I deserve it, my own
conscience condemns me: what needs any other judge? Christ came (said they)
to take away sin, Romans ii. 14. and calling for a book, they read unto him the
passion of Christ, and coming to his nailing to the Cross, Spira said, This
indeed is comfortable to such as are elected, but as for me wretch, they are
nothing but grief and torment because I contemned them. Thus roaring for grief,
and tossing himself up and down upon the bed as he lay, he entreated them to
read no more. As Gribauldus was coming to see him, Vergerius said to Spira,
dear Sir, here is doctor Gribauldus, a godly and faithful friend of yours, come
to see you: He is welcome, said he, but he shall find me ill: Gribauldus
replied, Sir, this is but an illusion of the devil, who does what he can to vex
you; but turn you to God with your whole heart and he is ready to show you
mercy: The Lord you know is full of mercy, it is he that has said, that as
often as a sinner repents of his sin, He will remember his sins no more.
Consider this in the example of Peter, that was Christ's familiar, and an
apostle, and yet denied him thrice with an oath, and yet God was merciful unto
him: Consider the thief, that spent his whole life in wickedness, and for all
that did not God graciously respect him in the last minute of his life? Is the
Lord's hand now shortened, that it cannot save? To this Spira answered: If
Peter grieved and repented, it was because Christ beheld him with a merciful
eye, and in that he was pardoned, it was not because he wept, but because God
was gracious to him; but God respects not me, and therefore I am a reprobate: I
feel no comfort can enter into my heart, there is no place there but only for
torments and vexings of spirit: I tell you my case is properly my own, no man
was ever in the like plight and therefore my estate is fearful.

Then roaring out in the bitterness of his spirit, said, It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: the violence of his passion and
action suitable, did amaze many of the beholders; insomuch as some of them said
with a whispering voice, that he was possessed; he over-hearing it, said, Do ye
doubt it? I have a whole legion of devils that take up their dwelling within me
and possess me as their own, and justly too, for I have denied Christ. We would
ask whether you did that willingly or not? (said they) That Is nothing to the
purpose (said Spira) Christ says, Whosoever denies me before men, him will I
deny before my Father which is in heaven. Christ will not be denied, no, not in
a word, and therefore it is enough though in heart I never denied him.

They observing his distemper to arise from the sense and horror of the pains
of hell, asked whether he thought there were worse pain than what he endured
for the present, he said, that he knew there were far worse pains than those
that he then suffered, for the wicked shall rise to their judgment, but they
shall not stand in judgment; Psalm. i. This I tremble to think of, yet do I
desire nothing more than that I might come to that peace where I may be sure to
feel the worst, and to be freed from the fear of worse to come.

Aye, but you are to consider (said one) that those opinions for which you are
accused before the legate, were impious, and therefore you are not to think you
denied Christ, but rather that you confessed him, acknowledging the infallible
truth of the Catholic Church. "Truly (said he) when I did deny those opinions,
I did think them to be true, and yet I did deny them.

Go to (said others) now then, believe that they are true. Now I cannot (said
he) God will not suffer me to believe them, nor trust in his mercy. What would
you have me do? I would fain attain to this power but cannot, though I should
presently burn for it. But why do you, (said the other) esteem this so grievous
a sin, when as the learned legate constrained you to it, which you surely would
not have done if your former opinions had not been erroneous; no good Francis,
the devil besets thee, let not therefore the grievousness of thy sin (if any
such be) amaze thee. You say right, replied he, the devil has possessed me, and
God has left me to his power, for I find I can neither believe the Gospel nor
trust in God's mercy. I have sinned against the holy Ghost, and God by his
immutable decree has bound me over to perpetual punishment, without any hope
of pardon. It is true that the greatness of sins, or the multitude of them,
cannot bind God's mercy, all those sins that in the former part of my life I
have committed, then did not so much trouble me, for I trusted God would not
lay them to my charge. Now having sinned against the holy Ghost, God has taken
away from me all power of repentance, and brings all my sins to remembrance,
and guilty of one, guilty of all. And therefore it is no matter whether my sins
be great or small, few or many: They be such as that neither Christ's blood,
nor God's mercy belongs to me. God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy;
and whom he will he hardens: This is it that gnaws my heart, he has hardened
me, and I find that he daily more and more does harden me, and therefore I am
out of hope: I feel it, therefore cannot but despair. I tell you there never
was such a monster as I am, never was any man alive a spectacle of exceeding
misery. I knew that justification is to be expected by Christ, and I denied and
abjured it, to the end I might keep this frail life from adversity, and my
children from poverty; and now behold how bitter this life is to me, and God
only knows what shall become of this my family; but sure no good is likely to
betide it, but worse and worse: and such a ruin at length as one stone shall
not be left upon another. But why should you said Gribauldus conceit so deeply
of your sin, seeing you cannot but know that many have denied Christ, yet never
fell into despair: Well said he, I can see no ground of comfort for such,
neither can I warrant them from Gods revenging hand in wrath; though it
pleases God yet to suffer such to be in peace; and besides, there will a time
of danger come, and then they shall be thoroughly tried, and if it were not so,
yet God is just in making me an example to others: And I cannot justly
complain, there is no punishment so great but I have deserved it, for this so
heinous offense: I assure you it is no small matter to deny Christ, and yet it
is more ordinary then commonly men do conceive of; it is not a denial made
before a Magistrate, as it is with me, for as often as a Christian does
dissemble the known truth; as often as he approves of false worship by
presenting himself at it, so often as he has not things worthy of his calling,
or such things as are unworthy of his calling, so often he denies Christ; thus
did I, and therefore am justly punished for it. Your estate (quoth Gribauldus)
is not so strange as you make it. Job was so far gone that he complained God
has set him as a mark against him, and David that was a man after Gods own
heart, complained often that God had forsaken him, and was become his enemy,
yet both received comfort again. Comfort yourself therefore, God will come at
length though he now seem far off.

O Brother (answered Spira I believe all this; the devils believe and tremble;
but David was ever elected and dearly beloved of God; and though he fell, yet
God took not utterly away his holy Spirit: and therefore was heard when he
prayed, Lord take not thy holy Spirit from me: but I am in another case, being
ever accursed from the presence of God: neither can I pray as he did, because
his holy spirit is quite gone, and cannot be recalled; and therefore I know I
shall live in continual hardness so long as I live: O that I might feel but the
least sense of the love of God to me though but for one small moment, as I now
feel his heavy wrath that burns like the torments of hell within me and
afflicts my conscience with pangs unutterable; verily desperation is hell
itself.

Here Gribauldus said, I do verily believe, Spira, that God having so severely
chastised you in this life, corrects you in mercy here, that he may spare you
there, after that he has mercies sealed up for you in time to come.

Nay (said Spira) hence do I know that I am a reprobate, because he afflicts
me with hardness of heart Oh that my body had suffered all my life long, so
that he would be pleased to release my Soul, and ease my conscience, this
burdened conscience.

Gribauldus being desirous to ease his mind from the continual meditation of
his sin; as also to sound how for the present he stood affected to the Romish
Church; asked him what he thought become of the Souls of men so soon as they
departed out of the body, to which he answered.

Although this be not so fully revealed in Scripture; yet I verily believe that
the souls of the elect go presently to the Kingdom of Glory; and not that they
sleep with the body as some do imagine.

Very well; said one of the Spectators, why do the Scriptures then say that God
brings down to hell, and raises up? 1 Samuel 2.6. seeing it cannot be meant of
the estate of the Soul after death, which as thou say, either goes to
heaven without change or to hell without redemption: it must be understood of
the estate of the soul in this life; like that wherein thou art at this
present: and oftentimes we see that God suffers men to fall into the jaws of
despair, and yet raises them up again, and therefore despair not, but hope it
shall be even thus with thee in his good time.

This is the work (quoth Spira) this is the labor; for I tell you when I at
Venice did first abjure my profession and so, as it were drew an indenture, the
spirit of God often admonished me and when at Citadella, I did, as it were, set
to my seal; the Spirit of God often suggested to me, Do not write Spira, do not
seal; yet I resisted the holy Ghost, and did both; and at that very present I
did evidently feel a wound inflicted in my very will, so although I can say, I
would believe; yet can I not say I will believe; God has denied me the power
of will; and it befalls me in this my miserable estate, as with one that is
fast in irons, and his friends coming to see him, do pity his estate, and do
persuade him to shake off his fetters, and to come out of his bonds which, God
knows, he would fain do, but cannot: this is my very case, you persuade me to
believe, how fain would I do it but cannot. Then violently grasping his hands
together, and raising himself up, Behold (said he) I am strong, yet by little
and little I decay and consume, and my servants would fain preserve this weary
life, but at length the will of God must be done, and I shall perish miserably,
as I deserve. Rejoice ye Righteous in the Lord; blessed are you whose hearts
the Lord has molified.

Then after some pause; It is wonderful, I earnestly desire to pray to God with
my heart, yet I cannot; I see my damnation, and I know my remedy is only in
Christ, yet I cannot set myself to hold on it; such are the punishments of the
damned; they confess what I confess, they repent of their loss of Heaven; and
cannot mend their ways.

As he was thus speaking, he observed diverse Flies that came about him, and
some lighted on him: Behold, said he, now also Beelzebub comes to his banquet;
you shall shortly see my end, and in me an example to many of the justice and
judgment of God.

About this time came in two Bishops, with diverse Scholars of the University,
one of them being Paulus Vergerius, having observed Spira more than any other,
being continually conversant with him: told him his estate was such as rather
stood in need of prayer then advice, and therefore desired him to pray with him
in the Lords prayer: Spira consented, and he began.

(Our Father which art in Heaven) then breaking forth into tears he stooped,
but they said it is well, your grief is a good sign. "I bewail (said he) my
misery, for I perceive I am forsaken of God and cannot call to him from my
heart as I was wont to do; yet let us go on, said Vergerius.

(Thy Kingdom come) O Lord (said Spira) bring me also in this kingdom; I
beseech thee shut me not out. Then coming to those words (Give us this day our
daily bread) he added, O Lord I have enough and abundance to feed this carcass
of mine; but there is another bread I humbly beg the bread of thy grace,
without which I know I am but a dead man.

(Lead us not into temptation) seeing Lord that I am brought into temptation,
help me Lord that I may escape; the enemy has overcome, help me I beseech thee
to overcome this cruel tyrant.

These things he spoke with a mournful voice, the tears trickling down
abundantly; and expressing such affections and passion, as turned the bowels of
those there present, with grief and compunction: they then turning to Spira,
said, You know that none can call Christ Jesus the Lord but by the holy Ghost:
you must therefore think of yourself, according to that soft affection which
you express in your prayers, inferring thereby that God has not wholly cast
you off, or bereaved you of this Spirit utterly.

I perceive, said Spira, that I call on him to my eternal damnation, for I tell
you again, it is a new and unheard of example that you find in me: If Judas
(said they) had but outlived his days, which by nature he might have done, he
might have repented, and Christ would have received him to mercy; and yet he
sinned most grievously against his Master which did so esteem of him, as to
honor him with the dignity of an Apostle, and did maintain and feed him: He
answered, Christ did also feed and honor me, neither yet is my fault one jot
less than that of his, because it is no more honor to be personally present
with Christ in the flesh, then to be in his presence now by illumination of his
holy Spirit: And besides, I deny that ever Judas could have repented, how long
soever he had lived; for grace was quite taken from him, as it is taken from me.

O Spira (said they) you know you are in a spiritual desertion; you must
therefore not believe what Satan suggests; he was ever a liar from the
beginning, and a mere imposture, and will cast a thousand lying fancies into
your mind, to beguile you withal, you must rather believe those whom you judge
to be in a good estate and more able to discern of you than yourself; believe
us, and we tell you, that God will be merciful unto you.

O here is the knot (said Spira) I would I could believe, but I cannot.

Then he began to reckon up what fearful dreams and visions, he was continually
troubled withal; that he saw the devils come flocking to his chamber and about
his bed, terrifying him with strange noises; that these were not fancies, but
that he saw them as realy as the standers by; and that besides these outward
terrors he felt continual butchery of his conscience, being the very proper
pangs of the damned wights in hell.

Cast off these fancies (said Gribauldus) these are but illusions, humble
yourself in the presence of God and praise him. The dead praise not the Lord
(answered he) nor they that go down into the pit: we that are drowned in
despair, are dead and are already gone down into the pit: what hell can there
be worse then desperation; or what greater punishment? the gnawing worm,
unquenchable fire, horror confusion and (which is worse than all) desparation
itself continually tortures me, and now I count my present estate worse than if
my soul (separated from my body) were with Judas and the rest of the damned.
And therefore, I now desire rather to be there than thus to live in the body.

One being present, repeated certain words out of the Psalms 89.30. If thy
children forsake my law and walk not in my judgments I will visit their
transgressions with rods, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from them, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail: mark this, O Spira, my Covenant I will not break.

These promises (said Spira) belong only to the elect, which if tempted, may
fall into sin, but are again lifted up and recovered out: as the prophet says,
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him:
therefore Peter could rise for he was elected; but the reprobates when they
fall cannot rise again, as appears in Cain, Saul, and Judas: God deals one way
with the elect, and another with reprobates.

The next day he prayed with them in the Latin tongue, and that with excellent
affection, as outwardly appeared. Blessed be God, said Vergerius, these are no
signs of eternal reprobation; you must not, O Spira, seek out the secret
counsels of Gods election and reprobation; for no man can know, so long as he
lives, whether by his good or bad deeds, he be worthy of Gods love or anger: Do
ye not know that the Prophet David complained, that God had cast off his Soul?

I know all this, quoth Spira, I know the mercies of God are infinite, and do
surpass the sins of the whole world, and that they are effectual to all that
believe, but this faith, and this hope, is the gift of God: O that he would
give it me! But it is as impossible as to drink up the Sea at a draught. As for
that of Solomon, if he had ever tried that which I feel by woeful experience, he
would never have spoken as he did: But the truth is, never had mortal man such
an evident experience, of Gods anger and hatred against him as I have. You that
are in a good estate, think repentance and faith to be a work of great
facility: and therefore you think it an easy matter to persuade a man to
believe. The whole need not the Physician, and he that is well can soon give
counsel to such as are ill: But this is the hell to me, my heart is hardened, I
cannot believe: Many are called, but few are chosen.

Upon what ground, said they, do ye conceive so ill an opinion of your self

I once did know God to be my Father, not only by creation, but by
regeneration; I knew him by his beloved Son, the Author and finisher of our
salvation; I could pray to him and hope for pardon of sins from him: I had a
taste of his sweetness, peace and comfort; now contrarily, I know God not as a
Father, but as an enemy: What more? my heart hates God, and seeks to get above
him, I have nothing else to fly to but terror and despair.

It Is like you think, said they, that those who have the earnest and first
fruits of God's Spirit may notwithstanding fall away?

The judgments of God are a deep abyss, (said he,) we are soon drowned if we
enter into them; he that thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he fall: As
for myself, I know I am fallen back, and that I once did know the truth, though
it may not be so thoroughly: I know not what to say, but that I am one of that
number which God has threatened to tear in pieces.

Say not so, answered they, for God may come though at the last hour; keep hold
therefore at the least by hope.

This (quoth he) is my case. I tell you I cannot God has deprived me of hope;
this brings terror to my mind, and pines this body which is so weak, as it
cannot perform the several Offices thereof: for as the Elect have the Spirit
testifying that they are the sons of God, the reprobates even while they live,
do often feel a worm in their conscience, whereby they are condemned already:
and therefore as soon as I perceived this wound inflicted on my mind and will,
I knew that I wanted the gifts of saving grace, and that I was utterly undone;
God chastneth his children with temperate afflictions, that they may come as
gold out of the fire; but punishes the wicked with blindness in their
understandings and hardness of heart, and woe be to such, from whom God, takes
his holy Spirit:

Here one rebuked him, and told him, he gave two much credit to sense, that he
was not to believe himself but rather him that was in a good estate, and I
testify to you (said he) that God will be merciful to you.

Nay (answered he) for because I am in this ill estate; therefore can I believe
nothing but what is contrary to my salvation and comfort; but you that are so
confident of your good estate, look that it be true, for it is no such small
matter to be assured of sincerity: a man had need be exceeding strongly
grounded in the truth, before he can be able to affirm such a matter as you now
do; it is not the performance of a few outward duties, but a mighty constant
labor, with all intention of heart and affection with full desire and
endeavor, continually to set forth God's glory; there must be neither Fear of
Legates, Inquisitors, prisons nor any death whatsoever; many think themselves
happy that are not; it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, that shall go
to heaven.

They came another day and found him with his eyes shut, as if he had been
drouzy, and very loath to discourse; at which time there came in also a grave
man from Cittadella; who demanded of Spira, if he knew him, or not; he lifting
up his eye lids and not suddenly remembering him, the man said to him; I am
presbyter Antonie Fontania; I was with you at Venice, about eight weeks since:
'O cursed day! (said Spira) O cursed day! O that I had never gone thither!
Would God I had then dyed!'

Afterward came in a Priest, called Bernardinus Sardonius, bringing with him a
book of Exorcisms to conjure this devil, whom when Spira saw, shaking his head,
he said, I am verily persuaded, indeed, that God has left me to the power of
the devil; but such they are, as are not to be found in your Littany; neither
will they be cast out by spells. The Priest proceeding in his intended purpose,
with a strange uncouth gesture, and a loud voice, abjured the spirit to come
into Spira's tongue, and to answer: Spira deriding his fruitless labor, with a
sigh, turned from him. A Bishop there present said to Spira, Brother, God has
put virtue into the Word and Sacraments, and we have used the one means, and
find not that effect which we desire; shall we try the efficacy of the
Sacraments, Surely, if you take it as a true Christian ought to receive, the
body and blood of Christ, it will prove a sovereign medicine for your sick soul.

This I cannot do, answered he, for they that have no right to the promises,
have no right to the seals. The Eucharist was appointed only for Believers, if
we have not faith, we eat and drink judgment to ourselves: I received it about
a month since, but I did not well in so doing, for I took it by constraint, and
so I took it to my deeper condemnation.

Here Vergerius began to importune him earnestly to beware that he did not
wilfully resist grace, and put himself out of Heaven, charging him vehemently,
by all the love that was between them, by the love which he bare to his
Children; yea, to his own soul, that he would set himself seriously, to return
to that faith and hope, which once he had in the death of Christ: With many
such like words, Spira having heard much of the like matter formerly, and being
somewhat moved, said, You do but repeat, Vergerius, Why should I hope? why
should I believe? God has taken Faith from me; show me then whither I shall
go, show me a Haven whereto I shall retire. You tell me of Christ's
intercession, I have denied him; you command me to believe, I say I cannot; you
bring me no comfort; your command is as impossible for me to obey, as to keep
the Moral Law. If you should persuade one to love God with all his heart, soul
and strength, and God gives him not power, can he perform your desire? Do not
the Church teach us to sing, direct us, O Lord, to love thy commandments?
Hypocrites say that they love God with all their heart, but they lie; for my
part, I will not lie, but tell you plainly, such is my case, that though you
should never so much importune me to hope or believe, though I desire, yet I
cannot, for God as a punishment of my wickedness has taken away from me all
his saving graces, faith hope, and all; I am not the man therefore that you
take me for; its like you think I delight in this estate, if I could conceive
but the least spark of hope of a better estate hereafter, I would not refuse to
endure the heavy weight of the wrath of that great God: yea, for twenty
thousand years, so that I might at length attain to the end of that misery,
which I now know will be eternal: But I tell you my will is wounded, who longs
more to believe than I do? but all the groundwork of hope is gone, for if the
testimonies of holy Scriptures be true (as they are certainly true) is not this
true, Whosoever denies me before men, him, says Christ, will I deny before my
Father which is in heaven? is not this justly my case as if it had been
intended against this very person of mine? And I pray you, what shall become of
such as Christ denies, seeing there is no other Name under Heaven whereby you
look to be saved; What said St. Paul to the Hebrews? It is impossible for those
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall away, to be renewed to repentance.
What can be more plain against me? Is not that Scripture also: If we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth there remains no
more sacrifice for sins, but a certain looking for of judgment? the Scriptures
speaks of me, St. Paul means me, St. Peter tells me, It had been better I had
never known the way of righteousness than after I have known, to return from
the holy commandments, it had been better I had not known, and yet then my
condemnation had been most certain. Do you not see evidently, that I have
denied the known truth; I may justly expect not only damnation, but worse if
worse be imagined. God would have me undergo the just punishment of my sin, and
make me an example of his wrath for your sake.

The company present, admired his discourse, so grievously accusing himself of
his fore past life; so gravely and wisely relating, concerning the judgments of
God that they then were convinced, that it was not frenzy or madness, that had
possessed him: and being as it were, in admiration of his estate, Spira
proceeded again in this manner. Take heed to yourselves, it is no light or easy
matter to be a Christian; it is not Baptism, or reading of the Scriptures, or
boasting of faith in Christ (though even these are good) that can prove one to
be an absolute Christian: you know what I said before; there must be a
conformity in life, a Christian must be strong unconquerable, not carrying an
obscure profession, but resolutely expressing the Image of Christ and holding
out against all oppositions to the last breath: he must give all diligence by
righteousness, and holiness, to make his calling and election sure: many there
are that snatch at the promises in the Gospel, as if they undoubtedly did
belong to them, and yet they remain sluggish, and fearless, and being flattered
by the things of this present world, they pass in their course with quietness
and security, as if they were only happy men; whom nevertheless the Lord in his
providence has ordained to eternal wrath; as you may see in S. Luke's rich
man: thus it was with me, therefore take heed.

Then came one of his nephews and offered him some sustenance, which he
disdainfully refusing, so moved the young man's choler, that he charged him
with hypocrisy and dissimulation, or frenzy; to whom Spira gravely answering
said, You may interpret the matter as you will; but I am sure, I am not only
the actor, but the argument, and matter of the tragedy I would it was frenzy
either fained or true, for if it were fained or true I could puff it off at
pleasure, if it were a real frenzy yet there was some hope left of God's mercy,
whereas there is none, for I know that God has pronounced me an enemy, and
guilty of high treason against his majesty; I am cast away, a vessel of wrath,
yet dare you call it dissembling and frenzy; and can mock at the formidable
example of the wrath of God that should teach you fear and terror: but it is
natural to the flesh, either out of malice or ignorance, to speak perversely of
the works of God. The natural man discerns not of the things that are of God,
because they are spiritually discerned.

How can this be, said Gribauldus, that you can thus excellently discourse of
the judgments of God, and of the graces of his Holy Spirit, that you find the
want of them, and earnestly desire them, and yet you think you are utterly
deprived of them.

Take this for certain, says he, I want the main grace of all and that which
is absolutely necessary, and God does many times extort most true and strange
testimonies of his majesty justice and mercy; yea, out of the mouths of very
reprobates, for even Judas, after he had betrayed his master, was constrained
to confess his sin, and to justify the innocence of Christ; and therefore if I
do the like, it is no new or strange matter. God has taken faith from me, and
left me other common gifts, for my deeper condemnation: by how much the more I
remember what I had, and hear others discourse of what they have, by so much
the more is my torment, in that I know what I want, and that there is no way to
be relieved. Thus spoke he, the tears all the while trickling down; professing
that his pangs were such, as that the damned wights in hell endure not the like
misery: that his estate was worse, than that of Cain or Judas, and therefore he
desired to die. Yet behold, said he, the scriptures are accomplished in me,
They shall desire to die, and death shall fly from them. And verily, he seemed
exceedingly to fear, lest his life should be drawn out to a longer thread; and
finding no ease or relief, ever and anon cried out, O miserable wretch, O
miserable wretch! then turning to the company, he besought them in this manner.
O brethren! take a diligent heed to your life, make more account of the gifts
of God's Spirit than I have done; learn to beware by my misery; think not you
are assured Christians, because you understand something of the Gospel: take
heed you grow not secure on that ground, be constant and immovable in the
maintenance of your profession: Confess even until death, if you be called
thereto: He that loves father, mother, brother, sister, sons, daughters,
kindred, houses, lands, more than Christ, is not worthy of him. These words,
said they, do not sound like the words of a wicked reprobate. I do but here
imitate, said Spira, the rich glutton in the Gospel, who though in hell, yet
was careful that his brethren should not come to that place of torment: And I
say to you brethren, take heed of this miserable estate wherein I am. Then
turning himself to certain young men that were present, he desired them to
conceive him aright. I do not speak this to derogate from the certainty of
saving faith and the promises of the Gospel, for they are more sure; but take
heed of relying on that faith that works not a holy and unblameable life worthy
of a believer: credit me, it will fail, I have tried it, I presumed I had
gotten the right faith, I preached it to others, I had all places of scripture
in memory that might support it: I thought myself sure, and in the mean time
lived impiously and carelessly: behold now the judgments of God have overtaken
me, not to correction, but to condemnation: And now you will have me to
believe, but it will not be; for I feel too late that good things belongs only
to such as are good, whose sins are covered with Christ's death and blood as
with a veil, and guarded with his righteous merits from the flood of God's
wrath, even as with a mighty wall, lest miserable mortals should be swallowed
up with the greatness of their sin: but as for me, I have as it were, wilfully
with my hands pulled down this Rampire, behind which I might have rested in
safety; and now are the swelling waters come even to my soul, and I am cast
away. One of his familiar friends chanced to say, that certainly he was
overcome with melancholy, which being overheard, Spira answered:

Well, be it so, seeing you will needs have it so; thus also is Gods wrath
manifested against me, in that he has taken from me the use of mine
understanding and reason, so as I can neither rightly esteem and judge of my
distemper, nor hope of remedy. You see brethren what a dangerous thing it is,
to stop or stay in things that concern Gods glory; especially to dissemble upon
any terms. What a fearful thing is it to be near, and almost a Christian? Never
was the like example to this of mine; and therefore if you be wise, you will
seriously consider thereof. Oh that God would let loose his hand for me, that
it were with me now as in times past, I would scorn the threats of the most
cruel tyrant, bear torments with invincible resolution, and glory in the
outward professions of Christ till I were choked in the flame, and my body
consumed to ashes.

You say you are desperate, O Spira, (said they) why then do you not strive
with some weapon or other violently to make an end of your life, as desperate
men use to do? Let me have a sword (said Spira) why what would you do with it?
(quoth they.) I cannot tell you (said he) what this mind would move me to upon
occasion; nor what I would do.

They perceiving small effect of all this their labor; but rather that he grew
worse; for the avoiding of concourse of people (for every day seldom fewer than
20 continued with him) and to stop the course of fame which was continually
blown abroad of him, they consult to carry him back again into his own country:
and those his friends that came to comfort him, began to take their leaves of
him: Vergerius among the rest required that at their parting they might pray
together with him: Spira hardly consented, and as unwillingly performed: for he
said, My heart is estranged from God, I cannot call him Father, from my heart;
all good motions are now quite gone, my heart is full of malediction, hatred,
and blasphemy against God; I find I grow more and more hardened in heart, and
cannot stoop and help myself; your prayers for me shall turn to your own
benefit, they can do me no good.

Vergerius came to take his leave of him, whom Spira embracing, said, Although
I know that nothing can bring any benefit to me a reprobate, but that every
thing shall tend to my deeper condemnation; yet I give you most hearty thanks
for your kind office of love and good will; and the Lord return it to you with
a plentiful increase to all good.

The next day being brought down to his intended journey, by the way looking
round about him with a ghastly look, he saw a knife lying on a table, to which
he running hastily snatched hold of, as intending to mischief himself, but his
friends laying hold of him, stopped him in his purpose: whereupon with
indignation he said, I would I were above God, for I know he will have no mercy
on me!

Thus went he homewards, often saying, that he envied the condition of Cain and
Judas. He lay about eight weeks in this case in a continual burning, neither
desiring nor receiving any thing but by force, and that without digestion, was
so spent that he appeared a perfect anatomy, expressing to view nothing but
sinews and bones; vehemently raged for drink; ever pining, yet fearful to live
long; dreaded hell, yet coveting death in a continual torment, yet his own
tormentor: and thus consuming himself with grief and horror, impatience and
despair, like a living man in hell; he represented an extraordinary example of
the justice and power of God: and thus (as far as appears) within a few days
after his arrival at his own home, he departed this present life. Yet an
occasion to make us remember that secret things belong unto the Lord our God;
but charity to man, to teach him to hope all things.

FINIS.

