A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE DELUDED DUTARTRES.

BRIEf ACCOUNT OF THE DELUDED DUTARTRES; EXTRACTED FROM A SERMOM, Preached by
the Rev. Mr. ALEXANDER GARDEN, A. M. At Charlestown, in South Carolina.

NEW HAVEN: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER and COMPANY, at the Post Office,
1762.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT, etc.
THE DUTARTRES were a Family of French Extraction, consisting of the two
Parents and eight Children, four Sons and four Daughters, settled in
Orange-Quarter, in this Province. SOUTH-CAROLIN^
They were always in low Circumstances in Life, but of honest Repute; and for
many Years behaved themselves regularly and blameless in all outward Instances
of religious and moral Duty. But some Years before the fatal Period, came
hither a certain strolling Moravian, Dutch or Swiss Enthusiast, named CHRISTIAN
GEORGE; who partly by Conversation, and partly by the Writings of JACOB BEHMEN,
etc. soon filled their Heads with many wild and fantastic Notions. In a Year or
two's Time, they began to withdraw or separate from public Worship, and all
outward Ordinances of God in his Church, and from all Conversation with the
World as much as possible; and strongly to conceit that they were the alone
Family upon Earth who had the true Knowledge and Worship of God, and whom he
vouchsafed to instruct and direct either by the immediate Impulses of his Holy
Spirit, or by Signs and Tokens which he gave them. Finally, it came to open
Visions and Revelations. They imagined that God had raised up a Prophet unto
them from among themselves (Viz. PETER ROMBER^, who had married the eldest
Daughter of the Family, a Widow like (...) Moses and to whom they should b^.
This Text it seems was powerfully impressed on their Minds. It was not long til
this Man solemnly declared to them. That God had expressly revealed to him.
That the Wi^ of M^ was now again become as great upon the ^ar^ as (...) in the
Days of N^, and that therefore the Lord purposed to ^ey Mankind a Second Time
from off the Face of the Earth, all (...) that one Family, when he would
preserve as he did Noah's, for ^ng up a Godly Seed again upon i^. This
Revelation he was ^e of be ^w it, be felt it, as certainly as the W^d ^ng on
his Body, and they with as much Assurance believed and depended upon it.

SOON a^t^ this Prophet declared with equal Solemnity and Confidence to them,
that God had revealed to him thus, Put away the Woman whom thou now had for thy
Wife, for when I have de^ this Wicked Generation, then will I raise up her
first Husband from the Dead, and they shall be Man and Wife as before, and go
then and take to Wife her Youngest Sister who is a Virgin, so shall that cho^en
Family he restored entire, and the Holy Seed be preserved part and undefiled in
it. The old Man the Father was staggered at so strange a Message. But the
Prophet assured him that God would give him a Sign. (Viz. on their going to the
next Plantation, the first living Creature they should See there, should be
such a one a Horse suppose or a Hog) which accordingly came to pass; and
immediately the old Man took his Youngest Daughter by the Hand, and gave her to
the Prophet to Wife, and he went in unto her and lay with her without any
further Ceremony, pursuant to his Revelation. And thus they continued in open
and notorious Adultery and Incest, 'till the fatal Period we now come to
mention. So far possessed were these Persons with a Conceit of their own
Holiness, and of the Impurity and Wickedness of others, that they would give no
Obedience to the civil Magistrate, nor to any of the Laws and Ordin^ces of Men,
and accordingly refused to comply either with the Militia Law (...) Pretense
that God had revealed to them not to bear A^m^ or the Law for repairing the
Highwa^. After long forbearance Justice SYMMONS, a worthy Magistrate and
Captain of the Militia in those Parts, saw it necessary to (...) his Warrants
for levying the Penalties of those Laws upon them. Moreover by this Time JUDITH
DUTARTRE, the Prophets Revelation. Wife proving with Child, a third Warrant was
issued for bringing her before the Justice to be examined and bound over to the
general Sessions for Bastardy, pursuant to a Law of this Province. The
Constable having received these Warrants, got two or three or his Neighbors to
go with him, doubting what Usage he might meet with from so odd a Family. The
DUTARTRES apprised of his Coming and Errand, consulted their Prophet, who soon
told them, that God commanded them to arm and defend themselves, and their
Substance, from the Persecution and Robberies of the Men of the Earth, and that
no Weapon formed against them should prosper. On which they forthwith arm
themselves, fire upon the Constable, and those Persons with him, and drive them
out of their Ground.

THIS was not to be suffered; and therefore the Justice taking with him. Ten or
Twelve Men of the Militia, went to protect the Constable in the Execution of
his Office. On their Approach, this deluded Family shut themselves up in their
House, and then fired like so many Furies, Shot the Justice Dead on the Spot,
and Wounded several of his Men. At length the House was forced open, Mrs.
LESAD, was found killed and the rest Six in Number taken Prisoners, and brought
hither to CHARLESTOWN; where at a special Court of General Sessions, held the
Twenty Ninth, and Thirtieth of September, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Twenty-four, Five of them, Namely, MICHAEL BOINEAU, PETER DUTARTE, DANIEL
DUTARTE, JOHN DUTARTE, and PETER ROMBERT, were arraigned, and tried for Murder,
found Guilty and Condemned. -- But were these miserable Wretches ever convinced
of their Delusion? The three chief of them, Viz. The Prophet, the Father of the
Family, and MICHAEL BOINEAU, confidently persisted in their Delusion to their
last Breath. -- They appeared on their Trials, all together easy and
unconcerned. They asserted they had God on their Side, and therefore feared not
what Men could do unto them. They freely told the incestuous Story in all its
Circumstances, as abovementioned, in open Court, with a good Countenance; very
readily owned the Facts and Circumstances of the Rebellion, and the Murder
charged upon them, pled Justification in all as authorized of God by immediate
Revelations from him, averring they had done Nothing in the one or the other of
the Cases but by his express Orders and Command. -- As the visiting of Persons
under Sentence of Death is a Part of my Duty as a The (...) M^. GARDEN.
Minister of this Place, so I attended these unhappy Creatures with more than
ordinary Pains and Diligence. They very readily owned, repeated and confirmed,
all the Facts and Circumstances as beforementioned with no material Variation
from what they had done in Court. But when I came to Reason with them on those
Facts, and endeavor to convince them of the Errors and Wickedness they were
guilty of in committing them, they treated me with great Disdain -- Their Motto
was, Answer him not a Word! They were confident they had the Spirit of God
Speaking inwardly to their Souls, and who was I to pretend to talk to, or
instruct them? They had obeyed the Voice of God, and were about to suffer
Martyrdom for it. But God had assured them, that he would either Work a great
Deliverance for them, or raise them up from the Dead on the third Day. And thus
the three beforementioned, who were Executed continued to insist to their
Dying Breath. Their last Words to the Spectators were, that they should surely
see them alive again from the Dead the third Day. -- As to the other three, the
Daughter JUDITH was not tried. The two Sons DANIEL, and JOHN DUTARTRE, Lad's of
about Eighteen or Twenty Years of Age, who were Tried and Condemned, continued
sullen 'till after finding no Resurrection of the others from the Dead, as they
expected, they became sensible of their Delusion, at least professed themselves
so, and were pardoned.

BUT Alas! one of them relapsed into the same Snare, and Murdered an Innocent
Person, without any previous Quarrel or Provocation, and for no other Reason as
he acknowledged, but that God had revealed it to him, it was his Duty to do it.
He was Tried for this Murder, found Guilty, Condemned and Executed. I attended
him again, under this Second Sentence of Death, and it pleased God with all
apparent Hopes of Success. No one ever appeared more sensible of his Delusion,
or to die a more hearty and sincere Penitent, or in greater professed Hopes of
Salvation through the alsufficient Merits of CHRIST his Redeemer.

THUS ended this Tragical Scene of Enthusiasm, immediate Revelations and Strong
Impulses; by following which no less than seven Persons lost their Lives, one
Killed, two Murdered, and four Executed for those Murders. A remarkable
Instance to what Heights of Extravagance, Folly and Wickedness, Persons who
hold such Principles, and pretend to immediate Revelations, and to follow
Impulses may be hurried!

A NARRATIVE Of the LIFE, Together with The last Speech, Confession and solemn
Declaration, OF JOHN LEWIS, Who was executed at Chester, on Saturday the 21st
of September, 1760, for the most inhuman, barbarous and bloody Murder of his
Wife; which unnatural Deed he committed on Friday the 27th of June, preceding.

WITH His Letter to Mr. RAIN, the Sub-Sheriff of Chester, concerning the
Publication of the following Narrative: and a penitential Prayer which he
composed just before his execution.

-- Murder, though it has no Tongue, will speak,
With most miraculous Organ.
SHEKSPEAR. NEW HAVEN: Reprinted by JAMES PARKER and COMPANY, at the
POST OFFICE, 1762.

THE LIFE, and solemn DECLARATION OF JOHN LEWIS.
I Was born in the County of Bucks, in the Province of Pennsilvania, in the
Year 1727; where I lived with my Father till about the 12th or 13th Year of my
Age: From thence my Father removed into Vincent Township, in Chester County;
where I learned the Trade of a Country Carpenter.

I lived single, after I was at Age, about two Years; and in the (...) Year of
my Age I married Ann James, with whom I lived (...) the fatal twenty-seventh
Day of June last, when I, more like a Devil than a Man, laid my murdering Hands
upon her, and took away her Life, after the following Manner.

ON the (...) of June, it being Friday, my poor Wife was preparing in the
Morning to wish she being then two or three W^ (...) ^ning I advised he^ to
send for a Neighboring W^ to w^h; and said that I or one of the (...); for
that I thought in the Condition the was (...) over the Wash-Tub; to which she
w^d (...), b^ (...) she would do it herself, and ac^ (...) as I did to my Work,
which was to (...) a P^w, in a shed behind the House, (...) I used to work.
There I continued till late Dinnertime, (...) I (...) ^ether. After Dinner I
desired (...), which she refused, saying, (...) W^ and went immediately out to
the ^pring for ^m^ Water; I then went to my work, at which I con^ (...) the
Spring. I then went into the House (...) this T^ (...) Afternoon and after
(...) down on the Bed, which (...) before I ^mped on her, (...) on h^ Belly,
and (...) the Neck, and with my two Thumbs did throatle [choak] her (...) She
^ed out, (...) Johnny B^h! "don't kill me" -- I made no Reply, but proceeded
(...) my bloody Work; and she again cried out as well as she was able) "My
Life! my Life! -- " I still kept my wicked Purpose until she expired under my
murdering Hands (...) and having finished the horrid and devilish Jobb, I st^
out on^ or both her Legs, which she had drawn up during the Str^ggle, raised
her Head on a Pillow, and spread a Blanket over her. I then resolved to commit
another murder, viz. on the Body of one of my Children, about two Years old,
the rest being all out of Doors. The poor Babe was lying a-sleep on the Floor,
with (...) Head on the Tereshold, while the bloody Deed was a (...) ^ng. When I
had laid the Corpse as I mentioned above, I took the Child off of the Floor,
and carried it up S^s, to lay it on a Bed, when, Oh! di^ Thought! I was going
to murder in lest it should be an Evidence against me for the murder of (...)
Mother: B^ recollecting that it was a-sleep, I concluded there was (...) Danger
from its surviving; so it pleased God to prevent my taking its Life.

Now the next Contrivance was, to ^en my self from the World; In Order
thereunto I went to a ^bouring House where I knew were three Women: I desired
the^, if they pleased, to come along with me to my House, telling them, that my
Wife was a dying, if she was not already dead. Upon which they arose
immediately, and we made the best of our Way toward the House; but I being
afraid lest she might not be quite dead, I started often before the Women (as
they could not go so ^st as I) and got into the House so long before them, that
I had Time enough to see that she was dead; being resolved if she was not dead,
to finish her before they came up

By this Time the Women came in, and I told them it was too late, for my Wife
was dead, which caused a general Surprise, and after some Time one of the
Women, viewing the corpse very attentively, observed some marks on the Throat,
and asked me how they came there? I answered, I knew nothing of it; but said
that my Wife had comp^ed to me, for sometime past of a Lump gathering in her
Breast; and that it seemed to move upwards toward her Throat, and that she was
afraid it would strangle her; and that I did not question but that it was that
w^ was the cau^ of her death, Bach, a W^ Word (...)
and might cause (...) settle there, and make her Neck look so. By this Time
there came a fourth Woman, being sent for, and she asked the same Questions;
and I answered as before. Then they concluded to ^th and say out the corpse,
which they did, where she say till Sunday morning, the 29th Day; when the
C^o^e^ came with a ^ury, to view the Body, and to take the Inquest.

They examined me as the Women had done, concerning my Wife's Throat, and I
gave them the same answers; and by that means I was by the Jury acquitted of
the murder. That afternoon the ^se was buried.

So far I ^ed on my devilish Scheme with Success; but that very (...) Week in
the Ev^ng, I was again tempted to murder my (...) C^ g^ ^t ten Years old; but
it p^ed the Almighty to spare her Life also. Now I thought (...) was well, and
that I had done nothing amiss, being fare from the S^spi^s of Man; but ^s I
could not so escape from the a^ seeing Eye of the Almighty*

For (...) what a Hell (...) within myself, my grand Enemy forseen me, but ^e
le^ m^ (...) by (...), w^ch set me almost distracted. A^ ^g other things, I had
^s remarkable; That Day Week that I murdered my Wife and unborn Babe, just
about at the same T^ of the Day, i. e. (...) at 4 o'Clock in the Afternoon, I
was with my Children in the Meadow, taking Hay^ I was very hot, and laid myself
down in a (...) to cool myself, where, while I was lying, the whole dism^
affair appeared to my mind in its proper colors. I could not bear it: I
started up with a resolution to quit House, Home, Children and every thing, and
go to some strange part where I should not be known, without ever taking any
Thing with me. ^et off from that part of the Meadow, and struck through a ski^ of
Woods into another clear Part of the Meadow, and just as I was entering into
the said clear start, I heard the Voice of my deceased Wife, on my right Hand,
as plain as ever I heard in my Life, (thus) "O^ where is he now?" I started,
and looked about all ^ound me, but saw no body, upon which I immediately
thought it was in vain to fly fr^ the just Vengeance of the Almighty! but now
or after what Manner to (...) my tormented Mind I (...) I concluded: ^osom
myself to an acquaintance (...), and ^ent to (...) several ^mes for that Purp^,
but could get no (...) ^ng either (...) company or (...)

At length after continuing five or six Weeks in this miserable Condition, I
got an Opportunity with that Friend, and discovered my heinous Crime to him!
and by his Means I was apprehended and committed to this Place; where I now
wait for that Punishment which I justly deserve, by the Laws of God and Man.
And h^e I confess that I was near a Week in Confinement, before I could
persuade myself that I had done wrong in murdering my Wife; but now it has
pleased the Almighty to clear me out of that diabolical Infatuation, and set
the Heiniousness of, not only that but all other my manifold black Sins, before
me, which I hope through the Merits and Sufferings of my blessed Redeemer, that
though I have past the judgment of Man, which is just for my crimes, yet that I
may have mercy from my allmerciful Creator; and that it may please him to
reverse the final Doom of Death eternal!

As for the present Death, I do desire it, for could the Laws of Man allow
(...) to ^e, my L^e would be but a Burden: For which (...) I pleaded Guilty at
my trial, though advised to the contrary (bec^e the^e was no Evidence but my own
confession) Vain thought! Little did my Advi^es know wh^ Crowds of Evidences I
had within myself! And here I must accuse myself (...) the willful and
abominable Lie I told the Hon. Judge ALLEN, when he asked me the Cause of my
laying murdering Hands on my Wife? And whether I wa^ (...) other? which I
answered in the Negative: He then asked me, What other cause I had to commit to
barbarous a Crime? I told him we differed in Point of Religion, which was true,
and the other was a lie: for Jealousy was the (...) Cause, as I thought I had
for destroying both (...) and her unborn Infant's life.

I have now to the (...) of my remembrance told every action and Circumstance
of the N^; so now I do inten^ (as far as (...)) to (...) M^d; and, (...) order
to make my Repentance more (...) to (...) the Causes I thought I had to per^
(...) a (...); ^ping it may be a ^ing to man^ to avoid the (...) which I have
(...) upon.

(...) that (...), Jealousy, entered and took (...) of my (...) so far as to
(...) her before (...) (not only by what I (...) ^d) but (...) A^ (...) upon
(...) by the only (...) I had before so s^, which a^ped to fan the Fire, alas!
too much kindled already in my Bosom. How many restless Hours has it caused to
me! How many diabolical Instigations has it buzzed into my mind! which in
order to diverse, I had recourse to my BIBLE; where my Notions of the Scriptures
and the devilish Constructions I put on the sacred Text, only made me tenfold
more a child of Hell than I was before! and made that sacred Writing, which
should have been my guide to happiness, sink my poor Soul to the lowest Depth
of Perdition! -- for, as I observed before, we differed about Religion; which,
joined to Jealousy made me conclude that I was pointed out, and ordered by the
Almighty to murder my Wife and Children; from the following Text, viz. --
REVELATIONS, Chap. ii. Verses 20, 21, 22 and 23. Notwithstanding, I have a few
things against th^e, because thou suffer that woman Jezable, which calls
herself a prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication,
and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. And I gave her space to repent of her
fornication, and she repented not. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them
that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of
their deeds. And I will kill her children with death and all the churches shall
know that I am he which searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto
every one of you according to your works. -- Now behold the Device of Satan, to
lead a poor Wretch, headlong to misery, by misapplying the Scriptures, for by
the above words, I was suggested to believe that I had a call from the
Almighty, not only to kill my Wife and unborn Babe, but also her eldest
Daughter, and was the more confirmed in this wicked opinion on account of my
Jealousy, by the Words Fornication and Adultery, as in the above Text, and I
likewise thought it must be done no where but on a Bed, which therefore I did
as above.

And it was on that remarkable black Thursday the 19th Day of June last, that
the devilish murdering scheme took possession of my Mind, which I had not an
opportunity to put in Execution until the Friday Week following, when the
barbarous and bloody Act was perpetrated. I did several times between the first
impulse and the Execution of the black and horrid Deed, strive to resist
against the wiles of the Devil, and prayed to GOD for his Grace to withstand
the Temptation, and I thought I was answered, it was no Crime; which, as I
observed before led me strongly to the wicked Act I am now to suffer for. It
were needless (...) point out all the Texts that I have constructed to my own
destruction: But believing that the Almighty had predestined or elected all
the Sons or Adam, I did inter from thence that what I do I must do, and
therefore all was quiet within, N. B. The Scripture Doctrine of Predestination
is well summed up, and plainly expressed in the 17th Article of the Church of
England. Predestination to Life, is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby
(before the Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by
his Council, secret to us^, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he
has chosen in Christ, out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ, unto
everlasting Salvation a^ Vessels made to Honor. Wherefore they which be endued
with so excellent a Benefit of God, be called according to God's Purpose, by
his Spirit working in due Season. They through Grace, obey the calling, they be
justified freely, they be made Sons of God by Adoption, they be made like the
Image of his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ; they walk religiously in good
Works, and at length, by God's Mercy, they attain to everlasting Felicity.

As the godly Consideration of Predestination, and our Election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable Comfort to godly Persons, and such as
see in themselves the Working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the Works of
the Flesh, and their earthly Members, and drawing up their Mind to high and
heavenly Things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
Faith of eternal Salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle the^ Love toward God: So for curious and carnel Persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their Eyes, the
Sentence of God's Predestination; is a most dangerous Down fall, whereby the
Devil do: thrust them either into Desparation, or into Wretchlessness of
unclean Living, ^less perilous than Desparation.

Furthermore. We must receive God's Promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to as in holy Scripture: And in our doings, that Will of God is to be
followed which we have exp^y de^cla^ed to us in the Word of God.


till I was led by the Nose to dip my Hands in Blood; and then all my vain
hopes of right flew from me, and I was left a naked abandoned wicked Wretch,
not fit any longer to breath the common Air among mankind; therefore I would
warn mankind in general not to be too forward or conceited in putting their own
construction on the holy Writ, for I now believe there is a great pa^ of it yet
sealed up, and that we should not attempt to scan the Decrees or Will of the
Almighty. It is a piece of presumption too^ great for a poor Animal to
comprehend; all we should or ought to do, is to admire and adore; it was that
presumption was the cause of that Angle of light to fall into utter darkness,
where he is still striving to ruin the human Race, and by his wiles to
circumvent the intents of the Almighty, and by that means he craftily plays
upon mankind, when he finds he can have entrance at no other Door. O! that I
could speak to the whole World, and advise them by my untimely end, that they
would strictly (...) to the plain precepts of our blessed Redeemer, to fear GOD
(...) love their Neigbour; upon these two Commands, says he, ^g all the Laws
and the Prophets, and not be commenting upon ^se points of Scripture.

JOHN LEWIS.

He behaved with a good deal of Calmness and Composure at the Gallows; told the
Audience, that he had left his Confession in the Hands of the Sub-Sheriff;
confessed the Justness of his Sentence; begged the Prayers of all good People
and ended with the following Prayer.
O! Holy, holy LORD GOD ALMIGHTY! which was, and is, and is to come! who art a
God from Everlasting to Everlasting, without Variation or Shadow of turning; --
who art the same God Yesterday, Today, and forever; -- who art worthy of all
Adoration, both by Angels and Men. -- Do thou be pleased, good GOD, in and
through the Merits of our blessed Mediator, the Lord JESUS CHRIST, to pardon
all my Sins and Transgressions. And Oh! will thou be pleased in Mercy to blot
out all my manifold Crimes: Grant of thy un-erring Spirit to sanctify my
distressed Soul. I am not worthy of the least of thy Mercies of myself; who am
viler than the Dust under my Feet, by Reason of my disobeying and breaking thy
most holy Laws and Commands in diverse Ways and Manners, wherein thou have had
just Cause to cast me into the Ocean of Woe and Misery: Oh! wicked Man that I
am! who shall deliver me from this Body of Death, and from the blood-guiltiness
for which the Laws of Man have condemned me to suffer. -- Look down, look down,
all-merciful God! on a poor, wretched, unhappy Mortal; who have rendered myself
deserving of eternal Punishment, without it please (...), most gracious God, to
cast an Eye of Pity and Compassion (...) the Lord give me a broken Heart and
contrite (...) forgive my Sins and ^lot out mine Iniquities. -- FATHER (...)
Fatherless regard in Mercy my little Children; guide them in thy Ways; teach
them to walk in the paths of Truth, and suffer them not to go a-stray as their
wretched Father has done. (...) JESUS CHRIST, in Mercy receive my Soul:
Remember thy ^ster, of this ^e, who attends me this Day, and since I have (...)
Prison; Oh! will thou graciously hear his Petitions for my Soul -- And now,
Most High, I ^ome unto thee: Do thou ^ve my Sins and Trespasses, as I do desire
to forgive all those (...) have tr^as^ed against me. And receive my Soul in
Mercy.

A Letter from John Lewis to Mr. Samuel Rain, the Day he was executed.
Mr. SAMUEL RAIN,
ON you I depend to cause this Sketch of my Life and Confession to be made
public being assured, from the kind and Christian Treatment I have received
from you, during my Confinement, that you will not fail me in this Request. It
is customary for Wretches under my unhappy Circumstances to say something at
the Place of Execution, to satisfy the World, concerning the Crime for which
they suffer: -- am willing to give Satisfaction, but not at tha^ Place. I have
therefore committed what is necessary to writing, which I leave under your Care
and that you may have it made public, as soo^ as possible, after my decease, is
the last Request of your dying Wellwisher,

JOHN LEWIS
From my Cell, in Chester-Jail, September 30, 176^
A PLAIN ADDRESS TO THE QUAKERS, MORAVIANS, SEPARATISTS, SEPARATE-BAPTISTS,
ROGERENES, And other ENTHUSIASTS; ON Immediate Impulses and Revelations, etc.

By ROBERT ROSS, A. M. Pastor of the Church of Christ in STRATFIELD.

"Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. My
Soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace. I am for Peace; but when I
speak they are for War."

The Psalmist. "I will speak that I may be refreshed; I will open my Lips and
answer. Let me not, I pray you accept any Man's Person, neither let me give
flattering Titles unto Man. For I know not to give flattering Titles, in so
doing my Maker would soon take me away.

Elihu. Printed by PARKER and Comp. in New Haven.

A PLAIN ADDRESS, etc.
MEN AND BRETHREN,
AS my Station is Life and Connexions with some of you called me to make a
pretty full Enquiry, into your Notions about Religion; I have taken a good Deal
of Pains in my Searches on this Point. I have conversed largely, Time after
Time, with sundry of you on your peculiar Principles; and have read, and
maturely considered, sundry Books which have been written to defend them. I
have gotten all the Information about you, I could, from sober, judicious Men,
who were looked upon to be well acquainted with your Principles and Practices
in other Parts of the Colony, and in the neighboring Provinces. Thus, I have
carefully endeavored to guard against hasty prejudices and Party Spirit; so
that I have sufficient Reasons to believe, that my present Opinion of you is
well founded.

From this full and candid Examination of your religious Notions, and Practices
proceeding from them, I am well assured you are greatly mistaken. It appears
evident to me, that your Notions of immediate Impulses and Revelations are
extremely dangerous; and that your Method of applying and (as you call it)
spiritualizing the Holy Scriptures, exposes you, and those who give Heed to
you, to such Temptations, as Satan has made Use of to persuade Persons to
commit the most horrid Crimes. Methinks such awful Instances of following
strong Impulses may warn the World, and convince Men of the pernicious Tendency
of real Fanaticism.

Permit me then, while these shocking Monuments of Satan's Delusion are before
your Eyes, to make one Attempt, in Love and Compassion, to show you your
unhappy Mistakes; and to prevent sober well-meaning Persons from being deceived
by the Impulses, Revelations, etc. to which those who are properly called
Enthusiasts pretend.

It is indeed true, that there have been such Instances of evident Delusion
among you, as have convinced many who once joined with you; and might have
convinced you all long ago; had you not been strangely inattentive, or
unreasonably biased in Favor of your Errors. Since you still follow your
Impulses, though they have led some of you into great Extravagancies, and brought
you into deserved Contempt, in various Places; I am afraid there are sundry who
will not be reclaimed by any Thing that can be said. However I hope there are
some serious well disposed Persons who have been captivated by the specious
Pretenses of your Ringleaders, without having duly considered Matters. Such may
follow the Truth when it is discovered. Good Jehoshaphat was found in Alliance
with deluded Jehoram. Though the Prophet Elisha would hardly have attempted the
Relief of Jehoram, yet he regarded the Presence of Jehoshaphat.

Hence, I don't write so much for the Sake of your Ringleaders, who are
obstinately determined to maintain the Opinions they have embraced at all
Adventures, right or wrong; and their confirmed Disciples, as for the sake of
some honest well meaning Persons, that have been unwarily captivated by their
specious Pretenses and extraordinary Zeal; and to inform others, who are still
at a Loss about them, that they may be prevented from embracing their dangerous
Errors. And since the Hearts of all Men are in the Hands of God, who can tell
but he may bless a well meant Endeavor to reclaim even some who have been long
deluded.

As I don't write for the learned, I shall use the greatest plainness of
Speech, adapting my Style, if possible, to the meanest Capacities. And lest you
should not take the Force of my Arguments at first View, I shall submit to the
Drudgery of being a little repetitious, representing some of them once and
again.

You profess to be honest Enquirers after Truth, and to be conscientious in
your Way. I would fain hope you are sincere in these your Professions; for I
always think of you in the most favorable Point of Light, your Conduct will
possibly bear. If you are honest and sincere as you profess, I my depend upon
it, that you will peruse this Address with Patience and Candor. I can most
sincerely assure one and all of you, I mean you no Harm. I really seek your
best Good. Surely the least you can do, if you are honest Men, is to read and
seriously weigh these Considerations which are presented to you, not with any
Hopes of obtaining any worldly Advantage from you, but with a Desire to promote
the true Peace and Prosperity of the Church of Christ in general, and the best
Interest of your immortal Souls in particular: The Lord grant it may answer
these important Ends.

If there should be any so weak as to be provoked by this Address, I can assure
them it has been and now is, my constant Design to give just Occasion of
Offense to no Person in the World. Remember it is written, James i, 19, 20.
Let every Man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to Wrath. For the Wrath of
Man works not the Righteousness of God. The best of Men may be mistaken in
some Things, since none are infalliable. Is it notthen a Part of true Christ.
Charity to show Men their Mistakes? Why should any become Enemies to me,
because I tell them the Truth? -- It is honorable for Men to yield to the Force
of Truth, and forsake their Errors. But it is shocking Pride and a Baseness
peculiar to wicked and weak Minds to resist the Truth; and to pretend, they are
more confirmed in their Mistakes by the Arguments that are used to convince
them. Such Persons often vent themselves in angry Reproaches and railing, being
destitute of better Reasons. If any can be so silly as to think such Treatment
can be any Advantage to them, or their Cause, they are quite welcome for any
Thing that concerns me.

All who have any serious Regard for Religion will readily acknowledge, that
Mistakes about it may have the worst Consequences. And a moderate Share of
Acquaintance with the History of the Christian World would discover, that there
are no Mistakes about Religion which are of a more pernicious Tendency, or have
produced more shocking Consequences, than those which arise from Enthusiasm.
Have not the high Pretenses of Enthusiasts, to immediate Impulses and
Revelations, prejudiced many against the convincing, converting and sanctifying
Influences of the Spirit? Have not such Notions been an Occasion of leading
some half-thinking Persons to believe there is nothing in experimental
Religion, but the extravagant Fancies and wild Imaginations of crazy Brains and
ignorant Fanatics.

The Enthusiasm which so greatly prevailed in Cromwell's Time, the
Lay-Exhorters and Soldier-Preachers, prepared the Way for that Flood of
Arminianism and Irreligion, which overflowed the Nation in the succeeding
Reigns. Yea this has afforded the Deists one of their most specious Topics to
burlesque the Scriptures, and ridicule Christianity, which they have
ungenerously improved to the utmost. See (...) ^ounded on Argument, and (...).


Is it not evident that where Separations have most generally prevailed in
New England; loose Principles and vicious Practices have succeeded in their
Turn, and increased in Proportion as the Separations had done, especially among
the rising Generation? And is not one great Cause of this, that such Persons
educate their Children in a Disregard and Contempt of regular Preaching and
Ordinances? For when they grow up to Years of Discretion, their own Reason
teaches them that the gross Mistakes of their Parents cannot be right. Yet they
cannot easily shake off the Prejudices their Parents early instilled into their
Minds against the standing Ministry. Hence, they lose all Benefit of public
Preaching, grow careless about Religion and too often openly vicious. However
little Regard you pay to me, or to the standing Churches; you had better
consider your Conduct for your own Sakes, and the Sakes of your Children, who
are likely to be great Sufferers in their spiritual Interests, by their close
Connexions with you.

You did not indeed, I charitably believe, foresee that such awful Consequences
would arise from your Notions, and Separations; and I hope, you don't continue
in them with a Design to destroy experimental Religion and introduce Vice and
Profaness in the Land. But whatever your Design was, however honest you may be
in your Conduct I have good Reason to believe that these sad Consequences,
which I have mentioned, have actually followed in various Places.

Who made greater Pretenses to immediate Revelations, Prophesyings, Excus^s,
etc. than you Quakers, at your first Rise? And what have your extraordinary
Pretenses come to at last? Let any sober and understanding Christian search and
(...), and he may find enough to convince ^m of the (...) Cons^s of Enthusiasm.
O^ let him look among the M^s. What can any (...) Man think of your stan^ D^s^
and in mod^t Contemp^tions on Christ's Circumcission, and on M^ge, etc. etc.

It is (...) that many ov^ among us, have suffered very much in (...) spiritual
Inte^ by looking (...) ordinaries. Some of those unaccountably overlook these
Things in which Religion chiefly consists, in their great Zeal for some high
Peculiarities of their own. Who can tell how far a righteous God may permit
Satan to mislead them, for their Punishment in aiming at, and seeking after
immediate Impulses and Revelations; while they are not duly thankful for the
written Word of God, and the sanctifying Influences of the Spirit? Such build
Wood, Hay and Stubble, upon the Foundation. Such of these as have the Root of
the Matter in them, their Work shall be burnt, they shall suffer Loss; but
themselves shall be saved; yet so as by Fire. 1 Cor. iii. 12, 15
That is, with very great Difficulty. They shall but just escape.

When the Corinthians were favored with extraordinary Revelations, and
remarkable Gifts, they laid too great a Stress on them, were proud and puf^ed
up; this had a very bad Tendency. The Apostle Paul found it necessary to inform
them, that how much soever they might value themselves, on Account of their
extraordinary Gifts, Divine Charity in the Soul was infinitely more important.
How much more pernicious and dangerous must it be for Persons to pride
themselves, in their immediate Revelations, when their Pretensions have no just
Foundation?

From this brief View of Things, it appears, it will be a Piece of good Service
done to Religion to expose Enthusiasm, that so its Spread and Growth may be in
some Measure prevented. For this End I write the following Address on Impulses
and Revelations, which I direct to the several Sects that have pretended to
them. I think you are all pretty well agreed here, whatever Differences there
are among your several Denominations about other Things. Immediate Impulses and
Revelations are the Foundation of all Enthusiasm; and I am fully persuaded,
they are the Life and Soul of all your Schemes.

Here, that I may proceed with all possible Clearness, it is necessary to
observe, that some of these Impulses and Revelations are without Scripture
(...) at Things, which are not in any Sense contained in the Bible; some of
them are in the Words of Scripture; and some again are said to be the spiritual
Meaning or Sense of Scripture. As I do 't write to amuse but to instruct; I
shall not, like some over-modish Writers, so far impose on my Readers as
entirely to neglect all Method, nor industriously conceal the Arrangement of my
Tho'ts from them; yet I don't design to be so stiff and pedantick, as not to
digress, if I think there is proper Occasion. Without an^ Fear of anticipating
the Reader's Pleasure, or Sagacity, I will here inform him, that I design to
state and explain the Scripture Doctrine about the Teachings and Influences of
the Holy Spirit -- Then to represent and confute your Notions of new
Revelations and immediate Impulses -- After these are discussed, I shall
examine your Impulses which are in the Words of Scripture, pointing out some
Marks by which we may distinguish them from the genuine Influences of the
Spirit -- From this I shall proceed to offer some Considerations on the
spritual or Allegorical Sense of the Scriptures -- And some where toward the
End of my Address I shall fully examine your Notions of an immediate Divine
Call to the Ministry, etc.

I.
As to the Teachings and Influences of the Holy Spirit. God reaches us by his
Spirit by giving us a sufficient -- and a finished or completed Rule of Faith
and Practice in all Things necessary to Salvation in his Written Word -- and by
bringing his People effectually to know, and love, and be duly influenced by
the Holy Scriptures.

1. As God was pleased to inspire Men by his Holy Spirit to write a Revelation
of his Will in the Scriptures for the Instruction of Mankind; these sacred
Writings are to be esteemed the Teachings of his Spirit. The divine Character
of this Teacher necessarily supposes, that when he undertook to instruct
Mankind in the Will of God, he would do it as fully and perfectly, as was
necessary for them in their present Circumstances. We cannot without great
Absurdity ascribe a Revelation to God, that is deficient in any Thing
absolutely necessary to be known for the Time being, since God is perfect in
all his Works.

The Old Testament was sufficient for the Instruction of the People of God in
that Time. God revealed him^, his holy Will, his Displeasure against Sin, Man's
Ruin thereby, and the Method of Recovery through Jesus Christ; together with the
Rewards and Punishments of a future State, at sundry Times, and in various
Ways, so clearly, that all serious ^quirers might attain to such a Knowledge of
these Things (...) was necessary for their Salv^. This is s^p^ in the Old
Testament, that I might have taken it for granted, were it not that some of you
The old Arab^p^s taught, that the Is^tes had no Knowledge of a future State of
Rewards and Punishments, and that the Promises of the Old Testament referred
only to an earthly Happiness. And absurd as this Notion may seem, I cannot think
of any Way in which they can better a^de the Arguments b^n't from the Co^erent
made with Abraham and his Seed, that grand C^ter of the ^ide Church, for in an^
Rapt^s^. See Collo. ^ranco Art. 15.16. and (...) Vol. ii. P. ^12.
have strongly denied it.

The terrible Threatenings which God denounced against our first Parents in Case
they should eat of the forbidden Fruit, his turning them out of Paradise upon
their violating this Precept^ cursing the Ground for their Sakes, and
subjecting them and their Posterity to various Afflictions and Sorrows, as
Moses gives an Account, was an awful display of God's Hatred against Sin. That
gracious Declaration, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Head of the
Serpent, the sparing their Lives and granting them several Mercies, could not
but give them some Intimations of Salvation by the glorious Redeemer, the
promised Seed of the Women. To give them some Ideas how this Salvation from Sin
was to be accomplished, Sacrifices were instituted, as appears from these of
Cain and Abel. For there is so little Connection between the killing of a Beast
and the Advantage of the Owner, that no Man could ever have contrived such a
Rite. It is expressly said in Scripture that Abel sacrifised in Faith. Heb. ^i.
4.
Thus it is evident that Sacrifices were instituted by God at first, to be
emblematical Representations of the Sufferings and Death of Christ. Hence he is
said in the Revelations to be the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World.
Rev. xiii. 8.


Now if the Saints of old had any Notices of Salvation by Christ, they must
have had some Ideas of a future State of Rewards and Punishments. For it is
principally eternal Punishment which Christ delivers his People from, and
eternal Salvation which he purchases for them by his Obedience, Sufferings and
Death. When God had given such terrible Displays of his Anger in this Life
against Sin, as the Punishment of our first Parents, and the drowning of the
old World, what could the Isralites reasonably think become of those who died
without being savingly interested in the glorious Redeemer? Is it to be
imagined that those eminent Saints, who walked with God, some hundreds of
Years, should have no Knowledge of that Happiness and Glory, which God has
prepared for his People, and of the Punishment which awaits the Wicked in the
World to come? The Apostle Jude assures us Enoch the seventh from Adam
prophesied -- Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to execu^
Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all
their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
Speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. Jude 14, 15.
Jude speaks of this Prophesy, as what was well known among the Jews in his
Time, which it might be either by certain Tradition, or in some Book which is
now lost. Is it not strange that any should imagine that the Doctrine of future
Rewards and Punishments was not known to the ancient Church?

God promised to Abraham Genesis xv. 1. xvii. 7.
to be his Shield and exceeding great Reward, yea "to be his God." Did the Lord
mean in these glorious Promises, that he would be a God and an exceeding great
Reward, to Abraham only in this transitory World, the few Days of his
Pilgrimage in this Earth? Could Abraham or his Posterity limit them to this low
Sense? How then could Jacob when he was drawing near the End of his Life
rejoice in the Prospect of Salvation? I have waited says he, for thy Salvation,
O Lord. Genesis xlix. 18.
But these Patriarchs are said, by the Author of the Hebrews, to have desired a
better Country, that is an heavenly, Heb. xi. 16.
which should be allowed as an evident Demonstration of their Knowledge of a
future State.

Circumcision, which was a Seal of the Covenant that God made with Abraham, is
said by the Apostle Paul, Romans iv. 11.
to have been a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, or of Justification by
Faith. Now, Justification is a Term borro^ed from the Manner of proceeding in
Courts among Men, and refers to the great Day of Judgment, when God will
approve the sincere Believer, and condemn the impenitent Sinner. And since
Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, or of Justification, it
referred to the Rewards and Punishments of a future State. Romans iii. 20. By the
Deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight. The learned ^i^ting
has with great Propriety observed, that this Word is borrowed from Psalm.
cxiiii. 2. and must therefore signify to receive the Testimony of being
righteous from a Judge, and cannot merely signify to obtain Mercy. To be
justified also sometimes signifies to overcome in Judgment. Psalm. li. 4 and the
Expression of being just before God, implies the same. And that this is the
Sense of the Word in this Epistle, appears from several passages; particularly
Romans ii. 3. So that on the whole, as he argues Justification is not a Phrase
parallel to Forgiveness, but refers to a judicial Process and carries in it the
Idea of Acquital, Praise and Reward. And Indeed it seems to me always
ultimately to refer to the being pronounced, and treated as righteous in the
great Day of God's universal Judgment. Doddriage.


Moses informs us, that the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious long-suffering, and abundant in
Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, and
Transgression and Sin, and that will by no Means clear the guilty. Exodus xxxiv.
6, 7.
or impenitent Sinner. Could Moses, could the Israelites, imagine that this
important Proclamation of God's Goodness, Mercy and Forgiveness, referred
merely to temporal Riches, and worldly Greatness, in the Land of Canaan? No.
Moses's Temper and Character is thus described by the Apostle, Heb. xi. 25, 26.
Christ proved the Doctrine of the Resurrection and a future State, from what
the Lord said to Moses in the Bu^h. If the Saduces denied it, 'twas because
they greatly erred^ not knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God.
Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season; Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt: For he had Respect unto the Recompense of Reward.
This Reward, as Doddridge observes, could not be temporal Grandeur, which he
might have had with much greater Security and Advantage in Egypt; nor the
Possession of Canaan which he never enjoyed: It must therefore be the eternal
Inheritance, which was discovered to him by the Principle here so largely
described and recommended.

The Hopes of a glorious Immortality were a Support to the People of God in
their Afflictions under the Mosaic Dispensation. Thus David; Although my House
be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered
in all Things and sure: For this is all my Salvation and all my Desire, although
he make it not to grow.

Though the Government of the Jews was a Theocracy God being their King in a
peculiar Sense, yet he did not always reward the Righteous, and punish the
Wicked, in an immediate Manner. He appointed Judges, and Kings, as Viceroys,
investing them with much of the executive Authority; and only interposed on
some extraordinary Occasions, when Necessity required that they should be put
in Mind of the peculiar Relation in which they stood to God. It was observed,
that, Because Sentance against an evil Work is not executed speedily; therefore
the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil. Eccles. viii. 11.
And it is certain that the wicked were so often prosperous, and the righteous
afflicted during that Dispensation, that some of the most eminent Saints were
greatly stumbled at it. The future State of Rewards and Punishments, when the
Saints shall be made completely happy, and the wicked punished, was their
Support at such Times; as appears at large from the lxxiii. Psalm; and the Book
of Job, especially the xix Chap.

Solomon, strongly inferred a future State from the Distributions of Providence
of this Kind which he observed Eccles. iii. 16, 17.
I saw under the Sun the Place of Judgment, that Wickedness was there; and the
Place of Righteousness, that Iniquity was there. I said in my Heart, God shall
judge the righteous and the wicked: for there is a Time there, for every
Purpose, and for every Work." It was common even to a Proverb in his Time that
the wicked is driven away in his Wickedness, but the righteous has Hope in his
Death.

Their Prophets and Teachers enforced their Exhortations by the powerful
Argument of future Rewards and Punishments. Therefore the ungodly shall not
stand in the Congregation of the righteous. For the Lord knows the Way of the
righteous: but the Way of the ungodly shall perish. Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little:
blessed are all they that put their Trust in him. The wicked shall be turned
into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God. Our God shall come and shall
not keep Silence. He shall call from the Heavens above, and to the Earth, that
he may judge his People. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in Pieces and there be none to deliver. Her House is the Way to Hell, going
down to the Chambers of Death. Know thou, that for all these Things, God will
bring thee into Judgment. For God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with
every secret Thing, whether i^ be good, or whether it be evil. Tophet is
ordained of old: yea for the King it is prepared: he has made it deep and
large: the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, the Breath of the Lord, like a
Stream of Brimstone does kindle it. And many of them that steep in the Dust of
the Earth, shall awake; some to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and
everlasting Contempt, etc. etc.

The same Covenant of Grace was administered under the Old Testament as under
the New, though in a different Manner. The same Salvation was preached, the same
Savior was represented and typified, though with different Rites, and in a more
obscure Manner. Temporal Blessings and Punishments were but Appendages to the
Abrahamic Covenant.

God carried on the Scheme of eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ then, as well
as now, and recommended it by the same Heaven and Hell. And though this Salvation
was not so clearly represented before Christ actually came in the Flesh, yet
the People of God had such Intimations of the glorious Redeemer as were
sufficient for their Trust in him. All Things that were then necessary for
Salvation were so plainly revealed in the Old Testament, that our Blessed Lord
himself teaches, that those who refused to hear and obey Moses and the
Prophets, would not have repented, though one had been sent from the dead to
preach to them. "Search the Scriptures," was Christ's Direction. "It is written
in the Scriptures," was a decisive Proof with the Apostles. The Scriptures are
said by the Apostle Paul, to be able to make Men wise unto Salvation, through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Two Things plainly follow from what has been now proved.

1. That it is not an absurd Thing to baptist the Infants of Christian Parents
under the Gospel. Circumcision the Rite of Admission into the visible Church is
changed into Baptism. But since the Covenant is the same, Infants may be
visibly taken into it, under the Gospel, as well as they were under the Law.

2. The written Word of God contains all Instructions necessary to our
Salvation. If the Scriptures of the Old Testament were sufficient for the Jews,
it would be very absurd to suppose, that the written Word of God which we now
have, when the Instructions of Jesus Christ and his Apostles are added to those
of Moses and the Prophets; and when Life and Immortality are more clearly bro't
to Light by the Gospel, and the Resurrection of Christ, does not contain all
Things necessary for Salvation.

The Evangelists profess to write THE GOSPEL of Christ, and who, that firmly
believes they were divinely inspired, can doubt whether they have done it
sufficiently? Was not the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit granted unto
them, to lead them to a perfect Remembrance of the Gospel History themselves,
that they should not commit any Mistake in their Instructions; and to enable
them to communicate, and write them to others with sufficient plainness? Who
dare say, that the inspired Disciples of Christ have not faithfully recorded,
whatsoever he commanded them in the New Testament?

The Apostle John plainly appears to to have wrote his Gospel as a Supplement
to the other three. See Doddridge, on the Time of writing the Historical Books.
We are informed by the Fathers, who lived in the first Ages of Christianity,
and whose Testimony is of great Weight in this Case, that he wrote it in
extreme Old Age, very near the Conclusion of the first Century. He was
undoubtedly the last of the inspired Writers. He bears the following Testimony
to the sufficiency of the written Word. John xx. 30, 31.
Many other Signs truly did Jesus in the Presence of his Disciples, which are
not written in this Book; but these are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, and that believing ye might have Life through his Name. Thus
according to the Apostle John's Account, which he wrote by the immediate
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, all Things necessary to Faith and eternal Life,
are to be found in the written Word.

Now if the Scriptures be a sufficient Rule, if they contain a Revelation which
teaches us all Things necessary to Salvation, to Faith and Practice, and that
in a Manner sufficiently plain; there can be no Need of the Traditions of
Papists, the infalibility of the Pope; nor of the immediate Revelations of
Enthusiasts, to direct us in our Conduct.

2. But I must now proceed another Step, namely, that the Scriptures are such a
perfect Rule, that we are to expect no further Revelations and Directions
relating to Religion. God has given us the whole Revelation of his Will, which
he designs for our religious Instruction, in the Scriptures.

The Writers of the New Testament evidently prove this by their frequent
Appeals to the Old Testament, and their own Writings, as the only Standard or
Test of Truth and Error If any Man, says the Apostle Paul, think himself to be
a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the Things which I write unto
you are the commandments of the Lord 1 Cor. xiv. 37.
The Apostle 2 Pet. iii. 1, 2, -- 15.
Peter recommends his beloved Brother Paul's Epistles; and in the last Epistle
which he himself wrote a little before his Death, he exhorts the Churches to be
mindful of the Words which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the
Commandments of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior. "We are of God," says
the Apostle John, 1 John, iv. 6.
He that knows God hears us; he that is not of God hears not us: Hereby
know we the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error. Since therefore, these
Writers, who were inspired by the Holy Ghost, thus plainly assert the
Perfection of their own Writings, as the only Test of Truth and Error, and
appeal to them in Conjunction with the old Testament; this affords full Proof,
and clear Evidence, that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, contain
all the Revelations which God designed to give Mankind relative to their
religious Duty.

It has been supposed, that this is one Thing which is intimated in those
remarkable Words of Christ, which are at the Close of the last Book of the
Bible, I testify unto every Man that hears the Words of the Prophecy of this
Book, if any Man shall add unto these Things, God shall add unto him the
Plagues that are written in this Book. And if any Man shall take away from the
Words of the Book of this Prophesy, God shall take away his Part out of the
Book of Life.

1 Ob. But does not God promise thus? Isaiah lix. 21. And see Barelay's Apol.
^. 46.
As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is
upon thee, and my Words, which I have put in thy Mouth shall not depart out of
thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's
Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and forever.

Ans. God does not say in this Text, that he would put his Words in their
Mouths in an immediate Way. You have no Right to add to his Words. Why may not
God refer in this Promise to his putting his Words in Men's Mouths by Means of
the Scriptures, which were written by the Inspiration of the Spirit, and which
are by Way of Eminency the Word of God? Does not the Spirit of God also put his
Words in the Hearts and Mouths of Sinners by his convincing and sanctifying
Influences, setting divine Truth home on their Consciences? Since therefore
what is promised here may be fully performed in these other ordinary Ways,
without immediate Revelation; I don't see how this Text can be any Thing to
your Purpose. Your Conclusion from this Text, that it must be immediate, is
just like his Reasoning in the Play; who, as soon as he heard that Pamphilus
was not to have Glycerium for his Wife, inferred he must have her himself, as
if there had been no other Men in the World.

2 Ob. But has not Christ promised in the New Testament, John xvi. 26.
to his Disciples, that the Comforter or Holy Ghost shall teach them all
Things; and bring all Things to their Remembrance!

Ans. Christ had chiefly a Referrence to his Apostles in this Passage. He was
speaking to them -- As he sent them to preach the Gospel to all Nations, to an
ignorant and malicious World; and appointed them to write the New Testament for
the Instruction of Mankind, and the Edification of his Church in all succeeding
Ages; so the immediate Teachings and Inspirations of the Spirit, were
absolutely necessary for them.

So far as this Text refers to Christians in general, it may be very reasonably
interpreted of the Spirit's improving the written Word, in his convincing,
inlightening and sanctifying Influences. But if any will pretend that the
Spirit teaches them all Things, and brings all Things to their Remembrance,
now, in an immediate Way; I would remind such, that we are informed by St.
John, that there were many other Things which Jesus did, besides those that
were written. Pray reveal some of those Things, which are not written in the
Bible to the World. Daniel and his Companions actually revealed
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream to him.

When God gives immediate Revelations and Directions to Men, he gives some
Evidence, which is sufficient, if duly attended to and examined, to prove that
such Revelations come from him as their true Original. This is absolutely
necessary, since there is a false Spirit who makes it his grand Business to
deceive. God has commanded us, 1 John iv.
not to believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they are of God,
because many false Prophets are gone out into the World. But how shall we try
the Spirits, unless God has given us some Rule, Mark or Evidence to try them by?

"The Word spoken by Angels," says the Apostle, Heb. ii. 2.
was steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just
Recompense of Reward. See Doct. Owen on this Text.
This implies that what Means soever God is pleased to use in the Revelation of
his Will, he gives it a Certainty, Steadfastness, Assurance and Evidence, which
our Faith may rest in, and which cannot be neglected without the greatest Sin.
The Word spoken by Angels, or the Law of Moses, was steadfast.

Divine Revelation is steadfast in Respect of them unto whom it is spoken being
the Foundation of Faith and Obedience; the formal Reason of them, and the last
Ground whereunto they are resolved -- On the Part of God, it is a stable and
sufficient Ground of Righteousness, in proceeding to take Vengeance on them, by
whom it is neglected. The Punishment of Transgressors, is a meet Recompense of
Reward, because the Word spoken unto them is steadfast. If the Revelation be
not a stable, firm Foundation for the Faith and Obedience of Men, they cannot
be justly punished for the Neglect of it. There must then be some Evidence
which sufficiently proves a Revelation to be from God; otherwise he could not
be just in punishing them for disregarding it, since on such a Supposition he
would punish them for not believing that which he gave them no sufficient
Reason to believe which suits not with the Holiness and Justice of God.

This Passage of Holy Scripture not only shows that immediate Revelations must
be recommended by sufficient Evidence to Mankind; but it also expressly
declares what this sufficient Evidence is, which confirms the Truth of new
Revelations. This whole emphatical Passage is an Inference from what the
Apostle had discoursed about the Excellencies of Jesus Christ, in the first
Chapter, and runs thus. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest Heed to the
Things which we have heard, lest at any Time we should let them slip. For if
the Word spoken by Angles was steadfast, and every Transgression and
Disobedience received a just Recompense of Reward; how shall we escape if we
neglect so great a Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them
Witness, both with Signs and Wonders and with diverse Miracles and Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, according to his Will?

The Word here spoken by Angels means the Law of Moses. The Phrase, Great
Salvation, which is placed in Contrast or Opposition, means the Gospel.
Interpreters observe, that the Gospel is called Salvation by a Metonymy of the
Effect for the Cause, being the Revelation of the Grace of God, that brings
Salvation; the Word that is able to save us.

God bore Witness to the Truth of this Revelation, not merely by strong
Impulses, but by Signs, Wonders and Miracles, etc. Thus we are assured, that
Miracles, public Miracles are the Evidence and Seal which God gave to the
Truth of the New Testament. And the Old was confirmed in the same Manner. Moses
proved the Truth of his Revelations in Opposition to the Magicians, and Korah
and his Company by incontestible Miracles. And Miracles were the Test, by which
Elijah tried, and confounded the false Prophets, who pretended to Revelations
in his Days. Whoever therefore pretends to new Revelations; whoever would
assume a Power of making new Terms of Communion, besides those contained in the
Scriptures, must work proper Miracles in the Face of the World; otherwise their
Revelations and Prophesies; their unscriptural Terms of Communion may be safely
rejected because destitute of God's Seal.

Persons and Churches can attain to no higher Degrees of Reformation and
Purity, than sincerely to believe, and practice the Directions God has given us
in the Bible. All pretenses to any Thing beyond -- to any Thing besides this
divine Rule in Matters of Religion are vain and impious. Hence all new
Revelations, let who will pretend to them; all new Terms of Communion, let who
will invent them, yea though Ecclesiastical and civil Power should join in
Alliance to impose them with the greatest Rigor, are to be rejected.
Christians should regard and obey nothing as divine, till it is proved to
proceed from God by proper Miracles. The heated Fancies of Enthusiasts, and the
Presumptions and Impositions of zealous and persecuting Bigots, afford no
sufficient Warrant for our Faith. They are equally groundless, and should be
disregard by all who profess to be the Followers of Christ. Human Authority and
Number of Men are of no Weight here. Nothing but Miracles will prove Directions
for our religious Conduct to be divine.

God has not set his Seal of Miracles to any other Revelation relative to
Salvation and our ordinary Duty; but that contained ^in the Bible. If therefore
Christians will receive for divine, any Revelation which has not God's Seal
upon it; if they will submit to any unscriptural Impositions of Men, they may
thank themselves for being deceived. Let them, in all Matters relating to
Salvation, follow no Impulses and Revelations; no Teachings and Inventions of
Men, by whomsoever devised and imposed, but those contained in the Bible, or
which may be derived from it by ^air Consequences; and this will be an
excellent Preservative against Delusions. No Revelations are to be looked for,
and depended on to direct us in our Conduct, but those delivered in the
Scriptures; since God has confirmed and recommended these, and only these, by
proper Miracles, which are his Witness, Mark, Evidence and Seal.

3 But though God has given Mankind all the Directions for their Conduct in his
written Word, which they are to expect; this does not superlede the Necessity
of the inward Work of the Spirit on their Hearts, in Order to bring them to be
sincerely religious. There is no sufficient Evidence to induce us to believe,
that Sinners become religious, merely by Dint of their own Application to Duty;
as Scholars learn Reading, Writing or Mathematics, by close Application to
Study. Indeed the Scriptures represent Men as being indifferent, or rather
averse to seek after God. They are not very sensible that they are Sinners, so
as greatly to need his pardoning Mercy. I hearkened and heard says the Lord by
his Prophet, Jer. viii.
to the Jews who were favored with peculiar Advantages but they spoke not
aright, no Man repented him of his Wickedness saying, What have I done? every
one turned to his Course, as the Horse rusheth to the Battle. They are
naturally so foolish as to say in their Hearts "there is no God." Most
certainly Mankind are greatly ignorant of the infinite Purity of God, the
inflexible strictness o^ his Law, and the glorious Righteousness of Christ.
They are but little affected with the important Truths and Facts, which are
recorded in the Scriptures; so great is their natural Love of Sin; so strong
are their carnal Lusts. Thus they are inwardly corrupted, and consequently have
Need of the inward Influences of the Spirit on their Hearts. Whatever then is
necessary to bring Sinners effectually to know and love the Truth, as it is in
Jesus; and be duly enfluenced by it; all this is done by the Spirit of God in a
Day of his Power.

The remarkable Success of the Gospel at first is at once a glorious Proof of
the Divine Truth of Christianity, and of the internal Operations of the Spirit
on the Souls of true Converts -- The Lord Jesus Christ according to the Flesh
was of the Jewish Nation, which was hated by the Gentile World for sundry
Reasons. He was bro't up at Nazareth, which was a very mean and despicable
Place. He appeared in such low Circumstances that his own Nation took Umbrage
at his pretending to be their Messiah, and put him to Death as an Imposter and
Blasphemer. After his Death, the greatest Part of the Jews still approved of
their Conduct, reproaching him to the utmost. They took every Method they could
devise, to prevent his Disciples from preaching in his Name.

The Gentile Nations as they hated the Jews, and were ready to be immediately
prejudiced aginst any Doctrine which any of them should advance; so they had
lost all rational Ideas about God, having from Time immemorial apostatised from
his Worship to that of their deceased Heroes and Idol Deities. And as Mankind
are greatly biased by their Education, and early Connexions, ready to imitate
their Parents, and strongly prejudiced in Favor of Customs, Habits and
religious Ceremonies, which they receive from their Ancestors; so the Heathen
Nations were most firmly attached, and violently bigoted to the Religion
professed in their respective Countries. They were instantly fired against any
that should affront their Gods: yea ready to risque their Lives as well as
Estates in Defense of their Religion. Jer. ii. 10, 11.
"Pass over," says the Lord by his Prophet, the Isles of Chittem and see; and
send unto K^dar, and consider diligently, and see if there be any such Thing.
Has a Nation changed their Gods which are no Gods? The Christian Religion was
not only different from the Religions, which the Gentile Nations professed, in
one or two Points; but was contrary to all the religious Systems then in the
World, in the most material Things. And it was equally contrary to the natural
Temper of Mankind, to their corrupt Inclinations and sinful Practices. It was a
Religion every where spoken against.

The chief Priests and Elders of the Jewish Nation were not more zealous
against the Gospel of Christ, than the Grandees of the Gentile World. -- Their
Orators harangued against it; their Poets satyrised and bantered the
Christians, for worshipping a crucified God. And the Civil Powers exerted their
Authority in suppressing and persecuting them to Death. Christians were
actually put to Death by Thousands at Rome, in the most barbarous Manner, and
wherever they could be found, for a Terror to prevent others from embracing
their Religion. Yet this new System, this Gospel of Jesus of Nazareth who was
crucified; this Scheme that was so contrary to all the religious Notions and
Customs, which they had learned from their Parents, had received from remote
Antiquity, and to which they themselves had always been habituated; this
Gospel, that was so contrary to the natural Inclinations, and vicious Practices
of Mankind, daily spread and prevailed, conquered their Prejudicies, triumphed
over all Oppositions; and in process of Time subdued the large Roman Empire.
The Emperors themselves became obedient to the Faith of Christ. To whom is this
to be ascribed?

The chief Persons employed in effecting this surprising Revolution were twelve
Fishermen of the despised Jewish Nation. One Saul who had been a violent
Persecutor joined himself to them, and became a Preacher. But the Moment he
became a Disciple of Jesus of Nazareth, he lost his Influence with his former
Friends. His Power and Inclination to persecute forsook him at the same Instant.

As the Apostles were not bro't up in Courts but were plain Fishermen, their
Success was not owing to their being fine Gentlemen, or the Arts of flattering
Insinuations. If they had been furnished with sufficient Learning and Skill, or
been Men of polite Breeding and easy Manners; they were so poor in the World,
having forsaken that little they possessed of its Riches at the Command of
their Lord and Master, that they could never have put such Methods in Practice.

The Poverty of the Apostles must have been an insuperable Inconvenience to
them in the ordinary Methods of Success. It was observed by the wise Man in his
Time, Prove. xiv. 20. xix. 7. Eccles. ix. 16. And see Steel's Christian Hero. P.
(...) 40.
that the Poor is hated even of his own Neighbors and Brethren, but the Rich
has many Friends. -- The poor Man's Wisdom is despised, and his Words are not
heard. And many others have observed, that it is with great Disadvantage a poor
Man enters upon the most ordinary Affairs; much more disputing with the whole
World, and in Contradiction of the Rich, that is, the wise; For as certainly as
Wealth gives Acceptance, and gai^ Approbation to all that its Possessor says or
does, so Poverty creates Disesteem, Scorn and Prejudice to all the Undertaking
of the Indigent. The poor Man is s^ghted in Men's Conversations, overlooked in
their Assemblies, and often beaten at their Doors. In a Word, after all you can
say of a Man, if you conclude "yet he is rich" you have made him Friends; nor
have you utterly overthrown him in the World's Opinion, 'till you have said, he
is poor. This is the emphatical Expression of Praise and Blame; For Men so
stupidly forget their natural Impotence and Want, that Riches and Poverty seem
often to take in their Imaginations the Place of Innocence and Guilt.

As the Apostles were poor, and destitute of worldly Power, they were naturally
fearful and timorous, and Witness their cowardly forsaking their Master when he
was apprehended and Peter's denying him through Fear.
of Consequence did not subdue the Nations by Force of Arms, and then oblige
them to embrace their Religion, like the Romans, and Mahometans. No. They
themselves were persecuted by the civil Powers. What could these poor despised
persecuted Jews do in demolishing the established Religions of the Gentile
World? Whence was it that these Fishermen accomplished this grand Revolution?

It is true indeed, that God wro't many glorious Miracles by the Apostles.
These were necessary to prove that the Gospel of Christ which they preached was
from God; and that they were immediately called to that Office. But the most
glorious Miracles are far from being able of themselves, to effect this
Conversion o^ the ignorant, idolatrous, debauched Gentiles to the Christian
Faith, God wro't very glorious Miracles before Pharaoh and the Egyptians; yet
they were not converted, but grew more hardened. Christ himself wro't many
Miracles before the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees. They were fully informed
by the Soldiers of that most glorious Miracle of his rising from the dead. This
surprised, but did not convert them. They immediately determined to bribe the
Soldiers to misrepresent the Fact. They saw the glorious Miracles which the
Apostles wro't to prove that Jesus of Nazareth was the very Christ, yet the
greatest Part of them obstinately persisted in their Unbelief, and persecuted
his Disciples with unrelenting Malice and Rage. Indeed if the Jews, like
Nicodemus, had heartily examined the Miracles which were wro't, they might with
him have been convinced that Jesus of Nazareth was the true Messiah. But Men
are seldom disposed to be candid, when a Change of their old Religion is
proposed. There are but few Men, who will be at the Pains, if left merely to
themselves, carefully to examine Religion. Now Miracles must be examined, and
their Reality and Certainty cleared from all just Suspicions of Imposture,
before they can convince the Judgment. And if they were ever so heartily
attended to, they could not change and sanctify Men's Hearts. The Evangelist
John observes, John xii. 37, 38.
that though Christ had done so many Miracles before the Jews, yet they believed
not on him. Now were not the Jews as likely to be influenced by the Miracles of
Christ, and his Apostles who were of their own Nation as the prejudiced
Gentiles? Had the Heathens so much more Candor and diligent Attention than the
Jews, who from their great religious Advantages were vastly superior to them?
While the Evangelist laments over the Unbelief of the Jews who saw Christ's
Miracles, he ascribes true Faith to a divine Agency on the Souls of Men. Lord
who has believed our Report? and to whom has the Arm of the Lord been
revealed? Could any Thing less than a divine Power on the Heart bring ignorant,
ungodly, debauched Heathens to be eminently holy Saints?

The Gospel is indeed a most reasonable and excellent Scheme, full of the
finest Sentiments, and the most weighty Arguments. But had the Spread of
Christianity in the World been owing merely to the external Evidences of the
Gospel, the Justness of the Sentiments or the excellent Reasonings contained in
it; then, one would think, Christ should have chosen some great Orators, like
Cicero and Demosthenes, to have preached to the World, who would have charmed
Mankind and forced Conviction by the Power of Elequence. The Gospel ^lt should
have been adorned with every Ornament of Language. All the Arguments should
have been ranged in the most exact Order. The polite and learned, the studious
and subtle Philosophers, should have become the first Converts to the Religion
of Je^us.

But Christ cho^e Fishermen for his Apostles, Men indeed of plain good Sense,
and who well understood the Gospel; but Strangers to labored Harrangues, and
Pomp and the Sophistry o^ Arguments, which the Orators of Gre^ce and Rome
affected, and which the Populace so son^ly admired. The Simplicity and
Plainness of their Discourses prejudiced the Gentile Philosophers (...) so that
very few of them became the Disciples of this crucified Redeemer. The grea^st
Part of the Christian Converts were among the lower Clas^ of Mankind.

The Apostles repeatedly refer this memorable Revolution which was bro't about
by their Preaching to a much higher and nobler Cause than human Eloquence. They
assure us, that however powerful and captivating the Charms of Oratory may be,
they were not employed in effecting this glorious Change. Who should know to
whom this wonderful Success of the Gospel in the Heathen World was to be
ascribed, so well as Paul, the famous Apostle of the Gentiles, the chief
Instrument of their Conversion? Hear the Account which he gives 1 Cor. i 17,
19. and 2 Cor. x 4 5 and 1 Cor. iii. 5, 6. Ephesians. ii, S^
-- Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with Wisdom of Words left the
Cross of Christ should become of none Effect. For the Preaching of the Cross is
to them that parish Foolishness, but unto us who are saved it is the Power of
God -- The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnel but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high Thing
that Exalts itself against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. -- Who then is Paul, and who is
Apollos but Ministers by whom ye believed even as the Lord gave to every Man?
You has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sin. We are his
Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. -- It is God that Works
in you both to Will and to do of his good Pleasure. Thanks be unto God which
always causes us to triumph in Christ and makes manifest the Savor of his
Knowledge by us in every Place, etc. etc.

Thus the Apostle Paul (as also the rest of the Apostles) in the most express
Words, in sundry Passages of his Writings, plainly ascribes the Success of the
Gospel to the internal Agency of God on the Minds of Mer. And if the Apostles
had been much less express in pointing us to the Spirit of God, no Man, that
should heartily consider how great the Authority of Parents is with their
Children; how difficult it is to persuade Mankind, honestly to enquire into the
Evidences of that Religion which they receive from their Ancestors; how easily
they learn Habits in their early Years; how strongly they are prejudiced in
Favor of Religious Customs to which they have once been habituated; how
jealous they are about making any great Change; as also how little Influence
Miracles had on the Jews; would easily give into it, that the sudden Conversion
of the Gentiles, to Christianity and Holiness, in Opposition to all these
Prejudices, and to all temporal Advantages, could not have been effected
without some internal Operations on their Hearts. It was surely God's own
Almighty Arm that bro't about such a glorious Revolution, by such weak
Instruments; and by such unlikely Means, as the Foolishness of Preaching.

The Gentiles were devoted, even to the Height of Bigotry and Superstition, to
the Service of their Idol Deities; and they were likewise sunk into the lowest
Depths of Vice and Debauchery, when Christ sent his Apostles to preach this
Gospel to them. These his faithful Ministers preached a crucified Savior to
them; wro't many Miracles before their Hearers, to prove that both their
Mission and Doctrine was divine; and showed them from the Scriptures that all
these Things were foretold by the ancient Prophets. God accompanied their
Preaching with the powerful Influences of his Spirit, on the Souls of their
Hearers. In a few Years, many Thousands, in various Parts of the World, became
as ominent for Virtue and Religion, as they had been before notorious for their
scandalous Vices and Debaucheries. The Apostle 1 Cor. iv. 9^.11.
could appeal to the Corinthian Converts, that some of them had been the most
enormous Sinners. And after their Conversion to Christianity he could with
equal Openness and Fredom declare, Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Yea in a
short Period of Time the revered Idols of the Nations fell into Contempt, their
Temples were profaned, and their Worship cashired through a great Part of the
World.

Thus the ancient Prophecies, that foretold this much unexpected and incredible
Revolution, were clearly fulfilled Isaiah xlii. 6, 7. and ii. 2^ 21. Jer. x. 11
Z^ph. ii. 11.
I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thine Hand, and
will keep thee and give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light to the
Gentiles, to open the blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison,
and them that sit in Darkness out of the Prison House -- The Idols he shall
utterly abolish. -- In that Day a Man shall cast his Idols of Silver and his
Idols of Gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the Moles
and to the Bats -- Thus shall ye say unto them. The Gods that have not made the
Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth and from under
these Heavens -- The Lord -- will famish all the Gods of the Earth, and Men
shall worship him, every one from his Place even all the Isles of the Heathen.

What abundant Evidences has God given to the Truth of the Christian Religion!
The most glorious Miracles have been wro't; the most surprising Prophecies have
been actually fulfilled; the Truths of the Gospel have been attended with the
most remarkable Displays of Divine Power in changing the Tempers, and reforming
the Lives of Thousands and Millions of Mankind. Would the God of Truth, the
righteous Governor of the World, give such Evidences to confirm a Falsehood?
Would be accompany a cunningly devised Fable with his Divine Power? Are
Sobriety, Temperance. Virtue, sincere Love to God and Mankind the natural
Effects of Imposture? Could Knavery or Enthusiasm effect such a glorious
Reformation, and bring the idolatrous and debauched Gentiles to be remarkably
virtuous and holy?

Let the Deistical Philosophers, with all their boasted fine Sense, try to
reform the wicked and debauched Part of Mankind; let them press that Virtue,
they profess to celebrate, with all the To picks their System affords, and with
the most polite and elaborate Discourses, and Philosophical Arguments. How vain
and insignificant would their Attempts be found? Whom have they reclaimed from
vicious Courses by their Reasonings? Is it not sadly true, that Vice and
Immorality have prevailed, in proportion, as the Gospel has been disregarded
and Deism has spread? This is the Result of their fine Sentiments!

This is not to be accounted an unnecessary Digression, since there is so much
Reason to fear that some of you, The Quakers are more especially referred to
here.
from your strong Impulses or Imaginations about a Jesus within you, discard
Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary, who was crucified without the Gates of
Jerusalem. The Religion which prevails among such, it is to be feared, is more
Deism, the Religion of Nature with a small Tincture of Enthusiasm. -- It was
also necessary thus fully to assert the internal Operations of the Spirit, that
the World may clearly see, how groundless your Insinuations are about the
standing Ministers denying them in Conversion, etc. Since there is still a
corrupt Nature in Mankind; Since Man is still born like the wild Ass's Colt,
ignorant, stubborn and perverse; Sinners have Need of the inward Operations of
the Spirit, to bring them to be sincerely religious now, as well as at the
first preaching of the Gospel. Why should Men pray for the Holy Spirit to
incline their Hearts to keep the divine Law, and sanctify their Souls; and be
warned against resisting, vexing and grieving him to depart from them, unless
he Works inwardly on their Minds? Doddridge on Regeneration. M L^uri^'s Sermons
and Essays which is a very excellent Book or the more understanding Sort of
Readers. Or consult even Whitby's Appendix to 2 Cor.
And if his Work in their Souls be so great, the Change which he effects so
important, why should they be supposed to be utterly unsensible of his
Operations on their Minds?

II.
But this, which I have now briefly mentioned, is not what you mean by the
Operations of the Spirit. Did you only maintain the Necessity of enlightening,
convincing, converting and sanctifying Influences; you would have no Need to
separate from our Churches; since you cannot but know, that the standing
Ministers (as you call them) zealously preach up the Necessity of a
supernatural Agency on the Souls of Men, in the first Rise and after Progress
of true Religion in their Hearts; and that this is one Reason why some are
disgusted with our Preaching. Yet all this does not satisfy you on this Point.
You want us to teach something beyond or different from all such divine
Influences, as have been mentioned. This you have made one chief Cause of your
Separation from us. It would therefore he very disingenuous and absurd for you
to pretend, that you think about them, just as I have now explained. This would
look like a low Artifice to impose on the unwary, and gain Proselites. If you
are agreed with us, why do you separate from our Churches?

The Method I have proposed leads me to observe in the first Place, that many
of you look for strong Impulses and immediate Revelations from God, besides
those contained in the Bible, to teach and direct you in your present Duty, in
such and such Cases. It is common for you to say, such a Thing is revealed to
you, or you are taught so and so. And when you have Things thus revealed to you
by a powerful Impulse on your Minds, then you profess you see clearly, you are
sure, know such and such Things are your Duty. And indeed it cannot be denied,
that you are am ^r^^ly confident on all such Occasions.

^e of you See (...) Barclay. For Pain, ^rothingham, etc. etc.
who seem best to understand yourselves openly profess that though the
Scriptures contain a full and sufficient Declaration of Christian Doctrine; yet
they do not contain the whole Will of God which is necessary for us to know;
but there are many Things wherein God reveals of his Counsel to his Children,
which are not in the Scriptures either expressly or consequentially, altogether
necessary to their Peace and Comfort. For Instance, It is a Part of the Counsel
of God for a Christian to know his inward Calling, whether in Favor with God,
and (...) and sanctified. And they say, though the Scripture does give
infallible Signs and Marks of such a State; yet no Scripture nor Scripture --
Consequence can ^llibly ass^ any Men that he has these Marks; but it is the
Spirit o^ G^d only that can and does give them this As^ce by an (...) or
Revelation. -- All (...) ^ers (...) of Christ ought to know the Mind and Will
of God, (...) they be called of God to the Work of the Ministry, which Call is
an inward Call that is altogether necessary. But this they cannot know by
Scripture. -- Every true Christian should know his inward Call to Pray, or give
Thanks, or perform any religious Duty or Service to God. But he cannot know this
from Scripture. And hence you look for immediate Impulses and new Revelations.

As you look for immediate Revelations and Impulses, so many of you are
extremely confident you actually have them, and that not only your present
Duty, but sundry future Events are revealed to you by the Spirit or Savior. It
was necessary to state your Opinions on this Point, thus largely, that the
World may not be imposed on by your specious Pretenses; and that all may
clearly see what I dispute against.

Your Notions plainly suppose, that the Scriptures are not sufficient to teach
you your Duty, and that God actually grants new Revelation; both which I have
clearly demonstrated to be false, and of Consequence, I have entirely
undermined the Foundation of your whole Scheme. Therefore I would advise you,
carefully to review what I have said on these two Points.

But though I have said quite enough to satisfy the more intelligent Reader, I
find it necessary, for the Instruction of others, to explain somewhat largely,
how the Scriptures are quite sufficient to direct Men in particular Cases,
their Minds being duly illuminated by the Spirit of God, that I may effectually
overthrow all your Pretenses and Pleas.

1. You readily allow that Mankind are rational Creatures, endowed with the
Powers of Conscience, Reflection, Memory and Reasoning. If Men had no
Conscience they would not be Moral Agents. If they had no Memory, they could
not be benefitted by Revelation or any Kind: For what is not remembered cannot
be a Rule of Conduct. This being granted, it will be easy to conceive, how the
Scriptures come to refer to us in particular, and to answer our particular
Cases. -- They are given to Mankind in general, in every Country, and in every
Age, where they are sent. The Laws and Truths, which they contain, don't
respect particular Persons as such, but as they belong to general Characters,
Ranks or Sorts, that are instructed, exhorted, reproved, comforted, etc. You
are not mentioned by Name in the Laws of England, nor in the Laws of this
Colony; yet if you violate them, and Proof is made, they are found to have a
peculiar Reference to you. Can you comprehend this? If you can, you need be at
no Loss to understand, how the general Directions and Truths in the Scriptures
refer to you, in particular, even as you belong to some general Character or
Sort of Persons. For the Scriptures are given to Mankind in general, just as
the Laws of a Kingdom or Colony to all the Subjects belonging to it, to one as
much as another.

This Observation is so important that I would not by any Means have it
misunderstood, and shall therefore add some Examples to render it quite plain.
When the third Command forbids Swearing, it has no more Reference to Robert
than to Gilbert, no more Reference to them, than to any other Men. And thus the
Law of the Colony against Swearing refers to all equally alike, forbidding one
as much as another. It is so likewise in the Declarations, Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel. Thus for Instance, He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. It Is not a
Man's Name being John, or James, but his Character, his being a Believer or an
Unbeliever, that determines whether the Promise or the Threatening belongs to
him in particular.

If the Scriptures had been designed, not for Mankind in general, but for
particular Persons as such, there must have been a distinct Bible for every
Individual. Now we know God has granted but one Bible to Mankind, which is
therefore the general or common Bible to the whole Christian World.

Even those Passages, which give us an Account of particular Persons, so far as
they are appointed for our direct Instruction, can only teach us general
Truths. The Persons to whom they had an immediate Reference are dead, and they
cannot have this particular Reference to any other Person, for this plain
Reason, that Since I wrote the above Sentiments, I have the Pleasure to find,
that Doct. Doddridge has stated the Matter in the same Light in his Note on 2
Pet. iii. 15. Our beloved Paul also according to the Wisdom given unto him has
written unto you. I look (says the Doct.) on this Passage, as a very
instructive Admonition to all Christians to consider St. Paul, and the other
Apostles as writing to them in their Epistles, so far as a Similarity of
Circumstances would permit. In which View it is of infinite Importance, that we
should consider them as written to us in like Manner as St. Peter tells us,
even the ancient Prophets considered the great Subjects of which these Epistles
treat as relating to them 1 Pet. i. 12.
Mark xvi. 16.
different Persons are not the same. Now when these peculiar Circumstances are
dropped they have like other Scriptures a general Reference to all.

Let us suppose a profane Swearer convinced of his awful Sin, by the Spirit of
God from the third Command, or the Instance of Shelomith's Son who was stoned
to Death for this Sin. Lev. xxiv. 10.^.23.
This Command and Example have a general and equal Reference to all. The Spirt
of God in this Case impresses the general Truth contained in them, on the Man's
Conscience, and refreshes his Memory, that he remembers at such and such Times,
he violated this excellent Precept. He sees he is guilty, and cannot but apply
the general Truth and the dread^l Threatening to his own particular Case. Thus
the Spirit ^ed convinces Man of their Sins, whatever they are, from general
Truths set home on the Consciences, and thus applied to particular Cases. I
appeal to the Experience of all convinced Sinners.

Thus it is also in Conversion. While Men's Minds are ^d, and their Hearts
hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin, they have very wrong Thoughts of God.
But when the Holy Spirit enlightens their Minds, by Manifestation of the Truth
to their Consciences, the general Truths which are contained in the Scriptures
about God, etc. they get some juster Apprehensions of him, his Holy Law, and
the miserable Con^, to which their breaking this excellent Rule has reduced
them. This is Law-Work or Conviction.

The same Spirit, having taught them about God, his Law, their Exposedness to
his Wrath, brings them to know effectually the general Truths of the Gospel, in
their eminent Glory. The Sinner then beholds God to be such a glorious Being as
the Scriptures describe him considered in himself; while he views his
Perfections unitedly displayed and glorified in Jesus Christ. God, says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. iv. 6.
has shined in our Hearts, to give the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the
Face of Jesus. -- His Objections instantly vanish, he now sees that God can be
just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. It is a general Truth
and worthy of all Acceptance, that "Christ Jesus came to save Sinners," even
the chief of Sinners, and that "he will in no wise cast out any that comes
unto him." On these or the like general Truths, Sinners are encouraged to
believe in Christ. The Truths contained in the Scriptures are the Foundation,
on which true Believers build their Hopes; the general Truths, which always
were and always will be in the Scriptures. They are eminently Believers,
because they effectually believe or receive the Testimony or Record, which God
has borne to his Son in the Gospel. So that there is no Need of any new
Revelation here.

As the Faith of true Believers is founded at first on the Divine Testimony
contained in the written Word; so their Increase in this Faith and Growth in
Grace is by the same Word. They love God's Law, and meditate on his Word; and
thus the Spirit of God giving them to see the excellent Beauty and real Glory,
which is in the Scriptures, that is in divine Things as represented there, they
grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Trough him we have Access
by the Spirit Of all Truths which People should welcome and study, they should
welcome and study those that concern Christ, and the Covenant of Grace most as
Foundation Truths, and seek to have them impressed by the Spirit. We are
afraid, there is a Fault among Christians, that most plain and substantial T^
are not so regarded; but some Things that may further them in their ^ght, of
tickle their Affections, or answer a Case, are almost only fought ^ter; which
Things, it is true, are good, but if the plain and substantial general Truths of
the Gospel were more studied and made Use of, they have in them that which
would answer all Cases. It Is very sad that Men are more taken up with Notions
and Speculations than with such Soul saving Truths as these; that Christ was
born, that he was a true Man, that he was, and is King, Priest and Prophet of
his Church, etc. and that other Things are heard with more Greediness; but if
these should be the great Subject of Ministers Preaching, it should be your
great Study to know Christ in his Person, Natures, Offices and Covenant; what
he is to you, and what is your Duty to him, and how you should walk in him, and
with him: This was Paul's Aim, I count, says he, all Things Loss and Dung for
the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, that I may know him and the Power of
his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, etc. Phil. iii. 8, --
10. It Is my Design (as if he had said) not only to make him known, but to know
him myself. There is little Faith in Christ and Distinctness in making Use of
his Offices, and Men take but little Pains to know these Things. Therefore on
the one Side let me exhort you to make this more the Subject of your Enquiry;
and on the other Side take it for your Reproof that there is such a Readiness
to snuff [to be offended and dissatisfied] when plain Truths are insisted on,
or when they are not followed to some uncouth or strange Way, which says, we
are exceeding unthankful to God, for giving us the best Things to speak, hear
and think of. The very learned and pious Mr. Durham's Christ crucified Sermon 1
P. 3.^
unto the Father Ephesians. ii. 20.21. Rev. xii, 11.
-- and are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, (the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testiment) Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Corner Stone -- The Saints overcome the Dragon by the Blood of the Lamb, and
the Word of their Testimony; that is, the Gospel to which they steadfastly
adhered.

2. The Temper and Character of true Saints is largely and plainly described in
the Scriptures, and God has endowed Men with the Principle of Consciousness and
Reflection, by which they may know their past Experiences and present Temper.
There is no Need then of any new Revelations to inform them about their present
State. The only Question here is, Have you this Temper and Character which the
Scriptures declare belongs to all true Saints? The Scripture-Direction in this
Case is not, Look for an immediate Revelation to assure you, that you are in a
State of Grace," but 2 Cor. xiii. 5.
Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye
not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates."
"These Things, says the Apostle John, 1 John v. 13.
have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God; that ye
may know that ye have eternal Life, and that ye may believe on the Name of the
Son of God.

Ob. But what is meant by the Witness of the Spirit? Romans viii. 16.

Ans. It is not said, that the Spirit bears Witness to Men by revealing to them
immediately, that they are in a State of Favor with God, or in the Number of
his peculiar Children; nor can any such Thing be fairly inferred from the Text.
If this had been the Way Christians came to know their good Estate, why did the
Apostle give, even in this Chapter, so many Marks and Characters of true Saints?

As to the Meaning of the Text, observe the Apostle had asserted in this
Chapter, that those who walked after the Spirit, in whom he dwelt, and who were
led by him, yielding to his sweet Influences and obeying his Word, were the
Sons of God. That in Consequence of this high Relation, they were delivered
from a guilty slavish Temper, and had received the Spirit of Adoption or the
Disposition of Children; "Whereby, says he, we cry Abba Father." Thus their
Spirits or Consciences, being delivered from the Guilt of Sin, and the servile
Yoke of the Mosaic Laws and ceremonial Institutions by Christ, acted with the
Freedom of Children, and bore Witness that they were the Adopted Sons of God.
Then follow these Words, The Spirit itself bears Witness with our Spirit,
that we are the Children of God. That is, the Spirit of God testifies, bears
Witness in his written Word, that those who are led by the Spirit and have a
filial Temper are the Children of God. And thus the Spirit of God joins with
the well enlightened Conscience of true Christians, and testifies that they are
the Children of God Thus the Spirit of God joins with the Conscience of wicked
Men under Convictions, and, bears Witness that they are not his Children, but
exposed to his Wrath. Or the Meaning of the Text may be, the Spirit bears
Witness that we are the Children of God, by the Graces which he works in us,
which are his Seal, Mark, Evidence or Witness.

But if any will still maintain, that they have had immediate Revelations to
assure them of their gracious State; let them work Miracles to prove their
Revelations came from God; otherwise, let them know they are in Danger of
trusting their eternal Salvation on a Delusion of Satan. It may perhaps be of
some Service to some to inform them, that it is the Opinion of the Papists, and
was confirmed by the Council of Trent, as may be seen at large in the sixth
Session, that no Man can ever know he is in a State of Grace, in this Life,
unless it be specially revealed to him by God.

3. To proceed to another Instance, God has revealed by his Spirit in the
Scriptures to Men, in general, that it is their Duty to pray frequently, to
devote all convenient Opportunities to this important Exercise, and Reason
teaches the same Thing. Consequently every Man is directed to pray on all
proper Occasions, as really as if he was called upon by Name in an immediate
Manner, so that none need to be at a Loss for Directions in this Point. You
have no Need of a new Revelation to teach you, that you should pray; nor when
you should; your own Conscience and Reason, together with the general
Directions of God's written Word plainly teach you this. And if you venture to
restrain Prayer until you have it immediately revealed to you by the Spirit;
whenever your Consciences are duly awakened you will clearly see the Weakness of
your Pretenses. -- If a Man may not pray, till he is immediately called to this
Duty by the Spirit; then he may not pray for the Influences of the Spirit,
which is contrary to Christ's Direction. Luke xi. 1, -- 13.
Then also it will be no Sin for him to neglect Prayer, a Notion which is very
agreeable to the ungodly World, Job xxi. 13.15. Mal. iii. 14.
but quite contrary to the Scripture. And how should a Man know that such a
Revalation came from God? Did God ever work any Miracles to prove the Truth of
such a Revelation? May not the Devil have various Ends in suggesting to Persons
it is their Duty to pray, hereby leading them to neglect the plain written
Word, and to look to him for Directions, when to perform this Duty. And will
not Satan direct to very unseasonable Times.

4. The Scriptures plainly tell what Sort of Men Bishops or Ministers should
be. See the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.
Let a Man then examine himself whether he has these Qualifications. In the
Multitude of Counselors there is Safety. It Is not reasonable that a Man should
be the sole Judge of his own Abilities and Qualifications. Hence, the Lord
Jesus Christ has appointed those who are already in the Ministry to look out
for suitable Persons for the Service of the Churches. They are required to
examine Candidates for the Ministry, and judge of their Qualifications and
Fitness for this Office. For every Man is allowed to be the best Judge of his
own Occupation, Business or Calling. The Directions, then, to Ministers, which
were immediately sent to Timothy as a Minister, are perfectly agreeable to
common Sense, and are Methods of proceeding in other Affairs of Life. The
Things which thou have heard of me among many Witnesses, the same commit thou
to faithful Men who shall be able to reach others also. 2 Timothy ii. 2.


A Candidate for the Ministry, then, must apply to the Ministers to whom Christ
has committed the Authority of examining, judging and putting faithful Men into
the Ministry; and if they find him duly qualified, the Scriptures plainly
direct him to proceed. And when such a Man is regularly chosen by the People;
and ordained according to the Rules of God's Word; he is made a Bishop,
Overseer or Minister, over such a People by the Holy Ghost. For the Holy Ghost
has fitted him for this Office, being the Giver of his ministerial
Qualifications; and has given those Rules or Directions in the written Word,
according to which he has been fixed in his Pastoral Charge. So that there is
no Need of any new Revelation in this Case. All that is necessary here is, that
Men have their Minds duly enlightened and influenced by the Truths which the
Holy Ghost has revealed in the written Word.

If the Scriptures are perfect, what Need of any further Directions and
Revelations? If these Cases, if Men's Duty in all ordinary Cases, be clearly
revealed and pointed out in them, what Advantage could be received from a new
Revelation? Would a new Direction about our Duty communicate any more Grace to
us than the old one in the Bible? May not Men know their Duty, and yet not be
willing to do it? Have there not been various Instances among you, wherein
Persons could not comply with your new Revelations, and thus you have been
quite disappointed.

Are not some disgusted at the old Directions in the Bible, because they are
not agreeable to your present Inclination, as Ahab was at Micaiah; and long,
with Balak, for a new Revelation, hoping it will be more agreeable to your
Fancies? But is not this to hope that God is changed? Perhaps some think they
are so eminent for their shining Gifts and Graces, that it is beneath them to
study the Scriptures. Some are too indolent and lazy to search this sacred
Book. They had rather have an immediate Revelation, or an Angel sent from
Heaven to instruct them. But will God gratify Men's Pride and Laziness?

There is no Doubt but God can give immediate Revelations, and send Angels from
Heaven. But it is evidently contrary to his Wisdom to do it, unless there was
some Necessity for it. If God has ever interposed in such a very extraordinary
Way, it was doubtless to answer some important End, which could not have been
well obtained by the common Instructions of the written Word The Light of
Nature and the Reason of Things taught the Heathens, they were not to expect a
God would interpose unless on some very important Occasion. Nec Deus intersit
nisi dignus Vi^dice Nodus. HOR.
Lazarus must not be sent from the Dead for an ordinary Preacher to Sinners,
nor to warn the rich Man's Brethren. So that both common Sense and Scripture
agree in teaching us, that God will not depart from his common Method of
Instruction, unless on some very extraordinary Occasion, to answer some very
important End. But what is there that is extraordinary in your Case? Or in the
Cases of Christians in general? If God has really given us a perfect Rule in
his holy Word, we may be sure that he will not set it aside to gratify the
Humors of Men.

5. These new Directions and Revelations would render the written Word of God
in a great Measure useless to Mankind. What does it avail us, that God has
given us his written Word, if it be insufficient to direct us in the Duties, to
which we may be called in our Christian Course? What Advantage can we have from
the Scriptures, if we must give Heed to some new Directions, which are to be
daily communicated to us? And it has been observed as Matter of Fact, that as
it is easier to wait for new Revelations, than to search the Scriptures; so
there are but few of those, who depend on immediate Impulses, that ever take
sufficient Care and Pains to understand the Divine Law and Testimony. They are
generally very ignorant of the true Meaning of the Word of God, notwithstanding
their great Pretenses to extraordinary Revelations.

But if your Notions were right, there would have been no Need of the
Scriptures at all unless of one short Direction, viz. To take Heed to the
immediate Impulses of the Spirit, or the Instructions of the Savior. For if
your Revelations really come from the Spirit, they are as Divine, and as much
to be regarded as any contained in the Bible. Barclay speaks consistently on
this Point with his Scheme, when he would not have his divine Revelation (...)
by the Scriptures. See his Apol. Prop. 2.
What Use then can the Bible be to you, who are immediately taught by the
Spirit? If you should pretend, you would try whether the Divine Spirit taught
you right by the Scriptures: This would be prodigiously absurd. For, do you
think the Spirit of God can teach you wrong? Would you, ignorant Worms of the
Dust, attempt to call the Spirit of God to your Bar and try his Revelations? Or
would you suppose, that the Spirit of God was wiser when he inspired the Penmen
of the holy Scriptures, than when he grants immediate Revelations to you? But
this is a blasphemous Absurdity. How you will judge and try those Revelations,
you hold to be divine, by the Scriptures, I cannot possibly devise.

Thus your new Revelations have a direct Tendency to destroy all Use and
Benefit of the written Word of God. When therefore God has given us such a
large written Revelation of his Will in the Scriptures, and commanded us to
search them;" "to continue steadfastly in them; 2 Timothy iii. 15, 16, 17.
to take Heed to them;" assuring us "they are a perfect Rule, and profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished, unto all good Works:
This saps the very Foundation of all your new Revelations. The Absurdity and
Wickedness of forsaking the Word of God, and following other Spirits and
Instructions is strongly painted by the Prophet Isaiah Isaiah viii. 20.
And when they shall say unto you seek unto them that have familiar Spirits,
and unto Wizards that peep and mutter, should not a People seek unto their God?
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no Light in them, i. e. no true Light. For such Persons are
deluded with imaginary or false Light which they receive from their familiar
Spirits.

6. Your Notions about immediate Impulses and Revelations expose you to the
Delusions of Satan. This Evil Spirit can deceive: He can transform himself into
an Angel of Light. There is no Doubt but he can reveal wonderful Things to
Persons. -- But what Mark have you to distinguish the Revelations of this bad
Spirit from those of the good Spirit? You have no certain Rule to judge by, on
your Principles. And thus your Notions not admitting of any, evidently expose
you to the Delusions of your greatest Adversary. You tamely deliver yourselves
up to be led by him, and wait for his Directions.

Whereas on my Principles, there is a plain and certain Rule, the written Word,
which has been confirmed by Miracles. We are (...) it is inconsistent with the
perfections of God, to per^ S^ and (...) Agents to work proper Miracles for the
Co^ (...) of a Falsehood. For Satan and all Nature are under (...) of God. It is
quite absurd to suppose that the g^ (...) infinitely powerful, wise and good,
would permit Satan to work Miracles, and thus to counterfeit his Seal, w^
interposing and giving more glorious and inconte^ Evidence to the Truth. For
then, God would leave us under (...) absolute Necessity of being deceived, and
so could not, (...) with his Justice, punish us for our Mistakes. W^ ^e the
Lord was pleased to permit the Egyptian Mag^ to work strange Wonders, he
enabled Moses to triumph over them and confound them, by much more glorious
(...), w^h they could not by all their Encantments (...). Satan's Miracles are
rightly ^led lying Wonders it t^ Scriptures: It carefully examined, they will
generally (...) seeming and counterfeit Miracles. Whereas the Miracles, which
God his wrought for Confirmation of the Scriptures of Truth, afford the most
infallible Certainty and glorious Evidence, that they are divine.

The Spirit of God, according to my Doctrine, only gives Men Eyes to (...), and
a Heart to understand and relish the glori^us Truths which are in the
Scriptures. Thus then Men may escape M^, as far as it is possible for Creatures
of our M^ and in our Circum^ to e^e them by (...) to the written Word of God
and obeying that S^, that Scripture ^e Office is to lo^ Men to the saving
Knowledge of the Truths cont^d in this sacred Book.

As the Spirit of God enlightens Men's (...) in what God has reve^ in his Word,
it (...) natural for Satan, who endeavors to h^ utmost to (...) this good
Spirit, to keep Men from this divine Light. (...) is the Prince of Darkness:
His Kingdom is the Kingdom of Darkness: His Interest is greatly supported the
World by keeping such a large Part of it i^ (...) ^ost ab^t State of (...)
^rance. As Schools and Colleges (...) Means to banish Ignorance and promote
useful I (...) and Knowledge in the World, no Doubt Satan (...) violent Grud^,
and would destroy them all, if it ^y in his Power, that Mankind might be redued
to gross Heathen Darkness. Then he would rule over them with more Ease and
greater Rigor, as he does over the miserable Nations of Africa, and as he did
over the poor Indians in America, before the Arrival of the English. Hence it
is no difficult Thing for an intelligent Christian to find out, whose Cause
Enthusiasts and Deists are promoting, while they declaim with great Warmth
against Learning, and represent the learned as the worst of all Men. See Lord
Bolingbrook's Writings, as also Barclay, Frothingham, etc. etc.


But Satan has still a more inveterate Grudge and bitter Rancour against the
Scriptures, because they are the principal Means which God has used to rescue
Mankind from his Tyranny. This is represented in a very striking Manner, in
that emblematical Vision, which the Apostle John saw of the Church of Christ,
and of Satan's powerful and malicious Assaults against her. Rev. xii.
The Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went to make War with the Remnant of
her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and ha^ (...) Testimony of Jesus.
Their keeping the Commandments of God. and faithfully retaining the Testimony,
the pure Gospel of Jesus Christ, was the great Provocation which filled him
with such implacable Resentment against them.

It is certain that every Artifice which Wit and Malice can invent has been
used against the Scriptures. Sometimes they have been secreted from the common
People, by not being allowed to be translated into vulgar Languages. Sometimes
Religion has been cumbered with such a Load of supplementary Traditions,
Canons, Rites and Ceremonies, as among the Jews, Papists, etc. that the pure
written Word of God has been but little regarded. While some professing
Christians have zealously contended about their own Additions and Appendixes,
they have, as might be justly expected, overlooked or forgotten the Scriptures
themselves, at least the more weighty Matters contained in them, Judgment,
Mercy, Faith and the Love of God, and of Men too. -- Since the Resurrection of
Letters when the Scriptures could be no longer secreted, Things have took
another Turn. Many have become Deists and employed all their Subtilty and
Malice in raising Cavils against the Scriptures, and hindering Men from
believing them. And though there have been many Commentators who have done
excellent Service in explaining the Scriptures, yet it is also evident that
many have been as busily employed in perverting them by wrong Interpretations
and forced Comments. See the voluminous Annotations of the Jesuits, etc.
'Twould perhaps be injurious to suppose, that these Persons were sensible they
were under the Influence of Satan. No; Had they known this, they would not have
been thus deceived. But is it not greatly probable that the Cavils against, and
Perversions of Scripture have in some Measure proceeded from his secret
Influence; since he is very skilful, as appears from his tempting Christ, in
putting wrong Senses on the Scriptures, and is extremely enraged against them?

Where such Methods were not likely to succeed, he has possessed Men's Minds
with the Notion of immediate Revelations, Impulses, Visions, Prophesyings, etc.
When Persons give Heed to such extraordinary Things, they soon imagine they are
wiser than their ordinary Teachers, and cannot be much edified by the plain
written Word. They have much more Light about themselves, and others, and can
see their Duty in any Particular Case more clearly, by having it immediately
revealed to them. When Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, is permitted
to deceive Men by false Light, no Doubt he suits his Revelations, Impulses and
Discoveries, to the disordered Fancies of his Followers. And when the Palate
and Stomach are greatly disordered, wholesome Food will not be relished. If
Men's Heads become giddy and their Imaginations wild; the plain Truths of the
Gospel will not please them. The Preaching of Christ crucified is a low Thing,
for which they have no Relish. And indeed the plain general Truths of the
Gospel have no Tendency to establish them in their fond Conceits. Nothing but
Discourses about wonderful Experiences, walking in God's Light, the Travel of
the Church, and Revelations and Fellowships will nourish such Persons. The
World never loved that a crucified Christ should be preached. 1 Cor. i. 23, 24.
It was a Stumbling Block to the Jews, and Foolishness to the Greeks. None but
the effectually called saw the Excellency of such Preaching; so that it is not
at all strange that many are disgusted with it in the present Day. But let it
be remembered, that if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in
whom the god of this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not,
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God should
shine unto them.

Many of you, I believe, are not remarkably influenced by the powerful Agency
of any Spirit. Whatever Truth there may be in what your famous Barclay See
Barclay's Apol. Prop xi.
and others relate about extraordinary Things, that were evident among you at
first in your Meetings; your Spirit has greatly withdrawn these powerful
Agitations from which you are called Quakers, or Tremblers. I heartily agree
with this famous Apologist that your silent Meetings are as much for
Edification as any among you. For the Instructions and Preaching of such as
pretend to be moved by the Spirit are so trifling and insipid, that it is
strange how any rational Beings can gravely attend upon them. Since the Spirit
your Speakers are moved and led by is evidently a foolish Spirit; I likewise
agree with this Writer that the best Preparation for your Worship in general,
is a Man's abstaining from his own Thoughts and Imaginations and from all the
Self-Workings and Motions of his own Mind, as well in Things materially good as
evil. For if Men would allow themselves to think and reason they must discover
the gross Absurdity of such Worship. -- After all the fine Things Barclay has
said of your dumb Meetings, they are really but dumb Meetings, a Way of Worship
more adapted to the Brutes that are not endowed with the Power of Speech, than
to Mankind, whose Tongue is a Part of their Glory. When therefore you are about
to transform yourselves like Dumb Creatures that have no Understanding, it is
no Doubt the most suitable Preparation for this unreasonable Service to forbear
thinking as much as possible.

The inward Light, which many of you harp so much on, is Nothing but mere
natural Conscience which remains in the worst of Men. Your great Mistake in
this Matter lies in taking the Dictates of your own Minds and Fancies for the
Inspirations of the Holy Ghost. Some of the Deists talk as high about inward
Light as Enthusiasts. The Teachers of all your various Sects would do well to
read, and seriously consider the following Passage in Ezekiel. Thus says the
Lord God, Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own Spirit, and have
seen Nothing. -- They have seen Vanity, and lying Divination, saying, the Lord
says; and the Lord has not sent them, and they have made others to hope that
they would confirm the Word, etc. Ezekiel xiii.


In some Instances your Impulses and Revelations evidently proceed from
Infirmities and Distempers of Body, as Melancholy, Vapors, Distraction. And
yet it is not impossible, that as Satan has a sincere Hatred to Mankind, he may
improve such Times as they are least able to observe and resist his
Temptations, in instill his Suggestions into their Minds that he may deceive them

But in many Cases, I make no Doubt, there has been and still is something
remarkable of a powerful and supernatural Agency on the Minds of some of you:
That you really have Things revealed to you in an immediate Way, and have
strong Impulses on your Minds far beyond what mere Imagination could possibly
work. And I think it appears evident from what has been said, that all such
Revelations and Impulses ordinarily come from Satan. For since the Scriptures,
are a sufficient and perfect Rule; all other Revelations are needless,
unwarrantable and contrary to Scripture. God has not confirmed any other
Revelation relative to Salvation with Miracles. Therefore they don't bear his
Mark and Seal. Now since they don't come from God, from whom can they come, but
from the Evil Spirit.

Ob. It is said in Joel, It shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out
my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophesy, your
old Men shall dream Dreams and your young Men shall see Visions. And also upon
the Servants and upon the Handmaids in those Days will I pour out my Spirit.

To this I answer, it is really astonishing that any Person, who has ever read
the New Testament, could allege this Passage to prove, that immediate
Revelations and Prophesyings may be expected in our Times. For does not the
Apostle Peter expressly assure us, that this Prophecy of Joel was fulfilled in
his Time, in the last Days of the Jewish Dispensation. See his Discourse upon
it at large. Acts ii.

Now, if this Prophecy was fulfilled in the Apostle's Time, what immediate
Reference can it have to us? 'Twas foretold that Sarah should have a Son. When
Isaac was born this Prophecy was fulfilled. Can any Woman now a Days infer from
this, that she herself shall have a Son? With equal Propriety this Prophecy of
Joel, which was fulfilled in Peter's Time, is brought to prove, we may expect
Men and Women to be endowed with the Gift of Prophecy in our Day.

At the first planting of Christianity in the World, before Churches were
regularly gathered, the Nations were quite ignorant of the Gospel; and being
devoted to their own superstitious Notions of Religion were extremely
prejudiced against all Attempts that were made to change their religious
Ceremonies, especially against the Followers of Jesus of Nazareth who was
crucified. The first Preachers of Christianity were placed in the most
extraordinary Circumstances, having to attack all the Prejudices and Ignorance
and Wickedness of the whole World, and that, without the Countenance of any
civil Authority. Nay, the civil Powers exerted themselves to the utmost, to
prevent the Spread of Christianity, persecuting the Preachers of the Gospel to
Death.

'Twas therefore agreeable to the Wisdom and Goodness of God to endow the first
Preachers of the Gospel with extraordinary Gifts, suited to the extraordinary
Circumstances in which they were placed. Among these extraordinary Gifts that
of Prophecy was one. Their Prophecies, when they were fulfilled, afforded a
striking Proof, to those who were acquainted with them, of the Truth of their
Doctrine. The Prophets who were raised up in the first Days of the Gospel were
likewise endowed with the Power of working Miracles, they could give
supernatural Evidence that they were divinely inspired sufficient to satisfy an
honest Enquirer. With Reference to these the Apostle gives that Direction,
Despise not Prophesyings. So that they are greatly mistaken, who imagine this
Text has any special Reference to our Times. It Is readily granted there were
Prophets in the first and extraordinary Days of the Gospel, and Christians were
warned not to despise their Prophesyings. And what then? what would you i^ from
this? That there should be Prophets now, when the Scriptures are completed,
and Churches regularly settled and supplied with a learned, orthodox and godly
Ministry? By the same Method of Reasoning you may also infer, that because
Nehemiah, his Servants and the Men of the Guard, in an extraordinary Time, did
not put off their Clothes, except for washing, you should not put off yours
now, but keep them on Night and Day.

But would you in sober Blood attempt to prove from Scripture that there are
Prophets, when it is certain and plain Matter of Fact, that there are none?
Your Reasoning, if it proved any Thing, would prove that the Scriptures are not
true, since it is incontestably evident, that they are not fulfilled in your
Sense of them. For where are your Prophets? What Events have they foretold?
Have their Predictions been fulfilled?

I have heard of many and read sundry Prophesies in late Years. Some of you, I
have been informed, prophesied, that the French would destroy New England,
because its Inhabitants would not turn to you. Others of you it is said,
prophesied that such and such Persons would not die. Others have prophesied,
that in a short Time the Lord would convert all our Churches to your Notions.
But these Prophesies have been most plainly contradicted by the Event and
proved to be false.

A remarkable Discovery of the Falsehood of your Prophesies happened some Time
since in your predicting that Mr. Elihu Dagget was to be a Minister among you.
This was revealed to sundry. They examined their Revelations by separatish
Rules and found them to be right. They were so confident of the Truth of their
Revelations, so certain their Predictions would be fulfilled, that they
appointed a Day to ordain him. Vast Crowds of People assembled to see his
Ordination. But Mr. Dagget himself refused to be ordained, saying it was not
revealed to him, that he must be their Minister. They exhorted him, and prayed
over him, 'till they were tired; but he could get no Light; so that they were
obliged to return home shamefully disappointed, proving themselves to be false
Prophets. For if their Prophecy had been from God, he would have given Mr.
Dagge^ a Disposition to have complied; since the Preparation of the Heart in
Man, and the Answer of the Tongue is from the Lord. He never suffered any of
his Words to fall to the Ground. God was never deceived nor frustrated.

As to what is reported about your foretelling that some particular Persons
would be converted, which Predictions are pretended to be fulfilled, this may
be contrived and published to give some Reputation to your Scheme among some
undiscerning Persons; but is in reality a Piece of Delusion. For you cannot
know that such particular Persons are converted. It is great Presumption for
you to pretend to know certainly who are truly converted, when God has declared
in the strongest Terms, Jer. xvii. 8, 9.
that the Heart is deceitful above all Things and desperately wicked, who can
know it? I the Lord search the Heart. So that this is to prove a Prediction to
be certainly fulfilled by an Event, which you cannot ^ossibly know, whether it
is so or not.

If you should pretend God has revealed it to you they are converted, then work
Miracles to prove the Revelation comes from God, and not from the Devil. What
signifies your Witnessing for one another, and Fellowship with another's
Spirits? How often have you witnessed for some, whom you must own have turned
Apostates, and however loath you may be must witness against them. When you bear
certain Witness, that a Man is converted, and afterward certain Witness that
he is not, this shows your Witness is not worth a Straw. How often have you
been deceived in your Declarations about Converts?

For any Thing that I see, the Devil might reval it to you, that such and such
Persons would be converted; and then, transforming himself into an Angel of
Light might deceive them, with a false Conversion to carry on his Designs the
more plausibly.

III.
There are sundry Persons belonging to these Sects, who will not own that they
look for immediate Revelations and Impulses, but for the Influences of the
Spirit to enlighten their Minds in the Scriptures. They call the Impressions
they have on their Minds the Operations of the Spirit. It Is necessary to point
out some Things, which they look on as certain Evidences their Impressions came
from the Spirit of God, and which yet are no good Proof at all.

1. Some imagine that when a Scripture is impressed on their Minds, this
Impression must certainly be from God. They think Satan cannot meddle with
Scripture. But this is a great Mistake. Did not Satan enforce his Temptations
on our Savior by Texts of Scripture? and is it not evident from the Narrative
of John Lewis, that he was imposed on and deluded by Satan suggesting and
impressing Texts of Scripture on his Mind?

2. Others look upon the Power or Force, with which a Scripture comes to them
and is impressed on their Minds, as an unquestionable Evidence, that the
Impression is from God. Is not this the chief Evidence which many of you trust
to, when you would prove that your Impressions and Interpretations of Scripture
are from above? Have not sundry of you separated from us, because it was
strongly impressed on your Minds that you must leave us? These Impressions are
sometimes so powerful as greatly to affect your Bodies. Hence your ridiculous
Motions, Rockings, Twistings, Jumpings etc. in your pretended religious
Meetings and Exercises.

There is no Doubt to be made but the Spirit of God could impress divine Truths
with such Force on our Minds, as would not only greatly affect, but even
dissolve our weak Frame. But as he knows our Make, there is Reason to think
that he does not ordinarily exert much Force, so as violently to agitate the
Body in bestowing his converting and sanctifying Influences. The Visions of
Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Paul and John, were very extraordinary indeed, and not
to be commonly expected. Such Extraordinaries are not necessary for Salvation.
The Divine Spirit enlightens the Mind in a gentle Manner which but seldom
agitates the Body. Divine Light poured into the Mind discovers the Way, the
Man's Judgment is convinced, his Objections vanish, he readily complies. So
that there is no Need of any forcible Pressure on his Body to compel him.
Whereas when Satan leads Persons to any Thing, since he has no Divine Light to
discover Truth to them, it is natural to suppose he uses, if permitted, a Sort
of a Force, something like the Charming or Enchanting of Serpents, when they
bring Birds into their very Mouths.

This Matter, I think, is fully illustrated and proved by the following
Scriptures. 1 Kings xix. 11.13.
And behold the Lord passed by, and a great and strong Wind rent the Mountains,
and brake in Pieces the Rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the
Wind: and after the Wind an Earthquake; but the Lord was not in the Earthquake:
and after the Earthquake a Fire; but the Lord was not in the Fire: and after
the Fire a still small Voice. And it was so when Elijah heard it that he
wrapped his Face in his Mantle and stood in the Entering in of the Cave. The
Lord was not in those powerful shocking Convulsions. But he was with the still
small Voice.

When the Spirit was pleased to grant the Church immediate Revelations and
Prophecies, in the first Days of the Gospel, the Apostle gives the following
Directions. 1 Cor. xvi. 30.32.
If any Thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the First hold his
Peace. For ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Which
Clause Dr. Doddridge thus paraphrases; There is no Impossibility of doing this;
for the Spirit of God that inspires you, is not a wild irresistible Impulse,
like that by which the Pythian Priestess, and others who profess Inspiration
and Prophecy among the Gentiles, pretend to be agitated; but the-Spirits or
Inspirations of the Christian Prophets produce those calm Emotions which are
subject to the Prophets.

Satan is a very powerful Being, having been one of the Chief of the Angels,
that "excel in Strength." We read 11 These. ii. 9, 10.
of one whose coming is after the Working of Satan, with all Power;" and that
"some would be given up to strong Delusions. So that the Power, Strength or
Force, with which any particular Text of Scripture is suggessed to a Man, and
borne in upon his Mind, cannot be justly looked upon as a certain
distinguishing Evidence, that the Impression is from God.

3. Hence, we learn, what to think of that which others mention as a Mark that
their Impressions come from God, viz. that they have strong Opposition against
them, that they strive and struggle to resist, but at length are compelled by
the Force and Weight which they feel, to yield. It Is to be observed, that all
this Opposition, which these Persons speak of, is after they have had their
Impressions, after they see and know that they are clearly taught their Duty in
such Instances. But the Spirit of God teaches Men, by renewing their Minds, and
enlightening their Understandings in the Truth. These Operations of the Spirit
remove Men's Opposition to the Truth. So that it is strange that Persons should
feel this Opposition to the Teachings of the true Spirit, and feel it exceeding
strong too; yea, and to be overcome at last rather by some unaccountable Force
upon the Body, than Light and Reason discovered to the Mind.

There is a Disposition in Men, by Nature to resist the Spirit, That is, their
sinful Lusts and Inclinations are contrary to God and Holiness. The Opposition
of Sinners to the Spirit arises from their Lusts and Ignorance. But the
Opposition which these Persons mention, so far as I can judge from their
Description of it, is the Opposition, their better Reason and Conscience make
against their Impressions. I wish this Matter may be as seriously and heartily
considered, as its Importance requires. -- These are two very different Sorts
of Opposition, and I think might be clearly distinguished, if thoroughly
examined.

Opposition to the Admonitions of the Spirit by the written. Word set home on
the Heart, because they are contrary to Men's sinful Lusts, is very common. It
is often reproved in the Scriptures, and is beyond all Controversy a very
sinful Opposition. But there may also be, yea often are strange and absurd
Impressions on Men's Minds, which their Conscience and Reason cannot but oppose.
They don't really see the Thing impressed on their Minds to be right, and they
have not sufficient Evidence that the Impression comes from God. For this would
ordinarily remove their Opposition, as in Paul's Case. If therefore the
Opposition arises from Men's Reason and Conscience, I don't see, how they can
make this any Mark at all of the Impressions coming from God. I should rather
think, it was an Evidence of its coming from Satan; since the Spirit of God
constantly applies, in his teaching Men by Scripture, to Men's Consciences, and
shows them sufficient Reasons to prove that the Things, he urges them to, are
right; and thus leaves them without Excuse. Whereas Satan hurries Men along
blindfold.

Virgil, the celebrated Heathen Poet, describes the Sibyl, the Priestess of the
Idol-Apollo, as struggling violently under the powerful Impressions of the Evil
Spirit. They who were possessed with Evil Spirits in the Days of Christ,
struggled against their violent Agitations, as we are informed by the
Evangelists. John Lewis say, I did several Times between the first Impulse and
the Execution of the horrid Deed strive to resist.

But the Apostles, when they were called by Christ, immediately without
manifesting any Opposition obeyed his Divine Call. Who was a more violent
Opposer of Jesus of Nazareth, and his Followers, than the Apostle Paul in his
Unbelief? Yet as soon as he was commanded by Christ, he immediately obeyed. We
don't read, that he strove and struggled against the Divine Command. His
Opposition though very violent before, was then instantly removed. He
immediately obeyed the heavenly Vision. Is it not astonishing that Opposition
to Impressions should be made a certain Evidence of their coming from God!

4. Others imagine that their suffering Reproach for following their
Impressions, is a good Proof of their proceeding from the divine Spirit; since
the World has a Disrelish for the Things of the Spirit of God. Hence, some make
a great Outcry about Pesecution, as if they were violently abused and
persecuted, because they don't enjoy such great Immunities and Privileges, as
the regular established Churches in the Colony. They magnify these Things, and
the Reproaches and Ridicule, they meet with for their Follies, are very
grievous Oppressions and sore Persecutions. Whereas there is no Part of the
World that enjoys Liberty more fully than the British Colonies. We may say with
the greatest Propriety in the Words of Peter, 1 Peter iii. 13.
Who is he that will harm you if ye be Followers of that which is good.
According to him it is not true, that the World is always disposed openly to
persecute Men because they are good. In Times of Persecution, good Men are
represented as Evil, before they are persecuted.

The Opposition and Enmity, which natural Men have to the Gospel in Christian
Countries, and in Lands of Liberty, consists rather in the Ignorance of their
Minds, and Contrariety of their Hearts, Wills and Lusts to God and Christ, than
in open Persecution of true Saints. There are many unconverted Persons who on
one Account and another have a great Regard for Men, who are eminently
religious. The Children of Heth, who were Heathens esteemed and honored
Abraham. Genesis xx. 3.
Saul who was a wicked King honored the holy Prophet Samuel.

But it is certain, that while Reason remains in the World, Follies and
Inconsistencies in Conduct will expose Men to Ridicule. There is no Possibility
of helping this. But what special Virtue there is in being thus ridiculous, I
am yet to learn. What Glory, says Peter, is it if when ye be buffeted for your
Faults, ye take it patiently? Most certainly then there is much less Glory,
when you bear your deserved Reproaches with great Impatience; and retaliate
them fourfold with Bitterness and Railing, which your Neighbors can testify is
your constant Practice.

5. Others look on the great Zeal with which they are filled, in Consequence of
their Impressions, as a certain Proof of their coming from God. It is readily
granted, that Men should be very zealous about Religion, and that good Men, who
are quickened by the Spirit, are filled with much holy Zeal. This Zeal proceeds
from the saving Knowledge of God through Christ, and disposes the Man who has
it to have a tender Concern for the divine Glory, and hearty Charity or Love
for Mankind, and it is always regulated by the Rules contained in the written
Word of God. Right Zeal, like the Wisdom that is from above, should be first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy.

It should be remembered, that the sensible Motions of the Blood and animal
Spirits, which ordinarily accompany Zeal, depend in a great Measure on the
Constitution of the Body; and will be very different in different Persons, who
are equally religious according to their respective Constitutions. Hence, it is
difficult to judge of the Affections of others, from the visible Discoveries,
they make of their Zeal. The Apostle Peter was a Man of a natural warm Make:
The Apostle John was of a meek and gentle Spirit. He was of a calm and pacifick
Temper; yet it does not appear that the zealous and forward Peter was a more
eminent Saint, or really more engaged in Religion, than the meek and humble
John. Each of them had his peculiar Gift in which he excelled. Peter had been
much to blame if he had despised John.

The Scriptures and the Reason of Things inform us, there is a false Zeal as
well as a true. Persons may be very zealous about their Religion, who are quite
Strangers to the Influences of the holy Spirit. Were not Baal's Prophets
extremely zealous in Elijah's Time about their own Religion? about the Credit
of their Worship and favorite Idol? And was not Jezebel equally engaged? Jehu
does not appear to have been sincerely religious; yet he was ready to call upon
others to come and see his Zeal for the Lord. Were not the Scribes and
Pharisees ignorant of Christ the Lord of Glory? yet who were more zealous than
they? How much engaged were they to make Proselytes, and increase their Number?
They would compass Sea and Land to gain one new Disciple. Yea, in the Height of
their ignorant Zeal, they crucified Christ himself. As true Zeal is always an
Attendant of true Religion; so false Zeal constantly accompanies Delusion,
otherwise the Counterfeit would be very imperfect. And indeed there is no
Branch of the Christian Character that is more easily, and commonly
Counterfeited than Zeal, as appears from the foregoing Instances.

Pride and Self-Will in Men, if they are opposed, will often make them zealous.
Opposition stirs Men's Angry Passions, and frequently enflames them with
burning Zeal against their Adversaries.

It is certain that Persons may do a great Deal at heating their own Fancies,
and kindling the Fire of Enthusiasm by their own Industry and Labor. Those who
have not been acquainted with such Things, would be surprised to see what
laboring and toiling will do at raising forced Transports. And may not Satan
be ready to blow this Wildfire. The Indian S^ge^ and to work themselves up
into a Sort of Enthusiasm and Rapture at their Entertainments, as appears from
some of their Reveries and Speeches. See the History of Capt. Breton. Let. viii.


When Persons have embibed the Notion, which it is to be feared the greater
Part of you have, that bodily Exercise is a principal ^art of eminent Holiness;
when the Heads of your Parties censure and condemn all reasonable Religion and
solid Piety as stupid, lifeless and dead Services; and recommend extravagant
Rants by their Examples and Exhortations, as the highest Devotion, practically
teaching that in Order to serve God acceptably, you must first get transported
beyond all Appearance of Reason; it is not at all wonderful, if many who have
no real Sense of Divine Things on their Minds should try to force and work
themselves up to such wild Frenzies. But all sober, understanding Christians
see there is something extremely odious in this mechanical or forced Zeal. Such
Zeal is doubtless one of the greatest Indignities that can be offered to a
jealous God.

But not to enlarge on this, since extraordinary Heat and Zeal may proceed from
a warm Imagination worked up by Men's own Labor and Industry; since it may be
raised by the Agency of Satan; it cannot be allowed to be any certain Mark that
the Impressions, which it accompanies, come from God. When Men's Zeal stirs
them up to Extravagancies, it may be looked on as an Evidence, they are not
then moved by divine Influences. For the Spirit has expressly revealed that God
is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace, as in all Churches of the Saints.
1 Cor. xiv. 33.
So that according to this Text i^ any pretended religious Assemblies, allow
and approve of Disorders and Confusions they are not to be accounted Churches
of Saints. They are not to be owned as Churches of Christ at all, so far forth
as they countenance Disorders.

6. Others pretend, that their Impressions make them exceeding humble. I
readily grant that true Humility is a good Evidence. For it is not probable,
that Satan, the proud Spirit, would try to make Men truly humble. But it is one
Thing for Men to be really humble, and another to say and profess they are so

There is something so very abominable and shockingly monstrous in Pride, it
renders a Person so like the Devil, that few or none will ever profess they are
proud. According to my Observations, Men generally make some Pretensions to
Humility; so that your professing that your Impressions make you very humble,
is no sufficient Evidence that you are so. When a Man professes to be very
humble, this is the same Thing as to profess in other Words, that he is a very
excellent Christian. And may not a Man who has much spiritual Pride, and only a
Show of Humanity profess this?

If you were really humble, how came you to be so wise in your own Conceits,
and to have such a high Opinion of your own Gifts, Experiences and Graces? And
so much Contempt for all but yourselves? Whence is it, that you don't pay any
Regard to the Reasons and Judgment of any Man or Number of Men, let them be
never so wise, learned and godly; but trample on all Churches, and their
Determinations, but your own, with the greatest Disdain? Did you not make this
one grand Plea for your Separations from us, that our Churches were not pure
enough for such holy Persons as you? Were you not afraid such eminent Saints as
you would be poluted by having Communion with such Sinners, as you think we
are? Is it not then a downright barefaced Insult on common Sense, for you to
pretend to Humility, when your whole Conduct loudly declares that you are
lifted up beyond Measure with Pride? But probably it was powerfully impressed
on your Minds, you were more excellent than your Neighbors. If you had such an
Impression on your Minds, your own Conscience and Reason doutless opposed it at
first, because there were sundry Things that rendered it very improbable. But
there was something so agreeable in the Impression, you at length gave Way to
it, and now act upon it.

Now can you think, can any Body believe, that an Impression, that has puffed
you up with Pride, and inspired you with Disdain toward Thousands that are
really superior to you, could come from God?

What though you despise fine Clothes, and new Fashions, and exclaim against
them? You may take as much Pride in railing against them, as others do in
following them. Reason and common Sense plainly direct Persons to appear in
that Dress, in which they are likely to be least stared at, and talked about;
since there are but few, who have Merit enough to support an extraordinary
Character. When Persons dress above or below what is accounted suitable for
their Estates and Stations, in the Place and Age where they live, they are
Offenders against this Rule, and are often punished by Ridicule.

Modest Apparel is recommended by the Scriptures, which are the Standard of
good Sense, as well as Religion. Unaffected Neatness is celebrated as the
Perfection of Dress by the best Judges. Women who are really beautiful need
not, and those who are truly virtuous will not, greatly study to outdo others
in Finery and Fashions; unless they have a strong Tincture of Vanity, or a
wrong Taste. They would not be the less amiable, though they should not conform
to the Fashions, that are contrary to common Sense, private Beauty and Family
Convenience. But if such, as have but little Virtue, and Beauty, should try to
recommend themselves by extravagant Finery, dressing even beyond the Fashion,
however inconvenient and ridiculous it may be, they would commonly find
themselves sadly disappointed; since hereby, they would make a glaring
Discovery of their excessive Vanity, Want of Sense and true Taste. Extravagance
in Dress is still more absurd in Men. What a sorry Character do Pops sustain?
It Is a Pity they are not always mortified by Neglect or Ridicule, which they so
justly merit with great Pains and Expense.

But since Mankind are proud of many Things besides Clothes, it will not
follow, that all, who rail against Finery and new Fashions are truly humble.
Some may do this to make a Righteousness of their Zeal against Foppery. Some
may from merefullenness put on Rags, when they see others glare in Robes. But
in true Humility the Mind is humbled, bro't to a meek and lowly temper. Such
Persons are poor in Spirit, diffident of their own Wisdom, and ready to esteem
others better than themselves, but not forward to exercise themselves in great
Matters, or Things too high for them. Psalm cxxxi.


As Pride often appears in excessive Finery, it is not improbable that some
Hypocrites may attempt to counterfeit the amiable Grace of Humility by a mean
and sordid Dress. It is certain some Superstitious Devotees among Heathens and
Papists have carried this to a very great Height. As Examples are sometimes
more striking than reasoning, I shall give a notable one in the famous Abbe de
Paris, from Doct. Leland, with some of his Remarks upon it. See his View of
Deistical Writers. 1 Vol. Letter xxi.


He was the eldest Son of an ancient, rich, and honorable Family, and therefore
born to an opulent Fortune: though his Father, when he saw his turn of Mind,
very prudently left him but a Part of it, and that in the Hands of his younger
Brother. But though he still had an ample Provision made for him, he
voluntarily deprived himself of all the Conveniences and even the Necessaries
of Life. He chose one obscure Hole or Cottage after another to live in, and
often mixed with Beggars, whom he resembled so much in his Customs, sordid and
tattered Garb, and whole Manner of his Life, that he was sometimes taken for
one, and was never better pleased, than when this exposed him in the Streets
and Ways to Derision and Contempt. Poverty was what he so much affected, that
though he applied to his Brother for what his Father had left him, yet that he
might not have the Appearance of being rich, he chose not to take it as what
was legally due to him, but to supplicate for it in the humblest Terms, as for
an Alms freely bestowed upon a miserable Object that had nothing of his own.
And yet in his last Will, he disposed of it as his own to various Uses as he
thought fit, especially for the Benefit of those who had been Sufferers for the
Jansenists Cause. For several of the last Years of his Life he seemed to make
it his Business to contrive Ways to weaken, or harrass, and torture his Body,
and thereby hasten his own Death. Whilst he gave away his Income to the poor,
he himself voluntarily endured all the Evils and Hardships which attended the
Extremity of Want and Poverty. Mean and wretched was his Garb, black Bread,
Water and Herbs, but without Oil, Salt, or Vinegar, or any Thing to give them
Savor, was his only Sustenance, and that but once a Day. He lay upon the
Ground, and was worn away with continual Watchings. After his Death, were found
his Hair Shirt, an Iron Cross, a Girdle, Stomacher and Bracelets of the same
Metal, all bestuck with sharp Points. These were the Instruments of Penitence,
with which he was wont to chastise himself, the plain Marks of which he bore in
his Body. By such a Course he brought himself not only into great Weakness of
Body, but into Disorders of Mind: And this, which was the natural Effect of his
Manner of Living, he attributed to the Influence of the Devil, whom God had in
just Judgment permitted to punish him for his Sins. And in enquiring into the
Causes of divine Displeasure, he fixed upon this, that he had still too great a
Love for human Learning and Knowledge, and therefore from thenceforth did all
he could to divest himself of it, and would have sold his well furnished
Library, if he had not been prevented by some of his Friends, whose Interest it
was to preserve it. For two Years together he refused to come to the holy
Supper, under Pretense that it was not lawful for him to come, God having
required him to abstain from it: And it was with great Difficulty that he was
brought to it at last, by the Threatenings and even Reproaches of his Confessor.
Finally, that no Kind of Misery might be wanting to him, he chose for his
Companion to dwell with him in his Cottage, a Man that was looked upon to be
crazy, and who treated him in the most injurious Manner. He did all he could to
hide himself from his Friends in one sorry Cottage after another, and about a
Month before his Death fixed himself in a little Lodge in the Corner of a
Garden, exposed to the Sun and Wind. When by such Severities he had brought
himself into an universal bad habit of Body, and it was visible to his Friends,
that if he continued in that Course he would not long support under it; a
Physician was called in, who only desired him to remove to a more commodious
Habitation, to allow himself more Sleep, and a better Diet, and especially to
take nourishing Broths for restoring his enfebled Constitution. But all the
Persuasions of his Physician, Confessor, and of his Friends, and the Tears of
an only Brother, could not prevail with him to follow an Advice so reasonable
and practicable; though he was assured, that if he use the Method there was
great Hope of his Recovery, and that his Life could not be preserved without
it. And when at last to satisfy their importunity, he seemed so far to comply,
as to be willing to take some Broth, it was only an Appearance of complying,
for he took Care to give such Orders, to the Person who was to prepare it for
him, that it really yielded little or no Nourishment. Thus it was manifest,
that he had determined to hasten, as much as in him lay, his own Death. And
accordingly he told his Confessor, that this Life had nothing in it to make it
worth a Christian's Care to preserve it.

However such Things procured him so extraordinary a Reputation that he has
passed for one of the greatest Saints that ever appeared in the Christian
Church. No sooner was he dead, but an innumerable Multitude of People ran to
his Corpse, some of whom kissed his Feet, others cut off Part of his Hair as a
Remedy against all Manner of Evils,; others bro't Books or Bits of Cloth to
touch his Body, as believing it filled with a divine Virtue. Thus were they
prepared to believe and expect the most wonderful Things -- But it cannot in
Consistency with Reason be supposed, that God should extraordinarily interpose
by his own divine Power, to do Honor to the Bones and Ashes of a Man weak and
superstitious to a Degree of Folly, and who was knowingly and willingly
accessory to his own Death.

How different is this from the beautiful and noble Idea of Piety and Virtue
which the Gospel furnishes us with, and from the perfect Pattern of moral
Excellency which is set us by our Blessed Savior himself in his own holy Life
and Practices! That the great Apostle St. Paul was far from encouraging such
Austerites as tended to hurt and destroy the bodily Health, sufficiently
appears from the Advice he gave to Timothy, Drink no longer Water, but use a
little Wine, for thy Stomach's Sake and thine often Infirmities. 1 Timothy v. 23.
He condem^eth those that under Pretense of extraordinary Purity, were for
observing the Ordinances and Traditions of Men, Touch not, taste not, handle
not; and brands their Practice under the Name of Will Worship, a voluntary
Humility and Neglecting, or as the Word might be rendered, not sparing the
Body. Col. ii. 20, 21, 22, 23. --

It has always appeared to me to be the Glory of the Christian Religion, as
prescribed in the New Testament, that the Piety it teaches us is solid and
rational, remote from all superstitious Extremes, worthy of a God of infinite
Wisdom and Goodness to require, and becoming the true Dignity of the reasonable
Nature. It comprehends not only immediate Acts of Devotion toward God, but a
diligent Performance of all relative Duties, and the faithful Discharge of the
various Offices incumbent upon us in the Civil and Social Life. It requires us
indeed to bear with a noble Fortitude the greatest Evils, when we are regularly
called to suffer for the Cause of God, but not rashly to expose ourselves to
those Evils or to bring them upon ourselves.

The wise and beneficient Author of Nature has stored the whole World about us
with a Varietly of Benefits: and can it be thought to be agreeable to his Will,
that instead of tasting his Goodness in the Blessings he vouchsafes us, we
should make a Merit of never allowing ourselves to enjoy them? How much more
rational is it to receive those Blessings with Thankfulness, and enjoy them
with Temparence, according to that of St. Paul, Every Creature of God is Good,
and Nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving: For it is
sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. 1 Timothy iv. 4, 5. Can it be pleasing
to our merciful heavenly Father, that we should not merely humble and chasten
ourselves on special Occasions, but make it our constant Business to torment
ourselves and to impair and destroy those Bodies he has given us, and thereby
unfit ourselves for the proper Offices of Life? Is it reasonable to imagine,
that under the mild Dispensation of the Gospel; which breaths an engenuous and
cheerful Spirit, and raises us to the noble Liberty of the Children of God,
the best Way of recommending ourselves to his Favor should be to deny
ourselves all the Comforts he affords us, and to pass our Lives in perpetual
Sadness and Abstinence? Could it be said in that Case, that Godliness is
profitable unto all Things, having the Promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come? 1 Timothy iv. 8. -- It was not indeed till Christians began
to degenerate from that lovely Form of rational, solid Piety and Virtue, or
which Christ himself exhibited the most perfect Example, that they laid so
mighty a Stress on those severe and rigorous Austerities, which neither our
Savior nor his Apostles had commanded. And in this Respect some of those, who
were anciently deemed heretical Sects, carried it to a greater Degree of
Strictness than the orthodox themselves.

7. In fine, many suppose that if Impressions from Scripture draw out their
Affections in Love to God and Christ, this is a sure Evidence that they come
from the Holy Spirit.

But this is also a rash Conclusion; since there is no sufficient Reason to
think that Love may not be counterfeited as well as other Graces. A Man may
greatly love another, having received a wrong Notion or Idea of him, and yet if
he were undeceived and really knew what Sort of a Man he was, his Love would
immediately vanish It Is not Love to God and Christ under any Notion that Men
may form in their Minds, that will evidence they have sincere, genuine Love to
the true God and his only begotten Son, and prove they are under the Influence
of the Good Spirit. When profane Sinners think (as they generally do) that God
is altogether such a one as themselves, it is natural for them to love him
under this Notion. But is there any great Virtue in their Love?

'Atheists are few, most Nymphs a G^dhead own,
'And Nothing but his Attributes dethrone;
'From Atheists far, they steadfastly believe
'God is, and is Almighty -- to forgive.
'His other Excellence they will not dispute,
'But Mercy sure is his chief Attribute.
'Shall Pleasures of a short Duration chain
'A Lady's Soul in everlasting Pain?
'No. He Is forever in a smiling Mood
'He's like themselves; or how could he be good?
'And they blaspheme who blacker Schemes suppose. --
'Devoutly thus Jehovah they depose
'The Pure! the Just! and set up in his Stead
'A Deity that is perfectly well bred.
'Dear T -- L -- N --! besure the best of Men;
'Nor thought he more than thought great Origon.
'Tho once upon a Time he misbehaved
'Poor Satan! doubtless He Will at Length be saved.'
DR. YOUNG. Multitudes of the Jews, while they believed Christ would be a
temporal Savior, deliver them from the Roman Yoke, and make them the Lords of
the World, loved him very much, and filled the Air with loud Hosannas in his
Praise; attending his triumphant Entrance into Jerusalem. When they found out
their Mistake, they cried out with great Vehemence, crucify him! crucify him!
Not this Man but Barabbas. When a Mohammedan greatly loves God, because he
believes he has provided for him great Quantities of generous Wines, and many
fine Women in Paradise, what special Virtue is there in his carnal Affections?
I am really very serious, when I prosess, that some of you I here refer to the
Moravians. The Reader who would see the Grounds of my Suspicion may peruse
Rimius's Candid Narrative, in which he will find sundry Passages transcribed
from their Writings, which contain the most shockingly obscene Expressions,
etc. which perhaps ever were penned.
seem to me to have as carnal Notions of Heaven as the Mahometans.

If a Sinner under slight Convictions should have a Discovery made to him by
the false Spirit, from some Text of Scripture, that God loved him with a
special Love, and would deliver him from Hell and receive him into Heaven, he
would undoubtedly love God under that View. The Principles of natural
Gratitude, which are implanted in the human Heart, would immediately produce
such a Love as this. Indeed it is (...) great Difficulty to persuade
unconverted Sinners, or even those that have but slight and partial
Convictions, to believe that God has a peculiar Fondness for them. But let such
Persons be brought effectually to see their exceeding great Sinfulness, and the
many black Aggravations with which their Sins have been attended, and they will
lose all this Faith and Love. Nothing can then support them but a real
Discovery of the glorious Mediator Jesus Christ.

Hence, I don't wonder that some of you discard Convictions out of your
Religion. It must be intimated to Sinners that whatever before this Time has
been believed to be a Preparation for coming to God is rather an Obsticle. See
Rimius's Narrative, 51, 52. And I have heard some of the Moravians myself find
great Fault with preaching any Terrors at all, even to the Unregenerate, So
also Saltmarsh taught in Cromwell's Time.
For there is nothing that would more effectually prevent your false Faith,
Love and Joy, than thorough Convictions of your exceeding Sinfulness. -- Legal
Convictions let them be ever so deep don't make any Atonement for Sin; for
then there had been no Need that Christ should have died. Neither do they
enable a Man to convert himself. The Law has Power to stay, but it cannot bring
to Life again. In Convictions a Man does not prepare himself for the Grace of
God; but the Spirit of God prepares his own Way, treating the Sinner like a
rational Creature, that so he may be willing to forsake his Sins, renounce his
own Righteousness, and receive and rest upon Christ alone for Salvation. It Is
the Scripture Doctrine, that the Spirit convinces of Sin, and of Righteousness;
that by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin; that Sinners are alive in their own
Conceits, 'till the Commandment is set home on their Consciences. John xvi. 8.
etc. Romans iii. 20. and vii. 9. And see Dr. Owen on Justification, p. 1. -- 40.
And Saxter's Saints Everlasting Rest, p. 13.
Though Persons may make a Righteousness of slight Convictions, yet thorough
Conviction is one great Thing which kills their proud Hopes. There is no
Probability that ever any Sinner will renounce all Dependence on his own
Righteousness, till he is thoroughly convinced by the Law of its utter
Insufficiency. To discard Convictions and preaching up the Law in its Purity,
Strictness and Tenor is an infallible Recipe to feed human Pride -- But then
Men will be more easily persuaded to believe God loves them, and that Christ
died for them in particular. Proud Haman thought in his Heart, to whom would
the King delight to do Honor more than to myself? And indeed if the Antinomian
Notion of Faith, viz. a Believing that Christ died for me in particular were
true, legal Convictions would be the greatest Obstacle to it. So that in this
the Moravians are by far more consistent with themselves than other
Antinomians. The less Sense a Sinner has of his own Unworthiness, and the more
he values his own Excellency; the more easily he can believe, that God has a
singular Regard for him, and that Christ must have a peculiar Esteem for him,
and if he died for any Body, besure for him.

1. Let us now attend a little to the Method in which the Spirit of God teaches
Men in his Word. -- As there are only general Truths in the Scripture, the
Spirit of God enlightens Men's Minds only in general Truths. The Scriptures
give us an Account of God, his glorious Perfections and Excellencies. They
represent his Law to be most excellent and important, to be holy, just and
good. They describe Sin against God to be most vile and abominable, and
consequently that Sinners are vile and wretched Creatures. They assert there is
no Door of Hope for Sinners but through Jesus Christ, who being the only
begotten Son of God, the Brightness of his Glory and the express Image of his
Person, by himself purged our Sins, or made Atonement for them on the Cross;
and that whosoever believes in this glorious Redeemer shall not perish but have
everlasting Life. These are general Descriptions of Persons and Things
considered in themselves.

2. Now when the Spirit of God instructs Sinners in the Scriptures, he gives
them a real view or Sense of these Things, according to that consistent Scheme
which is in the Scriptures. He does not represent one Scripture contrary to
another. He brings them to have the same Notions of these important Things, as
he has delivered in his Word. They see by his Influences that the Descriptions,
which God has given in the Scriptures, are divinely true. When therefore a
Sinner has the same Apprehensions about God, his Law, his own Vileness, and the
only Way of Salvation by Christ, as are delivered in the Scriptures; then he is
taught by the Spirit -- Such a Man apprehends God to be infinitely excellent
and glorious, his Law to most pure and holy, worthy of God to reveal; himself
to be unspeakeably vile, ungrateful and abominable; yea justly liable to God's
dreadful Wrath for violating this excellent Law; and that if he were to be
condemned to the everlasting Torments of Hell, it is no more than he justly
deserves for dishonoring a glorious God. He sees that all the Declarations of
God are infallibly true. He believes that Testimony which he has borne
concerning Jesus Christ. He sees that this glorious Redeemer has laid a
sufficient Foundation for the Safety of all believing Sinners, that God can be
just and yet the Justifier of every one that believes in Jesus; and that
whosoever comes unto Christ, he will in no wise cast outlet him be ever so
great a Sinner. Thus the Spirit of God teaches Sinners with his Word, bringing
them effectually to know and love the Truths which are revealed in the
Scriptures, the general Truths of God's holy Word, leading them to have such
Views of Things considered in themselves, as are given in the Scriptures. If
therefore a Man be conscious to himself, that he apprehends divine Things as
they are represented in the Scriptures; if he feels himself duly influenced by
the Gospel, that the Life which he now lives in the Flesh, he lives by Faith in
the Son of God; then it is evident that he is led by the Spirit of God. For the
Gospel is to them that perish Foolishness. They never behold its eminent Glory,
they are never duly influenced by it. It is only to those who are saved, that
the Gospel is made the Power of God.

As the Spirit of God teaches Men only general Truths from his Word, he does no
more by the Sacraments. There is, I apprehend, an entire Correspondence between
the Declarations of the Word of God and the Sacraments. Seals are used among
Men to confirm Writings, Bonds, Obligations, etc. Thus, King Ahasuerus
confirmed his Commands, which he sent to the several Provinces of his large
Empire, not only "by writing them in his own Name," but "by sealing them with
his Ring." E^her iii. 12.
Now though God's Declarations are worthy of all Acceptance, being
sufficiently credible in themselves, because of his infallible Truth and
Faithfulness, yet guilty Sinners have many Fears, and are very prone to
distrust his gracious Promises; so that there is Need of various Sorts of
Evidence to induce them to believe, or give hearty Credit to his Gospel. Hence,
God has been pleased in Condescension to our Weakness to affix Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, by Way of Seals to his Gospel or new Covenant. Now it is well
known that among Mankind the Seal is affixed to the written Agreement, Bond,
Indenture, Covenant, and to that only. Nothing is confirmed by the Seal, but
what is expressed in the written Instrument to which it is affixed. And thus
God confirms Nothing by the Sacraments, which are the Seals of the
New Testament or Covenant, but what he has written in it. Is it not absurd to
imagine that there can be any Thing sealed or confirmed by the Sacraments, but
what is declared in that Covenant and written Word in the Bible to which they
are affixed as Seals?

"This Cup, says Christ, is the New Testament in my Blood;" That is, as
commonly explained, the Sacramental-Cup, which represents the Blood of Christ,
is the Seal of the New Testament or Covenant, which is established by the Blood
of Christ. God has expressly declared, that whosoever believes in Christ shall
be saved. This is in brief the New Covenant. God not only reveals this general
Truth in Words, but he sets his Seal to it in the Sacraments; hereby solemnly
promising he will save them if they believe in the Sense of the Gospel. But he
does by no Means seal to those that partake of the Sacraments, that they have
this Faith. For then he would seal something that is not in the Scriptures, and
very frequently seal what is not true in itself, since many, who partake of the
Sacraments, have not justifying Faith.

Men on their Parts promise to fulfill this New Covenant, or believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ. This is their Indispensible Duty, agreeable to the general
Commands of Christ to all to repent and believe the Gospel. So that there is no
such Thing, even when graceless Men partake of the Sacraments, as a Seal's
being put to a Blank. Is it not true that God will save the Receivers if they
truly believe? Is it not equally true, that it is the Duty of the Receivers to
believe in Christ?

The Sacraments don't seal Men's saving Interest in the Covenant of Grace. They
are greatly mistaken who imagine they do, and have yet to learn the proper
Notion of Sacraments. Like Circumcision of old, they are a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, a Confirmation that God will save all who have true
Faith. Now it is every one's indispensible Duty to believe. God required and
commanded, yea he bound the Infants of the Jews to this by Circumcision of Old.
And why may he not bind and oblige Children of Christian Parents under the
Gospel to Faith in Christ? Why should any desire to have their Children free
from these Obligations to believe in Christ? Are they tired with the Yoke of
Christ themselves, that they would have a greater Liberty reserved for their
Children to disregard him? Why then are they so loath to dedicate them to him in
Baptism?

i. As it appears to be the Office of the Holy Spirit to enlighten Men's Minds
in the general Truths revealed in the Scriptures, so on the contrary it appears
to be one great Artifice of Satan, by which, it is to be feared, he deceives
many to deal in particular Suggestions, I mean, impressing particular Texts on
their Minds as if such Texts had an immediate special Referrence to them. Thus,
you see he did in the Case of John Lewis; and there is Reason to believe he
does so in many other Instances, where the Delusion wears a more agreeable
Dress. Satan instead of showing a Sinner, who is under some Terrors, the
general Encouragement there is in the Gospel for all believing Sinners, let
their Sins be ever so great, suddenly suggests to him some such Thing as this,
that he is elected, beloved, justified, that all his Sins are pardoned. For
this Purpose he frequently improves such Words as these O Man greatly beloved
-- I have loved thee with an everlasting Love -- Son be of good Cheer thy Sins
are forgiven thee -- Fear not little Flock it is your Father's good Pleasure to
give you the Kingdom, etc.

Now such Texts as they refer to us, teach us, as has been before observed,
only general Truths, viz. that God greatly loves his Saints, that he pardons
their Sins, and will receive them into his heavenly Kingdom. But they say
Nothing of you, John, Thomas, Ann, Mary, by Name whither you are Saints or
Sinners, beloved or hated. The holy Spirit when he enlightens your Minds in
these Scriptures can never teach you, that you in particular are beloved, etc.
because there is no such Truth in them.

When therefore Persons have it strongly impressed on their Minds from these
and the like Scriptures, that they in particular are beloved, elected,
pardoned, justified; this is entirely a new Revelation, which must owe its
Origin to an over heared Fancy or the Delusion of Satan. Persons must first
believe in Christ, before they can have any rational Grounds to hope they were
elected. They must prove their Election, and Justification, by their effectual
Calling and Sanctification. Men are said to be justified by Faith in Christ.
Consequently they are not justified before they believe in this glorious
Savior. When therefore Persons have it first revealed to them that their Sins
are pardoned, and they justified; this is a Revelation of a Falsehood, and may
therefore be justly ascribed to Satan who is the Father of Lies.

Hence, it has been observed of such Converts, that their Minds are not
enlightened in the general Truths of the Gospel, and the Way of Salvation by
Christ by their Discoveries. The grand Thing they can tell is, that they are
beloved, elected, justified, pardoned; and their Burden has gone off, and they
have been filled with Comfort and Joy, while they imagined the Lord manifested
his peculiar Affection for them.

2. When the Force of such particular Impressions wear off in some considerable
Measure, they would begin to be a little fearful: But to prevent all
Convictions, Satan instills it into their Minds, that it is a great Sin to
doubt, and perhaps strongly impresses that Text, O thou of little Faith
wherefore "did thou doubt? Thus, they are brought to imagine that true Faith
in Christ is to believe firmly they are in a safe State, and that God has a
singular Regard for them; and that walking by Faith is to maintan without any
Evidence a good Conceit of themselves.

This has been and still is a very common Notion among many Persons in the
Christian World. I must therefore examine it a little particularly.

It might be of Service, if Men would consider what is meant in Scrripture by
the Word Doubt, and to what it is applied in the sacred Writings. They might
see that Doubting in the Scriptures does not signify Men's questioning whether
they are in a State of Grace, but whether Jesus of Nazareth was the true
Messiah; or distrusting his Power, Truth and Faithfulness. O thou of little
Faith, wherefore did thou doubt, question, scruple my Power to preserve thee
from drowning?

It should be remembered that the main Question which was disputed in the Time
of Christ, and his Apostles, was whither Jesus of Nazareth was the promised
Savior. Men were termed Belivers or Unbelievers as they openly professed or
denied this fundamental Truth of Christianity. The believing Samaritans
declared thus, John iv. 42. Acts ix 22 John xx. 31. Acts viii 37.
We have heard him ourselves, and know that this is Indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the World. The great Thing which Paul proved with such striking
Evidence was, "that Jesus is the very Christ." The Gospel was written for this
End, that Men might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing they
might have Life through his Name." The Profession of the Eunuch was, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, or the promised Messiah.

Hence, when Men scrupled, did not believe this Truth, they were said to doubt.
Thus the Jews, John x. 24. Mat. xxviii. 17.
How long do thou make us to doubt? It thou be the Christ tell us plainly."
Thus also after his Resurrection, "When they saw him they Worshipped him, but
some doubted, (or though some had doubted) called in Question the Truth of his
Resurrection.

Your Misunderstanding of the Word Doubt, as used in the Scriptures, has
probably been an Occasion of your falling into sundry Mistakes. While you have
fancied the Essence of saving Faith consists in being strongly confident that
God loves you, and that Christ died for you in particular, you are ready to
pronounce all who have some Comfort after Convictions to be true Converts. You
imagine that if they tell you their Experiences and you have Fellowship with
them, you have a certain infallible Knowledge of their gracious State. Hence,
the chief Part of your Conversation about Religion is employed in telling your
religious Experiences. And I suppose it is from the same Notion, that you exact
an Account of Men's religious Experiences before you receive them into your
pretended Churches.

The standing Ministry in general zealously maintain the great Importance and
absolute Necessity of experimental Religion, as our Sermons, and printed
Discourses and Books abundantly testify. For my own Part, were it not for that
Regard which I have for experimental Religion, I should not have taken so much
Pains in my present low State of Health to rescue it from your
Misrepresentations, and to warn the World against those Things in your Conduct,
which are giving it such a deadly Blow.

Your prenouncing all, who pretend to have Comfort and Joy after Fears and
Trrors, to be true Converts is rash and unwarrantable; and must have a
pernicious Tendency wherever your Influence reaches.

How many, who have been enlightened, in some Measure, and, like the
stony-ground Hearers in the Parable of the Sower, receive the Word with Joy,
soon lose all remarkable Sense of Religion, and prove themselves by their
wicked Practices to be in the Gall of Bitterness and in the Bonds of Iniquity?
Now does it not reflect a Reproach on experimental Religion in the World, when
one and another, who made high Pretensions to it, and were cried up for eminent
Christians, discover they have no serious Regard for Religion at all?

Since it is certain, that there are common as well as saving Operations of the
Spirit; that unsound Professors may have various Changes and Reformations; that
many who seem to begin in the Spirit end in the Flesh, turning with the Dog to
his Vomit and with the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire; should
there not be the utmost Prudence and Caution used in declaring that others by
Name are sincere Converts? What Necessity lies upon Christians to search the
Hearts of others, and make any Declaration at all, that they are in a gracious
State? The Apostles received thousands into the Church in a Day upon their
professing that Jesus was the Christ, and treated all 1 Cor i 2
in every Place who called upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord as visible
Saints, though they knew there were many among them who had only the outward
Badge of Christianity. It is evident the Apostles did not examine those whom
they admitted into the Christian Church, about their religious Experiences. For
it is too absurd to believe that they could particularly examine three Thousand
in a Day. Now if they did not examine them on this Point, but received them on
their open Profession of Christ, how come you to require a particular Relation
of Religious Experiences before you will receive any Person into Communion with
you? Where have you any Precept or Example in the Bible for exacting a Relation
of Religious Experiences, in Order to your admitting them to christian
Privileges? Did Philip require the Eunuch to relate his Experiences before he
baptized him? Or did he not administer this Ordinance to him upon his
professing honestly to believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God? This is
the Account the Scripture gives and farther says not. Now remember it is
written Add thou not to his Words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a
Liar.

You have been often told (and if I remember right by President Edwards among
others) that a Declaration of religious Experiences was never insisted on
according to the Scriptures as a Term of Christian Communion, nor any Instance
of such a Practice to be found from the Days of Adam to the Death of the
Apostle John. Why don't you leave off this Practice or produce Scripture to
defend it? As there is no Controversy in New England about examining Candidates
concerning their religious Experiences, I have no Business and (...) ^eddle
with any Questions relating to that Matter.


You pretend to be extremely scrupulous sometimes about Things for which, you
think, there is no express Scripture, as in Infant Baptism, and keeping the
first Day of the Week for the Sabbath. It is but reasonable you should be
consistent with yourselves. Therefore I desire you, to produce the Scripture,
the express Command or Example, where Persons were required to declare their
secret religious Experiences in order to their being admitted to Baptism.

As to that Fellowship and Communion (as you understand the Words) which you
profess to judge by, when you hear Persons relate their religious Experiences,
it is Nothing but a Sympathy or fellow-feeling with them, so far as their
Experiences appear to you to agree with your own. And in this Sense almost
every Person feels something like it in the ordinary Affairs of Life. Thus,
when a true Englishman hears how his brave Countrymen have beaten the French,
the perfidious Enemies of Great Britain, he is immediately interested in the
Story and has a fellow-feeling with the English Generals and Soldiers in all
their Dangers and Victories. And on the contrary a Frenchman sympathises with
his Countrymen. And Men who have strong Connexions, whither from Interest,
Passions or Principles, will have this sympathetic Feeling, which you call
Fellowship and Witnessing for one another.

When you hear a Man tell his religious Experiences, and there happens to be
some Similitude between yours and his, you will have a fellow-feeling with him;
and upon a mutual Relation of Experiences, you may confirm one another's Hopes
and grow more confident of your good Estates, and imagine you are greatly
quickened and enlivened by such an Interview. And thus if two persons, who had
an implacable Grudge at a third Person, should open their Minds to one another,
they would have a great Deal of fellow-feeling with one another, and would be
more encouraged and confirmed in their Enmity against him. But can you think
that this is what the Scriptures call the Communion of Saints?

To rectify your Mistakes about the Meaning of the Words Communion and
Fellowship of Saints as used in Scripture, you may observe, that when a Number
of Persons have a common Interest in any Thing, which is capable of being
divided into Parts they have Communion or Fellowship in that Thing, each one
receiving his proper Share. Hence the Apostle speaking of the Lord's Supper
says, The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood
of Christ? The Bread which we break is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? Because the Bread is one So it should be Translated. See the Original
and Consult Beza and Whitby on this Text. 1 Cor. x. 16, 17.
we many are one Body; for we are all Partakers of that one Bread. Thus
Christians according to the Apostle sharing or partaking in the same Elements
of Bread and Wine have Communion or Fellowship together.

But where the Subject mentioned is not capable of being divided, Men have
Communion together in Respect of said Subject, who each of them have the whole.
Saints have all of them, one as well as another, the same God, the same Christ,
the same Holy Ghost, the same Graces. And thus all Saints have Communion with
one another, however distant they may live as to Time or Place. The Word
Communion or Fellowship of Saints among themselves is used ordinarily in one or
the other of these two Senses, in the Scriptures. Thus, it appears that the
Communion and Fellowship of the Saints mentioned in the Scriptures is quite a
different Thing from your sympathetic-feeling, arising from Communication of
Experiences. Which Fellowship you can have only with those who tell you their
Experiences: Whereas all Saints have Communion with one another though they
live in different Countries and Ages of the World.

What has been said about the Nature of your fellow-feeling with one another in
your mutual relating your Experiences, clearly discovers what Sort of Evidence
that is, which you call witnessing for one another's Conversion. When you have
this Fellowship, this is an Evidence that you have, or pretend to have some
religious Experiences; and that there is some Similarity or Likeness between
your Experiences. But it is no certain Proof, that the Man has had those
Experiences, which he relates. For he may borrow them, for any Thing you can
tell, from some Book that gives an Account of the Life and Experiences of some
excellent Christian published from his Diary by his Friends after his Death.
You can remember some Instances in which you have been wretchedly imposed on,
if you please. But suppose the Person relates his own Experiences, and you have
strong Sympathy with him, and he with you; this is no infallible Proof, that
either of you have Grace. For may not two Hypocrites have Experiences very like
one another? May not a large Number of Hypocrites be deceived by the same
Spirit, and split on the same Rock? And have Fellowship in one another's false
Experiences?

When you determine Persons to be in a gracious State merely by your Fellowship
with them in their religious Experiences, does not this open a Door for proud
Hypocrites to vaunt themselves, that they may be accounted eminent Christians?
And will not the meek, modest and humble Saint on your Scheme be in Danger of
being despised and contemned? False Professors, like the Pharisees, are likely
to be very forward in proclaiming their own Goodness. They may have strong
Fellowship with one another from the Agreement of their Experiences. Now the
Scriptures represent, that the greatest Part even of Professors are not true
Converts. Many are called but few chosen. Many travel the broad Way to
Destruction, few find the narrow Way that leads to eternal Life. When therefore
you receive or reject a Man by your Fellowship with him, requiring all your
Members, Men, Women, Boys and Girls (as your Practice is) to witness for or
against him, the greater Part of you must necessarily judge by a false Rule;
since every reasonable Man must allow, it is more than probable, that at least
more than half of your elective Body are unconverted, and of Consequence have
no right Experiences of their own.

There is a probability that Hypocrites will have Fellowship with Hypocrites
from the sameness of their Experiences. As they are not much restrained by
Modesty and Humility, but ambitious to be accounted eminent Christians, their
open Freedom and Forwardness will give them great Influence. But since the
Experiences of true Saints will differ from those of Hypocrites, they are not
likely to have much Fellowship with Saints in their Relations. Besides there
may be considerable Variety in the Experiences of true Saints. God has not
confined himself exactly in all Respects to one Method. etc John iii. 8.
The humble Modesty of sincere Converts will afford a plausible Pretense for
Suspicion; So that they run the Risque of being received but very coldly, and
sometimes of being wholly excluded from your Churches, if you adhere strictly
to that Plan you have set up. Thus, your Scheme bids fair to open the Doors of
your pretended. Churches for all selfdeceived, proud, forward Hypocrites; and
to shut them against sincere humble Christians.

This Method of yours in setting up religious Experiences as the only Rule of
judging by, seems to be liable to a very just and strong Objection, in that it
leads you off from the written Word of God to follow your own sympathetic
Feelings with them in their Relations. You don't pretend to know that such and
such Persons are converted, because their Experiences, which they relate to
you, are agreeable to the Account which the Scriptures give of the Work of
Grace in the Hearts of Saints, and the Instances of Conversion which are
recorded in them; but you pronounce them converted because you have a secret
Fellowship with them, or because you have some strong Impulse or private
Revelation that they are born again. Thus you don't use the Scriptures as any
Rule in forming your Judgment about your Converts. No Wonder you pass many a
rash Judgment. Must you not be strangely bewildered who after all can still
confidently blunder on in such gross Absurdities!

Religious Conversation or Discourse is doubtless very profitable, and should
be promoted and practiced by Christians. But I must be excused at present from
thinking, that a perpetual relating of Men's secret Experiences is much for
Edification. Does it not look too much like Ostentation? Would it not be much
better, when you discourse about experimental Religion, to enquire, not what
you or I have experienced as the Marks of a sincere Christian; but what God has
revealed in his Word about this important Matter. Do Christians know Nothing
about God, his holy Law, the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Redemption, etc. etc.
that they cannot furnish out a Conversation on religious Subjects, without
always introducing their own Experiences and Feelings? Surely, says Mr.
Bellamy, those cannot be said to remember God who are always full of
themselves, full of a Sense of their own Goodness, and are dwelling forever
upon their own high Seize, ready always to say, God I thank thee I am not
as other Men! Such may be said to remember their own Duties, or their own.
Experiences and good Frames; but in the Scripture Sense, God is not in all
their Thoughts See his Early Piety recommended. P. 11.
-- And there are many others of the same Opinion.

One would think, it should put a modest Person to the Blush, to make himself,
and his great Experiences, the perpetual Subject of his Discourse. But it is
natural for some always to make I the Burden of their Story: However, you see
this is not commended by some who sustain a religious Character. And why should
you desire to discourse about Religion in that Way which exposes your own
Characters, and gives Offense to many religious Persons. Should you not beware
of giving Offense?

Your Method of talking religious Experiences, and judging by them, furnishes
some, as they think, with a specious Pretense to search and try those they
don't love; as also to censure and condemn those who don't incline to submit to
their Examination. Some such are known to ride up and down the Country,
requiring Persons, especially Ministers, to give them an Account of their
religious Experiences. Some Time ago a Fellow, who was an utter Stranger to me,
called at my House, and immediately addressed me thus. As I understand you are
the Minister of this Parish I want to ask you one or two Questions. I told him
he might ask as many reasonable Questions as he pleased. Then he proceeded
without further Ceremony. Do you look upon yourself to be in a Sat of Grace?
What are your religious Experiences? I answered him; his Questions appeared to
me very improper, both as he was an entire Stranger whom I had never seen nor
heard of before, and as he was not invested with any proper Authority, that I
knew of, to make such Enquiries, and therefore I should not answer them. Upon
this he went off saying he believed I had no Grace. This extraordinary Visit
led me to enquire what Sort of a Man he was, from which I soon found he was a
Man of a very had moral Character.

Such Sort of Treatment and Enquiries excited me to search the Scriptures,
whether there was any Foundation in them for such Practices. But upon the most
diligent Search, I have not discovered any Passage, that warrants Christians
thus to demand an Account of other's religious Experiences. The Passages that
have been chiefly insisted on as Proofs for such a Practice, I think, are two.
The first is the Words of the Psalmist, Psalm lxvi. 16.
Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my Soul. Your Unacquaintedness with Languages may incline you to be very
confident that this Text favors your Notions. But I apprehend there is no
certain Evidence, that the Psalmist had any Referrence to his religious
Experiences in these Words. According to the Idiom of the Hebrew Language, the
Word, which our Translators have rendered Soul, very often signifies the Person
himself. Exodus i. 5. Psalm iii. 2. Psalm cxliii 12.
Thus all the Souls that came out of the Loins of Jacob were seventy Souls,
that is, seventy Persons. So the Psalmist himself, Many there be which say of
my Soul i e. of me, there is no Help for him in God. Destroy all them that
afflict my Soul i. e. me, for I am thy Servant. Hence, perhaps the Words under
Consideration might have been as properly translated, I will declare what he
has done for me, and the Clause referred to the temporal Deliverances, which
he celebrates in this Psalm; at least there is no Certainty that this is not
the Sense of the Passage.

But if it were certain, that the Psalmist in these Words had a Referrence to
religious Experiences, the Text would even then be far enough from
countenancing your Practice. For he does not require others to relate their
secret Experiences to him, but professes his Readiness to declare to such as
were looked on as Fearers of the Lord, the Experiences he had on that
remarkable Occasion. He did not give this Account of his Experiences to satisfy
any Body about his gracious State, to give them any Light about his being a
true Saint. For he was a Saint and treated as such long before he wrote this
Psalm. So that all that can be inferred from the Text taken in this Sense, is,
that a Christian may relate his Experiences, when he has Reason to think it
will be for Edification, which must be left to his own discretion, conducted
agreeable to the general Rules of the Word. There is nothing in this Text to
warrant your requiring and demanding Persons to relate their Experiences to
you, on Pain of being censured and condemned as graceless Wretches and
Hypocrites.

It may be of great Advantage and Service to the Church of Christ, for
Christians to relate their religious Experiences on proper Occasions. The Lives
of excellent Christians that are written with Judgment are of great Service and
contain much useful Instruction. And to relate Experiences on some very
important Occasions may in some Measure answer the same End. When Persons
labor under great Troubles, Difficulties, Darkness, Temptations, etc. it might
often be of great Advantage to them to open their Minds freely to their
Minister, or to some judicious Christian in whose Prudence and Secrecy they
could confide. But to have religious Troubles and Experiences blazed abroad,
and tossed about on the Tongues of the careless World must, I think, have no
good Tendency. Such open Proclamation of Experiences puffs up ignorant and
proud Professors. It fixes the Eyes and Attention of the World on them to keep
a narrow Watch, to wait for their Halting; so that when they fall into any
Miscarriages this proves a Stumbling Block, and thus Experimental Religion is
brought into Contempt. Such a one, say they, was converted to'ther Month or
Year, see how he behaves now, we always though it Pretensions to Conversion and
Grace were Nothing, but mere Cant and Hypocrisy. Now can you think such Things
are likely to promote Religion?

The other Text which you produce for your Practice is the Direction of the
Apostle Peter -- And be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks
you a Reason of the Hope that is in you, with Meekness and Fear. In this
Passage of his Epistle, whereof these words are a Part, the Apostle is giving
the Christians to whom be wrote Directions for their Deportment in the World,
the Sum of which is, that they cultivate a peaceful, benevolent Temper and
Practice. He recommends this as an excellent Preservative from Reproaches,
Sufferings and Persecutions. However he hints, that let them be ever so prudent
and peaceable, it might so happen, they should meet with various Troubles and
Afflictions from the Enemies of the Christian Religion; and he comforts them
with this. If ye suffer for Righteousness Sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid
of their ^err^, neither be troubled: But sanctify the Lord God in your Hearts
The^ follows the Direction under Consideration, And be ready always to give an
Answer to every Man that asks you a Reason of the Hope that is in you, with
Meekness and Fear, having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak Evil of
you as of Evil Doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
Conversation in Christ.

You see the Apostle speaks of two Sorts of Men in this Passage, professed
Christians and their open Enemies, that accused and persecuted them. He gives
the Christians a Direction in these Words for their Conduct toward their open
Enemies, whither professed Jews or Heathens. Now can any sober unprejudiced
Persons think, the Apostle could direct Christians to tell their secret
religious Experiences to the professed Unbelievers, who falsely accused and
persecuted them? Would it not be sensibly absurd for a serious Christian now a
Days to relate his religious Experiences to a reproaching Deist or Indian?

As Jesus of Nazareth was proved to be the true Messiah and Savior of the
World, by the most glorious Evidence of Miracles; and by fulfilling the
Prophesies of the Old Testament, etc. it was a most reasonable Thing, that all,
who professed to believe in him, should be always ready to show the Reasons why
they believed, hoped and trusted in him. If any of their Enemies should ask
them a Reason or Discourse of the Hope that was in them, desiring them to show
why they believed that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ; Nothing could be more
reasonable than to set before them the Evidences of the Christian Religion.
Thus Paul speaks of his being Acts xxiii. 6.
called in Question of the Hope and Resurrection of the Dead. He was ready to
show the Reasons of his embracing Christianity. And all, who call themselves by
the Name of Christ, should be so well acquainted with the Doctrines and
Evidences of our holy Religion, as to be ready to show every one that asks them
in a sober Manner, some sufficient Reasons, why they believe Jesus of Nazareth
to be the Christ, and hope and trust in him. For I presume the Text has not
changed its Sense by Length of Time. The Direction is still Important.

It Is certain that the Apostles had the highest Regard for experimental
Religion. They well knew that unless Men have right Experiences, they cannot
have true Religion. Yet they were not forward in relating their own
extraordinary Experiences. They observe the greatest Modesty and Decorum, when
they were obliged to say any Thing about themselves. But the false Teachers,
who opposed the Apostles, were very forward in recommending themselves, and
boasting of their great Seize. In Opposition to these Deceivers, St. Paul
found it necessary to say something about himself, his Labors, Sufferings,
Visions and Revelations; yet he does it in such a Manner, (as Dr. Doddridge
justly observes) as plainly shows how disagreeable it was to him, so much as
seem to applaud himself on the most necessary Occasions Most remarkable is the
Apology 2 Cor. xi. 12.
of the Apostle, I say -- Let no Man, think me a Fool; if otherwise yet as a
Fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little. That which I speak, I speak
it not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly in this Confidence of Boasting.
Seeing that many glory after the Flesh, I will glory also, etc. etc. -- It is
not expedient for me doubtless to glory, I will come to Visions and Revelations
of the Lord. -- I am become a Fool in glorying, ye have compelled me. Thus he
shows it was with the greatest Reluctance that he said any Thing about his own
Experiences. How widely different was the Temper and Conduct of the Apostles,
from that which prevails among you who are always harping on your own great
Experiences!

Though there can be no sincere christian Piety without experimental Acquaintance
with God through Jesus Christ by the Spirit, yet a Relation of religious
Experiences is not made the grand Evidence of the Sincerity of Men's
Profession, in the Scriptures. When Christ recommends it to his Disciples to
prove their Holiness to the World, he does not direct them to convince them by
telling their secret Experiences, and sweet Communion which they had with God;
but, Let Matt. v. 16.
your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven. Hence, James ii 18.
that of the Apostle James, I will show thee my Faith by my Works. Others may
do what they please, and appoint what Marks they will of their having saving
Faith, and being true Christians; but as for me, I look upon good Works to be
the best Evidence, See President Edwards on Religious Affections last Part.
I will show my Faith by my Works. In this, says the Apostle John, the Children
of God are manifest and the Children of the Devil. How are they manifest? By
the Relation of their religious Experiences to the World? No, by their good
Works. For thus he proceeds and informs us, Whoever does not Righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. -- He that does
Righteousness is righteous even as he is righteous. 1 John iii. 3 -- 10.


Where you have pronounced a Person to be converted from your Fellowship with
his Experiences, your Credit as a Party, and as a pure Church that consists
only of gracious Persons, naturally leads you to warn him against examining and
doubting his Conversion; so that though he should not do Righteousness, nor
show his Faith by his Works, nor bring forth good Fruits, yet he must not
scruple his Justification. If by any Means he should suspect he was yet
unconverted, then all your Art and Industry must be used to persuade him, he is
troubled with the Temptations of Satan, and that he must believe he is
converted. Your Conduct in some Instances of this Kind is well known.

We read of Seducers of Old, who in a Case something like this, cried Peace,
and there is no Peace; one built up a Wall and lo, others daubed it with
untempered Mortar. They strengthened the Hands of the Wicked, that he should
not return from his wicked Way, by promising him Life. Ezekiel. xiii. 10, -- 23.
Are not you guilty of this, when you pronounce Persons to be converted from
your Sympathy with them in their religious Experiences; and then teach them by
all Means to maintain this good Opinion of themselves, and that all Fears of
their being mistaken come from Satan?

It Is indeed true, that the Apostles speak of the Churches in their Time as
consisting of Saints. This was a Name which was given to all Christian
Professors. Christians in the Apostle's Times professed Christ, in Opposition
to the whole World, in the Face of the greatest Dangers, and severest
Persecutions. There was a strong Presumption that many of them were sincere
Saints, especially that the Influences of the Holy Spirit were poured out in a
remarkable Manner. Besides, all who professed Jesus to be the Christ were
immediately baptized, and thus publicly sanctified or consecrated to God, and
inlisted among the Disciples of his Son. They belonged to the visible Church
and Household of Faith, and are called Brethren. And thus as the World before
the Coming of Christ was divided into Jews and Gentiles, so under the
New Testament it is visibly divided into professing Christians and open
Unbelievers, those that acknowledge Christ, and those who deny him, as Jews,
Heathens, and Deists. The Apostle comprehends the whole World under those who
were without and those who were within the visible Church. 1 Cor. v. 12, 13.


The Inferences you should draw from this, is to treat all professing
Christians as Saints in Proportion as they show the Sincerity of their Faith by
their good Works. But you are certainly extremely mistaken, when you pretend to
prove, from the Apostles addressing the Churches to whom they wrote by the Name
of Saints, that they looked on them collectively to be real Saints.

They well remembered that Christ had taught them it was his Will, that when
there are Tares in the same Field with the Wheat, the Servants should not pull
them up. They were also well acquainted with the Parable of the Sower, and the
stony and thorny Ground Hearers. They speak of 2 Cor. xi. 26. Gal. ii. 4.
"false Brethren." It is supposed by Paul, that a Man that was called a Brother
might be a Fornicator, covetous, and an Idolater, a Railer, a Drunkard, an
Extortioner. 1 Cor. v. 11.
While such a Man concealed his Vices, and brought no public Scandal on the
Church, he was not to be cast out. But when he brought a public Reproach on the
Church by his visible ill Life, he was to be disciplined; and if he refused to
repent, and give christian Satisfaction, he was to be excommunicated. But no
Person was ever to be cast out of the visible Church, merely because he had not
saving Grace. The Crimes for which they were to be excommunicated were public,
such as could be proved upon Oath by credible Persons. In the Mouth of two or
three Witnesses, 11 Cor. xiii. 1.
says the Apostle Paul, shall every Word be established. But what wise Man
would swear, that he has searched his Brother's Heart, and that he is destitute
of saving Grace? Whereas, if he knew he was guilty of such and such public
Crimes, he could bear Witness against him.

The Apostles were not deceived by Persons, who proved to be wicked, as Simon
Magus, etc. For it does not appear that they formed any Judgment about their
being sincerely gracious. They did not examine them about their religious
Experiences, nor baptize them in Consequence of having Fellowship with them in
such Relations. If they had, they must have taken up a great Deal of Time in
examining, judging and witnessing for them who presented themselves. It would
have taken them at least two or three Months to have admitted the three
Thousand on this Plan. But we know they received them in less than a Day.

If the Apostles had received none into the Church but such as they had
examined and approved as sincere Saints, their own Credit and Characters would
have suffered extremely, when any of them apostatised, as sundry of them did.
How could they have persuaded sober thinking Persons, they were divinely
inspired, if they had been daily forming false Judgments about Persons. They
would perhaps have been tempted, like you, to have persuaded them, they were
still in a State of Grace. But instead of this we find they assured all
Professors, who did not bring forth the Fruits of Righteousness and show the
Sincerity of their Faith by their Works, that they were as destitute of saving
Grace as the Devils. The Apostle Paul speaking of professed Christians says,
Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that
they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose End is Destruction, whose
God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their Shame, who mind earthly Things.
Philip. iii. 18, 19.


As the Apostles received Persons into the visible Church upon their professing
to believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ, their Apostasy and Wickedness
brought no Disgrace on the Apostles. We never find their Enemies upbraiding and
reproaching them for being mistaken in their Judgment about those whom they
received when they proved naughty. None were so ready to point out, and reprove
hypocritical Professors, as the Apostles themselves. The Notion of a visible
Church that shall consist only of sincere Saints in this World never entered
into their Heads. It is not the Design of Christ to erect such a Church in this
World. It is Matthew. xiii. 37, -- 50.
not till the End of the World that the Son of Man sends forth his Angels, to
gather out of his Kingdom all Things that offend, and them which do Iniquity.
-- The Kingdom of Heaven or the visible Church in this World is like unto a Net
that was cast into the Sea, and gathered of every Kind; which when it was full
they drew to Shore, and sat down, gathered the good into Vessels, but cast the
bad away. So shall it be at the End of the World, the Angels shall come forth
and sever or separate the wicked from among the just, etc. Thus the Separation
between the Righteous and the Wicked is not to take Place to the End of the
World.

Thus your Pretenses to certain and infallible Knowledge of one another's
States, and (...) up a Church of sincere Saints in this World are contrary to
the express Directions of our Lord Jesus Christ. Does it not look like vain
Presumption, or insufferable Pride for Men to pretend to search the Hearts and
try the Reins? Your Notion of such a Church is a certain Evidence that you are
very (...) mistaken, and must have a dreadful Tendency (...) ^en Hypocrites,
whom you receive under the C^ of true Saints. If you pretend to receive
immediate Revelations about one another's gracious States, why don't you work
Miracles to prove they come from God?

If some who are visibly unholy and scandalous, did not take Shelter among you
to escape Censures for their immoral Practices, one would hope you were more
honest in your Pretensions, to so much greater Purity. In all probability they
would not be so fond of you, if you would faithfully remonstrate against their
scandalous Practices. But to proceed,

Since there was no Man received into the Gospel Church without professing and
believing that Jesus was the Christ, and since it is certain that many who thus
believed were not in a State of Salvation; it plainly follows that a mere
Assent to this Truth, or even to the Gospel is not saving Faith.

Different Men may believe the Gospel from Different Causes and Motives. Some
don't doubt of the Truth of it, because their Parents told them so. Others
assent to the Gospel from much the same Inducements, as they believe any other
History. Men believe other ancient Histories, such as Caesar's Commentaries,
Tacitus, Josephus, etc. at least many Things in them, without seeing any
special Glory or Beauty in them, though they are not the tenth Part so well
attested as the Gospel. Have not the Scriptures been abundantly confirmed by
such infallible Proofs, as must force the Assent of every rational Person who
carefully examines them without Prejudice? What should hinder Men from
believing the Gospel History upon merely rational Evidences, without seeing
that eminent Glory in it, which the Spirit of God discovers to true Saints at
their Conversion? But though Men may truly assent to the Gospel from sundry
Causes, yet the Spirit of God is beyond Comparison the highest and most
excellent Cause; and consequently that Faith which he works in Men by his
saving Operations, must be the most excellent. Hence, no Man can in this
highest and most important Sense, believe and say that Jesus is the Lord but by
the Holy Ghost.

Yet it is certain from the Gospel History, that many believed, who were
Strangers to the saving Operations of the Spirit. Many, says the Evangelist
John, believed in his Name, when they saw the Miracles which he did. But Jesus
did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all Men. The Stony-Ground
Hearers are represented in the Parable as receiving the Word with Joy, which
implies at least their assenting to it as true; otherwise they would not have
been so much affected with it. What we don't believe does not move our
Passions. Ananias and Sapphira were received into the Church upon this Belief:
Simon Magus believed; yet they discovered by their not bringing forth the
Fruits of Righteousness, that they had not saving Faith, but were in the Gall
of Bitterness and Bonds of Iniquity. I know, said Paul to Agrippa the almost
Christian, thou believe the Prophets. And certainly, it was as difficult to
believe the divine Testimony in the Prophets, as in the Gospel. Was it only a
Lie that Agrippa believed, instead of the Prophets? Does not the Apostle James
evidently suppose, that Men might assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and yet
have no more Grace than the Devils? See President Edwards's and President D^e^s
^or^ James ii. 19, 20. (...). P. ^^.


How absurd then is Barclay, in saying, that the spiritual Truths of the Gospel
are as Lies in the Mouths of carnel and unspiritual Men? Why did not Paul tell
Agrippa so? Why did not James tell those to whom he wrote that they only lied,
when they professed to believe?

Yet this Absurdity is a darling Topic with many of you, on which you lay
great Stress. For proceeding upon this gross Mistake, you charge all who enter
into Covenant in our Churches without certain and infallible Assurance of their
Conversion, with Lying; and that Ministers not only allow but urge their
Hearers to lie to God. One, who hears you discourse on this Point, as I have
often done, would be inclined to suspect, you had never read and considered the
xxix Chapter of Deuteronomy, where God expressly commanded the whole Nation of
the Israelites to enter into Covenant with him, that he might be to them a God,
as he had sworn unto their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Were the
Israelites, who were commanded to enter thus into Covenant with God, all
assured of their gracious State? If they imagined they were truly converted,
they were under an awful Delusion. For Moses plainly assured them, the Lord had
not given them an Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, or Ears to hear unto this
Day; so that he looked on the general Part of them to be unconverted. Yet that
very Day they were all to enter into Covenant with God in a visible, explicit,
solemn Manner, lest any should imagine they should escape the terrible Vengence
denounced in the Law against those that presumed to transgress. If it had been
unlawful for unconverted Persons, to enter into visible Covenant with God, why
did not the Lord plainly tell the Israelites so? Why did he not command Moses
to warn them against this visible Covenanting, since you reckon it a most
dreadful Sin? If your Nations were right, is it not the most unaccountable and
astonishing Thing, that ever was heard of, that he should command them thus
publicly to enter into his Covenant? Will you speak out plainly, and say, that
he required them to Sin, or that he made Lying their indispensable Duty?

1 Ob. But does not God say to the wicked, what have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into thy Mouth? Psalm. l. 16.


Ans. The xxix of Deuteronomy is express and plain: For it was designed to be
immediately understood and obeyed by the whole Nation, Men, Women and Children,
and therefore it must have been level to the lowest Capacities. This Scripture
may be reasonably supposed to be one of the plainest in the whole Bible. Now it
is a safe Rule, when two Scriptures treat of the same Thing, to explain that
one, which is more short and obscure, by the other which is more full and
plain. Since therefore it is certain from Moses, that God expressly required
and commanded all without Exception, to enter into Covenant with him, and that
they understood and practiced accordingly, the Psalmist must be interpreted in
such a Sense as is consistent with this, unless you would suppose there are
real Contradictions in the Scriptures, which would be the Way to undermine
their Authority altogether. Hence, the Design of the Psalmist in the Text you
object, must be to reprove the Jews, not for entering into Covenant with God,
which he had commanded them, but for breaking their sacred Bonds by their
wicked Lives, or perhaps the Psalmist refers to open profane Sinners who were
to be excommunicated.

We must put a similar Construction on sundry Scriptures, such as Isaiah i. 12,
13.
When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your Hand to tread
my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations. Incense is an Abomination unto me, the
New Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is
Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting. If you explain the Prophet Isaiah as you do
the Psalmist, you must allow that wicked Men are forbidden to keep the Sabbath,
and attend on public Worship. The Expressions of the Prophet are as strong as
those of the Psalmist. Hence the Design of both, I think, is to reprove Men for
their Wickedness after they had been attending on the Duties of Religion.

2. You say, Men should sincerely believe in Christ when they professedly enter
into Covenant with him. And should not Men keep the Sabbath in a gracious
Manner? Should not Men when they pray in the Name of Christ sincerely believe
in him? Is it not expressly commanded that Men pray in Faith? And is not the
Prayer of the Wicked an Abomination to the Lord? Would you infer from these
Texts, that Men should not pray 'till they know, they are converted and have
true Faith? This is too absurd.

3. "Unconverted Men sin in covenanting with God." They sin also in Plowing.
Why don't you go about and warn those of your Neighbors, you look upon to be
unconverted against Plowing?

If Men may assent to the Truth of the Gospel, as James supposes, without
saving Grace, where has God forbidden them openly to profess this their Belief?
Why may they not honestly promise to live in Subjection to the Gospel, as the
Jews did to the Law? But if they do not fulfill their solemn Covenant, they will
prove themselves False and Deceitful, and will be dealt with accordingly. You
must therefore prove that it is impossible that unconverted Men should give a^
Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, or seriously intend to look to Christ for
Salvation, before you can charge them with lying in the common and criminal
Sense of Lying. And then you must allow that every one who assents to the
Gospel has saving Faith, contrary to the forementioned Instances and daily
Experience.

The Papists place Faith in a mere Assent to the Truths of the Gospel. They,
that is, the Papists, define [Faith] to be a general Knowledge whereby we
understand and believe that the Doctrine of the Word of God is true. Perkins's
Reformed Catholic, p. 567. Lord. Ed. ^^16 -- Faith according to the Papists is
no more but a general Assent unto divine Revelations. Owen on Justification, p.
190. Agreeable to this is that famous Di^e^ of Mr. Knot the Jesuit in his
Charity Maintained. Faith says he is a voluntary or free, infallible, obscure
Assent to some Truth, because it is testified b^d^ and is sufficiently prop^ded
to us for such. See Chillingworth's Works. p. 228.
They found this necessary to maintain their Distinction of a first and second
Justification, by which they endeavor to subvert the Doctrine of Justification
by Faith, as declared in the Bible, and more especially in the Epistles of the
Apostle Paul.

The first Justification according to them is the Infusion of Communication
unto us of an holy Principle, the Habit of Grace or Charity, by which Original
Sin is extinguished, and all the Habits of Sin expelled. This first
Justification they say, is by Faith, that is, a mere Assent to the Truth of the
Gospel, the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ being the only meritorious
Cause thereof. So that to be justified by Faith according to them is to have
the Mind rightly prepared by this Kind of believing to receive an Habit of
Grace expelling Sin and making us acceptable to God. For, upon this believing
or assenting to the Gospel, with those other Duties of Contrition and
Repentance, which must accompany it, they say it is meet and congruous unto
divine Wisdom, Goodness and Faithfulness to give us that Grace, whereby we are
finally justified. For their second or final Justification is a Consequence
hereof, the proper formal Cause of which is good Works, proceeding from this
Principle of Grace and Love. Hence Men's own good Works according to the
Papists, are the Righteousness, wherewith Believers are righteous before God,
whereby they merit Heaven.

But according to the Doctrine of all sound Protestants, the Righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, what he did and suffered, is that ^or which we
are justified before God. This is the grand Difference between Papists, and
Protestants. It is well known that it was chiefly on Account of Justification
by Faith alone, the first Reformers separated from the Church of Rome.

Antinomians and Enthusiasts would fain have it believed, that they are the
most Orthodox in Point of Justification. And they seem at first View to run
into the opposite Extreme to the Papists. But if they are closely examined,
many of them, I believe would be found to have pretty much the same Notions
with the Papists on this grand Fundamental Doctrine of a Sinner's Justification
before God. They commonly place Faith in a mere Assent of the Mind. Their
Scheme of experimental Religion necessarily requires this, since it is all
supposed to proceed from God's revealing his Love to them in Particular. In
this they essentially agree with the Papists, only that they don't seem to be
quite so orthodox. For the Papists say, Faith is an Assent to the Truths of the
Gospel. But Enthusiasts place it in believing the Love of God, their own
Election, Justification, etc. in particular; which, as has been already proved,
is Something which is not in the Bible at all in their Sense, but depends on
some fanciful Discovery or Delusion. Let this then correspond to the Faith and
the first Justification of the Papists.

And whoever carefully observes your Temper and Spirit, the mighty Stress, you
appear to lay on your Performances, on your great Zeal and Engagedness in
Religion, and the Pains you seem to take to work up yourselves to Raptures and
Transports, will see there is Reason to fear that you look upon these Things as
that Righteousness by which you expect to recommend yourselves to God, and for
which you hope you shall be justified in his Sight. For my Part, I earnestly
wish that you may not be found among those who go about to establish their own
Righteousness. Does not Barclay, the famous Quaker Apologist, confound
Justification with Sanctification, and professedly plead That it is by the
inward Birth of Christ in Man that he is made just, and therefore so accounted
by God? And are not his Followers as ignorant as he, of the Scripture Doctrine
of Justification?

To prove that I have laid no unjust Charge against you who have separated from
the standing Churches of New England, in what I have now alleged, I might
bring many Testimonies from sundry worthy Persons: But I shall content myself
at present with the united Testimony of Mr. President Edwards and Mr. Bellamy
in a Book written by the latter and recommended by the former. The Author
having represented that true Humility consists in a Sense of our own Sinfulness
and Ill-Desert, observes, See true Religion delianated P. 391, 392:
There can be no more of true Faith in Exercise than there is of this true
Humility. When Men therefore appear righteous in their own Eyes, and look upon
themselves as deserving well at the Hands of God on the Account of their own
Goodness, they can feel no Need of a Mediator, nor at Heart have any Respect to
Christ under that Character -- This condemns the Faith of the self-righteous
Formalist, who depends upon his being conscientious in his Ways, and his
sincerely endeavoring to do as well as he can to recommend him to God -- This
condemns also the Faith of the proud Enthusiast, who appears so good in his own
Eyes, so far from a legal Spirit, so purely evangelical, so full of Light and
Knowledge, Humility and Love, Zeal and Devotion, as that from a Sense of his
own Goodness, and how greatly beloved he is in the Sight of God, he is
emboldened to come into the Presence of God, and draw near, and come even to
his Seat and use Familiarity and Boldness with God, as though he were almost an
Equal. Such are so far from any true Sense of their own Need of Christ, that
they feel more fit to be Mediators and Intercessors in behalf of others, than
to want one for themselves. It is the Way of such, from that great Sense they
have of their own Goodness to make bold with God, and to make bold with Christ,
in their Prayers, as if they felt themselves pretty nigh upon a Level. Hence
perhaps it is, that some have imbibed the Notion that true Converts are made
Partakers of the Essence of God, that is in plain English, are made Gods, which
every sober Man may see is blasphemous Nonsense. The Words of Peter which they
bring to countenance their Error "Partakers of the divine Nature" should have
been translated "Partakers of a divine Nature," that is, of a holy excellent
Temper.
-- Of all Men in the World I am ready to think that God looks upon these the
Worst and hates them the most. Luke xviii. 9 -- 14. Isai. lxv. 5

In the Time of the Apostles, some ran into Legalism, and others into
Antinomianism, as appears particularly from the Epistles of Paul who wrote
against the former, and of James who sharply reproved the latter. And at the
Reformation from Popery, there were sundry among Protestants who were strongly
^clined to these Extremes. Many confused Harangues about good Works have been
delivered and published by Legalists and Antinomians, the greater Part of whom
may charitably be supposed not to understand what they say nor whereof they
affirm.

Hence, I suppose it was, that some of the famous Reformers and Puritan Divines
observed, there was a twofold Error very common in the Discriptions of
Conversion. The one of those who only mentioned the Sinner's turning from Sin
to God, without mentioning any receiving of Christ by Faith. Such greatly
insist on Duties, Obedience and good Works.

1. To correct this Mistake it may be observed in brief, That since it is
certain Mankind have broken God's Holy Law by their Sins, they must of
Consequence be exposed to its Penalty or Curse. For Gal. iii. 10.
cursed is every one that continues not in all Things written in the Book of
the Law to do them. This Penalty or Curse is Nothing less than Eternal Death,
the everlasting Wrath of God in Hell. For "God Romans i. 18. and vi. 23.
has revealed his Wrath from Heaven against ALL Ungodliness and Unrighteousness
of Men," and "the Wages of Sin" of every Sin "is Death." Now a Law when it is
broken does not admit of Repentance or any Thing that the Breaker of it can do,
as a Reparation for violating it. Repentance how true and sincere soever it may
be, answers neither the Precept nor the Penalty of the Law. The Law requires
and demands perfect, sinless Obedience from first to last, or Punishment. This
is all that Law says to Mankind. Hence "by Romans ii. 20
the Works of the Law," by any Duties which sinful Men can perform to it, "no
Man can be justified." A broken Law must always condemn, but can never justify
the Man that has violated it. A broken Law always works Wrath or
Condemnation. Rom iv. 15.


2. As it was absolutely impossible in the Nature of Things, that Men should be
justified and saved by any Works or Duties of their own, so God has actually
appointed another Way through Jesus Christ, his Obedience, Sufferings and Death.
And now says Christ, I am John xiv 6.
the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man comes ^to the Father, but by me. The
Appointment of Christ to be our Mediator affords an unaswerable Argument that
we could not be saved by our own Repentance and good Works. For G^l. ii ^1.
if Righteousness* or Justification come by the Law, by any Law, then Christ is
dead in vain. Hence arises the absolute Necessity of receiving Christ by Faith
in Order to Salvation. And Repentance has its proper Place in this merciful
Dispensation. The Exhortations and Encouragements to Repentance which are to be
found in the Old Testament, and even in the Books of Moses, plainly show that
it was a Dispensation of G^ce. For strict Law does not demand nor properly
admit of Repentance. And indeed God's promulgating a Law at all to Sinners
requiring a Revenue of Glory by Way of Worship from them supposes some Method
of Recovery. For as Doct. Owen observes in his Pr^legomina to his Exposition of
the Hebrews In every Prescription of Day, God propose to himself as a Rewarder,
which he is only to them that please him; and to please God without the
Deliverance enquired after is impossible. P. 79. God never promulgated any Law
to the Devils since their Rebellion, not instituted any Religious Worship among
them. The Moral Law (...) Republication of the Law of Nature, but it was not
published and designed for a Covenant of Works. The Law when promulgated at
Sinai was accommodated to the Covenant of Grace. And so it is now under the
Gospel. The Law, as the celebrated Archbishop Leighton observes Select Works.
P. 341 addresses us to the Articles of our Faith: For seeing the Disproportion
of our best Obedience to the Exactness of the Law, this drives us to seek
Salvation in the Gospel by believing; and our natural Inability to believe,
drives us to Prayer, that we may obtain Faith and Perseverance in it, at his
Hands who is both the Author and Finisher of our Faith. -- It is a week Conceit
arising upon the Mistake of the Scriptures, to make Christ and Moses as
Opposites; no, Moses was the Servant in the House, and Christ the Son; and
being a faithful Servant he is not contrary to the Son, but subordinate to him.
The very Abolishment of the ceremonial Law was not as of a Thing contrary; but
as a Thing accomplished in Christ. -- Had the Law of Moses been merely a
Covenant of Works and a Scheme wholly preparatory to the Gospel without any
Referrences to the Way of Salvation by Christ, they who lived under the
Old Testament must have perished. For there is no Law as such that can be given
to Sinners, that can give them eternal Life, since they being sinful are
already condemned. -- The Law of Moses became a Covenant of Works to the Jews
through their own gross Mistake of its End, and not from the Design of God. To
those who looked for eternal Life from the Law considered as Law, and trusted
to their own Works, it was a killing Letter, and the Ministration of Death. But
those who believed in Christ as he was then exhibited, were saved as sincere
Christians are now. For Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith;
and Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes.
So that the Baptists who imagine the Old Testament was merely a Covenant of
Works are extremely mistaken. It was the Gospel more obscurely and legally
represented as the Circumstances of the Church the required. According to the
Apostle, the Covenant that was under that Dispensation was confirmed of God in
Christ long before the Law was given at Mount Sinai. The Law was not
promulgated with a Design to dis^ the ^mise, nor to oppose it in any Measure,
but was added to it because of ^sgressions to discover and restrain them. Gal.
i^i 17 -- 24 But if any should ri^^ be inclined to doubt about this Matter, let
them consider the following (...), For unto us was the Gospel preached as we
^as unto them, [under the Old Testament] but the Word preached did not profit
them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Heb. iv. 2.


It is through Jesus Christ the Mediator whom God has appointed between him and
us, that there is any more Hope for Sinful Men, than for the sinning Angels.
The first reasonable Hopes which any Sinner can entertain of his Escape from
the Wrath of God must arise from a View or Discovery of this glorious Redeemer
in the Glass of the Gospel by the Spirit of the Lord. He sees, believes; and
his Faith works by Love, and influences him to sincere Holiness or good Works,
which, as has been already observed, are according to the Scripture an Evidence
that his Faith is genuine and saving. Thus the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy iv. 7, 8.
I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness -- and not to me
only but unto all them that love his appearing. So that Men who don't perform
good Works cannot have Scripture Evidence that they have Saving Faith and shall
be justified.

3. It is often asserted in the Scriptures that God loves Holiness and delights
in good Works. But while Sinners remain in an unconverted State, and are not
united to Jesus Christ by Faith, they don't partake of the sanctifying
Influences of the Holy Spirit, and consequently don't perform any Works which
are spiritually good and accepted of God. We are his Workmanship, says the
Apostle; Ephesians. ii. 10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. According to this Text Men must be
regenerated by the Spirit before they perform any Works strictly good, in a
Scripture Sense. Again the Works of the Saints themselves are not accepted for
the intrinsic Value or Excellency of their Duties in themselves considered,
but because Believers who perform them are united to Christ, who has attoned
for our Sins, and who is infinitely worthy, and with whom the Father is always
well pleased, agreeable to that of the Apostle. Ephesians. i. 6.
"He has made us accepted in the Beloved." Hence the Articles of the Church of
England, Good Works which are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our Sins and endure the Severity of God's
Judgment: Yet they are acceptable to God in Christ. -- Works done before the
Grace of Christ and the Inspiration of his Spirit are not pleasant to God, for
as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make Men
meet to receive Grace, or (as the School-Authors) deserve Grace of Congruity:
Yea rather for that they are not done as God has commanded and willed them to
be done, we doubt not but that they have the Nature of Sin. Is it not certain,
that while Sinners remain in their unconverted unbelieving State, they are
under the reigning Power of Sin, and don't trouble themselves much about good
Works, unless from Custom, or some Awakenings and Remonstrances of Conscience,
which force them sometimes to engage a little in Religion? And even then they
have scarcely any Regard to God. When Romans vi. 20.
ye were the Servants of Sin, says the Apostle, ye were free from
Righteousness, that is, paid no proper Regard to it, were wholly destitute of
it.

4. However Sinners should be sensible of their undone State, and of their
infinite Need of the Grace of God, and wait upon him, in the Use of the Means
he has been pleased to appoint, for the Bestowment of his Favor. The famous
Westminster Assembly of Divines, who I should think may be allowed to have been
sound in the Faith, teach us that there are outward and ordinary Means by which
Christ communicates the Benefits of Redemption. And though God has not limited
the Bestowment of his Grace to the Attendance on the Means, but may, as in the
Instances of Paul and the Jailor, Work without and beyond them. Yet so far as
we can discover by Observation, he more usually meets with his professing
People in the Way of Mercy and Grace, while they are seriously waiting upon him
in the Way of Duty. Is not this clearly implied in these solemn Words, Where
having spoken of his giving Israel his professing People a new Heart and a new
Spirit, he adds, Thus Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37.
says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel
to do it for them.

The other Mistake about Conversion which I referred to is of those, who
mention only a Sinner's believing, and then think they have said all. Some
Antinomians who fall into this Notion, don't seem to care what, nor how a Man
believes, but all is well if he believes, and is confident of his
Justification. And yet according to them, the Elect were justified from
Eternity; so that Faith itself is not really necessary in Order to Salvation.
But at most, Nothing ^re than their Faith or Belief, that they are justified,
is required. Such are ready to pour great Contempt on the Means of G^ce, and to
reproach those as Legalists, who make any Thing but the mere believing the Love
of God in Christ, to them in particular to be a Part of Conversion, and would
per^. Men to question all their former Comforts, and conclude the Work has been
only legal and unfound, because they have looked on their Change of Heart, and
sincere turning from Sin and Creatures to God Part of it, and have taken Part
of their Comfort from the reviewing these Things as Evidences of their Faith
and of a right Work.

1. Here we may observe in brief, that if Sinners should rest upon these Things
without Christ, or take such a Change instead of Christ, in Whole, or in Part,
the Reproof would be just, and the Danger great. But since Self and Creatures,
(...) Lusts and wor^ly Vanities, are as it were both God and Christ to every
unregenerate Man, can Christ be rightly believed in, where our own
Righteousness or any other Thing is chiefly trusted in, and supremely loved?
Does God ever thoroughly discover a Man's Sin and Misery to him, and take his
Heart from all Creatures and false Refuges, by showing him Jesus Christ and his
glorious Righteousness, and yet leave his Soul unrenewed and unholy? I believe
for my Part, that where the Work of Conversion is sincere, there it is entire.
Sinners having by their Apostasy from God become unholy, they must be
sanctified as well as justified. Sin has perverted their Taste and Relish for
true Holiness and the Happiness which it affords, and thus they are become
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven as well as exposed to Hell.

2. Christ is a complete Savior. He saves his People from their Sins, and
recovers them to Holiness, as well as delivers them from Hell. Both these
Things were necessary. He that believes not shall be damned, is not more true
than this Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Verily, verily, Except a
Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Hence Christ is said in
the Scripture to be made unto us of God, Wisdom and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption. As the Gospel is a consistent Scheme, one Part
of it should not be set in Opposition to another: One Benefit and Grace should
not be extolled in Order to decry and vilify others. All should be allowed
their proper Place.

3. Besides what has been already said to expose this false Notion of Faith, It
should be remembered, that saving Faith is produced into the Souls of Men by
the supernatural Agency of the Holy Spirit, and is represented in Scripture
sometimes to be a receiving Christ, a believing with the Heart, which comprises
the Will as well as the Understanding Thy Psalm cx. 3. Isai. liii. 1. John i.
12.
People shall be WILLING in a Day of thy Power. Who has believed our Report?
And to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? -- As many as received him -- that
believed in his Name were born of God. Thus saving Faith and Regeneration are
strictly connected. Why should not the Gospel of Christ influence the Will as
well as the Understanding, when it is beheld in its Glory? And if it does must
it not be wrong to confine Faith merely to the Assent of the Understanding in
the grand Business of closing with Christ? But indeed the Antinomian Faith does
not imply a Soul's receiving Christ or closing with him. It is only an Assent
to their own good Estate upon some imaginary Revelation or Delusion. But right
Faith is the Substance of Things hoped for, the Evidence of Things not seen.
That is, such a Kind of Reason and Argument, as not only gains the Assent of
the Understanding, but effectually prevails with the Will, and engages the Man
to act, as the Greek Word imports. Romans v. 1.


4. With Respect to eternal Justification which some are so fond of, It is
certain the Scriptures represent all Unbelievers, the Elect as well as others,
under Condemnation. We are justified says the Apostle, Ephesians. ii. 3.
by Faith and therefore not before Faith; so that it seems they were in a State
of Condemnation before they believed in Christ. And in another Passage he says,
Heb. xi. 1.
speaking of Believers We were by Nature Children of Wrath even as others. I
would ask why it is not as proper to say, that Men were born from Eternity, or
dead from Eternity, as that they are justified from Eternity?

5. As to the Means of Grace, since Faith, regenerating Grace, a new Heart, a
new Spirit, are the Gift of God, why should not Sinners be sensible of their
undone State, and their infinite Need of these Things, and wait upon God for
these Blessings? God has instituted a public Ministry, and Means of Grace, If
he has, does he not require unconverted Sinners to attend upon them? Does he
not command all Men every where, and especially in his vissible Church, to
repent, to seek him, to call upon him, to labor for the Meat, which endures
unto eternal Life, to strive to enter in at the strait Gate? Is there not the
greatest natural Fitness, Prop^ety and Suitableness, that guilty Sinners should
be sensible of their Sin and Misery, and wait upon God for his Grace in Jesus
Christ? Can there be any good Reason offered why Christless Sinners may not
pray for Faith, and converting Grace? Is it not mentioned as an awful Instance
of Wickedness to ask, What Job xxi. 15. Malachy iii. 14.
is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what Profit should we have if we
pray unto him" and to say, "It is vain to serve God; and what Profit is it that
we have kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord
of Hosts? Has not God often heard the earnest Prayers and Cries of unconverted
Sinners? Yea did he not testify so much Regard to the Repentance of A^ab, and
the Nine^i^, as to withhold his threatened Judgment for a Time?

There was some in the Time of the Apostles that said, Let Romans iii 8 and ^i 1,
2.
us do Evil that Good may come" "and Sin that Grace may abound, and pretended
to derive this impious Sentiment from the Gospel, and particularly from the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Jesus Christ, as delivered by Pau^ But he
rejected it as a vile Slander with the greatest Abhorrence, and declared the
Damnation of such to be just. But to return,

As your Mistake about the Nature of Faith appears to be of dangerous Tendency
to the Souls of Men, I shall transcribe a lively Passage from Holy Mr. Baxter
against it, that if it be possible you may be reclaimed, and others prevented
from embracing this destructive Error.

The damned in Hell shall lose their present presumptuous Conceit, and Belief
of their Interest in God, and of his Favor toward them, and of their Part in
the Merits, and Sufferings of Christ.

This false Belief does now support their Spirits and defend them from the
Terrors that would else seize upon them, and fortify them against Fears of
Wrath to come. Even as true Faith does afford the Soul a true and grounded
Support and Consolation, and enableth us to look to Eternity with undaunted
Courage: So also a false, ungrounded Faith does afford a false ungrounded
Comfort, and abates the Trouble of the Consideration of Judgment and Damnation.
Obj. But if we regard this Representation, it is probable we should doubt: And
He that d^b^eth is damned.

Ans. He that doubts what? That he himself is in a State of Grace? Then every
one who is convinced of his Christless State would be damned. Th^s cannot be
the Sense. But he doubted whither he might lawfully eat these Things, which
were forbidden by the Law of Moses, and if he eat them contrary to his
Conscience, he was self-condemned, guilty of Sin, and liable to Punishment for
it from God, as well as for his other Sins. For thus ^s the Text, He that
doubts is damned, if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, for whatsoever
is not of Faith is Sin. If a Man has only a ^ake Faith and vain Confidence, the
more he doubt^ of the Truth of it, and no s^er he gives it up the better.


But alas this is but a palliative Salve, a deceitful Comfort? What will ease
their Trouble when this is gone? When they can believe no longer, they will be
quieted in Mind no longer. If a Man see never the greatest Mischief and yet
strongly conceit that he is in Safety; his Conceit may make him cheerful, as if
all were well indeed, till his Misery comes; and then both his Conceit and
Comforts vanish. An ungrounded Persuasion of Happiness is a poor Cure for real
Misery. When the Mischief comes it will cure the Misbelief; but that Belief can
neither prevent nor cure the Mischief. It there were no more to make a Man
happy, but to believe that he is so, or shall be so; Happiness would be far
commoner than now it is like to be. It is a Wonder that any Man who is not a
Stranger both to Gospel and Reason, should be of the Antinomian Faith in this;
who tell us that Faith is but the believing that God loves us, and that our
Sins are already pardoned through Christ; that this is the chief Thing that
Ministers should preach; that our Ministers preach not Christ, because they
preach not this; that every Man ought thus to believe, but no Man to question
his Faith whether he believe truly or not, etc. But if all Men must believe
that their Sins are pardoned, then most of the World must believe a Lie: And if
no Man ought to question the Truth of his Faith, then most Men shall rest
deluded with an ungrounded Belief. The Scripture commands us first to believe
for a Remission of Sins, before we believe our Sins are remitted. If we believe
in Christ, that is, accept him cordially for our Savior and our King, then we
shall receive the Pardon of Sins. The Truth is, we have more ado to preach down
this Antinomian Faith, than they have to preach it up and to preach People from
such a believing, than they have to preach them to it. I see no Need to
persuade People so to believe, the Generality are strong and confident in such
a Belief already. Take a Congregation of Five Thousand Persons where there has
been no remarkable Convictions and Awakenings] and how few among them all will
you find, that do not believe their Sins are pardoned, and that God loves them?
Especially of the vilest Sinners, who have least Cause to believe it? Indeed,
as it is all the Work of those Men to persuade People to this Belief; so it is
the hardest Task almost we meet with, to convince Men of the Ungroundedness of
this Belief, and to break the Peace which Satan maintains in their Souls.
Neither do I know a comm^er Cause of Men's Destruction than such a Misbelief.
Who will seek for that which he believes he has already? This is the great
Engine of Hell to make Men go merrily to their own Perdition. I know Men cannot
believe Christ or believe in, or upon Christ, either too soon, or too much. But
they may believe that themselves are pardoned, adopted, and in Favor with God,
too soon and too much. For a false Judgment is always too much and too soon. As
true grounded Faith is the Master-Grace in the Regenerate, and of the greatest
Use in the Kingdom of Christ; so is the false ungrounded Faith the Master-Vice
in the unregenerate Soul and of greatest Use in the Kingdom of Satan. -- I
would be loath to weaken the true Faith of the meanest Christian, or to persuade
any Man that his Faith is false when it is true; God forbid that I should so
disparage that precious Grace which has the Stamp of the Spirit! or to trouble
the Soul, that Christ would have to be comforted! But I must needs in
Faithfulness tell thee that the confident Belief of their good Estate, and o^
the Pardon of their Sins which the careless, unholy, unhumbled Multitude
amongst us, do so commonly boa^ of, will prove in the End but a Soul-damning
Delusion. -- Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest. p 316, 317, 318.
.

ii. The Spirit of God, when he teaches Men internally by his Word, improves
the Scriptures in a perfect Consistency one with another; but on the countrary,
when Satan improves any particular Passages of Scripture, i^ is in such a Sense
as ^ars with the Rest of this holy Book. Thus he said to Matt. iv. 6.7.
Christ, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down; for it is written, he
shall give his Angels Charge concerning thee, and in their Hands they shall
bear thee up, least at any Time thou dash thy Foot against a Stone. Here Satan
improved Scripture in his Temptation, but in such a Sense as was inconsistent
with the rest of the sacred Writings. Hence, our Savior repelled this
Temptation by another Text. It is written thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

It is evident that when Satan impressed that Scripture on the Mind of John
Lewis, it was in such a Sense as was quite inconsistent with the Rest of the
Bible. -- And thus the spiritual Sense, which sundry of you pretend to be
taught from various Passages of Scripture, is quite contrary to the true and
plain Sense of the Scriptures in general.

iii. When the Spirit of God improves the Scriptures in teaching Men, he brings
them to be duly influenced by Divine Truths, to have high Thoughts of God, low,
abusing Thoughts of themselves, to renounce their own Righteousness as the most
despicable Things, as filthy Rags, and as Dung, Philip iii.
to trust in Christ's glorious Righteousness, ^o cultivate divine Charity and
abound in all good Works. But the Suggestions of Satan have quite a contrary
Tendency. From the Impression made on their Minds, by this evil Spirit, that
they are the peculiar Favorites of God, they are filled with much spiritual
Pride, and Self-Conceit; and are disposed to trust in their own Righteousness,
their religious Exercises, high Experiences and great Zeal. -- Is not this the
Case with many of you? Don't you think you recommend yourselves considerably to
God, by your being so much engaged in his Service? So zealous against your
Neighbors? Would you not think it hard, if God should accept one, who belongs
to the lifeless, standing Churches (as you call them) as readily as one of you,
after all your Zeal and painful Services? -- Thus, you go about to establish
your own Righteousness. But remember, you must have a perfect Righteousness, if
you would be justified by it. Your zealous Services and high Experiences will
not justify you, unless they are absolutely perfect.

Gal. v. 2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, if ye be circumcised (with a View to be justified
thereby) Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify to every Man that is
circumcised (with this View) that he is Debtor to do the whole Law. If you
trust to your religious Experiences, if you think that any of your own Works
will avail for your Justification before God, you must yield an absolutely,
perfect obedience. -- Take Heed then to yourselves, on this important Point,
lest ye perish in your false Confidences.

It is very sad, that the supposed Conversion of many leads them to a Temper
and Practice directly contrary to Divine Charity, to be unkind to all but their
own Admirers, to bear no Provocations; to cover no Faults; to keep themselves
within no Bounds; to believe Nothing to their Neighbors Advantage; to believe
the Worst they hear of others, and suspect more than they hear; to vaunt
themselves in their great Experiences, and be filled with a great Sense of
their own Importance!

Diotrophes of G -- T -- M, was a Boy of middling Parts, but of much Pride and
Vanity; so that he never made much Proficiency in Learning, nor acquired any
considerable Stock of Knowledge. When he grew up, his Forwardness led him into
sundry vicious Courses, but his Pride helped him to conceal them so much, that
he maintained a tolerable fair Character -- About thirty he was more fully
convinced of his sinful State than ever he had been before -- While he was
earnestly praying for Mercy early one Morning, that Text was suddenly and
powerfully impressed on his Mind, They shall seek me early but they shall not
find me. This was followed by another. The Harvest is past, the Summer is
ended, and we are not saved. He now thought his Day of Grace was over, and that
it was utterly in vain to seek for Mercy. Following this strong Impression he
left off Praying, and seemed to sink into a settled Despair, in which he
continued for some Time. 'Twas now peculiarly distressing to him to think he
would be looked upon by Mankind as a forlorn Object, forsaken of God. After
some Weeks when the Ferce of the Impression was worn off in a great Measure, at
the Advice of his Friends he began to pray again for Grace and Mercy, though
not with so much Earnestness as before. And now he thought he had not been so
very wicked, though he had been betrayed into some Follies, but that God might
pardon him. When he had continued in this Course some Time, and heard how
sundry others, who had been more openly vicious than he, had received Light and
been filled with great Joy in believing, be began to be very uneasy. He was
afraid God did not regard his Prayers, though he prayed so very sincerely.
While he was greatly perplexed about this, and thinking it very hard that God
should neglect him so long, these Words were most strongly impressed on his
Mind. Thy Prayers are come up for a Memorial before God -- O thou of little
Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? These were followed by many others of the
same Import. His Affections were drawn out in Love to God and Christ. He was
ravished and filled with Wonder. He saw and believed that God loved him with an
everlasting Love, and accepted his Prayers. He abounded in Duties, in Prayer
and Praise -- He longed to tell others of his wonderful Experiences, the great
Things God had done for his Soul. This was all his Discourse in almost all
Companies, urging them from hence to come and taste that the Lord is gracious
-- Separations began soon after this -- He presently discovered that his
Minister's Preaching could not edify Christians. For he preached much about the
Perfections of God; the Excellencies of Christ; the Nature of true Religion as
consisting in Conformity to God and sincere Obedience to the Gospel of Christ;
and insisted upon it, that good Works were a Sign of Grace. Whereas, Diotrephes
wanted him to preach up his religious Experiences, and show that good People
have their Hearts filled with great Joy, when God first reveals to them, that
he hears their Prayers and discovers his Love to them. In short, he concluded
his Minister knew Nothing about Experiences, since he dwelt so much on the bare
Truths of the Gospel. -- Those Words having a Form of Godliness but denying the
Power, from such turn away, were impressed on his Mind -- He separated -- And
as he had a ready Utterance and great Experience, it was seen revealed to him
that God designed him for eminent Services; even that he (...) be a public
H^ss for the Lord. When he communicated this Revelation to others, be pretended
to be very backward to comply with it. But it being likewise revealed to them,
and being Fellowship with him; they persuaded him to exercise his Gift, and
obey the Call of God. Thus he became a w^ and zealous Holderforth -- He had no
Learning nor Skill in Divinity. But he had a prodigious Stock of Confidence,
and strong Lungs; so that what he wanted in Sense and Co^ he made up in Noise,
which he persuaded his Hearers was all holy Zeal. As he was naturally proud,
and could not brook Opposition, he was really very warm against all who did not
become his Followers and celebrate his Praises: But his burning Zeal never
framed higher, than when he declaimed against the standing Ministers, which he
did almost every Time he held forth, because they showed the People the
Assurdity and Sinfulness of such Conduct, and thus prevented the Spread of his
Fame. To give a Sanction to all his Exhortations, he pretended that he always
spoke by the Spirit, and professed to live in the full Assurance of his
Justification. And indeed he was never much disposed to question his own
Goodness. Accordingly he taught it was one of the greatest Sins for Christians
to doubt of their Conversion, or scruple that God loved them. He defined Faith
in Christ to be a Man's believing that Christ died for him in particular, so
that for a Man to doubt of his good Estate was the awful Sin of Unbelief.
Hence, he despised all Marks and Signs of Grace, and depended for Assurance on
immediate Revelations of strong Impulses, which he called the immediate Witness
of the Spirit. Had he not adopted this Notion of Assurance, he could never have
maintained his Confidence, because he was very deficient in most of the
scripture Marks of a Christian. For Instance, he was not meek and humble. He
was not kind to Mankind in general. He confined any Love he had for Mankind to
his own Party, and was censorious and unkind to all Christians of other
Denominations, let them be never so exemplary in their Practices. He rejoiced
in the Iniquities and Scandals of such as belonged to the standing Churches,
especially of the Ministers, and was very ready to misrepresent their Conduct
in Order to blacken their Characters and raise Prejudices against them.
However, as he never examined himself by the Scripture Marks of a Saint, these
Things never shaked his Confidence. A great Sense of his eminent Labors and
Services in the Gospel, his burning Zeal, the Reproaches and Sufferings he
endured for preaching; together with his immediate Revelations and strong
Impulses, and the Applauses and Witnesings of his Followers filled him with the
highest Assurance, that he was peculiarly beloved of God, and called by him to
be a Minister.

Now what can be plainer than that D^otrephes's religious Exercises were
directed and influenced in a great Measure, from first to last by Satan's
Suggestions? His first Despair, doubtless rose from this Quarter, since the
Texts that were improved were evidently perverted, being applied as if they had
a particular, immediate Referrence to him, when it is certain they belonged no
more to him than to others. Thus Satan frequently tries to drive Persons into
Despair, suggesting to them they are guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
or that their Day of Grace is past, or their Sins are too great to be forgiven;
all which Apprehensions have no Foundation in the Word of God, but depend
entirely on particular Suggestions or on the Misapplication of some Passages of
Scripture. God declares repeatedly, that he will pardon the greatest Sinners if
they believe.

If Satan can thus fill Men with Horror, why may he not, if permitted,
transport them with imaginary Joys, misapplying the Promises to them. Certainly
this would have a great Tendency to deceive them. He would act as much in the
Character of the Deceiver, by taking this Method, as any other. Why may not God
permit him to take this Method as well as the other?

If Diotrephes had really loved the Gospel of Christ, it does not appear that
he had any just Occasion of separating. Certainly he should have tried all
Measures before he proceeded to rent the Church of Christ. The Sin of Schism is
far from being small.

Where Persons withdraw from that Religion, which is professed in general where
they live, this turns the Attention of many from the Gospel of Christ, to know
what they are driving at. Such Persons, let the Cause of their Separation be
what it will, are almost always extremely zealous about their Peculiarities,
and lay a prodigious Stress on them, and take unwearied Pains to make
Proselytes. For the Strength and Credit of their Party chiefly consists in
their Numbers. When they happen to be in the wrong, their Pride and Ambition,
their Malice against such as oppose them, frequently prompt to take very
unlawful Measures to increase their Party, such as misrepresenting their
Adversaries and blackening their Characters to render them odious to the World.
Now such Conduct cannot but promote Hatred, Strife and Contention. While the
careless World see professing Christians dividing from, and reproaching one
another, and every Party confident they are right, and pleading Scripture to
maintain their different Opinions and Practices; they are ready to suspect that
the Scriptures themselves are uncertain, and that all Religion is Nothing but a
Piece of Priestcraft. Thus the weak are stumbled, and Thousands prejudiced
against Religion and hardened in their Sins to their eternal Destruction, by
Divisions and Schisms. Now these sad Consequences lie at their Door who go off
from the Churches where they live, without just Reason. For the Churches and
Ministers of Christ are exhorted to contend earnestly for the Faith once
delivered unto the Saints -- Surely Nothing but real Necessity should ever put
any Man upon withdrawing from the Churches where he lives. If Men had a due
Regard to Religion, and were not strangely mistaken; I cannot but think, they
would not withdraw from the standing Churches among us, unless they could show
better Reasons than any of them have yet done. All that have withdrawn from our
Churches on one Pretense and another would do well to consider the pernicious
Consequences of their Conduct Indeed Christ has said Luke xvii. 1, 2. Matt.
xviii. 7
"It is impossible but that Offenses will come." But he has declared at the
same Time, that this will be no Excuse for those who are the blameable Cause of
these Offenses. Woe unto that Man by whom Offense comes: It were better for him
that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he cast into the Sea than that
he should offend one of these little ones." His Instruction to his Followers by
his Apostle is Romans xiv. 21.
It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any Thing whereby thy
Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Our Blessed Lord rather
than offend the Jews Matt. xvii 24 -- 27.
wrought a Miracle to pay a Tribute or Tax though he could have justly refused
paying it. How contrary to his Example in this Instance is the Conduct of many
of you, who endeavor to give as much Disturbance and Offense to those whom you
are bound to treat as Brethren as possible, and rejoice and glory in
disobliging and molesting them!

As to Diotrephes's Call to the Ministry, it was directly contrary to the
express Rules of the written Word, which forbid a Novice to be a Minister, lest
being lifted up with Pride he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. 1 Timothy
iii. 6.
A Novice in this Text means a new Convert, as all, who are acquainted with the
Greek in the Original, well know. Now he was according to his own Account but
newly converted, and therefore was plainly excluded from the Ministry by this
Text for some Time. It is a pity your new Converts don't remember this Text.
When they are so very forward to be public Speakers, they might do well if
they would also seriously consider the Words of James, James iii. 1.
"My Brethren be not many Masters or Teachers." Is that Forwardness, which
leads Men to violate the express Commands of God's holy Word, a good Mark of
their Conversion?

Now it is to be feared, that something like Diotrephes's, is the Conversion
which many among you have met with? It is indeed very probable that you will
not be forward to avow, that this is the Religion you are acquainted with,
because it has been often exposed, and labors under some Disgrace -- Men are
not easily persuaded to believe they are mistaken about Religion. Their natural
Pride disposes them to hope well of themselves When true and false Religion are
often described and clearly distinguished in Books, or in Preaching, there is
hardly any Body that will lay Claim to the false, as their own. In such Places
Men's Experiences often become very orthodox, though their Practices are quite
irregular. But I may leave others to judge how much Honesty there is in this.

If you had not embraced some Errors about experimental Religion, why do you
separate from us? Why do you industriously b^zz it about, that we don't preach
up Religion? And whence should this Notion have arisen about your Mistakes in
these Matters, and been believed by the most serious and religious Men in the
Country? 'Twas very disagreeable to many of the standing Ministry to believe,
you were so awfully mistaken. You were, many of you, not only Members in our
Churches, but among our warmest Adherents. What then could dispose any of us to
entertain such Apprehensions of your Religion, but the strongest Evidence? You
have obliged us by your open Declaration of your religious Experiences; and by
your strange Conduct in various Instances have forced us, whether we would or
not, to suspect that you were extremely mistaken about Religion, and many of
you deluded by Satan. Yet with Respect to some of you, we would agreeable to
the Scriptures make a Difference, hoping that they have only drunk in some
unhappy Prejudices, and being Persons of no Learning, are only guilty of some
Blunders in their Expressions. But if this be the Case with any of you, it is a
Pity you should be so tenacious of wrong Expressions, and disrelish the Form of
sound Words.

However the Matter in Debate, is not, whither any of you are true Saints? How
far true Saints may be left to their own Weakness, and the Delusions of Satan,
as David and Peter were, for a Season, is beyond us to determine. It is
Opinions and not Persons I oppose. If I have written against particular
Parties, it is because they are well known to embrace the peculiar Tenets and
Errors, against which I have levelled this Address.

A Man's being gracious does not secure him always from Error and Delusion. Nor
is Error the more to be regarded, and loved, were it ever so certain, that
those who maintain it are truly pious Persons. But I heartily wish you would
give some better. Evidences of your Piety, than running into destructive Errors
in Principle, and wild Extravagances in Practice. It is not the most probable
Thing in the World, that God would permit you so generally to embrace such
false Notions of Religion, if you were so eminently pious as you imagine. No
Doubt the greater Part of erroneus Persons are full as corrupt in their Hearts
as their Heads.

Where Persons are under any serious Concern, and their Consciences in some
Measure tender, they would ordinarily be a great Deal shocked, if Satan should
tempt them to such gross Wickedness as he did John Lewis, and the Dutartres. He
is more likely to succeed by putting on a religious Appearance, and
counterfeiting as near as may be the Enlightenings of the Divine Spirit. This
is to attack Persons in a Way they don't expect him. Now if he can by this
plau^ible Disguise bring them to give Heed to particular Suggestions from
Scripture, it will as effectually answer his Purpose, as if he persuaded them,
with the unhappy Persons abovementioned, to commit the most horrid Crimes.

What was the Method Satan took to abuse that Scripture, I have a few Things
against thee, because thou suffer that Woman Jezebel -- Behold I will cast
her into a Bed -- And I will kill her Children with Death, etc. Was it not by a
particular Direction and powerful Impression of it on the poor Wretch's Mind,
as if it had immediately referred to him? Had he considered the true Scope, and
the general Truths, which are contained in this Passage; he might have clearly
seen it had no more Reference to him than to others, and could not be any
Warrant to him to kill his Wife and Children. But he was carried away with the
Powerful Impression, and took it for granted, that it was an immediate
Direction from God to him.

How was it that the Dutartres came to imagine that God had raised up a Prophet
to them from that Text, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your Brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all Things whatsoever he
shall say unto you? Was it not by some powerful Impression of it on their
Minds, as if it had an immediate Reference to them in particular?

Few or none of you I hope have been permitted to commit such horrid Crimes, in
following your Impressions. But there are Degrees in Sin. Some Sins are more
shockingly gross than others. Some that are very provoking in the Sight of God,
as Unbelief for Instance, are not reckoned scandalous among Mankind. You may
therefore have been much mistaken and have acted very sinfully without having
fallen into such open horrid ^mes -- Were it necessary, I could point out
sundry Instances in which you have been left to apply Scripture as
groundlessly, and to conduct as contrary to it is Sense as the Dutartres and
John ^ewis did. One was taught to leave the standing Churches in New England
from these Scripture Expressions, Ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. Why seek
ye the living among the dead? Behold he goes before you into Galilee, there
shall ye see him; lo I have told you. Another had it revealed to him that he
must leave the standing Churches, from these Texts. And they said one to
another, let us make a Captain and let us return into Egypt -- Let them alone
they be blind, Leaders of the Blind, and if the Blind lead the Blind, both
shall fall into the Ditch -- Then the Glory of the Lord departed from off the
Threshold of the House, etc. Others pretend it is revealed to them that what is
said in the Scriptures about Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon, belongs to
the standing Churches in New England. And it is in vain to dispute with them;
for they see it, God has revealed it to them, and following these Impulses and
Revelations they separate and pour out their bitter Reproaches against the
standing Ministers and Churches.

Now whoever will examine these Texts will find Nothing in them to countenance
such Notions and Practices. There are no such Truths in them as you pretend to
be taught by them; from which it appears, as clear as the Sun, that if there is
any Thing more in such Feelings and Revelations from the Scriptures, than a
heated Imagination; it must proceed from the positive Agency of a false Spirit
on your Minds. For as the Holy Spirit is the Author of the Scriptures, this
Divine Instructor could never teach you for Scripture Things which are not at
all contained in these sacred Writings. These Misinterpretations and
Perversions of Scripture must proceed from yourselves, or Satan, or both, the
one acting in Subserviency to the other.

IV.
The next Pretense which you plead in Favor of your Impulses, Revelations, and
Perversions of Scripture is, that they are the spiritual Meaning which you are
taught by the Spirit of God. You assert this with great Confidence, and boldly
pronounce those to be blind and carnal, who don't understand the particular
Passages just as you are pleased to spiritualize them.

The Phrase, Spiritual Sense of Scripture has been usually referred, by sober
intelligent Christians who have used it, to that Discovery of the peculiar
Glory of divine Truths which God grants to his People by the saving
Illuminations of his Spirit, they beholding in the Glass of the Gospel, the
Glory of the Lord. And if you will use the Words spiritual Sense, to mean this
and Nothing more, I should have no Debate with you, but would rather offer
sundry Arguments to prove that none but true Saints ever behold the great
Truths of the Gospel in their Spiritual Glory, since it is positively asserted
by the Apostle, 1 Cor. ii. 14.
that "the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God; for they
are Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. No Man, who is destitute of the Spirit of God, can be
supposed to know the peculiar Excellencies and Glories of the divine Truths
which are contained in the Gospel. Hence Christians are directed to pray for
the Teachings and Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, that the Eyes of their
Understanding may be enlightened.

But this is not what you mean by spiritual Sense of Scripture. For then it
would be no Support or Foundation for your new Truths, which you pretend are
revealed to you from such and such Texts of Scripture. When the Minds of
Sinners are enlightened by the Spirit of God, in the Scheme of Salvation by
Jesus Christ, as delivered in the Gospel, they only see the Truths which are
already revealed by the Spirit in the written Word. Divine Light may show Men
what is in the Scriptures, especially their eminent Excellency and Glory, but
it does not discover new Truths and Duties, not contained in the Bible. So that
the spiritual Sense of the Scriptures in this Acceptance of the Phrase is
Nothing to your Purporse. It could be no Advantage to your Scheme.

Hence your spiritual Meaning or Sense of Scripture is a secret mystical Sense,
which you imagine is communicated to you by immediate Revelation, and by which
you know new Truths and Duties. The Scriptures according to you, have a literal
and carnal Sense, and a mystical and spiritual Sense, hidden and wrapped up
under it, as in a Riddle or Allegory. The carnal or unconverted, see only the
literal and carnal Sense of the Scriptures, but you being spiritual and
gracious Persons are instructed in the secret and spiritual Sense of the Bible.
Let us examine these Things.

Every Speaker, who uses Words with Propriety has some Design in View, and of
Consequence some determinate Meaning fixed to his Words, whether he uses plain
Language or Metaphors, and Parable. When we fully understand this Meaning, we
have the whole Sense he intended. If we mistake his Meaning and Design, we
cannot be said rightly to understand him.

As God has been pleased to speak to us in human Languages most certainly he
speaks with the greatest Propritety: And therefore the Sense is most fixed and
determinate. The Scriptures were designed for the common Use of Mankind, for
the Unlearned as well as the Learned, and are therefore penned in an easy
familiar Style, in such Language and Words, as were commonly used among Men
when they were written. Sometimes Metaphors and Parables are used to strike
Men's Attention in a more lively Manner, and to teach them plain Truths, which
are clearly revealed in other Passages of Scripture. And it seems sometimes to
conceal them. See Mark iv. 11, 12.
Typical Representations were often used under the Old Testament to prefigure
Jesus Christ the promised Savior. But since Christ is come, such typical
Representations are become less necessary, and so not much used in the
New Testament. We, says the Apostle, use great Plainness of Speech and not as
Moses which put a Vail over his Face. 2 Cor. iv. 12, 13.


Since God designed to teach us Something in every Passage of Scripture, when
we comprehend what this is, what Instructions are contained in it, we see the
true Meaning of that particular Passage. If we don't see what was God's Meaning
and Design in any particular Passage, we don't understand that Passage, at
least the true Meaning of it. Thus every Scripture, whither plain or
parabolical, has some Design, some determinate Sense. It contains some certain
Truths, and no other. When the Passage is parabolical and typical, it must be
explained to discover these Truths which it contains.

The Scriptures were designed for, and are sent to Mankind in general, both
Saints and Sinners. They are used as a Means to convince and convert Sinners;
to edify Saints; and to leave impenitent Unbelievers inexcuseable in their
Sins. These Ends could not be answered by the Scriptures, unless they were in
some good Measure intelligible to all both Saints and Sinners God declares that
he had not spoken in secret; and that his Commandment was not hidden. Isaiah
xlv. 19 Deuteronomy xxx. 11.
It was not his Design to hide and conceal the Truths of his Word from the
unregenerate, but to reveal them to all in general in the plainest Manner. To
teach therefore that unconverted Sinners cannot have any Understanding of the
Scriptures is to oppose God, and to endeavor to frustrate one great End for
which he gave them. When the holy Spirit convinces Men of their Sins, does he
not often improve the Truths contained in the Scriptures? And don't convinced
Sinners believe the Truths, which the Spirit improves in convincing them? And
are not many awakened Sinners, with Felix, when he trembled under Paul's
Preaching, still in an unconverted State? If unconverted Sinners could know
nothing at all about the Truth contained in the Gospel, how could they be left
inexcuseable in their Sins? Or how could it be just in God to condemn them to
an aggravated Punishment?

Hence, though unconverted Sinners don't see the eminent Glory of the Lord in
the Glass of the Gospel, yet they may, and often do see the it is true, and are
frequently much affected with the Truths which it contains. And thus your
Notion of a carnal Meaning, which is understood only by carnal Men; and a
spiritual Meaning which true Converts understand has no just Foundation. The
Scriptures were penned by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and treat chiefly
about spiritual Things, and Men are brought to see their real Excellency and
peculiar Glory by the Illuminations of the Spirit. How then can they have a
carnal Meaning? Christ the great Antitype is come. Why would you turn the
New Testament into Types and Figures? Is not this to throw Shadows and Darkness
instead of Light upon the Gospel? But this will appear plainer while I briefly
point out some of the Marks and Characters of your spiritual Meaning which you
put on the Scriptures.

1. Your spiritual Sense of Scripture has no Connection with its true or real
Sense. For Instance, Jesus then comes and takes Bread and gives them, and
Fish likewise. Real Sense; Christ on a certain Occasion distributed Bread and
Fish to his Disciples. Your spiritual Sense, Bread and Fish mean Divine Light,
Comfort and Joy. Jesus gives this spiritual Food, these divine Manifestations,
not to the World but to his true Disciples, his poor persecuted Followers, that
is, yourselves. Now any unprejudiced Person may see this spiritual Meaning has
no Connection with, nor real Foundation in the Text.

2. Your spiritual Meaning is such a Meaning as no sober Man, let him have ever
so much Grace and Penetration, can see in the Text; and yet a blind,
unconverted Sinner can understand it if he pleases. Divine Influences and
saving Illumination don't help a Man in the least, to discern your spiritual
Sense of Scripture. For many who are favored with a large Share of saving
Light and Knowledge are quite Strangers to your spiritual Meanings. But some
carnal Men are very well acquainted with them. Thus 1 Kings, i. 1 -- 16.
David's Servants said unto him, let there be sought for my Lord the King a
young Virgin, and let her stand before the King, and let her cherish him; and
let her lie in thy Bosom, that my Lord the King may get Heat. So they sought
for a fair Damsel -- and found Abishag, etc. Your spiritual Sense of this
Passage is briefly, This fair Damsel that cherished King David was his Faith.
This lay in his Bosom and made him lively and warm in Religion. A carnal Sinner
can immediately understand this Meaning without any Illuminations of the Spirit.

3 Your spiritual Sense not only has no Connection with the real Sense, but is
often quite contrary to it. Thus, Let your Women keep Silence in the Churches
-- and if they will learn any Thing, let them ask their Husbands at Home."
Spiritual Meaning; "Christ is their Husband, the Church is their Home.
Therefore Women who are married to Christ by Faith may speak in the Church.
Here you see plainly, that the spiritual Sense is quite contrary to the true
Sense. Thus again, Thou have had five Husbands, and he, whom thou now have, is
not thy Husband. Spiritual Sense; Thou have had five false Hopes, and that Hope
which thou now have is not a true Hope, directly contrary to the real Meaning
and Design of the Words.

In fine, by such Spiritualizings, any Thing and every Thing or Nothing, may be
made out of any Scripture, as the Fancies of Men please. There is no Reasoning
with such Men from Scripture.

Allow your spiritual Sense, and we cannot establish any Doctrine, nor confute
any Error by the most express Scripture For it is easy for you to say, we take
the Scriptures in the literal, carnal Sense; but you have the spiritual Meaning
of the Texts to Confirm you in your Opinion; or that you are not taught the
spiritual Sense of the Texts brought to confute you. So that when Persons
pretend to set up such Spiritualizings of Scripture, they in Fact set the Bible
aside. Now from whom do you think such Notions could spring? Who is it that is
most industriously employed in getting rid of the Bible?

The History of the Fall of Man, the Miracles of Christ, etc. have been
spiritualized after this Manner, that is, explained away by some Writers. But
no Parts of Scripture have been more spiritualized, than the Revelation and the
Song of Solomon. The ingenious Mr. Lowman has commented very excellently on the
Revelation, rescuing the sacred Text from many Spiritualizers, and explaining
the real Import of the Language and the general Design of the Book.

Since the Song of Solomon was ranked among the Jewish Scriptures, according to
Inspiration, which would not permit any spurious Production to be placed in the
sacred Canon; since Christ has declared, that the Scriptures cannot be broken;
and Paul has expressly asserted that all Scripture, that is, the whole
Old Testament is given by Inspiration; it would be very absurd to question its
divine Authority. The following brief Account perhaps may be useful to point
out the general Design, and the right Method of explaining this celebrated Song.

Husbands and Wives mutually love one another. This mutual Love which is
between Husband and Wife may be used to represent that Love which is between
Christ and his true Followers. The Spirit of God has made Use of Marriage to
represent it in sundry plain Passages of Scripture. As Solomon was a Type of
Christ, the Love which he and Pharaoh's Daughter had for each other, is pitched
on as a particular Instance or Emblem, to represent the Love that is between
Christ and his People. This grand Truth is represented in this celebrated Song,
which is written after the Manner of Pastorals, by a great Variety of beautiful
Images, in a very striking Manner, agreeable to the Customs, of the Jews, and
the Eastern Taste. From the whole of this Song we learn this great Truth, that
there is a mutual strong Love between Christ and true Believers." This is
celebrated here in a every lively Manner. There is no Need to wring the
Expressions to force out of them uncertain Niceties. Dr. Owen.


Had the common, but too much neglected, Maxim about Parabolical
Representations, viz. That they don't run on all Four, been rightly applied and
attended to, many strained and unnatural Glosses on the Beams, Ratters, Neck,
Breasts, Navel. etc. might have been spared, without any Damage to the ^e
spiritual Edification of the Church. There is Need of a new Revelation from
God, and Miracles to confirm many spiritual Meanings, that have been affixed to
some Phrases in (...) ^ticles.

God sometimes taught his People by Hieroglyphics or Symbols. But it would be
very wild to infer from this, that all the Scriptures are hieroglyphical. If
God has revealed any where in his Word, that any particular Persons or Things
were symbolical (as he has sometimes done in the New Testament by Christ and
his Apostles) then we have a sufficient Warrant to explain them, as Types or
Hieroglyphics. But where God has not told us that Persons or Histories were
Allegorical, how is it possible for us to know it? Should not we stop where God
has stopped? Must not all beyond this be mere Imagination and Delusion?

Had Men been contented to have made Scripture the Interpreter of Scripture,
and not attempted to find out imaginary Mysteries, which are no where revealed,
many strange Interpretations might have been happily prevented.

Common Readers, I suppose, can see so much in the plain Meaning of the Book of
Job, as to be greatly benefited by the Example of Patience, which is set before
them in this eminent Person; and the Serious Instructions and sublime
Sentiments, which are delivered in the various Discourses, that passed between
him and his Friends, on Occasion of his Afflictions, etc. But many suppose this
Book to be a dramatick Piece, a parabolical Representation. Who can tell how
far they are right? On this Supposition this Book must have a hidden, mystical,
spiritual Meaning. Fancy must be set to Work to find it out. And as it is not
revealed in Scripture, when or by whom the Book of Job was written, Imagination
has a large Field to range in. Men may guess till they are tired: But how shall
they know when they have gu^ssed right?

One may imagine it was written by Moses, that Job mystically represents the
Children of Israel; his Afflictions and Murmurings, their Bondage in (...),
Sufferings and Murmurings i^ the Wilderness; his Pr^ty ^r his heavy
Afflictions, their Prosperity in the Land of Ca^aan. On this Scheme the Book of
Job was designed to recommend Patience and Perseverance to the Israelites in
the Wilderness.

As Job is represented to have lived in the Land of Uz, and the Names of some
of his Friends are such as were common among the Descendants of Esau. Another
may imagine, this Book was written to comfort the Edomites, when they were
carried away captive, and subjected to grievous Calamities. His Prosperity may
represent their Restoration; or their Conversion to Christianity. Another may
imagine, the Book of Job was written by Ezra for the Support and Comfort of the
Jews, after the Babylonish Captivity: That Job represents the returning Jews,
his three Friends, whom he called miserable Comforters, the false Friends or
Enemies of the Jews, Sa^ballat, Tobiah, and Geshem the Arrabian; his foolish
Wife, the strange Wives, whom the Jews had married, and whom they put away by
divine Commandment, etc.

Others may frame other Hypotheses, as Things happen to jump in their
Imaginations. Is it not a Pity they don't consider, that, since the mystical
Meaning of this Book, if it has any, is not revealed in Scripture, they can
never find it out? Is it not egregious Folly for Men to pretend to be wise
above what is written? If some self-conceited contemptuous Writers were ever
likely to read this Address, or capable of taking Advice from me, I would
recommend it to them, when they are seized with this Fondness for Mysticism and
Allegory, to confine themselves to the Metamorphosis of Ovid, Apulius, or the
Dreams of Arremidorus They will spend their Time more innocently in finding out
the Mysteries of the Heathens, than in torturing the Holy Scriptures, and they
may appear quite as Learned. -- To return,

If a Man should give you a Note or a Bond for a hundred Pounds, would you
allow him, to take as much Liberty to spiritualize away the true intent of it,
as you take with the Bible? If he should come and tell you with a great Deal of
Heat and Zeal, that the spiritual Meaning of a hundred Pounds was not a hundred
Pounds of Money, but a hundred Words, Complements or Visits, or the like, would
you not think be was monstrously impudent, or distracted? And has not the Bible
a real, important and fixed Meaning, as well as any other Writings? How dare
any Man take that Freedom with the Scriptures, which he would not allow his
Neighbor in explaining a trifling Note or Bond, where his temporal Property
was concerned?

Indeed there was a Necessity on you, who set up to be Exhorters, to give into
this Notion of Spiritualizing the Scriptures, from your great Ignorance of
their true Meaning. I am very serious, and remember while I am writing, I must
render a most strict and impartial Account of my Conduct at God's awful Bar.
And under this solemn Sense of the last Judgment on my Mind, I most seriously
declare, it is my firm Opinion, that such is the Ignorance which prevails among
both your Teachers and People, who have separated from us, that all of you
together could scarcely explain the true Sense of one single Leaf of the Bible.
So that your Teachers are obliged to spiritualize and pervert the Scriptures,
or else forbear holding forth. -- It seems also they find their Account in this
spiritualizing, in drawing sundry after them; for some are wonderfully pleased
to find strange Mysteries in plain Texts. Who could have thought, say they,
such a wonderful Discourse could have been made out of such a Text? Some will
always be best pleased with new and strange Things, which they don't understand!

1. But I expect to be told that I deny all the Teachings of the Spirit, etc.

To which I answer, the Spirit of God teaches by giving us the Scriptures; and
by impressing the real Sense, the general Truths, that are contained in them on
Men's Minds, as has been already explained. If therefore after this, any of you
shall dare to assert, or insinuate, that I deny the Operations of the Spirit, I
must look on it as a Specimen of wilful Malice and Deceit; since you cannot but
know, it is only your absurd spiritualizing of Scripture, which I discard.

2. But some Divines have spiritualized Scripture.

Ans. You doubtless frequently mistake the explaining Scripture Metaphors for
Spiritualizing, though they are widely different. To show the true Meaning of
such a metaphorical Phrase, as draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation, pluck
out a Right Eye, out off a right Hand: for Instance, is not to spiritualize,
but to explain.

Some of these Things, which you take for spiritualizing in the Writings of
Divines, are only Allusions to Scripture Types, and Histories, to give some
Illustration to the Subject on which they are discoursing, and to fix it a
little more strongly on the Memory. But what if Divines had spiritualized the
Scripture in the Method, which I have endeavored to expose? Does that make it
right, when it is so evidently wrong? I have long since learned, that I should
call no Man Father or Master upon Earth. Should we follow Men any further than
they follow Christ and Truth?

Many of the best Divines have warmly remonstrated against this Spiritualizing
Scripture from the Beginning of the Reformation. The excellent Dr. Doddridge
observes on 2 Cor. iii. 6. Not of the Letter, but of the Spirit] To understand
this of an Allegorical (that is a Spiritual) rather than literal Explication of
the Old Testament is very Arbitrary and Unwarrantable. And I wish no Christian
Commentators had given Encouragement to the Deists, to abuse this Text in the
Manner it is well known they have done.

Now when the Deists thus strongly arm themselves from the Spiritualizings of
Enthusiasts, and some weak Brethren, who have inadvertently embraced some of
their Interpretations, is it not high Time to expose this Method of explaining
the Bible? Should we for Fear of displeasing some weak Persons, quietly sit
still and be silent; until Enthusiasts have effectually prepared the Way for
Deists to discard the Scriptures, or bring them into Contempt, as a System of
unintelligible mistical Jargon.

If I have quoted from the Writings of some Divines, this is to show that I am
not singular, since many, whose Praises are in the Churches of Christ, have
been of the same Opinion. -- But since it is one of the Artifices of unfair
Opponents to Charge those that write against them, with any exceptionable
Expressions or Notions they think they have found in the Books quoted from, or
approved of in general; I here desire it may be remarked, as I receive Nothing
on any human Authority, I undertake to defend no Men's Peculiarities. I am
willing to be tried by the Scriptures, and to stand or fall by them. To them I
appeal.

In the above Sense of quoting from Divines I desire you to read and seriously
consider the following Passage of Dr. Doddridge in his Life of the very
excellent and pious Col. Gar^ner. He never pretended to have received any
immediate Revelation Obj The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and
he will show them his Covenant. -- This does not prove that God grants
immediate Revelations to them that fear him, besides those contained in his
written Word. For it is not true in Fact that all Saints have such Revelations
Now a Falsehood cannot be the right Sense of the Text -- The Secret of the Lord
here m^s that secret communion which he grants his People. He manifests h^s
covenant in a peculiar Manner by his Spirit to those that fear him. See (...)
xiv. 21, -- 23.
from God, which should raise him above the ordinary Methods of Instruction, or
discover any Thing to him, whether of Doctrines or Faith. No Man was further
from pretending to predict future Events, except it were from the moral
Prognostications of Causes naturally tending to produce them, in treating of
which he had indeed an admirable Sagacity, as I have seen in some very
remarkable Instances. Neither was he at all inclinable to govern himself by
secret Impulses upon his Mind, leading him to Things for which he could assign
no Reason but the Impulse itself. Had he ventured, in a Presumption on such
secret Agitations of Mind, to teach or to do any Thing, not warranted by the
Dictates of sound Sense and the Word of God, I should readily have acknowledged
him an Enthusiast, unless he could have produced some other Evidence than his
own Persuasion to have supported the Authority of them. See the Life of Col.
Gardener, P. 78.


It will be no unnecessary Digression to give a brief Specimen of your Manner
of Reasoning from Scripture, agreeable to your Spiritualizings about Baptism,
etc.

i. It is certain from the Scriptures, that God sent John the Baptist to
baptize with Water. For his Baptism was from Heaven, of Divine Appointment.
Christ himself was baptized with Water. Christ's Disciples, who were careful to
obey his Directions, baptized while he lived with them before his Crucifiction.
When he took his Leave of them, and ascended into Heaven, he commanded them to
teach and baptize all Nations. They were well acquainted with his Manner of
Speaking and Language, and they understood his Command, "Baptize," of receiving
Persons into the visible Church by Water Baptism, which, it seems, was the
known and established Sense of the Word. For to baptize with the Holy Ghost,
and with Fire, is evidently a metaphorical Phrase, which signified their
sharing plentifully in the Influences of the Divine Spirit. Thus, else where,
Christ uses the Metaphor of Baptism to signify his dreadful Sufferings and
Death. Acts ii. 38. and x. 47, 48.
Are ye able to be baptized with the Baptism I am to be baptized with? But to
baptize with Water, as John the Baptist did, was the proper and common Sense of
the Word. So the Apostles understood it, and so they practiced. Matt. xx. 22.
Peter said to the three thousand, Repent, and be baptized, every one of you in
the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the
Gift of the Holy Ghost.

Their sharing in the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, or being baptized with the Holy
Ghost, did not supersede the Necessity of being baptized with Water. No, Can
any Man forbid Water, said Peter Acts x. 47, 48.
with Respect to Cornelius and other Gentile Converts, who have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we. And he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of
the Lord. Though therefore Peter and Paul, as appears from some Passages, did
not ordinarily baptize themselves, being chiefly employed in Preaching the
Gospel; yet they were careful in commanding that Baptism with Water should not
be neglected. Philip who was under the immediate Direction of the Spirit,
baptized the Eunuch with Water. Thus Baptism by Water was constantly practiced
by the Apostles. This is the one Baptism which they speak of. And this Baptism
was frequently accompanied with the Influences of the Holy Spirit. Some might
lay too great a Stress upon Baptism in their Days, as the Papists have done
since, and others who teach that Men are regenerated by Baptism. To correct the
Mistake of such, Peter plainly tells them, that they were not to look so much
to their being baptized with Water, as to their living answerable to their
Promises in that holy Ordinance. 1 Pet.
Baptism does also now save us, not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh,
but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Which shows that Baptism by Water, was then practiced; that the
Apostle, approved of it, but would not have too great Stress laid upon it,
considered merely in itself.

Now who, that considers that Baptism by Water was of Divine Institution, was
never repealed, but was enjoined by Christ, and practiced by his Apostles,
would think any Man would pretend to prove from their Writings, that it should
be disregarded? Would they not have been the most inconsistent of all Men, if
they had thus taught one Thing and constantly practiced the contrary? If they
had wrote against Water Baptism, when they were thus careful to see that it was
administered? Barclay was so intent on the figurative or spiritual Sense of
Scripture, that he quite overlooked its real Sense and plain Scope; and
therefore could not see any Divine Warrant for Baptism with Water in all the
New Testament; yet he could see it clearly forbidden in these Words of John,
Christ's Harbinger, "He must increase but I must decrease." Apol. Of Baptism.
P. 423. John iii. 31.
Which must besure be the spiritual Sense of the Text, since in its real Sense
it says Nothing more nor less about Baptism at all. A Man had Need of the
Second Sight to see any Thing in these Words against Water Baptism. But such
are the Reasonings of those who pretend to follow the spiritual Sense of
Scripture!

ii. Thus also others of you declare, with equal Reason and Positiveness as
Barclay against Infant Baptism, as if it was merely a vain Invnetion of Men,
and a very sinful Observance.

It is certain from the Scriptures that God held Adam's natural Posterity bound
with him, in that Law or Covenant which he gave him in his State of Innocence.
God cursed the Ground for the Sake of Adam's Transgression, and his Posterity
in all their Generations have felt the sad Effects of his Apostasy. It is
likewise certain, that God bound Abraham's natural Posterity as well as
himself, when he ratified his Covenant with him by Circumcision, which was,
according to the Apostle Paul, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith or Coveant
of Grace. Now the Covenant of Grace was never yet repealed. Consequently the
Grant, which God made in it in Favor of the Infant Seed of his People, still
remains in full Force and Virtue. This is the plain Sense of these
Scripture-Accounts. -- It Is true these Things are in the Old Testament. But
would you deny Original Sin Such as are disaffected to this Doctrine may read
Dr. Watts's Ruin and Recovery, and President Edwards against Dr. Tailor. Surely
it is not reasonable for any to reject and contem^ Doctrines before they have
fully considered what can be said in their Defense.
and discard the Old Testament, rather than allow Infant Baptism? If you don't,
pray consider at your Leisure, whether our Infants be not as capable Subjects
of being bound by Covenant to the Lord in Baptism, as the Infants of the
Israelites were by Circumcision? While you charge us with horrid Presumption
and Sin, for baptizing Infants, hereby putting God's Seal upon them; beware
least in your great Zeal and intemperate Heat you should be found charging God
foolishly; since he expressly commanded the Infants of the Israelites to be
circumcised. Length of Time does not change the Nature of Right and Wrong.
Whatsoever was wrong in itself under the Old Testament, is so still. If
therefore it be in itself absurd, wrong and sinful, to take Children into
Covenant now, it was so also under the Old Testament. It becomes you to be a
little more careful how you express yourselves on this Subject. Indifferent
Things may be abolished, but nothing that is in itself wrong and sinful can
ever be commanded by God. Do you think Circumcision referred only to earthly
Riches? Or that all the Saints of Old were under no other but a strict Covenant
of Works?

1. But God has not expressly said, in so many Words, Ye shall baptize Infants.

Ans. But he has said, that the same Covenant of Grace still continues Acts
iii. 43. and ii. 39.
Ye are, said Peter to the Jews, the Children of the Prophets and of the
Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy Seed
shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be blessed. -- The Promise is to you and to
your Children and to all that are afar off even as many as the Lord our God
shall call: That is, bring to a public Profession of Christ, calling them by
the Preaching of the Gospel. Since many are thus called and but few chosen;
there is no Necessity, nor sufficient Reason, to restrain this to an effectual
Call in this Place. The Covenant and Promise, then, under the Gospel extends to
the Children of Christan Professors as well as themselves. Yea if only one of
the Parents of a Child be a professed Christian, yet even in such a Case the
Child is to be treated as a Subject of the visible Covenant and Church. 1 Cor.
vii. 14.
The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by the Husband: else were your Children unclean; but now are they
holy. This does not mean that they are really or sincerely holy. For many
excellent Christians have had ungodly Children. The Sense then evidently is
that the Children of Christian Parents, or where only one of them professes
Christ, are visibly holy by being in Covenant along with their Parents. Thus,
according to the Apostle the Children of Christian Parents are holy, and of
Consequence proper Subjects of Baptism. Why should we refuse to baptize
Children and receive them into the visible Church when God has thus expressly
assured us they are holy?

Some brought little Children to Christ, that he should touch them, and his
Disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it he was much
displeased, and said unto them, Suffer little Children to come unto me and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. -- And he took them up in
his Arms, put his Hands upon them and blessed them. Mark x. 13. -- 16.
The Kingdom of Christ in this Passage, must mean either the Kingdom of Glory
above, or the Gospel Church in this World. If little Children belong to the
Kingdom of Glory, why should we refuse to admit them into the visible Church by
Baptism? Would Men have their Churches in this World purer than Heaven itself?
But if the Kingdom of God in this Text should be taken in the second Sense, as
meaning the visible Church or Kingdom which he has erected in the World, then,
this Passage is a direct Proof for Infant Baptism; since this is the Ordinance
by which they were made visible Members. Such is the plain Sense of this
Passage, and the Consequence which is fairly derived from it.

But the Spiritual Sense which some of you put upon it is, These who were
brought to Christ were not little Children in Age and Stature, but true
Converts who resembled little Children in their Temper and Disposition. That
is, Christ took up grown Persons in his Arms, who, it may be, were Thirty,
Forty, Sixty, or Seventy Years old. -- Such could have come to Christ
themselves, without being brought by their Parents or Guardians. To such
pitiful Shifts are Men drove, to defend their Errors. To mention such an
Interpretation is to expose it.

2. But Christ said to his Disciples, Go and teach all Nations baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, etc.

Ans. What then? According to your own Interpretation of this Text, it does not
refer to Infants, but to grown adult Persons. But how will you confute Infant
Baptism from a Text which you grant has no Reference at all to it? Suppose I
should allow for Argument's Sake, that Infant Baptism could not be proved from
this Text; that would be no good Reason against it, since, as I have showed, it
may be proved from other Scriptures. The Lord's Supper is not expressly
mentioned in this Text. Will you admit this to be a good Proof, that Christians
should not show forth the Lord's Death in this Ordinance according to his
command in other Scriptures? All Things could not possibly be taught in one
Text. But how can any reasonable, unprejudiced Man suppose the Apostles
understood this Commission. "Teach and baptize all Nations? Must they not have
understood it as comprehending Infants, when they knew they were received as
Members of the Jewish Church at eight Days old, by Circumcision? And when they
well remembered the sharp Rebuke, which Christ gave them for attempting to
hinder little Children from coming to him? Had any Insinuations been made by
the Apostles against Children; had they excluded them from the visible Church;
no Doubt their Enemies the Jews, would have made a loud Complaint against them
for cutting off their Infant Seed from the Lord. But there are no Intimations
in the whole New Testament of any such Objections and Complaints being made
against them.

3. But there is no express Example to prove that Infants were baptized.

Ans. When Lydia was converted to Christianity, Acts xvi. 14, 15. and 33.
not only she herself, but also her household were baptized. The Jailor and all
his were baptized. The Apostle Paul baptized the Household of Stephanas. 1 Cor.
i. 16.
How can you prove that there were no Children in these Families? Is it by a
strong Imagination, or a violent Impulse, or some new Revelation?

If Children are holy as the Apostle expressly assures us, 1 Cor. xii. 14
how dare you treat them as unclean, as unholy, as Heathen, refusing to baptize
them? Should you not have express Scripture to justify you in your discarding
Infant Baptism on your own principles? Or do you think there are no Sins of
Omission? Or that you will never be called to Account for the Injury, you do to
your Children by neglecting to devote them to God in this solemn Ordinance?

If you still insist upon some express Scripture or Example, why don't you
steadfastly and honestly adhere to your own Rule in all Things? Why do you
pretend to dip or plunge Persons when you baptize them? Where have you any
express Command or Example for such a Mode? Not in the Bible. Produce it if you
can. As I have been informed it is your Custom, when you pretend to plunge
Persons, especially in cold Weather, to bundle up the Men, not only in their
ordinary wearing Apparel, but also in sundry great Coats sometimes; and the
Women in many Clothes, Wrappers, Mufflers, etc. You must give me Leave to ask
you, what Scripture you have for such a Practice? When Persons are baptized,
should not the Water be applied to their Bodies some Way or other? Can they be
supposed to be baptized at all, when the Water is applied chiefly to their
Cloaks and Wrappers? Is not this rather a plunging and soaking of their
Clothes, than a baptizing of themselves? Have you any express Command or
Example in all the Scripture of Persons who were thus bundled up in great Coats
and Wrappers, in Order to be baptized by plunging without wetting their Skin?
Does not this look like mocking the Ordinance, or a cowardly shrinking back
from the Cross. Whoever would see Infant Baptism more fully vind^ed may read
Dr. Wa^ History (...), t^ late President D^s^n's Dialogue upon it, Pre^nt F^
P^s on the Subject against M^ (...), C^k^ ^ce again Dr. Gill, a very excellent
Piece, etc. ^ 1 Cor. xii. 14


iii. The Scriptures assure us, that Christ Matt xi^ 8
declared that he was the Lord of the Sabbath. He rose on the first Day when he
had finished the Work of our Redemption, which was more glorious than that of
Creation, and therefore more worthy to be remembered. Christ visited his
Disciples, when they were met together on the first Day of the Week after his
Resurrection. ^o^ xx 1^ -- ^6.
Christ declares he did not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets.
Consequently not to abolish the Sabbath. When therefore the seventh Day became
not so proper, the first Day was appointed in its Room.

The first Day of the Week was a Day appointed for public Worship in the Time
of the Apostles. Acts xx 7.
The Disciples at Troas, met together to break Bread, or celebrate the Lord's
Supper on the first Day of the Week, and Paul preached unto them. This Apostle
gave Orders 1 Cor. xvi. 1.
to the Churches of Corinth and Galatia to make their charitable Contributions
on the first Day of the Week, which seems to be a strong Intimation, it was
then a Day observed for public Worship. To encourage the Christians in the
Observance of the first Day, notwithstanding any Opposition they might meet
with from the Jews, he says, Col. ii. 16.
Let no Man judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in Respect of an holy Day, or of
the New Mood or of the Sabbath Days which are a Shadow of good Things to come.
How do you know that this is not an express Alteration of the Sabbath from the
seventh to the first Day of the Week? Is it not strange that some can see
Baptism by plunging plainly instituted, in the Example of the Eunuch whom
Philip baptized, though there is not a Word in the Text about Dipping; and yet
cannot see the Jewish Sabbath altered here?

It is well known from History, that the first Day of the Week was called the
Lord's Day, as the Apostle John speaks of it in the Revelation, in the first
Ages of Christianity. See Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. Just. Mar^. Edit. at Grab.
Apol. 1. 87, and 89, etc.
It was a distinguishing Badge of Christians in the third Century to keep the
Lord's Day or first Day of the Week, for which many were put to Death by their
Heathen Persecutors. God has owned and blessed his Church and People in the
devout Observance of the first Day of the Week, and often punished those who
have dared to profane it.

Are not these Evidences sufficient to convince any sober Enquirer after Truth,
that God has appointed, and still approves of the Observance of the first Day
of the Week as the Sabbath? Could you The Reg^nes are referred to here.
be at any Loss about this Matter, unless you had determined you would set up
your own Wills; would have it known that you looked on yourselves more wise,
zealous, and religious, than the whole Christian World; would follow your
strong Impulses and Revelations, and spiritualize away the true Sense of the
Scriptures? But why have not you wrought some Miracles to prove that those
Revelations, which you pretend you have had, came from God? It is astonishing,
that you should venture on the Strength of your Impuses to glory in your
Disregard for the Lord's Day; to burlesque and ridicule it in your awkward
Manner; and not only presume to follow your worldly Business on this solemn
Day; but, if current Reports be true, endeavor to your utmost at Time to
disturb your Christian Neighbors in their religious Worship. Does the Gospel
teach you any where to offend and molest your Neighbors in their religious
Assemblies and Worship? Does not this look something like the Temper of the
Heathens, who persecuted the primitive Christians for their religious
Observance of the Lord's Day? Is it not probable that Satan is very active in
exciting Persons to such turbulent offensive Behavior? Satan would have the
Sabbath abolished no Doubt if he could, because there are many Attempts made
against his Kingdom on this Day.

Some of you The Separates and separate Baptists are referred to here, and
their Favorers.
who are a good Deal tinged with these Errors, have a considerable Regard for
the Rev. Mr. Bellamy* And indeed, this Gentleman has had a pretty large
Acquintance with the Separates and their Religion, and has well exposed the
pernicious Tendency of their Notions. I shall therefore transcribe a few
Passages from his Dialogues.

He describes a sincere Christian's Experiences thus. I behold (1.) The Love,
the self-moving Goodness, of God in the Gift of his Son: But not (as the
Separates imagine) that he loves me in particular, and is reconciled to me.
(2.) I then see, that Christ has secured the Honor of the Divine Government;
and that now God can be just, and yet justify the Sinner that believes in
Jesus;" But not, that I am one for whom he died, with an absolute Design to
Save." (3.) "I then see, that any Sinner may return to God through Christ; and
see that those who do will be accepted and saved; but not, that, Pardon is
mine, Grace is mine, Christ and all his spiritual Blessings are mine -- In a
Word I see the Truth of what is already revealed in the Gospel; but I don't see
Truths not revealed there. The Holy Spirit helps me to see the Truths already
revealed; but reveals no new Truths. The Things, which I believe, were true,
before I believed them. If after all any pretend, There is no Difference
between these two Kinds of Faith; I only say, if these two Kinds of Faith like
two Roads which seem, and but seem, to lead the same Way, should in Fact, lead
to two different Worlds, as far asunder as Heaven and Hell; it is proper to set
up these Monuments, to warn Travelers, and the nearer they are alike, the more
Need poor Travelers have to take Heed they do not mistake. But if they will
mistake after Warning, their Blood will be upon their own Heads; and they will
eternally remember, that they knew what they believed was not revealed in
Scripture -- They believed without any Evidence from Scripture, Sense or Reason.

"But admit all this Error and Delusion how shall we know "the Truth?

By making the written Word our Rule, our only Rule; -- Once the Question was
concerning Jesus of Nazareth, Art thou he that should come? Or, look we for
another? Go and show John, said our blessed Savior, those Things which ye do
hear and see. The blind receive their Sight, the Lame walk, and the Lepers are
cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised, and the poor have the Gospel
preached unto them -- These were the Characters of the Messiah, according to
the sacred Writings of the Old Testament, and to these he appeals -- Now the
Question is concerning Thereon, (any Man) is he a true Believer, a real Convert,
a Christian, that our Lord will own at the Day of Judgment? Well, Go read, say
I, our Savior's Sermon on the Mount. -- Blessed are the poor in Spirit --
Blessed are they that mourn -- the Meek, etc. etc. to the End. And see; is my
Thereon a Man of this Character? If so, his House is built on a Rock. If not, it
is built upon the Sand -- This is such a Witness of the Spirit as will pass at
the great Tribunal; and you will need no other. But without this, ten thousand
Revelations will avail you Nothing. Nay, but that will be your certain Doom, I
know you not, depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity.

If we do certainly know our good Estate by our Sanctification, is not the
immediate Witness of the Spirit needless? If Men do not certainly know they are
Good Men by their Sanctification; who on Earth can tell, but they are
Hypocrites? And so, but that their immediate Witness comes from the Devil? --
If they cannot tell -- to be sure you and I cannot. Nor will their immediate
Witness prove the contrary; unless you can demonstrate (contrary to Scripture)
that Satan never transforms himself into an Angel of Light. -- Leave Holiness
out of the Account, and what is there -- but what the Devil can do? If he can,
how do you know but he will? How do you know but he does? Go to the Anabaptists
in Germany in Luther's, Time -- Go to the Enthusiasts in England, in Cromwell's
Time, -- and see what the Devil has done in former Ages. Yea, I could name
Towns and Persons in New England, where and in whom Satan's mighty Works have
been to be seen, within less than twenty Years ago. --

"This Doctrine," (viz. That Men know their good Estate by their
Sanctification, and are not to look for any other immediate Witness of the
Spirit) so plainly taught by JESUS CHRIST and ALL HIS APOSTLES, were it once
thoroughly understood, and firmly believed, would not only "wound" and
"perplex" presumptuous Hypocrites; but even slay its ten thousands; while the
righteous would flourish like the green Bay Tree, nourished up by such sound
and good Doctrine. For never did Assurance, true and genuine Assurance, so
abound among Professors as in the Apostolie Age, when this was the Doctrine
universally in Vogue. -- And then the holy Lives of their Converts were so
exemplary; that they won the Favor and commanded the Respect of all the
People. And Christianity, thus adorned by the constant Behavior of its
Professors, gained Ground every where, in Spite of all the Efforts of Earth and
Hell. -- Whereas in the Days of Luther, in the Days of Cromwell, and in our
Days, when your Kind of Assurance (by immediate Witness of the Spirit,
Revelations, Visions, etc.) has been so much in Vogue, the Lives of many
Professors have been such as to bring Reproach upon Christianity, in the Sight
of the World. It was this that prejudiced the Papist against Reformation in
Luther's Time. It was this that prejudiced England against experimental
Religion in Cromwell's Time. And it is this, it is this, O my Thereon, that has
brought vital Piety into such general Contempt in New England, in these late
Years (Let every Enthusiast hear and consider) Could I speak, O my Thereon, with
a Voice like that of the Archangel, when he shall wake up all the sleeping
dead, I would sound an Alarm to all God's People through the Christian World,
warn them against this Delusion, and invite them to return back to the old
apostolic Doctrine. -- Thus Mr. Bellamy. P. 123, 171, 173, 163.

V.
What has been already asserted, and clearly proved, against all immediate
Impulses and Revelations in our Day might serve to confute your Pretenses to an
immediate Call to the Ministry. For if Men's Duty be not ordinarily revealed to
them by immediate Revelation, etc. in any Case, now, since the Scriptures were
completed; then certainly, it is not immediately revealed to Men, that they
should preach the Gospel. But since you greatly insist upon this immediate Call
to the Ministry, and a great Part of the Religion which prevails among you,
depending very much upon this Call, and since some others are ready to be
stumbled by their high Pretenses; I shall clearly state the true Notion of an
immediate Call; show what Evidence is Necessary to satisfy us, that Persons
have it, and thus prove that those who pretend to it among these Sects are
quite destitute of this Evidence, and answer their principal Objections, as
they come in my Way.

1. An immediate Divine Call to an Office is, God's revealing to a Person that
it is his Will to employ him in such an Office, or to perform such a Business,
commanding him in an immediate Way to undertake it. Thus Moses was immediately
called to bring the Children of Israel out of Egypt. Thus many of the Prophets,
as Samuel, Jeremiah, Jonah, Amos, for Instance, were called. Thus the Apostles
were called. Paul was a most remarkable Instance of this immediate Call.

Now in this Sense, you hold your Teachers are called. I suppose Barclay speaks
the true Sense of you all, when he says, That none can be made Officers in the
Church, but -- by inward Revelations of the Spirit, (not by outward Ordination)
from which none is to be excluded, if so called, whither married, or a
Tradesman, or a Servant -- And by the leading, moving, and drawing hereof,
ought every Christian Pastor to be led, and ordered in his Labor, and Work of
the Gospel, both as to the Place where, as to the Persons to whom, and as to
the Time wherein he is to minister. See his Anarch of Rout. p. 105. Apology p.
271.


This immediate, Divine Call is not a Person's Mind being enlightened by the
Spirit of God, in the true meaning of some Passages in Scripture; but is
entirely a new Revelation. Let a Man's Mind be ever so much enlightened in the
true Sense of the whole Scriptures, he can never see, nor infer from them, that
he is immediately called to be a Minister to preach, in this particular Place;
to such a People; such a Time; because there is no such Thing in the Bible,
that he, such a one by Name, is called to this Station. True Light will indeed
discover what is in Scripture, but does not help in the least to see those
Things which are not in it at all. If therefore any Man be called to the
Ministry in an immediate Way, this Call must be a quite new Revelation.

Examples serve greatly to illustrate Things. Let us then briefly consider the
Example of the Apostle Paul. When Christ immediately called this violent
Persecutor to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, this was as much a new
Revelation as any that ever was made. It could not be inferred from all that
God had revealed to his Church before. An Impression on his Mind of something,
that God had said to some of his ancient Prophets, as Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Amos, etc. would not do in this Case, be it ever so clear and strong; for this
plain Reason, Persecuting Saul was not the same Man. He was not Elijah, nor
Isaiah, nor Jeremiah, nor Amos, etc. but Saul of Tarsus. Therefore the Call
directed to them, could be no immediate Call to him.

Let us for once suppose, that such an Impression had been made on his Mind,
and he had looked on it as a Divine Call to the Ministry, he must also have
looked on it, as immediately directed to him; and then as to the Sense of the
Scripture-Words that were thus impressed, this would have been entirely new,
which would in Fact have rendered it to him, not an old, but wholly a new
Revelation. The Scripture reveals that Jehu, the Son of Jehoshaphat, was called
to be King over Israel; and that Jeremiah of Anachoth was called to be a
Prophet to the Jews. But how shall any Man at this Distance reasonably infer
from hence that he is immediately called to be a King, or a Gospel-Minister? A
new Revelation is as much needed to teach him this, as if the Scriptures had
not revealed one Word about Jehu and Jeremiah

2. I have clearly explained this the more largely, because I suppose, it will
in some Measure discover, what Sort of Evidence Men, who pretended to this
immediate Call, must produce to justify their great Pretensions. Every One, who
is acquainted with his Bible, may remember that Miracles wrought in a public
open Manner are the Seal of God, by which he attests the Truth of new
Revelations. This was the Evidence which he bore to the Truth of the
Old Testament. This was the Seal by which he testified the Truth of the New in
the Time of Christ and his Apostles. Now if we carefully view the Temper of
Mankind at present, it should seem, there is as much Need of Miracles to prove
the Truth of a Revelation, that should be made now, as there was in those
ancient Times. Is the World grown so much better? Are not Men as naturally
prone to Unbelief as ever? If they are, is there not Need of the same Sort of
Evidence to prove the Truth of New Revelations, which was formerly granted to
recommend them?

The Lord seems to have given us just Grounds to expect Miracles, from those
who profess to come with a new Revelation and an immediate Call, by his Conduct
toward Moses, when he gave him that immediate Commission to bring the Children
of Israel out of Egypt. Moses himself had sufficient Evidence that God called
him. But he was a Man of too good Sense, and too well acquainted with Mankind,
to think, that his telling others what he had seen and felt, would be
reasonable Evidence to them, that the Lord had given him that important
Commission. Therefore he humbly desired to be informed how he should surmount
this Difficulty; and the Lord assured him he would grant him the incontestable
Evidence of Miracles, to prove his immediate Divine Call. This remarkable
Passage is so very pertinent to my Purpose, that it would be Injustice to my
Argument not to transcribe it entire.

Moses answered Exodus iv. ^ -- 9.
and said, But behold, they will not believe me nor hearken unto my Voice, for
they will say, The Lord has not appeared unto thee. And the Lord said unto
him, What is that in thine Hand? And he said, A Rod. And he said, Cast it on
the Ground; and he cast it on the Ground, and it became a Serpent, and Moses
Fled from before it. And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine Hand, and
take it by the Tail. And he put forth his Hand and caught it, and it became a
Rod in his Hand. That they may believe that, the Lord God of their Fathers, the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has appeared unto thee.
And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine Hand into thy Bosom: And
he put his Hand into his Bosom, and when he took it out, behold his Hand was
leprous as Snow. And he said, Put thy Hand into thy Bosom; and he put his Hand
into his Bosom again, and plucked it out of his Bosom, and behold it was turned
again as his other Flesh. And it shall come to pass if they will not believe
thee, nor hearken to the Voice of the first Sign, that they will believe the
Voice of the latter Sign. And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe
also these two Signs, neither hearken unto thy Voice, that thou shall take the
Water of the River and pour (...) upon the dry Land, and the Water which thou
take out of the River, shall become Blood upon the dry Land.

Thus the Lord, having sent Moses with an immediate Commission to the Children
of Israel, gave him such Credentials, as were sufficient to prove in the
clearest Manner to all concerned that he had called him. It seems they would
have been guilty of unreasonable Hastiness and Inadvertency; if they had
received Moses on his own bare Affirmation. The Lord, who called him, assured
him, he would support him in discharging his Commission. Now is it not still
suitable to the Perfections of God, and does not the Nature of Things require,
that he should, in some such convincing Manner, maintain the Authority of all
those whom he calls immediately to any Office?

But least you should imagine, I strain Matters in my reasoning on this
Instance of the Old Testament, I shall now turn to the New. Permit me to assure
you it will give me great Satisfaction, if you will look with your own Eyes, and
laying, aside Prejudice, search the Scriptures daily, whether these Things,
which I assert, are so. I am fully persuaded you would soo^ find sundry
incontestable Proofs for my Opinion in the sacred Oracles.

Does not our Blessed Lord plainly teach us, we have a Right to insist on some
other Evidence of a Man's immediate Call than his own SAY SO, in the following
Passages. John v 31, 32 etc.
If I bear Witness of myself, my Witness is not true. That is, If I produce no
other Witness or Proof of my divine Mission, but my own Affirmation, this is
not to be admitted as true. It would not be sufficient Evidence for you to act
upon. You could not be blamed for rejecting me, if I gave you no other
Testimony than this. Hence, Christ appealed to the Testimony of John the
Baptist, who was known to be an eminent Prophet; and to the glorious Miracles
which he himself performed. The Works which the Father has given me to finish,
the same Works that I do, bear Witness of me, that the Father has sent me.

Agreeable to this, is that celebrated Passage of his solemn Discourse, which
he had with his Disciples immediately before he was betrayed. If I had not come
and spoken unto them they had not had Sin; but now they have no Cloak for their
Sin. John xv. 22, 24.
If I had not done among them the Works which none other Man did, they had not
had Sin; but now they have both seen, and hated, both me and my Father. If
Christ had not given sufficient Evidence, and wrought Miracles to prove his
divine Mission; it would have been no Sin to have rejected him. Since therefore
Christ has declared, it was necessary for him, who was the supreme Lord of all,
to give such Evidences; since he did not think fit to require any to
acknowledge and receive him, 'till he had fully proved that God had sent him;
this plainly teaches us we have a Right to demand due Evidence from those who
pretend to come in his Name, before we submit to their Ministrations. Such who
pretend to an immediate Call, and require us to receive them, without bringing
any Evidence but their own Affirmation, pretend to higher Authority, than
Christ himself ever did. But Christ has declared it was unreasonable for the
Servant to expect to be above his Lord.

1. Some who pretend to an immediate Divine Call to the Ministry, without
having any sufficient Evidence to prove it; I am sensible will object here,
that only true Christians are capable of judging of this Evidence. But this is
only a trifling Sophism, by which they deceive themselves, and impose on some
well meaning Persons; but does not at all remove the Asurdity.

The Ministers of Christ are sent to preach the Gospel to all Nations, to every
Creature, that is, to every Man without Exception; and consequently, to
unconverted Sinners, as well as to Saints. This may be further proved from
Sinner's being blamed, sharply reproved, yea threatened with severe
Punishments, for rejecting the Ministers of Christ. This plainly supposes that
God has given Mankind some Evidence, by examining which they may know who are
the Ministers of Christ, since it would be apparently unjust to punish Men for
disregarding them, if they cannot possibly know them? Therefore it must be
allowed, that Mankind, notwithstanding that moral Depravity which they derive
from our first Parents, can examine and judge whether Ministers have a divine
Call.

This is very plain from that pointed Address of our Blessed Savior to the
Jews, Luke xii. 54 -- 57.
When ye see a Clould rise out of the West, straitway ye say, there comes a
Shower, and so it is. And when ye see the South Wind blow, ye say, there will
be Heat, and it comes to pass. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the Face of the
Sky; but how is it, that ye, do not discern this Time? Yea, and why even of
yourselves judge ye not what is right?

Nothing can be plainer than that our Lord takes it for granted in these Words,
that the unbelieving Jews, though they were as deeply involved in original Sin
as others; and more obstinate and hardened in their own Sins than most, were
notwithstanding endowed with such Faculties as rendered them capable of judging
of the Evidences of his divine Mission, which he exhibited before them; as also
that the Evidences which he produced to support his Pretensions to an immediate
Call from God were such, as would actually have convinced any rational Person,
whether Saint or Sinner, who should heartily examine them. It was not merely
Want of Grace, but Want of Honesty and Candor in examining the Evidences which
Christ set before their Eyes, that greatly prev^d the Jews from being convinced
he was the true Messiah. This their Prejudice is a great Bar which has kept the
Jews in Ignorance of this important Truth so many Ages. Could the pr^ent Jews
be persuaded to lay aside their Prejudices which they have inherited from their
Fathers, and can^y examine the Evidences of Christianity; these Evidences and
Proofs are so clear and strong that they would extort their Ass^ to the Truth
of it, and that without the saving Work of the Spirit on their Hearts. Mr. now
D^. Ma^hew, some Years ago published a Number of Sermons (...) above ^ss^ge, in
which he endeav^ured to prove, That there is a (...) Difference betwixt Truth
and Falsehood, Right and Wrong -- and that M^ are (...) endowed with Faculties
proper for discerning these Di^s. M^ worthy Persons were dissatisfied with
(...) Sermons, supposing and under the Pretense of con^uring the Py^ho^s and
Scepticks he cong^ to ^represent, expose and ri^e those who are commonly called
C^.

The Reasons of their Suspicion I suppose were, that they thought, he could
notion upon its Sermons of much Importance in any other View. All our Series
(...) to ^form us there is a (...) Difference in Things, that Truth and
Falsehood are different ^deas. All Mankind take it for granted in their Conduct.
None (...) pretended to deny the natural Distinction between Truth and
Falsehood, but such as ^ounced common Sense, and Conscience; and should pro^n^
and vain B^lings, and Oppositions of Science falsely so (...), who are
acquainted, with their perverse Disputings have (...) Answers to them. And the
unlearned having never heard (...) ^h denied, are in to Danger of falling into
any M^ke here. Hence they conjectured his labored Discourses in Con^tation of
this E^ we^ d^g^d ^o ins^te that the Notions of the Calvinist, who are (...) us
in the Country, are as absurd as the Pyrrhonists. For it is reported, that w^
this Gentleman published these Sermons, he was known to be very much p^j^
against Calvinism.

2 They conserved, that he has given no Intimations on this Subject that M^n's
b^s are in any Measure impaired by the Fall of our first Parents, etc or to
(...) any Need of the Influences of the Holy Spirit in any Sense, though (...)
very ^r Opportunity to have inculcated both these Points.

3 The^ think the following ambiguous Passage seems to contain a
Misrepresentation and a S^, on the (...) received Doctrine of Original Sin. M^
(...) endowed with Faculties proper for distinguishing betwixt (...) and (...),
Right and Wrong And hence it follows, that the D^c^ a (...), Ignorance, and
Incapacity to judge of moral and religious Tru^s brought upon Mankind by the
Apostasy of our ^st Parents is (...). How much brighter and more (...) our
int^^ (...) were in (...), six (...) Y^ before we had any Existence, I leave
others to determine. It is sufficient for my Purpose to consider Mankind as
they are at present, without inquiring what they were before they had any
Being. See Mayhew's seven Sermons, P. 38.

If Dr. Mayhew be corrupt in his Principles of Religion, and has misapplied
Scripture to support his Errors, I am not to blame for that; nor is this any
sufficient Reason why I may not improve the same Passage of Scripture to
maintain the Truth. If he really meant to d^y the Doctrines of Man's Apostasy
and the Influences of the Spirit by this Text, it is certain, it cannot answer
his Purpose. His own Interpretation is That by what is right our Savior meant
what is true; for his Discourse in this Place turns upon examining, judging and
inferring one Thing from another. P. 5. Now there may be Truths in the Head,
which have but little Influence on the Heart and Practice. Were it true then,
as it is not, that Sinners in their present State could regenerate themselves,
and practice all sincere Holiness, and make themselves meet to be partakers of
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, without any supernatural Influences of
the Spirit: this Passage, which is granted to refer to right Opinions or true
Judgments and not to Practice, could not be adduced with any Propriety to prove
that Position.

The Doctor seems to have been sensible That Men are not much disposed to exert
their Faculties but to receive very implicitly the Opinions of their good
Fathers and good Mothers -- yea that no Notion is so absurd but some are absurd
enough to propagate and others to believe it; especially if it be such an one
as strikes at the Root of all Religion and every Thing wherein the Happiness of
Mankind consists. Now is not an Indisposition to love and seek after Truth, and
a Proneness to embrace the most absurd and pernicious Errors a very evil and
hateful Quality? Whence does such a Wrongness of Temper arise? He has granted
the Fact to be so, and he is as much obliged to account for the Phenomenon as
the Calvinists.

Though Men in their natural State can judge in some Measure of Truth and
Falsehood, Right and Wrong, and by examining the Evidences with which the
Scriptures are recommended must be convinced they are true, yet they are
represented in these sacred Writings to be in a State of Ignorance, Da^ness and
Blindness, while they remain unregenerate, when compared with sincere Saints,
who enjoy the saving Illuminations, and sanctifying Influences of the Holy
Spirit. The Path of the just is as the shining Light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect Day. The Way of the Wicked is as Darkness, they know not
at what they stumble. The Fool walks in Darkness. I am the Light of the
World, said our Lord to the Jews. He that follows me shall not walk in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. Christ plainly told the unbelieving
Jews, That though they acknowledged his Father to be their God, yet they had
not known him. And though they were endowed with such Faculties as rendered
them quite inexcusea^e in not judging what was right, yet the Apostle
represents them as having their Minds so blind, and such a Vail on their
Hearts, as could be removed only by the Spirit of the Lord. According to the
Apostle John. He that hates his Brother is in DARKNESS, and walks in
Darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that DARKNESS has blinded
his Eyes. The Gentiles being more wicked and debaugched, are frequently spoken
of as being more in Darkness than the Jews. And thus all Mankind both Jews and
Gentiles, while they remain unregenerate and in Unbelief are represented in the
Scriptures, as ignorant and blind, notwithstanding their being endowed with
Capacities to judge of Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong. But how came
Mankind to be thus ignorant and blind? It they are thus blind with Respect to a
living and saving Sense and Knowledge of divine Things, does not this plainly
prove, they have Need of the Illuminations of the Holy Spirit?

But it is currently reported that the Doctor is become more orthodox in these
Points. -- In his Sermons on striving to enter in at the strait Gate, he seems
to allow That Mankind are not to be considered in a State of Innocence at
present, but apostate, degenerate and guilty Creatures, justly obnoxious to the
Wrath of God -- That the very Foundation of the Gospel is laid in, and the
whole superstructure of it built upon the supposition that Mankind in general
are in such a State of Condemnation and Ruin. P. 11. And he seem^ likewise to
grant The Necessity of the Illuminations of the Holy Spirit -- for a new Heart,
and right Spirit. -- And lays it is generally if not universally agreed amongst
professed Christians, that Repentance unto Life, and evangelical Holiness are
not attainable without the gracious Operations of the Holy Spirit; and
consequently that without these divine Influences all the Endeavors of Sinners
to attain Holiness and so to eternal Life must be ineffectual. Which indeed
amounts to neither more nor less than what our Lord himself declares -- That
except a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. etc. Had he
discovered this sooner might not some of his Banter have been spared? But it is
agreeable to see how he grows wiser as he grows older.

The Opinion which he endeavors to establish in these two last Sermons,
perhaps in Brief is this, That though Mankind are now in a degenerate State,
yet God for the Sake of Christ has granted the Influences of his Spirit equally
to all who live under the Gospel; and that they having rational Faculties may
so strive for Grace and Salvation as actually to obtain the special Favor of
God, in Consequence of their suitable Improvement of these general Influences,
and their earnest Strivings, God having established a Connection between this
Bestowment of his special Grace and such sincere Endeavors of unregenerate
Sinners as the Doctor has discribed: And that unregenerate Sinners having these
general Aids, Awakenings of the Spirit, etc. not only may, but many of them
actually do thus strive; so that such as are actually converted and saved, do
in Fact become Partakers of this Grace and Salvation, in Consequence of their
having previously strove and improved the religious Advantages, which God
bestowed upon them in common with those who live under the Gospel, better than
others; and that all, who do not thus first strive for Salvation, and make this
better Improvement of their common Advantages, must necessarily fall of
Regeneration here and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter

As God has commanded Sinners as well as Saints to seek his Grace and Mercy,
and to wa^ upon him for all they need, there can be no reasonable Doubt but it
is their Du^y, and a Duty of great Importance to strive to enter in at the
strait Gate. But if I have ^ghtly stated the Doctor's Sentiments on this Head
they are liable to sundry Objections. Want of Room will only permit me to ask
the following Queries relative to his Scheme, so far as it supposes that
Sinners actually obtain regenerating Grace from God in Consequence o^ their own
earnest strivings, and that all others do in Fact fall short of this special
Favor.

Que. 1 Does this Scheme correspond with the Scripture Instances of Conve^i^n,
the Women of Samaria, Z^cheus, the penitent Thief, the Apostle Paul, the ^hree
thousand? etc.

Que. 2. How does this Scheme agree with such Scriptures as these, We ourselves
also were sometimes foolish, disobedience, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and
Pleasures, living in Malice and Envy, hateful and ha^ing one another. But after
that the Kindness and Love of God our Savi^ur toward Man appeared, not by Works
of Righte^usness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us.
Who has saved and called us with an holy Calling not according to our Works,
but according to h^s own Purpose and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the World began? Titus (...) And ^e o^ P^h. ii.


Que 3. Does not God represent Sinners in his Word as backward to the Duties of
Religion, as prone to resist his Spirit, and abuse his Grace, and strongly beat
to gratif^ their sinful Lusts? When the Invitation was given in ^he Parable did
they not all with one Consent begin to make Excuse?

Que. 4. I^ the Salvation of Sinners be ((...) Things considered) suspended on
their own serious Strivings, and faith at Improvement of their common
Advantages; how can any of them be saved, since they are so extrem^ly negligent
about performing this necessary Condi^?

Que. 5. Does not God represent himself as absolutely sovereign and free in the
bestowment of his Grace and Salvation? I will have Mercy on whom I will have
Mercy, and I will have Camp^ssion on whom I will have Compassion, so then it is
not of him that wills nor of him that (...), has of God that shows Mercy.
If Sinners, when the^ are invited in the Gospel, and urged by the Spirit, are
not willing to return to God through Jesus Christ, but are disposed to quench his
heavenly Motions how can they obtain saving Grace in Consequence of their own
Willing and ^ing, and ^ight Improvement of these common Influence of the
Spirit? Let H^p^hes^s be laid aside in Divinity as well as Philosophy and as
the Question of principal Im^ortance (...), How a Sinner becomes Partaker of
Grace and (...) Let the Truths and Facts which are recorded and explained in
the Scriptures de^ it.


The Devils are acquainted with the Proofs which confirm the Being of God and
the Truth of his Declarations concerning them in the Scriptures; they believe
and tremble without any saving Grace. The giddy and debauched Part of Mankind
are very indifferent about Religion, while they are revelling in Luxury and
Wontonness in this World. But the wicked rich Man is represented in the Parable
as being fully convinced of its infinite Importance, as ^on as he died and lift
up his Eyes in Hell, when he begged so piteously for one Drop of Water to cool
his scorched Tongue; yet I suppose no Body believes, he had any more saving
Grace or true Holiness in Hell, than he had while he lived in this World.

Was not Nicodemus a Stranger to Regeneration when he came to Jesus by Night?
yet even then he could say Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from
God; for no Man can do these Miracles that thou do, except God be with him.
Thus Christ gave Evidence that was sufficient in itself to convince Sinners as
well as Saints, if they had heartily attended to it. Christ bore this Evidence
not only to himself but also to his Apostles, yea to all whom he ever called in
an immediate Manner to preach his Gospel.

To say that only true Christians can judge of the immediate Call of Ministers
is to open the Doors to all Sorts of Impostors who honoring their Followers
with this high Character will avail themselves of this Pretense. When they are
opposed, they can easily say their Opposers are blind and unconverted and so
cannot judge of their Pretensions, whereas true Christians know and acknowledge
their Call. Now by true Christians they mean their own Followers and fond
Admirers. Thus they wrest themselves out of the Hands of indifferent, impartial
Judges, and appeal to those they know are strongly prejudiced in their Favor.
It would be strange indeed, if their own Admirers should not strongly witness
for them. This is a fine Way to be tried, when they themselves are both Judge
and Party. How can a Deceiver be detected on this Plan, which takes his bold
Say so for Proof? And allows him to bear Witness of himself, that God has
immediately called him, in direct Opposition both to Scripture and Reason?

In fine, God has been pleased to give sundry plain Intimations in his Word,
that he would raise up and qualify Men for the Ministry; and call them to it;
not in an extraordinary Manner as he did the Apostles, but in a common,
ordinary Way. Hence the Apostle Paul gave various Directions to Timothy and
Titus, and consequently to the Ministers of Christ in all Ages how to proceed
in putting Men into the Ministry. These Directions plainly prove, that God
determined to call Ministers to supply his Churches in the common, ordinary
Way. For there would be no Room to follow them, to examine and judge, approve
or reject Candidates for the Ministry, if God called them to it in an immediate
Manner. They who come into the Ministry according to these Directions have the
Call of God agreeable to the stated Rules of the Word.

Now since God has appointed a Method for the supply of his Churches, we may
argue from his Wisdom, that he will not recede from it unless on some very
extraordinary Occasion. When he does, he will undoubtedly give sufficient
Evidence, that he has altered the old and set up a new Plan. As therefore, such
Alterations have always been introduced by Miracles, we act safely in adhering
to the stated Rules delivered in the New Testament, in calling Men to the
Ministry, till those, who reject them, and plead for an immediate Call, work
Miracles to prove that God has repealed these Rules; and that their Pretensions
for an immediate Call, are not mere Fancies or immediate Delusions.

2. Barclay See his Apology; P. 296.
objects against this Argument, that John the Baptist wrought no Miracles. To
which it may be easily answered, that the Call of this eminent Person, before
he was born, was confirmed by very public and striking Miracles, as is evident
from the first Chapter of Luke's Gospel. Besides as John the Baptist was the
Son of Zacherias, who was a Priest; he had a common and ordinary Call to be a
Teacher to the People, according to the stated Customs of that Dispensation. So
that John the Baptist had both a common and extraordinary Call, which last was
confirmed by Miracles. As this Writer has pitched on no other particular
Instance of any Person, who was immediately called, and no Miracles wrought to
prove his Call was from God; it should seem he was exceedingly pinched by this
Argument. It Is greatly probable his not knowing how to answer it was the true
Reason, he studied so much Brevity here, when he is so very lengthy almost
every where else.

3. Some pretend to evade the Force of the foregoing Reasoning against their
immediate divine Call, by alleging, that Sinners are convinced, and converted,
and Saints edified by their Ministry, which is a great Miracle, and therefore
according to my Principles a sufficient Proof of their immediate Call.

Ans. It does not appear that such good Effects have ordinarily been produced
by their Attempts to preach, unless Evil-Speaking and Railing against the
standing Churches, and Zeal for Errors, and spiritual Pri^e, should be called
Conversion and Edification. -- To call Conviction, Conversion and Edification
Miracles, is a manifest Perversion of Words; and must proceed either from
Weakness or Wickedness in them who do so. Were these the Miracles which Moses
wrought to prove that God immediately sent him to bring the Children of Israel
out of Egypt? What Sort of Miracles did Christ and his Apostles work to prove
that God immediately sent them?

To appeal to the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of Saints, as a
Miracle to prove your immediate Call, is in Reality to appeal to your own
Party, whether you are in the right; since those Sinners, that are imagined to
be converted, and the Saints supposed to be edified, are all your own
Followers. It would be strange indeed if they would not bear Witness for their
Ring Leaders. This could be only an Evidence to those Sinners who were
convinced, and the Saints that were edified, who most certainly are but very
few. Whereas, when God sends any Minister, he sends him to all Sorts, to
Sinners as well as Saints, to the lukewarm and secure, the careless and
profane; and consequently the Evidence of his Divine Call is such, as they,
even they, can judge upon, at least in some Measure.

4. But does not the Apostle Paul appeal to the Success of his Ministry, as the
grand Proof of his immediate Call to the Apostleship, when he says, 1 Cor ix.
2, 3.
Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Are
not you my Work in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless
I am to you, for the Seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord.

Ans. It is certain that Paul wrought Miracles among the Corinthians, and that
he appeals to the Miracles he wrought among them, as the great Proof that God
had called him to be an Apostle. This is incontestably evident from his own
Words. 2 Cor. xii. 11, 12.
I ought to have been commended of you, for in Nothing am I behind the very
chiefest Apostles. (For) truly the Signs of an Apostle were wrought among you
in all Patience, in Signs and Wonders and mighty Deeds. So that, unless you
would suppose the Apostle Paul contradicted himself, you cannot imagine, that in
this Passage under Consideration, he appeased to their Conversion, as the only
Evidence of his immediate Call to the Ministry.

If you would closely examine the Passage, you might see that he first appeals
to his miraculous Call to prove he was an Apostle. Am I not an Apostle? -- Have
I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Thus he appeals to that gl^rious Vision,
which he had of Christ, when he was going to Damascus, which struck him blind,
and all who were with him speechless; at which Time he was immediately called
by a loud Voice from Heaven, as the grand Proof of his Apostleship. This is one
of the most striking and incontestable Miracles that ever was wrought. To this
therefore he appeals in the first Place. Have I not seen the Lord? And you see
from the above quoted Passage, 2 Cor. xii. 11, 12. that he appeals to the
Signs, Wonders, and mighty Deeds, the glorious Miracles he had wrought before
their own Eyes, as the grand Proof of his being an Apostle. So that their
Conversion could only be a secondary Proof of his Call to be an Apostle. It
should have been translated, For a Seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord,
not the Seal, as all who are acquainted with the Original, know it would
properly bear.

Paul was immediately called to be an Apostle, before he had ever preached the
Gospel at all. But to suppose he had converted any by Preaching, before he had
preached, is to suppose a manifest Contradiction. So that the Success which the
Lord gave to his Ministry could not be the Evidence or Proof that he called him
to this Office. The Success of his Ministry was not the Proof of his immediate
Call, but it was a Proof and Evidence, that the Lord owned him in this Office.
All therefore, that can be inferred from this Text is, that the Success of a
Minister, who has first given sufficient Proof, that God has immediately called
him, is an Evidence that God blesses the Truths which he delivers. This in
Conjunction with other valid Proofs may corroborate the Evidence, and be a Seal
to his Ministry; but is by no Means to be looked on as a sufficient Evidence of
itself. Indeed it is no Evidence at all of an immediate Call to the Ministry;
otherwise some who preached Christ merely out of Envy, (...) ^dd Affliction to
the Apostle's Bonds were immediately called. For says the Apostle, (...) 15 --
^^
Notwithstanding every Way, whether in Pretense or in Truth Christ is preached;
and therein I do rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. But do you think the Apostle
would have rejoiced in the Preaching of those his Enemies, unless he had good
Evidence to conclude the Lord overruled, and blessed it for the saving good of
some. I could indeed wish (says Dr Doddridge in his Paraphrase on this Passage)
that all engaged in so honorable a Work, were pursuing it from the most worthy
and generous Motives; yet every Way, whether it be only in Pretense of pious
Zeal or in the Truth of it, Christ is however preached, and the great Doctrine
of Salvation by him has Something of a wider Spread. And in this I heartily
rejoice, yea and I will rejoice: For I had much rather that some who are
converted to Christianity by my Enemies, should think as ill of me as they
themselves, do, than that they should remain ignorant of those fundamental
Truths on the Knowledge of which their eternal Happiness depends. Nor do I much
regard the Opposition which may arise against me from the ill-designing
Teachers and their misguided Followers. --

If the holding forth of your Teachers had any Tendency to spread the Gospel,
where it was not already preached; if their Zeal would lead them among the
Indian Tribes to instruct them; I should heartily rejoice with the Apostle. But
since the evident and direct Tendency of their Teaching is to draw People from
attending where the Gospel is abundantly better preached, than they with any
Reason can pretend; to fill their Minds with Prejudices, and lead them into
dangerous Errors; I must be excused from countenancing them in their Conduct.
However if in any Instance God has been pleased to overrule and bless any of
their Exhortations, for real good to any, which has I believe very rarely
happened in this Country, I sincerely rejoice in this, and give Glory to God,
who sometimes accompanies by his Power Means that are the most unsuitable in
themselves. Person's falling into grievous Sins has sometimes been made an
Occasion of their Conversion. But woe to them that would sin that G^ may abound.

To (...), this (...) of Scripture instead of favoring your Cause might be
improved against you. For the standing Ministers are regularly called, and set
apart according to divine Appointment, to the Work of the Ministry, and
therefore have the ordinary Call of God agreeable to the stated Rules of his
Word. God has been pleased to own them in their Office, making them Instruments
of converting Sinners, and edifying Saints. You must acknowledge this, since
many of you have declared that you were converted in the standing Churches
before you separated.

Upon your own Principles then, we can say to sundry of you, Are not you our
Work in the Lord? If we be not Apostles to others, yet doubtless we are to you:
For a Seal of our Ministry are ye in the Lord. And to this Day, blessed be God,
there are some hopeful Instances of Conversion among us, in which we are
improved as the Instruments. So that Christ has not forsaken us. He blessess
the Word preached in the standing Churches both to Saints and Sinners,
notwithstanding all the Pains you have taken to prejudice Men's Minds against
our Persons and Ministry. Now if the Ministers in the standing Churches were,
as you confess, once true Ministers of Christ, and owned by him as such, are we
not so still? Especially since we still maintain the same Religion both in
Principle and Practice as formerly? Since it is certain from Christ's Promise,
and the sensible Effects of his Presence and Spirit in sundry Instances, that
he has not forsaken the standing Churches how dare you? Speak out plain i^ you
think that Christ's Ministers have fallen from Grace. But if you pretend to an
immediate Call, then work Miracles to prove that your Call is from God, and not
from the Devil. You are obliged to work Miracles to support your extraordinary
Pretensions or else give them up. Consider this at your Leisure, and remember
that a thousand Assertions, conceived in the strongest Terms and expressed with
the greatest Zeal don't amount to one good Proof. You may depend upon it that
solid Proof and not confident Assertions will be expected. If God has really
given your Teachers an immediate Call he will doubtless work Miracles to prove
it, since their Credit with all judicious People necessarily requires this
incontestible Evidence, and God is still the same, and therefore as able to
give this Evidence now as in former Ages.

5. But does not the Apostle say no Man takes to himself this Honor, but he
that is called of God as was Aaron. Heb. v. 1 -- 4.


Ans. This I suppose is one of the many Scriptures which you quote for the Sake
of the Sound, since in its true Sense it is evidently Nothing to your Purpose,
as will presently appear.

The Apostle is here discoursing of the High Priesthood among the Jews, which
Office he says, as they knew from the Law of Moses, no Man had a Right to but
he that was called of God, as Aaron and his Posterity were. Now what can this
Passage which has no Reference at all to the Gospel Ministry prove about it?
But if I should, for Argument's Sake, grant that this Text referred to the
Gospel Ministry, what would you infer from it? That Gospel Ministers should be
called under the New Testament as the high Priests were under the Old? Then it
would follow that Ministers should not be immediately called themselves, but by
some other. For Aaron was called by Moses according as the Lord commanded him.
Then also none should presume to officiate as Ministers of the Gospel, but
Minister's Sons. For none might be Highpriests under the Law, but the Sons and
lineal Descendants of Aaron.

Once more, when God called any Persons in an immediate Way, he gave them
Qualifications with his Call, so that they were well fitted for the Ministry.
Thus the Prophets of Old. Thus also St. Paul and the Apostles. Hence, it may be
presumed, that if you were really called of God, you would be eminently fitted
to preach the Gospel. But this is not the Case with you.

Here I dare appeal to sundry who have occasionally attended your Meetings. Let
me ask such, are not the Discourses of these Exhorters very mean and
despicable; without Sense as well as Connection? Is not the Vehemence of the
Speakers almost the only Thing that recommends their Exhortations? How unlike
are their Exhortations to the solid, weighty Discourses of the Prophets and
Apostles, though they pretend to the same immediate Divine Commission, and the
same extraordinary Assistance? What plainer Proof can there be of the Vanity of
their Pretensions? -- I wish some ready Writer would take down one of their
Exhortations or Preachments as they deliver it, and publish it to the World,
that their Admirers might see what it is they are carried away with, and that
they themselves might learn a little more Modesty, and forbear meddling with
Matters that are too high for them. -- The Gospel is not mere vehement Noise
and Bawling.

It is in vain for these Teachers to plead the Example of the Apostles, for
their own Ignorance and Want of Learning. The Apostles were some considerable
Time under the Instructions of Jesus Christ. They understood the Gospel to
great exactness, and had a thorough Acquaintance with the Scriptures. They
spoke with Propriety on every Subject they had Occasion to handle. Whether
their Abilities were natural, acquired, or communicated in an extraordinary
Manner; certain it is, they wrote with so much Correctness and good Sense, as
but few learned Men can equal.

Our Translation calling them ignorant Men. Acts iv. 13. is very unhappy, since
the original Words lit-rally signify only this, that they were not S^ctors, nor
in any public Rank of Life, as the Priests and Magistrates were: But they
import no Want of natural good Sense, or any Ignorance of what was then the
Subject of Debate. Though they did not seek after rhetorical Embellishments,
stowery or fertile Ornaments; yet they delivered themselves with Sublimity of
Thought, and a striking Simplicity of Style, which is the truest Eloquence.

What shall I say of your Women, who are so forward to speak, b^r Witness,
exhort and hold forth, in your public Assemblies? I would be far from saying
of Women in general as the Celebrated Mr. Pope does.

"Every Woman would be a Queen for Life." For I have the Happiness to be
acquainted with sundry virtuous Women, who look upon Humility and Modesty as
most excellent Ornaments, and who discover by their amiable Conduct, they feel
their meek and gentle Influence. But I may say without giving any Offense to
such modest and virtuous Ladies.

"The Female Preachers would be Queens for Life." Since it is well know, that,
even those Women who are most devoted to reading, rarely get a better
Acquaintance with Books or Things, than an understanding Grammar Schoolboy;
what should tempt those, who perhaps are very I ^ry Readers, and worse
Spellers, to lay aside that Modesty which is so great an Ornament to their Sex,
and contrary to Nature and Decency hold forth in a public pr^miscuous
Assembly; unless intolerable Va^y, P^e, or De^sion? I cannot help thinking of
the impe^ J^e, who called herself a Prophetess, and was a public Speaker. But
however fond your Women may be of their usurped Authority, I presume it may be
disputed, and the Foundation, upon which it is built, examined.

And now Ladies, to address you with Complaisance; you would probably plead,
that by long Acquintance with your Husbands, you discovered their Weakness, and
your own Superiority; and thus found yourselves well qualified to instruct and
govern them, and therefore you assume no more than is due to your superior
Merit.

Ans. If this be really true I pity your Families. But it is not fair you
should be Judges in your own Case. There may be Reasons to suspect you were
biased in your own Favor, when you made your Discoveries. It is but
reasonable to submit this Matter to impartial Judges. -- But not to debate this
Point much with you; If what you allege were really so, it would not follow,
that you are qualified to instruct and govern Men, in general; since it is very
likely, there are many Men much wiser than your Husbands. Now when you speak
and teach in public, you thereby usurp or use Authority over all the Men, that
happen to hear you. If there happen to be any Man hearing you, wiser than you
are, which would be no wonderful Thing neither, then besure you are out of your
Sphere, and are acting contrary to the Fitnesses of Things, as Philosophers
speak, as well as to Scripture. It is no Doubt a Sight to behold a Number of
Men sitting very gravery in ^am^ Subjection to a Woman, and attending with all
Obedience to her Dictates! It Is difficult to say whether their abject
Submission, or her imperious Impudence is most surprising.

Perhaps you would further plead, that the Flippancy of your Tongues qualifies,
and points you out for public Speakers.

But you should remember that Solidity of Judgment is as necessary for a
public Instructor, as Nimbleness of Tongue. Now if you are acquainted with the
History of your own Sex, you cannot but know, they have not been so much
celebrated for Depth of Though, as for a ready Utterance^ It Is possible there
may be many Words delivered by a public Speaker, and but little Instruction
communicated. Nothing that can greatly edify the Hearers.

I have indeed read, that by a strange Concurrence of Circumstances, the famous
Madam JOAN was promoted to be the first Clergyman in Europe. But it is said
that her Pregnancy in her exalted Station, and her being seized with Travail,
while she was attending a certain grand Parade, was contrary to the fundamental
Laws of the Popedom, and astonished her Attendants. The Papists themselves, as
much as they are devoted to the Pope, don't pretend that her Holiness Pope Joan
added any new Honors to the Popedom. -- Now the same Inconveniences, which
befell Pope Joan, might possibly befall other She-Bishops, and She Preachers.

But old Women are not liable to such Conditions.

This is indeed very true. But then they are in Danger of growing
superannuated. The Apostle has given a Direction to disregard old Women's
Fables, which intimates they don't always increase in Wisdom by Age. The Stream
of Prejudice against the Capacities of old Women, since the Time of the
Apostle, has been so great and general in the World, that most Men, I believe,
if they were to choose, had rather have one young Woman than three old ones. I
am fully persuaded, that unle^s an old Woman works Miracles to prove her Call
to be a public Speaker, she will never be able to support her Character in
this exalted Station.

If any should think these female Speakers and She Bishops are rather
influenced by Satan, than merely by Pride and Ambition; I would rather
accommodate this Difference in Opinion, than enter into any warm Dispute about
it. For Satan may tempt them, by applying to their natural Pride and Lust for
Power and Dominion. How far they are under the immediate powerful Influence of
an evil Spirit in every Instance, as it is not necessary, so perhaps would not
be easy to determine. But the most favorable Construction that can be put upon
their Conduct, is that it proceeds in a great Measure from misguided Zeal.

It were easy to offer sundry other Considerations against Women's speaking
publicly in any religious Assembly, accounted a Church. But God has so plainly
and expressly forbidden them in his Word, that all, who have any due Regard to
the Scriptures in this Particular, must be restrained from this strange
Practice, by seriously and heartily considering the following Passages. 1 Cor.
xiv 34 -- 38. 1 Timothy ii. 9 -- 15.


Let the Women keep Silence with all Subjection: But I suffer not a Woman to
teach nor to usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in Silence; For Adam was
first formed, then Eve; And Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived
was in the Transgression. -- Let your Women keep Silence in the Churches, For
it is not permitted to them to speak, but they are commanded to be under
Subjection, as also faith the Law. And if they will learn any Thing, let them
ask their Husbands at Home. -- For it is a Shame for Women to speak in the
Church. -- What! Came the Word out from you, or came it unto you only? If any
Man think himself to be a Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge that the
Things which I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord: But if any Man
be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

Thus Women are expressly commanded to keep Silence in all Churches while they
are assembled for religious Worship. So that public praying as well as
exhorting and preaching are forbidden here.

But does not the Apostle Paul write thus in another Epistle, I entreat thee
also true Yoke Fellow, help those Women which labored with me in the Gospel
Philip. iv 3.


Ans. It does not appear from these Words that Women either preached, exhorted,
or prayed publicly. For there were other Labors in the Gospel, in which they
might be employed. We may learn from the Apostle himself, what Labors Women
performed for the Service of the Church and Gospel, according to the Customs of
that Time. 1 Timothy v. 9* 10.
-- Let not a Widow be taken into the Number under threescore Years old, having
been the Wife of one Man; well reported of for good Works; if she have brought
up Children, if she have lodged Strangers, if she have washed the Saints Feet,
if she have relieved the Afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good
Work. Here the Apostle had an Occasion to enumerate the various Services and
Labors of Women. It was thus they labored in the Gospel, if we will grant the
Apostle that common Piece of Justice, to be his own Interpreter. Peruse this
Passage leisurely. Does he mention Women's public Praying or Exhorting in this
minute Enumeration of their Labors and Services in the Gospel?

This Interpretation, which I have given, fairly reconciles these several
Passages of the Apos^'s Writings. But according to you he statly contradicts
himself, which, if you could make out, instead of confirming, your Practice
would destroy the Authority of the Apostle, since Contradictions could never
proceed from divine Inspiration.

Let none of your Adherents excuse themselves here, and try to wave the Matter
of your Women's speaking in your pretended Churches, by professing not to
understand this particular Part of your Conduct. For it is as plainly contrary
to the Scriptures for Women to speak or carry on in any Assembly met for
religious Worship, as any Thing can possibly be. You cannot but see this, unless
you wilfully shut your Eyes, or are judicially blinded. When Hannah prayed she
spoke in her Heart, only her Lips moved, but her Voice was not heard.

You should not venture to disregard any of the Commands of the great God. Our
blessed Lord bears this Testimony, Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth
pass, one Jot or one Title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. But
can we think the Command which enjoins Women to be Silent in the Church is of
small Importance, when it is so often repeated, and seriously inculcated? I
must therefore entreat all your Followers in the Fear of God to be honest, and
not pretend after this to be at any Loss about a Practice which is expressly
forbidden in the Scripture in the strongest Terms. If you will follow such
Speakers and Teachers, directly contrary to God's express Prohibition, is it
not to be feared he will at Length be provoked to execute that Judgment upon
you, which is spoken of by the Prophet, Children shall be your Opp^sions, and
Women rule over you; O my People they which ^ad thee, cause thee to err and
destroy the Way of thy ^a^hs. Isai. iii.xii.


As to the Women Speake's themselves, I wish them sincere Repentance for that
breaking God's express Commands, that they may obta^ (...) this and all their
other Sins, be clothed with Hum^ty, and from henceforth behave in all Things
as becomes the Gospel.

VI.
To illustrate and confirm sundry Things which have been said, I shall now
subjoin a brief Account of some of the more remarkable Instances of Satan's
deceiving and imposing upon Mankind.

The first, and indeed the most remarkable Instance of Satan's Power and
Subtilty, in managing his Temptations, was that of his deceiving Eye in the
Shape of the Serpent. Now the Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the
Field which the Lord God had made; and he said unto the Woman, yea, has God
said ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? And the Woman said unto the
Serpent, We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees of the Garden; but of the Tree
which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the Serpent said unto the Woman, ye
shall not surely die. For God does know, that in the Day ye eat thereof then
your Eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. etc.
Was not the Power of Satan in managing this, Temptation very great, when he put
Words into the Mouth of the Serpent or Snake, a Creature that is by Nature
dumb, and thus begun and carried on a Conversation with the Woman? It is worthy
to be remarked that he managed this first Temptation by bringing a new
Revelation, different from, and contrary to that which God himself had
expressly revealed. But it was a Revelation that promised them great Things. Ye
shall not surely die -- Ye shall be as Gods. And Satan to this Day, when he
tempts Men to Sin often and ^avours to persuade them that they shall not surely
die; but are in a very safe State, in the direct Way to eternal Life

We have another notable Instance of Satan's Power, and Malice when he was
permitted to afflict Job. How ^n did he send the Sabeans and Chaldeans to seize
upon his Oxen, Asses, and Cames, and slay his Servants? He sent Fire and burnt
up his Sheep; and raised a terrible Hurricane, and tore d^n the (...) where his
Children were, and smote Job himself with sore Boils from the Sole of his Foot
unto his Crown. If this powerful and malicious Adversary had but Permission, he
would soon turn this World into a hideous Wilderness.

What surprising Wonders did he enable Pharaoh's Magicians or Co^ers to
perform, though they were at last shamefully buff^d with all their Enchantments,
by the g^ous Miracles which the Lord wrought by his Servant Moses.

"But Satan can not only work very wonderful Things before Men i^ an external
Manner, but he can also work internally on their Minds. He thought it not
enough to tempt Judas, by the Object of Gain, but he broke his Mind in direct
Terms and put it into his Heart. John xiii. 2 He did the like to Ana^s whose
Heart he filled with a large Motion for that Li^, and backed it with many
Considerations of the Necessity and Expediency of it -- When we consider that
Thoughts are sometimes, cast upon the Minds of Men, which are above their
Knowledge; and that they say and do Things sometimes, which are far beyond any
of their Accomplishments and Parts, and yet in the Nature of them wicked; we
must be forced to run so high as to charge it upon Satan. Readiness Prophesying 1 Samuel xviii. 10. was by the Influence of the evil Spirit; and this must of
Necessity be understood of such a Kind of Action and Speaking, as the true
Prophets of the Lord usually expressed under the Influence of the blessed
Spirit; for from the Likeness of the Action in both, must the Name be borrowed.
The Experience that we have of inward Disputings, the bandying of Arguments in
several Cases, is a Proof of this beyond Exception: Wounded Consciences express
an admirable Dexterity in breaking all Arguments urged for their Peace and
Establishment; as ^o in framing Objections against themselves, so (...) above
the ^ual Measure of common Capacities that we cannot ascribe it to any other
than Satan's* (...) did this Way." Gilpin on Satan's Temptation. P 75. and 330.
Which is a very solid jud^c^u^ Treatise well worth the ^e^io^ Perusal (...) all
who would be fortified ag^ the Wiles of the Devil.


Baal's Prophets, though they could not work Miracles to support the Credit of
their Idol, when it was publicly called in Question, and brought to this Test,
yet are ^d to have prophesied, until the Time of the offering of the evening
Sacrifice, that is they were exercised with Frensies and rapturous Furies, in
which they uttered strange Sounds and Speeches. By whose Aid were they enabled
to do this?

Very remarkable is what we read about Ahab's Prophets. And there came forth a
Spirit and stood before the Lord and said I will persuade him. And the Lord
said Wherewith? And he said I will go forth and I will be a lying Spirit in the
Mouth of all his Prophets. And he said thou shall persuade him. 1 Kings xxii.
19, -- 23.
Satan was ready for the Work; he wanted Nothing but a Permission. He deceived
the same Prophets, and by them deluded Ahab, by being a lying Spirit in the
Mouth of the Prophets. On which Peter Mar^yr observes, That Satan had a Power
to fix so strongly on their imaginary Faculty, the Species, Images, or
Characters, of what was to be suggested, that he could not only make them
apprehend, what he presented to their Minds; but also make them believe, that
it was a Divine Inspiration, and consequently true. For th^se false Prophets
did not speak hypocritically what they knew to be false, but what they
confidently apprehended to be true; as appears by the whole Story -- He
irritated and i^ (...) to publish these their persuasions to the King (...) ^e
Manner of Divine Prophecies. -- He persuaded Ahab that his Prophets spoke Truth.

There are many Instances in the Gospel-History of Persons being really
possessed with the Devil, and violently agitated by him. For it is grossly
absurd, to explain what is said of these Persons, and the casting Devils out of
them, to Lunacy, etc. It is a very remarkable Account which the sacred
Historians give of sundry of these, and particularly in Acts. xvi. As we went
to Prayer a certain Damsel, possessed with a Spirit of Divination, met us,
which brought her Masters much G^ by Sooth saying: The same followed Paul and
us, and ^ed, saying, these Men are the Servants or the most high God, which
show unto us the Way^ Salvation. And this did she many Lays. But P^ I being
grieved, turned and said to the Spirit, I command thee in the Name of Jesus
Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same Hour Satan doubtless
testified this important Truth by this Damsel, with a View to lead the People
to imagine the Preachers of the Gospel acted in Confederacy with that Spirit;
and thus by some Means or other to discredit true Christianity: So that it
seems he can, when it suits his Design, earnestly exhort Men to regard the
Gospel.

The Apostles frequently mention false T^ and false Prophets. Peter and J^e d^
(...) large in their Epistles. P^ul plainly (...) and Influence, which those
fal^e T^ (...) Christian Churches, was owing to the (...) I fear, says he, left
by any M^s, as the (...) his Subtilty, so your M^s she be (...) ^e Simplicity
that is in Christ. -- O^h G^ (...) bewitch^ you that you should (...) whose
Eyes Jesus Christ has he (...) crucified among you? viz. (...).

Simon M^s, who ha^ (...) of Sama^ with his Sorceries, to whom (...) to the
greatest, saying this M^ (...) God. ^s one of the most eminent of (...).
Notwithstanding Peter's solemn R^ to (...) w^ in his Wickedness. He is sa^ to
(...) Character of a Divine ^erson, and by his m^ (...) p^suaded his Fellowers
to think he was (...).

Before the Death (...) the (...) C^us, a Disciple of Simon Magus, a ^ty ^der
to ^tion. He taught that Ca^ w^ (...) a temporal Kingdom on Earth, and that Men
would spend a (...) in Mirth and Jo^ty with him in this World.

In the next Age, the second ^t my, arose M^us, who had no s^er emb^d the
Christian Faith, For his great A^steritius of Life, made him to b^t (...), and
to be had in Esteem among many of the most zealous (but indiscreet) Christi^.
His great Zea^d him to set up for a great Reformer in the Church; but wanting
Solidity of Judgment and Coolness of Thought, he was apt to be driven by every
Impulse that seized him. This gave Satan an Opportunity to le^ him a^ h^ ^ed.
This evil Spirit sometimes would suddenly ^iz. him and agitate him as it he had
been distracted, (...) it is said, as he had not the Use of his Reason, (...)
over his own Members and Organs. He (...) His many new and strange Resolutions.
He (...), especially among the weaker Sex, sundry (...) with the s^m^ Spirit,
and were agitated in (...) Manner, and were ^o^ted upon by their deluded Fol^
(...) famous Propheresies. But their Prophecies were (...) and ridiculous, and
were not fulfilled. T^ (...) very numerous, full of Zeal; and gave great Dis^
(...) the Church for a considerable Time; but at length (...). -- As for
Montan^s he hanged himself.

(...) ^e Year of our Lord 600, appeared that grand I (...) Mahomet, whom Satan
employed, as his Instrument, (...) about one of the greatest Revolutions
religious a^ (...) as political that ever happened in the World. He made Use,
it is true, of Force and Arms to propagate his ^on; but it is evident that the
Accomplishment of his (...) was as much owing to the Influence of Enthusiasm,
as the Power of the Sword. It is plain from the best Accounts of Mahomet, (...)
he was a great Visionary; that he set up to be a Reformer of Abuses and
Corruptions; that he gave himself out to be no more than a Reviver of the most
ancient Religion, whereby the Patriarchs walked with; and had the familiar
Communion of God and his Angels. This took wonderfully with vast Multitudes of
all Sorts, who were presently bewitched with that strange Power, and Authority
which app^ (...) him, especially when they beheld him agitated so violently,
t^a^ ^en appeared to lie as one dead; which was (...) to the Majesty of the
Divine Presence overpowe^ his ^re, or at least to the Luster of some great
Angel con^sing (...) him. He was suspected of Im^, even (...) the B^g; but
there never, was any (...) that (...) greater Protestations of his Sincerity,
or more solemn Appeals to God to justify the Truth either for or against him.
There were a World of Miracles reported of him, for the Confirmation of his
Doctrine and Mission; but he himself never seems to have insisted much upon
them, but always to have appealed to the Inspirations themselves, challenging
not only the Heathens, but the Jews and Christians to produce any that were
comparable with these. Accordingly the Alcoran, which co^ns a Collection of
these, has ever since to this Day been ^ly esteemed among the Mahometans, as
the Miracle of Miracles. He acknowleged he was a simple Man without L^rs, and
of no Capacity to understand a great Deal, (...) his own Revelations; and no
more than only a weak ^ment, taken up of God for the manifesting his Power and
Glory to the World.

The learned Dr. Casaubon supposes that Persons subject to the Epilepsie or
falling Sickness, as Mahomet was, are naturally liable to see Visions and
Apparitions, which Phrensies of the Brain, they are apt to take for Realities.
He mentions it, as a Matter disputable, whether Mahomet himself might not be
under a Delusion, really thinking he converted with Angels, and received
Revelations, at his first setting out, before he had gone far, in that which
must be looked ^n as gross Imposture. He remarks very pertinently. When we
consider with our selves, what these Things which began with Epileptical
Raptures, and Ecstasies, and supposed Revelations of Angels, and the like, came
to afterward; it should make Men the more wary, either how they give Cr^it to
such Fits and Revelations of others, or how themselves by their Ignorance and
Indiscretions expose themselves to Delusion. To which I will add, if Men had
steadfastly a^hered to the written Word of God; it is not likely they would have
been left to embrace the Delusions of Mahomet.

The first eminent Reformers from Popery paid a most inviolable Regard to the
written Word of God. The Scripture in the Opinion of Luther, that eminent
Servant of Christ, was so full, that as for Visions and Revelations he neither
desired nor regarded them. And when Christ seemed to appear to him after a Day
of Fasting and Prayer, he immediately suspected the Imposture and cried out.
Avoid Satan I know no Image of Christ but the Scripture. And when he was urged
by the Council at W^^s to submit his Doctrines to the Decrees of Councils, he
boldly replied." My Conscience is so bound up in these Scriptures of Truth,
that I cannot alter, unless convinced by Arguments drawn from them. And the
famous Calvin was fully agreed with him in this grand Principle of the
Reformation. Though he was the Wonder of the Age in which he lived for his great
Genius and Learning, yet he never pretended to enforce his Doctrines by his own
Authority; he derived them from the written Word, which he understood the best
of any Man in his Time, as his excellent Commentaries upon it discover.

But the Reformation had but just begun to spread and prevail in any
considerable Degree when there sprung up sundry V^ss^^naries, who pretended to
wonderful Revelations, and were always speaking in a strange high flown
Language, which could not be understood by other serious Christians. For
indeed, like the Language, which Enthusiasts generally affect, it was a Dialect
consisting of swelling Words of Vanity without any determinate Meaning.

Among these Enthusiastic Sects the Anabaptists were very famous At first they
forbad the baptizing of Infants, and rebaptizing themselves; afterward they
brought in a Puddle of all the Heresies that ever were. At first Twinglius
dealt with them familiarly -- till they began to do Nothing but lie and gather
together Disciples; to separate from the Church and set up a new Church; then
he was constrained to resist them with all his Might, and had public
Disputations with them, in which being convicted of Errors they foamed against
their Antagonist with Blasphemies and Reproaches. At last the Senate was sain
to deal with them, with Banishments, N. B As the Christian World had practiced
Infant Baptism from the Apostle's Times, this new Sect was called Anabaptists
or Rebaptist from their baptizing over (...) who had been baptized in their
Infancy; and they are now more shortly called Baptists a Name which I perceive
some of them greatly affect, looking upon themselves as the only Persons who
are truly baptized, and of Consequence the only Members of the Church of Christ
in this World, a most absurd and uncharitable Notion. Hence in order to be a
Baptist, a Person must be ^zed by plunging after he comes to Years of
Discretion. This is an essential Qualification of a Baptist. Such as attend on
their Meetings without being dipped may be Enthusiasts, they may be Separates,
they may be dissatisfied and prejudiced Persons, but Anabaptists or Baptists
they cannot be, 'till they are plunged.
Prison and Dea^n; Not now as against Anabaptists, but as against Men perjured
and seditious. The Head of ^m was Balthazar Hubmer, who was an (...) again, who
being delivered by the Benefit of w^ (...) loaded him with Lies and Reproaches.
(...) Life of Twinglius, and Baxter's Scripture (...) 140.

We have, says Calvin, been endea^ (...) Time, by our daily Labors to restore
(...) G^, for which we bear the Opposition (...). But how much have these Men
[t^ (...) promoted it? Or what Help have they afforded (...). Nay they have
rather vehemently troubled and hundred us. Luther roundly declared that it
appeared evident to him that Popery, and the great Power of the Pope, that
Antichrist would in all Probability have been entirely ruined and destroyed, if
it had not been for the Anabaptists, who weakened the Hands of the Reformers
and hardened the Papists.

MUNCER was a great Pretender to Revelations, some of which were printed. He
affirmed that the Preachers of that Time were not sent of God, but were
impertinent Interpreters of the Scriptures; that the Word was to be learned by
the Spirit intrinsically, and not out of the Bible; that the Empires of the
World were to be exterpated, and the Kingdom of Christ restored, etc. etc.
These wonderful Revelations induced many to follow him, so that at length he
had eleven thousand armed. Men wholly at his Beck, to whom he promised in his
Revelations sure Victory over their Enemies. But the Event proved him to be a
false Prophet.

But his Ruin did not open the Eyes of his deluded Followers, See Description
of Holland, P. 326 And the History of the Reformation, etc.
Some of them took Possession of the City of Munster, the Capital of
Westphalia, where he proposed to begin Christ's Kingdom. They ran about the
Streets crying, repent and be baptized; or the Wrath of God will speedily
overwhelm you. The Bishop of Munster besieged the Place with a powerful Army.
Matthews a celebrated Prophet among them declared, that God the Father had
commanded him to drive off the Besiegers. But though he himself was slain in
their Sight; yet so infatuated were they, as to hearken to JOHN of Leyden, a
Tailor, and others who pretend it was revealed to them, that this JOHN should
have the Empire of the whole Earth, and possess the Throne of his Father David.
After this they made him their King. He wore a Crown of Gold on his Head, and
his Titles were the King of Justice, the King of the new Jerusalem. When this
great Monarch went abroad he had always two Harbengers before him, of whom one
carried a Sword, and the other a Bible. All who did not fall down and worship
him were sentenced to die, and immediately executed. He caused one of his
Concubines to be put to Death for despising his pretended Inspirations. He
spirited up the Citizens to make a most resolute Defense, assuring them all the
while of a miraculous Deliverance. And so strong was the Infatuation, that though
Multitudes of them were daily destroyed, they held out till they had suffered
almost as much as the Jews did, when Jerusalem was taken by Vespasian. The town
was taken at last, and the mock King with his two principal Associates were
sent in Derision about the Country. He was afterward put to Death by having
his Flesh torn off with red hot Pincers. Some who survived the Siege were still
so confident in their Revelations, as to expect they should have all the World
at their Command in a very little Time. -- These were strong Delusions! such
were the Fathers of the Baptists. Likely Persons to understand the Scriptures!

That was a very remarkable Impulse, which Lord HERBERT of Cherbury, the first
noted Deistical Writer, was led by to publish his Book against the Christian
Religion, as revealed in the Scriptures. See Dr. Leland's View of Deistical
Writers, Let. 2.
As the Frame of his whole Book was so different from what had ever been
written on the Subject, and he apprehended he should meet with much Opposition,
he did consider, whether it were not better for him for a while to suppress it.

Being thus, says his Lordship, doubtful in my Chamber, one fair Day in the
Summer, my Casement being open toward the South, the Sun shining clear, and no
Wind stirring, I took my Book, de Veritate in my Hands, and kneeling on my
Knees, devoutly said the Words, O thou eternal God, Author of this Light which
now shines upon me, and Giver of all inward Illuminations; I do beseech thee,
of thine infinite Goodness, to pardon a greater Request than a Sinner ought to
make: I am not satisfied enough, whether I shall publish this Book: if it be
for thy Glory: I beseech thee give me some Sign from Heaven; if not I shall
suppress it. I had no sooner spoken these Words, but a loud, though yet gentle
Noise, came forth from the Heavens (for it was like Nothing on Earth) which did
so cheer and comfort me, that I took my Petition as granted, and that I had the
Sign I demanded; whereupon also I resolved to print my Book. This, how strange
soever it may seem, I protest, before the eternal God is true: Neither am I any
Way superstitiously deceived herein; since I did not only clearly hear the
Noise, but in the serenest Sky that ever I saw, being without a Cloud, did, to
my thinking, see the Place from whence it came. N. B. There is a full Answer to
Lord Herbert's Book written by Mr. Halyburton, Professor of Divinity. This
Answer is commended by the celebrated Dr. Watts, and Dr. Leland, and is
reckoned by some good Judges one of the best Books against the Deists.


It is well observed by Dr. Leland on this extraordinary Impulse, that It may
be justly doubted, whether an Address of such a particular Kind, as that made
by his Lordship, was proper, or regular; it does not seem to me, that we are
well founded to apply for, or to expect an extraordinary Sign from Heaven, for
determining Doubts concerning the Expediency of publishing a Book. Methinks, if
a Man has used his best Endeavors to find out Truth, and, which certainly
ought not to be neglected, has humbly applied to God to assist and direct him
in his Enquiries; if he has the Testimony of his own Conscience to the
Uprightness of his own Intentions, and that he is not acted by Pride and vain
Glory, by an Affectation of Singularity or any worldly sinister Ends and Views;
and if he is satisfied, upon the most diligent and impartial Examination, that
what he has advanced is both true, and of great Importance to Mankind, and is
only afraid of the Opposition it may meet with; I think in such a Ca^e,
especially if he has also the Advice of good and judicious Friends concerning
it, he has sufficient Grounds to proceed upon and does not need a particular
Sign from Heaven to determine him. This seems to be putting it on a wrong Foot,
since God has not in his Word given us any Ground to expect that he will
answer such a Request; nor is there any Reason to expect it from the Nature of
the Thing. -- I believe it will be acknowledged that sudden Impressions or
supposed Signs from Heaven, like that upon which Lord Herbert seems to lay so
great Stress, are very equivocal, and not much to be depended upon for
Information in Truth or Direction in Duty. They may lay Persons open to Mistake
and Delusion. It cannot be denied that in such Cases Men are in Danger of being
imposed upon by the Warmth of their own Imaginations especially if they be
wrought up to a strong Desire and Expectation of an extraordinary Sign from
Heaven, in Favor of a Design which they heartily wish should succeed.

Since I have found some Persons who have discovered a great Regard for such
Signs or Tokens, I will add that whatever might be said to excuse Lord Herbert,
who did not pretend to believe the Holy Scriptures, in his following this Sign,
it must certainly be very absurd for Christians, who profess to believe that
the Scriptures are a perfect Rule, to look for such Tokens. When they are at a
Loss about what is their Duty, why don't they diligently search the Scriptures
and ask the Advice of such as are prudent? If they don't search the Scriptures
is not this to treat them with Neglect?

It is true, that God sometimes gave Intimations of his Will under the Old
Testament by Signs or Tokens. But it was those whom he favored with immediate
Revelations, as the Prophets, etc. to whom he gave such Signs, and that on
extraordinary Occasions. Others were to enquire the Word of the Lord from the
Prophets, and to consult the divine Law and Testimony. Where God gave no
Intimations, that he would grant them Signs, it was unwarrantable to look for
them. They had no Right to demand Signs. Christ would not gratify the captious
Pharisees when they demanded a particular Sign from Heaven, but referred them
to what the Scriptures had declared. And so on another Occasion, they have,
Moses and the Prophets let them hear them.

Whatever God was pleased to grant to his People, while Prophets were raised up
from Time to Time, this can afford no Warrant at all to us now after the
Scriptures are fully completed, to expect Signs from Heaven. It should be
remembered, that God who at sundry Times and in diverse Manners spoke in Time
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets has in these last Days spoken unto us by
his Son. Hence the former Methods or immediate Revelations by successive
Prophets, Dreams, Visions, Signs, Tokens are not to be expected: God has
revealed his whole Will which he designed to communicate to his Church at once,
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles. After this one Season, no further immediate
Revelations were to be granted. Such Methods are laid aside. This is evidently
implied in the Text. The Antithesis plainly requires it. Since the Canon of
Scripture is thus fully completed, there is no Need of such Revelations, Signs
and Tokens. Consequently it must be vain Presumption for any to expect them. To
follow such Signs is to follow Delusions.

Such a Notion would give cunning Impostors a great Advantage to contrive
Schemes before Hand, and thus to deceive the simple and unwary. And who would
engage that they would not knowingly and wittingly attempt to deceive; when it
is certain Wondermongers have been detected in a thousand Instances of pious
Fraud among Heathens and Papists? And who can tell what strange and to us
unaccountable Signs, "the Prince of the Power of the Air" may if permitted give
to those who trust to such Things. If there was any Thing more in the Sign upon
which Lord Herbert published his Book against the Scriptures; or in that upon
which the Dutartres acted than imagination, I leave it to all sober Christians
to say whence it came. And since Satan would be ready to deceive if any Stress
was laid on uncertain, doubtful Signs, it is certainly necessary that proper
Miracles be wrought to distinguish the true from the false, and to prove that
such a Sign comes from God and not from the Devil; otherwise Persons may, as
appears from the Instances of the Dutartres, be led to commit the most shocking
Crimes, while they follow such Signs and Tokens.

This surprising Incident of Lord Herbert, this immediate Answer which he
imagined he received to his Prayer, may serve as a Caution and Warning to
Christians against making Requests to God for immediate Directions by such
Signs, and prevent them from following what they might perhaps imagine an
express Imitation from Heaven in immediate Answers to their Prayers.

The most extraordinary Instance of Enthusiasm I have met with in Modern Times,
is that of the French Prophets. From June 1688, to the End of February
following there arose in Dauphiny, and then in Vivarais, five or six hundred
Protestants of both Sexes, who gave out that they were Prophets inspired by the
Holy Ghost. As Mankind are apt to be taken with Novelty, and the injudicious to
be fond of Extraordinaries, they soon became very numerous. The Burden of their
Exhortations and Prophecies was, Amend your Lives, repent ye, the End of all
Things draws nigh.

The Account which Mr. John Lacy has written of them, who was afterward
himself the chief of the English Prophets that was seized with the same Spirit,
and which he says was verified upon Oath and other Proofs, is very wonderful. I
shall mention but a few Instances referring the inquisitive Reader to the Sea
his Cry to the Desert.
Book itself.

John Vernett, of Bois-Castle declared at London, January 14, 1706. That the
first Persons he saw under Inspiration were his own Mother, his two Sisters,
and a Cousin; that his Mother spoke, at the Time of Inspiration, only French;
which surprised him exceedingly, -- because she never, before her Inspirations
attempted to speak a Word in that Language; nor has since to his Knowledge; and
he is certain she could not do it. He says the same of his Sisters, and that
they all urged their Hearers to Amendment of Life, and pressed it upon him in
particular (who was then a little loose) to be sober. He went with two of his
Acquaintance, to see a Friend of theirs near Vernoux; that as they were
drinking together, a Girl came to call her Mother, who was with them, to see
the Child -- They all ran immediately. The Child was Thirteen or Fourteen
Months old, and covered then in the Cradle, and had never of itself spoken a
Word, nor could it go alone. When they were come in where it was, the Child
spoke distinctly in French, with a Voice small like a Child, but loud enough to
be heard all over the Room. It exhorted like others in that Condition, to the
Work of Repentance. The Room where the Child was had about twenty Persons in
it, who were, most of them, round the Cradle weeping and praying.

CLAND ARNASSAN, of Montel, declared on the 14th of January, 1706, among other
Things as follows -- In the House of my Father at Montel, a Shepherd who
looked to my Father's Sheep, named Peter Bernaut, so silly he was next to an
Idiot, besought me several Times, to carry him to an Assembly; which I was
afraid to do lest through his Weakness he should betray those Affairs:
Nevertheless, one Time I did venture to lead him to an Assembly by Night. Peter
being there I observed him to keep upon his Knees, for two Hours together at
least; then the Gift seized him, he was struck as it were dead: And after some
Time, had violent Agitations of Body. He returning Home, the Spirit came upon
him again, the following Day. At which Time his Bodily Motions were so great,
that being on his Back the whole Body leapt from the Ground. We were all afraid
he would hurt himself upon the Pavement. He continued to batter himself in that
Manner, that his Hair was as wet with Sweat as if dipped in Water. Two or three
Times was he taken with these violent Contortions, without speaking. At length
he said, it was for his Sins he had been thus tormented. After that, in other
Inspirations he spoke aloud, quoting appositely many Texts of Scripture, and
all to press us earnestly to a good Life. As for this Man, I am certain he
could not read. He never was at Divine Worship but that Time, nor was he
capable to be instructed by any Person whatsoever, to speak the Things he said
in his Inspirations.

They increased greatly in spite of all Opposition, and very severe
Persecutions, in which many of them were put to Death; so that in a few Years
there were several Thousands of them, from whom, I might, if it were needful,
present you with Multitudes of the like Nature and Tendency with these already
mentioned.

Sometime in the Year 1706, three or four of these Prophets came over into
England, and brought their prophetic Spirit along with them, which soon spread
among others, so that before the Year was out, there were two or three hundred
of these Prophets in and about London of both Sexes, of all Ages, Men, Women
and Children; and they had delivered four or five hundred prophetic Warnings.

We may have a lively Idea of the Genius of these Prophets from the Relation of
Mr. John Lacy, which he introduces in these Words, "I give what follows, which
does particularly concern myself, with the same Awfulness and Appeal to the
Searcher of all Hearts, as if I were called by Authority to do it upon Oath."

Having from November last, to the Beginning of February following, been
present diverse Times at the Ecstasies of Mr. Marien, Mr. Fage, and Mr. Cavalier;
I can say, that their Agitation did never make any Impression on my Mind or
Imagination, such as to promote an Imitation of them or even an Inclination to
it. For the Space of at least eighteen Days before mine came upon me, I had
seen none of them; and mine were so entirely different from any of theirs, that
it is altogether unlikely that the Force of Imagination, as some without
Consideration have fancied, could produce them -- The first Symptoms of the
Emotions on my Body surprised me in the Instant of awaking, on the first Day of
March; -- and continued more or less upon me unto the twelfth Day of June,
before the Word was put into my Mouth. -- I can positively say, I never once
expected or desired to have them before I was actually seized with them: But as
they came not of my Will or Desire, so I know they came in Consequence of my
frequent Prayers, that God would guide me aright in my Opinion and Judgment of
that awful Subject of Inspiration, among the Covennes, whereof I had been then,
and for two Months before preparing the Relation. -- The bodily Impressions
were gradually increasing upon me, until the Effect or rather Issue of them was
produced, viz. the opening my Mouth to speak.

They began by a preternatural Course of Breathing, then my Head came to be
agitated or shaken violently and forcibly, and with a quick Motion
horizontally, or from Side to Side. Then my Stomach had Twitches not much
unlike an Hickup; afterward my Hands and Arms were violently shaken; at length
a struggle or a Laboring in the Windpipe, and sometimes a Sort of Catching or
Twitches all over my Body; and about a Week before my Speaking, I observed my
Tongue was now and then moved involuntarily, as were also my Lips, my Mouth,
and Jaw severally; all which Preparation of the bodily Organs, I found attended
with a constant Elevation of Soul to God, the Mind being unaccountably cast
into a Frame of spiritual Joy, holy Contempt of all Things in the World, and
incessant Prayers far more earnest and intent than what I had ever found before
-- My secret Prayers were inseparably attended with the Increase of those
Symptoms, and during all this Time, I searched the Scriptures carefully, for my
Direction, and heedfully considered all the Advices given me by my Friends.

After so much Care and Fear of being deluded, I am the better assured, and do
affirm without the least Doubt, that my Agitations and Words in the Ecstasy are
produced by a superior Agent, and are independent of me any further than that I
do not, nor dare not oppose, but do remain altogether passive -- My Mind at
those Times continues clear and sedate, during which my Fear and Caution make
me wait always, until the Tongue be moved by that superior Power; nor does any
Impulse alone prevail with me therein: So that it is no longer I, as the Prime
voluntary Mover and Agent that speak, and oftentimes I know not the Sense until
the Words are spoken, and so heard by me as by other Persons present. Nor did I
myself write those English Words, which are contained in the Warning of the
twelfth of July; but my Fingers were forcibly moved to do it, my Eyes then
being she and I under Agitations. Therefore I utterly deny myself to be the
Framer, either of the Agitations, or of the Voice. I have moreover thrice
experienced a Tone or Manner in the Voice itself, which I am well assured, I am
no Ways capable of, in my natural State.

I have great Reason to bless God for having had a virtuous Education, and for
the Grace he has since vouchsafed me never to allow myself to live in the
Practice of any known Sin; nor deliberately, or presumptuously, to commit any
one such Act. -- I have therefore the more Confidence that God does not now
deliver me up to so horrid a Delusion, as the voluntary speaking of myself in
his Person would be; and when I believe the wilful Doing thereof would be such
an henious Crime, as would deserve that I should be struck down instantly to
Hell -- I know assuredly, that no Trouble of Mind, nor Melancholy, nor a
Pre^ssession of prophetical Schemes, drew me into the State I am under -- I
enjoy at this Time, through Mercy, a perfect Health without any Pain, Sickness,
or Weakness whatsoever, or ^y Sort of Disorder proceeding from the frequent
exstat^ Agitations. I sleep ordinarily seven Hours in twenty-four; I have a
good Appetite and ^ges^on; and I appeal to all Persons with whom I converse
about my necessary Affairs, and to such other Company as daily occurs to me,
whether I am otherwise besides myself than only to God.

As to the Observation of the Lord's Day, it has pleased God to vouchsafe me
his gracious Visits, more frequently and solemnly on those Days than on others.
I therefore with Joy and Comfort wait for them: A Voice that comes to me
frequently in my Closet, as well as before Company (which upon all the Enquiry,
Reasoning, Caution. Fear and Deliberation, that I am capable of) I do firmly
believe to be from God; consequently I dare not disobey, hide or stitle, under
the Dread of thereby charging my Conscience with a I oad of Guilt and Horror
unsupportable; although at the same Time I am sensible what numerous
Reproaches, what Loss, what Difficulties, what Hazzards, what Trouble, what
Labor, what Clamours and Contempt, the owning myself to be inspired, has done,
does, and will engage me in -- I would not surely have unnecessarily brought
myself under any of these; nor could I now, by my own proper Strength bear up
under them. But the inward Joy that I have from the great Comforter, has from
the Beginning supported me, and I trust it will continue so to do, and make me
in his due Time triumphant over all.

But notwithstanding all this Seriousness and Confidence, which these Prophets
discovered, it is certain beyond any reasonable Doubt that this Business of
Inspiration was wholly a S^ne of Imposture, Delusion or overheated Imagination,
or a Mixture of them all. This might be made evident from various Topics,
which sundry eminent Divines who lived in those Times, well improved and urged
against them -- But if there had been Nothing besides the palpable Failuers of
their Predictions, this alone would have been sufficient to convince every Man
who believes the Scriptures, that they were not inspired by God. For this is a
Mark which God himself has given us in his written Word of a false Prophecy.
See Deuteronomy. xviii. 21, 22. If thou say in thine Heart, how shall we know the Word
which the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the
Lord, if the Thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the Thing which the
Lord has not spoken.

As the Lord employs Satan to inflict Vengeance on his incorrigible Enemies, as
in the Case of wicked Ahab; and permits him sometimes to afflict his Saints, as
in the Instance of Job; this Deceiver at Times may have some Intimations of the
Divine Will about some future Events. Besides Satan is a profound Politician,
and has had great Experience in human Affairs, and in many Instances may give a
very near Guess at Things to come. But as he is not endowed with absolute
Knowledge, he may be mistaken himself. And it is very certain, that he makes it
his grand Business to deceive Mankind. But God knows all Things, past, present,
and to come. Such is his infinite Perfection he cannot be deceived himself, nor
attempt to lead his Creatures into a Mistake, by revealing a Falsehood to them.
When therefore any Prophesy is contradicted by the Event, this is an infallible
Proof, that it did not proceed from God, as is expressly asserted in the
forecited Text.

The chief Purport of these Prophet's Predictions was to warn the World of the
near Approach of the Kingdom of God; and the happy Times of the Church; which
were to be ushered in by terrible Judgments executed on the Wicked, universally
throughout the World; which were to root out the Tares and leave only good
Corn, A PURE CHURCH, upon the Earth; all which was to be manifest over the
whole World within a short Term of three Years, etc. etc.

Now we, who live in the present Day and Time, know that many Years are past,
sin^ these Predictions were uttered, and no such Events have happened. The Term
which they perfixed is long since expired, so that they have been proved by the
Event to have been false Prophets.

But the most remarkable Failure of their Predictions was in the Resurrection
of Dr. Emes, one of the new Prophets, who was taken ill about December 4th,
1707, and died December 22d, and was buried December 25th, in Bunhillfields,
London. December 5th, J. L. addressed himself to the Doctor in these Words at
his own House, under the Operations of the Spirit. If I command thy Life away,
yet I will restore it again here even in this House, thou shall return to thy
Dwelling again -- December 6th, J. Potter under Inspiration of the Spirit said
to the Doctor. If thou die I will raise thee -- I will fulfill all those
Promises made to thee.

After the Doctor was dead and buried, they had still more clear Prophecies of
his Resurrection.

December 29th, J. C. under the Operation of the Spirit, in an Assembly spoke
in French; to this Purport in English. My Children, in a few natural Months,
you shall see greater Miracles wrought than I myself wrought upon Lazarus --
You, and the Inhabitants of this City shall, in a few natural Months see (Dr.
Emes) my faithful Servant, who has been buried, raised in the Presence of Men
-- He shall come out of his Grave, without the Earth being taken away, that
lies upon him. He shall come forth in the Presence of Men, and he shall untie
his Shroud in which he is wrapped. This shall not be in Secret, it shall be in
Public.

December 29th. The Spirit in J. Potter said, It shall be manifest, that the
raising of this Body shall be a greater Miracle, than that of your Lord when he
raised Lazarus. Lazarus lay but four Days, but my Servant shall lie much longer
in his Grave: Yes, I say, more Months than he lay Days. He shall be raised fat
and lovely, so that he shall captivate the Affections of the Beholders. Blessed
are ye that believe. Many are hardened by his Death. They have suffered
themselves to be captivated by the Devil. Shall they believe in his
Resurrection? I tell you no. Yet Thousands and ten Thousands shall believe
thereby. --

January 1st. The same Prophet under the Operation of the Spirit, in a great
Assembly, said, I have that to declare by this Mouth, see that it startle you
not, see that you believe it. Here he sell into violent Agitations and labored
extremely in his Throat, as if he were choking; and after having uttered
several inarticulate Sounds, said, Know ye the Day in which my Servant [Dr.
Emes] was interred? Five Months from that Day the twenty first Day of May, thou
shall behold him rise again. One Month above the Number of Days that Lazarus
was in his Grave. The very Hour he was put in the Earth he shall rise I^ ye the
Day, my Children? Ans. Yes, well. The twenty-fifth Day of May. Right, I say ye
shall see him rise that is now dead. -- For thy Part, [John Potter] by whom I
speak, thou shall not laugh until thou beholdest him. No thou shall not smile
-- Behold him, [John Potter] by whom I speak, if you see any Sign of Joy fixed
on his Vissage, say then, the Words were not the Lord's." -- Then he said to
Mr. Lacy, Fear not, my Child, I say, thou shall appear on the twenty-fifth Day
of May next, in that Ground where my Servant lies. Wait thou there with others
of my Children, from twelve at Noon till six in the Evening. I will surround
you, Angelic Hosts shall guard thee with thy Companions. -- Provide no
Clothing for my Servant, for he shall rise pure and innocent: Therefore no
Shame shall attend him, neither shall it be esteemed Indecency, for him to walk
unto his Habitation. Remember, Remember the Day, the Time observe it, from
twelve to six. There were many other Predictions of the Doctor's Resurrection
equally express with these, which to avoid Tediousness I have not inserted.

These Prophesies of the Doctor's Resurrection, delivered so often, with such
great particularity, and Confidence; and all under the Agitations and
Inspirations of the Spirit, could not fail to make a great Noise in the Nation.
Such was the Alarm of this predicted Miracle, that the Queen's Guard was posted
on Bunhillfields on the 25th of May the Day appointed for its being wrought to
prevent Disorders. Twenty thousand People from one Motive and another
assembled, and no Doubt many of them with an Expectation of seeing the Doctor
rise from his Grave. But there he lies, and will lie, till the Voice of the
Archangel at the last Day shall awake the Dead and summon them to Judgment.
Nothing remarkable happened on that noted 25th of May at Bunhillfields; only
the vast Concourse of People, and such a woeful Disappointment to these
Prophets, as brought them, with Ahab's Prophets of old when they attempted to
prove the Divinity of Baal by a Miracle, into great Disgrace, and gave such a
Check to their Spirit that there was little or no Appearance of it afterward.
They who desire a fuller Account of these French Prophets may consult Dr.
Edmund Calamy's Caveat; Owen's Scene of Delusion opened; Hick's Spirit of
Enthusiasm exercised; the History of Montani^m; Dr. Hoadly's Vindication of the
ancient Prophets against the Pretensions of the new (...), etc. etc.


There is no Need to enquire with much Solicitude how far some of these
Prophets exaggerated their Feelings or counterfeited them. There plainly
appears an Honesty in their Relations; and no Doubt there was Something very
extraordinary in this Scene which they acted, though they might as is natural
to Mankind, endeavor to represent their Cause to the best Advantage, and thus
perhaps embellish some Things beyond the Truth.

As to their speaking in Languages which they had never learned, it is to be
observed, that they only spoke in such Languages, when they were under the
forcible Agitations of their Spirit. They had, as appears from their own
Accounts, no more Skill in those Languages afterward, than before. This then
was not the Gift of Tongues which the Divine Spirit gave to the Apostles, and
some of the first Converts to Christianity. It was a distant, and but a distant
Imitation of it -- This was not so wonderful as for Satan to cause the Serpent
to speak, that is by Nature dumb. And it seems that, like the Serpent, they
spoke as they were impelled, their speaking Organs being forcibly moved by that
Agent for whose Motions they waited.

Had they steadfastly adhered to the written Word of God, and not looked for
any Revelations but those contained in the Bible, Satan would not have found an
Opportunity of befooling them in such a prodigious Manner. But where Men will
look for Extraordinaries, when they will run after Wondermongers, they may
thank themselves, if Satan lends them sometimes a helping Hand, and holds forth
a false Light to those who are so very willing to follow him.

When the French Prophets were overruled by divine Providence to bring their
Prophecies, Revelations, etc. to be tried by the right Test, that is, by
genuine, public Miracles, they soon discovered their Delusions. Some of the
Ancient Heretics, and many among the Superstitious Papists have pretended,
that Miracles have been wrought in Proof of their Religion. But they were
secret Miracles, some of them like Transubstantiation were always so invisible,
that they could never be seen but by Hearsay. And others of them were never
heard of till many Years after they are said to have been wrought. If the
Popish Wonders were not mere Imposture, why were they not wrought before some
of their understanding Opposers among Protestants, as well as before their own
superstitious Bigots, and fond Admirers? Christ wrought his Miracles before his
most cunning and fiercest Opposers as well as before his own Disciples and dear
Friends. His Enemies themselves could not but own that he and his Disciples
wro't many glorious Miracles. The Jews confessed this. Julian, the learned and
malicious Apostate, confessed this. These Miracles were wrought so publicly
that they could not deny them. But the pretended Wonders of Papists and
Enthusiasts have been often detected, and clearly discovered to be Nothing but
the artful Inventions of cunning Deceivers, to blind the ignorant and
credulous, to raise the Credit, and increase the Number of their Party, or to
wheedle them the more easily out of their Money; or else they are some strange
Appearances produced by the Power and Subtilty of Satan. Such are these famous
secret Wonders. They are therefore called lying Wonders with the greatest
Propriety, in the Scriptures. But let us always insist upon public Miracles.
This is an infallible Test which will always demonstrate the Truth of divine
Revelation, to the Confusion of Deceivers, and clearly distinguish it from, all
Counterfeits. Let Men produce the Evidence of proper Miracles, such as raising
the Dead, etc. to recommend their new Revelations, or let them not pretend to
be inspired.

There must be some Mark or Character by which we may distinguish divine
Revelation from such as are false and imaginary. For it appears to be no new
Thing for Men to pretend they are under the immediate Direction of God and
receive divine Instructions from Heaven. The Authors and Ringleaders of new
Sects have generally made this Pretense. It was so in the Heathen as well as in
the Christian World. When Numa Pompilius introduced the ancient Romish
Superstition he pretended to be directed in all he did by the Goddess Egeria.
Triptolemus, to recommend his Laws to the Athenians, gave out that he was
inspired by Ceres. Licurgus professed to act by the Direction of the God,
Apollo, when he promulgated his extraordinary Laws to the Spartans. And it was
common throughout the Heathen World, when any remarkable Change was to be made,
or any important Enterprise to be undertaken, for some of those who favored
it, to pretend to some new Revelation or Oracle in Support of their Opinion.
Now though there is the most undeniable Evidence to prove that many of their
Revelations and Answers of their Oracles were Nothing but the Contrivance of
crafty Knaves, downright Cheat and Imposture; yet for any Thing I have ever
seen proved, some of their oracular Responses might be supernatural, from the
immediate Agency of the Devil The Fathers, who had much better Opportunities to
be acquainted with the Revelations of the Heathens, than we, as they lived,
some of them at least, while the Oracles were consulted, generally agreed that
the Devil had a great Hand in first introducing, and constantly supporting the
pagan Oracles and Revelations.

Such as are prejudiced against the Bible may imagine, that the many Pretenses
that have been made to divine Revelation by Enthusiasts and Impostors are a
sufficient Confutation of the Scriptures. But such an Imagination must be owing
to their great Inattention or inveterate Prejudices. For if the Matter be fully
and heartily examined, the various Pretensions that have been made only prove,
what I have once and again inculcated that we should receive no Revelations as
divine, 'till we have just Grounds to believe they come from God: We must not
receive them for divine till they are recommended by proper Miracles.
Enthusiasts and Impostors pretend to divine Revelation, but have never been
able to work any Miracles to prove the Truth of their Pretentions.

The Prophets and Apostles professed to be inspired and wrought such glorious
Miracles as fully proved that God was with them, and that they acted by his
Commission.

The Fondness which Mankind in every Nation have showed for divine Revelation,
the Greediness, with which they have received the various Pretensions of this
Kind, instead of weakening the Credibility of the Scriptures rather affords a
good Argument to confirm their divine Authority. For whence should this
Disposition and Practice of Mankind arise? What can be the Reason they have
been so ready to look for and give Credit to divine Revelation? Is it not
because they are conscience to themselves they have great Need of a Guide to
direct them? Or from some universal Tradition that God had actually granted
some Revelations? If Men did not feel themselves extremely in the dark if they
had not heard from Tradition, or by their Intercourse with the Jews, that there
was a divine Revelation; is it not probable they would have been so ready to
follow those who pretended to extraordinary Communications. But having been
informed that the Deity had granted immediate Revelation to some excellent
Person, they might be imposed on and follow those who pretended to this
Intercourse with Heaven, especially as they found the Light very insufficient
for their Direction.

All who are acquainted with the religious Customs of the ancient Heathens know
there were sundry Usages among them which bore some Resemblance to some of the
Ceremonies which we find were prescribed by the Jewish Lawgiver. These they
undoubtedly derived from the Patriarchal Customs or borrowed from the Jews. As
to what some learned Men have conjectured, that many of the Laws of Moses were
instituted partly in Compliance to the Prejudices of the Jews, who were fond of
the Egyptian Superstitions; this is an idle Imagination, which is, and always
will be destitute of all proper Evidence. For it can never be made to appear
that any Customs prescribed by the Law of Moses were practiced by any Heathen
Nation so early. Moses is wholly ^t about his borrowing any Heathen Rites. And
there is no Heathen W^ing that (...) throw any Light on the Point, since the
most ancient, now extant were not written 'till four or five hundred Years
after Moses. A wonderful Discovery truly that God yielded to the Humor of the
Jews and adapted the idolatrous Ceremonies of Egypt!
For though the Jews in general were hateful to the Gentiles, yet the eminent
Virtues and Prosperity of some of them, as Joseph, Moses, David, Solomon,
Daniel, not to mention Abraham their renowned Ancestor, commanded Respect and
Admiration from the neighboring Nations, and particularly from the Egyptians.
And though they did not change their own false Gods, and acknowledge the God of
Israel, yet they might adopt some of the Jewish Ceremonies in the Worship of
their Idols, as we are informed by the sacred Historian the Samaritans did to
answer their now Ends. Now since it appears that the Heathens derived some of
their religious Ceremonies from the Jews, or from the Patriarchs, why might
they not derive the general Notion of a Revelation from the same Quarter?

If there never had been any true Revelation given to Mankind, what could have
led the Heathen Priests and and Lawgivers to counterfeit them? Can there be
Copies without Originals? Or Counterfeits without Realities? Do not false
Coiners imitate the noblest Metals? Or do Clippers work on any Thing but Gold
and Silver? Thus false Pretensions to Inspiration rather strengthen than weaken
the Evidences of its Reality -- They do so in another View, viz. by their
corresponding to the Predictions of the New Testament. The Rise of false
Prophets mere Pretenders to Inspiration, was expressly sore told by Jesus
Christ and his Apostles; so that their Appearance in the World is a completion
of their Prophecies, and as it were a Seal which we ourselves see put to the
New Testament, the more fully to illustrate and Confirm the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures. God will not suffer any of his Words to fall to the Ground, let
the Things foretold be ever so unlikely to human Reason. Now must not that
Prophesy have proceeded from God which is thus exactly verified by the Event?
The Scriptures have been confirmed by so many infallible Proofs and these
Arguments have been placed in such a convincing Light, and all the Cavils that
have been raised, have been so fully answered by many excellent Writers, that
one cannot but think that Infidels discover Want of Sense, as well as Want of
Faith: who still persist in their Unbelief. We read of some of their Kinsmen of
Old who while they professed themselves to be wise became Fools.

As it would be inconsistent with my present Design to enter into any long
Defense of Christianity, so there is no great Occasion, if the Deists would but
read and seriously consider the many excellent Books that have been written on
the Subject. But since this Address is likely to fall into the Hands of sundry
Persons, who would fain deny all revealed Religion, I shall leave the following
Hints to their Consideration. Such as would see the Scriptures defended against
the Deists may consult Royl, look, Ad^ron, Ditton, We^, ^leton, Holybarton,
Doddridge, Leland, etc.


Since you don't profess to be Atheists, but pretend to have a Regard to God,
and to be Friends to Virtue, I will take it for granted that you suppose God
has given you a Law to direct your Conduct, enforced with the suitable
Sanctions of future Rewards and Punishments. You must also grant, if you
honestly reflect on your Conduct, that you have done wrong in some Instance or
other, and consequently have broken that Law you are under. Hence yon lay
exposed to the Punishment threatened in the Law. Don't your own Consciences tell
you this sometimes? Don't they warn you, that though your Sins are pleasant
now, they will be Bitterness in the latter End? If they don't, whence comes it
that sundry of you appear so afraid of Death, in Storms and Sickness? Let me
ask you, when you are well, and the Weather is Calm, how you expect to escape
this Punishment to which you lay exposed according to your own Scheme, and your
own Consciences, and which you appear to be afraid of in Times of Danger?

You will not surely pretend that your Repentance and Virtues will balance your
Accounts with God's Law. For not to insist upon it, that you are not very
remarkable for these Things, you must discover, if you have any just Notions,
about Law, that they by no Means answer its Demands. A Murderer might Plead
with equal Reason, that he had murdered but once, that he had been heartily
sorry for his Crime, and had obeyed the Laws of his Country in all other
Instances both before and since that unhappy Moment. But you know such Pleas
are Nothing to the Purpose. The Law condemns him to Punishment and Death for
that one Transgression. He must plead not guilty, or as good not plead at all.
Now you having done wrong in some Instance or other cannot plead, not guilty.
You have broken God's Laws, and of Consequence must be condemned by them. God
who searches your Hearts, and who is perfectly acquainted with all your Conduct
is your Judge. He is a most just and righteous Judge. He gave you his Law, and
he will support its Authority, and the Honor of his Government. Since you
refuse to have any Connexions with Jesus of Nazareth, you cannot object against
being judged on your own Principles. Can you offer any Reason why you should
not be condemned for your Sins against the Light of Nature? Can you devise any
Method in which there is any Probability, you shall escape Punishment for your
Breaches of God's Law? I believe if you would reason right according to your
Principles, you would despair. Since this appears to be the Case, why don't you
redeem so much Time from the Hurries and Pleasures of the World, as is
sufficient to make a full Enquiry? Why don't you hear and obey the Voice of
that Monitor God has put in your Bosoms, and consider whether the Alarm is not
perfectly just, and founded on the most incontestible Dictates of Reason? Why
don't you think, whether your boasted Light of Nature affords you any rational
Hopes of Escape? Therefore as Joshua Joshua xxiv. 14, 15.
said of old to the Israelites, If it seem evil to you to serve the LORD,
choose you whom you will to serve, so I may say to you: If you dislike the
christian Religion, choose you a better if you can. Show some Method in which
Sinners may reasonably hope for the Pardon of their Sins and to obtain the
Favor of an offended God. Don't be so absurd as to cavil against the Gospel,
and discard it, till you can discover some more sure and excellent Way. You
must discover astonishing Weakness or Perversity of Mind who renounce that
glorious Way, which is plainly revealed and incontestibly proved in the Gospel,
if you cannot discover any Way of your own, in which any reasonable Man can
hope to be forgiven any of his Sins, and be received into Favor with God.

But to return, the high Pretenses of Enthusiasts to supernatural Influences,
and the great Craft and Indecency which, it appears, Satan has used in
counterfeiting them is at once a Proof of their Reality and Excellency. If
there were no inward Influences imparted by the Spirit of God to true Saints,
Why should Satan attempt so much to counterfeit them? Does not counterfeit
Money always suppose there is true Money? The Devil is a powerful, a malicious
and cunning Adversary. The Scriptures represent him as constantly and
indefatigably employed in seeking our Destruction. Let such as don't love to be
told so much about the Devil, tell me, why Christ has directed us to pray, lead
us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil? (or from the Evil One as it
might be translated.) Now if Satan be so powerful and crafty, we are unable of
ourselves to resist him, and have therefore absolute Need to be led by the
Divine Spirit, especially if we remember our own Weakness through Corruptions
and Lusts.

Some recommend (says a celebrated Preacher of the Church of England) Virtue,
in pompous Harangues, and urge Religion from the rational Topics of
Convenience and Inconveniency: They display the Amiableness and Advantages of
Good, and the Deformity and Mischiefs of Evil. How ugly is Envy? How tormenting
is Revenge? How brutal is Drunkenness? How pernicious is Lust? On the contrary;
Meekness, Temperance, and Beneficence, how serene are they in their State, and
how commodious in their Effects? And needs a Man now (say they) any infusion
here to determine his Choice? Or any assisting Influence to put it in
Execution? All that he seems to need is only this, that he do not turn Fool,
and desert the Use of those Faculties and Powers which Nature has given him.

After such a moral Discourse as this, having called upon Reason, and stirred
Men up to Consideration, they presume they have done enough, and leave us to
grow good upon our own Stock and Strength. But alas! these are Zearus's
Flights. Nature has provided no Wings for Men to soar so high with. Vice will
not be chased out of the World by Invectives, nor Virtue advanced to her Empire
by panegyricks. The most prudent Advertency, and the most manly Resolution, the
most rational Love, and the most generous Indignation, that ever Opinionative
Moralists could conceive and fortify the Breast withal, will not be able to
secure a Man against the subtle Approaches, or violent Assaults of Sin [and
Satan.] It Is only divine Grace and Assistance that is our Castle and our
Defense, and the vital Spring of all our good Habits: And whosoever terminates
his Hopes, even of serving and pleasing God, upon the Confidence of any other
Strength than what is derived from God, his Hopes are impious, and he must
miscarry.

There is hardly any Thing which Enthusiasts in general plead more strongly for
their Practices than Conscience, and it is to be feared many plead Conscience
who scarcely know what Conscience means. As this is evidently the Case, it will
not be amiss briefly to explain the Nature of Conscience, that you may not
plead it; where it cannot lay under a proper Obligation.

The Will and Law of God is holy, just and good, which all moral Agents are
bound in Duty to obey by what Means soever it is made known to them. This is
the supreme Rule and original Standard of all moral Goodness. God has been
pleased to discover this his Will to Mankind in several Ways, as by Conscience,
Reason, Revelation. Conscience is that Power of the Soul, by which God gives
Mankind some Notices of his Will, of Virtue and Vice, of Praise and Blame, and
by which, when it is in right Exercise, we approve of whatever, we have
sufficient Reason to believe is agreeable to the holy Will of God, whether in
ourselves or others, and Condemn what is contrary to this divine Standard. When
the Gentiles, says the Apostle, Rom ii. 14 15.
which have not the [written] Law, do by Nature the Things contained in the
Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves; which show the Work
of the Law written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing Witness, and
their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. Hence
Conscience is called God's Deputy or Vicegerent in the Soul. When any Thing is
known to be agreeable to the Will of God, Conscience in its proper Exercise
urge to obey, and remonstrates against Disobedience, threatening Punishment from
God. But Conscience is only a Deputy. It is not Conscience of itself which
properly binds or obliges a Man, but the Will and Law of God which is written
in ^s Records. Conscience derives all its just Authority from God.

Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong, cannot be changed by the Fancies of Men.
The Will of God remains still the same. Hence though such is the natural Frame
and Constitution of Human Nature, that an honest Man cannot but follow his
Conscience; though he would sin, if he should counteract the Dictates of his
Mind, and be self-condemned, as the Apostle Romans xiv. 23.
intimates; yet when Conscience is misinformed, and abuses its Office,
representing Right to be Wrong, and Wrong to be Right; this Mistake cannot
alter the Nature of Things nor change the divine Law. A Man is not properly
obliged in this Case to act contrary to the Will of God, but is rather bound to
renounce his Errors and search out the divine Law and obey it. Paul before he
was converted verily believed in his Conscience, that he ought to do many
Things in Opposition to Jesus of Nazareth: Yet when he came to be better
informed, he blamed himself, and lamented over that Conduct as sinful. Though his
mistaken Conscience did in some Measure alleviate his Crime, yet he was far
from thinking it entirely excused him. He 1. Tim. i. 13, -- 16.
mentions it as a Sin for which he had Need of Mercy. When forty of the Jews in
their great Zeal judged in their Consciences, they ought to murder Paul, this
did not render Murder a Virtue, and such Conduct acceptable to God. Their
Conscience in this Instance had not God's Authority.

As Conscience is not the only Means by which God reveals his Will since he has
given us Reason and Revelation, so it is also greatly enfeebled in this
imperfect State, and often mistakes the divine Will. Therefore its hasty
Dictates should not be rashly obeyed. Reason and Revelation should be seriously
consulted, least Men instead of obeying the holy Will of God should be found
following the Dictates of their own corrupted Understandings or the Suggestions
of Satan. And since the Will of God is the only perfect Rule and original
Standard of moral Goodness, and Conscience only a Deputy, and one too that is
often mistaken, Men should have Recourse to the divine Law, and carefully
examine, if God requires such Things. Unless you can produce some divine Law
that requires you to do so and so, it is in vain for you to plead Conscience:
For where there is no Law, there is properly no Duty nor Transgression. And if
Conscience forbids or commands an Action, where there is no divine Law, in this
Instance Conscience abuses its Office, and the Man is not properly obliged,
unless he can be strictly and truly obliged to disobey the holy Will of God,
which is absurd.

Hence it appears that God has not laid you under Obligations to follow your
new Revelations and Impulses, since you cannot prove by the proper Evidence of
Miracles that they proceed from God. Your new Revelations and Impulses are not
the natural Dictates of Conscience or a Part of the moral Law, which God has
written on the Heart. For then these Revelations could not be called new, nor
peculiar to you more than others, but common to all Mankind. You cannot prove
your Revelations to be the Will of God from Reason, nor from the Fitness of
Things. And ^ou cannot prove them to be immediate Revelations of the Will of
God, because they are destitute of his Seal of public Miracles. Now since your
Revelations do not appear to be the Will of God, I hope your Consciences will
find themselves disentangled from all imaginary Obligations, and not urge you
to follow them any more. Surely it is reasonable that these imaginary Chains
should be loosed. You may see you can be under no proper Obligations from
Conscience to follow your new Revelations and Impulses. It is weak and
ridiculous to plead Conscience for following your Impulses, or for any Practice
which you cannot prove to be agreeable to the Will of God. If you plead
Conscience any more, then produce some Law of God that obliges you to practice
as you do. But if you can produce no divine Precept, and yet continue in such
unlawful Practices, you may plead Ignorance, you may plead Prejudice, you may
plead Self-Will, you may plead strong Imagination, or the Transports of hot
Zeal, or Pride; but you have no Right to plead Conscience for your Practices,
till you can produce the divine Law where God has required these Things at your
Hands. Some very ingenious Philosophers seem to have coined a new Name for
Conscience, calling it a Moral Sense. This new Name perhaps has not helped much
to throw any new Light on the Thing. Conscience both Name and Thing was well
known to the ancient Jews, Greeks, Romans, etc. And after all that the
ingenious Professor Smith has said, I cannot but think, that Conscience or Moral
Sense is a much more important and intelligible Principle in Morals than
Sympathy, as well as more universally known.

The conserving Power of the Soul, is that Faculty or Power in which are hidden
and laid up the moral Principles of Right and Wrong known by the Light of
Nature and so is a Part of a natural Conscience: And in it are treasured up the
Scripture and Gospel Truths which are known by a Star of a greater Magnitude,
to wit, the Candle shining in divine Revelation, and this is a Part of the
enlightened and supernatural Conscience. -- In the inner Cabinet the natural
habit of moral Principles ledgeth, the ancient Records and Chronicles which
were in Adam's Time, the Law of Nature. -- All these are written in the Soul in
deep Letters, yet the Ink is dim and old, and therefore this Light is like the
Moon swimming through watery Clouds, often under a Shadow, and yet still in the
Firmament -- This is a Part of Conscience, because by no Faculty in Man, but by
the Conscience are these Truths apprehended. When any in ill Blood deny such
Truths, as that there is a God, and Parents are to be loved, we all say such do
sin and offer Violence to their Conscience -- There is more Reason and sound
Knowledge in the Conscience, than in the whole understanding Soul. It is the
crystal Globe of Reason, the Beam, the Sun of the Soul -- Because Conscience
is something of God -- a Keeper sent from Heaven, a divine Piece which is all
Eye, all Sense, and has the Word with it; in so far it is to be reverenced,
and he that reverenceth the King reverenceth the Ambassador, in so far as he
carries along the King's Will, be that honors the Lord must honor the
Servant. To receive Instructions and Rebukes from Conscience in so far as they
come from the Word of Truth is spiritual Prudence, and he that turns away his
Ear from his Conscience shall die. As to submit to the Word is to submit to
God, so to offer violence to divine Truth is to wrestle with God, and b^ the
l^ke Proportion, to stoop before Conscience carrying a Message from God is to
submit to God, and to do violence to the domestic Light and Truth of God is
all one as to wrestle with God -- If Conscience be so divine a Piece filled
banksful of Reason and Light, then the more of Knowledge the more of
Conscience, as the more of Fire the more of Heat, the more of the Sun the more
of Light. Then when Fancy goes for Conscience, as in Enthusiasts and new
Spirits grapling beside the Word of God, a new Angel commended only for
Newness, -- Conscience must be turned into a Dream. Novelty can go for
Conscience, our Nature is quickly taken with Novelty even as a new Friend, a
new Field, a new House, a new Garden, a new Garment delights us for a little
while; so a new Christ a new Faith. Heresy goes for Conscience. Some's
Conscience fancied that to kill their Children to Molech was a Doctrine that
entered into the Heart of God to command, Jer. 7.30, 31. -- Hence Conscience
must be ruled by Scripture. Conscience is not Scripture, nor a Canonick Book
and Rule of Faith and Conversation, it often speaks Apocripha, and is neither
God nor Pope but can reel and totter and dream. Ruther^urd one of the Members
of the famous Assembly of Divines at WESTMINSTER. He was one of the most
celebrated Divines both for his Piety and Orthodoxy. See his Book on Liberty of
Conscience, at the Begininng. See also Turretine vol. ii. Question 1st.




Now what Law of God requires you to separate from our Churches? And to use
your Influence to promote Strife and Contention? What Law requires you to
reproach our Churches as Antichrist's Churches? And to endeavor to offend us?
What divine Precept requires your Women to speak in your pretended Churches?
Where has God required you to rebaptize Persons? Your Consciences cannot
proberly oblige you to these Things, since you cannot produce a divine Law for
them.

What Law requires you [Rogerenes] to disturb Churches in the sober and
religious Performance of religious Worship on the Lord's Day? You would
certainly act a wiser Part, if you would produce the divine Law first, before
you venture to behave in such a strange Manner. Do you think that no Respect is
due to civil Authority? Did you never read that divine Law "Ye must needs be
subject, not only for W^ath but also for Conscience Sake?"

Persons in Sickness may overlook the Hand of God, and like King Asa of old may
trust too much in Physicians, and if they do there is no Body denies they are
to blame. But their Sin does not consist in their applying to Physicians in
Sickness, but in their trusting two much in them, and forgetting the Lord who
is our Life and the Length of our Days. Men Act like Atheists who in their
Pains and Distresses seek to Physicians and forget the Lord.

In such a Country as this, where there is scarcely any regular Method of
studying Physic, and every one practices that pleases, there are doubtless many
Quacks, who I readily grant do as much Harm as Good. And I believe that a great
many who on every Occasion send for a Doctor, would recover as well without as
with his Prescriptions, if they would keep themselves under proper Regimen.

Temperance and reasonable Industry are excellent Means to preserve Health. If
it be certain that the present Inhabitants of these Colonies, especially Women,
are more weak and sickly than their Great Grandfathers and Grand Mothers,
perhaps there is no greater Cause of this in general than the Increase of
Luxury, Idleness and the too common Practice of Night-Walking. When many use
Spiritous Liquors to an immoderate Degree, and when many others Seldom or never
use any suitable Exercise; Weakness and Diseases may well be expected to be
more epidemical. If Parents will be so fond of their Children, as to bring them
up too delicately, and never inure them to any Hardships; the Consequence will
ordinarily be, that they will weaken their Children's Constitutions, and thus
subject them to many Ails and Sicknessess which they would probably never have
known any Thing about, if it had not been for the extreme Tenderness of their
Parents. However, no Directions can be given that will be sufficient
effectually to preserve Health, and save the human Body from many Casualties.
Wounds, Bruises, etc. And therefore when all reasonable Concessions are made to
you, they do not prove that Physicians may not be lawfully employed. Is it not
certain in a thousand Instances that Physicians under God have been a Means of
preserving Life? God works in this as well as in many other Cases by second
Causes. Since God thus visibly owns Physicians in so many Instances, does it
not look like Presumption in you to refuse their Assistance? Must if not be a
Sort of Self Murder for Persons to reject the Use of those Means which God in
his Providence has discovered and blessed for the Preservation of Life?

Joseph was one of the wisest of Men and a most eminent Saint. His Conscience
was remarkably tender, as appears from his repulsing the impure Solicitations
of his Mistress with this memorable Saying, How can I do this great Evil and
Sin against God? Genesis xxxix. 9, and l. 2.
Yet holy Joseph had Physicians. Luke the Evangelist, who wrote the Gospel that
is now called by his Name, was also "the beloved Physician." But if Physic were
unlawful, would Joseph have employed Physicians, or the Evangelist Luke
followed this Calling?

The Lord Jesus Christ frequently represents himself to his People in his Word
under the Character of a Physician. Would he have done this, if this Employment
were unlawful? But to put the Matter out of Controversy, Christ has expressly
declared that they that are whole need not a Physician; but they that are sick.
Luke v, 31.
Thus according to our Blessed Savior, the sick and disordered in Body need
Physicians, and ought to employ them. For Christ in these Words expressly
refers to bodily Ails and Sicknesses, and it is only by Analogy that they are
referred to the Disorders of the Soul.

No^ since it appears not only from the Nature of Things, but also from the
Example of the most eminent Saints both under the Old and New Testament, and
from the express Words of our Blessed Savior to be lawful and commendable to
employ Physicians, you can be under no proper Obligations from Conscience to
refuse to apply to them; for there is no Law of God that forbids you. If you
can lay aside Prejudices, you may see that the Words of Christ, and the Example
of his Saints require you to employ them? Surely you must act a very sinful
Part, if you will sacrifice your Lives in Defense of your Error, as your
understanding Neighbors are fully persuaded some of you have already done. But
if you will still go on and practice upon your Mistake, I am clear of your
Blood, and you must suffer the Consequences of your Folly.

And now, to conclude this Address, let me earnestly entreat you all, and
especially such of you as have lately separated from the Churches of
New England, to consider what has been said with that seriousness which the
Importance of the Affair justly demands. The Honor of God, the Interest of the
Redeemer's Kingdom, the Welfare of your Country and your Posterity, and even
the Salvation of your own Souls will be greatly affected by your Conduct. Now
when such important Interests are at Stake, you must excuse me if I speak
plainly to you. When you have separated from us, you have set up and followed
such for Teachers among yourselves, as professed to be immediately called. This
your immediate Call has been heartily examined in the preceding Discourse, and
it has, I think been plainly and fully proved that you are false Prophets and
Teachers. Several of you have pretended to foretell future Things, which the
Event has proved to be false. Now if you hearken either to the Voice of Reason
or to the Word of God, you must be convinced that this is a full and clear
Proof that you are false Prophets. And though others may say, that they have not
been thus detected, or that their Prophecies have never been proved false by
the Event; yet this will not excuse them. For it is the fundamental Principle
in your Scheme, and what you all Act upon; that Truths and Duties are
discovered to you by Impulses or immediate Impressions made on your Minds. As
the true Church of Christ is built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, or the written Word of God, so your separate Assemblies which you
call Churches are built upon private Impulses. Now it has been proved in the
foregoing Pages, that these Impressions, if they come from God as you pretend,
are as really Revelations as any that were made to inspired Persons of old; and
that some of them, such for Instance, as those by which your Teachers pretend
to be called to the Ministry, are Revelations of new Truths, which are not
contained in the Bible. But God forbids our receiving any Thing as a Revelation
from him, which has not his Seal. And therefore since you cannot work Miracles
in Confirmation of your being sent of him in an extraordinary Way, God requires
us to account and treat you as deluded Persons, and your pretended inspired
Teachers as false Prophets. It seems to me this must convince you, at least
bring you to entertain some Doubts and Scruples, unless you shut your Eyes
against Conviction, or are judicially given up to strong Delusions. And as I
would ^ain hope that neither of these is the Case with you, I beseech you to
consider the Guilt and Danger of your State, while you continue in your present
Course.

It is too plain to admit the least Doubt, that God is greatly and justly
displeased with your Conduct. To ^un, when God has not sent you; to speak in
his Name, when he has given you no Commission, and that in Opposition to those
whom he has sent and commissioned; to father your weak and foolish Fancies, and
perhaps the Suggestions of Satan upon the infinitely wise and holy Spirit; is
it possible that these Things should be done without contracting awful Guilt?
can you possibly doubt whether God is awfully provoked by them? If so, hear and
tremble at what he has said by the Mouth of a true Prophet. Ezekiel. xiii. 3, 9.
Thus says the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own
Spirit and have seen Nothing. They have seen Vanity and lying Divination,
saying the Lord says, and the Lord has not sent them. And they have made
others to hope that they would confirm the Word. Have ye not seen a vain
Vision, and have ye not spoken a lying Divination, whereas ye say, the Lord
says, albeit that I have not spoken? Therefore thus says the Lord God,
because ye have spoken Vanity, and seen Lies, therefore behold I am against
you, says the Lord God. And mine Hand shall be upon the Prophets that see
Vanity, and that divine Lies: They shall not be in the Assembly of my People,
neither shall they be written in the Writing of the House of Israel, neither
shall they enter into the Land of Israel. That is, they shall not be Members of
my Church either on Earth or in Heaven. Don't deceive yourselves by imagining
that the awful Doom thus pronounced against the false Prophets, is a Thing
peculiar to the Severity of the Jewish Dispensation, and that a milder Sentence
may be expected by Persons of that Character from the Grace of the Gospel. For
the New Testament represents the same Thing in stronger Terms, and more awful
Language. And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented
Day and Night, forever and ever. Rev. xx. 10.


Could you be persuaded impartially to consider, how sinful and how pernicious
your Pretensions and Practices are, you would not wonder to find the Word of
God threatening them with such a dreadful Severity. The Affront offered to God
by falsely pretending to be immediately sent, and inspired of him, and
recommending your Errors under this extraordinary Claim; and the Indignity done
him by imputing to his holy Spirit Things which proceed from the Heat of your
own disordered Imaginations, and perhaps Things that arise from the Agency of
Satan, have been already mentioned. I shall only add on this Head, that it is
not very easy to determine, which is the greatest Affront to the blessed God,
to impute his Operations to Satan, as the Pharisees did of old; or to impute
the Suggestions of Satan to him, as it is at least greatly to be feared the
Enthusiasts do at present.

Your depending upon Impulses and Impressions, and looking on them as Rules of
Action and Directions to Duty, exposes you in a dreadful Degree to the worst of
Temptations, and may be attended with the most fatal Consequences to all around
you. To this very Principle you see it was owing that John Lewis murdered his
Wife, and that the Dutartres committed the awful Crimes of Incest and Murder.
And if the Devil had so much Power over them, because they embraced the fatal
Opinion, that Impressions made on their Minds by Text of Scripture were
Revelations from God, and must be obeyed; what sort of Security can you
possibly have, that he will not make the like Attempt, and with the same
Success upon you, who by holding the same Principle are equally expossed to
such Kind of Temptations* Or what Security have your Families or Neighbors
that they shall not be murdered by you? It is true we all depend upon the
overruling Providence and restraining Grace of God to keep us from committing
the grossest Enormities. This I know is sufficient for you as well as others; I
earnestly pray it may be afforded to you, and I sincerely wish you had more
Reason to expect it. But surely they who sinfully expose themselves to
Temptations have awful Reason to fear that God will in his righteous Judgment
leave them to be overcome by Satan. And should this be the Case with any of
you, which God forbid, you will when it is too late heartily wish you had taken
the Warning and ^ened to the Council given you.

When Christ says, Many false Prophets shall arise and shall deceive many: And
because Iniquity shall abound the Love of many shall wax cold, he may justly be
thought not only to assert that the Evils mentioned shall prevail at the Time
he particularly speaks of; but to represent them as so connected in the Nature
of Things, that whenever the first prevails, the others may reasonably be
expected. When Peter foretold there would be false Teachers in the christian
World, he adds, Many shall follow their pernicious Ways, by Reason of whom the
Way of Truth shall be evil spoken of. In this Sense these Scriptures are
awfully fulfiled among us at this Day. There never, I suppose, was a Time, when
false Teachers and Prophets more abounded among us, than at present and for
some Years past. There never was a Season in which more Persons pretended to
Inspiration, or to have Truths and Duties revealed to them by immediate
Suggestions and Impulses. And as no one of these Persons produces proper
Credentials, or has the Seal of God to show; both Reason and Scripture allow,
and indeed require us to look on them all as false Prophets or Teachers. Yet it
is sadly true that they have deceived many, leading them from the Word of God
to follow their deluded Fancies. They have been unhappily successful in filling
the Minds of many well-meaning Persons with Prejudices against the regular
Ministers of Christ. And what has been the Consequence? Does not Iniquity
abound, and the love of many wax cold? Are not the Ways of Truth evil spoken
of? Do not Profaneness and Immoralites of various Kinds greatly prevail in the
Land? Is not a Want of Love to God, manifested by a general Luke-warmness and
Indifference in Religion, and by that surprising Neglect of the Worship and
Ordinances of God, so justly lamented by serious Persons in all Parts of the
Country? And can there be a more unhappy Proof that Love to Man, or Charity
waxes cold, than the prevailing Disposition to judge, condemn and separate from
one another?

It requires only a calm and unprejudiced Examination to be convinced, that
your Principles and Conduct have been in a very great Degree a Cause why
Iniquity has abounded, and the Love of many waxen cold among us. You have
embraced, and are continually endeavoring to propagate a Set of Principles,
that can never be defended, many of them being really absurd and ridiculous.
You teach Persons to place Religion in Things that can never be received by a
rational Mind. You are unwearied in your Endeavors to destroy the Influence of
the standing Ministers representing them as carnal, blind and dead, as
Hirelings and Ministers of Antichirst. And the Consequence has been that many
unthinking Persons are careless about or prejudiced against all Religion, and
it is to be feared will turn open Infidels. You with the greatest Confidence
pronounce this Man converted, and that Man immediately called of God to the
Ministry; when all your understanding Neighbors plainly see, that the former
wants the Scripture Marks of Conversion, and perhaps is further from the
Character of a good Man than he was before; and that the latter is destitute of
the most essential Qualifications of a Gospel-Minister. And there have been
Instances, as you very well know, wherein both the Convert and the Minister,
concerning whom you have pronounced with the greatest Assurance, have after all
turned out to be Men of immoral and abandoned Characters. These and such like
Things have wounded Religion, and are continually wounding it in an awful
Manner. On the whole, it may be justly doubted, whether you could have done so
much Hurt to Religion, if you had been open and professed Enemies to it, as you
have done under the Profession of the highest Friendship to it, and a Cloak of
the most flaming Zeal. If you are unprejudiced enough to feel the Force of my
Reasoning, yet methinks a View of the present State of Religion in the Country,
joined with the Consideration that it is plainly foretold in the Scriptures,
that when false Prophets and Teachers should rise and deceive many, Iniquity
should abound, the Love of many wax cold, and the Ways of Truth be evil spoken
of, must at least abate your Confidence, and raise some Suspicion in your Minds
whether you are not mistaken, and whether your Conduct does not destroy instead
of promoting Religion.

After all, I have no great Expectations of convincing the Heads and Leaders of
your Parties; but I hope what has been said may by the Blessing of God have a
good Effect upon some honest People that have been misled and seduced by them.
And I more especially hope, that all who attend your Assemblies either out of
Curiosity, or on Account of their being near their Habitations, while they
don't profess to join with you, will consider seriously what has been said. I
know some of you have sundry Things to say in your own Vindication. And since
my chief Hopes of Success are among you, I shall conculde this Address by
answering your Arguments, and giving my Reasons against your Practice.

1st. Some of you are ready to plead that these Sects hold a great many good
Things, and their Exhorters say some good Things. And why may not you go and
hear them? Why need Ministers say any Thing against them?

ANSWER. Don't you think that the Papists, Jews, Mahometans, and Deists, hold
many good Things? When we dispute against them, it is not against the good
Things which they hold in common with us, but against their Errors. The
Question is, whether those Things wherein they differ from us are good? Whether
considering them as Papists, Jews, Mahometans, and Deists, they are right; to
be countenanced and followed. And thus it is with Respect to these several
Sects I have been opposing. There is no Doubt but they hold some good Things, I
wish they held more. I have no Controversy with them about the Truths they
believe, but about their Errors. Now the Question is whether they are right in
those Peculiarities wherein they differ from the standing Churches? For these
are the Things that denominate them to belong to some or other of these Sects.
I have plainly declared my Sentiments, that they are entirely wrong in their
Peculiarites, and I cannot but believe you must be of my Mind if you peruse this
Address with sufficient Care and Candor. If you think they are right in their
distinguishing Tenets, why don't you join them? And if you cannot prove they
are right in their peculiar Notions, your pleading they are right in those
Things which they hold in common with us is really Nothing at all to your
Purpose. There never was any Sect of Heretics so corrupt as to deny all
Truths, so that by this Rule Ministers should never try to reclaim Persons from
their Mistakes, and consequently the Apostles did very wrong in reproving and
w^iting against the false Teachers that disturbed the Churches in their Days.

2d. But you have a more plausible Argument. You say, when you look ^ound on
the standing Churches and their Members, you can scarcely see any Appearance of
Religion. A dull Formality prevails in attending public Worship, and at other
Times much Vanity, Frothiness, yea and much open Profaneness. The Youth are
light, airy, careless and irreligious; the aged worldly, lukewarm and
indifferent about serious Piety. Whereas when you look among the separate
Meetings, and those that attend them, you see much Solemnity and Seriousness.
In short you say there is a much greater Appearance of Religion among them than
in the standing Churches.

ANSWER. As I have already considered the extraordinary religious Appearances
which are among them, and I think fully proved that they are no good Proof that
they are right, I shall not here repeat what I have said, but seriously entreat
you to review those Passages again. There is doubtless great Reason to lament
over the prevailing Iniquities of the Times, and the Wickedness of many that
belong to the standing Churches. But since those who have separated from us
have had a principal Hand by their disorderly Practices to provoke God to
withdraw his Spirit, to raise and foment Pejudices in the Minds of People
against their Ministers, and thus to promote the Wickedness so much lamented
among us, I cannot but think, that when they upbraid us with these Things they
must do it with a peculiar ill Grace.

This is an Objection which was made of old against Christ and his true
followers. The Disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast, and they
came and said unto Christ, why do the Disciples of John, and of the Pharisees
fast, but thy Disciples fast not? Mark ii, 18.
They were it seems greatly stumbled, and much at a Loss about Christ and his
Disciples, because (as they thought) they did not appear to be so strict and
religious, as the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees. It is abundantly
evident from the New Testament that the Pharisees were very strict and devout
in their Way. They were frequent in their religious Exercises, since they
fasted twice in the Week. The Mahometans are very frequent in their Devotions,
and they value themselves on being more strict and virtuous, than they think
Christians are. Hence it is reported to be a common saying among them, would
you have me to swear and lie like a Christian. If we come to Christendom, have
not the Papists a much greater show of Religion than the Protestants? Where can
you find any Man so strict and devout in his Way as the famous Abbe de Paris?
And there are great Numbers who profess the Romish Religion, who are eminent
for extraordinary Fastings, Penances and Devotions, far beyond what prevails
among Protestants. And I have been credibly informed that Popery spreads and
gains Ground among the common People in some Places in England, on this very
Account, that the Papists are more frequent and devout in their religious
Exercises. Suppose you had been carried Captive to Canada in the beginning of
the War, and had seen the Papists frequent, engaged and lively in their
religious Worship, as they are said to have been if I remember right, and then
upon an Exchange of Prisoners, when you came into the English Army, you should
have perceived scarcely any Appearance of Religion, but the general Part
Cursing and Swearing, what would you have done? According to your Objection you
must have been ready to change your Religion, and become Papists, at least you
must have been greatly at a Loss, whether they were not after all in the right.
Thus your Argument concludes as strongly in Favor of the Pharisees,
Mahometans, and Papists, as it does in Favor of those who have separated from
our Churches. Yet I dare say you have no Tho'ts of professing yourselves
Pharisees, Papists, or Mahometans. Your Argument proves too much, if it could
prove any Thing, and therefore it must proceed upon a Mistake. The Mistake in
this Respect is your making the external Show of Religion a certain Mark, and
Evidence of Person's being right. Now you might have known from the common
Proverb, "all is not Gold that glisters" that some profess a great deal of
Religion, who have no more of it in Reality, than their Neighbors. Was not
this the Case with the Pharisees, the Mahometans and Papists? As I don't
pretend to search the Hearts, nor to know how far God may permit Saints to be
deluded by Satan, as David was when he was influenced by this proud Spirit to
number the People, as Peter was who through his Instigation denied his Lord and
Master; so I cannot tell how many of those who through his Delusions have
separated from us, are sincerely religious. But be that as it may, I am sure
they are wrong in yielding to his Delusions, and I am sure you would be very
wrong in following them. I cannot think that their following their own
erroneous and heated Imaginations, and the Delusions of Satan, is any great
Sign of eminent Holiness.

As it is natural for surperstitious and deluded Devotees to appear more
religious than they really are, and to make a great Show of external Piety,
when they are utter Strangers to it; I have often wondered that those who have
separated from the standing Churches have not been more eminent for their
visible Purity and Holiness than they generally are at present. They withdrew
from us, because they imagined our Churches were not pure. They were a select
Company of true Converts as they themselves gave out. And yet if we make the
Gospel our Rule by which to judge of Purity, I believe they don't shine very
bright. -- As our Churches contain in some Sense the general Part of those that
are born and brought up in the Land, and there is a small Company who all
professed to be true Converts, it would not have been wonderful, if their
Members had greatly outshined ours, considered as a Body. For they pretended to
the greatest Purity, and their Character and Credit as a Party depended very
much on making good their Pretensions. Now Pride will excite Men to do a great
Deal in Religion, when their Credit of Interest lies at Stake. How many brave
Things did Jehu do? Yet notwithstanding all these powerful Motives and peculiar
Advantages which they have had, I believe if you heartily consider their
Members and ours, and the several violent Heats and unchristian Contentions
that have arisen among them, at one Time and another, etc. you must acknowledge
they have very little to boast of, even in Point of visible Purity. According
to my Observation, and the Account I have received from several worthy
Gentlemen that are acquainted with them, there have been as many Scandals among
them for their Number, and the Time they have separated, as in the standing
Churches. And I believe they have showed as little Zeal and Faithfulness in
censuring Offenders as any Church in the Land. If they were to be tried by the
Standard of Purity before impartial Judges, they would probably be found to be
no Gainers by their Separation. And if we remember that it has been proved,
that many of those Things which they call the eminent Exercises of Religion
proceed from unscriptural Notions, and wild Imaginations or the Suggestions of
Satan; the Advantage in Point of true Religion, sincere Christian Piety, is
almost beyond Comparison on the Side of the standing Churches. For strip their
Religion of Extravagancies, and what have they left behind? They have the
outside Show of Religion, but where is there any Thing among them like internal
Holiness and real Humbleness of Heart? Where is their Meekness? Where their
Charity? Now according to the Apostle, It a Man should speak with the Tongues
of Men, and of Angels, and have not Charity, he is become as a sounding Brass
and a tinkling Cymbal: Though he had the Gift of Prophecy, and understood all
Mysteries -- and have no Charity, he is Nothing; yea, though he should be so
zealous as to give his Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits
him Nothing.

But I don't desire to push this Point too far. As I have already hinted, the
Practices of those who profess any certain Religion should not be made the
grand Mark or Evidence by which we should judge of its Truth or Falsehood. There
have been very excellent Persons who have seemed to differ greatly in their
religious Sentiments about various Things. Some wicked Persons have belonged to
the best and purest Churches, as Simon Magus to that of the Apostles. When we
examine whether such a religious Denomination be right, the proper Questions to
be discused are, what do they believe? what are their peculiar Tenets and
distinguishing Principles? If we find these to be agreeable to the Word of God,
we must pronounce them right, let the Professors of that Religion live as they
will. If their Practice is bad, this does not prove that the Religion which
they profess is bad, when by the Supposition it is agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, but that they practice contrary to their Good Principles. Thus though
many professing Christians in St. Paul's Time appeared by their wicked
Practices to be Enemies of the Cross of Christ, this was no good Argument to
prove that the Christian Religion was bad. The Gospel was not the Worse for
their wicked Practices, since it did not countenance them in their Wickedness,
but bore an open Testimony against all Sorts of Iniquity. And thus the standing
Churches are not to be blamed for the Luke-warmness, the Irreligion and
Profaneness, which alas! too much prevail among many in the present Day; for we
don't approve of their Luke-warmness and Wickedness. With the Apostles of old
we bear the most public and earnest Testimony against all Manner of Vice and
Immorality. And thus the Irregularities, which some, who in some Sense belong
to the standing Churches are guilty of, can be no proper Grounds of Stumbling
and Offense, since they are duly testified against Time after Time. And much
less can they be any just Cause of Separation. There were many in the Apostolic
Churches who were Enemies to the Cross of Christ. Luke-warmness prevailed to a
dreadful Degree in the Church of Landice^. But Christ did not recommend it to
the Christians to divide and read his Church, and separate from one another. No
he frequently exhorted to love one another, and to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the (...) of Peace.

The the S^ (...) Churches cannot be justly (...) with the Luke-warmness and
Immoralities that some of their ^mbers may be guilty of, since they bear a
proper Testi^ against them; yet those who have separated from us cannot (...)
themselves of the same Pl^ Be^ of their Enthusiasm and Disorders, for this
obvious Reason, that they professedly maintain the enthusiastic Notions of New
Revelations, Impulses, etc. and not only so, but glory in them, and in the
various Irregularities into which they have been led in Consequence of these
false delusive Principles. They approve, maintain and exh^ to those Things and
Practices, which we charge with being (...) scriptural, imaginary and delusive.
They commend them as the most eminent Att^ in Religion. But the Standing
Churches lament and (...) the Luke-warmness of their Members. They reprove and
censure those who walk disorderly. Is there not a very wide Difference between
the Conduct of the Standing Churches with Respect to the Blemishes you see in
them, and the Conduct of those who have separated with Respect to the
Irregularities with which they are charged?

If then you would State the Objection, I have been thus largely considering,
sa^ly and honestly, you should do it in some such Manner as this Viz. Whether
these Sects who openly avow unscriptural Notions, and professedly teach and
zealously inculcate enthusiastic Errors, are to be reckoned more agreeable to
the Word of God, and more likely to promote the Spiritual Good of Mankind,
merely because they have a great external show of something that looks a little
like Religion; than the regular standing Churches whose Principles are known to
be founded on the Scriptures, since there are some Lukewarm Professors and
vicious Persons belonging to them, whom they greatly disapprove and faithfully
exhort to forsake their wicked Courses? When your Objection is thus fairly
stated, I hope you can see that it is not very weighty. I believe I need say no
more to it, unless it be to put you in Mind, that while you accuse others of
Luke-warmness and Irreligion, you yourselves should be eminently holy. No Body
hinders you in the standing Churches to grow in Grace, and let your Light shine
before Men that they may be brought to glorify your Father who is in Heaven.

3d. But why does God own those who have separated from us if they were so very
wrong?

ANSWER. How do you know that he does own them? God may overruled a Temptation
of Satan, or a Person's falling into a grevious Sin to be a Means of saving
Good to his Soul. But would you run into Sin, or the Temptations of Satan in
Expectation of receiving this saving Good? You should remember what I have
already observed, that when we speak of any religious Sect of People, we always
refer to their peculiar distinguishing Principles. Now you have no Reason to
think that God ever improved any of the peculiar Principles of these Sects to
do any Good to one Soul, otherwise than he might overrule the Temptations of
the Evil Spirit. Whereas on the contrary, you have the most solid Reasons to
convince you that God has frequently blessed the Doctrines of the standing
Ministers and Churches for the saving Benefit of the Souls of his People. Do
you consider what you say, when you talk about God's owning these separate
Teachers and Assemblies? Do you, can you, soberly think that God approves of
Errors and wild Disorders? And is it not certain that these are their
Peculiarities? If they are not owned in these Things, they are not owned at
all. Suppose then it were certain that God blessed some Truths which they
chance sometimes to deliver for the Benefit of some Persons, this is not to be
looked on as his owning of them, since this is only his blessing his own Truth
and not an Approbation of their Errors. And thus it seems he blessed his Truths
in Paul's Time though delivered by Men who preached Christ out of Envy.

And now having heard and considered the chief Things you have to say in
Defense of your Practice, in encouraging these Enthusiasts, and their Teachers
by frequenting their Meetings, I hope you will patiently attend a little longer,
while I offer my Reasons against it.

It is represented in the Word of God as a Sinful Thing to continue fickle and
unsettled in your Sentiments about Religion. Most certainly Religion is a
Matter of such Importance, as should engage your most serious Attention. You
should carefully examine what is right, and adhere to it with Stedfastness.
Hence the Isralites of old were blamed for halting between two Opinions. The
Apostle Paul represents it as a childish Thing for Christians to continue
wavering and unsettled about Religion, ^er that Christ has granted us such
great Advantages under the Gospel. Ephesians iv 14 2 Timothy iii 6 ^. etc.
That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro with every Wind of
Doctrine by the Slight of Men and cunning Craftiness whereby they lie in wait
to deceive. And in another Passage he speaks of them as silly Women who are
ever learning and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. You see
according to the Apostle Paul, that Persons, who have no fixed Principles in
Religion, but who are ready to follow every one, who says, Lo here is Christ,
or Lo there, seem to be childish and silly. Must not your wavering between one
Opinion and another arise from this Sort of Childishness and Silliness; or from
such an Indifferency to all Religion, that you don't think it worth while to
examine it at all. I cannot but be afraid this is the Case with some of you,
though I hope better of others. But be that as it may, certainly you don't
represent yourselves in a good Light, who having grown up in a Christian Land,
and under the most excellent, religious Advantages, and yet are so ignorant or
unstable, that you are ready at every Turn to renounce your professed
Principles, and become the Proselytes of every enthusiastic Sect, and separate
Party.

How many of those who have separated from us, solemnly promised before God,
Angels and Men, that they would sincerely adhere to the holy Scriptures, and
seek the Peace and Prosperity of our Churches. Yet you see they have rent
themselves off from us, and use all their little Arts and Cunning to ruin and
destroy us. Now what can be done with Persons, who from Impulses or Prejudices,
or both, thus openly break their solemn Promises and Covenant Engagements? God
commands, and they promised to seek and maintain Peace. And yet they use their
utmost Endeavors to promote Division, Strife and Contention, as if they had
determined to act in the most open Defiance of their solemn Vows and Promises
as well as of the Gospel. Had we imposed any unscriptural Terms of Communion on
them, this would have made us the Breakers of the Covenant Contract, and
afforded them a good Plea for Separation, if they had patiently endured and
tried to make us sensible of our Errors. But we have remained true and steadfast
to our Covenant, adhering strictly to the Word of God, teaching those Things,
and those only which Christ has commanded in his written Word. And thus it
clearly appears, they have separated from the standing Churches for the Sake of
their own beloved Errors, their Impulses, Revelations, etc. Now when you attend
on their Meetings Time after Time, don't you encourage them to go on in these
their Errors, which are of such a dangerous Tendency to the Souls of Men; which
threaten to subvert the Scriptures, and root out all sincere experimental
Religion. Do you think this is acting a friendly Part to them, or to the
standing Churches, or to yourselves.

It seems by your Conduct, you can hear them reproach, vilify and contemn all
the Churches and Ministers of Christ in the Land, as Limbs of Antichrist, and
Synagogues of Satan, without any Appearance of Dissatisfaction; nay, with
seeming Approbation. For why else do you attend their Meetings? And yet
astonishing! sundry of you would take it hard to be excluded from christian
Privileges in our Churches. Is not this strange and inconsistent Conduct? When
you review it soberly* can you possibly believe that Christ the great King and
Head of the Church approves of your Practice? Has he left you at Liberty to
countenance Enthusiasts in their Errors, and confirm them in their awful
Delusions and Evil-Speekings; and to weaken the Hands of those who upon your
own Principles are his true Ministers and Churches? Yet you cannot but see, if
you seriously consider Matters, that this is the native Tendency of you
Conduct, in frequenting their Meetings.

God has given us sundry Directions or Rules with Regard to Deceivers, false
Prophets or Teachers, which you would do well seriously to consider such as,
Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have learned and avoid them. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in
Sheep's Clothing with specious Appearances of eminent Religion. According to
the Scripture, if a false Teacher or Prophet come unto you, you must not
receive him into your House, neither bid him God Speed. For he that bids him
God Speed, is Partaker of his evil Deeds. Romans xvi 17. Matt. vii. 15. 2 John
vii, -- 11.
These separate Teachers whose Ministrations you attend, are either what they
profess, that is, Persons sent and inspired of God in an extraordinary and
immediate Way, or else they are Deceivers and false Teachers. That they are not
thus sent of God has been fully proved already; and you yourselves seem to
allow it, since you don't profess to join with them as complete Members. It is
evident therefore that they are in Truth and in your Opinion false Prophets.
Since therefore your attending upon their Meetings is a very great
Encouragement to them, and has a Tendency to strengthen and confirm them in
their erroneous Principles and Practices, you make your selves accessory to all
the Injury they do to Religion; you make yourselves Partakers of their evil
Deeds, and you will at last find yourselves answerable to God for the
Consequences.

As this your Conduct is sinful, offensive to God, and hurtful to Religion, you
have awful Reason to fear, lest God in his righteous Judgment should give you
over to strong Delusions, and leave you fully to join with them in the worst of
their Extravagancies in Principle and Practice; even to go to that horrid
Length to which John Lewis and the Dutartres were carried of Satan. It Is often
observed, that when a new Sect of Enthusiasts arises, many follow them, and
attend their Meetings; some out of Curiosity, and some perhaps to divert
themselves with their Extravagance and Nonsense. After a while some will attend
because the Place of their Meeting is nearer them, than that to which they
belong, or because they are disaffected to the Minister or some of the Church;
and some of these Persons at length go fully into those Principles and
Practices, which they at first abhorred. This in many Cases at least seems
plainly to be owing to their being given up to strong Delusions, to believe a a
Lie, because they received not the Truth in the Love of it. Instances of this
Kind should serve as a Warning to you. And the Improvement you should make of
them, is this, you should forsake the Tents of these deluded Men.

As the Separatists, when they hear any Story that reflects Disgrace upon our
Churches, especially on the Ministers, we from long Experience don't expect
they will take any suitable Pains to enquire whether it be true or false; but
that they will rather employ all the Strength of their gloomy Imagination in
exaggerating it, till it becomes quite frightful; and then deal by it as the
Levite did with his Concubine, cut it into Pieces and send to all the Coasts of
Israel to raise the popular Odium. And what is yet worse, if they can find
Nothing of a public Nature sufficient to ruin a Minister's Character and
Usefulness, they will give broad Hints and frequently, expressly affirm that he
is unconverted, or at best fallen from God and become dead. And it is to be
greatly lamented that this same ansavoury Leaven has deeply infected many of
the standing Churches. Sundry great Professors, if we may judge from their
Practice, seem to imagine that a considerable Part of Religion consists in
decrying Ministers. To hear them discourse on this darling Topic, one would
think the present Set of Ministers in this Country were a Parcel of silly
Idiots or designing Knaves, or that the Declaimers were Pupils of Shaftsbury or
Bolingbrook.

If such can stop a little in their Harangue, I would ask what Evil have we
done? What are the Crimes you have to charge against us? Are there any of us
guilty of Heresy or Scandal? Point out the Men and prosecute them according to
the Rules of the Word. Let the grossly Ignorant, the Heterodox and Scandalous
be complained of, tried and deposed unless they amend. FIAT JUSTITIA ET RUAT
COELUM. Though Gal. i.
we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, let him be
accursed. But ^t not the innocent suffer with the guilty any longer.

That none may think I have mentioned these Things with a View of screening
myself from their private Jealousies, dark Innuendoes, or public and express
Declarations, I here give all and every Person full Liberty to take any or all
of these Methods so far as I am concerned, if they can be so weak as to think
them commendable, or that they cannot maintain their Principles, and answer my
Arguments in any other Manner. Predestination is an Article of my Creed. Hence
I believe that God who has said to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come but no
farther: And here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, will also restrain the Wrath
and Malice of Men, so that they can do me no Injury without the divine
Permission. I have long since read, and endeavored thoroughly to imbibe and
practice upon the Sentiment of the Apostle in the following Words, With me it
is a very small Matter that I should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment:
Yea I judge not mine own self. For I know Nothing by myself, yet am I not
hereby justified: But he that judges me is the Lord. Therefore judge Nothing
before the Time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to Light the hidden
Things of Darkness, and will make manifest The Counsels of the Heart. 1 Cor.
iv. 3, -- 5.
This Passage contains (as Dr. Doddridge justly observes) a gentle, but very
affecting Insinuation that his Opponents, confident as they might seem in their
own Integrity and Safety, would do well to take greater Heed, that they were
not imposed upon by the Deceitfulness of their own Hearts; that under specious
Forms his Enemies concealed very dark Designs which would not bear the
Discoveries of the awful Day of Judgment; as also a very solid Argument against
magnifying one Minister above another, namely, that the secret Principles of
Men's Actions are unknown.

At present I shall only hint that Christ has instituted the Gospel Ministry,
and that Ministers are his Ambassadors, and consequently that he requires all
his People to treat them with that Regard which is due to them in this
Character, and that he accounts the unjust Indignities and Contempt offered to
them as offered to himself. And as to you who have not withdrawn from our
Churches, but attend the Ordinances we administer, you must at least allow me
to plead in Behalf of Ministers the common Privilege of Brethren. It is the
second Command of Christ to love your Neighbors and Brethren as yourselves.
Now by your attending the Sacraments with us, you promise and swear that you
will sincerely keep all the Commands of Christ, consequently that you will love
your Ministers as yourselves, since you must at least allow that we are
Neighbors and Brethren. But if instead of loving us as yourselves, you indulge
unchristian Jealousies and Suspicions, and endeavor to weaken our Influence
and ruin our Characters by dark Innuendoes, you must permit me to ask you,
whether this be not comprehended in Scripture in the Words Backbiting and
smiling secretly. And if it is, you would do well to remember, that God has
said, Cursed be he that smites his Neighbor secretly, and all the People
shall say, Amen. Let Men then take Heed to themselves, lest while they are
secretly judging and smiting others they should be condemned themselves.

Separatists of one Kind and another commonly buzz it into People's Ears where
they think they are likely to have any Influence, that all, who join in
communion with a Church in which there are any Persons guilty of scandalous
Sins, erroneous Opinions, or chargeable with Backsliding and Luke-warmness, are
as wicked as the Persons themselves who have actually fallen into such Sins.
And as it cannot he denied that there are sundry Persons in the standing
Churches, whom we have Reason to mourn over with the Apostle 2 Cor. xii. 20,
21. this is a Topic which affords them Matter for many zealous and bitter
Declamations, which have a Tendency to alarm the Consciences of weak Persons.
Yet this Principle is a very ignorant and wild Conceit.

The Means of Grace and the Ordinances of the Gospel were not appointed for
sincere Believers as such, but for the visible Church, for visible Believers
and their Seed. Thus Moses instructed. Thus Israel understood and practiced.
Christ and his Apostles preached to the unconverted, and commanded them to take
Heed how they heard and to repent and believe. When the Apostle Peter looked on
Simon Magus to be unconverted he directed him to pray -- The Ordinances of the
Gospel were not instituted nor designed to testify that we believe that all
with whom we join are sincere Saints, nor that we approve their Conduct, but
they were appointed to represent Christ and his Benefits. This is their
principal End. With Respect to our Brethren with whom we join in Communion, we
testify by our Conduct, that so far as we have any certain Knowledge about
their Practice, all Things considered as Matters are circumstanced, we may
lawfully join in Communion with them. And though they should be guilty of many
Sins, yet we are not in any Sense chargeable with them, if we have carefully
followed what appeared to us to be the Mind of Christ in reproving,
disciplining, and testifying against their erroneous Opinions and sinful
Practices; all which we may do according to the Rules of the Gospel, without
any Separation from the Church to which they belong. Unless this be allowed it
will follow that the Prophets and Apostles were defiled by holding Communion
with the Jewish and Christian Churches. For there were many erroneous,
disorderly, backsliding and lukewarm Persons in both the Jewish and Christian
Churches in their Days, as well as now. Yea, more shocking, Christ himself the
Holy One of God must have been polluted by his joining in Communion with the
Jewish Church, and chargeable with all the scandalous and abominable Sins of
that People, who were the greatest Part of them open Sinners or secret
Hypocrites. For he punctually attended their religious Worship and Feasts at
Jerusalem. He never separated from their Communion. But he used all lawful
Means to reclaim them, and bore due Testimony against their false Doctrines and
wicked Practices. In following his Example we are safe. In forsaking it there
is Danger.

Do we hinder you to follow any of the Methods which God has prescribed to you
in his Word in reproving any scandalous Offender in our Churches, or in tabling
a Complaint against him, or in bearing Testimony against every Thing that is
wrong in a christian Manner?

As to the Scriptures which the various Kinds of Separatists from true Churches
quote to justify them in their Separations having been so lengthy already I
have not Room at present to examine them particularly. Nor is there any great
Need -- God erected his visible Church among the Jews, and at length chose
Jerusalem for the chief Seat of his public Worship to which he commanded them
all to repair. This Church he maintained and erected no other till after the
Resurrection of Christ. Hence it is certain, there can be no Precept, nor any
Example that God approved of to justify Separation from the Jewish Church, or
any true Church during this Period. The Old Testament and the four Gospels, can
be Nothing to the Purpose of the Separatists. Yet there were many Separatists
during this Period. King Jeroboam withdrew from the Jewish Church, and set up
two Separate Meetings, one at Dan and another at Bethel, and many induced
partly by his Authority, and partly by their own Inclination, followed his
Example. But he and they stand on Record in the Scriptures stigmatized as
wicked Schismatics to all Generations. The Samaritans set up another Separate
Meeting at Mount Gerizzim: But our blessed Lord expressly condemned them as
Schismatics, and as worshipping they knew not what.

We find as little to countenance Separations from a true Church where no
unscriptural Terms of Communion are imposed, in the Acts of the Apostles and
their other Writings as in the preceding Part of the Bible. It appears from
their Writings that there were many Disorders, Corruptions and Backslidings in
the primitive Churches before the Apostles died. An Antichristian Spirit had
even then begun to work. Yet notwithstanding these Things they were still true
Churches of Christ, and owned by him as such. He had not forsaken them, but
held their Stars in his right Hand, and walked in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks. And since this was the Case, can any Man be so weak as once to
imagine, that he allowed or required any of his People to separate from the
Communion of those Churches. Hence it is plain that they must pervert all and
every Tex of Scripture which they quote to justify Separations from the regular
standing Churches in the Country; since such Passages are only Exhortations to
Christians to keep themselves from the Sins and Corruptions that prevail in
their Day, and not to countenance others in their Errors and wicked Practices,
all which may be done without withdrawing from their Communion; or at most to
separate from those Churches where there are new and unscriptural Term of
Communion imposed and all other Methods of obtaining Redress prove
unsuccessful. In such a Case it is readily acknowledged that Christ has
commanded his Disciples to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith he has made us
free, and he justified his Disciples in disregarding the Rites, Ceremonies,
Inventions and Traditions of the Pharisees and Elders. And then the rigorous
Imposers are the blameable Schismatics. A major Party in a Church may act
inconsistent with the Principles of Liberty and play the Tyrant. And if they
do, and thus compel the Minor to withdraw by their unscriptural Impositions and
Tyranny, the Sin and Guilt of the Schism will lie at their Door. However a
Minor Party should not be rash in withdrawing and setting up another Church. It
is agreeable to the Scriptures and the Example of the Apostles, Acts xv. to
submit the Matter in Contest to the Decision of proper and Impartial Judges.
This valuable Privilege and important Branch of Christian Liberty is secured to
our Churches by our excellent Constitution as well as granted in the
New Testament. But it is incompatible with that Sort of Government or rather
Anarchy, that must necessarily prevail in the independent separate Assemblies.
Hence their various Confusions, Contentions, and sometimes Excommunications of
one another, and Separations from Separations. For indeed their independent
Notions of Church Government and Practice upon them are equally inconsistent
with the Liberty of particular Members, Common Sense and Scripture.

But since we don't oblige any of our Members to approve any Thing that is
Evil, nor to condemn any Thing that is Good; since we don't impose any
unscriptural Terms of Communion on any Person; nor hinder nor forbid any to
live in most exact Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel in all Godliness and
Honesty; let those who on one Pretense and another go on and persist in
separating, know they must be reputed Schismatics, and involve themselves in
all the Sin, Guilt, Danger, and Punishment which awaits those who without
Cause, divide, rend and tear to Pieces the Church of God, the beloved Spouse of
Jesus Christ, whom he has redeemed with his own Blood. This Sin and Guilt
would doubtless be dreadful, though the Separations proceed from merely a
proud, ambitious and contentious Spirit. But certainly it must greatly
aggravate the Guilt and Punishment, if such Persons besides Pride and Ambition
are also influenced by a Love to destructive Errors. In such a Case they must
in an awful Manner be laying Stumbling Blocks in the Way of the blind, and
hardening Sinners in their wicked Ways, to their eternal Ruin. Now if this be
the Case with the various Sects of Separatists against whom I am writing, I
leave it to be seriously considered, Whether any who directly or indirectly
aid, assist and countenance them in their Separations shall escape with
Impunity, when a jealous God makes Enquiry?

The Falsehood and bad Tendency of their Principle about immediate Impulses,
Revelations, etc. which is the great Foundation, the Life and Soul of all their
Schemes, has been clearly demonstrated. And it is easy to show that their other
Antinomian Fancies which have been more briefly glanced at, are equally false
and pernicious. How Things appear to others I shall not pretend to say. But it
appears plain to me from sundry Year's Observation, that the natural, corrupt
Disposition of Sinners to depart from God, neglect the Duties of Religion, and
indulge their sinful Lusts with Greediness, has been greatly kept in
Countenance and strengthened by the Clamours of Separatists, the Prejudices
they have infused into People's Minds against the Ordinances of the Gospel, and
the Influence of their false Principles.

Some Quakers.
of them in direct Opposition to the plain Commands of Christ discard Baptism
and the Lord's Supper altogether. And alas! too many practically join with
them. Others (...) vi ^^
of them manifest a great Disaffection to the Law, and exclaim against
preaching it up at all in any Sense, representing Convictions by the Law as
tending to build Men up in their own Righteousness, and thus an Obstacle that
hinders Men from believing in Christ. And does not Presumption and Stupidity,
the natural Consequences of such Notions, greatly prevail in the present Day?
Have any been bro't to Christ where the Law has been rejected as a
Schoolmaster? Some of them R^s.
deny and ridicule the Sabbath, especially the Christian Sabbath. And has not
Profanation of the Sabbath been growing more fashinonable for some Years?
Others Separate Baptists.
of them declaim against Infant Baptism, and represent it as a Thing utterly
insignificant and useless. And don't many suffer themselves to be so far
influenced by their noisy Clamours as to forget their baptismal Vows? They
zealously maintain that the visible Church must consist only of sincere Saints,
and that God does not require, but forbid unconverted Sinners to attempt the
performance of any religious Duty, and that it is one of the greatest Sins, if
not the unpardonable Sin for any who are not sincere Believers to attend the
Sacraments. Hence when a Man has attempted to pray whom they looked on to be
unconverted, sundry of them have been known immediately to withdraw, probably
lest they should countenance him in such a sinful Practice.

The Consequence which naturally follows from such Priciples is that
unconverted Sinners should not regard Religion at all, but live as they please.
For if they may not lawfully attempt to perform religious Duties, and wait upon
God for his Grace in the best Manner they can; if it be really so, that God has
absolutely forbidden them to read, hear, pray, meditate, attend Sacraments,
etc. without the highest Kind of Faith; then they must first know they are
converted and have this saving Faith. Otherwise they will do what according to
this Scheme God has not directed nor required, which would be Presumption.
Dreadful is the Curse which God has denounced against those who make any
Additions to his written Word, and do what he has not commanded. -- On this
Scheme there can be no public Worship nor Sacraments attended at all. For there
are not a sufficient number of assured Christians ordinarily living so
contigous as would answer for this End.

They will allow perhaps when pinched with an Argument that unconverted Sinners
are under Obligations to serve God by virtue of his Law. But if they would be
consistent with themselves, they must own that unconverted Sinners are obliged
only as the Devils are. But the Law which God has revealed to Mankind in his
Word is the Law of Christ. It is ordained in the Hand of a Mediator. And Men
had perhaps as good neglect Duties altogether as perform them without any
Reference to Christ the Mediator. If any should think the Devils are bound to
pray to God, yet surely they cannot imagine they are bound to pray to him in the
Name of Christ which is the Way which God has prescribed to Mankind in his
Word. So that such Notions directly (...) to subvert the whole Love of God in
that view in which it is more especially published in the Bible.

Some endeavor to support themselves in their Errors and others in their Sins
from the Doctrine of Predestination, saying if they are elected they shall be
saved, let them be ever so wicked. But such should remember that the Scripture
Account is Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience and Sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ. The Means and the Way are as much appointed as the End. And to
allude to the Words of Christ in another Case, "what God has joined together,
let not Man put asunder."

Some Ignorant Persons infer with John Lewis, that if the Doctrine of
Predestination be true, then Moral Agency is destroyed, and they so compelled
to act, that they are not to blame for their Sins. But did they never read,
that though it was determined or decreed in the Scripture Sense of these Words,
that Judas should betray his Lord and Master; yet this did not free him from
Blame, nor deliver him from a most aggravated Punishment? The Son of Man goes
as it was determined, but Woe unto that Man by whom he is betrayed, It had been
good for that Man if he had not been born This plain Text mentions a certain
Matter of Fact. Let those who dislike the 17th of the famous 39 Articles,
explain this Text and Fact fairly at their Leisure. Let Men's Consciences be
thoroughly awakened, and they will find with John Lewis, that such Refuge will
fail them. They will then see, that as the Decrees of God were secret and
unknown to them, so they never indulged their sinful Lusts with any View to
fulfill them: and consequently that it is utterly vain to attempt to throw the
Blame of their Sins on the wise, just and holy Decrees of the blessed God.

God has made the reprobate as well as his Elect. The Non-Elect are his
Subjects as well as the Elect. The Commands of God which are the Rule of
Conduct are given to both without Distinction. And all are bound to obey them.
So that it is contrary to all the Commands of God to suppose that Men should
not attempt to serve God till they know they have the Faith of God's Elect.

The Means of Grace and the Ordinances of the Gospel, are not given to the
Elect as such, because they live promiscuously among the Non-Elect, and are
unknown to the World. Neither are the Means of Grace appointed for sincere
Believers as such, because they are designed for the Conviction and Conversion
of Sinners, as well as the Edification of Saints. Faith comes by Hearing.
Besides, it cannot be certainly known who are sincere Believers. Men cannot
search the Heart. It follows then, that the Means of Grace are given to the
visible Church, to visible Believers or Christian Professors and their Seed.
Thus Moses instructed of Old. Thus Israel understood and practiced. Yet the
Doctrine of Election was as true, and the Necessity of saving Faith as great
then as it is now. Christ and his Apostles preached to Sinners and Saints, and
commanded them to take Heed how they heard. And when the Apostle Peter looked
on Simon Magus to be unconverted, he directed him to repent and pray. There is
no Doubt but Faith was implied in this Repentance and Prayer. For God requires
Perfectness and Sincerity of Heart in every Duty. But the Question here is
this, and this only, should not Simon Magus attempt to pray till he knew he had
saving Faith? Did Peter give any Intimation to him that he might neglect
Prayer, or that he ought not to pray at all while he continued in the Gall of
Bitterness? Was not Simon Magus's Perverseness a principal Part of his
Inability? And is not this in some Sense the Impotency of unconverted Sinners?
If it is, I must be permitted to ask. Whether it is reasonable to suppose that
God does not require Sinners to perform Duties, because they are very averse to
his Service? Will this Plea be a sufficient Excuse for their Ungodliness?

If Sinners are taught that they may not do any Duty 'til they know they have
saving Faith, and are elected, left it should be of no Advantage to them; this
cannot well fail to encourage them in their Sins, and make them very easy in
that Neglect of Religion which is so natural to them. Then it will also follow
that they act very reasonable, when according to their Custom they carefully
strive against all Convictions of Sin, and to get rid of all Awakenings and
serious Impressions as soon as possible. For they will, with Paul Acts ix. 11.
compared with Romans vii.
in the like Case, be earnest in Prayer, while they have any serious
Impressions on their Minds. If serious Convictions be, as the Moravians teach,
a great Obstacle to hinder Men from believing in Christ, then the more secure
and sinful they are, the more likely to get Faith and Salvation. Such Notions
may be advanced with a Pretense of exalting the Righteousness of Christ, and
the Glory of free Grace; and they may be greedily imbibed by the unwary. But
they appear to me the greatest Affront that can be offered to Christ, a
monstrous Perversion of his Atonement, as if Christ had died to render
impenitent Sinners accepted unto everlasting Life, and thus excuse them from
Repentance and religious Duties. For don't such Notions make Christ the
Minister of Sin with a Witness? I am bold to say that such Principles reduced
to Practice will land in Damnation. But I hope the Hearts of some Antinomians
are better than their Heads.

Be that as it may, I am certain of this that such Notions are not to be found
in the Bible. When God promises to give Israel a new Heart, and a new Spirit,
and to take away the stony Heart, and give them an Heart of Flesh," he adds, "I
will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. God
expressly commanded speaking to the Wicked and Unrighteous, Seek ye the Lord,
while he may be found, call ye upon him, while he is near. He appeals to Men's
own Reason and Conscience on this Point, when he asks, "Should not a People
seek unto their God?" Did not God approve of the Conduct of the Ninevites in
crying mightily unto him? Was not their Conduct more pleasing to God, than if
they had neglected Prayer, and gone on hardened in their Sins? But who will say
they all had the highest Kind of Faith. Such Principles are not agreeable to
Paul's Experiences, Romans vii. not to his Writings. He never taught that Sinners
should do Evil that Good may come. But they are agreeable to the Principles and
Practice of another Sort of People. Job. xxi. 14, 15.
they say unto God. Depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge of thy
Ways. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? And what Profit shall we
have if we pray unto him? There are many such Reasonings in the Hearts of
ungodly Men. And no Wonder, since they don't love God nor his Law, and would
fain be excused from Duty, and yet hope they shall have Peace though they
gratify their sinful Lusts. But God expressly declares, that all such Notions
and Speeches are against him. Mal. iii. 13 15. Ezekiel. xiii. 22. Matt xxv. 24, 30.
Your Words have been stout against me, says the LORD; yet ye say, What have
we spoken so much against thee? Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what
Profit is it, that we have kept his Ordinance and that we have walked
mournfully before the LORD of Hosts. And now we call the Proud happy: Yea, they
that work Wickedness are set up; yea they that tempt God are even delivered. It
is not Truth but Lies that Strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, that he should
not return from his Wicked way, by promising him Life. It was the slothful
Servant who hated to take suitable Pains in improving his Talent, who wickedly
and impudently imagined he could throw the Blame on his Master, and pied that
his Lord was an hard and austere Man.

Sinners if they should cry to their utmost to Eternity can do nothing at all
toward working out a justifying Righteousness, nor can they ever create
themselves a new in Christ Jesus unto Good Works. And where does God command
them to perform Duties either before or after Faith with such Views? However
since they are so ignorant and so proud as not to know their own Weakness,
'till they have fully tried the Way of Justification by Men's own Works, though
it has been blocked up since Adam's Time so that no Man ever obtained
Acceptance in that Way. Yet it remains recorded and plainly described in the
Scripture, that none may forsake it, 'till they find by their own Experience
they must leave and renounce it, or perish.

But though Sinners are prone from their Ignorance and Pride to take this
antiquated Path, and so to oppose Christ and his Righteousness, how does it
follow, that it is the Design of the Spirit in convincing Sinners to build them
up in Self-Righteousness? Or that what the Sinner does under his enlightening
and convincing Influences has any such Tendency? The very Reverse is true. For
these Operations of the Spirit, and the Sinners finding his Attempts to
establish a justifying Righteousness all in vain, is one great Thing, that
brings him to renounce Self Righteousness. And this may be done in a great
Measure before the Sinner sees Jesus Christ and his Righteousness; yea, in
many, who never have a saving Discovery of Christ at all. If it be asked what
supports the Sinner at such a Time? I answer we are apt to impose on ourselves
by metaphorical Terms. What supports the Multitude of profane Sinners, of
Heathens, etc. Is it their own Righteousness? or Christ's? They are equally
^estitute of both. What supports them then? If this Question has any Meaning,
it must be this when stripped of Metaphor, How do they live along? or what
defends them from the Fears of the Wrath to come? The true Answer to it then is
Forgetfulness of God and Security are their principal Support. Sinful Lust and
Foolish Vanities divert many. The Cares of the World employ the Thoughts of
Multitudes. In Reality Christless Sinners receive less Support from their own
Righteousness than from a Hundred other Things. Neither Scripture nor Reason
prove that all Christless Sinners constantly trust in their own Righteousness,
or that their is any Necessity in the Nature of Things that they should always
really design to work out a justifying Righteousness by attending on the Means
of Grace. If Sinners could improve their Talents, the Means of Grace, while
they remain in a State of Nature to no other Purpose than to build up a
Righteousness of their own, in Opposition to Christ's, I think it is very
strange that the Holy Spirit should ever convince and awaken them, which always
puts them on earnest Seeking and Striving. For every Attempt of a Sinner to
attain Justification or become righteous before God by his own Works, and much
more, every Imagination that God will assist him in any such Attempt must be
criminal in Man, and carries in it a dishonorable Reflection on the Most High.
So that the Spirit can never be sent to put Men on any such Labor. It is
likewise evident, that if Sinners must necessarily in all and every Thing that
they perform, design, and actually attempt, to build up their own
Self-Righteousness; the Lord would never have condemned the Servant for not
improving his Talent. For as good fit idle, as do what is worse than Nothing.
Better not build at all, than to build what must be all thrown down; unless
such foolish Attempts and Disappointments have some Tendency to teach the Man
more Sense in coming Time. If all a Man's Attempts, even under serious
Convictions, to wait upon God for his Grace, to attend on Ordinances, etc. only
lead him to build up in more hidden and refined, and consequently in more
dangerous Methods, his own Righteousness in Opposition to Christ's, he had
better neglect Duties than perform them. Most certainly God will never condemn
Men for not bring more diligent and laborious in building up their own Works
for a justifying Righteousness, in Opposition to the glorious Righteousness of
Christ. Yet it is certain, the slothful Servant in the Parable was condemned
for his Idleness and Misimprovement of his Talent. Which shows, that Sinners
should improve their Advantages and Means of Grace, and not trust in their
Duties; and that this is not impossible in the Nature of Things. Such as talk
otherwise, give but too much Reason to suspect that they are ignorant of the
Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, and the Way in which Men are brought to
renounce their own Righteousness; or at least that they have not duly attended
to what has passed in their Minds.

That such Principles have a Tendency to Irreligion is evident from plain,
undeniable Matters of Fact. While the Quakers deny both the Sacraments, and the
Separatists represent it as the most horrible Sin for Men to attend upon them
without Faith. Is not the Lord's Supper generally neglected? While some from
the same Principle dispute, or at least scruple whether there is any Advantage
in unconverted Men's attending on the Means of Grace, and performing any
religious Duties, have not some begun to leave off both praying and hearing? Is
not Remissness in attending the Means of Grace a growing Practice in the
Country? People have become slack and indifferent in assembling themselves
together "to worship the King the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the Feast of
Tabernacles," the Lord's Supper. And the Lord has been fulfilling his
Threatening upon this Land in an awful Manner, commanding that there should be
no Rain upon us for some Months in the Summer. 1761.
Let every One then renounce his erroneous Principles, and foolish and sinful
Practices, and search the Scriptures, and adhere to the pure Gospel of Christ,
and seriously and diligently attend on all the Duties of Religion and Means of
Grace; lest God's Anger should not be turned away, but his Hand be stretched
out still.

God has eternal as well as temporal Judgments to execute on disobedient
Sinners. Temporal Judgments may be removed. But except Sinners repent and
believe the Gospel in the true Import of it, and bring forth the Fruits of
Holiness, they shall all surely perish, and never see the Lord in Mercy. As for
such as turn aside unto their crooked Ways, the LORD shall lead the forth with
the Workers of Iniquity.

Upon the Whole, I must therefore earnestly recommend to you the Advice of the
wise Man, Cease my Son to hear the Instruction that causes to err from the
Words of Knowledge. And to engage your solemn Attention to the Warning, I have
now given you, I must leave with you those Words of his in another Case not
quite unlike this under Consideration. Hear me now therefore O ye Children, and
depart not from the Words of my Mouth lest thou mourn at the last, when thy
Flesh and thy Body are consumed; And say, how have I hated Instruction, and my
Heart despised Reproof? And have not obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor
inclined mine Ear to them that instructed me.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT does not appear to me that I have much to hope from the the Applauses, or
to fear from the Censures of the World; and therefore have made it my Business
to represent and defend what appears to me to be Truth. Since I have written
freely, though not rashly, on sundry Points, it will be no Disappointment to me
to find that many will not be pleased with what I have said. Such may remember,
I have as much Right to differ from them, as they have to differ from me; and
they may, if they please publish their Sentiments to the World as I have done.

As my Connexions with a particular Company gave Rise to what I have written,
so I have endeavored to confute their Notions, and obviate their Objections;
otherwise I could not have answered my own Design, nor acted with tolerable
Propriety; yet I have endeavored to strike at the Root of Enthusiasm, that so
the Address may be of some Service against it in general.

If the Errors I have written against were trifling, or such as No body ever
embraced, or attended with no bad Consequences, I should not have taken so much
Pains to expose them. Yet many are not aware of any Danger here. To convince
such, I have reprinted an Account of John Lewis, and the Dutartres. These
Accounts were short, they suited my Purpose, they were published before. I gave
them just as I found them. But lest some should imagine that only such weak and
ignorant Persons were in Danger of following such Impulses and Revelations, I
have inserted some others, particularly that surprising Incident in the Life of
Lord Herbert, who was a Man of great natural Parts, and had made considerable
Seize in Learning. -- I will add here, that there is Nothing which is a
greater Bar in hindering the Jews from embracing Christianity, than the Regard
they pay to their Oral Law, and their Spiritualizings, or Allegorical
Interpretations of the Old Testament.

The Address is much longer than I had intended, because I have been obliged to
discuss sundry Things that fell in my Way, which I had not particularly though it
of when I began to write. To prevent its being longer, I have been obliged to
be so Iaconic on several Things, that I shall he glad, if sundry Readers don't
mistake my Meaning. Some who are acquainted with those against whom I have
immediately written, will be ready to think, I have treated them with too much
Lenity. But in this I have endeavored to follow the Scripture Directions, not
rendering Railing for Railing, but in Meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves; if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging
the Truth.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTORY Observations, Page 1, 8. The Sufficiency of the Scriptures
asserted and argued 1st, from their Divine Author 2d, from his being perfect in
all his Works, Page 8. The Sufficiency of the Old Testament for that Time
considered, ibid. Sundry Things very briefly hinted at, from which it might be
proved, that from the Beginning of the World, and through all succeeding Ages,
Mankind, but especially the People of God, had the Knowledge of a future State
of Rewards and Punishments, Page 9, 13. The Sufficiency of the Old Testament,
taken for granted by Christ and his Apostles, ibid. The Reasonableness of
Infant Baptism hinted, and the Sufficiency of the Old and New Testament in
Conjunction, in^red from the foregoing Reasoning, ibid. The Sufficiency of the
Scriptures argued from the Title which the Evangelists give their Books -- from
their having the Holy Spirit, according to Christ's Promise -- and from an
express Passage in John's Gospel. Page 14. That there is no Need of the
immediate Revelations of Enthusiasts inferred from the Sufficiency of the
Scriptures. ibid. That no further immediate Revelations about religious Matters
are to be expected. ibid. Proved from the, New Testament. 1^. After two
Objections are answered, it is proved to be Matter of Fact, that there are no
such immediate Revelations as Enthusiasts, imagine, because they are not
confirmed by the Evidence of proper Miracles. 16, 19. The proper Idea of Purity
in Persons and Churches. 18. The Necessity of the internal Influences of the
Spirit proved; (...) from the Corruption and Stupidity of Mankind, 2d. from the
Success of the Gospel. 19, 26. The Truth of Christianity inferred from the
foregoing Reasoning and sundry Evidences of it. Miracles, the Fulfillment of
Prophecies, and the Divine Powers that attended it, very briefly represented.
ibid. That the Sects to whom this Address is Written, have different Notions
about the Influences of the Spirit, proved from their Separations. 27, 28. and
compare 105, 106, 107, 108. Their Notions stated, 28, 29. and confuted at
large, 29, 46. How the Spirit improves general Truths. 29, 36. That Men are
never taught any but general Truths by the true Spirit from the Scriptures. 30,
31, 32, and 62, 63. How Christians come to know they are in a State of Grace,
33. The Witness of the Spirit explained, 33, 34. How Men come to know it is
their Duty to pray from general Truths. 34, 35. How Men are called to the
Ministry. 35, 36. Since the general Truths of the Scripture are sufficient to
discover Men's Duty to them, there is no Reason to expect new Revelations. 36.
Some Causes of Men's looking for new Revelations hinted at. ibid. That the new
Revelations of Enthusiasts would undermine the Scriptures. 37, 38. That their
Notions expose them to the Delusions of Satan. 38, 42. and ordinarily proceed
from him. 43. No proper Miracles ever wrought to prove a Falsehood. 39. What the
Spirit of God does, summarily represented. 38, as also 49, and 63. Satan's
Methods of opposing the Spirit, 1st. by keeping Men in Ignorance of the
Scriptures. 2d. by adding to them and perverting them. 3d. by immediate
Impulses and Revelations. 39, 42. Some Account of the Quakers silent Meetings.
ibid. Their great Mistake about inward Light pointed out. ibid. That Impulses
sometimes proceed from bodily Infirmities, but often from Satan. 43. Objections
answered from Joel, etc. 43, 44. That it is Matter of Fact there are no
Prophets in our Day. (...) Sundry Instances of false Prophecies. The Sect
called (...) mortals who imagine they will not die, glanced at, and ^futed.
ibid. Prophecies of the Conversion of particular Persons considered. 46.
Witnessing for one another exposed. ibid. The Pretenses that such immediate
Revelations and Impulses are enlightening Influences, considered at large. 46,
etc. The Pretense that it is Scripture which is impressed, examined, 47. That
the Impression is with great Power considered. 47, 48. That they have strong
Opposition to the Impression. 49, 50. Their Sufferings considered. 50, 51.
Their great Zeal. 51, 53. Their Humility exanined. 54. Some Observations on
Dress. 55. The Story of Abbe de Paris. 56. Their Love very briefly considered.
60, 6^ Convictions asserted in Opposition to the Moravians. 61, 62. The true
Spirit teaches only general Truths. 62, 63. Gives those whom he Teaches a real
and consistent View of Things. 63. The Views of one who is taught by the Spirit
of God, briefly described, and how he is influenced. 63, 64, and 99. That the
Sacraments teach and seal only general Truths. 64, 65. Satan's Method of
suggesting particular Notions. 65. This represented in Men's receiving Comfort
by having it particularly impressed on their Minds, that their Sins are
pardoned. 66, 67. The Scripture Notion of Doubting stated. 67, 68. The
pernicious Consequences of misunderstanding it, pointed out. 68. No Warrant to
pronounce Men true Converts from their having some Comfort after Terrors. 68.
nor from sympathizing with them in their Experiences. 70. A short Account of
the Communion of Saints according to Scripture. 70, 71. Talking Experiences and
judging merely by them considered. ^2, 74. Some Scriptures explained. 75, 78.
Some bad Consequences that a^e from pronouncing Persons (...) be converted
merely from their declaring their Experiences 79. Though the Apostles speak of
the Churches as consisting of visible Saints, yet they did not believe that all
Christian Professors were real Saints. 79, 82. That Men may yield an Assent to
the Gospel and not have saving Faith, 82, 84. and compare 110, 111. and also
from 131, to 139. The Separate-Baptist's Objections against unconverted Men's
visible covenanting, considered and answered, 84, 86. The Opinion of the
Papists about Faith and Justification compared with that of the Enthusiasts,
addressed. 86, 89. The Errors of Legalists and Antinomians about Conversion.
89, 96. Some brief Hints on the Means of Grace. 93, and 96. and compare 86.
Regeneration previous to saving Faith. 95, and 39. and 49. and 83. and 92. Mr.
Baxter's Sentiments about the Antinomian Faith. 97, 99. That Satan improves the
Scriptures in a Sense that makes one Passage inconsistent with another 99. And
in such a Manner as fills Men with Spiritual Pride and leads them to trust in
their own Works. ibid. The several Sects of Enthusiasts, and particularly the
New England Separatists, and Separate Baptists, charged with trusting in their
own Righteousness for Justification. 88, and 99, 100. Diotrephes's Experiences,
Call to the Ministry, etc. 100, 103. A brief View of the bad Consequences of
Separations. 103, 104. Diotrophes not called to be a Minister. 105. The
Agreement in the Main, between the Conversion of Diotrephes and that of
Enthusiasts. ibid. Reasons to think they are unsound in the Faith. 10^, 106.
Some Instances of their perverting Scripture mentioned. 107, 108. The Spiritual
Sense of Scripture explained. 108, 111. The Notions of Enthusiasts pointed out,
and the Marks of their Spiritualizings discovered by sundry Examples. 111, 117.
Col. Gardener pretended to no immediate Revelations. 118 Water Baptism proved
against the Quakers 118, 120. Infant Baptism proved against the Separate
Baptists. 120, 12^ ^5. A Sabbath asserted and the Christian Sabbath proved
again the Rogerenes. 124, 126. Mr. Bellamy's Sentiments on sundry Points that
have been examined. 126, 129. An immediate Call to the Ministry stated. 129,
131. Miracles, the Evidence of it. 131, 134. Objections answered. 134, 146.
Women's public Speaking in the Church exposed. 146, 151. Sundry Instances of
Satan's deceiving by immediate Impulses and Revelations. 151, 171. Mahomet
pretended to such Extraordinaries. 155, 156. The Anabaptists in Germany,
Muncer, Matthews and John of Leyden. 157, 158 A Surprising Incident of Lord
Herbert. 159, 161. No Reason to look for immediate Signs and Tokens from
Heaven. 161, 162. An Account of the French Prophets. 163, 171. Heathens
pretended immediate Revelations. 172, 173. This no Objection against the
Scriptures. 174, 175. Nor against the supernatural Influences of the Spirit.
177, 178. Whether Enthusiasts are properly obliged by Conscience to their
Practices. 178, 182. The Lawfulness of employing Physicians, against the
Rogerenes. 183, 184. The Sinfulness of Enthusiasm, Separations and of
countenancing them. 185, 213.
ERRATA.
PAGE 7. line 1. dele of those. p. 8. for the last line but one read, a
competent Knowledge of these Things. p. 12. l. 14. after the Word Times, insert
before the Coming of Christ as well as since. p. 15. l. 16 after Writings, r.
thus, and appeal to them in Conjunction with the Old Testament as the only Test
of Truth and Error. p. 19. l. 2. r. disregarded. p. 20. l. 12 from bott. for
and r. and. p. 22. l. 16. from bot^. for naturally, r. also naturally, p. 24.
l. 9. r. Harangues, and the Pomp and Sophistry. l. 3. from bott. for Sin r.
Sins. p. 25. l. 19. after could dele not. p. 31. l. 15. for the r. their. p.
32. l. 15. after that is, put a Comma. ibidem l. last for Trough, r. Through.
p. 33. l. 4. for overcome, r. overcome. p. 34. l. 18. after us, r. and which in
some Sense are. p. 35. l. 9. from bott. for are, r. the. p. 38. l. last, put a
Comma after Miracles, and add, to direct us in the whole of our Conduct, and
such Miracles are an infallible Test by which to try all immediate Revelations.
p. 39. l. 14. dele that Scripture. ibid. l. last but one, for redued r reduced.
p. 41. l. 6. from bott. r. Fellowships. p. 42. l. 9 from bott. r. forbear. p.
40 l. 11. from bott. for reval, r. reveal. p. 50. l. 7. from bott. for are, r.
as p. 54. l. 9 for Humanity, r. Humility. p. 62. l. 17. for Tenor, r. Terror.
p. 66. l. last but one, dele 2. p. 72. l. 12. from bott. for elective, r.
collective. p. 79. l. 12. for Where, r. When. p 82. l. 18. for to, r. till. p.
94. l. 3. for Such, r. Some of these. p. 96. l. 14. from bott. for was, r.
were. p 97. l. 15. for see never, r. be near. p. 109. l 4. from bott. r.
Parables. p. 115. l. 6. after Esau, put a Semicolon; p. 124. for Watts's, in
the Margin, r. Wall's. p. 125. Margin, for at, r. a. p. 127. l. 18. for admit,
r. amidst. p 128. l. last. r. Papists against the Reformation. p. 129. l. 23.
for their, r. your. p. 135. l. 17. of the Margin after wrote, insert or at
least met with. p. 146. l. 20 for or fertile, r. and futile. p. 155. l. 10. for
Resolutions, r. Revelations. p. 157. and 158. for Twinglius, r. Zwinglius p.
159. l. 1. for pretend, r. pretended. p. 163. l. ^. for Imitation, r.
Intimation. p. 174 l. 4. for conscience, r. conscious. ibid. l. 10. for is it,
r. it is. ibid l. 13. for Person, r. Persons. ibid. l. 15. after Light, add of
Nature. p. 175. l. 2. for now, r. own p. 176. l. 8, and 15. for lay, r. lie. p.
177. l. 13. from bott. for indecency, r Industry. p. 178. l. 21. for Zearus's
r. Icarus's. p. 189. l. 15. from bott. after are, insert not. p. 193. l. 15.
for there is, r. their's. p. 200 l 5. after As, add to p. 207. l. 9. from bott.
for Love, r. Law. p. 211. l. 12. for Men's r. their.


