Mr. Davies's Valedictory ADDRSS.

September 21, 1760.

RELIGION AND PUBLIC SPIRIT.

A Valedictory ADDRESS TO THE SENIOR CLASS, DELIVERED IN NASSAU-HALL, September
21, 1760. The SUNDAY before the COMMENCEMENT:

By Samuel Davies, A. M. Late President of the College, deceased.

Printed and Sold by DANIEL FOUL, at the Printing-Office in PORTSMOUTH,
NEW HAMPSHIRE. MDCCLXII.

THOUGH the DISCOURSE was particularly addressed to the young GENTLEMEN who
were Candidates for the Hnours of the College; yet the Subject of it, RELIGION
and PUBLIC-SPIRIT, both of them, are or ought to be inseparable from the
Character of every Member of Society. The CHRISTIAN and the PATRIOT must unite
in order to form the good Subject.

This (...) C^^^^^tion that again brings this Dis^^^^s^ to (...) the Con^^^^^ce
of a Number of Sub^^^^ (...) its Second Publication; and th^^ si^^^ (...) not
ex^^^^se generally as would be desired.

(...) Spirit with this Discourse breathes, insp^re (...) into whose H^^^s it
may fail, h^w (...) they (...) be in th^^^^; and the (...), how (...) its,
P^^^^tion may at (...) Lovers of GOD and Man; (...) Tune the S^^^^el (...) the
^^^scious guilty, (...) Int^rests of Religion, than (...) with their Pleasures
and Profits.

A Valedictory Address.
ACTS XIII. 36 -- -- DAVID, after he had served his Generation, by the Will of
GOD [ or, having in his own Age served the Will of GOD,] fell on Sleep, and was
laid to his Fathers, and saw Corruption.


GREAT and good Characters are often formed by Imitation: And if we would shine
in any Sphere, we must propose to ourselves some illustrious Examples. Great
Generals have acquitted their martial Skill, by perusing the Memoirs of the
ALEXANDERS and CAESAR'S of former Ages. And LONGINUS advises us, if we would
rise to the Sublime in Writing, always to keep in View, a Homer, a Plato, a
Demosthenes or a Cicero. And how shall the more amiable, though less glaring and
renowned Character of the good, the useful, and publick-spirited Man, be
formed? Nothing surely can contribute more toward it, than the imitation of
some bright Example. And among all the Kings, Patriots and Prophets, whose
Names are immortalized in sacred History, no Example shines with a brighter
Luster, than that of DAVID, who served his own Generation according to the Will
of God, and then, as a weary Labourer, gently fell on Sleep, and sweetly rested
from his generous and pious Toils.

As this is my last Address to you, my dear and worthy young Friends, who have
now happily finished the Course of your Education, and are about to take Leave
of this Society, in which you have been instituted for public Life, I have been
very solicitous to select some Subject of Importance, to employ your Thoughts
in this precious Hour, that is peculiarly adapted to you present Circumstances
and future Prospects. And after anxious Inquiry, I can fix upon none, that
appears to me more perti^^ent or useful, than the Example of DAVID; a Man
characterized from the highes^ Excellency to which human Nature can arrive,
Conformity to God the Standard of (...) Perfection; A Man after God's own
Heart: A Man, that without the Advantages of Birth or Education, and without
the dishonest Arts of a Courtier, rose to the Height of human Grandeur, and
became an ext^^^^ Blessing to the Church and his Country: A Man, in ^^^om an
Assemblage of exalted Characters were united, beyond all Precedent; and who
shines conspicuous, through all Ages, in the separate Splendors of each, and the
collected Splendors of all; an invincible Hero in the Field; a magnificent and
good King on the Throne; a great Example of passive Loyalty under Persecution,
of Fortitude and Patience under Affliction, on a Mountain, in a Cave, or a
Wilderness; an evangelical Prophet, a devout and sublime Poet, ever Home^'s
Muse was known, and, to finish all, the Servant of God and his Generation. It Is
this last Part of his Character, my Text delineates. It Is this I would propose
to your Imitation, as not beyond your Reach. And indeed, in ^^is are summed up
all the complicated Excellencies of his other Characters. He suffered, he
f^ught, he reigned, he prophesied, he sung, he performed every Thing, to serve
his Generation, according to the Will of God.

The Excellency of the Example now before you, consists in two Things, PUBLIC
SPIRIT and RELIGION. -- Public Spirit, in serving his Generation, -- and
Religion, in doing this according to the Will of God, or, (as it might be
translated,) serving the Will of God, in his own Generation. The Union of these
two Qualities ever composes the truly good and useful Man; a proper Member of
human Society; and even of the grand Community of Angels and Saints. The one
includes a Temper and Conduct agreeable to our social Connections; and the
other a Temper and Conduct agreeable to our Obligation to the Author of our
Nature. And so inseparable are these united, that the one cannot exist, in the
entire Absence of the other. Public Spirit and Benevolence without Religion, is
but a warm Affection for the Subjects, to the Neglect of their Sovereign; or a
Partiality for the Children, in Contempt of their Father, who is infinitely
more worthy of Love. And Religion without Public Spirit and Benevolence, is
but a sullen, selfish, sour and malignant Humor for Devotion, unworthy that
s^cred Name. For if a Man love not his Broth^r, whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen? But when these are united, they form a
beautiful Symmetry; they adorn, ^^^rish and perfect each other; they contain
the Substance of all Obedience to the divine Law, which is summed up in the
Love of God, and the Love of Man. And if you, my dear Youth, enter into the
World with this Foundation of future Utility and Importance laid in your
He^r^s, my highest Wishes will be accomplished in you; and all the little Pains
we have taken in your Education, will be more than repaid. It will be a
Blessing to the World, that ever you passed through it; an Honor to this Dome,
that ever you resided in it; and an everlasting joy to yourselves, that ever
you were born. -- To excite and cherish such a Spirit, I can at (...)
comprehensive Epitome of the History of DAVID.

-- "HE (...) his Generation." -- To be the Servant of the Public, was his
Ambition; (...) Love to Church and State, was the (...) of his Life. His public
Spirit pushed him on to engage in the most fatiguing, self-denying and
d^ng^^^^s Services; he thought nothing too hard, nothing bene^^^ his Dignity,
that was conducive to the public Good. Was he King of the Thousands of Israel?
This only made him the Servant of Thousands; at once increasing his Labor, and
enlarging the Sphere of his Beneficence. His Royal Prerogative was but an
Obligation to serve; and his Authority but a Power of doing more extensive
Good. Was he an able General, and a mighty Conqueror? He fought, he conqured,
not to gratify the sordid Passions of Avarice, Ambition, or private Revenge;
but to deliver his Country, to guard his Subjects, to chastise and restrain the
Disturbers of Mankind, and to execute public Vengeance upon public
Malefactors. Had he a fine, a sublime Imagination? And did Nature and
Inspiration animate him with poetical Fire? His immortal Writings bespeak a
Breast glowing with the united Fervors of both. This Accomplishment he did not
prostitute to mean selfish or impious Porposes; but consecrated it to the
Church. His Muse was a heavenly Seraph, teaching Mortals to celebrate the
Praises of JEHOVAH in a Language above Humanity; and furnishing a divine System
of Psalmody, most perfectly adapted to that Religious Dispensation under which
he lived; and capable of being accommodated, by a natural and easy Variation,
to the more improved State of the Gospel Church. Could his Prophetic Eyes
penetrate into Futurity, beyond the Ken of human Knowledge, and pry into "the
deep Things of God?" This also was consecrated to the Service of his
Generation, and not converted into Ostentation, Amusement or idle Curiosity. In
short, all his Talents, natural and supernatural, were sacred to the Church, to
his Country and Mankind; thus becoming universal and distinguished Blessings.

THIS, my dear Pupils, this is the Spirit, with which I would inspire you. A
public Spirit always appeared to me of the utmost Importance, this you are
sensible is not the first Occasion on which I have endeavored to fire your
Breasts with the generous Flame. Devoid of this, though stationed in the most
public Offices, your Lives will be of little Use to Community; and all the
valuable Ends of a liberal Education, will be lost upon you. But if you feel
the generous Impulses of a public Spirit, you can never be altogether
insignificant, you will never be mere Ciphers in the World, even in the
obscurest and most sequestered Vale of Life. Even in the lowest Station, you
will be of some Use to Mankind, a sufficient Recompense this for the severe
Conflict of sixty or seventy Years. It is unknown to me, and perhaps to
yourselves, in what Employment you will spend your future Lives. But whatever
it be, whether you appear in the sacred Desk, as the Ministers of God, and
devote yourselves to that Office, in which you can have no bright Prospects of
secular Advantages, but only the benevolent and God-like Pleasure of
endeavoring to make Men wise, good and happy; or whether you appear at the
Bar, as Advocates for Justice, and the Patrons of the Oppressed; or whether you
practice the healing Art in the Chambers of Affliction, to alleviate the Pains
and Sicknesses of your Fellow Creatures, to restore the Sweets of Health, and
prolong the dubious Duration of Life; or whether you choose the serene and
quiet Pleasures of Retirement, and glide through the World in a private
Station; whatever, I say, be your Place, permit me, my dear Youth, to inculcate
upon you this important Instruction, IMBIBE AND CHERRISH A PUBLIC SPIRIT.
Serve your Generation. Live not for your selves, but the Public. Be the
Servants of the Church; the Servants of your Country; the Servants of all.
Extend the Arms of your Benevolence to embrace your Friends, your Neighbors,
your Country, your Nation, the whole Race of Manl^nd, even your Enemies. Let it
be the vigorous unremitted Effort of your whole Life, to leave the World wiser
and better, than you found it at your Entrance. Esteem yourselves by so much
the more happy, honorable and important, by how much the more useful you are.
Let Self-Love pushed to Social, to Divine,
Give thee to make thy Neighbor's Blessing thine.
Is this too little for the boundless Heart?
Extend it, let they Enemies have Part:
Grasp the whole Worlds of Reason, Life and Sense,
In one close System of Benevolence:
Happier as kinder, in what'er Degree,
And Height of Bliss, but Height of Charity.
POPE'S ESSAY ON MAN.
Let you own Pleasure, your own private Interrests, yield to the common Good.
For this, spare no Pains; avoid no Labor; dread no Sufferings. For this, do
every Thing; suffer every Thing. For this, live and die. From this, let no
selfish Passion mislead you; no ungrateful Returns, the useful Returns of
active Benevolence, discourage you; let no Opposition deter you; no private
Interest bribe you. To this, be your Bodies, your Souls, your Estates, your
Life, your All sacred. Bravely live and die, serving your Generation, -- your
own Generation. This David did.

-- "He served his own Generation" -- Every Man's Sphere of Usefulness, is
limited; the Beneficence of one Man, can extend to but a Small Part of Mankind:
Even David could but serve his own Generation. For other Generations, God
raised up other Servants, accomplished according to the Work he had to do in
them: And thus, the great Scheme of his Providence is carried on, through the
fleeting Succession of human Nature, and never sails of Execution, for want of
Instruments. It Is true, David's Usefulness survived ^im, and (...) to the
re^^test Acc^^^n^ Countries; and nothing (...) to a benevolent and public
^^^rited Mind ^^^n to be the S^^vance. Posterity, the Se^v^nt of Mankind for
ever, as well as of his Contemporaries. Yet his B^nesicence was more peculiarly
appropriated to the Generation in which he lived; that, especially, was his
Stage of Action, on which he was to perform his Part. Other Actors were
reserved for other Ages. All Hands must be busy, in every Period, to accomplish
the Designs of Heaven; and ^o Part of the destined Work, shall remain undone,
for Want of proper Agents.

THUS, my dear Youth, your Sphere of Usefulness, however large, will always be
limited; and it is enough, if you fill it with Honor and Integrity. If it
should ever be in your Power to project or person* any Thing, that may be of
Service to Posterity, rejoice in the Opportunity, be ambitious to survive
yourselves, to be immortal upon Earth, in this import^nt Respect. But your own
Generation, i^ the (...) and ^^^ropriated Sphere of your Usefulness. Your (...)
^^mpora^^, particularly your Countrymen, who are w^^^n the Reach of your
Influence, are the more direct and ^^^ma^^ to Objects of your Beneficence. When
you (...) Exit from this mortal Stage, God will raise (...) other Servants to
supply your Place, and perform his Work in future Ages; and this is a most
delightful Thought t^ a (...) Heart; and affords no small Support under th^se
Dumps of Discouragement and blasted Hopes, which ^^^ze us, at the frequent
Mortality of the most important Men, in the Height of their Popularity and
public Service. He that renews the Face of Nature, after the Ravages and
Consumption of Winter; He that makes each succeeding Summer productive of
Plenty for the following Year, after the Harvests of the past are expended; he
will perpetuate the Race of his Servants, and repair the Wastes of Time and
D^^^. But this is your Day: now you have Room upon the Surge of Life. A long
Succession of Generations, has retired into the Chambers of the Grave, to give
Place to you. And now, it is your Turn to act your Part. You are surrounded with
"a great Clould of Witnesses:" the Eyes of Heaven and Earth are fixed upon you,
in eager Expectation and anxious Suspense for the Result. Therefore strain
every Nerve to the utmost Pitch of Exertion, and act your Part well; that you
may gain the Plau^^^ of God, Angels and Good Men; be s^^ulous in doing good,
and pro^^^ting the Interest of Individuals and Communities, of Church and
State. of Men's Souls and ^odies, in Time and Eternity. Let the mere Power of
doing Good, always appear to you an ^ndispensable Obligation, and irresistible
Indu^^^nt to do it. It Is but a little Time you have to work. The Day of L^fe is
short; and the Shadows of the Evening are advancing fast, even toward the
youngest of you. A neglected Opportunity, is lost forever; and past Omissions
can never be supplied by future Diligence; for our utmost Industry can never be
more than is due for the Time present; Therefore, work while it is called Day.
Whatever your Hand finds to do, do it with your Might; for there is no Work,
nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither you are going.

THIS important Instruction will be still more strongly enforced by the Text,
if we give the Translation something of a different Turn, equally easy and
natural. David, having in his own Age served the will of God -- in his (...)
Age. The most important Life, is confined to an Age; a short transient Age; and
after that the most generous Schemes must die in Embrio; or be carried into
Execution by other Hands. The eternal World indeed is all Life and Action; and
that State of Rest, which remains for the People of God, is not a State of more
idle Fruition, or quiet Inaction. It is indeed a Rest from the painful Labors
of this State of Discipline and Trial; though it not only admits, but necessarily
includes, Action of a more exalted and pleasing Nature; a vigorous and
indefatigable Discharge of high Offices in the grand Community of the Universe;
Offices of more Importance, and more extensive Utility, than the feeble Sons of
Mortality can sustain. Nothing but such a State of benevolent Activity, can be
a proper Heaven for vigorous Immortals, whose Powers demand perpetual Exertion;
and without it, they would be painful and cumbersome, or lie dormant and
insensible; both which would be inconsistent with their perfect Felicity. Yet
this is no Reason why we should reserve our Usefulness to another State; for
Time and Eternity have each its proper Work; and the Business of the one, can
be no more done in the other, than if it were a State of entire Inaction; seize
therefore the present flying Moments. Do the Work of Time in Time. Eternity has
its Work too; but it is Work of a more exalted Kind, not adapted to the present
infant State of our Existence. If you remain inactive and useless in this Life,
the Business of it can never be done. If you serve the World at all, it must be
in your own Age. You will never be able to make up the Neglect, in another Age
of Time, or in the endless Ages, of Eternity. Nay, if you continue useless in
your own Age, you will continue so through all the Periods of your immortal
Existence, For you should never forget, that Advancement to a State of more
extensive Usefulness in the eternal World, is the Reward only of faithful
Laborers in this. Oh! remember the Doom of the slothful Servant, whom his
Master discharged for ever from his Service, and delivered up to the Tormentors.

THE other Part of David's Character, which I would propose to your Imitation,
is his RELIGION. He served his Generation by, or according to THE WILL OF GOD.
The original Word here, signifies rather the Counsel, than the Will of God. And
if we thus translate it, the Meaning is, Either that David served his
Generation, according to the Purpose of God in raising him up: Or, that he
accomplished the Purpose of God concerning him, and performed his destined Work.
The Will of God, was the Rule of his Beneficence to Men; and he served his
Generation, because in so doing he served his God. Whatever he did, he did
heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto Men. It Is this Regard to the Will of
God, in Acts of Humanity and Public-Spirit, that sanctifies them, and renders
them true Virtue and Religion. Without such a Regard to the divine Will, they
form but a monstrous, athestical Patriotism, and an un-creature-like
irreligious Benevolence. Without this, all our good Offices to Men, as they are
not intended, so neither will they be accepted, as Acts of Obedience to God.
Certainly, it must be the Height of Impiety, to be capable of doing even what
God commands, not because he commands it, but for some other sordid, selfish
Reason. The greatest Stress is laid upon this, in the refined Morality of the
Gospel. To receive a righteous Man, as a righteous Man; to receive a Prophet in
the Name of a Prophet; to give fo much as a Cup of cold Water, to the least of
Christ's Disciples because he belongs to Christ;...this is at once an Act of
Charity and Piety. But without such a Regard to God, it is but a poor,
grovelling, selfish Humanity; and has no more real Goodness in it, than the
Instinctive Fondness of a Brute for its Young.

THEREFORE, my young Friends, let Religion be the Source of your Benevolence
and Publick-Spirit; and have a Regard to the Will of God, in all your good
Offices to Men. Let it not be your principal End, to gratify a natural
Benevolence of Temper; to procure Honor to yourselves, or to accomplish some
interested Design; but to PLEASE GOD. Let this be the Center, in which all the
Actions of your Life shall terminate, and the Scope to which they ^end. Then
you may claim a Character more noble than even that of a Patriot, I mean a
CHRISTIAN.

THIS Thought will appear in a still stronger Light, if we follow the other
Version of the Text.... David, in his own Generation, having served the Will of
God....not his own Will; not the Will of Man; but the Will of God. All his
Services were done in Obedience to the Will of his heavenly Master. He did not
assume the Direction of his Conduct, nor the Management of himself; but he was
Servant to the Will of God; that was his absolute Rule in all Things; to which
he yielded an unreserved universal Obedience.

THIS also I propose for your Imitation in future Life, Be not ambitious of
Self-Government, but resign yourselves to the Will of God. Serve his Will, and
be the Ministers of his Pleasure. Whatever is agreeable to it, pursue with all
your Might; and let even its gentlest Prohibitions, give you an effectual
Check, in your most eager Career. In short, do the Will of God, and then you
will do all that is noble, all that is good, all that is benevolent and useful.
To be dependent upon the capricious Will of a Mortal, is a wretched State of
Indigence, Servility and Anxiety But the Divine Will is the supreme unerring
Rule of Right; and in observing it, you will certainly promote your own
Happiness, and the Good of the System to which you belong, in the most
effectual Manner.

To finish what I have to say to you at present on the Head of Religion, I must
add, That though I address you in the exhortatory Form, and would persuade you to
exert yourselves, yet I would by no Means intimate, that the Forces of mere
Nature, in their utmost Exertion, can produce in you that public Spirit and
Piety I am recommending, without the Agency of the Holy Spirit. It Is He that is
the sole Author of all that little Religion and true Virtue, that is to be
found here and there in our World. And therefore to Him you must look; on Him
you must depend; yet still in the Exertion of all your natural Powers, and in
the earnest Use of all instituted Means; for the Idle have no Reason to expect
his Assistance.

I MUST add farther, that great Change of Temper, that Extirpation of the
corrupt Principles of Nature, and that Implantation of holy and supernatural
Principles of Action, which the Scriptures express by such strong and
significant Metaphors as Regeneration, a Resurrection, a new Creation, and the
like; I say, that divine Change of the Principles of Action, is the great
Foundation of true Religion and social Virtue; without which, you can never
arrive at the finished Character of good and great Men. Though you should make
a shining Figure in Life, and dazzle the World with the Luster of your Name;
your true Character in the ^ight of God, will be nothing higher, than that of a
worthless, ^dious and contemptible Sinner, fit for no Place but Hell, for no
Society, but that of infernal Spirits. -- If my Temper were a^reeable to my
Subject, and the Views I have of it, I should here assume an Ai^ of peculiar
Solemnity; and by the Manner of my Address, convince you how much I am in
earnest, when I inculcate upon you the vast importance and absolute Necessity
of entering upon public Life with A NEW HEART AND A NEW SPIRIT. So deep and
universal is the present innate Depravity of human Nature, that the sacred
Structure o^ a truly great and good Man, can never be built upon that
Foundation. It may admit of the external Decorations of a whited Wall; but it
is incapable of any true substantial Goodness, till there be a new Creation;
till old Things pass away, and all Things be made new. You must be "created in
Christ Jesus to good Works," before you can "walk in them." "A new Heart must
be given you, and a new Spirit put within you," before you can "walk in God's
Statutes, and keep his Judgments, and do them. Therefore let this saying sink
deep into your Hearts, THE NEW BIRTH IS THE BEGINNING OF ALL GENUINE RELIGION
AND VIRTUE; it is your first Entrance into a new World of Usefulness; and an
Incorporation with the Society of Saints and Angels, and all the beneficent
Beings in the Universe. May your Minds, my dear Pupils, always retain a full
Conviction of this great Truth, in this Age, when i^ has lost its Popularity
even among nominal Christians; and so, many will marvel and stare, with
Ni^^d^^^, when they hear, "a Man must be born again.

Thus have we traced the Example of David in Life, let us now follow him to his
End. -- "Having served his Generation by the Will of God, he fell on S^^^p, and
was laid to his Fathers, and saw Corruption."

-- "He fell on Sleep" -- This is a favorite Scripture Phrase, to signify the
Death of a good Man; it is not the King of Terrors; not the Execution of a penal
Sentence; but a Sleep; a gentle, quiet, refreshing Sleep, after the laborious
and ^^^isome Day of (...): an undisturbed Sleep th^^^ the still and silent
Night o^ Death, till the bright and welcome M^^^ing of the Resurr^ction; then
the sleeping D^^^ shall (...), vigoro^^ and immortal, capable of everlasting
Vigilan^e, and (...) erupted A^tivity; without Fatigue, or Necessity of Rep^se.
-- You need hardly be informed, that it is (...) the Soul, but the Body, that
thus falls asleep in Death. The Soul, as soon as dis^^^ssed from its
Confinement in this Prison of Clay, soars to the Region of Spirits, mingles
with kindred Minds, expatiates at large in its own Element, and exerts all its
Powers unrestrained; forever incapable of the Indolence and Inaction of Sleep,
and standing in no Need of its Repose and Refreshment.

-- He fell on Sleep, and was laid to his Fathers. -- His mortal Part was added
to the numerous subterranean Inhabitants of the Grave, "the House appointed for
all Living"; where Fathers and Children, Kings and Subjects, the Learned and
the Vulgar the wise Man and the Fool, and all the various Classes of Adam's
Race, meet at last, and mingle their kindred Dust, however much distinguished
in Life. His immortal Part was also added to his Fathers, his pious Ancestors,
who had gained Admission before him into the heavenly Community; which is a
Colony planted from our World; and every Saint that dies, is a new Inhabitant
added to it. The Happiness of Heaven is a social Happiness; and no doubt one
Part of it consists in enjoving the Converse of our Fathers, and the great and
good Men that have been before us. Secr^tes, in his last Moments, was elated
with the Expectation of an Interview with Homer, H^s^^d, Palamede, and the
other Genii of Antiquity. But how much more illustrious a Prospect did
REVELATION open to David, when the glorious Assembly of the Patriarchs appeared
ready to embrace him, and welcome him into their Society!

-- He fell asleep, and was laid to his Fathers, and saw Corruption. This added
to form a Contrast between David and his Antitype, JESUS CHRIST. " David is not
yet ascended into Heaven," i. e. his mortal Part is still confined in the
Grave; it is putrified, and dissolved into its elemental Clay. But JESUS, the
Lord of Life, burst the Bands of Death on the third Day, before Corruption
could seize his Flesh. This is one instance of his Pre-eminence above all his
Servants; who, however honorable or useful, must claim Kindred with Corruption
and the Worm.

THUS, my dear Youth, though now in the Prime of Life, and the Vigor of your
Strength, thus must you fall asleep in Death, and see Corruption. This is the
End of all Flesh; and the highest Endowments, n^teral, acqui^ed or
supe^natural, which even David was ^do^^^d with, can be no Security against it.
Those Eyes. that have poted with so much Pleasure upon the P^ge^ of Knowledge,
must be closed in Death; and d^^se Ears, that have E^tened with so much
Eag^rness to Instruction, must be ^^opt in the Dust. Stupor and Insensibility
must seize your Limbs; and a dead Sleep arrest all your active Powers. --
Therefore enter the World with a deep Sense of your Mortality; a^^ that after a
few Turns upon the Stage^^^ must retire into the Chambers of Death. Let your
Prospects and ^^^pect^^i^ns as be confined within narrow Limits; and indal^^^
(...) lopes, sorm no everlasting Schemes, on this Si^e (...). -- Quid aeteruis
mine^em
Consiliis animam fatigas? --
Her.
-- Put on a noble Indifferency toward the li^d P^a^^^its and Cares,
Enjoyments and Bereavements of the present State; for This I say, Brethren, the
Time is (...); it remains therefore, that they who weep, be as though they wept
not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; for the Fashion," the
phantastie Parade, "of this World passes away; and the vain Farce of Life is
soon over. -- Let me also renew my Exhortation to you, to exert all your Powers
in ^oing Good, before they are seized with the eternal Torpor of the Sleep of
Death; for then, all your Capacities and Opportunities of being serviceable to
your Fellow-Mortals, will be irreparably lost forever. -- Make it the great
Business of Life, to prepare for Death; and for that End, learn to familiarize
the Prospect. Look forward to approaching Death; look downward into the gaping
Grave, even in the gay and giddy Hours of Health and Youth. And oh! above all,
take frequent Surveys of the eternal World, that li^^ beyond Death and the
Grave. There you must ere long be, ye young Immortals! ye Candidates for
Eternity! ye Heirs of Heaven or Hell; There you must soon be added to your
Fathers, who now people the blissful or the doleful Apartments of that immense
Region, according to their Character and Conduct in the Days of their Flesh.
You must dwell forever, with Abraham, Isaac and J^c^^, in the Kingdom of God;
or with Judas, and other Sons of Pe^^ition, in the infernal Prison. There you
must spend a never-en^ing Duration, in the Maturity of your Nature, capabl^ of
Plea^^^ or Pain infinitely superior to what Mortality can bear. And oh! is
there any Thing within the Compass of human Knowledge, of greater, of equal, of
comp^^able Importance? Unless you secure a happy Immortality, in the few
uncertain Years of Life, your Existence, your Reason, your liberal Education,
your religious Advanta^e^, (...) All. will be your everlasting Curse: And it
w^^ld be b^tter for you, to be Hottentots, or even the most abject and ^^^able
Creatures among the meanest and m^st (...) of the b^at^l Tribe^, than to be the
Sons of (...). There^^^ "strive to enter in at the s^^ait G^^^," And do not
d^^app^^nt my eager Hopes of seeing you at the ^ight (...) of the supreme
Judge. We an soon to part, and be di^p^r^ed (...) the World. But oh! let us si^
upon that, as the ^^^e Place of Interview, and the Commencement of an Union
never to be dissolved.

Let me now take Leave of you with a few pa^^icular Advices and Warnings; though
the Hurry of the present Hour, will but admit of some concise Hints, for your
own Tho'ts to improve.

Do not imagine, you may now put an End to your Studies, as having arrived to
the utmost Limits of useful Knowledge. A College-Education does only lay the
Foundation; on which to build, must be the Business of your future Life. If you
neglect this, even the Foundation however skilfully laid, will gradually
moulder away. You will live your Age backward; and be less wise at Sixty, than
at Twenty. Therefore, as you can redeem Leisure from the Business of your
future Station, diligently prosecute your Studies; especially in those Branches
of Knowledge, which are most practical, and subservient to your particular
Profession.

Let me also advise you, in the Choice of your Stations for Life, to follow
Nature, and consult the public Good; and fix upon that which is most agreeable
to your natural Turn, which in some Measure is equal to your Abilities, and may
be most conducive to the Service of your Generation. If you mistake in your
Choice upon your first setting out, you will make an awkward Appearance during
Life, and be of very little Use in the World.

Allow me also to solicit the Continuance of that Friendship to this
Institution, to which you are obliged for your Education, and the Prospect of
your future Importance; and to hope that your Inclination will at least equal
your Opportunities to promote the Interest of your ALMA MATTER. Be not however
prompted by the jealous and malignant Spirit of Rivalship, in Opposition to
other literary Institutions; but show yourselves catholic disinterested Friends
of Learning in general.

Finally, I advise you to enter into the wide World, which is now before you,
forewarned of the Dangers and Temptations, in which you will soon be involved.
You are about to enter into a State of dubious Conflict, where all your Virtue
will be put to the Proof; and where Strength more than human, Strength from
God, is absolutely necessary to render you victorious. Farewell now to this
peaceful Retirement; this happy Recess from the Temptations of the World. Now
you are to act your Part in a new Scene, to enter upon other Business, and to
mingle in Company. And alas! you will find yourselves surrounded with new
unsuspected Snares; which with all your Vigilance, you will hardly escap^.
Allow me therefore, with the Love and Solicitude of a Father's Heart, to
caution you particularly against some of the Dangers, to which you will be most
incident.

I solemnly warn you against indulging a Taste for youthful Pleasures, and
giving yourselves up to sensual Gratifications. This has been the Ruin of many
a promising young Creature; and it is your Interest to learn Wisdom and
Circumspection from their melancholy Fate.

I also solemnly warn you against forming pernicious Connections with bad
Company. This is the greatest Mischief into which you can fall; and which will
push you headlong into the foulest Vices. Therefore, above all Things, be upon
your Guard in this Respect.

I warn you against a Life of Idleness and Trifling, which will be injurious to
your own Interest, as well as that of others; and render you troublesome
Superfluities in the World. "Be not slothful in Business;" but diligent and
industrious, in whatever Station Providence may fix you -- "I speak not these
Things to shame you: but as my beloved Sons, I warn you."

And now, my ever-dear Pupils, I must dismiss you from my Care, into the wide
World, to shift for yourselves. You enter into it with the great Advantage of a
fair Character; for I must do you the Justice to declare, that you have always
been dutiful teachable Pupils to me; and this whole House can attest the
regularity of your general Conduct, since you have been Members of it. Go on in
this Path; and may it shine more and more till the perfect Day!

FAREWELL! my dear young Friends, -- I collect all the affectionate Powers of
my Soul into one vigorous Effort, and repeat the cordial FAREWELL! -- "The Lord
bless you, and keep you: The Lord make his Face shine upon you, and be gracious
to you," that you may faithfully and honorably serve your Generation by the
Will of GOD, and then gently fall asleep in JESUS, and enter into the Joys of
your LORD. -- Grant this, Most merciful GOD, for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST. AMEN.

FINIS.

