Dr. CHAUNCY'S DISCOURSE AT THE DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, AT HARVARD-COLLEGE IN
CAMBRIDGE, MAY 12. 1762.

THE VALIDITY OF PRESBYTERIAN ORDINATION ASSERTED AND MAINTAINED.

A DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT THE ANNIVERSARY DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, AT HARVARD-COLLEGE
IN CAMBRIDGE NEW ENGLAND, MAY 12. 1762.

WITH AN APPENDIX, GIVING a brief historical account of the epistles ascribed
to IGNATIUS; and exhibiting some of the many reasons, why they ought not to be
depended on as his uncorrupted works.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. ONE OF THE PASTORS OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED AND SOLD BY RICHARD DRAPER. IN NEWBURY-STREET,
AND THOMAS LEVERITT IN CORNHILL. 1762.

THE words I would prefix to the following discourse, as a proper MOTTO, are
those inspired ones of the apostle PAUL,

NEGLECT not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying on the hands of the presbytery.

1 TIMOTHY iv. 14.
THE honorable judge DUDLEY esteemed the method of ordination, as practiced in
Scotland, at Geneva, among the dissenters in England, and in the churches in
this country, to be safe, scriptural and valid. And he firmly believed, that
the great head of the church, by his blessed spirit, had owned, sanctified and
blessed the administration of gospel ordinances by persons ordained in this way;
and that he would continue so to do to the end of the world. It was accordingly
his intention, that the discourse at this lecture should be adapted to the
purpose of "explaining and maintaining" this kind of ordination. Not that he
questioned "the validity of what is commonly called episcopal ordination, as
performed in the church of England," or had it in his heart to encourage the
saying any thing that would insinuate as though God had not blessed, and would not
go on to bless, the ministry of those who were thus ordained. Had none of the
friends to ecclesiastical superiorities, according to the present episcopal
form, been less wanting in candor and charity toward those who differ from
them, we should never have heard of this lecture. It took rise, in the
honorable founder's mind, from the narrow principles of those anathamatising
zealots, who would confine salvation to their own church, by confining the
validity of gospel ordinances to the administration of them by persons, upon
whom the hands of a bishop, in their sense of the word, have been imposed. And
he wisely ordered the preaching of it in this place, that our sons, who are
sent here, from all parts of the land, to be trained up for public service,
might be under advantage to hear and know the reasons, upon which they may,
with all good conscience, join in communion with these churches, and officiate
as pastors in them, should they, when fitted for it, be called thereto in the
providence of God.

YOU are, by this time, at no loss to know the design of the present discourse;
that it is to vindicate the New England churches in their method of ordination
by presbyters: or, in other words, to assert and maintain the safety and
validity of what is commonly called presbyterian ordination, to the purposes of
the gospel ministry.

ONLY, before I come to the argument upon this head, it may not be amiss to
mention a few things, in which we agree with our opponents.

WE agree with them, it is the will of Christ there should be officers in his
church to preach the word, to administer the sacraments, to exercise
discipline, and to commit these powers to other faithful men; and that this
will of his extends to all ages, till time shall be no more. "Lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the world." Whether it be his will, made known in
the new-testament-revelation, or elsewhere, that this work of the sacred
ministry should be divided, and differently lodged in the hands of two distinct
orders of men, the one superior, the other inferior, we shall hear afterward.

WE agree with them, that none should take upon them the ministerial office,
unless they are qualified for it conformably to the apostolic directions in the
epistles to Timothy and Titus; and, if they are thus qualified, that they have
no right to officiate as pastors in the church of Christ, till they are called
hereto. "No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God as
was Aaron." This call, in the opinion of the church of England, includes not
only an ability given by God for the work of the ministry, but the excitement
of an actual readiness in the persons who have it freely to devote themselves
to the gospel service. We go farther, and add hereto, the voice of the church.
And herein the advantage lies undeniably on our side, whether an appeal be made
to scripture, or primitive antiquity. Even after the distinction between
bishops and presbyters took place, it was by the suffrage of the people that
this or that person was selected for this or the other cure. In this way,
Alexander was chosen bishop of Jerusalem Eusebius. Lib. 6. ^. ^1
; in the same way Fabianus was advanced to the sea of Rome, upon the death of
Anterus Eusebius. Lib. 6. ^. 28.
, as was also his successor Cornelius Cyprian. Epis. 67.
; and it was by the same favor and suffrage of the people, "plebis favore,"
Pontius in vita Cypriani.
"populi suffragio," Cyprian. Epis. 55.40.
that Cyprian was elected bishop of Carthage. -- But instead of mispending the
time to prove that which is so well known to all, in any measure acquainted
with antiquity, it may rather be lamented, that the churches of Christ have so
generally had wrested from them, in one way or another, this invaluable
privilege. The people, constituting the episcopal church at home, scarce know
what it is to have pastors of their own choosing. And the case is much the same
with most of the protestant churches in Europe. The right of nomination is
almost universally lodged, not with the people, but with princes or patrons,
either clerical or secular, in consequence whereof their ministers are not of
their own choosing, but such as others choose for them. The New England churches,
blessed be God, possess and exercise the right of electing their pastors in the
most ample manner of any in the whole christian world. May they ever "stand
fast in this liberty" wherewith he who is "head over all things," has "made
them free"! And may their glory, in this respect, be never taken from them!

WE agree with them, that, besides the call to, their must be an investiture
in, the ministerial office, before persons may, in ordinary cases, regularly
undertake to do the work that is proper to it: And we are further agreed, that
ordination, meaning hereby imposition of hands with solemn prayer, is the
scripture-mode of this investiture. By the use of this rite, with prayer, Paul
and Barnabas were separated to the work to which God had called them. So was
Timothy; and so were those separated by him to the like work. And this has been
the rite of ministerial investiture in use in the church all along from the
beginning to this day.

ONLY, let it be remembered here, if, by ordination, our opponents suppose any
moral gift, or spiritual power, inherent in the ordainers, is conveyed from
them to the persons upon whom they lay their hands, we beg leave to dissent
from them in this: Apprehending, and, as we judge, upon good grounds, that the
authority of gospel ministers comes solely from Christ; while the ordainers are
nothing more than his servants in instating the persons they ordain in the
regular exercise of this authority. As in the case of the mayor of a city, the
king* charter of incorporation grants the power; the burgesses and recorder
only indigitate the proper recipient of it, and put him legally into the
execution of his office. So here, Christ, in the gospel-charter, gives the
power to act as his ministers; it only belongs to the ordainers to point out
the persons with whom this power is entrusted, and regularly admit them to the
exercise of it. The ordainers are to be considered, not as granting this power,
but as acting ministerially in introducing capable persons, according to
gospel order, into the possession and use of it; the power itself having
already been granted by Christ, the alone fountain of all power in the church,
which is properly jure divino.

IT follows from hence, as we judge, very obviously and justly, that those who
are regularly vested with the ministerial office may fairly claim, and
warrantably exercise, all the power that belongs to it, be the words of their
investiture, or the intention of their ordainers, what they will. For as their
office is from Christ his instituting will, not the intention or words of their
ordainers, must be the true and only measure of their power.

IN fine, we agree with our opponents, that the investiture by ordination must
be the act of those, and only these, who are authorized to perform it. It is
not left, in the sacred scriptures, a work common to all, and that may be done
by any; but is the appropriate trust of some, in distinction from others. The
brethren may not impose hands in consecrations to the gospel ministry. Nothing
occurs in the new testament that can be construed to countenance such a
practice. The business belongs to those only who are officers in the church of
Christ; though not to these indiscriminately. For deacons, no more than more
brethren, may be allowed to lay on hands in ordination. The gospel officers who
may do this are only those, who are authorized hereto; that is to say, they are
only those whose office contains in it this, among other ministerial powers.

BUT who are those officers? This is the grand question: And the true answer to
it will be decisive in the present dispute.

OUR opponents say, bishops, considered as an order of men distinct from, and
superior to, presbyters, are the only church officers, who are vested with a
right to ordain.

WE say, on the contrary, the scripture knows of no such order of officers in
the church; and that gospel-presbyters, or such ministers of Christ as are
allowed to have a right to preach the word, and administer the sacraments, are
true scripture bishops, and clothed with authority to do every thing that is
to be done in the business of ordination.

AND this is the point I am to make evident to you. In order whereto I might
call your attention to those various arguments which have commonly been made
use of upon like occasions with this: but, as I am confined within too narrow
limits to do them proper justice, I shall wholly pass them over, though they
carry in them, as I imagine, conclusive force, that I may leave room to enlarge
on the following considerations, namely,

THAT the apostles of Christ, in settling the churches, constituted (besides
the order of deacons) no more than one order of standing pastors; That these
pastors, in their day, were called sometimes bishops, sometimes presbyters, and
promiscuously pointed out by either of these names; and finally, that these
bishops or presbyters were endowed with all the ordinary powers that were to be
exercised in the church of Christ, particularly with that of ordination.

THESE premises will, if set in a just point of light, unavoidably justify us
in concluding, that presbyterian ordination, or, as it might with equal
propriety be called, ordination by scripture-bishops, is safe and valid.

IT scarce needs to be previously remarked here, that the apostles, considered
as such, were immediately sent by God, and this under the infallible guidance
of inspiration, to preach the gospel to Gentiles as well as Jews, to gather
churches in all parts of the world, and to appoint the officers, both for
instruction and government, which were to be perpetuated in them for their
edification in faith and holiness, till the time of the appearing of our
Savior to put an end to the present gospel-oeconomy. This being taken for
granted, I proceed to say,

THAT the apostles, in virtue of this plenitude of power, which they received
immediately from Christ, constituted no more (besides the order of deacons,
with which we have nothing to do at present) than one order of standing
officers in the gospel church. It is not my business, in this part of the
discourse, to say who these officers are: This will be done afterward. At
present I am concerned only with the fact itself; the proof of which is to be
fetched from the sacred writings. And the proof from hence is as full as could
reasonably be desired.

NEITHER Christ nor his apostles have any where given instructions, descriptive
of the persons fit for the work of the ministry, that are adapted to the
supposition of a difference of order in the pastoral office. Had there been
such a difference, different qualifications would have been requisite to the
suitable discharge of the different trusts arising therefrom; and it might
justly have been expected, that the scriptures would have distinguished between
the qualifications respectively proper for the management of each of these
trusts. But they no where thus distinguish. They no where intimate, that such
different endowments were necessary. Far from this, they have specified the
qualifications of one order of pastors only; as may be seen at large in the
epistles to Timothy and Titus. And what is strange, they have been very
particular in discribing the qualifications of this one order, while they are
totally silent with respect to the other that is pleaded for, though that other
is said to be by much the most honorable and important of the two.

IN like manner, no rules are any where laid down for the guidance of ordainers
in vesting ordinary ministers with different degrees of honor and power. They
are no where told of the institution of two distinct orders of standing
pastors; they are no where instructed to exercise their ordaining right
conformably to this distinction, by placing some in an higher, others in a
lower rank in the church. The sacred writings of the apostles say nothing to
such a purpose as this. On the contrary, they present to our view a very full
and explicit directory for the ordination of one order only of standing
pastors. This we have in the Pauline instruction, referring to the settlement
of the churches in Crete. The great apostle of the Gentiles gives it in charge
to Titus, whom he left in this island with a direct view "to set in order the
things that were wanting," to ordain fixed pastors in the several churches
there. But what pastors were they? Of a different rank, some superior, others
inferior? Not a word leading to such a though it is to be found throughout his whole
epistle. No; but the pastors he directs should be ordained were precisely of
the same rank or degree: Nor did Titus ordain any other. He could not indeed
have done it, unless he had acted counter to the direction he had received from
the inspired Paul.

THE plea here is, Titus was himself, at this time, the sole bishop of Crete,
and as such entrusted with the power of ordaining inferior pastors. But this is
a plea that cannot be supported upon just and solid reasons; as we shall have
occasion, by and by, to make plain to you. In the mean time, we go on and say
further,

THAT, in the churches settled in apostolic times, no ordinary gospel ministers
are to be found but of one order only. No other were in Lystra, Iconium and
Antioch. The apostle Paul, with Barnabas, constituted such pastors in all the
churches in these places, but no other. It Is said, Acts, xiv. 23.
"they ordained elders," officers of one and the same rank, "in every city."
Should the words, (...), be rendered, not, "when they had ordained them elders
in every city"; but, according to Dr. Hammond's Vid. Hammond in loc.
mind, "when they had ordained them elders church by church"; meaning, that a
plurality of elders was constituted in these churches collectively taken, not
that there was this plurality in each individual church: I say, should this be
allowed to be the sense of the words, it would notwithstanding remain the truth
of fact, that one order of officers only was here spoken of; which is all I am
at present proving from this text. Though I see not but a plurality of elders
might be ordained "from church to church," in one church after another, and so
in every church, as well as a single one in each church. And this is
undoubtedly the true sense of the place, as it best accords with what was
actually done in other churches.

AT Ephesus, as in the place we have just been considering, no pastors had been
settled but of equal degree. No other are mentioned by the apostle Paul, when
he sent from Miletus to Ephesus to call to him the pastors of that church. He
speaks of them in the style of elders, Acts, 20. 17.
evidently describing them as officers of one and the same rank. Had there been
a bishop in this church, a single person of a superior order, to whom these
elders were in subjection, it is strange he did not send for him likewise. Or
if, at this time, he had been so far distant from his cure as not to be within
call, it is equally strange he should say nothing relative to him; especially,
as he was now to take his final leave of this church, Acts xx. Ver. 38.
"knowing that they should see his face no more." This, if ever, was a fit
season to mind them of their duty to their principal pastor. And it might the
rather have been expected now, as he speaks of it as a thing known to him,
"that after his departure, grievous wolves would enter in among them, not
sparing the flock." Ver. 29.
Who so proper to have received instructions, in this case, as the chief
shepherd? He tells them also, "that of their own selves men should arise,
speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them." Ver 3^
And who so suitable to be charged with the care of withstanding these men as
the bishop? And yet, the whole care of this church, now the apostle was going
from them to return no more, he devolves on the elders; and this, though he knew
they would be exposed to hazards, both from within themselves, and from abroad.
This conduct is so unlike to the manner of after times, when bishops were
advanced to superior dignity and power, that it must be supposed, either that
the church of Ephesus had no such bishop, or that the apostle was strangely
forgetful of him. Ignatius, a primitive father, who lived in this same century,
if his epistles are genuine, as they are said to be by our opponents, did not
treat the bishop of this, or any other of the churches he wrote to, with such
neglect. He rather esteemed them officers so highly important as to make
obedience to them an article worthy of his inculcation repeated to disgust. If
the apostle Paul had been of the like spirit, he could not have omitted
mentioning the bishop of Ephesus, if there had been one in the church there, in
his day.

AT Philippi likewise there were no fixed pastors but of one order. Very
observable to this purpose is the inscription of the epistle to the church
there. "To all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the
bishops and deacons." Philip. I. ^.
Besides the deacons, no gospel pastors but of one order are here taken notice
of. And the same silence runs through the epistle itself. These pastors, it is
true, are called bishops; but they were bishops of the same class with the
elder at Lystra, Iconium, Antioch and Ephesus. To be sure, they were not
bishops in the sense of the church of England; and for this very good reason,
because there was a plurality of them in this church at the same time; which
flatly contradicts that essential article in the episcopal scheme, "one church
one bishop."

NO pains have been wanting to evade this difficulty. Some, in order to it,
have adopted the sense, the counterfeit Ambrose, but the true Hilary, would put
upon the inscription, and read it thus, "Paul and Timothy, with the bishops and
deacons, to the saints at Philippi." Should this construction be allowed to be
just it would not solve the difficulty. For it would still remain true, that
there was a plurality of bishops in this church, unless it should be said, that
these were the bishops, not of the church of Philippi, but of other churches
happening to be there at this time; which is a mere random-conjecture,
arbitrarily made without the least proof. But the construction itself is
forced, and incapable of being justified. Should the inscriptions prefixed to
the two epistles to the Corinthians be thus read and interpreted, no
episcoparian, however zealous, would venture to say, we should have the true
sense. And why any should pretend, that this is the sense of the inscription in
dispute, no imaginable reason can be assigned, setting aside that of serving an
hypothesis; as the mode of diction is precisely the same in all these
inscriptions. Besides, as some of the best critics have observed, if the
apostle had intended to have taken in the bishops and deacons with him in
saluting this church, he would not have wrote, (...), I say, he would not have
wrote thus, but (...). This was his mode of expression, when the brethren were
copartners with him in writing to the churches of Galatia. The form of words
is, Gal. I. 1. 3.
(...). This same form of expression is used likewise by Polycarp, who had
conversed with those who had seen our Lord, in his epistle to the Philippian
church. Inscription to Polycarp's epistle.
(...) to the church of God that sojourneth with the Philippians. -- But this
is too uncouth a sense to require any thing more to be said in confutation of
it.

THE learned Dr. Hammond, to avoid the supposition of more bishops than one in
this church, makes Philippi a metropolitan city, and the bishops of it, not the
bishops of that single city only, but of the cities under that metropolis.
Hammond's note on Philip. I. 1.
In answer whereto, Dr. Whitby assures us. His note on Philip. I. 1.
that Philippi was not, at this time, a metropolitan city, but under the
metropolis of Thessalonica, which was the metropolis of all Macedonia. And, as
to its being a metropolitan church, the learned bishop Stillingfleet has
abundantly proved, (...) page (...) etc.
that there are no traces of it within the first six centuries. But it would be
needless to enlarge here. The irreconcileableness of this notion with the (...)
of things in apostolic times is so apparent, that the bare mentioning of it is
enough to refute it. Dr. Maurice, though a strenuous advocate for diocesan
episcopacy, in opposition to Mr. Clarkson, speaks of this learned author, (...)
of (...) episcopacy," page 27.
as "alone" in this solution of the difficulty, and declines the defense of it;
at the same time, professing "that he could never find sufficient reason to
believe these bishops any other than presbyters, as the generality of the
fathers, and of the church of England, have done." This is fairly and freely
said.

I SHALL only add here, the apostle is as forgetful of the bishop of this
church, as he was of the bishop of Ephesus; for he takes no notice of any
single pastor superior in rank to the other pastors. And the same silence is
observable in Polycarp's epistle to this church a few years after. Will any
pretend, that non-residency was a common custom in those primitive times? It is
far more likely there were no such superior pastors, than that they should be
thus absent from their cures. And yet, this must have been the case, or it
cannot easily be accounted for, that no mention is made of them; especially when
inferior pastors are applied to, and even the deacons are not neglected.

THERE is yet further evidence, that pastors of one order only were settled in
the churches, in the first times of the gospel, from the apostle Peter's first
epistle, which he directs to the christians (...)
"scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia." Had
this apostle been acquainted with any distinction of order between bishops and
other pastors, he would undoubtedly have taken some notice of it in an epistle
inscribed to christains in so many parts of the world. But, instead of this, he
mentions only such pastors as were of equal rank; and these, while silent about
others, he is express in urging to the faithful discharge of their duty as
officers in the church of Christ. "The elders," says he, 1 Pet. ^. 1. ^.
"which are among you, I exhort, feed the flock of God."

AND, from that apostolic injunction, James ^. (...)4
"Is any sick among you? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let
them pray over them": I say, from this apostolic rule, it should seem, that the
then known ordinary pastors of the church were only elders. Why else are they
particularly named, and christians instructed to apply to them to assist them
with their prayers? Had there been, in those days, another and superior order
of pastors, it cannot easily be supposed, they should have been wholly
overlooked. -- But I may not enlarge.

IT is sufficiently evident, I would hope, from what has been offered, that the
apostles of our Lord constituted no more than one order of standing pastors in
the gospel church. And so the way is prepared to show,

IN the next place, that the names, bishop and presbyter, were, in apostolic
times, reciprocal terms, and accordingly used as such to point out this
constituted order of pastors. The text to this purpose are full and strong.
Thus, the elders, (...), whom the apostle Paul called to him from Ephesus, are
applied to in the style of overseers, (...). Having sent for them under the
former name, he exhorts them under the latter. So we read, Acts xx. 17, 28.
"He sent to Ephesus, and called the elders, (...), of the church; and when
they were come to him, he said unto them -- Take heed to the flock over which
the holy Ghost has made you overseers," (...). The same persons, who are
styled presbyters in one part of the same continued sentence, are in the other
called bishops; and this, while spoken of in their proper character as officers
of the church. In like manner, the apostle Peter promiscuously uses these
names, applying them to the same pastors. 1 Pet. v. 1, 2.
"The elders ((...)) that are among you, I exhort -- feed the flock of God,
taking the oversight thereof," (...); acting the part, exercising the office,
of bishops in it. The same promiscuous use is made of these names by the
apostle Paul, in his epistle to Titus: For, having said some things descriptive
of the qualifications of those he would have ordained elders, Tit. i. 5, 6.
(...), he gives this as the reason of what he had offered, Ver. ^
"a bishop, (...) must be blameless --." There would be no connection, no
force, in this reasoning, unless he meant by the names elders and bishops,
(...) and (...), precisely the same church officers.

IT may not be amiss to observe here, for the sake of those who are so apt, in
this dispute, to recur to antiquity, that both the greek and latin fathers, if
we may believe Dr. Whitby, Note on Philip. i ^
an episcoparian writer, "do with one consent declare, that bishops were called
presbyters, and presbyters bishops, in apostolic times, the names then being
common. So Chrysostom, Thodoret. Occumenius and Theophylact, among the Greeks;
and, among the Latins, Jerome, Pseud-Ambrosius, Pelagius, and Primasius."

AND if the names were then common, and, as we have proved, promiscuously used
to point out the same church officers, it is obvious, and yet just to conclude,
that these are the officers always intended, whether they are called bishops or
presbyters. And upon the truth of this conclusion, we may warrantably affirm,
that the bishops, whose qualifications are described in the epistle to Timothy,
are precisely the same with the elders Titus was directed to ordain in Crete;
as also, that the bishops of the church at Philippi were the same with the
elders spoken of in other churches, and, e contra, the elders in other churches
the same with these bishops. And in this view of the scripture language a
perfect harmony runs through the whole new testament upon this head of ordinary
pastors.

I SHALL finish this part of the discourse with the following remark, worthy of
special notice, namely, that in all the above scripture-passages, the argument,
in proof that bishops and presbyters are one and the same order of pastors, is
not grounded merely on the promiscuous use of these names, but their being so
used as to point out the work, or describe the qualifications, that are proper
to one and the same office. Perhaps, the argument would have been valid, could
we have reasoned only from the reciprocal use of these names; but, as we reason
not merely from this, but from the appropriation also of the same work, and the
same moral endowments, to the same persons under these different names, the
arguing is unexceptionably strong and conclusive. And so it is confessed to be
by some of the best writers in favor of episcopacy, particularly by the late
celebrated bishop Hoadly, who, far from calling in question the strength of
this way of arguing, acknowledges it is force, "Reasonableness of conformity to
the church of England." page (...)
(...) pleads, that the bishops of the church of England don't answer to those
that are promiscuously called either bishops or presbyters in the
new testament, but to officers superior to them: A suggestion we shall have
opportunity afterward to consider. But, previous to this, we shall go on to
the last branch of the present argument, and say,

THAT these officers of equal rank, who are promiscuously called either bishops
or presbyters, were endowed with all the ordinary powers proper to be exercised
in the church of Christ, with that of ordination, as well as those of teaching,
baptising and administering the Lord's supper.

THAT they were authorized to preach and administer the sacraments, our
opponents do freely allow. And from hence it might be consequentially argued, a
fortiori, that they were empowered also to ordain. For these are ministerial
acts more excellent and important in their nature, than that of ordination. --
But the limits to which I am confined oblige me to pass over this argument.

IT is also allowed, and even insisted on, by episcopal writers, that the same
persons who are authorized to govern, are in like manner, empowered to ordain.
Now, it were easy to show, from the scriptures, that the former of these powers
was given to presbyters; from whence it might be inferred, that they were
vested with the latter. But this argument also I shall dismiss, that I may have
time more fully to lay before you the direct proof we have, that the power of
ordination was lodged with ordinary pastors or presbyters.

AND we prove this from scripture-instances of this kind of ordination.

IF the sacred books of the new testament present to our view examples of
ordination by presbyters, we shall take it for granted, this will be esteemed a
good reason why we should think, they were vested with ordaining power; and
that presbyters now will act warrantably, while they copy after the pattern
that is set them in the inspired writings. It only remains therefore to produce
these instances.

THE first is that of the separation of Barnabas and Paul to the work to which
God had called them; the account whereof is recorded (...)
in these words, "There were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets
and teachers. -- As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost
said, separate me Barnabas and Paul to the work whereunto I have called them.
And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid hands on them, they sent them
away." This is the most circumstantial account given in scripture of an
ordination. The persons ordained were previously called of God; they were set
apart to the special work to which they had been called; all the ministerial
acts any where mentioned, in the new testament, as accompanying the separation
of persons to the service of the church of Christ, were performed, imposition
of hands, fasting and prayer; and what is more directly to our purpose, the
ordainers were "the prophets and teachers" of the church at Antioch. These
teachers were its ordinary pastors, the same officers that are elsewhere
promiscuously called bishops or presbyters. Most certainly, they could not be
bishops, in the sense of the church of England, because there was a plurality
of them in this church. What more can be wanting to make this a complete
instance in our favor?

THE objections against it only serve as so many occasions to place it in a
stronger point of light.

IT IS said, by Turrianus, bishop Bilson* and some others, that this separation
of Barnabas and Paul was the act, not of the teachers, but of the prophets
(extraordinary officers) who imposed hands with them. But this is only said not
proved; nor can it be proved. The divine order, "separate me Barnabas and
Paul," was as truly directed to these teachers, as to the prophets; they as
certainly laid hands on these persons; and prayed over them, in separating them
to their work: and as much is attributed to them, relative to their separation,
as to the prophets. And consequently, if it can be argued, from any thing that
is here said to these prophets, or that is spoken of as done by them, that they
were vested with the power of ordination; it may, in the same way, and with
equal strength, be argued, that the teachers also were endowed with the same
power; for there is nothing said to the prophets, but what is equally said to
the teachers; nor was any thing done by the former but the same was done by the
letter.

IT is pleaded, by the whole body of episcopal writers* that Barnabas and Paul
were, before this, commissioned ministers of Christ's and that their present
separation was only to a special service among the Gentiles. It is
acknowledged; but, at the same time, denied that this makes any real alteration
in the case. For it is to be remembered, the thing intended by ordination is
not, that the ordainers should commission persons to do the work of the
ministry. This is done by Christ. It only belongs to them to declare who these
persons are, and separate them to the work to which Christ has commissioned
them. They don't make them ministers; but, being authorized hereto, give them
an authentic character as such in the eye of the world. They don't confer upon
them their authority in the gospel-kingdom; but let them into the exercise of
the authority proper to their office, with the solemnity the scripture esteems
regular and decent. And it might seem good to the holy Ghost to order, that
Barnabas and Paul, though before commissioned and sent by Christ, should yet, at
this time, be separated to their work by man, in the common and ordinary way.
Neither of them, from any thing said of the matter in the sacred books, appear
to have been thus separated before now; and as they were now separated to the
work to which they had been called by imposition of hands, with fasting and
prayer, it may with all reason be affirmed, that this separation was a true
scripture-ordination. All the outward actions common to an ordination were
performed upon this occasion, and particularly that of laying on of hands. They
were, in a word, separated to the service assigned them in the same way that
Timothy was separated to the ministerial work, and afterward separated others
to it; in the same way Titus was directed to ordain elders in the churches at
Crete; yea, in the same way they themselves ordained elders at Lystra, Iconium,
and Antioch in Pisidia, and this, while upon the very service they were now
separated to. And why their separation, at this time, should not be esteemed as
proper a scripture-ordination as their's, which was effected by the performance
of the same outward actions, no better reason can be given, than that it will
not fall in with the scheme of our opponents.

IT is further objected, this separation of Barnabas and Paul was in
consequence of an immediate order from the holy Ghost, and therefore a
precedent not pleadable but in like circumstances. The answer is obvious. Both
Timothy and Titus were immediately directed by an apostle of Jesus Christ,
speaking to them under the inspiration of the holy Ghost, to ordain pastors at
Ephesus and Crete; and yet, the objectors themselves plead these instances in
support of the right of bishops, in their sense of the word, to ordain; and
this, to the exclusion of presbyters. And if the plea is good on their side, it
is equally so on our's. I would say further, this objection, instead of setting
aside the instance before us as a precedent, makes it the more strongly valid.
For it cannot be supposed, if ordinary teachers were unsuitable church officers
to perform the business of ordination, that the holy Ghost would have ordered
them to do it. And, by his committing this work to them, we have an authentic
precept, as well as example, for ordination by common teachers, standing
ordinary pastors of the churches. And let me add here, it is highly probable,
this direction from the holy Ghost, giving rise to this instance of ordination
by ordinary teachers, was intended for a precedent to the Gentile churches in
all after times. This was the judgment of the learned Dr. Lightfoot. "No better
reason, says he Vol. I. page 18^
, can be given of this present action, than that the Lord did hereby set down a
platform of ordaining ministers to the church of the Gentiles in future times."

ANOTHER instance to our purpose we have in the case of Timothy, who was
separated to the gospel ministry with the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery; as is evident from that exhortation of the apostle Paul addressed
to him, in my text, "Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee
by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery:" The meaning of
which words, compared with what is said upon the matter in 2 Timothy i. 6. may, I
think, be fully expressed in the following paraphrase, "Improve the gift of the
holy Ghost, which I imparted to you in an extraordinary measure, according to
the prophesies which went before concerning you, when you was separated to the
work of the ministry with the laying on of the hands of the consistory of
presbyters."

YOU observe, I do not interpret the gift here said to be in Timothy of his
office as a minister, but of the communication of the holy Ghost, in an
extraordinary manner qualifying him for it; which appears to me the most easy
and natural sense. You observe likewise, I speak of this gift of the holy Ghost
as imparted to Timothy, through the hands of the apostle Paul, not the hands of
the presbytery. There is no certain example of such a communication to be met
with in the new testament. Perhaps, the holy Ghost, in the days of the
apostles, was never imparted through any hands but those of an apostle. But
should it have been otherwise, this was the way of communication in the present
case. For the apostle Paul expressly speaks of this gift 2 Timothy i. 6.
as a gift that was in Timothy "by the putting on of his hands." These
presbyters therefore did not impose hands on Timothy with a view to communicate
to him this gift. It was imparted wholly through the hands of the apostle Paul.
And yet, the presbytery as certainly imposed their hands on Timothy as Paul
imposed his. And why? No good reason can be assigned for it but this, that they
might separate him to the gospel ministry in the ordinary way, by using the
scripture-rite common upon such an occasion. And if it be supposed, that this
gift of the holy Ghost was imparted to Timothy through the hands of Paul, about
the time that he was separated to the ministry by the laying on of the hands of
the concessus of presbyters, we shall have an easy and consistent sense of this
whole affair.

THE truth of the case seems plainly to be this. The apostle Paul imposed his
hands on Timothy to communicate to him the gift of the holy Ghost; and either
with the apostle, or, as I rather think, afterward, the council of presbyters
laid on their's, separating him, by this rite, to his work, as Paul himself,
with Barnabas, some time before, had been separated to their's. And very
observable, it may be proper to remark here, is the analogy between this
separation of Timothy, and that of Paul and Barnabas. They were separated by
express direction from the holy Ghost; so was Timothy, for he was pointed out
by prophecy, that is, by holy men prophetically speaking of him by inspiration
of the holy Ghost, as a fit person to be employed in the service of the gospel.
And it was probably owing to this, that he was so soon separated to this work,
being, at this time, a very young man, and in danger, on that account, of being
despised. They were separated also by the laying on of the hands of the
prophets and teachers, that is, the ordinary pastors of the church at Antioch;
so was Timothy, by the laying on of the hands of the company of presbyters,
residing where he now was.

BUT the pertinency of this instance will appear with a brighter luster, by
considering the objections that are made to it; as, by this means, we shall
have an opportunity of going more critically into the examination of it.

IT is objected, the word presbytery, (...), here used, means the office
ordained to, not the consistory of ordaining presbyters. This was Calvin's
interpretation, when he wrote his institutions Says he, "Quod de impositione
manuum presbyterii dicitur, non ita accipio quasi Paulus de seniorum collegio
loquatur; sed hoc nomine ordinationem ipsam intelligo" --.

Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 16
; though afterward, in his commentary upon this text, having attained to greater
maturity of judgment, he fell in with the commonly received sense
"Presbyterium] Qui hic collectivum nomen esse putant, pro collegio
presbyterorum positum, recte sentiunt meo judicio."

In loc
. The other, by whomsoever it is given, will exhibit a downright piece of
nonsense, unless the substantive (...) is made the genitive case, not to the
immediately foregoing word (...), but to that far distant one (...), and the
text be accordingly read, "Neglect not the gift of the presbyteratus which was
given thee by the laying on of hands." But this grammatical transposition is
arbitrary beyond all reasonable bounds. And should the like liberty be taken in
other cases, we might make the scripture speak, in any place, just what we
please. Besides, the word (...) is never used in this sense in the
new testament; but always as signifying "concessus, senatus presbyterorum."
This also is it is meaning in the writings of the fathers, as may be seen in the
famous Blondell's "apologia pro sententia Hveronimi." Page 89, 90.
And this is its meaning particularly in Ignatius's epistles, whose authority
will not be questioned by those we are at present concerned with. He often uses
this word, and never in any other sense.

BUT should we allow this pretended sense of the word to be the true one, and,
in consequence hereof, that Timothy was ordained, not by an assembly of
presbyters, but to the degree of the presbyterate; instead of helping the cause
of our opponents, it would, unluckily for them, very much serve our's. For
Timothy, according to this interpretation, was, at the time, when this epistle
was wrote, nothing more than a presbyter, whatever he might be afterward: And
yet, he is particularly applied to, in the epistle itself, as one entrusted
with the power of ordination, and accordingly instructed to use caution and
prudence in the management of this trust, "not suddenly laying hands on any
man." And if Timothy, while a mere presbyter, was spoken of, by an inspired
apostle, as one vested with ordaining power, it is as good a proof of the power
we are establishing, as if he was ordained by a consistory of presbyters.

IT IS again said, by the presbytery here is intended, not an assembly of
presbyters, but the college of apostles. So speak Chrysostom, Theophilus,
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and after them such learned men as Dr. Hammond, Mr.
Drury, and some others; but, as we imagine, without any sufficient reason to
support this sense of the word. It is indeed a sense that carries with it not
the least probability of truth. The apostle Peter, it is true, introduces an
exhortation to Presbyters, by taking to himself the style of a
fellow-presbyter, (...) 1 Pet. v. 1.
; but the apostles, in a collective view, are never once spoken of, in the
new testament, as a presbytery; nor is the word, (...), ever used by any
ancient writer (as Mr. Boyse observes) to signify the bench of apostles. Far
from this, when met together in council at Jerusalem, upon a special occasion,
with the elders, they are carefully and particularly distinguished from them,
every time they are mentioned. Acts xvth chap.
Nor can it well be imagined, if the other apostles had joined with Paul in
laying their hands on Timothy, either for imparting the holy Ghost, or
separating him to the gospel ministry, that this humble apostle would have
omitted mentioning their names, since he so expressly mentions his own.
Besides, there is not the least reason to think, that either all, or most, or
any considerable number of the apostles were together at this time. It Is far
more likely, from the history we have in the acts of their travels, and
dispersions from each other, that Paul only was now present, and that the
presbytery that laid their hands on Timothy was not the company of apostles,
but such presbyters as they had constituted in the several churches.

BUT should it be supposed, that the apostles were now together, and that this
presbytery was the assembly of apostles, it would be of no real service to the
episcopal cause. For it is plain, they acted not, in their apostolical
character, but as presbyters. Why else are they called a presbytery? It cannot
reasonably be thought, if the holy Ghost intended to declare, in this text,
that Timothy was ordained by apostolical authority, and not that which is
vested in presbyters, he would so expressly have spoken of the apostles as
acting in this affair as a presbytery. It should rather seem evident from
hence, that the work they now did was common and ordinary, and such as might be
done by these officers, under whose style they are represented as performing
this action.

FINALLY, it is pleaded, that Timothy was vested with his office by the laying
on of the apostle Paul's hands, while the consistory of presbyters, by imposing
their's, only gave their concurring approbation. And for the proof of this we
are turned to 2 Timothy i. 6. where Paul, calling upon Timothy "to stir up the
gift that was in him," adds, "which is in thee by the putting on of my hands."

THE answer is easy. This same apostle attributes as much to the hands of the
presbytery in 1 Timothy 4.14. as he does to his own hands in the place referred to
in his second epistle; and consequently there is just the same reason to say,
that the presbytery ordained Timothy, as that Paul ordained him. Besides, it
cannot be reasonably supposed, that an inspired apostle should permit a number
of presbyters to join with him in the sacred solemnity of imposing hands, if
they had not a right, as officers in the church of Christ, to perform this
action; and their performing it is a sure argument of their right to do the
thing intended by it, that is, to separate a person to the work of the
gospel ministry: As they that have a right to apply water in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, have a right to baptize; and they that
have a right to set apart bread and wine, and distribute it to the people, have
a right to administer the Lord's supper.

BUT the truth of the matter is, it is far from being evident, that Paul
imposed hands with the presbytery in Timothy's ordination; and I am strongly
inclined to think he did not. The gift the apostle speaks of, in his second
epistle to Timothy, which, says he, "is in thee by the putting on of my hands,"
was undoubtedly the gift of the holy Ghost in miraculous powers; but whatever
the gift was, it was imparted by the apostle's own hands. Not a word is said of
the presbytery, or any person whatever, as joining with him, not so much as in
a way of concurring approbation. Whereas, in the passage we are now
considering, recorded in the first epistle, the thing that was done, whatever
it was, was done with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. Their hands
only are mentioned, not a word is dropped insinuating that Paul's hands were
joined with theirs. It is therefore highly probable, if not certain, that Paul
imposed hands on Timothy to confer the gift of the holy Ghost, which was
usually, if not always, done by some apostle in this way; and that the
presbytery afterward laid on their hands for another purpose, that of
separating him to the work of the ministry, which also was usually done in this
way.

OR if it should be still said, that Paul laid hands on Timothy at the same
time the presbytery imposed their's, he did it principally that through his
hands, being an apostle, the holy Ghost might be imparted to him; they, that he
might, in the ordinary method, be separated to the gospel ministry. So that, in
either of these ways, we have an evident instance of ordination by presbyters.
In the former, they were sole ordainers; in the latter, ordainers in
partnership with the apostle Paul.

I CANNOT help saying here, if, instead of, "the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery," it had been wrote, "the laying on of the hands of the episcopate,"
our opponents would have triumphed in having an unexceptionable instance of
episcopal ordination. But this occasion of glorying is happily taken away. And
it is remarkable, though we have examples, in scripture, of ordination by both
extraordinary and ordinary officers, by apostles, by prophets, by evangelists,
by teachers or common pastors and presbyters; yet we no where read of an
ordination by any person under the name of a bishop. There is a total silence
throughout the new testament upon this head. This observation, to use the words
of your worthy Divinity-professor, in a book of his, relative to this
controversy, wrote near 40 years ago, entitled, "sober remarks," and which I
would recommend to your diligent perusal, "This observation, says he, Page 115.
may perhaps draw some weak persons into doubts about the validity of episcopal
ordination. -- But the truth of the case is, that bishops and presbyters are
one and the same order by divine institution; and that they succeed the
apostles, in all their ordinary powers, of which that of ordination is one;
which is warrant enough for ordination by presbyters, and the very same warrant
which those have for it, who are now, by custom and human constitution,
dignified and distinguished with the title of bishops.

I HAVE now considered the argument at first proposed, in all its parts. And
the sum of what has been said, that we may have it in one view, is this; that
the apostles of Christ, in consequence of their commission from him, and as
acting under the inspiration of the holy Ghost, constituted and settled in the
church, besides the order of deacons, no more than one order of fixed pastors;
that they promiscuously point out the pastors of this one order by the names
bishop and presbyter, sometimes using the former, sometimes the latter, and
meaning by either precisely these pastors of one and the same order; and
finally that they give us abundant reason to believe, that these pastors of
this one order were endowed particularly with the power of ordination,
instances whereof they have left upon sacred record. The conclusion from which
premises, if they have been clearly and fully evidenced to be true, as I trust
they have, is unquestionably this, that ordination by presbyters, according to
the usual method in these churches, is safe and valid, because agreeable to the
holy scriptures, and warranted by them.

BUT notwithstanding all that has been offered in proof of the point we have
been upon, it ought not, it is acknowledged, to be received as truth, unless
the contrary evidence can fairly be set aside. This therefore makes it
necessary to consider what is pleaded on the other side of the question. And
this I shall now do, giving what is said its full strength, so far as I am
able. For if the counter-evidence, in it is full weight, will not admit of a
just and solid answer, we ought, in all reason, to esteem the above proof to be
defective, how plausible soever it may appear in a separate view.

THE first thing said in favor of the superiority of bishops to presbyters, and
in vindication of their claim to the powers of ordination and government is,
that they are successors to the apostles, and derive from them this superiority
of order and power.

THE answer is ready. The apostles, as such, were extraordinary officers, and
had no successors. They received their commission immediately from Christ,
their charge was unlimited, their province the whole world. They were, by
office, the teachers of all nations, had power to gather churches every where,
to settle them with proper officers, to inspect over them, and give binding
rules and orders for the good government of them; and all this, under the
infallible guidance of the holy Ghost. It will not be pretended, I trust, that
bishops, in these respects, are successors to the apostles. In their proper
apostolic character, they were far exalted above all bishops. As the great Dr.
Barrow expresses it, (to adapt his words to the present case) It would be a
disparagement to an apostle to take upon him the bishopric of Rome; as it
would be to the king, to become mayor of London; or to the bishop of London, to
become vicar of Pancrass. The apostolic office, as such, was personal and
temporary; not successive and communicable: Neither did the apostles
communicate it. Those parts indeed of their office which were ordinary, and
intended for perpetual use, such as feeding the church of God with the word and
sacraments, and restraining them within the rules of good order, were
communicated from them to others. We have accordingly seen, that they appointed
standing pastors in the churches, vesting them with all the powers proper for
the work of the ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ. And in a lax
sense, these may be called successors to the apostles, as having derived their
power from them in Christ's name. And in this loose sense only may bishops be
said to be successors to the apostles. They certainly do not succeed them in
their office, considered as apostolic; but in such powers of it only as are
ordinary and communicable. And here they are perfectly upon a par with common
pastors or presbyters, unless it can be proved, that the apostles in
communicating these powers, made a difference, committing some to a superior
order called bishops, and others to an inferior one described by the name of
presbyters. This is what we may reasonably expect to see evidenced. The
new testament is open. If it contains any such evidence, let it be produced. We
imagine it contains clear evidence of the contrary, and that we have given such
evidence. Merely the calling bishops successors to the apostles will not prove
their superiority; though, by the way, they are never so called in the sacred
books. And should it be allowed, that the fathers, in after times, speak of
them in this style, it can be in a loose sense only; meaning, that apostolic
power had been communicated to them, though what that power was, can never be
determined merely by their being called the apostles successors. The bible only
can settle this point.

IT is further said, in defense of the episcopal scheme, that Timothy and Titus
were bishops, the one of Ephesus, the other of Crete, meaning hereby officers
of a rank superior to the other pastors of the churches in those places, with
whom, as such, were lodged the powers of ordination and jurisdiction.

IT IS replied, they are neither of them called bishops any where in the
new testament. This name, it is true, is given them in the postscripts to the
epistles that are directed to them. But I need not say, that these postscripts
are after-additions, and not very ancient ones neither. This is sufficiently
known to all men of learning, who accordingly lay no stress upon them. It Is
true likewise, that they are called bishops, the one of Ephesus, the other of
Crete, by the fathers; but not by the more primitive ones. Dr. Whitby honestly
confesses, Preface to the epistle to Titus.
that "he could not find, within the three first centuries, any intimations
that they bore this name." He adds indeed, "this defect is abundantly supplied
by the concurrent suffrage of the 4th and 5th centuries." But these were times
too far distant from Timothy and Titus to be relied on for the truth of this
fact; especially, as, in these times, they had greatly departed from the
simplicity of the gospel. And it is observable, Eusebius, the great source of
primitive ecclesiastical history, only says, "it is reported," (...) Lib. III
cap. 4
dicitur, "that Timothy was bishop of Ephesus, and Titus bishop of Crete." And
he has himself taught us, how far we may depend upon this report, by what he
tells us a little before, Lib. I. cap. 1
"that he could trace no footsteps of others going before him, only in a few
narratives." And the suffrage of these centuries is the less to be regarded, in
this particular, because it does not agree with the scripture-account of
Timothy and Titus. Timothy is expressly called "an evangelist," 2 Timothy iv. 6.
And his work, as such, was inconsistent with his being the bishop of Ephesus,
or any other church. The business of an evangelist, as Eusebius Lib. III. cap.
37.
justly represents it, was, to lay the foundation of faith in strange nations,
to constitute them pastors; and, having committed to them the cultivating those
new plantations, to pass on to other countries and nations. And this
description of evangelists perfectly agrees with what the scripture says both
of Timothy and Titus. They evidently appear to have been itinerant
missionaries, not settled pastors. To be sure, they sustained no fixed relation
to the churches of Ephesus and Crete, and consequently were not the bishops of
them; for they continually went about from place to place, as the service of
the churches made it necessary, and were as long, and it may be longer, in
other churches than those that are said to be their settled charge. And would
any man, as Mr. Boyse expresses it, "Account of the ancient episcopacy," page
331.
"call him the fixed bishop of London that should only perform the episcopal
functions there for a year or two, but for twenty or thirty years is found to
perform the same episcopal functions in most other dioceses of England, nay in
many dioceses in France, Spain and Italy?" Can such an itinerary ministry as
this consist with a man's fixed relation to a particular church, which enjoys no
more of his labors and care than twenty or thirty churches more?

BUT the strength of the argument from Timothy and Titus chiefly lies in this,
that they were charged with the management of ordination at Ephesus and Crete.
Titus particularly was left in Crete with a professed view to his ordaining
elders in the cities there. The answer is, it will not from hence follow, that
they were vested with an exclusive power of ordination. I argue upon the matter
thus; either elders had been settled before this in the churches at Ephesus and
Crete, or they had not; and whether our opponents proceed upon the former, or
latter of these suppositions, their reasoning is inconclusive.

IF elders had been settled in these churches, the consequence is far from
being just, Timothy and Titus were particularly entrusted with the affair of
ordination in these churches, therefore the power was in them exclusive of the
standing pastors. By this way of arguing, they must have been sole preachers,
as well as ordainers; for they are as particularly charged to do the work of
preaching, as that of ordaining. And by this same method of reasoning, the
church of Rome must be justified in their plea for Peter's supremacy; for there
are not wanting texts of scripture, in which he is particularly applied to, and
charged with instructions and orders without mentioning the other apostles. The
plain truth is, as these evangelists were assistants to the apostles, and left
in those churches extraordinarily qualified to supply their place, it was
proper they should have particularly committed to them the chief management of
ordination, and all other affairs pertaining to the kingdom of Christ, while
they continued among them. But how does this prove, that, when they were gone,
as was soon the case, this same work might not be done by the standing pastors?
Or that the standing pastors might not, or that they did not, join with them in
doing it, while they were actually present? It Is far more probable that they
did, than that they did not. Timothy's ordination by the consistory of
presbyters would naturally put him upon going into the like practice. To be
sure, some positive good evidence ought to be given, that he did not, and that
the power of ordination was solely and exclusively vested in him.

THE other supposition was that of there being no settled pastors in these
churches, when these instructions were given to Timothy and Titus. And in this
view of the fact, I see not but the dispute must be at (...) ended; for their
being directed to ordain pastors in churches that as yet had none, cannot
possibly prove, that these pastors, when ordained, might not ordain others
also. And perhaps this is the real truth of the case. I am well assured, it
will be found, upon trial, to be an insuperable task to make it appear, that
either of these churches, at this time, were settled with pastors. They were,
most probably, in the same imperfect state with the churches of Lystra,
Iconium, and Antioch, before Barnabas and Paul, upon their return to them,
ordained them elders. And, it may be, as Dr. Benson well observes, Essay at the
end of his paraphrase and note on the epistle of Paul to Timothy, page 8^.
most of the churches the apostle Paul writes to were in the same imperfect
unsettled state, at the time when he wrote to them.

I SHALL only add here, as Timothy and Titus were evangelists, they had no
successors; or if they had, fixed bishops could not be their successors. Nor
will it follow, because these evangelists were left at Ephesus and Crete to
manage the affair of ordination, that therefore bishops, any more than
presbyters, have this power. It must first be proved, and upon the foot of good
evidence, that bishops, meaning hereby officers in the church superior to
presbyters, were fixed in those places, and that the ordaining power was lodged
with them, to the exclusion of presbyters; which has never yet been done, and I
am fully persuaded never will.

IT is pleaded yet further, that the angels of the seven Asian churches, in the
book of the Revelation, were bishops; that is, such bishops as the present
argument is concerned with, or they are mentioned to no purpose. But how does
it appear, that these angels were bishops in this sense? If the word is here
used collectively, meaning the pastors of these churches, and not a single one
in each church, the argument is at once superseded. And it ought to be thus
understood. Such an exposition best agrees with the manner of speaking throughout
this whole book, in which like words are commonly used in this collective
sense. Nor, unless the word is thus interpreted, will the other pastors of
these churches have any concern in the messages that are sent to the churches,
which it would be highly unreasonable to suppose. But, if every one of these
angels should be allowed to mean a single person, how will it follow herefrom,
that they were bishops vested with the sole power of ordination and government
in these churches? The word angel carries in it is meaning nothing that imports
this; nor is there any thing said, in the epistles themselves, from whence it
can be deduced. The argument therefore must be wholly grounded on this, that
these angels are singled out, and particularly wrote to. But this they might
be, supposing there was no greater distinction between them and the other
pastors, than between Peter and the other apostles; between rectors and
curates; between an assembly of equal ministers and their praeses. In short, it
must be proved by other evidence than what is contained in the word angel, or
the application of this word to a single person, if proved at all, that bishops
were hereby intended, meaning by bishops officers in these churches endowed
with the sole power of ordination and government; which evidence has never yet
been produced.

THE last plea, and that which is triumphed in as decisive, is the suffrage of
all antiquity in favor of bishops, as an order of men in the church superior to
presbyters, to whom belonged the powers of ordination and government.

BUT, before I come to this plea, it may be proper just to observe, that we are
now disputing against the episcopal scheme, and particularly that branch of it,
the confining ordination to bishops, not as a mere ecclesiastical appointment,
a prudential expedient; but as an institution of Jesus Christ, and an
institution of his essentially connected with the validity of
gospel-administrations. And in this view of the matter, the demand, we imagine,
is highly reasonable, "what says the scripture?" It is to little purpose to
tell us of the fathers, and that it is uninterruptedly handed down from them as
a fact, that bishops were superior to presbyters, and had the sole right of
ordination. This cannot make episcopal-ordination necessary to the validity of
gospel ordinances. It must be constituted necessary, if so at all, by the
revelations of God, and in fair and legible characters too. We may, with all
reason, expect to find both the constitution itself, and it is necessity,
delivered in the sacred books, not by innuendoes, far-fetched arguments, or
probable conjectures; but with so much positive clearness, and express
affirmation, as to leave no reasonable room for doubt. And there would now be
no need of testimonies from the fathers. It would indeed be dishonorary to the
sacred scriptures, and a gross reflection on them as not being a perfect and
sufficient rule, if we might not, without traditionary helps from the elders,
depend on them for the essentials of salvation. And, considering the sentiments
of our Savior concerning the traditions handed down to the Jews from their
elders, this kind of tradition seems to be one of the last things suitable to
be recurred to, in order to our knowing what is necessarily connected with true
christianity.

HAVING remarked this, I come to consider the plea that is so much gloried in,
as carrying with it even demonstration. And, that it might lose none of its
strength, I shall give it you in the words of the celebrated bishop Hoadly, who
has wrote, perhaps, in as masterly a way, upon this side of the controversy, as
any who have handled it. In his book entitled, "The reasonableness of
conformity to the church of England," in order to prove, "that the apostles
left the power of ordaining presbyters in the hands of fixed bishops," he says,
Page 3^6, 3^^.
This being a matter of fact, past many ages ago, the only method by which we
can come to the knowledge of it, is the testimony of writers who lived in that,
and the following ages. And there is the more reason to rely upon their
testimony in this case, because this is a matter of a simple, uncompounded
nature, perfectly within their knowledge; not standing in need of any curious
niceness of learning, or reasoning, but level to all capacities; a matter in
which they might very easily have been contradicted, had they represented it
falsely; and a matter in which they could not in the first ages be biased by
Interest. And here -- I think I may say, that we have as universal and as
unanimous a testimony of all writers, and historians from the apostles days, as
could reasonably be expected, or desired: Every one who speaks of the
government of the church in any place, witnessing that episcopacy was the
settled form; and every one who has occasion to speak of the original of it,
tracing it up to the apostles days, and fixing it upon their decree; and what
is very remarkable, no one contradicting this, either of the friends or enemies
to christianity, either of the orthodox, or heretical, through those ages, in
which only such assertions concerning this matter of fact could well be
disproved. -- Were there only testimonies to be produced, that this was the
government of the church in all ages, it would be but reasonable to conclude it
of apostolical institution; it being so highly improbable that so material a
point should be established without their advice or decree, when we find the
churches consulting them upon every occasion, and upon matters not of greater
importance than this. But when we find the same persons witnessing not only
that the government of the church was episcopal, but that it was of apostolical
institution, and delivered down from the beginning as such, this adds weight to
the matter, and makes it more undoubted. So that here are two points to which
they bear witness, that this was the government of the church in their days,
and that it was of apostolical institution. And in these there is such a
constancy, and unanimity, that even St. Jerome himself (who was born near 250
years after the apostles, and is the chief person in all that time whom the
presbyterians cite for any purpose of their's) traces up episcopacy to the very
apostles, and makes it of their institution; and in the very place where he
most exalts presbyters, he excepts ordination as a work always peculiar to
bishops. -- He says, a little further on Page 338.
-- The testimony we speak of, is not concerning the apostolical institution of
the exorbitant power claimed by later bishops, or of any external ensigns of
worldly grandeur, or riches appropriated to them: But merely of the institution
of one person to ordain and govern presbyters, within such or such a district,
and according to the design and rules of christianity. -- He adds, Page 339.
All churches and christians, as far as we know, seem to have been agreed in
this point, amidst all their other differences, as universally as can well be
imagined.

HAD I met with this representation of ancient testimony in a declamatory
secondhand writer, who knew little himself, and only retailed, in a flourishing
manner, what he had heard from this and the other party-zealot, it would not
have been surprising; but it really was so, to find a truly great and
deservedly renowned author bringing in the ancient fathers, universally,
unanimously, and constantly affirming it to be fact, and this in all ages from
the apostles, that "the government of the church was episcopal," and "of
apostolical institution;" yea, and that it was "of apostolical institution too,
that one person should ordain and govern presbyters within a certain district."
One would imagine, from this representation, that, if the writings of the
fathers were consulted, episcopacy, both the thing, and the divine institution
of it, would so glaringly appear to have been acknowledged by all the fathers,
in all ages from the beginning, that there would be no room left for the least
debate upon the matter.

AND is this the truth of fact? We shall soon see whether it is, or no. In
order whereto let it be observed.

A DISTINCTION ought always to be made between the two first centuries, and the
succeeding ones for the difference between the writers in these centuries, as
witnesses in the present cause, is both obviously and certainly very great.
Perhaps, due attention has not been given to this distinction by the disputants
on either side of the question in debate. Sir Peter King's "account of the
primitive church," is, it may be, as impartial an one as any extant; but it
would, as I apprehend, have been less faulty, and more perfect, if he had kept
in his eye this distinction through the whole of his work. Nor have any of the
writers on our side of the dispute, so far as I have had opportunity to read
them, managed the cause with the advantage they might have done, if they had
particularly pointed out the difference between the two first and following
centuries, and made the use of it they might have done to their purpose.

IT is readily acknowledged, the name bishop, toward the close of the second
century began to be an appropriated term; signifying something more than the
word presbyter. In the third century, and onwards, the appropriation was
common. Bishop and presbyter pointed out officers in the church distinct from
each other; though to say precisely what, and how great, this distinction was,
will, I believe, be found to be exceeding difficult. It was undoubtedly small
at first. The bishop was no more than "primus interpares," the
"head-presbyter," the "praeses" of the consistory. And it was by gradual steps
that he attained to that dignity and power with which he was afterward vested.
Those ecclesiastical superiorities and inferiorities which have, for a long
time, been visible in the christian world, were unknown in the first and purest
ages. Nor did they at once take place. It was the work of time. From
prime-presbyters arose city-bishops; from city-bishops, diocesan ones; from
diocesan bishops, metropolitans; from metropolitans, patriarchs; and finally,
at the top of all, his holiness the pope, claiming the character of universal
head of the church. But to return to the distinction between bishops and
presbyters in the centuries immediately following the second. And it is owned,
there was a distinction between them; but, at the same time, utterly denied,
that the fathers are universal, and unanimous, in affirming it for fact, that
it was a distinction importing a superiority of order, or that it was of
apostolical institution. The learned professor Jameson, in (...) Cyprianus
Isotimus, is positive in declaring, Chap. 14.
that even "Cyprian did not believe the divine right of episcopacy;" and that
"he, with his colleagues, most clearly depose, that bishop and presbyter, are,
by Christ's institution, reciprocally one and the same." More full to our
purpose is what I find related, in Calamy's defense of nonconformity, Page 87,
88.
from the renowned Dr. Raynolds. The account is, "Dr. Bancroft, afterward
Archbishop of Canterbury, preaching at Paul's cross, told his auditory, that
Acrius was condemned of heresy, with the consent of the universal church, for
asserting that there was no difference, by divine right, between a bishop and a
presbyter; and that the puritans were condemned, by the church, in Aerius. The
famous Sir Francis Knolls, being surprised at such doctrine, to which they were
not in that day, so much used as we have been since, wrote to the learned Dr.
John Raynolds, who was universally reckoned the wonder of his age, to desire
his sense about the matter. The Doctor wrote him word in answer, that even
Bellarmine the Jesuit owned the weakness of the answer of Epiphanius to the
argument of Aerius; that Austin esteemed the assertion of Aerius heretical,
merely because he found it so represented by Epiphanius; and that Austin
himself owned, that there was no difference between a bishop and a presbyter by
divine right. He cites also bishop Jewel, who, when Harding had asserted the
same thing as Dr. Bancroft, alleged against him Chrysostom, Austin, Jerome, and
Ambrose. He mentions, from Medina, several other ancient fathers; and further
adds himself, Oecumenius, Anselm archbishop of Canterbury, another Anselm,
Gregory, and Gratian." And bishop Stillingfleet, who appears to have been as
well read in the fathers as any man in his day, or since, freely says, I^^n.
pa^ ^76.
"I believe, upon the strictest enquiry, Medina's judgment will prove true,
that Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, were all of Aerius's judgment, as to the identity of both name and
order of bishops and presbyters in the primitive church." And again, a little
onwards, Page 3^.
"I do as yet despair of finding any one single testimony in all antiquity,
which does in plain terms assert episcopacy, as it was settled by the practice
of the primitive church, in the ages following the apostles, to be of
unalterable divine right." If any regard is to be paid to the judgment of these
celebrated writers, who had made it their business to study the fathers, one
would think there was reason, at least, to suspect, whether the evidence in
favor of episcopacy, as an apostolical institution, is so universal and
constant as has been affirmed.

BUT, leaving these later centuries, let us go back to the two first. And we
may, with the more pertinency, do this, as the famous bishop, whose plea we are
considering, has said, Page 349.
We do not argue merely from the testimony of so late writers as these (meaning
Jerome and Austin) that episcopacy is of apostolical institution. We grant it
does not follow, St. Jerome thought so, therefore it is so. But writers of all
ages in the church witness, that this was the government in their days; that it
was instituted by the apostles, and delivered down as such. All that we produce
St. Jerome for in this case, is that it was in his time, and that he believed it
to be apostolical, and received it as such: But without the testimony of the
ages before him, I should not esteem this a sufficient argument that it was
really so.

AND do the fathers, in the two first ages, witness what they are thus
peremptorily said to do? I was at the pains, in my younger years, to read these
fathers, particularly with a view to this controversy, and am obliged to say,
upon my own knowledge of the matter, that the above representation is really a
mistake, and a very great one too; which I heartily attribute to inattention,
or some undiscerned prejudice of mind. Would the time permit, I could give you
the whole of what is said, relative to the plea before us, by Barnabas, Hermas,
Polycarp, Clement of Rome, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Clement of Alexandria,
all writers in the two first centuries, and satisfy you from the very words of
these fathers themselves, that they give no such evidence as is here pretended.
But it must suffice to say at present,

THAT, Ignatius only excepted, the fathers, within the two first centuries,
unitedly concur in speaking of bishops and presbyters much in the same language
with the sacred scriptures. They never once say, either in so many words, or in
words from whence it can fairly be collected, that bishops were an order in the
church superior to that of presbyters; they never once say, that ordination was
the work of bishops in distinction from presbyters; they never once say, that
episcopacy was the government in the church, or that it was instituted either
by Christ himself, or any of his apostles; nor do they ever say, that it was so
handed down to them from the beginning. Far from this, unless it strangely slipped
my observation, which I do not in the least suspect it did, Clement of
Alexandria, who flourished toward the close of the second century, is the
first father (Ignatius excepted) who used that mode of speech, "bishops,
presbyters and deacons." And the terms seem not even then to have lost their
promiscuous use; for this same Clement, speaking of one under the name of a
bishop, calls him, in the same sentence, the presbyter. Blondelli Apol. Sect.
xi. page 36.
Irenaeus, it is true, a few years before, once uses that form of expression,
"bishops and presbyters." His words are, Lib. III. cap. xiv.
"Paul called together to Miletus the bishops and presbyters of Ephesus." But,
as the learned Mr. Jameson very justly observes, "Nazian. querela," sect. vi.
page 157.
"for his seeming here to distinguish bishops from presbyters, this scripture
where they got both names, and which Irenaeus then had in view, and his
frequent promiscuous using of these names, persuade me that he only respected
the 19th and 28th verses, and so took bishop and presbyter synonimically (as
the apostle Paul did) for one and the same."

I MADE the remark, while upon the argument from scripture, that no instance
was to be met with there of an ordination, by any person under the name of a
bishop. I now add, neither have I been able to find an instance of ordination
under the like name and meaning by it a bishop as distinguished from a
presbyter, in any writer till we come to the times when it is owned, a
distinction obtained between these officers of the church. Episcoparians have
sometimes, with an air of triumph, called for an instance of presbyterian
ordination for some hundreds of years after Christ. If they will be pleased to
favor us with only one example of episcopal ordination, in their sense of it,
within the time above-described, which is a very considerable space; longer,
counting from Christ, than from the first settlement of this country to the
present day, we will take it into consideration, and give so notable a
discovery all the weight it deserves. In the mean time, we hope to be excused,
if we do not believe it to be a fact, either universally, or unanimously, or
constantly handed down from the days of the apostles, that single persons,
meaning hereby bishops as distinguished from presbyters, exercised the
ordaining power within such and such districts, or that they were ever vested
with a right, by apostolical institution, so to do. We rather think, there is
no just reason to affirm this to be fact, upon the testimony of any one genuine
writer whatever, within the limits we are now speaking of.

THE plain truth is, no more can be collected from the writings of the fathers,
till toward the close of the second century, or the coming in of the third, in
favor of episcopacy, than from the scriptures themselves. And were it proper to
settle the controversy by an appeal to the general suffrage of these writers, I
should willingly put it on that issue; as being fully persuaded, that the
advantage would lie on our side of the question, as much as if it was to be
determined by the scriptures only.

IT is readily owned, the epistles ascribed to Ignatius, a truly primitive
father, do as certainly, as strongly, and as constantly distinguish bishops
from presbyters, as any of the writings of the third or fourth centuries. But
this we esteem of little weight in the present cause, as there is so much
reason to think, that these epistles are not his genuine works. If he wrote
these epistles (which, by the way, is far from being a point beyond dispute) it
is not in the least probable, that they came out of his hands as they now
appear. The Usserian and Vossian copies, the only ones their great advocate,
bishop Pearson, pretends, in his "Vindiciae Ignatianae," ^o defend, carry in
them too many, and too notorious, evidences of interpolation to induce a
belief, in any unprejudiced mind, that it is always the true primitive Ignatius
that is the writer. For my own part, I esteem it an easy thing to reduce it to
an high degree of moral certainty, that these epistles, even in their purest
editions, contain such unquestionable marks of a later date than the times of
Ignatius, that they ought never to be mentioned in this, or any other
controversy, unless to prove that religious cheat and knavery were in practice
so far back as the days of the fathers. Instead of going into the proof of what
I have now said, which would put me upon trying your patience beyond all
reasonable bounds, I shall refer you to the two celebrated French ministers,
Daille and L'arrogue, on our side of the question, and the celebrated bishops,
Beveredge and Pearson on the other; in whose writings you will find antiquity
ransacked, and every thing said upon the matter, that learning or good sense
can suggest. Read them carefully (they are to be found in the College-library)
and judge for yourselves.

I TRUST, I may now say, it has been made sufficiently clear, from the positive
evidence that has been exhibited in the former part of this discourse, and from
its not being invalidated, but rather strengthened, by the counter-evidence we
have examined in the latter part, that the power of ordination was not
deposited in the hands of bishops as distinguished from presbyters; but that
bishops or presbyters, meaning by these terms one and the same order of
officers, were vested with power to ordain in the church of Christ; and
consequently that ordination by a council of presbyters, as practiced by these
churches, is valid to all the ends of the gospel ministry.

THE institution of a lecture, on purpose to vindicate the New England churches
in this method of ordination, may, perhaps, be represented to their
disadvantage. Occasion may be taken herefrom to insinuate, that the method is
novel and peculiar, not practiced or approbated by the other reformed
protestant churches, any more than by the church of England.

IN order to guard against suggestions of this kind, it it may be proper to let
you know, that the protestant churches abroad, in common with our's, far from
owning the jus divinum of episcopacy, assert a parity between bishops and
presbyters, allowing the latter, equally with the former, to perform the work
of ordination.

THE churches of this denomination, in Germany, speak fully to the point in
their book, entitled, "Liber concordiae," printed at Leipsic in the year 1580,
and again in 1612, in which are contained "the confession of Augsburg, and the
apology for it, the Smalcaldic articles, and Luther's greater and smaller
catechisms." One of the "Smalcaldic articles, has these words, "LIQUET autem
confessione omnium. etiam adversariorum nostrorum, hanc potestatem communem
esse omnibus -- Hic docet Hieronymus* distinctos ^^^dus episcoporum -- tantum
human ^tate constitutos esse -- Jure divino nul^^^ est discrimen (...) et
postorem." -- Jameson's (...)page 8^.
"'It Is manifest from the confession of all, our adversaries themselves, that
this power [in the foregoing words, the power mentioned was that of "preaching,
dispensing the sacraments, absolution, and jurisdiction"] "is common to all
that are set over the churches, whether they be called pastors, presbyters, or
bishops. Jerome therefore plainly affirms, that there is no difference between
bishop and presbyter; but that every pastor was a bishop. -- Here Jerome
teaches, that the distinction of degrees between a bishop, and a presbyter or
pastor, was only appointed by human authority. And the matter itself declares
no less; for, on bishop and presbyter is laid the same duty, and the same
injunction. And only ordination, in AFTER TIMES, made the difference between
bishop and pastor. -- By divine right there is no difference between bishop and
pastor." Mr. Boyse mentions the following words as further contained in this
article, BOYSE's clear account of the ancient episcopacy, page 282.
"Since bishops and pastors are not different degrees by divine right, it is
manifest, that ORDINATION, performed by a pastor in his own church, is VALID."
It is remarkable, the articles composed at Smalcald, of which the foregoing is
one, were subscribed by three electors, the prince Palatine, and the electors
of Saxony and Brandenburg; by forty-five dukes, marquesses, counts, and barons;
by the consuls and senators of thirty-five cities; by (...), Melancton, Bucer,
Fagius, and many other noted divines. The number of ministers who signed these
articles, as it has been computed, was eight thousand. CALAMY's "defense of
moderate nonconformity," page 99.


THE other protestant churches as plainly assert the equality of all pastors,
in point of divine right; as appears from their "public confessions of faith,"
which are, without all doubt, a truer and more authentic standard of their
doctrine, than the private sentiments of this or the other particular person,
however noted or learned. In the "confession of the churches of Helvetia," it
is expressly said, "DATA est autem omnibus in ecclesia ministria una et
aequalis potestas, sive functio. Certe ab initio, episcopi vel presbyteri
ecclesiam communi opere gubernaverunt. Nullus alteri se praetuit, aut sibi
ampliorem potestatem dominiumve in co-episcopos usurpavit. -- Interea propter
ordinem servandum, unus aut certus aliquis ministrorum coetum convocavit, et in
(...) consultandas proposuit, sententias item aliorum collegit, denique ne qua
oriretur confusio, pro virili cavit. Sic legitur fecisse, in actis apostolorum,
S. Petrus, qui tamen ideo (...) aliis fuit praepositus, nec potestate majore
caeteris praeditus -- ". "Syntagma confessiorum," page 40.
ONE and that EQUAL POWER and office is given to all ministers in the church.
Certainly from the beginning, bishops or presbyters governed the church with a
common care. None set himself above another, or usurped a larger power or
dominion over his fellow-bishops. -- Nevertheless, for order's sake, one or
other of the ministers called the assembly together, proposed matters to be
consulted on in the meeting, gathered the opinions of the rest, and finally
took care, as much as in him lay, to prevent confusion. So St. Peter is said to
have done in the acts of the apostles, who notwithstanding WAS NOT SET OVER THE
REST, NOR VESTED WITH GREATER POWER." This confession is the more worthy of
notice, as it contains virtually the sense of most of the protestant churches,
besides those we have already mentioned; for it was subscribed, not only by the
church of Helvetia, but by the churches of Scotland, Poland, Hungary, Geneva,
Neocome, Myllhusium, etc. as is expressly declared in the preface that
introduces it.

CONSONANT hereto is the confession of the French church, presented to Charles
the ninth. Their thirtieth article runs thus, "We believe, that all true
pastors, wherever they are placed, are endued with EQUAL POWER under that only
head, the chief and sole universal bishop: And therefore no church ought to
claim an empire or domination over any other church." "CREDIMUS omnes veros
pastores, ubicunque locorum collocati fuerint, cadem et aequali inter se
potestate esse praeditos sub unico illo capite, summoque et solo universi
episcopo Jesu Christo: Ac proinde nulli ecclesiae licere sibi in alium imperium
aut dominationem vendicare"

Syntag. confess. page 84.


THE Belgic confession is much the same. Their thirty-first article says, --
"As concerning the ministers of the word of God, in whatever place they are,
they have all the SAME POWER AND AUTHORITY, as being all the ministers of
Christ, that only universal bishop and head of the church." "QUANTUM vero
attinet divini verbi ministros ubicunque locorum sint, candem illi potestatem
et authoritatem habent, ut qui omnes sint Christi, unici illius episcopi
universalis, unicique capitis ecclesiae" --.

Syntag confess. page 142.


TO these may be added the Waldenses and Albigenses, of whom Alphonsus de
Castro relates, "that they denied any difference between bishop and presbyter,
and herein differed nothing from Aerius;" which also may be learnt from Thuan,
who compares them with "the English non-conformists." The Waldenses were in
this, as in the rest of their articles, followed by J. Huss, and his adherents,
who also asserted, "there ought to be no difference between bishops and
presbyters, or among priests." Yea, so universal has this doctrine, of the
identity of bishop and presbyter, been, that it has, all along, by the
Romanists, been reckoned a prime doctrine of Rome's opposers. Jameson's Nazian.
querela, page 96.


IT IS readily acknowledged, in most of the protestant churches there are
ecclesiastical officers, who bear the style of bishops, super-intendants,
inspectors, or seniors; as may be seen in Stillingfleet's "Irenicum," where
these churches are all mentioned by name: But, as that learned author observes,
"all these reformed churches acknowledge no such thing as a divine right of
episcopacy, but stiffly maintain Jerome's opinion of the primitive equality of
gospel ministers" Iren. page 411.
. Nor could they consistently do any other; for they have, at bottom, no other
than presbyterian ordination among them. "Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Melancton,
Bugenhagius," etc. and all the first reformers and founders of these churches,
who ordained ministers among them, were themselves presbyters, and no other.
And though, in some of these churches, there are ministers which are called
super-intendants, or bishops; yet these are only "primi inter pares," the first
among equals; not pretending to any superiority of order. Having themselves no
other orders than what either presbyters gave them, as were given them as
presbyters, they can convey no other to those they ordain. "THE dissenting
gentleman's answer to White," page 45. At the bottom of this page, it is added,
"The Danish church is, at this time, governed by bishops. But they look upon
episcopacy as only an human institution; and the first protestant prelates in
that kingdom were ordained by Burgenhagius, [he ordained no less than seven of
them at one time] a mere presbyter; who, by consequence, (...) no other than a
presbyterian ordination to their successors ever since."


OUR adversaries indeed do themselves, when they speak out their mind, freely
tell us, that "all the trans-marine reformed churches are really presbyterian."
Dr. Heylin, upon this account, through a large folio, bespatters, with the
blackest of railings and calumnies, every one of the reformed churches in
particular. Howel also makes Calvin "the first broacher of the presbyterian
religion." And says, "Geneva lake swallowed up the episcopal see; and church
lands were made secular, which was the white they levelled at. This Geneva bird
flew thence to France, and hatched the Huguenots, which make about a tenth part
of that people. It took wing also to Bohemia and Germany, high and low, as the
Palatinate, the land of Hesse, and the confederate provinces of the States of
Holland." Jameson's Nazian. querela, page 95.


IF, to the protestant churches that have been mentioned, we add the
congregational dissenting brethren in England, who, at the revolution, are
supposed to have made nearly two thousand churches; the large body of
presbyterian dissenters in the north of Ireland; as also the dissenters of
other denominations in Britain, the united provinces, and other parts of
Europe, who are all of one mind as to the right of presbyters to ordain: -- I
say, if we add all these together, they will make a number vastly greater than
that which constitutes the episcopal church of England, should we take into the
computation every member of this church. But should we leave out of the
reckoning those, who live in love and harmony with dissenters, esteeming their
ordinations valid, though not according to the established form, and bring such
only into the account, who are so strenuous for the jus divinum of episcopacy
as to nullify all ordinations, unless by a bishop, in their sense of the word,
they will sink into a number too inconsiderable to be mentioned in comparison
with the many, who differ from them in their sentiments. Not that we rely upon
numbers. The scriptures only can determine, what is truth in the present
debate. But still, it is a satisfaction to us, that our ordinations are such as
agree with the declared sentiments of almost the whole protestant world. And
our satisfaction is the greater, as we have so much reason to believe, that
they agree with the principles even of the church of England itself, at the
beginning of the reformation, and for some time afterward.

THE generality of it is pious and learned divines in those days, whether of
higher or lower dignity, were far from insisting on the divine right of
episcopacy; as may be seen in quotations, from their writings to this purpose,
by the celebrated Stillingfleet. Irenicum, page 394, and onwards
And it is worthy of of special notice here, in Henry the eighth's time, when
things were tending to a reformation, the archbishops, bishops, archdeacons,
and clergy of England, in their book entitled, "the instruction of a christian
man," subscribed with all their hands and dedicated to the king an. 1537; and
king Henry himself, in his book styled, "a necessary crudition for any
christian man," approved by both houses of parliament, prefaced with his own
epistle, and published by his command, expressly resolve, "that priests and
bishops by God's law are one and the same, and that the power of ordination and
excommunication belongs equally to them both." Calamy's "defense of moderate
non conformity," p 90, 91.
Herewith, it may be further noted, agrees the manuscript mentioned by bishop
Stillingfleet, in which archbishop Cranmer, one of the assembly, called
together by the special command of king Edward sixth, in answer to his
questions, has these words, Irenicum, page ^92.
bishops and priests were at one time, and were not two things, but one office
in the beginning of Christ's religion." The bishop of A^^ph, Therleby, Redman,
and Cox were all of the same opinion with the archbishop; and the two latter
expressly cite the opinion of Jerome with approbation. Upon which the learned
writer, to whom we are indebted for this account observes, Stillingfleet, in
his Irenicum, page 393.
"Thus we see by the testimony chiefly of him, who was instrumental in our
reformation, that he owned not episcopacy, as a distinct order from presbytery,
of divine right, but only a prudential constitution of the civil magistrate for
the better governing in the church." This same archbishop Cranmer was "the
first of six and forty, who, in the time of king Henry the eighth, affirmed (in
a book called "the bishop's book," to be seen in "Fox's martyrology") that "the
difference of bishops and presbyters was a device of the ancient fathers, and
not mentioned in the scripture." J. Owen's "plea for scripture-ordination,"
page 114.


IT is indeed beyond dispute, that the episcopal form of government was
settled, at the reformation, upon a very different foot from that of a jus
divinum. How else can it be accounted for, that not only in king Henry the
eighth's reign, but likewise in king Edward the sixth's, the bishops took out
commissions from the crown, by which they were to hold their bishoprics only
during the king's pleasure, and were empowered powered in the king's name, as
his delagates, to perform all the parts of the episcopal function? Archbishop
Cranmer, that excellent and holy martyr, set an example to the rest in taking
out one of them. Burnet's abridg. of the hist. of the reform. Vol. II. p. 7.
This method of acting is certainly better adjusted to a constitution, sounded
on policy, than divine right. Nay, as far from the beginning of the reformation
as the days of queen Elisabeth, in the articles of religion agreed upon, the
English form of church government was only determined "to be agreeable to God's
word;" which Irenicum, page 393, 394.
had been a very low and diminishing expression, had they looked on it as
absolutely prescribed in scripture, as the only necessary form to be observed
in the church.

THE truth is, says Mr. Owen, this notion of the jus divinum of episcopacy, as
a superior order, was first promoted in the church of England by archbishop
Land. Dr. Holland, the king's professor of divinity in Oxon, was much offended
with him, for asserting it in a disputation for his degrees. He checked him
publicly, and told him, "he went about to make a division between the English,
and the other reformed churches." "Plea for scripture-ordination," page 115.


AND it was in this archbishop's time, that the point of reordination began to
be urged. Through his influence, as Mr. Prin tells us, "Plea for
scripture-ordination," page 117.
bishop Hall re-ordained Mr. John Dury, a minister of the reformed church. But
the old church of England did not require or practice reordination. In king
Edward the sixth's time, Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and P. Fagius had
ecclesiastical preferments in the church of England without reordination. Ibid
page 118.
Mr. William Whitingham was made dean of Durham, about 1563; though ordained by
presbyters only. Ibid page 121.
In like manner, Mr. Travers, ordained by a presbyter beyond sea, was seven
years lecturer at the temple, and had the bishop of London's letter for it.
Ibid page 122.
And even in the reign of king James the first, the validity of ordination by
presbyters was not set aside; as appears from the case of the three presbyters
that were consecrated bishops for Scotland at London. Before their
consecration, Dr. Andrews, bishop of Ely, moved the question, "whether they
should not be first episcopally ordained presbyters, that they might be capable
of being admitted into the order of bishops?" Upon which archbishop Bancroft
(a most rigid assertor of episcopacy) answered, "there was no need of it, since
ordination by presbyters was valid." The bishop of Ely yielded; and without
repeating their ordination as presbyters, they were consecrated bishops.
Pierce's vindication, part I. page 167.


HOW far this practice, in the episcopal church, at home, in those days, would
be countenanced at present, I don't pretend to determine; but thus much has
been said by your highly esteemed divinity-professor, upon a proper occasion;
whose words are well worth transcribing here, I cannot learn, whether there has
been even in England, to this very day, properly any public and express
assertion of the "divine right" of prelacy, either by parliament, or
convocation. I think no such thing can be found in the thirty-nine articles, or
in the homilies, or in the form of ordination, or in the common prayer book,
etc. Unless it may be thought contained in the preface to the book of
ordination, where there is a hint that seems to carry such an aspect; but, I
believe, will appear too slender a foundation to build upon, in the present
case; especially if we remember who were the chief compilers of that book; and
what reason we have to conclude, they were of the judgment, that "priests and
bishops are, by God's law, one and the same"; and that the episcopal dignity is
rather by custom, than by divine institution. "Sober remarks," page 11.


WHAT has been offered will, I believe, be though it sufficent to make it evident,
that ordination by presbyters is no new thing under the sun, a singularity
peculiar to the New England churches; since we have seen it approved by so many
of the protestant reformed churches, and by the church of England itself, at
least in its first protestant and reformed state, and for a considerable time
afterward. And had there been an establishment, in those days, putting the
power of ordination into the hands of presbyters, it would have been, according
to the then general opinion, as agreeable to scripture, as that which put it
into the hands of bishops. Possibly, the latter would not have been the
establishment, had it not been for ecclesiastical dignities and revenues; which
enter not into the jus divinum of the thing.

I SHALL now put an end to the trial of your patience, by speaking a few words
to the young gentlemen of the college, who are under tuition in order to their
being formed for usefulness, when they go out into the world.

WE have such a question as that in the prophesies of the prophet Jeremiah,
"Has a nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods?" And it beautifully
represents the strength of a people's attachment to the religious sentiments
and practices of their forefathers, the difficulty with which they are wrought
upon to depart from them. Even the nations, who have been taught by their
ancestors, to worship idol-gods, which, in reality, are no gods, will not
easily change the object of their devotion. It Is not, it is owned, a sufficient
plea in favor of any religious principles, or mode of worship, that they are
such as were handed down to us from our fathers. They may, notwithstanding, be
superstitious, absurd, and sinful. And should this be the case, filial
reverence toward the father of our spirits should take place of the reverence
due to the fathers of our flesh. But should they, on the other hand, be
consonant to the dictates of uncorrupted reason, and the truth of revelation,
'twould be strange, if posterity should desert them; especially, if, instead of
adhereing to them, they should go back to those their progenitors had
renounced, and were really right in having so done. This, if I mistake not, is
a thought well worthy of the attention of ^^^sons, who are sent to this
collegiate-school to be fitted for public service. We don't advise you to hold
fast the religion of your country, merely because it is the religion of your
fathers. This would be to act below your dignity as intelligent and moral
agents. But still it deserves, on this account, your serious examination. And
we would exhort you to the greatest care and diligence in studying the reasons
upon which the religion you have been educated in is grounded; and, in this
way, we doubt not but you will, and upon the foot of just and solid conviction,
be firmly attached to it. We would particularly recommend it to you thoroughly
to enquire into the reasons of that "mode of worship," and "form of church
order," which your progenitors left every thing that was dear to them, in their
native land, that they might enjoy themselves in this place of retreat, and
transmit to their posterity: Especially would we recommend this to those among
you, who are designed for the ministry; and the more exact and critical you are
in your enquiries upon this head, the less will be our concern as to the event;
being fully satisfied, you will find abundant reason, with all freedom, to join
in communion with the New England churches, and to settle in them as pastors,
in the method of investiture common among us, should you be called thereto in
the providence of God.

WE advise you all, our beloved sons, to make the wisest and best use of the
rich advantages you are here favored with, to lay the foundation for such
acquirements in learning as will make you eminent blessings to the world, in
the various stations of life, when you go from hence. It Is pity any of you
should misimprove the valuable price that is put into your hands; a thousand
pities you should idle away your time, much more that you should mispend it in
needless diversion, in vain company, or, what is vastly worse, in the pursuit
of those follies, by which young men are too apt to be drawn aside and enticed.

ABOVE all, we advise and beseech you to cultivate in your minds a serious
sense of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God and Christ. Rest not
satisfied with any seize, till you have secured the justification of
life, the sanctification of the spirit, and the adoption of children. You may
then live joyfully, and you will die safely. The great God will be the guide of
your youth, your guide through the world, your guide through death, and your
portion for ever. AMEN.

APPENDIX, GIVING a brief historical account of the epistles ascribed to
IGNATIUS; and exhibiting some of the many reasons, why they ought not to be
depended on as his uncorrupted works.
IF we form our judgment of Ignatius from the accounts that are given of him by
some modern authors, we must conceive of him as FIRST among the oriental
worthies, not only in ecclesiastical dignity, but in piety, learning, and every
other endowment, whether natural or spiritual. And, possibly, such sentiments
concerning him may be just; though there is no way in which, at present, we can
know them to be so. The fathers, who lived in the two or three first centuries,
say but little about him. They don't so much as tell us, where he was born, how
educated, when brought over to the christian faith, or by the instrumentality
of what persons or means They have indeed left nothing upon record, save the
manner of his going out of the world, from whence his character, as
distinguished from that of others of the same age, can be particularly drawn.

HE is spoken of, in aftertimes, as bishop of Antioch. ORIGIN, a writer in the
third century, is the first that mentions him under this character. He is
herein followed by the succeeding fathers: Though they differ in the place they
give him in the line of succession; some putting ^uodius before him, and others
Ignatius next to the apostle Peter, or Paul, or both. This makes a difficulty
not unlike to that of Clement's succession in the sea of Rome. The
episcoparians take different methods to solve it; which it is not my business,
at present, to examine.
But it would lead us into wrong tho'ts of this style, should we take our idea
of it from that superiority to which bishops were then exalted. It Is probable,
the fathers, who call him bishop, esteemed him such in the sense the word was
understood in their day; but as the sense of this word was different then from
what it was in the age in which Ignatius flourished, they might take more into
it is meaning, than it at first intended. Prime-pastor, head-presbyter, is the
most that was meant by his being bishop of Antioch, at the time when he
sustained this relation to that church.

IF there is no room to question his dying a martyr, the manner and
circumstances of the fact, as they are related in "the acts of his martyrdom,"
may reasonably be disputed. The story of Trajan's sending him to Rome, after
his condemnation at Antioch, that he "might be thrown to wild beasts," does not
seem, however defended with his epistles, to be any of the most probable. "For
wherefore should Ignatius of all others be brought to Rome to suffer, when the
"Proconsuls," and the "Praesides provinciarum," did every where, in time of
persecution, execute their power in punishing christians at their own
tribunals, without sending them so long a journey to Rome, to be martyred
there. And how came Ignatius to make so many, and such strange, excursions as
he did, by the story, if the soldiers that were his guard were so cruel to him,
as he complains they were." "Iren." page 298.


BUT however it might be as to circumstances, the thing itself, his dying for
the sake of Christ, is not denied; though the year of his martyrdom cannot be
certainly fixed. Basnage ranks it among the obscurities of chronology. Annal.
107.
Bishop Pearson, bishop Loyd, Pagi, LeClerc and Fabricius place it A. D. 115 or
116. But Du Pin, Tillemont, and Dr. Cave, in the 10th of Trajan, 107. Perhaps,
this last period is by far the more probable.

AS to the epistles that have been ascribed to this primitive father, and given
rise to so much dispute in the protestant world, the most perfect account of
them, I have been able to collect, is briefly this.

THE first edition of them came out in the year 1494 or 5; containing only
three latin epistles, one to "the Virgin Mary," the other two to "St. John." A.
D. 1497 or 8, Faber Stapulensis published eleven more latin epistles, which
were several times reprinted at Stratsburg, and once at Basil. Champerius
afterward impressed the above three and eleven epistles, with the addition of
another "ad Mariam Cassabolitam." This was done at Cologn in 1536, and made in
all fifteen epistles. They were as yet extant only in latin, and thus they
remained, in still repeated impressions, till 1557, when Pacaeus printed them
in greek, with the latin translation of Perionius. The following year Gesner
published them in greek likewise, with the version of Brunnerus. This Gesner
assumed the honor of being the first, who had made these epistles public in
greek. But Pacaeus is allowed, both by DuPin, and bishop Pearson, to have been
the first editor of them in this language. [N. B. These greek editions contain
only twelve of the fifteen epistles.] In the year 1608, the edition of
Mestraeus came forth; and finally that of Vedelius in 1623, with large
commentaries.

THIS was the state of the "Ignatian epistles," when archbishop Usher first
saw them. Upon reading them, he took notice, that three ancient English divines
Wodeford, Robert Lincolniensis, and Tissington. "Hammond's answ. to animadver.
on his defense," page 5
had formerly quoted a passage from them in the very same words, in which it
had been quoted by Theodoret, which words were not to be found in the present
editions, either greek or latin; and from hence he concluded, there must be
some manuscript-copy of these epistles in England. He made diligent search, and
at length found two copies, one at Cambridge in the library of Caius college,
the other in the private library of bishop Montague; containing an ancient
version different from the vulgar. He compared it with the passages cited by
the fathers, and, finding a good agreement between them, though it fit to put out
an edition of "the Ignatian epistles," from this version; which was printed in
1644. Not long after this, the learned Vossius found, in the duke of Tuscany's
library at Florence, a greek manuscript, containing six of these epistles,
supposed to be the same that are mentioned by Eusebius and Jerome; which,
agreeing with archbishop Usher's copies, he published at Amsterdam in 1646,
with the addition of a seventh, that to "the Romans," much amended from the
latin version. This last epistle, in 1684, was published at Paris, by Mr.
Ruinart, from a supposed uninterpolated copy.

FROM this account of the epistles that go under the name of Ignatius, it is
obvious to divide them into three classes.

THE first contains those three that are extant only in latin, inscribed to
"the Virgin Mary," and "St. John." But they are of so little importance, that
learned men scarce think it worth while to be at the pains to prove them
spurious.

THE second comprehends the epistles that are printed in greek, but not
mentioned by Eusebius, or Jerome. And these are five in number. The first, to
"Mary Cassabolita;" the second, to "the inhabitants of Tarsus;" the third, to
"the Antiochians;" the fourth, to "Hero the deacon of Antioch;" the fifth, to
"the Philippians." Bellarmine, Baronius, Passevin, and a few others, give
credit to these epistles as the real works of Ignatius; but they are herein
opposed by almost the whole body, especially, of protestant writers, who look
upon them to be evidently supposititious.

IN the third class are comprised the seven epistles, which are supposed to be
mentioned by Eusebius and Jerome; which are as follow. The first, to "the
Ephesians; the second, to "the Magnesians;" the third, to "the Trallians;" the
fourth, to "the Romans;" the fifth, to "the Philadelphians"; the sixth, to "the
Smyrnaeans"; the seventh, "to Polycarp." It may be observed here, archbishop
Usher, and others after him, reject this last; looking upon the six former as
the only ones commemorated by Eusebius: Though there are those, on the contrary,
who, perhaps not with so much reason, conclude he takes notice of the whole
seven.

AS for the seven greek epistles, in this last class, they may be considered as
extant in the editions of them before, or since, the days of Usher and Vossius.

IN the former consideration of them, they are styled "the larger epistles,"
and generally discarded as unworthy of so primitive a father as Ignatius.
Calvin, the Century-writers, Whittaker, Parker, Scultet, Rivet, and others,
always declared this to be their opinion of them: Though the advocates for
prelacy, such as Whitgift, Bilson, Dounam, Heylyn, Tailor, and others,
professed a belief of them as truly genuine. And as such they were, in those
days, appealed to, in the cause of episcopacy, with as much zeal and frequency
as they have been since. But these "larger epistles" are now, I may say,
universally given up as incapable of defense. The learned bishop Pearson freely
owns, that they are corrupted and interpolated: And though he commends the
industry of Vedelius in what he has done to distinguish between what is
genuine, and interpolated, in them; yet he thinks, at the same time, that he
has not sufficiently done it; and, in a word, does not undertake their defense,
in these editions of them.

THESE epistles, considered in the latter view, as published from the
"Cantabrigian" and "Florentine" copies, are called the "shorter ones," and
represented by the episcoparians to be the uncorrupted works of Ignatius; and,
as such, we are turned to them, upon all occasions, as containing full evidence
of the superiority of bishops to presbyters in order and power.

UPON which, I cannot but put you upon minding the conduct of, at least, some of
our opponents. The "larger epistles" of Ignatius they once earnestly contended
for against all that opposed them, and constantly repaired to them as the great
support of their cause. But now they are willing to throw them by as useless;
the "shorter editions" of Usher and Vossius being the only ones to be depended
on. They could not be prevailed with, by any methods of reasoning, to give up
Ignatius in the "former editions," till they had got others, from other copies,
to supply their place. And now they readily see the force of the arguments,
they before esteemed as nothing better than mere cavils. It certainly looks as
though they imagined their cause stood in absolute need of Ignatius, and were
willing to part with him in "former editions," only because they have others to
substitute in their room, that they can better manage: Nor can one well forbear
thinking, if "other editions," from still other manuscripts, should come forth,
more defensible than these they now have, they would as readily quit "these,"
and cry up "them.".

BUT however incorrupt the "shorter Ignatian epistles" are said to be, there
are some, and of the first rank too for learning, who have openly declared
their opinion of them as spurious; and a still greater number look upon them as
interpolated, and to a degree that renders them unfit to be repaired to, in
order to know the mind of the true Ignatius.

THE strange silence of primitive antiquity concerning epistles under the name
of Ignatius is given, by the learned Daille, as a good reason to suspect, that
he never wrote any. There is no controversy about the fact itself, namely, that
none of the writers, whose works are still remaining, mention epistles wrote by
Ignatius, either a less or greater number, till we come into the fourth
century, three only excepted. And it is really a disputable point, to say the
least, whether any of these three, all circumstances considered, are to be
looked upon as proper vouchers in the case. Polycarp, Irenaeus, and Origin, are
the three fathers, who are said to mention epistles wrote by Ignatius. The
sentence in Polycarp, which takes notice of these epistles, is that which
concludes his own epistle. It Is an independent paragraph, and may be
considered, either as an original part of the epistle, or an after-addition
without the least damage to its connection or sense. In this view of it, Daille
and L'arroque look upon it as an interpolation; and for this reason, because it
speaks of Ignatius as yet alive, and not come to his last sufferings; while, in
the ninth section, he is directly mentioned as dead, and gone to the Lord;
which, as they argue, is an inconsistency, it would be a dishonor to charge
upon Polycarp. So far as I am able to judge, neither bishop Pearson, nor
archbishop Wake have said that which is sufficient to take off the force of
this arguing. As for Irenaeus, the manner of his introducing what he gives us
from Ignatius is this, "quemadmodum quidam de nostris dixit," as one from among
us said; which is as properly applicable to a VERBAL, as WRITTEN saying: For
which reason I cannot but think, notwithstanding all that has been offered in
favor of this testimony, that Mr. Lardner speaks the exact truth, when he says,
"'It Is disputable, whether he cites a passage of a WRITING, or only mentions
some WORDS or EXPRESSIONS of Ignatius, which might be spoken by him upon the
near view of his martyrdom." The testimonies from Origin (who by the way, was a
writer in the third century) are two. The first is taken from "the prologue to
the commentaries on Canticles," that goes under his name. If he was the real
author, (which is though it questionable) we have it only in the version of Ruffin,
who is represented as taking a shameful liberty in all his translations of
Origin, to alter, add or diminish; insomuch that there is no knowing what is
his, and what is Origen's. It Is, I conclude, for this reason, that neither arch
bishop Usher nor Dr. Hammond do make use of this Origenical testimony in the
evidence they exhibit in favor of the "Ignatian epistles." The other testimony
is cited from "his homily on Luke." This also is suspected to be the work of
some latin author; but if Origin really wrote it, it is extant only in latin:
And if it was translated by Jerome, as is pretended, there is no knowing what is
truly Origen's. DuPin says, the versions of Jerome are not more exact than
Ruffin's. And Ruffin complains of the liberty Jerome took in his translations,
as Jerome complains, in like manner, of him. And certainly no great credit ought
to be given to translations which were done with unbounded license. I may
pertinently as here, it is a shrewd circumstance, giving reason to suspect that
Origin never mentioned the "Ignatian epistles" in his writings that he is
silently passed over by Eusebius. For no one was a greater admirer of Origin,
nor was any one more particularly versed in his writings. And as he expressly
refers to the above passages in Polycarp and Irenaeus, it is strange he should
take no notice of those in Origin, if they had, in his day, been contained in
his writings.
But should they be allowed to be so, it is notwithstanding an unaccountable
thing, that, for the full space of two hundred years, no more notice should be
taken of the writings of this primitive father, if he left any. For let it be
considered,

IGNATIUS was a person that lived in the first age of christianity; was
personally known to, and acquainted with, at least, some of the apostles, and
many of those who had been conversant with them; and he was (as is generally
supposed) fixed, by the apostle Peter, or Paul, or both, in the pastoral office
at Antioch, a noted city in itself, and the more so on account of its being the
place, where believers were first distinguished by the name of christians.
These are considerations that open to us so much of the character of this
ancient father, as to leave it past doubt, that he was not so obscure a person
as to be unknown in those days. Besides, he was a glorious martyr for the cause
of Christ; and, if he really wrote these epistles, the circumstances of his
martyrdom were more signally illustrious, than ever attended any other
martyrdom before, or since, that we have any record of. For he was condemned at
Antioch to die at Rome; and, in order to the execution of this sentence, was
conveyed by a band of soldiers, as a prisoner of Jesus Christ, through all the
gospelised places, that lay between these two greatly distant cities. Such
circumstances could not well fail of spreading his fame, and occasioning his
being universally known, and talked of, among christians. A primitive father,
and first-pastor of one of the most celebrated christian churches, to be
carried, as it were, through the world, in bonds for the name of Christ; -- it
could not but be taken notice of, by all the churches, as he passed along: Nor
is it conceivable, but that his name upon this account, should be had in
remembrance. If he had been an obscure person before, these observables would
have "set him on a hill," and put him under an advantage, beyond any of the
fathers of the same age, of being commemorated in after-writings. Such are the
circumstances under which we are to conceive of the supposed author of these
epistles.

AND extraordinary ones attend the epistles themselves. For they were wrote, if
at all wrote by Ignatius, in the capacity of a "prisoner of death," and while
actually on his journey to be "devoured by wild beasts": Nor were they wrote to
a particular friend, upon some private concern; nor yet to here and there an
obscure church, but to as noted ones as had then been formed; and this, if we
may credit the episcoparians, upon matters of the greatest importance: Which
are considerations that will not suffer us to think, that "these epistles" were
either unknown to the world, or esteemed worthy of no notice. Six epistles
wrote and sent to as many famous churches, by the head-pastor of Antioch, upon
the most momentous affairs, and at so solemn a time as that of his being about
to die for the sake of Christ, could not but have occasioned great talk in the
christian world; not is there room to doubt, that they would have had a very
distinguishing value put upon them: Nay, they must have been esteemed the most
celebrated monuments of all uninspired antiquity, and as such have been
universally known and regarded, especially by the learned writers in those
times. And it is really a surprising thing, that so little respect should be
paid to them for the full space of 200 years, after their composure; and what
makes the matter still more strange is, that the writings of others of the same
age are particularly named, or quoted. And why should the writings of Ignatius,
the most famous of them all, be treated with such unbecoming neglect? -- There
is certainly some reason, from these hints, to suspect, whether Ignatius was
the real author of these epistles.

IT IS urged, if be did not pen them, they were forged before the days of
Eusebius, that is, between the beginning of the second, and the coming in of
the fourth century; which is represented as a thing altogether incredible. It Is
readily acknowledged, this religious knavery was practiced, if at all, within
the time specified. And I freely own for myself still further, that I really
though it it an incredible thing, it should be practiced within this period, till,
by better acquaintance with antiquity, I was fully convinced I had been under a
great mistake. Perhaps, the knavish forgeries, within this term, were as
numerous as they have ever been since, in the same space of time. Scarce one of
the apostles, or first most eminent fathers, have escaped being personated by
some wretched impostor, in some piece or other, they have palmed on the world
under their name. Nay, our blessed Lord himself has been thus basely used. And
there is no one tolerably versed in the ancient writings, but knows this to be
true. Hegesippus, (contemporary with Justin Martyr, who flourished about the
year 150) discoursing of "apocryphal books," says, at least, of some of them,
that they Eusebius. lib. IV. cap. xxii.
"were made by the heretics of his time." Irenaeus observes, that Advers.
Haeres. lib. I. cap xvii.
"the heretics in his day had an innumerable multitude of spurious and
apocryphal books, which they had forged to delude the more weak and ignorant
sort of persons." Origin, Jerome, Epiphanius, Ambrose, and others, tell us of
great numbers of these books made use of by the heretics in their times. Of
these books, some are quite lost, not so much as the names, or the least part
of them, remaining. Of others, there are some few fragments in the writings of
the fathers, without mentioning the books from whence they were taken. Of
others, there are undoubted fragments, with the names of the books out of which
they are cited. Others are still extant, at least, in part. The reader may see
a surprisingly large catalogue of these forged books, in DuPin's
"ecclesiastical history;" and a much larger one still in Mr. Jones's "method of
settling the canon of the new testament": From both which authors, he may meet
with what will abundantly satisfy him, that they are indeed forgeries, and were
imposed on the world long before the days of Eusebius.

AND not only were books forged under the name of inspired persons, but of some
of the most famous primitive fathers. Such are the "Recognitions" fathered on
Clement of Rome; the "Clementines," as also the "Epitome of the Clementine acts
of Peter"; not to say any thing of the pretended "apostolical constitutions and
canons," said to be penned by Clement. Such are Polycarp's "letter to Dionysius
the Areopagite," and his "discourse on St. John's death". These are all of them
evidently spurious pieces, and most of them universally owned to be so. And
yet, they were forged before the fourth century. So that, be our opinion of the
times before Eusebius as it will, some there were, even in those times, who
were both impudent and knavish enough to be guilty of such a fraud, as that we
suppose might have been practiced, under the name of Ignatius: And the
supposition of his being thus fraudulently dealt by is so far from being an
incredible thing, that it only adds one to the many religious frauds, which
were committed in those days, and under the names of much better men than he
can be pretended to be. --

AFTER all, it is possible, I own, Ignatius might be the writer of these
epistles: Nor will I pretend to determine, that he was not: Though I am inclined
to think, most unprejudiced persons, from what has been offered, will be
disposed to question, whether they are so certainly his, as to leave no
reasonable room for, at least, some doubt in the case.

BUT should it be conceded, that these epistles were certainly wrote by
Ignatius, we shall, notwithstanding, hope to be excused, if we lay no great
weight upon what is cited from them; and for this very good reason, because we
judge they are so interlarded with corrupt mixtures, as not fairly to exhibit
the real sentiments of the primitive father, whose name they bear. IT should be
remembered here it is not only the truth of fact, that Ignatius has been basely
and fraudulently dealt with, no less than eight of the fifteen epistles that
bear his name being FORGERIES, and owned to be so; but it is fact likewise, and
acknowledged as such, that the other seven, in all the editions of them, before
Usher and Vossius, have been so CORRUPTED by some knavish interpolator, as that
they ought not to be received as his genuine works. We don't argue from hence,
that the "later editions" must be corrupted also; but thus much is obviously
and certainly deducible herefrom, that they MAY be so; that the supposition is
quite easy and natural, as falling in with what has already been practiced upon
these epistles.


WHAT we have to offer in support of this judgment, takes in so many
particulars, that it would require a vast deal more room than can at present be
spared to consider them. I shall therefore wholly pass them over, and confine
myself to one thing only, viz. what is here said concerning the officers of the
churches he writes to. And I the rather pitch upon this, because the discourse
upon this head so runs through all the epistles, (one only excepted, the
epistle to the "Romans" IT IS observable, this epistle is the only one that is
perfectly useless to the episcopal cause. For it differs from all the rest in
this, that it don't once distinguish bishops from presbyters; and, if I don't
misremember, the word bishop is but once used throughout the whole epistle.
) bears so great a part in them, and is so mingled with almost every paragraph,
that if what is offered upon this point is not worthy of the true Ignatius, or
evidently exhibits the marks of an age POSTERIOR to that in which he lived,
they will have fastened on them the charge of corruption, unfitting them to be
depended on in the present, or indeed any other, debate.

THREE things I have here to say, which I esteem worthy of particular notice,
and shall distinctly mention.

I. THERE is vastly more said upon the head of church officers, than might be
expected from the true Ignatius. The seven epistles, in the translation of
archbishop Wake, take up about 50 pages in octavo; and the extracts I have
made from them, as they relate only to bishops and presbyters, will fill at
least ten; though they are made from but six of the seven epistles. Now,
considering the circumstances of Ignatius, when he wrote these epistles, it is
highly improbable, he should have his heart so much set upon the honor and
power of the clergy, as, in all of them, to be so very lavish in his discourse
upon this point. He was now a "prisoner of death," and on "his journey to the
place of execution": And if he found within himself a disposition to write to
the several churches, as he went along, it is really strange, he should be so
large in his encomiums, exhortations, directions, cautions, and insinuations,
all tending to exalt the clergy, and bespeak for them the highest reverence,
and most profound subjection. Had he thus wrote in one or two only of his
letters, the special circumstances of the churches to whom he wrote might,
perhaps, be pleaded in his excuse: But it cannot be supposed, so many churches
should be so ignorant of their own constitution, or of the duty they owed to
the officers set-over them; or that they had been so faulty in their behavior
toward the clergy, as to make it proper for a condemned pastor, just going out
of the world, so to write to them, as if the main thing suitable to be said
was, "that they had very worthy, and God-becoming bishops and presbyters, whom
they ought to revere and honor as God the Father, and his son Jesus Christ."
There is plainly much more spoken upon the subject of the clergy, and their
rights, than upon any other, though of the most fundamental importance; which
looks very strange. It would certainly do so in epistles, wrote at present,
under like circumstances; and the rather, as the same things are not only
mentioned in all the epistles, but in most of them needlessly repeated, and in
some of them repeated over and over again so as to be quite fulsome. Should a
bishop, at this day, while in the near view of death for religion's sake, write
epistles to the churches after this pattern, I scruple not to give it as my
opinion, that the general thought of the world concerning him, in this day of
christian liberty, would be, that overheated zeal for clerical honor and power
had put him out of the possession of himself. This leads

II. TO the next consideration, namely, the "lofty descriptions" that are
given, in these epistles, of the officers of the christian church, with the
"exorbitant claims of power and dominion" made on their behalf. The language to
this purpose is truly extraordinary, not at all consonant to the age of the
true Ignatius, nor indeed worthy of so primitive a father and martyr. What
other thought can we entertain of those numerous expressions, which represent
bishops as "presiding in the place of God": which compare them to "God the
Father, and to Jesus Christ the son of the Father": which declare it our duty
to "receive them as the Lord, to reverence them as Jesus Christ," yea, "to
follow them even as Christ does the Father": which caution against "resisting
the bishop, lest we should disobey God": which command us "so to obey the
bishop, and subject ourselves to him, as to do nothing without him": which,
"without the bishop", deem it "unlawful either to baptize, or celebrate the
sacrament, or indeed do any thing, however reasonable it may appear to us":
which exhort to be "so one with the bishop, as Christ is one with the Father;
and so to do nothing without him, as Christ did nothing without the Father":
which make so great account of "obedience and subjection to the bishop," that
they who "do any thing without him" are esteemed "doing the devil a service";
and "those that remain with him" are, upon this account only, thought worthy of
the character "of belonging to Christ"; and are represented "as walking not as
men, but according to Christ": Yea, in so high estimation is obedience to the
officers of the church, with the author of these epistles, that he even "pawns
his soul for those who obey the bishop, presbyters and deacons," and desires
"his portion in God may be with such."

THESE, and like, expressions, so frequently to be met with in these epistles,
cannot easily be supposed to have been penned by the true Ignatius. In their
literal strict sense, they are unworthy of any pious writer; much more of the
celebrated father, to whom they are ascribed: Nor can it be denied, that they
aggrandise bishops beyond all reasonable bounds, and plead for the most blind,
implicit and absolute obedience, as that which is properly due to them. And, in
a qualified sense, they are some of them very unguarded; others scarce capable
of being at all justified; and, in general, all of them do much rather savor
of the language and spirit "of after times," than of the age in which Ignatius
is known to have lived.

THERE is, perhaps, no fact more notoriously evident, than that none of the
sacred writers, nor primitive fathers, either of the same age, or near the same
age, in which Ignatius flourished, do hold the least affinity with him, in his
strange talk (if it be his) about the officers of the christian church. If we
look into the "Pastor of Hermas," the "epistle of Polycarp," or any other
genuine piece, near the time in which these epistles are said to be wrote, we
shall find in them all the discoveries of a quite different spirit. These
unitedly concur in the like plain language; speaking of the officers of the
church in a manner becoming the simplicity of the gospel, and the purity and
humility of those early days: Whereas, when we turn to the "Ignatian epistles,"
the reverse is clearly visible through them all; little being here to be seen
but such high strains of language, as are evidently adapted, if not purposely
contrived, to exalt the clergy, and secure to them all power, reverence and
subjection. And how shall this be accounted for? Why should there be such a
signal difference between the manner of writing in these epistles, and all the
other extant books of the same age?

TO this it is said, that the style of authors is very different, and the turn
of expression, in every writer, as peculiar to him, as his countenance or gate:
For which reason, its thought to be no ways strange, that the manner of
Ignatius's writing is not like that of his contemporaries.

IT is readily acknowledged, that the particular turn of language, in different
authors, is different, as is pleaded; but at the same time, denied, that this
at all removes the difficulty. For a number of authors, writing upon the same
subject, may each of them write in his own peculiar style, and yet agree in
exhibiting the like account. The style of Hermas widely differs from that of
Clement, as Clement's does from that of Polycarp; and yet, they all lead us to
think much the same thing about the clergy; and this, very evidently,
notwithstanding they severally express themselves in a turn peculiar each one
to himself. And why might not Ignatius, with the rest of his contemporaries,
have wrote in his own style, and yet have concurred with them in a like account
of the officers of the church? It Is certain he might. And it must be ascribed,
not to mere difference of style, but to some other cause, that he so strangely
differs from them.

IT is therefore further pleaded, Ignatius was a SYRIAN, and its no other than
might be expected to find him writing in a "swelling turgid style." To which it
is easy to reply,

HIS being a SYRIAN may possibly account for his sometimes barbarous Greek, as
well as uncouth compound words peculiar to himself; but how it should account
for his sentiments concerning the clergy, as differing from those of his
contemporaries, is not so easy to say. For not only is the high language in
these epistles, but the thing intended by it, quite different from that which
is contained in the other writings about the same age. Ignatius is alone, not
in style only, but in real meaning. Unclothe the metaphors, qualify the
hyperboles, bring down the rhetorical strains used in these writings, and put
them into simple language, and their true spirit, their genuine intendment,
will carry the honor and power of the clergy much higher, than it is carried by
all the phrases of all the contemporary writers united together: Nor can a
person, who reads the epistles of Ignatius, help having excited in his mind a
far more exalted idea of presbyters as well as bishops, than by reading all the
other writers, till we come to the third and fourth centuries.

THE plain truth is, there is so little resemblance between these epistles,
upon the head under consideration, and the other writings of the same age; and,
I may add, so great a resemblance between them, and the writings of a POSTERIOR
DATE, that one can scarce help thinking, the real author of them was alive in
the world, long after the death of the truly primitive Ignatius.

HOWEVER the dispute about the superiority of bishops to presbyters be
determined, nothing is more evident, than that the language relative to the
clergy, bespeaking the reverence and submission due to them, was very different
after the second century, from what it was before. And as the language, in the
"Ignatian epistles," is quite different, upon this head, from the language of
the age in which this father lived; so it well agrees with that, which was in
fact used afterward.

THIS is particularly obvious, upon a comparison between the books that go
under the name of the "apostolical constitutions, and canons," and "these
epistles." Before their appearance in the editions of Usher and Vossius, the
agreement between them, not in spirit only, but in words and phrases, was so
observable, that some have not scrupled to say, that they had both one author.
That great antiquary, the archbishop of Armagh, was clearly of the opinion,
that the same hand interpolated the Ignatian epistles, that interpolated the
apostolical constitutions; and is somewhat large in offering the reasons of his
entertaining such a thought. And since the publication of the new, and (as is
though it) very much purged editions, the resemblance is still visible; so clearly
so, that I cannot suppose, but prejudice itself will own, there is a much
greater analogy between them, in their high descriptions of bishops, and the
honor and obedience due to them, than between these epistles, and any other
piece that is not of a much later date.

AND what should be the reason of this? Why should the Ignatian epistles be
thus different from all the contemporary writings, and so much like those which
did not appear till many years after his death? Why should they be wrote with a
spirit, and in language, that are well suited to the claims made by the clergy,
and the honor and obedience that were in fact yielded to them, not at the time
when they were wrote, but LONG AFTER the supposed author of them was gone out
of the world? This surely looks suspicious, and is a shrewd sign of unfair
dealing some how or other. -- To proceed,

III. THE most weighty consideration of all is, the APPROPRIATION of the names,
bishop and presbyter, so commonly and certainly to be met with in these
epistles. The learned Daille distinguishes this from all his other arguments,
calling it "argumentum palmarium"; as well he might, it being an argument that
is founded on one of the best and surest rules in criticism, evidencing a
pretended genuine writing to be spurious, or corrupted; namely, it is using
words in an APPROPRIATED sense, which words were not so used at the time when
this writing is known to have been penned, but were so used in AFTER-AGES. The
greatest critics ever recur to this as the surest test: Nor is its sufficiency,
as such, in matters of this nature, disputed by any. In applying therefore this
test to the point in hand, let it be observed,

THE words, bishop and presbyter, are, in the "Ignatian epistles", APPROPRIATED
terms; not used in a loose and promiscuous manner, but in a sense particularly
ascertained and fixed. Bishops are not here called presbyters, nor are
presbyters called bishops; but the officers, styled bishops, are distinguished
from those that are styled presbyters, and, on the other hand, those that are
styled presbyters are, in like manner, distinguished from those that are styled
bishops. And the terms, bishop and presbyter, are the APPROPRIATED ones,
pointing out these different church officers. And this appropriation of the
words is not accidental, but runs through all the epistles, and all the editions
of them, the Usherian and Vossian, as well as those that preceded them. And
it is so sacred and inviolable, that, in no case, at no time, upon no occasion,
is this use of the words departed from. Not an instance is to be met with,
where the word bishop is confounded with the word presbyter; or the word
presbyter, with the word bishop: But these terms are accurately and religiously
applied to different persons, in a fixed and appropriated sense. That is the
manner of diction in these epistles, "obey your bishop, and the presbytery." --
"I have been judged worthy to see you by Damas, your bishop; and your
presbyters, Bassus and Apollonius." -- "The bishop presiding in the place of
God, your presbyters in the place of the council of the apostles." -- "Let all
reverence the bishop as the Father, and the presbyters as the Sanhedrim of
God." -- "Attend to the bishop, and the presbytery." -- But I have no need to
multiply citations here. It Is the very thing pleaded, in favor of episcopacy,
that Ignatius ever distinguishes bishops from presbyters. This he has been said
to do (if my memory don't fail me) thirty-six times: Which, I am satisfied, is
not an enlargement; though, I must confess, I have not been so curious as to
adjust the precise number.

WHAT agreement now is there between the supposed Ignatius, and his
contemporaries, upon this head? Do they likewise use the words, bishop and
presbyter, in an appropriated fixed sense? The plain answer is, they do not.
Far from so doing, they differ as much from him in their use of these terms, as
they do from any of the writers of the third or fourth centuries: Nor is there
an author extant, that wrote either before Ignatius, or at the time when he
wrote, or even afterward till we are got into the third century and onwards,
that uses these words as he does, in a sense so certainly, so commonly, and so
invariably fixed and determined.

IT is plain, there is no manner of affinity between the apostolic, and
Ignatian use of these words; though Ignatius was personally known to, at least,
some of the apostles. With HIM they are always appropriated terms; but with
THEM, they are promiscuously used, as may be seen in the foregoing discourse.
It evidently appears from hence, that bishop and presbyter were not yet settled
names, signifying distinct officers. And this, as Daille says, was the
unanimous opinion of the ancient fathers, who speak of the use of these words
in this primitive age. And Dr. Whitby, an episcopal writer, affirms the same
thing; as was observed in the discourse to which this is annexed. Nay,
Bellarmine himself, a Roman-catholic-writer, representing the sense of the
fathers upon this point, says, as he is quoted by Daille, "In the apostolic
times, the names, bishop and presbyter, were common to all the priests, both to
the greater, whom we now call bishops; and to the less, whom we call
presbyters." I don't bring these testimonies by way of proof, that these names
were thus used in the first age; but only to show, that this though it of the
matter is not confined to those, who live in these latter days, and may be
suspected of prejudice against the order of bishops; but that it was the
opinion of the ancient fathers themselves, even those of them who flourished
after episcopacy took place, and were hearty friends to this kind of government
in the church.

AND as these names are promiscuously applied in the apostolic writings, so are
they in the other writings before those of Ignatius. In Hermas's "Pastor" the
word, bishops, is explained to signify Apud "Apost. Pat. Coteler." page 123.
Simil. ix. cap. xxvii.
"those that preside in the church", and those that preside in the church are
the Ibid. page 78. Visi. II. cap. iv.
"presbyters that preside in the church." And in Clement's "epistle to the
Corinthians," the same officers that are called "presbyters," are expressly
spoken of as "cast out of their episcopacy." Ibid. page 173. cap. xliv.


AND if we turn to Polycarp, the supposed collector of the "Ignatian epistles,"
and the next and nearest writer to him, he says nothing from whence it can be
gathered, that bishop and presbyter were, in his day, appropriated terms, and
applied, as such, to distinct officers in the church. Presbyters and deacons
are the only officers he speaks of; and he undoubtedly means by them the same
church officers that are called by Clement, and by the apostle Paul, in his
epistle to this same church, bishops and deacons. And it is remarkable, Polycarp
no where uses the word bishop, nor does he say a word of the bishop of
Philippi, much less of his distinction from the presbyters of this church:
Wherein he widely differs from Ignatius; which is really unaccountable,
considering how lately Ignatius, under very extraordinary circumstances, had
wrote his epistles, and how particularly acquainted Polycarp (as is pretended)
was with them; especially considering still further, that Ignatius had wrote
one epistle to Polycarp himself, and another to his church at Smyrna, in one of
which he "pawns his soul for them that were obedient to the bishop and the
other clergy"; and, in the other, makes the bishop so necessary, "that no
administration could be valid without him, but whatever he should approve would
be pleasing to God."

NO more is to be seen of an appropriated use of the terms bishop and presbyter
in Justin Martyr, than in Polycarp. Irenaeus frequently uses these terms, but
in the loose and promiscuous sense; as is well known to all who have read him:
Nor do the terms appear to be appropriated ones, till toward the close of the
second century; and even then the appropriation (as was observed in the
foregoing discourse) was not steadily fixed. We must get into the third
century, and the middle of it too, before we shall find it, after the manner of
Ignatius, sacred and inviolable.

UPON which the enquiry is obvious and just, how comes it to pass, that
Ignatius should CONSTANTLY use the terms, bishop and presbyter, not in the
sense, in which they were used, in the age in which he wrote, but in the sense
in which they were used in OTHER AGES, LONG AFTER HIS DEATH? This ought
certainly to excite our jealousy, and put us upon caution lest we should take
some knavish impostor for the worthy and primitive Ignatius. Words, we know,
often vary in their meaning; and sometimes particular words are as sure marks
of such a particular age, as particular garbs or fashions. And this is the case
here. Before the days of Ignatius, about the time of his flourishing and dying,
and for some considerable time afterward, the words, bishop and presbyter,
were UNAPPROPRIATED terms, and promiscuously applied to the same persons:
Whereas, toward the going out of the age in which he lived, or rather the
coming in of the next, they lost their promiscuous use, and became APPROPRIATED
terms, and were as such applied to different persons, who were accordingly now
distinguished from each other by being spoken of under these names. And as
these names, in the epistles ascribed to Ignatius, in their purest editions,
are ever used in the APPROPRIATED sense, distinguishing bishops from
presbyters, we are presented with a most evident mark of time POSTERIOR to
that, in which the true Ignatius is known to have lived.

ENOUGH, I trust, has now been said to answer the design I had in view, which
was to justify those who pay no great regard to what is bro't from the
"Ignatian epistles," in support of episcopacy. And I would flatter myself, that
even our opponents, while they judge impartially, will not think, we herein act
as though we had nothing to say in vindication of ourselves. Bigotry itself must
confess there is good reason, at least the plausible appearance of it, to
suppose, either that Ignatius did not write the epistles that are ascribed to
him; or, if he did write them, that they are handed down to us so MINGLED WITH
CORRUPTION, as not to deserve a reception as his genuine works.

THE reader is desired to correct, with his pen, the following errata, and such
other as he may observe, which have escaped the author's notice.

Page. 10, line 2, read there. P. 15, l. 3, from the bottom r. describing. P.
25, l. 18, read constituted. P. 37. l. 15, r. consessus. P. 39, l. 9, from the
bottom, r. consessus. P. 72. l. 5, of the note at the bottom, r. L'arroque P.
76, l. last, r. confessionum. P. 77. l. 3. from the bottom r. universali. P.
79, l. last but one, r. or. P. 82. ^ 4, del. of.


