A Correct JOURNAL Of the Landing His Majesty's Forces on the Island of CUBA;
And of the Siege and Surrender of the Havannah, August 13, 1762.

By PATRICK MACKELLAR, Chief Engineer.

Published by AUTHORITY.

The SECOND Edition.

LONDON: Printed.

BOSTON; Reprinted and Sold by GREEN and RUSSELL in Queen Street. 1762.

JOURNAL of the Siege of the Havannah, etc.
1762. June 6 th.
AFTER a very fortunate passage through the old Straits of Bahama, the fleet
arrived within sight of two small forts to the Eastward of the Havannah,
situated upon two rivers about three miles distant from each other. The whole
fleet brought to, and Sir George Pocock, with 12 sail of the line, some
frigates, and all the store ships, bore away for the mouth of the harbor, to
block up the Spanish Men of War that were there and to make a feint on the
other side, in order to facilitate our landing on this. Commodore Keppel, with
several sail of the line, and several small frigates, was ordered to remain
with the transports, to protect and conduct the debarkation of the troops,
which was deferred 'till day. There was too much wind, and too great a surf
from the shore to effect it at that time.

7 th. By break of day this morning, the army landed without opposition between
the two forts Bacarans and Coxemar. The one was silenced, and taken possession
of by the Mercury and another frigate; the other was taken by the Dragon, of 74
guns. They were defended by a considerable number of peasants and negroes in
arms, who very soon abandoned them, and fled into the woods. The Earl of
Albemarle, with the light infantry and grenadiers of the army, passed the river
Coxemar, where his lordship took his quarters that night. The rest of the army
lay upon their arms along the shore, with the picquets advanced into the woods.

8 th. Lord Albemarle marched the main body of the army early in the morning to
a village called Guanamacoa, about 6 miles from the landing place, and sent
Colonel Carleton through the Coxemar wood, with a final corpse of troops, to
the same village, to endeavor to cut off the retreat of a corpse of the enemy,
said to be assembled there, and which his lordship determined to attack. The
enemy were drawn up to receive us, and very advantageously posted upon a rising
ground between us and the village. Their cavalry marched down in a large body
to the light infantry who were upon the right of Col. Carleton's corpse. They
were very soon repulsed, and the whole body dispersed-before the army got up.
They were about 6000 in number, chiefly militia mounted, with the regiments of
Edinburgh dragoons, two companies of grenadiers, and many Spanish officers.
This morning Col. How, with two battalions of grenadiers, was sent through the
woods to the Moro, to reconnoitre, and secure the communication to that fort
from the Coxemar.

9 th. Lord Albemarle marched the army from Guanamacoa, and encamped in the
woods between the Coxemar and the Moro, leaving a corpse at Guanamacoa, under
the command of Lieut. General Elliot, to secure the avenues on that side, and a
large tract of country, which could supply the army with water, cattle, and
vegetables. We now discovered the enemy dismantling their ships in the harbor,
at the entrance of which they had laid a boom.

10 th. The Moro hill, called the Cavanno^, where the enemy were said to have a
post well fortified, was reconnoitred: and in the evening Col. Carleton, with
the light infantry and grenadiers from Coxemar, went and invested that hill and
the Moro fort.

11 th. Col. Carleton attacked the redoubt about one of Clock in the afternoon,
and carried it with very little loss, and little resistance on the side of the
enemy. Here was a post established, and the work called by the name of the
Spanish redoubt.

12 th. The Moro fort was further reconnoitered by his lordship's order. It was
difficult to reconnoitre it with much accuracy, it being surrounded with thick
brushy woods, which could not be seen through, and we^^ mostly impossible. It
was observed the parapet was thin, and all of masonry, and it was threfore
judged advisable to erect a battery against it, as near as the cover of the
woods would admit of; there was accordingly a plan fixed upon, at about 250
yards distance, and preparations were accordingly made, and parties ordered out
for fascines, and collecting earth, which was a work of great labor, the soil
being exceedingly thin and scarce. The landing of the stores was, at the same
time, carried on with great diligence by the fleet.

13 th. The battery mentioned yesterday was begun, as also a howitzer battery
beyond the Spanish redoubt, to remove the shipping further off up the river.
They threw a great deal of random fire into the woods, and annoyed us very
much. Col. How, with 300 light infantry, and two battalions of grenadiers, was
detached to land at Chorera, about 7 miles to the Westward of the town, to
secure a footing, and engage some part of the enemy's attention upon that side.

19 th. There was a mortar battery begun upon the right near the sea, for one
13 inch, and fourteen royal mortars.

20 th. Parallels put in the woods to the right and left battery, and a fascine
line begun, to secure the guards from the enemy's fire.

23 d. Another battery made upon the beach, to advance the royals in the
battery on the 19th, nearer the fort.

24 th. A battery for two howitzers begun near the lime kiln; likewise against
the shipping, to remove them further up the harbor, which had its effect.

25 th. A battery for a 13 inch mortar begun near the lime kiln, against the
shipping.

26 th. A battery begun against the fort for four guns and two mortars, upon
the left of the first battery.

29 th. The enemy, at day break, landed two detachments of 500 men each, of
grenadiers and chosen men, with a detachment of armed Negroes and Mulattoes,
with each corpse, one upon the right under the Moro, the other upon the left of
the lime kiln. The picquets and advanced posts, prevented the success of these
detachments, by repulsing them, killing, and taking near 200, besides wounding
a great number of them, who mostly got of by the favor of the woods. Our loss
was only ten men killed and wounded.

30 th. This day was chiefly taken up in carrying ammunition and carriages to
the several batteries to provide for their opening next morning, which was done
by the soldiers and 500 Blacks purchased by Lord Albemarle, at Martineco and
Antigua, for that purpose.

July 1. This morning we opened two batteries of cannon, which, with our
mortars, made up a fire as follows, viz. Guns, MORTARS, 24 lb 13 inch 10 inch
Royals. Battery, on the left called Williams's Batrety, 4 2 0 0 Grand battery,
8 2 0 0 Left Parallel, 0 0 2 12 Battery on the Beach, 0 2 1 14 Total 12 6 3 26

The enemy's fire exceded ours upon the front attacked, in the number of guns,
which amounted to 16 or 17 from 6 to 12 pounders. They played one mortar of 8
inches, and that very seldom. Upon the whole, we reckoned our fire superior to
theirs considerably, besides the difference of the security of our works,
theirs being only a parapet of thin masonry.

About ten o'clock the Cambridge of 80 guns, the Dragon of 74, and the
Marlborough of 66 went in and lay against the fort; the Cambridge lay within
grape shot. They continued firing for above three hours, which the fort
received and returned with great steadiness: At length the ships were ordered
off. The Cambridge and Dragon suffered much, particularly the former. The
attacked front of the fort did not seem to suffer much from their fire, it was
so much above them; but they still did us a consideaable service in taking up
the enemy's attention for that time, which gained us a superiority in the
number of guns.

2 d. Our batteries continued their fire with great success, and beat down the
front attacked, as fast as could be wished or expected, particularly the eight
gun battery; but unhappily about noon, we were obliged to slacken, that battery
being in danger of catching fire, from the constant fire kept up, and the
dryness of the fascines, having had no rain for 14 days; however, before the
evening, the enemy's fire was reduced to two guns, which fired but seldom.

3 d. We flattered ourselves the fire was quite out, but about two in the
morning it broke out again with great violence. Both water and people were sent
as fast as possible, but unhappily too late; the fire had insinuated itself
where water could not reach it, nor earth stifle it. Thus 17 Days labor of 5
or 600 Men, and which must have let us into the fort in a few days, was now
baffled, and to do over again. There was another embrazure added this night to
William's battery.

4 th and 5 th. These two nights our endeavors still continued to extinguish,
and with much difficulty, there were two embrazures saved upon the right, and
the epaulment for mortars upon the left. The fire of these two embrazures was
continued until the guns was disabled, and two mortars served en barbette,
until the enemy's fire obliged the men to give it up. It was now determined to
convert the mortar battery, in the left parallel, into a battery for cannon,
which accordingly begun, with some improvements to the other works, which the
enemy's fire from the town, Fort la Punta, ships of war, and floating
batteries, had rendered necessary.

6 th. Two more embrazures were added this night to Williams's battery, and a
place fixed upon near the stone redoubt for another battery of four guns.

9 th. This morning we had 12 guns in battery, viz. Williams's battery of seven
guns, and the left parallel of five guns, besides our mortars. The enemy fired
with about eight or nine.

10 th. At night a battery of four guns begun in the right parallel.

11 th. This morning the four gun battery, near the stone redoubt, and two guns
upon the saved part of the grand battery newly repaired, opened and played with
success. We now had 18 guns in play to 8 or 9, which the enemy still kept up;
for, by their uninterrupted communication with the town, and the great
assistance of their sailors, who serve their guns, they always made the losses
of the day good at night. This afternoon two guns in the left parallel battery
failed, one by running, the other by cracking; the carriages of a third was
disabled upon Williams's battery. In the afternoon the merlons of the grand
battery again caught fire, and extended from right to left, and the whole was
irreparably consumed.

12 th. The disabled guns in the left parallel, and in Williams's battery were
replaced last night, so that we still had 16 guns in play: Toward noon the
carriages of the three guns in the stone redoubt battery were disabled.

13 th. This morning there was a battery of four 32 pounders opened on the
right parallel against the left bastion, and made considerable havoc. There
was another battery of four guns ordered to be made upon the right of it as
soon as materials can be collected. The ruins of the burnt battery was ordered
to be converted into a line for musquetry at the same time. There were two guns
remounted in the night upon the battery near the stone redoubt, but there were
two more dismounted immediately afterward.

14 th. The four guns in the stone redoubt battery were last night mounted on
sea-carriages: We now had 20 guns mounted against five or six, which the enemy
began with in the morning: They were reduced to two before dark. The whole
front attacked appeared in a most ruinous condition, yet the enemy, though kept
in a constant hurry and confusion, behaved with spirit.

Preparations for carrying on approaches had now been in hand some days. The
40th regiment was employed in making gabions, and several men of war in making
junk, blinds, or mantelets, and some bales of cotton purchased to serve as
wool-packs. As our approaches must be entirely raised above ground on account
of rocks, these precautions were necessary.

15 th. We played with the same number of guns as yesterday. The enemy fired in
the morning with 6 or 7 guns, but were totally silenced before night.

16 th. Our fire as yesterday. The enemy fired in the morning with two guns,
and only twice with each. They fired the rest of the day with musquetry and
wall-pieces, but not much with either. This evening the materials for the
approaches began to be advanced. The guns and ammunition are carrying up for
the new battery, which is to open tomorrow morning. The enemy seemed to be
employed in making up fresh merlons upon the face of the right bastion.

17 th. The Valiant's battery opened this morning between 10 and 11; the enemy
had no fire on the front attacked, but fired two guns from the left face of the
left Bastion upon Williams's battery, and up along the Cavannos. This afternoon
we began to stuff Gabions with Fascines for advancing our Sap. In the evening
our Sap was begun, but there being a thick thorny wood to cut through, was
advanced but a little way.

18 th. The enemy's fire this morning was the same as yesterday. We had two
howitzers put in Dixon's battery to fire into the breaches; the Sap was carried
on this night about two thirds of the way to the small battery at the foot of
the Sorties before the right Bastion. There was likewise a small lodgement made
at the edge of the wood, before the point of the west Bastion.

19 th. The enemy fired this morning with three guns from the front attacked,
but they were soon silenced. About noon we took possession of the covered way,
before the point of the right Bastion, and the former Sap carried on at night,
and another begun along the covered way before the right face, where we made a
lodgment.

20 th. This morning the miners were entered under the right or sea face of the
right Bastion, the only place Where there was a practicability of doing it, at
the foot of the wall, for the ditch of the front attacked is 70 feet deep from
the edge of the Counterscarp, and upwards of 40 feet, of that depth, sunk in
the Rock, but fortunately there was a thin ridge of the Rock left at the point
of the Bastion, to cover the extremity of the ditch from being open to the sea,
and to prevent surprises, and by means of this ridge the miner past, with some
difficulty, to the foot of the wall, which he could do no where else without
the help of Scaling Ladders, an operation which would be both tedious and
dangerous. This ridge was so narrow that there was no possibility of covering a
passage upon it, from the fire of the opposite flank, but we took our chance,
and were glad to find it, even with that disadvantage. It cost us but only
three or four men during the whole time. We began the same afternoon to sink a
Shaft without the covered way, for mines to throw the Counterscarp into the
ditch to fill it up in case of occasion. We continued our Sap along the Glacis,
and got a gun into the Saliant Angle of the covered way against the opposite
flank. In the daytime we had parties for making Fascines and other
preparations against the town, after the Moro should be taken.

21 st. Our Sappers and Miners continued to carry on their work; in this they
were much retarded, by meeting often with very large stones, which cost them
much labor to remove. In the night there being a suspicion that there were
very few men in the Fort, there was a Sergeant and 12 men that scaled the sea
line a little to the right of the mine, and found only about nine or ten men
asleep in that part of the work: they wakened before our men got to them, and
ran off immediately to alarm the rest: the Sergeant and his party then came
down, and being ordered up a second time, found they had taken the alarm, and a
considerable number assembled, and ready to make an opposition. Had it been
practicable to succor them briskly, the Fort might have been carried at that
time, but the attempt was not to be repeated.

22 d. About four this morning there was a sally made by the enemy from the
town, which, by the information or prisoners, amounted to 1500 men, divided
into three different parties; one pushed up the bank behind the Shephard's
battery; they were stopped for near an hour, by the guard posted there,
consisting only of about 30 men, commanded by Lieut. Col. Stuart, of the 90th
regiment, until he was joined by about 100 sappers, and the 3d batt. of Royal
Americans; the fire continued hot all the time; the enemy were then driven down
the Bank with great slaughter; as many as could, got in their boats, and many
leapt into the water, where there were 150 drowned. Another party endeavored
to push up by the saliant angle of the Moro to attack our Sappers upon the
Glacis, and their Covering Party, but they were beat off in a very short time;
the third party went up the Bank of the Spanish Redoubt, but finding our people
ready to receive them, they returned very peaceably from whence they came. The
alarm was entirely over, and our people returned to their work by eight
o'clock. The enemy's loss was said to be near 400 men killed, drowned and
taken; besides the wounded that got off. We had about 50 men killed and
wounded. The enemy canonaded up most violently, when their troops were beat
down the bank, from the Punta, West Bastion, and from the lines and flanks of
the entrance, and from their shipping; they even killed some of their own men,
so eager were they to kill us. At the same time that their troops wete
attacking, we saw they had great numbers paraded in the town, and some of them
going into boats to sustain the attack; but when they perceived the rough
treatment their comrades had met with, they prudently dropped the attempt.

23 d. The former works continue in hand, viz. Sapping, Mining, and making
Fascines. This day a sketch of the batteries against the town, and defenses of
the harbor, to be erected along the cavannos after the Moro should be taken,
were laid before the Earl of Albemarle, and approved of by his Lordship.

24 th. The former works in hand, and the materials collecting for a four gun
battery, to the left of the Spanish redoubt, to be called -- This battery to be
opened against La Fuerza, and to enfilade the two next flanks, facing the
entrance of the harbor. There was a party of 600 Negroes ordered this day for
fascine making, and to be continued upon that service, but they seldom amounted
to above half, or even a third of that number, occasioned by sickness, and
other pressing duties.

25 th. The same work in hand as yesterday. There was a road made from the rear
of William's battery, up to the Spanish redoubt, covered from the town, to
serve as a communication to the new designed batteries upon the Cavannos. This
afternon there was a battery for five guns begun, to the right of the rear of
Dixon's battery, to open against the Punta. This battery is called --

26 th. The former works in hand, and the battery begun, to the left of Spanish
redoubt. This morning a two decked Merchant's frigate, across the entrance
before the West Bastion, within the Boom, and near the sunk ships, was sunk by
a howitzer, near Dixon's battery; this ship had annoyed us very much.

27 th. The former works in hand, and a mortar battery begun at a Spanish
redoubt; there was likewise a battery begun for three guns to fire upon boats
landing at the Moro, which would have been of considerable use all along, if it
could have been served without erecting other batteries to check the fire of
the Moro itself, upon that side: But that could not be undertaken, as our
troops were already sufficiently employed in the works of the real attack.
Brigadier Burton arrived with the first of the troops from North America, and
was ordered to the west side.

28 th. The former works in hand. This afternoon a large merchant ship of the
enemy's caught fire by lightning within the Harbor, and blew up in ten
minutes. At night there was a battery for two mortars begun to the right of the
Spanish redoubt: And one for five guns against Fort La Punta upon the left of
our Sap, near the point of the Moro.

29 th. The former works in hand. The mines were this day preparing for being
sprung tomorrow morning.

30 th. About two this morning the enemy sent two boats and a floating battery
out of the Harbor, to fire into the ditch where our Mines were at work: They
fired grape and small arms, but without any other effect, than a short
interruption of the work: The covering party fired so smartly upon them that
they were obliged to retire: About two o'clock in the afternoon the mines were
sprung; that, in the counterscarp had not a very considerable effect, but that
in the Bastion having thrown down a part of both faces, made a breach, which
the General and Chief Engineer thought practicable; upon which the troops under
orders for the assault, were ordered to mount, which they did, with the
greatest resolution; and ^^rming very expeditiously upon the top of the breach,
soon drove the enemy from every part of the ramparts: The Spaniards had about
130 men, with several officers, killed; about 400 threw down their arms, and
were made prisoners; the rest were either killed in boats or drowned in
attempting to escape to the Havannah. Our loss in this glorious affair,
amounted to two officers killed, and about 30 men killed and wounded.

31 st. Our preparations were carried on with all possible diligence, for
erecting the intended batteries upon the Cavannos. The enemy's fire continued
very hot against the Moro; they pointed chiefly at that part of the work where
the cistern was, in hopes no doubt, of letting out the water. Lord Albemarle
went this evening to the west side of the town to reconnoitre the ground there,
and see in what manner attacks might be carried on with advantage on that side,
in case of occasion.

August 1 st. The enemy's fire still continued against the Moro. This evening
General Keppel determined to erect the remainder of the batteries to be erected
upon the Cavannos; some by the 1st and 2d brigades, and some by the sailors,
and to begin them tomorrow night.

2 d. This morning, before day, the enemy, sent down a 74 gun ship into the
Entrance, and moored her opposite to the Fuerza; she directed her fire likewise
against the Moro: There were two howitzers run into the battery to fire at her,
which incommoded her a good deal. The batteries mentioned yesterday were begun
this night, by the two brigades, and sailors; they consisted of thirty-five
pieces of cannon.

3 d. The former works in hand, and carried on with diligence. This morning the
Chief Engineer was ordered to the westward of the town, to reconnoitre the
ground, for attacking that side in case of occasion. This evening the enemy's
ship opposite to the Fuerza, mentioned yesterday, was removed by our howitzers,
with a good deal of confusion.

4 th. The chief Engineer reported to Lord Albemarle, that as the Moro, was now
in our possession, there was, to the westward of the town, a very advantageous
attack to be formed against the poligons next the Punta, by the cover of a bank
running along shore from the Lazaro to Fort la Punta, supposing that fort
silenced: That there was a road upon the bank which was, for a considerable
way, covered both from Fort la Punta and every part of the town, that the road
was at present stopped up by trees felled on each side, but might be easily
cleared; but as attacks upon that ground would in some degree stand in the line
of fire of our batteries upon the opposite side, it would be most advisable to
delay them until these batteries had in some measure effected their design; and
especially, as they might of themselves, perhaps, answer the end without
further trouble.

5 th. The works and batteries on the (...) in hand as before, and some of the
platforms begun to be laid: It was now difficult to get materials for that
purpose, those from England and Martinico being expended; but by the Admiral's
assistance, the materials were got. Lord Albemarle took up his head quarters
this evening the other side.

6 th. The works in hand as yesterday, and being considerably advanced, and the
men much fatigued, there was none allowed for this night. -- There was 30
carpenters from the provincial troops, lately arrived, now employed in making
platforms. There was a command of Engineers, and a proportion of entrenching
tools ordered to the west road, the former to go as soon as the batteries and
works on the east side should be ready, and the tools to be shipped
immediately: The chief engineer was ordered to repair to that side, and there
remain.

7 th. The former works upon the east side were going on, and Fascine parties
ordered to work on the west side.

8 th. The former works in hand on the east side, but Fascine-making was
retarded considerably on the west side for want of tools. This afternoon the
ship arrived on the west side with the intrenching tools, but the ship being
very sickly, there were none landed. In the evening Lord Albemarle went himself
to reconnoitre the road and ground between the Lazaro and the Punta, and
ordered some posts to be taken up farther advanced.

9 th. The intrenching tools were landed this day, by the assistance of the men
of war, in the afternoon. The enemy having discovered our reconnoitring toward
the Punta for some days past, set some houses near the road on fire to prevent
their being a shelter for us. In the evening there was a party of 200 men
ordered to make a redoubt upon the roads to the Punta, with a covering-party of
the same number; the place intended for the redoubt, which was partly upon the
road, being much encumbered, as mentioned before, all they could do was to
clear off the trees, and form an Abbates in the front and flanks for present
defense.

10 th. At day break this morning the enemy having discovered the covering
party, and suspected our having been at work, began to cannonade along the road
pretty warmly, but with little execution. About ten in the morning, our
batteries being ready to open on the east side, and we to open ground on the
west side, Lord Albemarle sent a flag of truce by an Aid de Camp to acquaint
the Governor with the ruin that threatened the place, and summoned them to
capitulate. The Governor after keeping the flag from till between three and
four in the afternoon, in the open fields, at some hundred yards distance from
the works, sent him back, and before he got two thirds of the way, began to
fire: we at the same time saw many people leaving the town with loads; in the
evening there was a party sent to carry on the works as before.

11 th. At day break this morning, all our batteries opened consisting of 43
pieces of cannon, and 8 mortars. The advantage of position, as well as superior
fire, became visible very soon. Fort Punta was silenced between nine and ten.
The north bastion almost, in about an hour afterward; but now and then fired a
shot. Between 1 and 2 we discovered a great number of the enemy running off
from the Punta, as if they had abandoned it. About two o'clock there were flags
of truce hung out all round the garrison, and on board the Admiral's ship: soon
after, there arrived a flag of truce at our head quarters, by Don -- Fort
Major, his son, and an interpreter, which proved to be with proposals for a
capitulation. Sir George Pocock was then sent for, and the business entered
upon, as soon as he came. The works were stopped for this night, and the flag
returned about dusk.

12 th. The truce continued. This day the flag was sent in, and returned; and
sent in again in the evening. The works were ordered to be carried on as
before, which gave room to expect the hostilities were to be renewed in the
morning; but the capitulation was settled before that time.

13 th. This day the capitulation was signed and sealed; the long time it took
to be settled, is said to be owing to an unreasonable earnestness in the enemy
to save their shipping, which they at length gave up.

14 th, About ten this morning, General Keppel with -- men, took possession of
Fort la Punta, and about noon, of the Punta gate and bastion, at both which
places there were British colors hoisted, having been evacuated by the enemy.
Brigadier How took possession of the land gate, with two battalions of
grenadiers, much about the same time,

A LIST of the Ships of War that were taken at the HAVANNAH, under the Command
of the Marquis DEL REAL TRANSPORTE, Commodore and Commander in Chief of all his
Catholic Majesty's Ships in America, and surrendered with the City, the 13th
of August, 1762.
Ships. Guns. Surrendered, Sunk, or Taken. Tigre 70 Surrendered with the City.
Reyna 70 Ditto. Soverano 70 Ditto. Infant 70 Ditto. Neptuno 70 Sunk in the
entrance of the Harbor. Aquilon 70 Surrendered with the City. Asia 64 Sunk in
the entrance of the harbor. America 60 Surrendered with the City. Europa 60
Sunk in the entrance of the harbor. Conquestad 60 Surrendered with the City.
San Genaro 60 Ditto. San Antonio 60 Ditto. Frigates. Vinganza 24 Taken by the
Defiance in Mariel harbor, June 28, 1762. Thetis 22 Taken by the Alamin in the
Old Straits of Bahama, June 2, 1762. Mart 18 Taken by the Defiance in Mariel
harbor, June 28, 1762.

N. B. There are two Ships of War on the Stocks, and several Merchant Ships in
the harbor.

Return of guns, mortars, and principal stores, found in the Moro Castle, City
of Havannah, and Punta, the 14th of August, 1762.
Brass Ordnance. 42 pounders 1 36 4 32 3 26 11 24 1 20 3 18 8 16 14 15 5 12 31
10 6 8 3 7 1 6 4 5 3 4 1 4 3 Total 102 Iron Ordnance. 36 pounders 2 26 25 24 68
18 67 16 47 12 16 11 6 8 18 Total 249 Brass Mortars. 9 inch 1 8 1 5 3 4 4 Total
9 Iron Mortars. 13 inch 1 12 1 Total 2 Powder. Quintals 537 Muskets of
different Calibres, 4157 Ditto Cartridges filled, 125,000 Hand Granads, fixed.
500 Musket Ball. Quintals, 30 Empty Shells, of sorts. 460 Round Shot. 24
pounders, 7603 18 1613 16 5650 12 1458 8 80

Samuel Cleveland, Lieutenant Colonel of the Royal Regiment of Artillery.
N. B. There are many Articles of small stores, the particulars of which at
present cannot be ascertained.



FINIS.

