AN ESSAY ON THE INVENTION, Of MAKING SAND IRON.

AN ESSAY ON THE INVENTION, OR ART of making very good, if not the best IRON,
from black Sea Sand.

By Jared Eliot, M. A. Of KILLINGWORTH.

They shall suck of the Abundance of the Seas, and of the Treasures hid in the
Sand.

DUT. xx^^^^.10 Iron is taken out of the Earth, and Brass is molten out of the
Stone.

JOB xxviii 2 Iron sharpeneth Iron, so a Man sharpeneth the Countenance of his
Friend.

PROVE. xxvii.17. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by JOHN HOLT, at the
New-Printing-Office: near Burling's Slip, 1762.

THIS ESSAY, IS HUMBLY DEDICATED TO the Honorable and Laudable SOCIETY,
instituted at LONDON, for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce;

By their most humble, most obedient Servant, JARED ELIOT.

An ESSAY, on the Invention or Art of making Iron from Sea Sand, etc.
AS one great End of our Existence, consists in being useful to each other in
social Life, in a careful Discharge of all (...) D^ties incumbent on us;
sensible of this, according to my small Capacity I have endeavored to promote
the Good, and general Interest of the Community of which I am a Part, and with
whom I have a strong Connection; but by Reason of my Situation in the Country*
Want of proper Instruments to lend Assistance in searching into the Secrets of
Nature, and St^te of Bodies, have been able to make but a (...) Progress in
that which I have so much at Heart.

With this View, I now give an imper^e^t History of a singular Sort of Sand,
called s^^uring Sand; denominated so, (...) the Acco^^t of its peculiar Fitness
to scour, (...), and (...).

(...)* and even to sixty Rods in Length, in some Places: Had they not been
distinguished on the Account of the aforesaid Uses, their uncommon Color, and
ponderous Nature; they might have remained unnoticed to the End of Time. These
Sands ap^ea^ and disappear at different Seasons of the Year, they appear in the
Summer and Autumn, and in a great Measure disappear in the Winter. They lie in
the greatest Degree of Depth close in with the Upland, then fall away gradually
toward the Sea, -- know not whether there be any beyond Low Water Mark.

I once thought these Sands were brought up by the Waves of the Sea, and then
by the Agitation of the Sea in Storms, and by the great Hurry of Waters, were
carried back again to the Sea; but am now fully convinced that this Conjecture
was unphilosophical, and not founded on true Principles: As the Solution of
that Phoenomenon did not then appear any Way interesting, my Thoughts were
unattentive, ^or was I concerned whether my Conjecture was right or w^^ng, but
I am now certain, that the black Particles of these Sands are Iron, well washed
from all Impurity, and that they are derived from the u^land Earth a^^a^ent, as
also from other (...) ^ands; I conclude so, for the following Reasons;

^

(...)

(...) Sea, in its Flux and Reflux, that there (...) T^me to form a Cohesi^n;
this Motion (...) Iron Particles is what keeps them so pure and free from all
fabulous and other heterogeneous Mixtures; which I suppose to be the Reason why
such a small Quantity of this Sand Ore will afford such a large Quantity of
Iron, beyond that of Bog Ore, or Mountain Ore* The Iron Mines of New-Milford
and Salisbury, which are accounted very good (if I remember right) afford but
one Ton of Iron from three or four Tons of the Ore; ordinarily they reckon four
Tons, one with another, to a Ton of Iron.

I formerly had an Interest in the Ore Bed in Salis^ury, which I have sold; the
other in New-Milford I still retain, but having committed it to the Care of one
of my Sons settled in those Parts; I have in some Measure forgot the
Proportions of Ore to Iron, but think I am not mistaken; and can correct
afterward if I find any Mistake.

When we dig through these Ore Sands, under^eath we find a yel^ow Substance, much
resembling what those who dig up the Bog Ore call the Mother of Iron, which
they suppose to be the ^^bulum and Food of the growing Bed of (...) what it is
I know not; possibly it may be the Cement which ho^ds the Particles of Iron
t^gether, but is (...) in doing its Office b^ the frequent (...) of the
Particles of Iron, and so ^ails to the Bottom when we (...) it.

These Iron Particles are scattered in many Parts of the Earth, and carried
forward by the Water from Rill^ to Brooks, from Brooks to Rivers, till they
fall into the Sea, mingle with the Sand Ore, and add to the Quantity, or to
some proper Bed. Traveling the Road with the Reverend Messrs. Ruggles and
Todd, at the Bottom of an Hill which we had descended, while we were
discoursing on this very Subject, we observed some Sand brought down by the
Water, nigh a Brook, which it might probably reach the next Rain; on the Top of
that Sand there was a thin Stratum of a blue Color, we had nothing convenient
to take off this Stratum, but took up all together, brought it to my House, and
dried it; there was three Penny Weight of Sand, from which we extracted with
the artificial Magnet 15 Grains of Iron Particles, which were in Figure and
Color the same with the Sand Ore.

If it be objected, that as Iron is much heavier than Water, so it must be
contrary to the Laws of Gravitation to suppose Iron to be transported in Water:
If we consider how Iron may be plated so thin as to swim in Water, and that
these Particles of Iron are much less than Plates made by Hand, it is not
strange they should swim.

As these Particles of Iron were on the Surface of the Sand, so they must have
floated on the Top of the Water by which they were conveyed; if th^se Particles
of Iron were much larger, the Velocity and rapid Motion of the Water might
thrust them forward, as we see Gravel and even great Stones ^umbled forward by
the Force of Water. Since this Observation was made, Persons that are curious
and attentive, have seen frequently in the Roads and elsewhere, these Iron
Particles.

From hence we may conclude the Usefulness of Water, not only in Vegetation,
but also for Transportation of Bodies to the Place of their Destination; so
what a Political Writer said of the Dutch, that they were the grand Carriers of
the World, may with greater Propriety be applied to Water. Water not only
serves to bring together the Materials which form a Tree, or a Mine of Iron,
but also unites them together; it is the grand Cement or Bond of Union; take
away Water from Wood and it will become like Powder of Post, take away Water
from common Stone and it become as Sand, extract it from Limestone (which as
Borehaa^e says, yields the most Water, it will become Lime in fine Powder; so
I suppose, if Water was taken from Bog or Rock Ore, it would become like this
Iron Sand Ore.

Many Years past a Number of Proprietors in an Iron Work, being in Want of Iron
Ore, heard of a great Quantity in an Island; they sent and found a large Bed of
it, but the Water which had fed and maintained it being drawn away, or dried
away, the ^^ine was starved, become dry like an Honey Comb, when all the Cells
are destitute of Honey, and therefore would yield no Iron.

I was also informed of another Iron Mine at Windsor, which was so richly fed
with Water, fully impregnated with Iron Particles, that the Ore being taken
away, the vacant Bed in a Number of Years was replenished with a new Stock fit
for Use. It is consistent with Reason to suppose, that as it is with Fire,
Water, Air, and Earth, so it is with Iron, which is a component Part of the
Earth; that there was at first, just such a Proportion and Quantity created,
which is never more nor less, and has so continued from the Beginning, and
will ^o the End of Time. The Fire dispersed in all Parts of the World, is
gathered and collected into one or many Places, and is increased according to
the Proportion of Fuel, where it is put in Motion; which is vulgarly called a
Fire. It is as easy to strike Fi^e with Flint and S^^el, or if you have Wood,
to kindle a Fire in Gre^^land, as in Persia, or the hottest Part of the World.

Water which is raised from the Seas, Lakes, Ponds and Rivers, and carried in
Clouds over the Land, is let fall in Dews and Rains, and then returns by Rills,
Brooks and Rivers, to the Places prepared to receive it; and as Water continues
its circular Motion and Round, so I conceive it is with Iron; by the Water the
Particles of Iron are carried to a proper Bed or Receptacle, thence it is taken
and wrought for the Use of Man, and is worn out in his Service; or contracts a
Rust and is consumed when it is worn away, as by the Earth in plowing, or from
Horses Shoes in traveling, or from Iron Shod Wheels in carting, or by grinding
with a grind Stone: The Iron by these Means, reduced again to fine Particles,
and returns to the Earth again: When it is corrupted by Rust; this is much as
when a Tree rots, or a Man dies, they Each return to Mother Earth again; these
same Particles of Iron then worn away, are not annihillated or lost, but being
joined with Sulphur, and those other Materials which constitute Iron Ore, it
proceeds and takes the same Journey round till it comes to the Smith's Forge
again: Under all these Changes and Revolutions there is no Addition; the same
Quantity as there was at first, there remains the same still, and no more.

A Piece of Iron Ore was sent to me as a Curiosity from Salisbury, taken from
the Ore Bed in that Place; it was in the Shape and Form of three Isicles, two
or three Inches long, and joined to a Body of Ore like Fingers to the Hand;
Water impregnated with Particles of Iron, had ra^ down upon three Spires of
Grass as Conductory to the Mineral Water, the Water from Time to Time drying
away, left the Iron Particles in the above said Form: -- Which is a farther
Evidence, that Iron in its primitive and original State, is in very small
Particles, and are collected and brought together b^ Water, and there formed
into Masse^ of various Forms, as we find in what we call Iron Mines.

Iron if considered either Mechanically or Medicinally, is the most useful
Metal in the World* An Ax made of Iron and Steel is for all Mechanical Uses
very much to be prefered to an Ax of Gold; Steel is only Iron differently
modified; if Amputation is to be performed, the Surgeon and Patient would
choose a Knife of Steel, rather than a Knife of Gold. In the Rebellion under
Pizarro in Peru, they were obliged for want of Iron to Shoe their Horses with
Silver, but it was but poor Stu^^ ^or that Use compared with Iron.

Medicinally used it is greatly preferable to other more costly Metals. There
has been much said of Aurum Potabile, and of Preparations of Silver, but they
are but splended Trifles compared with Preparations of Iron; but let the
Preparation or Composition be what it will, whether a Water, a Powder, or a
Salt, still it is Iron; these Preparations pass through the Body, and return
again to their original State.

How useful is this Metal for the Forging and making the Instruments of
Agricu^ture, for proc^^^^g o^^ neces^^ry Food; for ^aking (...) proc^ring a
sufficient Store of it must be of great Importance to Mankind. It is well known
that Mercury or Quicksilver is a mere Pro^e^s* can by Art be so orde^ed, as to
appear in a great Variety of Forms, of diverse Colors, Consistence, and
Operation; as that of S^lves, O^ntment^* Pills, and Powders; ^et can be reduced
back to its primitive State. Yea, of itself it inclines (...) return to its
original Sta^e o^ Condition, ^or in the Graye D^^t of those who in Life had
been (...), it ha^ been found returned ^ack to Quicksilver with all its true
(...) it had been exhibite^ in a very d^fferent Form. -- So from a^^er (...)
has (...) several Stages, and s^bsisted under (...) Forms, and ^aving (...)
d^fferent T^pes, Colors and Fig^^es* (...) retu^^ (...) Par^^cle to its
original and (...) State* As we may (...) from Analogy and (...)


What I have further to write on this Subject, not only for the Sake of Order
and greater Precision, but even from Necessity too, will be in the Manner of a
Journal. For now entering on the Borders of Terra incognita, -- can advance not
one Step forward, but as Experience my only Pole Star shall direct, am obliged
to write as poor Men live, from Hand to Mouth, and as Light springs up before
me as I advance.

To trace the Matter therefore from the Beginning; Some Years past viewing this
black Sand, the present Subject of writing, with particular Attention, was very
much of the Mind that the black Particles were Iron; if it had been tried with
a Magnet and was not affected by it, it would not have altered my Resolution to
try it if an Opportunity should present, having been credibly informed that the
Mountain Ore of New Mil^^rd* (...) not affected by the Magnet* even when it was
pulverized

Having had no Opportunity of making a Trial, the Matter rested till the last
Year, when my Son ere^ted Iron Works in this Town, in order to refine ^^g Iron;
upon that I reasu^ed the Purpose o^ making a Trial, to see if Iron could be
made from it; it is true, I might have sent of this Sand to an Iron Work at a
Distance: If ^^ad, how unavailing would it have been, where I had neither
I^terest or Authority to ^^em the Tide of Prejudices that there is against
Projectors, and the seem^ng Impossibility of making Iron from Sea Sand? The
Owner of the Works, and the Workmen would have united in rejecting such a silly
Proposal: A Projector is under discouraging Circumstances, he must make his
Fac^ harder than a Rock; for if he succeeds in any important Undertaking, it is
th^n depreciated as ^o great A^cheivement, and within the Reach of an ordinary
Capacity; if he (...) it spreads general Joy, and he becomes a Subject of
(...), as a Jeffery G^^crack, or a Second D^n Quix^te; and indeed i^ the
Undertaking be either useless* or impossible, such as the Art of Flying, the
grand Cath^^^co^, ^r the Philo^opher's Stone, the Pr^jectors are ^^^ly
ridi^ulous.

Mentioning some Things of this Nature t^ ^y learned and worthy (...)
judiciously observed, that such Treatment wa^ neither just nor political; that
the German^ acted a wiser Part, for i^ a Project failed, unless it was
ridiculous in itself, the Undertaker was named with Respect, saying though it
failed, yet it was well imagined.

If some Body had not happily projected for us the Art of making Iron and Steel
till this Time, we might have been confined to the Use of Stone Hoes and Axes,
as were the miserable original Indian Inhabitants of this Land, and are even to
this very Day.

My Son's Iron Works being erected as I said before; some Time last November I
rode down to the Beach, where I found the black Sand had in a great Measure
disappeared. I filled my Saddle-Bags with the black Sand, which I gathered from
the Surface of the red Sand, but the Chaffery was not then finished, and the
Refinery not being fit for such a Purpose, the Trial could not be made, it was
therefore necessarily suspended till the first Week in January.

The Sa^d being weighed, which was designed to be used in the Trial, we desired
the Workman to use his best Skill to see if he could make Iron from it: Against
which, the Workman objected three Things.

1 st, That he was not a Bloomer by Trade, but a Refiner, therefore it was out
of his Province; but as there was such an Affinity between these two
Occupa^ions, we did not doubt his Skill and Ability to do it, if done it could
be.

2 d, That notwithstanding the Weight and Appearance of this Sand, he much
doubted whether it contained Iron Ore or not.

3 d, He farther observed that if it were Iron Ore, it consisting of such very
fine heavy Particles like Flesh without Bones, having nothing to sustain it,
would run down among the Coals, sink to the Bottom, full too low, and
consequently never gather into a Mass and form a Loop.

This, I must confess, was a formidable Objection, a Difficulty which I had
foreseen, and which we knew not how to obviate, otherwise then by adding to the
Sand some Cinder or Slag, which had ^^owed from Pig Iron in the Working;
notwithstanding this Difficulty, my Son and I were determined at all Events,
that a Trial should be made. Besides the Exer^ion of Authority, we thought it
best to engage the Workman to exert himself, and use his best Skill by motives
of Honor and (...), let him know the Importance of the U^dertaking; he being a
s^ber Man, who would use strong Drink with Moderation and Tempe^ance, I
promised him that i^ he could produce a Bar of Iron from that Sand, I would
send him a Bottle of Rum. The Workman used great Diligence, Labor, Patience,
and (...) as I was capable of judging Skill too: As (...) a Number of P^^ple
waiting (...) see the Issue of this singular Undertaking, who grew uneasy with
long Attendance, we diverted ourselves as well as we could. I told them that it
had been said of Spaniards, that when they were angry with a Man, the utmost
that Ill Will could suggest was, that they wished that he might be always
employed in Building* and wait for a Man that should never come: That our
present Situation made me think of a certain whimsical Enthusiast, who told his
Wife, that if she had primitive Faith as he had, Stones might be turned into
Bread* therefore ordered her to heat the Oven well, then to put (...) Stones,
and close the Mouth in good Order; after t^o Hours ba^^ing directed her ^o dra^
the Bread before she opened the Oven, (...), I (...) not (...) that it is
Bread; o^ Sight^^ the Stones (...), I told you so, that it would not ^e Bread;
^o which the Man replied, (...) this is because you did not Believe; but said
she, why is it not half Bread? The Work^an being under great Discouragement
took the Hint, and turns to me, Sir here is no Bread.

After some Time found a Substance adhe^ing to the Crow-bar, which he shook
off, (...) with the Hammer, and found it Malleable, says, this is certainly
Iron; after five Hours ^abour, long looked for came at Last, he drew out a
la^ge Loop; it bore Shingling and (...) well, and when compl^ted, the (...)
weighed (...) two Po^nds and an Half, and proved excellent good Iron; Part of
it was tried by the most Skilful of our ^lack-Smiths, who pronounced it to be
equal to the best of refined or Swedes Iron.

Some may say, that such trivial Stories, and a long Detail of minute
Particulars concerning a little Bag of Sand and a Bar of Iron, is really below
the Dignity of Writing. I do not know what such Persons intend, by Dignity of
Writing, unless they can Mean, that when a Person is to write a Letter or a
Book, he must ascend into the Clouds, think himself going about something quite
different from the common Actions of Life: That he must divest him himself of
that Sociability, that easy Freedom, that Familiarity which is so much the
Support and Pleasure of Conversation; must now put on a distant and forbidding
Air, assume a solemn Mein, a formal Stiffness, as if clad in Buckrum; and being
thus equipt is in Appearance like a Hog in Armor, very different from the
inimitable Sir William Temple, who relates the common Incidents of Life, in
such an easy agreeable Manner, as to engage the Attention, captivate the Mind,
and excite the Admiration of every Reader.

The Matter related is not so inconsiderable as some may think, but a Matter of
importance; for as to me, it was to know whether these numerous Sand B^nks,
which as far as we know, may contain Ore (...) Thousands of Tons of Iron, (...)
to Mankind, to future Times, as they have in all Ages past. If this Trial had
fa^^ed, when neither Skill, Care, (...) nor (...) sufficient Length of Time was
wanting, and more (...) as the P^o^ect did not wear the most p^omis^^g Face or
Prospect of (...); I think I (...) not have been so hardy as to have made
another Attempt.

It was a discouraging Circumstance that one third Part of the Sand was common
Grit Sand, which is hard to Flux, and when it is melted runs into a kind of
Glass* this dry hungry vitrous Matter being more likely to retard than promote
the Flux of the Metal, whereas the true Cin^er or Slag greatly promotes the
Design of reducing the Ore into Iron, and is as useful as the other is
prejudicial* although this Grit Sand does not prevent the Operation, yet I
suppose it to be one Cause why it is so slow in melting. When I gathered that
Sand of which the Trial was made, I did suppose that no more could be got (...)
the next Appearance of the Sands.

On the second Week in January, I desire^ my Son to ride to the B^ach and see
if he could scrap^ up a little more Sand* some he found driven on to the
Upland, and some in Holes and Corners; -- mixed it with Bog Ore, and made two
Bars of Iron; as B^g Ore (...) poor, and this S^nd Ore so (...)* thought it
would make a to^erab^^ Sort of I^o^, (...) it should so happen that (...) Sand
(...) obtained but in small Quantities; such a Mixture would be a good Saving.

The third Week the Anvil gives Way, a large Breach is made; the greater Part
of the Week is spent in cutting it down to make a new Face. This is the third
Time the Anvil has failed in this Manner; and a new Hammer was broken to pieces
and wholly spoiled not many Months past: I tell my Son that I think he must
send to England for a new Supply, where I am informed those which are good may
be had; so much Delay, Expense, and Disappointment, being the Consequence of
trusting to those made of such bad Metal; what he has in Use being an old
second Hand Hammer.

About this Time, and for some Time past; having been at Work on a Parcel of
Pig Iron, which is of such a sharp sulphurous Nature, as frequently to burn
and destroy the Tew Irons, which is the Occasion of much Delay and Expense, as
well as Loss of Time; at all Times, and with the best Pig Iron, there is
Difficulty and Loss on this Score, though not equal to what it is when they
Work those of a sharp Kind. A Tew Iron is a Case of Iron so framed, and of such
a Constructure, as to secure the Bellows Pipes from being hurt by the Fire, and
to convey and direct the Blast of Wind into the Fire; I have thought of various
Expedients to remedy that Evil, have some Times thought of making them of the
Asbestos or Cotton Stone, or of that Composition of which Crucibles are made,
but then the Clearing Rod, and the Crow Bar so often Entering, and the
necessary Motion that must be made of the Loop, while in the Fire, and the
Drawing it out, will inevitably break such brittle Substance.

There is a Sort of Wood, in or near ^ Place^ called the Nine Partners, which
is Incumb^stible; it will endure strong Heat, will be re^ Hot, but not consume
neither by Length or Strength of Heat; Fire makes no more Impression upon it
than on the Asbestos; makes no se^sible Diminution of the Substance, or
Alteration in Color or Texture, I once had a small (...) of this Wood; several
have seen it in the Possion of others: This Wood is not of a sparry or a strong
Substance, but has all the Properties of Wood, except that strange
differencing Quality, that it is Uncombustible.

Some say that there are living Trees of this Kind; others say, that there was
only one Log of it, which was discovered by an Endeavor to burn it out of the
Way, it was found Impenetrable by Fire; some think that this in Fact* is the
Case, and that it is All, or the greater Part chiped of, and carried away to
show as a Rarity; that it acquired this singular Property by some Effluvia from
the Earth; which is in Truth accounting for one Phenomenon, by another as
strange and unaccountable as the first; but let this be as it will, I have
employed a young Student of the College, who travels into that Part of the
Country, to get the best Information upon the Spot that he can, and to procure
me a small Piece, if none that are large can be had, that I may send it to the
Society (...) London* I imagine that if Pieces of this Wood, whether green or
dry, could be procured large enough to make Cases, to serve in the Place of Tew
Irons, they would last till they were wo^n away by Friction; which would take a
long Time, and would endure like Asbestos, called with us Cotton Stone. The
making and mending of Tew Irons is a great Expense of Time and Labor.

The third Week of January, I told my Son that it was not unlikely but that our
Theory, concerning the appeari^g and d^sappearing of the black and might be
wrong, and instead of being carried off to Sea, they might be buried under
common Sand, driven up by Storms and high Tides: At about sixteen Inches depth
he found great (...); there were sundry smaller Stratas and one Large, about
four Inches thick, clean, heavy, and very black* soon carried off three Tons to
the Works. Finding the black Sand buried under common Sand, quite un^aveled the
whole Mystery of the Periodical disappearing of the I^on Sand; but then as to
these Sands mak^ng their Appearance in the ^ummer; a Person of greater Sagacity
might have found out the Latter by the Former, ^ut I was not so happy; I still
remained unresolved, (...) ab^^ to account for it: One of the Cart-Loads of
Sand in its Passage to the Iron Works, being stayed for a Time in the Street,
there falling a hour of Rain in the Night, looking on it in the Morning, I
observed that the Rain had driven away the common Sand, which is mixed with the
Iron Sand, as being surprisingly ^ighter than the Ore Sand, and had le^t the
Iron Sand like Cream on the Top; I rode down to the Beach, and found the Rain
had done the same there, where the ^tratum of common Sand was thin: This
Observation upon Matter of Fact, resolved two Things, which were Matter of
Doubt and Difficulty: First, I learned that it was by Rain that the lighter
common Sand was removed, which being repeated, and ^o ^torms to ^ring up a new
Accession of common Sand, the Sand Ore makes ^ts Appearance in its p^oper
Season. The other Difficulty was this, that I had observed that the richest and
he^viest Part of the Iron Sand, was on the Surface of the Beach; which seemed
to be contrary to the Law of Gravitation; but these Matters of Fact, show, that
it is so far from being contrary to the Law of Gravitation, that it is fully
Agreea^^^ to it. I should not have been so long and ^^^^ticular on this
Article, but on (...) it may be servicable to Those who m^^ be ^^ Search after
these Sands.

When we meet with Difficul^ies relating to natural History, for which we are
not (...) Account, when by Experience and (...)* the Whole of that which seemed
to be so Mysterious, comes to be fully explo^ed, we wonder at our former
Blindness; and ^o others who had never been perplexed with them, and now see
them in full Light, they appears so so plain, natural and easy, they think that
the Discovery is not in any Degree Meritorious.

The Manufacturing of Sand into Iron having made a great deal of Noise far and
wide, I was informed of many more Places where there is an Appearance of these
Sands, than ever I had any K^^wledge of before: I heard that there was of it at
(...), a large Bank of it at New London, at Block Island, at Long-Isl^^d, on
the North and South (...); at Guilford, at Bran^^rd, and at New Haven, besides
what we have in this Town, from whence my Son gathers what he makes use of. It
is many Years since I have seen the Book, if I remember right, Gordon in his
Geographical Grammar, writes of a (...) of black (...) at New Haven, as one of
the Rarities of New^England.

About this Time, sent my Sons East and West to search for Iron Sands, but
found them covered up, and not knowing exactly the Spot, where these Sands were
wont to make their Appearan^e, (...) that was very good. I think that (...)
would be acting a prudent Part, for (...) where the (...) Sand makes its (...)
a Stake in that (...), that (...) ^t ^ay be known where to dig, and to gather
up what is on the Surfac^ in those Seasons, and put it into Casks prepared for
that Pu^pose.

About this Time go to New Haven, and bring with me two artificial Magnets,
with a Design to know what Proportion of Iron, is contained in each of these
several Sorts of Iron Sand; these Magnets are made at that Town, by a Workman
who received his Instructions from that learned and ^^genious Gentleman Joseph
Harrison, Esquire the red (...) being the poorest of all the Iron Sand, the Magnet
could separate only one eighth Part and a half, it seemed to be but dry hu^gry
Particles of Iron, being extracted from the Sand, by the strong Force of the
Mag^ets* that of a deeper red one Quarter, others an Hal^, some two Thirds, and
some more, that which yields two Thirds Ore, is that of which my ^on makes his
Iron. Every Week's Experience affords a new Accession of Knowledge, and opens a
new Scene of Wonders, and fur^ish^s out a new Set of Ideas. Having n^w found a
Plenty of Sand Ore, and car^ed up something of a Stock for the Present, after a
Time go on to make ^and Iron s^ccessf^lly, making ^oops of which each affords a
Ba^^ of Iron, of two or three and Fifty Pounds. It still continues to Work but
slowly, which is strange, c^^sidering the fine Particles of which the Sand does
consist; takes more T^me th^^ (...) Bog (...), or (...) Or^, (...) however,
that in Tim^ ^ Remedy may be found for this Evil or Inconvenience; the Sand
contained in it, I suppose to be an Obstruction. The Iron made of Sand Ore, is
not only fit to answer all the ordinary Purposes for which Iron is used, but it
seems to be well fitted for, and to have all the Qualities requisite for making
Steel for Edge Tools.

1 st, In the first Place, this Iron is soft; the popular or vulgar Notion is,
that the hardest Iron is best for Steel; this I suppose to be a Mistake,
founded on a Conjecture, that Steel is no other than Iron made hard; if this
were the Case, a great Degree of Hardness in Iron would forward the Operation;
as this Iron is soft, so the heat and virtues of the Ingredients made use of in
making the Change, will the more effectually Penetrate, in order to make a full
Conversion of the Iron to Steel.

2 d, This Iron is pliant, or as we vulgarly say, tough. In Iron Bars there is
a Grain, which runs the whole Length of the Bar, which is sometimes visible to
the naked Eye; in breaking a very tough Bar of Iron, the Fibers appearing in
some Measure resembling the Grain of Wood; the more distinct and connected
these Fibers are, so much the more pliant and tough. If this be true in Fact,
we see what is the Cause of the Pliancy or Toughness in Iron; I suppose it to
be a necessary Property in Iron, to render it fit for making the best Steel for
Edge-tools.

3 d, Another Property of this Iron is, that the Grain is fine; The Particles
o^ Grains of Gold are fine, and consequently connected, which is one Reason of
its Ductility.

If I have any right Notion of the Manner in which Iron is cleansed or
converted to Steel it is this; that when the Iron lies confined in the Store
Chest or Box, the Heat and the Virtues of the Ingredients communicate, cut and
divide these Fibers into Angles, resembling Diamond Point ^^ ^f the Grains
which go to constitute the Fibers or Filaments, are fine, so much the the fi^er
will the Angles or Diamond Points be; and by how much the more Plian^ and Tough
these Fibers or Filaments are, so much the stronger they will be, and the
Angles into which they are divided; and consequently so much the better to cut,
and bear force as in A^es and Stone Chisels, where Steel is put to the hardest
Trial.

Iron when it is enclosed in the Chest is greatly expanded, as appears by the
Blisters that rise on the Bar; this Expansion is the Cause of ^uch a strong
Tension upon the Grain or Filaments, as to snap them off Short; an hard
Substance thus broken short, necessarily forms ^^to Angles, or Diamond Points;
if the Change be not brought about in this Manner, I must ^onfess I am not able
to account for it at all.

It is said that the Edge of an Ax, Knife or Rasor, viewed through a
Microscope, appears (...) Saw; it is probable that this is a true
Representation, as the Edge is composed of a Row of these Angl^s or diamond
Points; so that to speak strictly and philosophically, that which is cut is
sawed asunder. As all Theory not founded upon Matter of Fact, and that is not
the Result of Expe^ience, is vague and uncertain; therefore it is with great
Diffidence that I have offered any Thing in Way of Theory, which is only
conjectural, and shall always take it as a Favor to be corrected and set
right; for I suppose that the greatest Obstruction to the Increase of Knowledge
is Pride and self-Sufficiency, I have learned many useful Things from the
lowest of the People, not only in Rank, but in Understanding too. Most Men by
their Observation and Experience arrive at the Knowledge of some thing not
known to others, let each esteem Others better than themselves.

One of the Ways in which Steel is prepared for medicinal Uses, is by apply^ng
a Bar of red hot Steel to a Roll of Brimstone, holding it over a Vessel of
Water; the Steel will melt and fall down in Drops into the Water, the Water
being poured off, and the Steel dried, in a metal Mortar it may be reduced to
powder like prepared Coffee: This being Matter of Fact, I thought that there
was Reason to conclude, that when Steel or Iron was too hard and touchy (as the
Smith's say) would not bear the Hammer, it would break and fly to Pieces,
especially when welding hot: With such Stuff the black Smith spends his Time,
his Coal, his Patience, and his Reputation with his Customers; he has paid his
Money for it, therefore cannot afford ^o lose it, goes on s^ri^^ng to work it,
but strives in vain* I suppose that these bad Qualities in Steel and Iron, is
owing to a too great Quantity or Proportion of Sulphur in its Composition.

Therefore in Order to resolve this Question, and to determine whether the
Brittleness of Steel or Iron, be owing to an abounding of sulphurous
Particles, and for a Remedy at the same Time; from a Number of Bars of b^d
Steel, I chose a Bar the most friable, touchy, and the worst I could find;
(...) le^t I might ^e mis^aken, and that it might be better than I had (...) I
ordered the Smith to try it, and found it as bad as it was supposed to be, and
full a^ bad or worse than above described.

Having s^^cked Lime in Readiness, I directed the S^^th to use this Lime as
they use Clay, to ^^ve the Steel or Iron from burning, with this Alteration
only, that ^e should cast into the Fire more in Quantity, than what they use of
Clay; and to give it a welding Heat; when it was taken out and hammered, there
(...) off ^ thick Scale from the Steel, which when broken was white within,
occasioned by the Lime that was mixed with the Cinde^s; the Effect was, that
after this Operation, the Steel was malleable, and could be wrought very well
in the common Way with Clay. The Steel being thus enclosed on all Sides with a
thick Coat, the sulphurous Particles were extracted, or else consumed,
something analogous to ^ncaling.

I must confess that I made only this single Trial; it has not been usual with
me to publish or recommend any Thing upon one single Experiment: Some Smith's
to whom I communicated the Method say, that they have tried it with success. As
there has been some Pig Iron made of such sulphurous Metal, as to be matter
of Terror and Vexation to Refiners* it may be worth while to try this Method
upon the Iron made of such bad Pig Iron; the Way is cheap, easy, and as I
suppose harmless; if it prove a Cure of the ill Quality of such Iron, it may
prove of considerable Advantage to the Public. Intimations of this Kind, crude
and imperfect, and not supported with repeated Experiments may at least give an
Handle to further Improvements. The Iron made of Sand Ore seems to have no more
Sulphur in its Composition than is in due Proportion.

If I am mistaken as to the Cause of the Brittleness of Steel and Iron, it is
the Practice of melting Steel with Brimstone has led me astray; for when we see
good malleable Steel in a Moment rendered as brittle as China Ware, only by
mixing with the Steel, particles of Brimstone, c^^ we think otherwise? To this
it may be objected, that Iron when melted or fused by Heat alone, will become
brittle as all Cast Iron is known to be; but then Cast Iron cannot be
pulver^^ed as Stee^ or Iron may be, when melte^ wi^h Brimstone* how wrong
soever I am in Theory, yet (...) in Fact it should be ^ound by Experience, that
Lime applied as above, should be ^ cure for bad Steel and Iron* we shall have
the Benefit of the Effect as in the Load Stone, though we mistake the Cause

Iron being so necessary for the carrying on of Husbandry, Arts and Navigation,
as has been intimated already; there being as yet no more Iron Ore found, than
only two Beds of Mountain Ore, one at New-Milford, and another at Salisbury*
and a small Matter of Bog Mine: and the greater Part of that at Salisbury,
being transported out of the Government, and never returning again but by
Purchase; there remains no more wholly belonging to this Colony, save only that
of New Milford* that and a sma^^ Part of Sal^sbury Mine, being all that we can
call our own; and this being so utterly insufficient to supply so great a
Deman^, unless a Furnace be erected to render the New-Millford Ore more
extensively Useful, or the^e Iron Sands, or both, afford a much larger Supply
than at at Present, other Colonies must still, as they have done, draw from us
large Sums Yearly, which we can but ^ll spare* in the Purchase of P^g Iron, we
save One-(...) by Manufacturing, for although there (...) little Gain accruing
to the Manufacturer, yet ^t is a ^aving of Ha^^ to the Colo^y; the Impo^tation
o^ Bar I^^n (...) upon u^ as a heavie^ (...), being (...) the (...) by Purchase.

There are promising Appea^ances of Sand Ore (...) many ^^aces (...) this
Colony, but what th^se Beac^es may afford, no Man ca^ tell, w^ether much ^r
(...), it being no (...) to examine that Matter* i^ they should all be as well
(...) within, as that S^o^t ^each from w^^ch my Son draws his Supply, they may
^^ove greatly to our Advantage: There may be enough, together with what
Mountain and (...) Ore we have, to supply the whole Government, and for
Exportation too; of which we we have great Need, having no one Product o^ which
we can make an immediate Remittance (...) Pa^ment for the Abundance of English
Goods, which our increasing Wants call ^or.

I presume that no Person will pretend to set up Iron Works, o^ Dependence of
Working (...) Ore Sa^ds* til^ they have first g^thered up what can be had on
the Surface of the (...) whence they expect to be supplied* (...) to (...) what
can be had by (...) gather to the amount of Three (...) Hundred Tons, with a
good (...) supplies* for what is so (...), ^ad need ^e made as ^^re as the
Nature of (...) allow, b^^ore they put themselv^s (...) Sands, in Case they
should be found in a great Quantity, and of a good Quality, such as those
already Found.

1 st, From the Situation, being adjacent to the ^ea, convenie^t for
Transport^tion, to be conveyed into Rivers on which Iron Works in Time may be
erected; the Convenience of Water bearing, and the cheap Conveyance compared
with the heavy Charge of Land Carriage, is obvious to every one, too plain to
need any farther Enlargement on this Head.

2 d, As it generally, I suppose, requires five Ton or more of Bog Ore* to make
a Ton of Iron, and from three to fo^r Tons of Mountain Ore to make one Ton of
Iron, and from Twenty-eight Hundred to o^e Ton and Half of Pig Iron, to make
one Ton of Iron^; Of this Sand Ore it requires no more than two Tons, to make
one Ton of Iron, which is also of small Cost; so then in Case of ^and Carriage,
this Sand Ore w^ll bear more than double the length of Mountain Ore or Bog Ore;
that is to say, this will as well bea^ the Charges of ten Miles Land Carriage,
as the other Sorts of Ore five Miles.

3 d, If there should ever be ^ou^d a (...) Quantity of this Sand Ore, to (...)
it is all ready pulverised (...) your Hand; (...) that made from (...)* by
refining, if by any Means the sinking a Loop of this in the Chaffery, could be
brought within the Compass of two Hours, (...) would never turn to any
profitable Account to erect a Furnace; nay, i^ the Sinking a Loop could be
brought within the Compass of three Hours.

4 th, The Gathering, Digging, Raising and Filling of Carts or Boa^s, with this
Sand Ore is cheap, compared with the Charge of digging and raising Mountain o^
Bog Ore.

5 th, As our Manufactures are small, and our Manufacturers few in Number,
compared with the great Exten^ of our Agriculture, (which is still increasing
and the great Numbers employed in that great and useful Branch of Business is
such, that in plentiful Years the Product so far exceeds the Consumption, as to
overstock all all the Markets ^ar and near; when in Consequence of this, the
rich valuable Product of the Earth, lies upon the Hands of the Farmer, it is
discouraging, and of ba^ Tendency, tends to enerva^e and abate the Vigor and
Zeal of the Farmer, re^de^s him Indolent, takes off the Edge of Industry* But
if great Numbers were employed in and about Manufactures in Iron, this would
bring Co^bers, Carters. (...), Carpenters, into a necessary Depen^^^ce o^ the
Farmer, and by a home Cons^^ptio^ make the most sure and certain Market.

P. S, I have contrived an Engine, by which not only the third Part Sand, may
be separated from the richest and best Sand Ore, but but also from the poor
Sand, such as contains but one Half, one Quarter, or one eighth Part Iron Ore,
and will (as I suppose) be performed with Ease, and with such Speed as to turn
to good Account; which will be a good Saving* where richer Sands are not to be
found.

When I wrote the foregoing Essay, I was not certain whether three or four Tons
of the Mountain Ore went to produce a Ton of Iron, I am now certain that at
New-Milford, they always reckon four Tons, to a Ton of Iron.



FINIS.

