A SHORT ACCOUNT Of that PART of AFRICA, Inhabited by the NEGROES; With Respect
to the Fertility of the Country; the good Disposition of many of the Natives,
and the Manner by which the SLAVE TRADE is carried on. Extracted from several
Authors, in order to show the Iniquity of that TRADE, and the Falsity of the
ARGUMENTS usually advanced in its Vindication. With a Quotation from GEORGE
WALLIS'S System of the Laws, etc. and a large Extract from a Pamphlet, lately
published in London, on the Subject of the SLAVE TRADE.

ACTS xvii. 24, 26. GOD that made the World -- has made of one Blood all
Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the Face of the Earth, and has determined
the Times before appointed, and the Bounds of their Habitation.

EZEKIEL xxii. 29. The People of the Land have used Opprespresion, and
exercised Robbery, and have vexed the Poor and Needy; yea, they have oppressed
the Stranger wrongfully.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the YEAR M,DCC,LXII.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Slave Trade, etc.
IT is a Truth, as sorrowful as obvious, that Mankind too generally are
actuated by false Motives, and substitute an imaginary Interest in the Room of
that which is real and permanent: And it must be acknowledged by every Man, who
is sincerely desirous of becoming acquainted with himself, and impartially
inspects his own Heart, that Weakness and inbred Corruption attends human
Nature; which cannot be restored to its original Purity, but through the
Efficacy of the Blood of JESUS CHRIST, our blessed Savior. So that
notwithstanding the imagined moral Rectitude pleaded for, and the boasted
Pretenses of the present Age to refined Conceptions of Things beyond our
Forefathers, all this Divine Help is embraced, the bent of the Heart of Man
will remain corrupt, and its Power of distinguishing between Good and Evil
liable to be obscured by Prejudice, Passion and Interest. Covetousness and
Pride have introduced many iniquitous Practices into Civil Society, some of
which being established by Custom, and adapted to flatter our Favorite
Passions, though odious in themselves, and most pernicious in their Consequences,
yet, through the Influence of Example and Use, become familiar to us, and our
depraved Reason has Recourse to plausible Excuses, to cover and palliate the
most atrocious Crimes; so that by Degrees we silence the Dictates of
Conscience, and reconcile ourselves in the Perpetration of such Things which,
when first proposed to our unprejudiced Minds, would strike us with Amazement
and Horror.

A lamentable and shocking Instance of the Influence which the Love of Gain has
upon the Minds of those who yield to its Allurements, even when contrary to the
Dictates of Reason, and the common Feelings of Humanity, appears in the
Prosecution of the Negroe Trade, in which the English Nation has long been
deeply concerned, and some in this Province have also lately engaged. An Evil
of so deep a Dye, and attended with such dreadful Consequences to all that are
concerned in it, that no well-disposed Person, anxious for the Welfare of
himself, his Country, or Posterity, who knows the Tyranny, Oppression and
Cruelty with which this iniquitous Trade is carried on, can be a silent and
innocent Spectator. How many Thousands of our harmless Fellow Creatures have,
for a long Course of Years, fallen a Sacrifice to that selfish Avarice, which
gives Life to this complicated Wickedness. The Iniquity of being so deeply
engaged in a Trade, by which so great a Number of innocent People are yearly
destroyed, in so untimely and miserable a Manner, is greatly aggravated from
the Consideration that we, as a Nation, have been peculiarly favored with the
bright Beams of the Gospel; that Revelation of Divine Love, which the Angels
introduced to the World, by a Declaration of Peace on Earth, and Good Will to
Men -- of every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People. How miserable then must be
our Condition, if, for filthy Lucre, we should continue to act so contrary to
the Nature of this Divine Call, the Purpose of which is to introduce an
universal and affectionate Brotherhood in the whole human Species; by removing
from the Heart of every Individual, who submits to its Operation, the Darkness
and Corruption of Nature, and transforming the selfish, wrathful, proud Spirit,
into Meekness, Purity and Love: For this End the Son of GOD became Man,
suffered, and died; and the whole Tenor of the Gospel declares, that for those
who refuse, or neglect, the Offers of this great Salvation, the Son of GOD has
suffered in vain.

The End proposed by this Essay, is to lay before the candid Reader the Depth
of Evil which attends this iniquitous Practice, in the Prosecution of which,
our Duty to GOD, the common Father of the Family of the whole Earth, and our
Duty of Love to our Fellow Creatures, is totally disregarded; all social
Connection and tender Ties of Nature being broken, and Desolation and Bloodshed
continually fomented in those unhappy People's Country. It is also intended to
invalidate some false Arguments, which are frequently advanced, for the
Palliation thereof, in Hopes it may be some Inducement to those who are not
defiled with this Trade, to keep themselves clear; and to lay before such as
have unwarily engaged in it, the Danger they are in of totally losing that
tender Sensibility to the Sufferings of their Fellow Creatures, the Want
whereof sets Men beneath the Brute Creation, which must unavoidably be the
State of every one that continues to partake of the Profits arising from this
wicked Traffic: A Trade by which so many Thousands of innocent People are
brought under the greatest Anxiety and Suffering, being violently rent from
their Native Country, in the most cruel Manner, and brought to our Colonies, to
be employed in hard Labor, either in Northern Climates, unsuited to their
Nature, or in a State of the most tyrannick and barbarous Slavery, subject to
the Humors and inhuman Lash of some of the most hard hearted and inconsiderate
of Mankind, without any Hopes of ever returning to their Native Land, or seeing
an End to their Misery: Nor must we omit, in this dismal Account, the Weight of
Blood which lies on the Promoters of this Trade, from the great Numbers that
are yearly butchered in the Incursions and Battles which happen between the
Negroes, in order to procure the Number delivered to the Europeans; and the
many of these poor Creatures whose Hearts are broken, and who perish, through
Misery and Grief, on the Passage. Heaven preserve the Inhabitants of
Pennsylvania from being further defiled by a Trade, which is entered upon from
such sensual Motives, and carried on by such devilish Means. And although these
Scenes of Horror are acted in Places far remote, and out of the Sight of those
who are the most enriched thereby; whose Senses being usually exercised only by
present Objects, are little affected with the distant Sufferings of their
Fellow Creatures; yet every Mind, which is not so hardened with the Love of
Wealth as to be void of feeling, must, upon serious Consideration of this
inhuman Practice, be impressed with Surprise and Terror, from a Sense that
there is a righteous GOD, and a State of Retribution, which must last for ever.
It is frequently alleged, in Excuse for this Trade, that the Negroes sold in
our Plantations, are mostly Persons who have been taken Prisoners in those Wars
which arise amongst themselves, from their mutual Animosities; and that these
Prisoners would be sacrificed, to the Resentment of those who have taken them
Captives. If they were not purchased and brought away by the Europeans. It is
also represented, that the Negroes are generally a stupid savage People, whose
Situation in their own Country is necessitous and unhappy, which has induced
many to believe, that the bringing the Africans from their Native Land is to
them rather a Kindness than an Injury.

To confute these false Representations, the following Extracts are proposed to
the candid Reader's Consideration; they are taken from the Writings of the
principal Officers, not only in the English, but also in the French and Dutch
Factories or Settlements in Guiney, some of whom have lived many Years in those
Countries, and have been Eye Witnesses to those Transactions, and whose Station
in the Factories will not admit of any Doubt of the Truth of what they relate;
by which it will appear, that the Negroes are generally sensible, humane and
sociable, and that their Capacity is as good, and as capable of Improvement, as
that of the White People: That their Country, though unfriendly to the
Europeans, yet appears peculiarly agreeable, and well adapted to the Nature of
the Blacks, and so fruitful, as to furnish its Inhabitants plentifully with the
Necessaries of Life, with much less Labor than is necessary in our more
Northern Countries. And as to the common Argument, alleged in Defense of the
Trade, viz. That the Slaves sold to the Europeans are Captives taken in War,
who would be destroyed by their Conquerors, if not thus purchased, it is
without Foundation, it being made clearly to appear, from the forementioned
Testimonies, that the Wars and Incursions made by the Negroes, one upon
another, are mostly at the Solicitation of the Europeans, who instigate them by
every Method, even the most iniquitous and cruel, to procure Slaves to load
their Vessels, which they freely purchase, without any Regard to the Precepts
of the Gospel, the feelings of Humanity, or the common Dictates of Reason and
Equity. For though it is scare to be doubted, but that there were Wars amongst
some of the Negroes, before the Europeans began to trade with them, yet certain
it is, that these Calamities are not only since that Time prodigiously
increased, and the Europeans, by encouraging them thereto, and gladly
purchasing the Captives they take, are become come not only Parties with them
therein, but the sole Cause of that Increase. This is plainly inferred from the
Account given by N. Brue, Director of the French Factory at Senegal, who lived
Twenty-seven Years in that Country, who says, That the Europeans are far from
desiring to act as Peace Makers amongst the Negroes, which would be acting
contrary to their Interest, since the greater the Wars, the more Slaves are
procured.

William Bosman, Factor for the Dutch, at Delmina, where he resided sixteen
Years, relates, That one of the former Commanders hired an Army of the Negroes,
of Jafferia and Cabesteria, for a large Sum of Money, to fight the Negroes of
Commany, which occasioned a Battle, which was more bloody than the Wars of the
Negroes usually are: And that another Commander gave, at one time, Five Hundrea
Pounds, and at another time Eight Hundred Pounds, to two other Negroe Nations,
to induce them to take up Arms against their Country People. This is confirmed
by Barbot, Agent General of the French African Company, who says; The
Hollanders, a People very zealous for their Commerce at the Coast, were very
studious to have the War carried on amongst the Blacks, to distract, as long as
possible, the Trade of the other Europeans; and to that Effect were very ready
to assist upon all Occasions the Blacks, their Allies, that they might beat
their Enemies, and so the Commerce fall into their Hands. But nothing shows
more plainly, that the Europeans are the chief Instruments in inciting the
Negroes to the Perpetration of those unnatural Wars, by which they are kept in
continual Alarms, their Country laid waste, and such great Numbers carried into
Captivity, than the Account given by William Smith, who was sent by the African
Company to visit their Settlements in the Year 1726, from the Information he
received of one of the Factors, who had resided ten Years in that Country, viz.
That the discerning Natives account it their greatest Unhappiness that they
were ever visited by the Europeans: -- That we Christians introduced the
Traffic of Slaves, and that before our coming they lived in Peace; but, say
they, it is observable, that wherever Christianity comes, there comes with it a
Sword, a Gun, Powder and Ball.

As to the Account of the natural Disposition of many of the Negroes, and of
the Fruitfulness of their Country, the forementioned Authors, as well as many
others, have wrote largely upon it. M. Adanson, in his Account of the Country
and Natives of Goree, where he was so lately as the Year 1754, after giving an
Account of the delightful Aspect of the Country, says; The Simplicity of the
Natives, their Dress and Manners, revived in my Mind the Idea of our first
Parents; and I seemed to contemplate the World in its primitive State; -- they
(the Negroes) are generally speaking, very good natured, sociable and obliging.
I was not a little pleased (says he) with this my first Reception; -- it
convinced me, that there ought to be a considerable Abatement made in the
Accounts I had read and heard every where of the savage Character of the
Africans. -- I observed, both in Negroes and Moors, great Humanity and
Sociableness, which gave me strong Hopes that I should be very safe amongst
them, and meet with the Success I desired in my Enquiries after the Curiosities
of the Country.

Bosman, speaking of the Negroes of that Part Guiney where he then was, says;
They are generally a good Sort of People, honest in their Dealings; others he
describes as being generally friendly to Strangers, of a mild Conversation,
courteous, affable, and easy to be overcome with Reason; in Conversation they
discover a great Quickness of Parts and Understanding. He adds, That some
Negroes, who have had an agreeable Education, have manifested a Brightness of
Understanding equal to any of us.

William Smith's Account of the Natives is, That he found them a civil good
natured People, industrious to the last Degree, and their Country exceeding
Fertile. -- It is easy (says he) to perceive what happy Memories they are
blessed with, and how great Progress they would make in the Sciences, in case
their Genius was cultivated with Study: They explain themselves in choice
Terms, their Expressions noble, and Manners polite; -- this (he adds) is to be
understood of the People of Distinction, as Officers, Merchantmen, and the
like; for Peasants, Workmen and Shepherds, are as ignorant in these Parts as
elsewhere.

Barbot says, The Inhabitants of Oedo are, for the Generality, very civil, good
natured People, easy to be dealt with, condescending to what the Europeans
require of them, in a civil Way; but if treated with Haughtiness and rudely,
they are stiff and high, and will not yield on any Account.

Some Writers have represented the Natives of Cape Mesurado as faithless and
cruel; but it is very likely this Representation of their Disposition was
occasioned by the Resentment they had shown for the ill Usage received from the
Europeans; for Captain Philips declared them to be civil and courteous. And
Snoek says, He found them a civil good-natured People; but that the late Injury
they had received from the English, who had carried off some of their People,
had so exasperated them, that it was to be feared some English People they had
in their Power, would fall a Sacrifice to their Resentment.

Although the extreme Heat in many Parts of Guiney, is such as is neither
agreeable nor healthy to the Europeans, yet it is well suited to the
Constitution of the Negroes: And it is to these Heats that they are indebted
for the fertility of their Land, which in most Places is so great, that with
little Labor Grain and Fruit will grow in the greatest Plenty.

Brue, in his Account of the Fertility of the Country, and Industry of the
Natives, says; He was surprised to see the Land so well cultivated, as he
observed it to be, in one of his Journies; scarce a Spot lay unimproved; the
low Grounds, divided by small Canals, were all sowed with Rice; the higher
Grounds planted with Indian Corn and Millet, and Pease of different Sorts, Beef
and Mutton very cheap, as well as all other Necessaries of Life.

Bosman says, The Indian and Guiney Corn is here sown and reaped twice every
Year; the first Harvest is in August, and the other the latter End of the Year,
though but small, Corn grows with little Trouble, very speedily taking Root, so
that one or two Men can manure and plow as much Land as one Plow can turn up in
Holland. Indian Corn grows in the upper Lands, in prodigious Quantities, and
where Corn will not grow, there Rice increases in Abundance, and Yamms and
Potatoes are in the greatest Plenty.

Speaking of the Kingdom of Fida, he says, The Country was very populous, many
large Villages, besides innumerable small Ones, through the whole Country,
plentifully provided with Corn, Potatoes and Fruit, which grew close to each
other; in some Places a Foot Path is the only Ground that is not covered with
them, the Negroes leaving no Place, which is thought fertile, uncultivated,
even within the Hedges which enclose their Villages: And the very next Day
after they have reaped they are sure to sow again. This sine Country is now
very much depopulated, which it is likely, was owing to the Incursions made
upon them by their Neighbors, in order to get Slaves to sell to the Europeans.
For the same Bosman, speaking of the neighboring Nation of Pope, says; They
depend on Plunder and the Slave Trade, in which they exceed some of their
Neighbors.

Other Parts of the Country he describes, as being full of Towns and Villages;
the Soil very rich, and so well cultivated, as to look like and entire Garden,
abounding in Rice, Corn, Oxen, Goats and Poultry; and the Negroes to be
laborious.

W. Smith gives much the same Account of the Country of Delmina, and Cape
Corse, etc. for Beauty and Goodness; and adds, The more you come downward
toward that Part called the Slave Coast (I suppose because the most Slaves are
brought from thence) the more delightful and rich the Sol appears.

Barbot says, The Inland People employ themselves in Tillage and Trade, and
supply the Markets with Corn, Fruit and Palm Wine; the Country producing such
vast Plenty of Indian Wheat, that Abundance is daily exported, as well by
Europeans as Blacks, resorting thither from other Parts. He adds, That the
Country of Delmina, which was formerly very powerful and populous, though now
so much drained of its Inhabitants, by the intestine Wars fomented amongst the
Negroes by the Dutch, that there does not remain enough Inhabitants to till the
Country; abounded with fine well built and populous Towns, enriched with vast
Fields of Corn, Cattle, Palm Wine and Oil. The Inhabitants all applying
themselves, without Distinction, to Agriculture, sowing Corn, pressing Oil, and
drawing Wine from Palm Trees, with both of which it is plentifully stored
others to fishing, and boiling Salt, and other Trades, on their own Account, or
as Brokers for the Inland Blacks.

Many more Accounts could be given of the good Disposition of the Generality of
the Negroes, and of the Plenty their Coutry affords, in which it, perhaps,
exceeds most Countries in the World; but this is sufficient to show that they
might have lived happily, more especially if the Europeans had not only bore
the Name, but had acted the Part of Christians, in using their Endeavor, by
Example as well as Precept, to make the Negroes acquainted with the glad
Tidings of the Gospel, and with that Change of Heart, and Redemption from Sin,
which Christianity prorposes; this, if attended to, would have necessarily been
productive of the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness; Innocence and Love would
have prevailed, and nothing would have been wanting to complete these poor
Africans Happiness. But the Reverse has happened; the Europeans, forgetful of
their Profession and Duty as Men and Christians, have conducted in so
iniquitous a Manner, as must necessarily raise in the Minds of the thoughtful
and well-disposed Negroes the utmost Scorn and Detestation of the very Name of
Christians. They have made all other Considerations give Way to an insatiable
Desire of Gain, and are become the principal and moving Cause of the most
iniquitous and dreadful Scene that was, perhaps, ever acted upon this Globe:
Instead of making use of their superior Knowledge to stir up the Principle of
Peace and Good Will in the Breasts of the simple unwary Negroes, they have
acted as Agents for the great Enemy of the Happiness of Mankind, and have
stirred up and strengthened the earthly Principle of Craft and Covetousness in
the poor Africans, who have thereby been induced to captivate and sell their
unhappy Countrymen; every Thing, even the Power of their Kings, has been made
subservient to answer this wicked Purpose; instead of being Protectors of their
Subjects, these Rulers, allured by the tempting Baits laid before them by the
Factors, etc. have invaded the Liberties of their unhappy Subjects, and are
become their Oppressors; as is fully evidenced by the following Account, viz.

Francis Moore, Factor to the african Company in 1730, tells his Reader, That
when the King of Barsalli wants Goods or Brandy, he sends a Messenger to the
English Governor at James's Fort, to desire he would send up a Sloop with a
Cargoe of Goods, which, says the Author, the Governor never fails to do:
Against the Time the Vessel arrives, the King plunders some of his Enemies
Towns, selling the People for such Goods as he wants, which commonly is Brandy
or Rum, Gunpowder, Ball, Firearms, Pistols and Cutlasses for his Soldiers,
etc. and Coral and Silver for his Wives and Mistresses. -- If he is at War with
no neighboring King, he falls upon one of his own Towns, and makes bold to
sell his own miserable Subjects. He often goes with some of his Troops by a
Town in the Daytime, and returns in the Night, and sets Fire to three Parts of
it, placing Guards at the Fourth, to seize the People that run out of the Fire,
then ties their Arms behind them, and marches them to Joar or Rohone, where he
sells them.

Brue, the French Factor beforementioned, says, That having received Goods, he
wrote to the King, that if he had a sufficient Number of Slaves, he was ready
to trade with him, this Prince, says that Author, as well as the other Negroe
Monarchs, have always a sure Way of supplying his Deficiencies, by selling
their own Subjects, for which they seldom want Pretensions of some Kind or
other, to justify their Rapine. These Negroe Kings, thus seeking Pretenses to
cover their Crimes, shows they are not quite void of Shame, and insensible that
Covetousness induces them to act a Part so inconsistent with their Duty; but
here they may plead the Example and Solicitation of the more knowing Europeans.
The King had Recourse to this Method, by seizing Three Hundred of his own
People, and sent Word to Brue, that he had the Slaves ready to deliver for the
Goods. The same Author further adds, That some of the Natives are, on all
Occasions, endeavoring to surprise and carry off their Country People; they
land (says he) without Noise, and if they find any lone Cottage, without
Defense, they surround it, and carry off all the People and Effects to their
Boat: The Slaves are sold to the Europeans, unless they be Persons of some
Rank, whose Friends can redeem them, by paying two Slaves, or five or six Oxen.

John Barbot says, The Slaves sold by the Negroes are for the most Part
Prisoners of War, or taken in the Incursions they make into their Enemies
Territories; others are stolen away by their own Countrymen. Abundance of
little Blacks, of both Sexes, are stolen away by their Neighbors, when found
abroad, on the Roads, or in the Woods, or else in the Corn Fields, at the Time
of the Year when their Parents keep them there all Day, to scare away the
devouring small Birds.

Francis Moore, the English Factor, says, That captivating the People is, by
Custom, become so familiar, that when the King of Kayor wants to make a Present
to the Factor, for what he has received of him, he sends to have two or three
Slaves taken up at the nearest Village. Unhappy (says that Author) are they,
who at that Time fall into the Hands of his Guards, for they stay to make no
Choice. And he further says, That in Battle they spare the Enemies as much as
possible, but it is only that they may have the more Slaves; from which even
Persons of Quality, taken Prisoners, are not exempted: That the Merchants bring
down some Years, to that Factory, to the Amount of Two Thousand Slaves; which,
they say, are taken Prisoners in War: These they buy from the different Princes
who take them; many of them come from a great Way Inland. Their Way of
bringing them, is tying them by the Neck with Leather Thongs, at about a Yard
Distance from each other, having generally a Bundle of Corn, or Elephants
Teeth, on each of their Heads, Thirty or Forty in a String. The Author judges,
That the Number of Merchants who followed this Trade were about an Hundred.
Some Authors say, They go Six or Seven Hundred Miles up the Country, with Goods
bought from the English, with which they purchase these Slaves, and Ivory:
Besides those Slaves, there are many bought along the River; these are either
taken in War, as the former, or Men condemned for Crimes, or Persons stolen,
which is very frequently. Since the Slave Trade has been introduced, all
Punishments are commuted in this; and they strain hard for Crimes, in order to
have the Benefit of selling the Criminal; so that not only great Crimes but
even trifling ones, are at present punished with Slavery.

Bosman says, That being in the Kingdom of Pope, who depend on Plunder and the
Slaves Trade, in which they exceed some of their Neighbors, because, being
endued with a much larger Share of Courage, they rob more successfully, they
assured him, that if he would have Patience for three Days, they would be able
to deliver him One or Two Hundred Slaves, and that their Incursions succeeded
so well, they returned with about Two Hundred Slaves. That the Inhabitants of
Arda were so diligent in the Slave Trade, that they were able to deliver a
Thousand Slaves every Month; and that if there happened to be no Stock of
Slaves when the Vessels arrived, they would sometimes send their Commodities
Two Hundred Miles deep in the Country (a later Author says, they have now
carried the Trade Five Hundred Miles farther, going now Seven Hundred Miles
back into the Country) where Markets of Men were kept in the same Manner as
those of Beasts with us. Most of the Slaves are Prisoners of War, which are
sold by the Victors as their Booty. When these Slaves come to Fida, they are
put in Prison altogether; and when (says he) we treat concerning baying them,
they are all brought out together in a large Plain, where, by our Surgeons,
they are thoroughly examined, and that naked too, both Men and Women, without
the least Distinction or Modesty. Those which are approved as good, are set on
one Side; in the mean while a burning Iron, with the Arms or Name of the
Companies, lies in the Fire, with which ours are marked on the Breast. When we
have agreed with the Owners of the Slaves, they are returned to their Prisons,
where, from that Time forward, they are kept at our Charge, cost us Twopence a
Day a Slave, which serves to subsist them like our Criminals on Bread and
Water; so that, to save Charges, we send them on board our Ships with the very
first Opportunity; before which, their Masters strip the^ of all they have on
their Backs, so that they come on board stark naked, as well Women as Men: In
which Condition they are obliged to continue, if the Master of the Ship is not
so charitable (which he commonly is) as to bestow something on them to cover
their Nakedness. -- Six or Seven Hundred are sometimes put on board a Vessel,
where they lie as close together as possible for them to be crowded. -- I doubt
not, says the same Author, but this Trade seems very barbarous to you, but,
since it is followed by mere Necessity, it must go on. What Necessity does the
Author mean, no other Necessity appears but that arising from the Desire of
amassing Riches; a Necessity laid on worldly Men by their hard Task-master the
Devil? Many more Examples might be given to show the arbitrary and tyrannick
Oppression with which this Trade is carried on, and the Devastation and
Bloodshed it occasions in those unhappy People's Country; but I trust this is
sufficient to convince the candid, considerate Reader of the Unlawfulness and
Iniquity of the Trade. And indeed what Distress can we conceive equal to the
Alarms, the Anxiety and Wrath, which must succeed one another in the Breasts of
the tender Parents, or affectionate Children, in continual Danger of being torn
one from another, and dragged into a State of cruel Bondage; Reader, if the
Impressions of Grace, or even the common Feelings of Humanity, are not
suppressed in thy Heart by the Love of Gain, compare what thou have read with
the Equity, the Sympathy, the Tenderness and affectionate Love which is the
Life of Christianity, and then say, what Concord or Affinity can these Fruits
have one with the other. May not this Trade be truly said to be the most
iniquitous and cruelest Act of Violence and Rapine, when considered in all its
Circumstances, that, to our Knowledge, is perpetrated in any Part of the World,
and that therefore it behooves every one who is desirous to maintain the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and enjoy Rest and Peace in Time and Eternity,
to avoid being, in any Respect, defiled by the Gain resulting therefrom. And
Thanks be to the Great Father of the Family of the whole Earth, that it is not
alone in America that some are raised to bear their Testimony against this
mighty Evil, but that a noble Indignation is also raised in the Breasts of some
in our Mother Country, zealously to declare against so unparalelled Invasion
upon the Rights and Liberties of Mankind, particularly George Wallis, a
Gentleman of the Law, in a Book wrote by him, entitled, A System of the
Principles of the Law of Scotland; in which, speaking of the Slavery of the
Negroes in our Colonies, he says; "We all know that they (the Negroes) are
purchased from their Princes, who pretend to have a Right to dispose of them,
and that they are, like other Commodities, transported by the Merchants, who
have bought them, into America, in order to be exposed to Sale. If this Trade
admits of a moral or a rational Justification, every Crime, even the most
atrocious, may be justified. Government was instituted for the Good of Mankind;
Kings, Princes, Governors, are not Proprietors of those who are subject to
their Authority; they have not a Right to make them miserable. On the contrary,
their Authority is vested in them, that they may, by the just Exercise of it,
promote the Happiness of their People. Of Course, they they have not a Right to
dispose of their Liberty, and to sell them for Slaves. Besides, no Man has a
Right to acquire or to purchase them; Men and their Liberty are not (in
Commercio) they are not either saleable or purchaseable. One, therefore, has no
body but himself to blame, in case he shall find himself deprived of a Man,
whom he thought he had, by buying for a Price, made his own; for he dealt in a
Trade which was illicit, and was prohibited by the most obvious Dictates of
Humanity. For these Reasons every one of those unfortunate Men, who are
pretended to be Slaves, has a Right to be declared to be free, for he never
lost his Liberty; he could not lose it; his Prince had no Power to dispose of
him. Of Course the Sale was ipso Jure void. This Right he carries about with
him, and is entitled every where to get it declared. As soon, therefore, as he
comes into a Country in which the Judges are not forgetful of their own
Humanity, it is their Duty to remember that he is a Man, and to declare him to
be free. I know it has been said, that Questions concerning the State of
Persons ought to be determined by the Law of the Country to which they belong;
and that, therefore, one who would be declared to be a Slave in America, ought,
in case he should happen to be imported into Britain, to be adjudged according
to the Law of America to be a Slave; a Doctrine than which nothing can be more
barbarous. Ought the Judges of any Country, out of Respect to the Law of
another, to show no Respect to their Kind, and to Humanity. Out of Respect to a
Law, which is in no Sort obligatory upon them, ought they to disregard the Law
of Nature, which is obligatory on all Men at all Times, and in all Places: Are
any Laws so binding as the eternal Laws of Justice? Is it doubtful, whether a
Judge ought to pay greater Regard to them, than to those arbitrary and inhuman
Usages which prevail in a distant Land? Aye, but our Colonies would be ruined,
if Slavery was abolished. Be it so; would it not from thence follow, that the
Bulk of Mankind ought to be abused, that our Pockets may be filled with Money,
or our Mouths with Delicacies? The Purses of Highwaymen would be empty in case
Robberies were totally abolished; but have Men a Right to acquire Money by
going out to the Highway? Have Men a Right to acquire it by rendering their
Fellow Creatures miserable? Is it lawful to abuse Mankind, that the Avarice,
the Vanity, or the Passions of a few may be gratified? No! there is such a
Thing as Justice, to which the most sacred Regard is due. It ought to be
inviolably observed. Have not these unhappy Men a better Right to their
Liberty, and to their Happiness, than our American Merchants have to the
Profits which they make by torturing their Kind? Let therefore our Colonies be
ruined, but let us not render so many Men miserable. Would not any of us, who
should -- be snatched by Pirates from his native Land, think himself cruelly
abused, and at all Times entitled to be free. Have not these unfortunate
Africans, who meet with the same cruel Fate, the same Right? Are not they Men
as well as we, and have they not the same Sensibility? Let us not, therefore,
defend or support a Usage which is contrary to all the Laws of Humanity.

But it is false, that either we or our Colonies would be ruined by the
Abolition of Slavery. It might occasion a Stagnation of Business for a short
Time. Every great Alteration produces that Effect; because Mankind cannot, on a
sudden, find Ways of disposing of themselves, and of their Affairs: But it
would produce many happy Effects. It is the Slavery which is permitted in
America that has hindered it from becoming so soon populous, as it would
otherwise have done. Let the Negroes free, and, in a few Generations, this vast
and fertile Continent would be crowded with Inhabitants; Learning, Arts, and
every Thing would flourish amongst them; instead of being inhabited by wild
Beasts, and by Savages, it would be peopled by Philosophers, and by Men." --
Thus far this honest and noble spirited Briton.

And now Reader, if from the Example of others, and without a sufficient
Knowledge of the deplorable Consequences attendant on this Trade, thou have
inadvertently engaged therein, let me beseech thee, by the Mercies of CHRIST
JESUS our LORD (those Mercies which, perhaps, ever long, thou and I shall
desire to fly to as our only Refuge) that thou would refrain a Practice so
inconsistent with thy Duty, both as a Christian and a Man. Remember, the first
and chief Commandment is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart.
And that the Second like unto it is, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself.
That our blessed Redeemer has enjoined us to do unto others as we would they
should do unto us; and that it will be those who have been righteous and
merciful to their Fellow Creatures, that will be entitled to the Mercy of the
Great Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whom we must all appear, to give an
Account of the Deeds done in the Body.

And as for those who confess themselves now, convinced of the Iniquity of this
Trade, and the Injustice of buying and selling their Fellow Creatures, and yet
continue to keep those Negroes they are possessed of in Bondage, for the Sake
of the Profit arising from their Labor, it behooves them seriously to consider
their Motives for such a Conduct; whether the Distinction they make between
buying a Negroe, and keeping the same Negroe, or his Offspring, in perpetual
Bondage, is not a Plea founded more in Words than supported by Truth; for it
must be obvious to every Person, who is not blinded by the Desire of Gain, that
the Right by which these Men hold the Negroes in Bondage, is no other than what
is derived from those who stole them, or received them from the Thief, who
having no other Title, but that which Robbers have over their Prey, could not
convey any better to the Purchaser; and that therefore to continue to hold them
in Bondage, for worldly Advantage, by no other Right than that which those
guilty Men gave them, is consenting to, and partaking of their Guilt. Instances
may fall out, where Men of Candor may be concerned in the Purchase of Negroes,
purely from a Principle of Charity; and there are also many of the Blacks,
amongst us, whose Dispostions, Infirmities or Age, render them unfit for
Freedom; but in the Case beforementioned, where Persons declare themselves
convinced of the Injustice and Iniquity of this Trade, and are possessed of
Negroes who are capable of managing for themselves, and have sufficiently paid,
by their Labor, for their Purchase or bringing up, besides the Profit some
Families have reaped, during a long Course of Years, from the Labor of their
Progenitors; it is the undoubted Duty of their Possessors to restore to them
that Liberty, of which they, or their Parents, have been unjustly deprived; and
they ought also to use all reasonable Endeavors, to enable them to procure a
comfortable Living, not only as an Act of Justice to the Individuals, but as a
Debt due to them, on Account of the Oppression and Injustice perpetrated on
them, or their Ancestors; and as the best Means in their Power, to avert the
Judgments of GOD, which it is to be feared will fall on Families and Countries,
in Proportion as they have, more or less, defiled themselves with this
iniquitous Traffic.

EXTRACTS from a Manuscript, entitled, Two Dialogues on the MAN-TRADE.
Printed in London, in the Year 1760.
THE African Blacks are as properly and truly Men, as the European Whites; they
are both of the same Species, and are originally descended from the same
Parents; -- they have the same rational Powers as we have; they have free moral
Agents, as we are, and many of them have as good natural Genius, as good and as
brave a Spirit, as any of those to whom they are made Slaves. To trade in
Blacks, then, is to trade in Men; the black-skin'd and the white-skin'd being
all of the same Species, all of the human Race, are by Nature upon an Equality;
one Man in a State of Nature, as we are with Respect to the Inhabitants of
Guiney, and they with Respect to us, is not superior to another Man, nor has
any Authority or Dominion over him, or any Right to lay his Commands upon him:
He that made us, made them, and all of the same Clay: We are all the
Workmanship of his Hands, and he has assigned this Globe to the human Race, to
dwell upon: He has given this Earth, in common, to the Children of Men. -- GOD
gave to Man Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air,
and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping Thing that
creeps upon the Earth, Genesis i. 26; but not to any one Man over another: Nor
can one Man, on any Supposition whatever, become the Property, or Part of the
Goods or Estate, of another Man; as his Horse or his Dog is.

The European Whites, and the African Blacks, are all under the same Moral Law,
the eternal Law of Reason, which GOD has written upon the Table of Man's
Heart. We and they are Members of one and the same great Society, spread over
the Face of the whole Earth, under one and the same Supreme Lawgiver and
Judge; and are joined together, by the close and strong Ties of human Nature,
common to us all; and it is in this Bond of Humanity, that is the Foundation of
all other particular Ties and Connections between Men, and gives Strength to
them all. -- A Patriot, or a Lover of his Country, is a brave Character; but a
Lover of Mankind is a braver Character.

Our being Christians does not give us any worldly Superiority, or any
Authority whatever, over those who are not Christians. CHRIST'S Kingdom is not
of this World; neither does Christianity dissolve or free us from the
Obligations of Justice, Equity, and Benevolence toward our Fellow Creatures of
the same Species, be they Jews, Mahometans, or even black-skin'd Heathens,
which the Law of Nature lays us under; but, on the contrary, greatly
strengthens them. The Jews, in our Savior's Time, understood that Precept,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself, in a very confined Sense, as relating
only to their own Countrymen. But this Precept, as adopted into the Christian
Religion, takes in all Mankind. By our Neighbor we are to understand every
Individual of the human Species. We are commanded in the Gospel; to render all
their Dues, and to do unto others, as we would they should do unto us, to be
kind, merciful and compassionate, to be ready to communicate, and to do Good.
Which Precept, and many others to the same Purpose, are not to be understood,
in such a narrow Sense, as if they related only to those who are of the same
Religion with ourselves, or whose Skin is of the same Color with ours, as is
evident from other Precepts of the Gospel. We are commanded to do Good to all,
especially to those who are of the Household of Faith, to imitate our Heavenly
Father, who does Good to all, and whose tender Mercies are over all his Works,
yea, and to love our Enemies. -- These Propositions I believe no body would
have refused to grant; but though they are so evident that few will expressly
deny, or dispute the Truth of them, yet, it is reasonable to suppose, that
those who are concerned in the Man-Trade, do not allow themselves to think on
these Truths impartially, seriously to consider them, and lay them to Heart;
but that on the contrary, they have, some how or other, a Kind of confused
Imagination, or half formed Thought, in their Minds, that the Blacks are hardly
of the same Species with the white Men, but are Creatures of a Kind somewhat
inferior: I say it is reasonable to suppose so; for I do not know how to think
that any white Men could find in their Hearts, that the common Sentiments of
Humanity would permit them to treat the black Men in that cruel, barbarous
Manner in which they do treat them, did they think and consider that these have
rational immortal Souls, that they are made after the Image of GOD, as well as
themselves, and that, being in the same Body, they have the same Passions,
Senses and Feelings, as they have, and are as susceptible of Pain and Grief,
and upon the same Occasions, as they. -- Man-stealing is not only unlawful -- I
think it the most atrocious, detestate Crime. To steal a Horse, or to rob a Man
on the Road of his Money, is reckoned, among us, a capital Crime, deserving
Death and is, by Law, punishable with Death. What then does he deserve, what
Punishment can be great enough for him, who steals a Man, a Crime, in
Comparison with which Horse-stealing or robbing on the Highway is but a little
trifling Fault, quite excuseable and venial. Man-stealers were, by the Law of
Moses, punished with Death. He that steals a Man, or if he be found in his
Hand, he shall surely be put to Death, Exodus xxi. 16. And in the New Testament,
1 Timothy i. 10. Manstealers are reckoned amongst the very worst of Men. Can any
Thing be more cruel and barbarous, than to seize upon human Creatures, and take
them away by Force from their native Country, from their Friends and Relations,
for ever; Children from their tender Parents, Parents from their dear Children,
Women from their beloved Husbands, and Husbands from their beloved Wives, and
drive them, like Hogs, to Market, there to be sold for Slaves for Life? How
great must be the Misery those poor Creatures are in, and the Agonies of Mind
they fell, when they are thus carried off; so great, that, to relieve
themselves, some of them have put an End to their Lives. And how grievous, how
distressed, must be the Condition of their Friends and Relations, who are
deprived of them, and shall never see their Faces any more? It is horrid, it is
shocking to think of such Cruelty and Barbarity. What Monsters in Nature then,
destitute of all Humanity and Compassion, must they be, who are guilty of it.
The black Men have the same natural Affection for their Kindred, and as strong,
as we have. -- To sell and buy human Creatures, without their Consent, yea and
sore against, their Will, to trade in Men, as you would in brute Creatures, or
any other Commodities, is really impious as well as cruel. Man is a noble
Creature, made but a little lower than the Angels, and crowned with Glory and
Honor. He is the Offspring of GOD; therefore thus to debase him, and to bring
him down upon a Level with the Brutes, yea with Things inanimate, is great
Impiety, it is an high Affront offered to him, who is the kind and merciful
Father of us all, who has made of one Blood all Nations of Men, to dwell on
the Face of the Earth, and has united them all in one Body by the Ties of
Nature. It is likewise an Affront put upon Mankind, upon the whole human Race,
which should raise a generous Resentment and Indignation in the Breast of every
one that partakes of the human Nature, and has any Notion of the Dignity of it,
or any Sense of Humanity, which he should express and discover upon all proper
Occasions, and in all proper Ways. -- And I think the Receiver, in this Case,
will appear to be worse, to be more guilty, in some Respects, than the bare
Thief, if we fairly consider the Matter.

It is evident, that the Europeans, in sending Ships yearly to the Coast of
Africa, to buy Slaves, without enquiring how those they purchase them of came
by them, do encourage those Thieves, and tempt them to make a Practice and
Trade of stealing their own Countrymen; for this is the same Thing in Effect,
as if they were to tell them in so many Words, You get Men ready for us, how
you can, and we will take them off your Hands. Besides, those Men-merchants not
only encourage others in this cruel flagitious Practice of Man-stealing, but
are really guilty of it themselves. You will observe, that what is done by
their Command, and according to their Orders, I consider as done by themselves.
As those poor miserable Creatures were stolen, those who did steal them, could
not convey any Right in them to others, though these others should give ever so
much in Purchase of them, any more than if they had them for nothing. For those
Purchasers then to deprive them of their Liberty, and, by Force, keep them in
their Possession, in whom they have no Right (supposing one Man could be the
Property of another) and who never injured them in the least, nor forfeited
their Liberty; to keep them in Bonds, and carry them away Captives, is,
properly speaking, Man-stealing. And what aggravates this Crime in the European
Man-merchants, and renders it much more heinous in them than in the Africans,
is, that the former enjoy the Light of the Gospel, and profess themselves to be
Christians.

Man-stealing is a Kind, and indeed the worst Kind, of Sacrilege, which
Consideration farther shows the Impiety of it. Man is sacred, and is, by
Nature, devoted to the Service of GOD, to whose Authority alone he is obliged
to yield an absolute, unlimited Obedience; for one Man therefore to assault
another, and, by mere Force, to make a Captive of him, not for any Crime that
he has been guilty of, but to make a Penny of him, considering him as Part of
his Possessions or Goods, with which he can do what he pleases, is robbing of
GOD, which is Sacrilege.

It is very common in the Countries, where the Europeans carry on this Trade,
for the petty Kings and Princes, of which there are a great many, to go to War
with their Neighbors, not in Defense of their Right, not to get Satisfaction
for any Injuries done them, or to repair any Damages they have unjustly
suffered by those Neighbors, but purely to get Prisoners against the Time the
Ships from Europe arrive upon their Coast, that with them they may be able to
purchase of the Captains of those Ships the Goods they have on board.

Now here the Injury and Crime is the same in Kind as in the former Case, and
indeed greater in the Kind: In both Cases it is stealing Man, but in the latter
it is attended with shedding of Blood, with Slaughter and Destruction; which
Consideration does aggravate the Crime of our Guiney Merchants, who purchase
those Prisoners. CHRIST has said, that blessed are the Peacemakers, for they
shall be called the Children of GOD. But how contrary to what our Savior
recommends, the making of Peace among Men, is the Spirit and Practice of those,
who, for Lucre Sake, provoke and encourage others to go to War with their
Neighbors, and by unjust Force to kill and destroy some, and others of them to
make Prisoners.

But let us now suppose, -- that the Prisoners, which are bought, were even
engaged in an unjust War, that they were the first Invaders or Aggressors --
When one King or Prince goes to War with another, the common Men are not
capable of judging of the Merits of the Cause, which Party has or has not Right
of their Side; but, laying aside this Consideration, they are forced to go
whithersoever their King or Captain leads them; they are obliged to obey his
Commands, and to desert would be Death to them: Therefore I think it would be
unjust and cruel, in him who comes off Conqueror, though he had Right of his
Side, and was engaged in a just War, to deprive those common Men, who are taken
Prisoners, of their Liberty, after the War is over, or at any Time to sell them
for Slaves for Life, either by Way of Punishment or Retribution, unless they be
supposed to be answerable for whatever Damage or Injury is done by their King,
or that they are his Goods or Property; both which are absurd, and the latter a
Supposition unworthy of human Nature, and shocking to the human Mind;
consequently, the buying of them for such, must be altogether as criminal in
the Europeans.

It is reckoned we have now in this Kingdom Thirty Thousand French Prisoners,
or more; and we say, that in the War we are carrying on against France, we have
Right on our Side; that we entered into it for the Recovery and Defense of our
Territories, invaded by them; but though it be true (as I believe it is) that
our Cause is good, yet would it not be cruel and inhuman in us, to sell these
Prisoners into Slavery for Life, and in any other Nation, as the Spaniards, for
Instance, to buy them of us, in order to send them to work in their Mines in
Peru, as long as they live? And would not all the other Nations of Europe
exclaim against us, and the Spaniards, as inhuman, barbarous People, for so
doing? If it be replied, that such a Thing would be contrary to Custom, and to
the Law of Nations in Europe, whereas in Guiney and Negroeland it is a common
Custom, to sell for Slaves the Prisoners they take in War; there they make a
Trade of it. I own -- that may be one Reason, among others, why such a Thing
practiced in those Countries is not looked upon, by us here, with so much
Abhorrence and Detestation, as it would be if it were to be practiced in
Europe: But this makes no Difference, as to the Nature of the Thing in itself;
for as I have shown before, the Man-trade in this last mentioned Case, wherein
the Men who are sold, are supposed to be Prisoners, that were engaged in an
unjust War, is in itself wicked and inhuman, contrary to the Law of Nature, the
Obligations of which are eternal and unchangeable, not to be altered or
disannulled by Use or Custom, be it ever so ancient or universal, they are the
same all over the World, the same in Guiney, or Jamaica, as in England.

The Captain of the Guiney Ship, when he has finished his Marketing, when he
has bought as many reasonable Creatures as he wants, and is full freighted,
having on board (we will say) Two Hundred of them, coupled in Irons, and
closely crammed up in a Ship of about One Hundred Tons Burden, he sets out for
one of our Plantations, -- and may be two or three Months on the Voyage; during
which Time, from the Filth and Stench that must be among them, occasioned by
their being put down under Deck, and penned together in so little Room, --
Distempers break out among them, and carry off a great many, a Fifth, or
Fourth, yea, sometimes a third Part of them; and it is reasonable to suppose,
that some of them have their Hearts broke, and die with Grief and Anguish, to
think that they shall never more set Foot on their Native Soil, and that the
Eye that has seen them, shall see them no more. I remember I read an Account
in one of the Newspapers last Year; a Ship, belonging to Liverpool, that had a
Hundred and Ninety Slaves on board, Eighty of whom died on the Voyage, which is
more than two Fifths -- Taking all the Slaves together, that are brought on
board our Ships yearly, from the Coast of Africa, where they are bought by our
Guiney Merchants, I think one may venture to affirm, that, at least, a Tenth
Part of them die on the Voyage; -- the Merchants are certainly chargeable with
taking away the Lives of as many of those poor Creatures, as come by their
Death by being so confined and treated, and are guilty of Murder; for to take
away a Man's Life, unjustly, is Murder; whether it be done in two or three
Minutes, or two or three Months, that makes no Difference. -- I do not think it
necessary, in order to convict a Man of Murder, to make it appear that he had
an Intention to commit Murder: Whoever does, by unjust Force and Violence,
deprive another of his Liberty, and, while he has him in his Power, reduces him
to such a Condition, and gives him such Treatment, as evidently endangers his
Life, and, in the Event, do actually deprive him of his Life, is guilty of
Murder. -- By the Account given in the second Volume of the Complete System of
Geography, the Number of Negroes brought away by the English, in the Year
172.5, appeared to be about Fifty Thousand. -- We will suppose that the Number
of Negroes purchased by our Guiney Merchants, one Year with another, are no
more than Thirty-five Thousand: Now, in the Account given by that Author of the
Negroes in our Plantations, it is said, that, in the Island of Jamaica, almost
Half of the new imported Negroes die in the Seasoning, and that, in Barbados,
it is reckoned that a fourth Part die in Seasoning; and, according to the same
Account there are twice as many imported into these two Islands, as into all
our other Islands in the West Indies, and all our Colonies in North America. At
a moderate Computation, therefore, it may be reckoned, that of all those who
are purchased by our African Merchants in a Year, Twelve Thousand die upon the
Voyage, and in the Seasoning.

What a sad dreadful Affair then is this Man-Trade, whereby so many Thousands
of our Fellow rational Creatures lose their Lives, are, truly and properly
speaking, murdered every Year; I do not think there is an Instance of so great
Barbarity and Cruelty carried on in any Part of the World, as is this, Year
after Year. It is enough to make one tremble, to think what a Load of Guilt
lies upon this Nation, on this Account, and that the Blood of Thousands of poor
innocent Creatures, murdered every Year, in carrying on this cursed Trade, cry
aloud to Heaven for Vengeance. Were we to hear or read of any other Nation in
the World that did destroy every Year, in some other Way, or on some other
Account, as many human Creatures as are destroyed by this Trade, we should look
upon them as a very bloody, cruel, barbarous People. We, to this Day, exclaim
against the Cruelty of the Spaniards, in destroying so many of the Inhabitants
of Mexico and Peru, when they unjustly invaded those Countries, though it is a
Question, whether the English have not destroyed as many of the Inhabitants of
Africa, since the Commencement of this villainous Man-Trade among us, and of
our Popish Queen Mary, whose Reign is looked upon as the most cruel and inhuman
of any in all the English History, though there were not above Three Hundred
burnt, for Heresy, in the five Years of her Reign, and you know that the
Papists believe, or prosess to believe, that they ought to put Heretics to
Death, at least they did then: Whereas the English have, for many Years past,
put to Death Ten or Twelve Thousand a Year, in carrying on this Trade, which
they still continue for the Sake of getting Money, and furnishing themselves
with the Superfluities of Life, which shows a greater Degree of Barbarity; and
many of those poor Wretches have endured more Pain, before they died, than
those Heretics did in being burnt. There is nothing that shows the Degeneracy
of Mankind more, that casts a greater Blemish on human Nature, or exposes it in
a more disadvantageous Light, than this Consideration, that whole Nations,
Christians as well as Heathens, profess to believe the greatest Absurdities and
Contradictions, and justify the most wicked and vilest Practices. -- If it be
said that I charge the Legislature -- because they have encouraged, and still
do encourage, this Trade, -- what I have asserted, I think I can defend. -- No
Legislature on Earth, which is the Supreme Power in every civil Society, can
alter the Nature of Things, or make that to be lawful which is contrary to the
Law of GOD, the Supreme Legislator and Governor of the World. Mischief may be
framed, and established by a Law, but if it be, it is Mischief still, as much
so as it was before it was established, though its being so may make Men
insensible of their Guilt, or bold and fearless in the Perpetration of it; for
too many, among Christians, are, contrary to CHRIST's Exhortation, more
influenced by the Fear of Man, than by the Fear of GOD. -- It is really a
serious Subject, and I own it raises a serious Concern in my Mind, that such
Barbarity should be suffered in Christian Nations. It is enough to make a Man's
Heart ach, unless he has lost all Love and Regard to his Kind, to think that so
many Thousands of the human Race should be sacrificed every Year to that greedy
voracious God Mammon.

Nor is it less shocking to hear or read the Accounts we have of the barbarous
Treatment that those black Men, who stand and survive the Seasoning, as it is
called, meet with. According to the Accounts in the forementioned Author, it is
inhuman and unmerciful.

Sir Hans Sloan, in his History of Jamaica, says; That a rebellious Negroe, or
he that twice strikes a white Man, is condemned to the Flames; being chained
flat on his Belly, at the Place of Execution, and his Arms and Legs extended,
Fire is then set to his Feet, and he is burnt gradually up to his Head. They
starve others to Death, with a Loaf hanging before their Mouths, so that some
gnaw the very Flesh off their own Shoulders, and expire with all the frightful
Agonies, expressing the most horrid Tortures. For Crimes of a less Nature, they
geld the Offender, and chop off Half of his Foot with an Ax; for Negligence
only, they whip him till his Back is raw, and then scatter Pepper and Salt on
his Wounds, to heighten the Smart; and some Planters will drop melted Wax on
their Skins, which puts them to intolerable Pain. Now must not the human
Nature, in those People, be changed into the Devilish, who can put these poor
Creatures to such Torments? -- It is observed by the same Author, that Some
excuse these Severities by telling us, that the Blacks, being so perverse,
sullen, and mischievous a Generation, deserve such Treatment, and that milder
Usage would not reclaim them. -- It is no Wonder they are sullen; would not
white Men be so, were they in their Condition, and treated as they are? No
Doubt but they would. But the Blacks, though they be unjustly deprived of their
Liberty, banished from their native Country, from all their Friends and
Relations, and made Captives and Slaves for Life, though they are treated worse
than Dogs, and made to wo^k harder than Horses, yet they ought to be pleasant,
good humoured, and obliging to them that do thus treat them; and, if they be
not, they should be put to Pain and Torment. And they are, it seems, a
mischievous Generation, apt to mutiny and rebel; that is, in Truth, they want
to recover their Liberty, and would attempt to do it, if they were not kept in
Awe by hard Usage, and severe Discipline. In the Account of Jamaica, we are
told that the Negroes, when first brought thither from Guin^y, are very simple,
innocent Creatures, but soon turn roguish, and when they come to be whipped,
urge the Example of the Whites for their Excuse. Whereas, in that of Barbados,
the same Author says, That the Masters of the Negroes are obliged to treat them
very severly, not only because of the stubborn, treacherous Temper, which is so
peculiar to all of their Complexion and Country, but because they are three
times the Number of the Whites in this Island, and have made frequent Attempts
to get the Mastery; that is, their Liberty, or to deliver themselves out of the
miserable Slavery they are in. -- But how come they to be three times the
Number of the Whites in this Island? Is it not owing to the white Inhabitants,
to their purchasing them, and keeping them in Bondage? How weak then is this
Excuse? Where is the Sense of assigning this Majority, which is of their own
procuring, as a Reason for their treating the Blacks with such Severity? -- We
have also an Account from that Author, of those Plots laid by the Blacks in
Antigua, but which were discovered by the Whites, before they could be brought
to bear, and of the horrid Executions which followed upon the Discovery. "The
King, that is, he who was to have been King of the Blacks, had the Plot
succeeded, and his two Generals, with two others, were all broke on a Wheel
(that is, their Bones were broke with an Iron Bar whilst alive.) Four more of
the principal Conspirators were burnt the same Day; as were Seven on the next
Day. Six were hung alive in Chains on Gibbets, and starved to Death; after
which their Heads were cut off, and their Bodies burnt; and Fifty-eight others
were, at several Times, chained to Stakes, and burnt alive." Now, was not this
a lamentable Affair (and there have been several Instances of such Cruelty in
our Plantations) that so many poor Creatures should be put to the greatest
Tortures, and be made to suffer the most painful Deaths. Some of the French.
Prisoners in England, whose Condition is far preferable to that of most of the
Salves in our Colonies, have attempted to break out of Prison, but, being
discovered in Time, failed in their Attempt. Now should not we have been
reckoned, by all the World, a cruel barbarous People, if the Government had
ordered some of them to be broke on the Wheel, some to be burnt alive, and
others to be starved to Death, though the French are our Enemies, and are
engaged in an unjust War against us; whereas those Slaves had never done any
Hurt or Injury to those who torture them to Death. -- We reckon ourselves to be
a brave, generous, humane, civilized People; -- but is this a true Character,
while that barbarous, savage Man-Trade, in the carrying on of which so many
Thousand Lives are sacrificed every Year, is not only winked at, but
countenanced and encouraged amongst us. -- There are other Nations in Europe,
besides ours, concerned in this Trade, but that does not lessen the Guilt in
our People, though it may keep them in Countenance; but the English are now
more concerned, I believe, than all the other Nations in Europe, taken
together, in this abominable Trade, which is the greatest Scandal and Reproach
that lies upon this Nation; the removing of which, by proclaiming Liberty to
those Captives now in our Plantations, making them Freemen, and prohibiting for
ever, upon the severest Penalties, the Man-Trade throughout all His Majesty's
Dominions, and thereby leading the Way, and giving a good Example to the other
Nations in Europe, concerned in the Man-Trade, would be much to the Honor of
our Government, and I am sure would give great Pleasure to all who are Lovers
of Mankind, and have a Regard for the Honor, Safety, and Prosperity of their
Country. -- It is objected, that if the English were to drop this Trade
entirely, it would be immediately thereupon carried on by other Nations, to a
much greater Degree than it now is. -- Perhaps that might be the Consequence,
and if it should, they must be answerable for that, the Guilt and Scandal would
lie upon them. But if it were certain that this would be the Case, this
Consideration cannot be a just Reason for our continuing to carry on such a
wicked Trade. If we should not carry on this Trade others would, therefore we
may, would be a strange Way of reasoning.

And as this Slave Trade has been encouraged by the Government, for many Reigns
back, it is queried, whether the present Government, in case they were to set
those Negroes in our Colonies at Liberty, should not make good that Loss to
their Masters; but I shall not take upon me to determine that Point; our
Governors are best Judges of that, only I think they had better do so, though
it should require some Millions to do it, than suffer those poor Creatures to
continue in the miserable State of Slavery they are now in. There is one
Consequence more which, some People fear, would follow upon prohibiting of the
Negroe Trade, and that is, that such a Prohibition would greatly lessen, if not
utterly ruin, some other considerable Branches of our Commerce, especially the
Sugar and the Tobacco Trades, because of the Difficulty of getting Hands
enough, in the Room of the Blacks, to work and labor in those Plantations,
where these Commodities are produced; but this can be no real Objection against
what I have asserted, or in Justification of the Man-Trade; for if this Trade
be in itself one continued Scene of such Cruelty and Barbarity, as it has been
represented to be, it must be allowed, that it ought to be strictly prohibited,
let the Consequences of such a Prohibition be what they will, that none should
be suffered to go on, tormenting and murdering their Fellow Creatures, Year
after Year, though we were never any more to see an Ounce of Tobacco or Sugar
in Great Britain. The Inconveniences, or worldly Disadvantage^ (...) ^^ing from
adhering to our Duty, and acting (...) ^^ding to the moral Obligations we are
under, let them be ever so great, are of no Consideration at all in the Eye of
Reason, nor can they have any Weight with, or Influence upon an honest,
virtuous Mind, when set against these Obligations.

The Author of the Dialogues on the Man-Trade, concludes with the following
Address to the Guiney Merchants in England.

SIRS,
AS the Business you are concerned in, and carry on openly and publicly before
the World, has a bad Aspect, and you are sensible that most Men make Objections
against it, and blame you for engaging in it, you are obliged to justify it to
the World, upon the Principles of Reason, Equity and Humanity, to make it
appear, that it is no unjust Invasion of the Persons, or Incroachment on the
Rights of Men; or for ever to lay it aside. And this is what every one, not
only of your Fellow Subjects in England, but of your Fellow Men upon the Face
of the Earth, who are no Way concerned in the same Business, have a Right to
insist upon, and demand from you; and ought, in a proper Manner to resent it,
if you will do neither the one nor the other.

But, laying aside the Resentment of Man, which is but of little or no Moment,
in Comparison with that of the ALMIGHTY, of the Supreme Lawgiver and Judge of
Mankind, think of a future Reckoning. Consider how you shall come off in the
great and awful Day of Account. You now heap up Riches, and live in Pleasure;
but oh! what will you do in the End thereof? and that is not far off. What if
Death should seize upon you, and hurry you out of this World, under all that
Load of Blood-guiltiness, that now lies upon your Souls. The Gospel (I suppose
I am now speaking to professed Christians) expressly declares, that Thieves and
Murderers shall not inherit the Kingdom of GOD. Consider that at the same Time,
and by the same Means you now treasure up worldly Riches, you are treasuring up
to yourselves Wrath, against the Day of Wrath, and Vengeance that shall come
upon the Workers of Iniquity, unless prevented, by a timely Repentance. And
what greater Iniquity, what Crime that is more heinous, that carries in it more
complicated Guilt, can you name, than that in the habitual deliberate Practice
of which you now live? Good GOD! How can you, as some of you do, go to the
Sacrament of the LORD's Supper? How can you lift up your guilty Eyes to Heaven?
How can you pray for Mercy to him that made you, or hope for any Favor from
him that formed you, while you go on thus grossly and openly to dishonor him,
in debasing and destroying the noblest Workmanship of his Hands, in this lower
World? He is the Father of Men; and do you think he will not resent such
Treatment of his Offspring, whom he has so loved, as to give his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, might (...) p^^ish, but have everlasting
Life? This (...) GOD to Man, revealed in the Gospel, (...) ^ggravation of your
Guilt; for if God so (...) us, we ought also to love one another. You remember
the Fate of the Servant, who took Hold of his Fellow Servant, who was in his
Debt, by the Throat, and cast him into Prison: Think then, and tremble to
think, what will be your Fate, who take your Fellow Servants by the Throat,
that owe you not a Penny, and make them Prisoners for Life.

Give yourselves Leave to reflect impartially upon, and consider the Nature of,
this Man-Trade, which, if you do, your Hearts must needs relent, if you have
not lost all Sense of Humanity, all Pity and Compassion toward those of your
own Kind, to think what Calamities, what Havoc and Destruction among them, you
have been the Authors of, for filthy Lucre's Sake.

GOD grant you may be made sensible of your Guilt, and repent in Time. And as
this is my hearty and earnest Prayer to GOD for you, I hope you will excuse the
Plainness and Freedom of this Address in your sincere Friend, who would be glad
to do you any Good that lies in his Power.

J. PHILMORE.


POSTSCRIPT.
AS Doubts may arise in the Minds of some, whether the foregoing Accounts,
relating to the (...) and good Disposition of many (...) of Guiney, and of the
violent (...) they appear to be torn from their (...) sufficiently founded on
Truth, (...) who are brought to us are seld^^ (...) complain, and do not
manifest that Docility and Quickness of Parts which might be expected from this
Account; Persons who may make these Objections, are desired impartially to
consider whether the Reason of these Objections are not owing to the many
Discouragements these poor Africans labor under, though in an enlightened
Christian Country, and the little Opportunity they have of exerting and
improving their natural Talents. They are constantly employed in servile
Labor, and the abject Condition in which we see them, from our Childhood, has
a natural Tendency to create in us an Idea of a Superiority over them, which
induces most People to look upon them as an ignorant and contemptible Part of
Mankind; add to this, that they have but little Opportunity of freely
conversing with such of the Whites as might impart Instruction to them, the
endeavoring of which would, indeed, by most, be accounted Presumption. A
Fondness for Wealth, or for gaining Esteem and Honor, is what prompts most Men
in the Desire of excelling others, but these Motives for the Exertion and
Improvement of their Faculties can have but little or no Influence upon the
Minds of the Negroes, sew of there having Hopes of attaining to any Con^^^^^^
(...) that of Slavery; so that though the (...) of many of them was ever so go^^^
(...) have no Inducement or Opportunity (...) it to any Advantage, which na^^^^
(...) ^^^press their Minds, and sink their (...) its of Idleness and Sloth,
which they wo^^^, in (...) Likelihood, have been free from, had they stood upon
an equal Footing with the white People: Nevertheless it may, with Truth, be
said, that amongst those who have obtained their Freedom, as well as those who
remain in Servitude, some have manifested as much Sagacity and Uprightness of
Heart as could have been expected from the Whites, under the like
Circumstances; and if all the free Negroes have not done the same, is it a
Matter of Surprise? Have we not Reason to make the same Complaint with Respect
to many of our white Servants, when from under our Care, though most of them have
had much greater. Advantages than the Blacks; who, even when free, still labor
under the Difficulties beforementioned, having but little Access to, and
Intercourse with, the white People; whereby it happens, that, though free, they
yet remained confined within the former Limits of Conversation with those of
their own Color, and consequently have but little more Opportunity of
Knowledge and Improvement than when in Slavery.

And if they seldom complain of the unjust and cruel Usage they have received,
in being forced from their native Country (...) is not to be wondered at; (...)
Time after their Arrival amongre (...) can speak our Language, (...) are able
to express the^ (...) but observe, from the Behavior (...) at little or no
Notice would (...) plaints; yet let any Person (...) who had attained the Age
of (...) were brought from their nati^^ (...) and the shall hear such Relations
as, if not ^^st to the common Feelings of Humanity, will sensibly affect his
Heart. The Case of a poor Neg^^^, not long since brought from Guiney, is a
recent Instance of this Kind. From his first Arrival he appeared thoughtful and
dejected, the Cause of which was not known till he was able to speak English,
when the Account he gave of himself was, that he had a Wife and Children in his
own Country, that some of them being sick and thirsty, he went, in the
Nightime, to fetch Water for them at a Spring, where he was violently seized,
and carried away by some Persons who lay in Wait to catch Men, whence he was
transported to America; the Remembrance of his Family, Friends, and other
Connections left behind, which he never expected to see any more, were the
principal Causes of his Dejection and Grief. Can any compassionate Heart hear
this Relation without being affected with Sympathy and Sorrow? And doubtless
the Case of many of these unhappy people would, upon Enquiry, appear attended
with Circumstances equally tragical and (...) you that have studied (...) and
those that are le^^^ (...) you say to this dep^^^^ (...) has this Man forfei^^
(...) Justice loudly call (...) him? Has he not the sam^ (...) us any of us
should have (...) ^^^^tly natched by Pirates from (...) Where Instances of this
Kind from (...) occur, and are neither enquired into norredressed by those
whose Duty it is to seek Judgment, and relieve the Oppressed, what can be
expected, but that the Groans and Cries of these Sufferers will reach Heaven;
and what shall ye do when GOD rises up, and when he visits, what shall ye
answer him? Did not he that made them make us, and did not one fashion us in
the Womb?

To conclude; I earnestly entreat that those who desire to maintain a
Conscience void of Offense toward GOD and toward Man, do keep themselves
clear from touching or handling this enormous Evil; which every serious Person,
who heartily considers the Matter, must acknowledge is marked with the clearest
Signature of the Divine Displeasure, as well from its own Nature, as from its
woeful Effects in every Country where it prevails: In its Nature, as it is a
high Infringement of both the Divine and moral Laws; and in its Effects, in
several Respects, particularly from the destructive Consequences ensuing to
Tradesmen and labonring People, whose Situation calls for the particular Cate
and Concern of every well-governed Country (...) Slavekeeping prevails, the
(...) being supplied by the (...) themselves slighted and dis^^^ (...) robbed
of the nature (...) common in other Country (...) Families are often (...) and
Want; besides the (...) given to many poor People, (...) Brend in our Mother
Country; (...) prevented, on Account of the great Number of ^^egroes, would be
likely to come over into the^ Colonies, where they might, with Ea^^ proceed to
themselves a more comfortable Living than at Home. And there direful Effect
arises from the fearful Apprehensions and Terrors which often seize the Minds
of the People; for the Suppression of which, the most cruel Methods are
pursued, such as are indeed a Reproach to Christianity, and will necessarily
harden the Hearts of those who are active therein into such an Obduracy, as
must, by Degrees, deprive them of that Tenderness and sympathetick Love which
make the Happiness, and is the Glory of intelligent Beings: And as for the
Possessors of the Negroes themselves, though the Sumptuousness and Ease in
which they live, and the Attendance and Obsequiousness of their Slaves, may
raise in their Minds an imagined Apprehension of their being Persons more
happy, and of great Importance than others, who do not live in the like
Affluence and State; yet it would be Matter of Joy to such as wish well to
Mankind, if these People could see how greatly they are mistaken, and (...)
seriously consider the Case of poor La^^^^ (...) ^igh Men, mentioned by our
Sation^ (...) plainly perceive, that they (...) ^ouse of their Power and (...)
they have father Occasion (...) Children, and their (...) Effect of their
Situation (...) rapeatedly observed to fill Men with Hought^^ess, Tyranny,
Luxury and Barharity, co^upting the Minds; and debasing the Mo^^^^ of their
Children, to the unspeakable Pre^^^^ of Religion and Virtue, and the Exclusion
of that holy Spirit of universal Love, Meekness and Charity, which is the
unchangeable Nature and Glory of true Christianity.

The END.
ERRATUM.
Page 28, For EXTRACTS from a Manuscript, read, EXTRACTS from a Pamphlet.


