Mr. Bellamy's ELECTION-SERMON, May 13 th, 1762.

A SERMON Delivered before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT,
AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, May 13 th, 1762.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Bethlem.

Godliness is profitable unto all Things, having the promise of the Life that
now is, and of that which is to come. ST. PAUL. NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by
TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the Colony of CONNECTICUT.

AT a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of Colony of Connecticut,
holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May, Anno Dom. 1762.
ORDERED, That ELISHA SHELDON, Esquire and Mr. DANIEL SHERMAN, return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Rev'd Mr. JOSEPH BELLAMY, for his Sermon delivered before
the Assembly on the Thirteenth Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may
be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

An ELECTION SERMON.
PROVERBS XIV.34. RIGHTEOUSNESS exalts a Nation: but Sin is a reproach to any
People.
SOON after Solomon came to the Throne of Israel, the Lord appeared unto him,
and said, "Ask what I shall give thee?" Solomon, desirous above all earthly
Things to be qualified for his high Station, requests neither Riches, nor
Honor, nor length of Days, nor the Life of his Enemies, but rather prays for
"an understanding Heart" And this Prayer "pleased the Lord." God loves to see
Rulers more concerned about their Duty than about their private Interest. A
benevolent, generous frame of Heart prompting them to do all the Good, in their
places, that they can, is pleasing to the Lord. Wherefore God heard his prayer,
and gave him a wise and understanding heart, as he desired; and long life,
riches and honor besides. God gave Solomon wisdom, and understanding exceeding
much, and largeness of heart, even as the Sand that is on the Seashore: and
Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the Children of the east Country,
and all the wisdom of Egypt; for he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the
Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the Sons of Mahol: and his fame
was in all Nations round about. And there came of all People to hear the wisdom
of Solomon, from all Kings of the Earth which had heard of his wisdom: and he
spoke three thousand Proverbs. -- one of which was this, Righteousness exalts
a Nation: but Sin is a reproach to any People. -- These words then come
recommended to our most serious Consideration, as containing one of the wise
Maxims of the wisest of men, a chief political principle of the greatest
Politician; and they furnish us with a Subject proper for this Occasion. --
Here then, Let us Enquire

I. WHAT is meant by Righteousness.

II. HOW Righteousness exalts a Nation.

III. HOW Sin is a Reproach to any People,

And then,

IV. I will endeavor to show that the only way for us in this Colony to be a
happy Community is to be a righteous People.

I. IN the first Place, we are to Enquire, what is meant by Righteouness. And
there is no doubt the word is designed to comprise all moral Virtue in general;
as it was only in this large and comprehensive Sense of the word that National
Prosperity and Happiness were promised to Righteousness under the Jewish
dispensation. -- But then still it may be enquired, what is the Sum of moral
Virtue? and how does Righteousness naturally comprise the whole?

TO view Beings and Things as they are, and to be affected and act accordingly
is the Sum of moral Virtue. All moral Virtue is frequently, in the sacred
writings summed up in one thing, under one comprehensive Name. For, as every
moral Virtue grows up from one Root, and is therefore radically but one thing;
so with the greatest propriety all may be called by one Name. Thus LOVE, in
fact, is the whole of moral Virtue. And thus LOVE is the Name given to the
whole, in that brief Summary of the divine Law given by our blessed Savior.
"Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart:" and "thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy Self." Love is radically the whole of that Duty which God
requires of man. "For on these two Commands hang all the Law and the Prophets,"
Yea, Love is the Sum of all God's moral Perfections. And of all holiness in all
holy Beings in the Universe. For the moral Law is the transcript of God's moral
Perfections. The divine Nature is the original, the divine Law is an exact
transcript, and in a perfect conformity to this Law consists the perfect
holiness of Angels and Saints in heaven, and in an imperfect conformity to it
consists the imperfect holiness of Saints on Earth, and the perfect mediatorial
Righteousness of Jesus Christ is but a perfect conformity to the same Rule
through a course of the severelt Trials. For the holiness of God and Christ, of
Angels and Saints in heaven, and of Saints on Earth, is of the same Nature, how
different soever in Degree and in Circumstances. For there is but one kind of
true holiness in the Universe: and all consists in Love God is Love, and Love
is the Sum of all that Duty which God requires of Man. -- "Thou shall Love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart and thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self."
-- But

LOVE to God and to our Neighbor supposes that we view them as they are, and
it consists in our being affected accordingly, and this affection naturally
excites to an answerable Conduct. -- And

TO love God with all our hearts is only to give him his due: for he deserves
it at our hands. And to love our Neighbor as our selves, is only to feel them
as we would have them feel to us; that is, to do as we would be done by. And
therefore to love God with all our hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves is
in its own Nature right. -- He then who is thus affected toward God and his
Neighbor is, in Scripture, called, a righteous Man. He is rightly affected. He
feels as he ought to do. His heart is right. And so he is called a righteous
Man. And therefore Righteousness is another Name used in Scripture as
comprehending the sum of all Virtue, even as the word Sin is used to comprehend
all Vice. Thus in our text, Righteousness exalts a Nation: but Sin is a
reproach to any People.

II. RIGHTEOUSNESS exalts a Nation -- as it is in itself an honorable thing
-- as it has a natural tendency to make a Nation prosperous and happy -- and as
it will be attended with the special Smiles of him, who loves Righteousness and
hates Iniquity, and sitting at the head of the universe, can build up or pull
down Nations at his Pleasure.

RIGHTEOUSNESS is in its own Nature an honorable Thing. Yea, among all the
variety of Excellencies in the universe, there is none of equal Dignity with
this. It renders God glorious, Angels lovely, and heaven a place of consummate
Bliss. Infinite knowledge, almighty Power, and universal Dominion render the
Deity great; but it is Righteousness, or the moral rectitude of his Nature,
that renders him Glorious. Could we conceive an almighty Being at the head of
the universe, able with the utmost ease, to accomplish all his purposes, but
entirely devoid of moral Rectitude, whatever reason there might be to fear and
tremble before him, there would be no ground for any one in the intellectual
system to esteem, love, and honor him. Perfect moral Rectitude is the highest
Glory of the divine Nature it self. Yea, it is radically the sum total of all
that Beauty there is in the Deity. It is this, that renders every other
attribute of God Amiable, and causes the divine Being to appear Glorious in the
Eyes of Angels, in whatever point of light they view him.

Is he Almighty, so that none can resist him? is he All-knowing, so that none
can circumvent him? is he Supreme, so that none can call him to an account? and
is he an absolute Sovereign, so as to be entirely at liberty to conduct
according to the Council of his own Will? and does his Providence extend to all
things in the universe? and is this a settled Maxim with him, My Council shall
stand, and I will do all my Pleasure? Yet, as he is a Being of perfect moral
Rectitude, he is not the less, but rather infinitely the more Glorious, in the
Eyes of the Angelic world. They rejoice in his Almightiness and infinite
Wisdom, they exult in his Supremacy and absolute Sovereignty, and are favished
in a view of his universal Government, because it is absolutely perfect They
cry one to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is
full of his Glory.

IT is not with the great Monarch of the universe, as it is many times with
earthly Princes. They often abuse their Power, and their Supremacy to
mischievous Purposes. The thought, that there is none above them to call them
to an Account, emboldens them to cruel and barbarous Deeds. And this, amidst
all their external Granduer and Glory, sinks their Character and renders them
odious and contemptable. All their royal Dignity looses its Lusture, while they
are without that moral Rectitude, which exalts the great Monarch of the
Universe above all blessing and praise. -- For, concerning God, it may be said,
that great as his Power is, he never used it to oppress the meanest subject in
his Dominions: and absolute as his Sovereignty is, he never made one unwise
decree. His Law is holy, just and good, like its Author; perfect in Beauty,
without a Blemish; sweeter than honey, yea, than the honey comb: and all his
Conduct toward his Creatures is so exactly right, and good and wise, that it
is absolutely above emendation. In all instances he knows what is best to
Decree, and what is best to Command, and what is best to do; and in all
instances he Decrees, he Commands and he Conducts as well as he knows how. An
absolutely perfect, an infinitely glorious and amiable Being! -- It is true, he
is accountable to none; and it is equally true, there is no need of it: for he
is absolutely perfect. -- It is true, "he works all things according to the
Council of his own Will;" and it is equally true, that the Council of his own
Will is absolutely perfect. -- "He does according to his Pleasure in the armies
of Heaven and among the inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand,
or say unto him, what do thou?" But then, "He is the Rock, his work is
Perfect, for all his ways are Judgment: a God of Truth and without Iniquity,
just and right is he." -- It is true, "He is the high and lofty One, that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is holy, and who dwells in that high and holy
Place," infinitely exalted above the noblest of his Creatures; yet at the same
time, "he dwells with the humble and contrite, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and the spirit of the contrite ones." -- It is true, He has the care of
Kingdoms and Countries, Armies and Fleets; yea, all the grand Affairs of the
universe lie upon his Hands; for "his Kingdom rules over all:" however, he is
as mindful of the Widow and the fatherless Children, who trust in him, and
takes as good Care of all their Concerns, as though he had nothing else to do;
for "the very hairs of their head are all numbered." -- But if we begin to
speak in his Praise, we know not where to stop; for there is no end to the
Excellencies of his Character. -- And, it is Righteousness, it is the perfect
moral rectitude of his Nature, that thus exalts him, and renders him worthy of
so much honor and praise.

AND it is this, which renders the Angels, the inhabitants of Heaven such
glorious Beings. They are like their sovereign King; holy, as he is holy. Their
hearts are right, they feel as they ought to feel. They view all Beings and
Things, so far as their finite Capacities will admit, as they are, and are
affected and act accordingly. They view the Deity as the sum of Being, of
perfection, and of all Good; as their Creator, and rightful Lord and Sovereign;
and consider one another as fellow creatures and fellow subjects: and they feel
and act accordingly. And to Rejoice in God's' exaltation to exult in his
absolute supremacy and universal Dominion, to be charmed with the beauties of
his Character and the perfection of his Conduct, to be entirely dependent on
him and absolutely devoted to him, perfectly united together in Sentiments and
in the most cordial Love, render them glorious Angels and happy Associates.
Righteousness, or moral Rectitude is their Beauty and Glory, and what renders
them such a noble and blessed Community, under the Government of him, who is
absolutely perfect in the highest possible Degree.

AND THIS IS HEAVEN. -- And thus Righteousness exalts that holy Community
above. -- God possesses the Throne, not merely as being Creator and Lord of all
things, but on the foot of proper Merit and Worthiness. He is worthy on account
of his superior Character: he is infinitely worthy on account of his infinitely
superior Character to take the Throne, and reign over all for ever and ever:
"for his Name alone is excellent, and his Glory is exalted above the heavens."
And the Angelic Hosts, while they stand before him, full humility and
reverence, of love to him, of harmony among themselves, all ready to do his
will, are worthy to be approved, and loved, and honored by their glorious
Sovereign.

FROM Heaven, the world of Righteousness, look down to Hell, the world of Sin
and Wickedness, of discord and confusion, of pride, malice, envy, and all the
furious Passions, and view them in contrast; and well consider their different
States, -- and behold -- thus, Righteousness exalts the one, -- and thus sin
sinks down the other.

AND if Righteousness is of so honorable a Nature, as thus to exalt even God
himself, no wonder the wise Man should say, Righteousness exalts a Nation: If
it is the very Glory of the Divinity, if it is the Beauty of Angels, if it is
this chiefly which renders Heaven so much better than Hell, no wonder Solomon
should think it would render Kingdoms, Countries and Nations on Earth
Honorable and Glorious should it once prevail among them.

LET us stop here, a few Minutes, and think, what the Consequences would be,
should Righteousness which is the Glory of the Deity, and the very Beauty of
Heaven, should that holy and divine Temper, which reigns there in Perfection,
descend on crowned Heads, and fill the Courts of Princes, and spread down through
every Rank, even down to the meanest Cottage, and to the poorest Beggar. What
would the Consequences be? Heaven would soon begin on Earth.

PRINCES, even the most haughty Monarchs of the Earth, who, to gratify their
Pride and Ambition, do often now, in the present state of things, summon mighty
Armies, spread war, devastation and ruin through whole Countries, would be at
once turned into other men, "be Converted and become as little Children," as
harmless as Doves, as meek as Lambs. Such would be their humility, their
self-abhorrence, their penitence, their reverence toward the Deity and love to
the human kind, that they would, speedily and with the utmost sincerity, begin
to concert measures for a universal, perpetual Peace. Ambassadors for that End
would be sent from, and to, every Monarch, Prince and Court -- and Orders be
soon dispatched to Fleets and Armies to stop the effusion of human Blood. --
The thundering Cannons would cease to roar -- Peace, universal Peace be soon
proclaimed; for every Monarch, from the heart, would soon begin to say, to each
other, "Take your right my Brother, and let me have mine, and let us live in
love and peace, and seek the true happiness of our subjects, and no longer go
on sacrificing thousands of precious lives, in quarrels, which honest men might
settle with the utmost ease." And so now the "Nations would beat their swords
into plow-shares, and their spears into prooning-hooks, neither would they
learn war anymore."

AND should Righteousness, should all right Affections, should supreme love to
God and Jesus Christ, love to our holy religion, brotherly love, meekness,
gentleness, fidelity, temperance, chastity, and all the christian Graces, not
only take possestion of the hearts of Kings, but spread through all their Royal
Families, among their privy Counselors, through their Parliaments, and to all
their Courts of Justice, and should the sacred flame fly from City to City,
from Town to Town, through all their Dominions, and into all their distant
Colonies, into what a glorious and happy State would things be immediately
brought? -- Look round upon all ranks and orders of men, and behold the
glorious Change!

GO to the Clergy, and view them in their Studies, or in their Pulpits, behold,
they are clothed with Righteousness, they are inflamed with every holy, pious,
benevolent, heavenly affection! they love their Master, they love their People,
they love their Work: they "delight in the law of the Lord, and in his Law do
they meditate Day and Night" They are "like Trees planted by the Rivers of
Water, whose leaf never falls, and which brings forth fruit in their season."
And out of their "I reasure," from time to time, they "bring forth things new
and old." While their public Prayers and their Sermons are animated with the
humblest, purest, warmest Devotion. -- And, O behold, how they love one
another! -- Look through a Province, they are united in the same Faith, and love
and live as brethren. Yea, look through a Kingdom, yea, look from Kingdom to
Kingdom, there are no Sects, no Parties, no Divisions. They all, Ministers and
People, make up one great Family, united in faith and love; united in one and
the same Belief, and in the most cordial Affection to one another. -- And
Ministers of choice give themselves wholly to their work; and their People from
their own inclination unite as one to give them an honorable support, not as
their burden, but as their delight, they even take pleasure in it.

GO to the Merchant's Shop, and you will find not only just Weights and just
Measures, but also piety toward God and love to the human kind, diligence and
industry, prudence in their calling, frugality in their expenses, generosity to
the poor, charmingly mingled in their Characters. And, while wealth flows in
upon them from every quarter, they are clothed with humility; and they, their
Children, and all they have bear this inscription, in great Capitals, HOLINESS
TO THE LORD.

GO to the House, the happy House of the industrious Farmer -- in early Morning
he, and all his arise, and assemble to worship the GREAT ETERNAL. Devoutly they
read God's holy word, and offer up prayer and praises, in the Name of Jesus
Christ, with penitent, humble and grateful hearts. With alacrity and joy they
go forth to their Labors, and enjoy the delights of Heaven in their Fields,
love and harmony reign within doors: the Parents happy in God, in one another,
and in their Offspring: while their Children grow up in piety toward God,
reverence toward their Parents, and in the most cordial Affection to one
another. And hearken, and hear the wise Maxims of the household, where
Righteousness reigns. -- "Let us be industrious and frugal, that we may be able
to render to all Men their dues. Tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom
custom. Yea, let us be industrious and frugal, that we may have wherewith to
give to the Poor, and to make the Widow's heart sing for Joy. And let all we
have be consecrated to God. And while we live upon his Bounty, let us live to
his Glory, and prepare for his heavenly Kingdom"

GO into Neighbourhoods -- Malice and Envy are gone -- Tattling and Backbiting
are no more heard. -- Love, undissembled Love and Goodwill reign.

GO to Courts of Justice, and behold, they are unfrequented! for the People are
become righteous, and live in Love. And while they do as they would be done by,
there seldom happens any Affair, that needs to be disputed at the Bar.

GO to the house of the Governor, who, as he was advanced to his high Station
merely on account of his Merit; so he is the wisest Man in the Province, and a
Father to all his Subjects. Every morning and evening he makes King Solomon's
Prayer, for a wise and understanding heart: for it is his great concern to fill
his Station well. He is loved, revered, and obeyed by all his People, who live
under him as one united happy Family, concientiously concerned, by their good
behavior, to render his Government as easy and happy to him as possible. All
the influence his high Station, superior Wisdom and Goodness give him over
their hearts, is wholly consecrated to make them a still holier and happier
People. For he feels toward them all the Good Will and Tenderness, which are
wont to reside in the heart of a nursing Father or nursing Mother toward an
infant Child.

GO to the Taverns, and even they are houses of Piety and good Order. No
Rioting or Drunkenness, no Chambering or Wantonness to be found there. No
Town-dwellers assembled for Drinking and Debauchery. -- No -- for there are no
such People to be found in Towns where Righteousness universally prevails. At
these Houses the Stranger and the Traveller may call, refresh themselves in
quiet, or take lodging in peace, and in the morning go their ways, rejoicing to
see good Order and Religion reign every where.

GO to the cottages of the Poor, if you can find them, for their number will be
but small in such a state of things. None rendered Poor by a course of
excessive Drinking, or by gay Dressing, or by high Living, or by Idleness, or
by any dishonest Practices. A few, perhaps, you may find, rendered Poor through
some natural infirmity of Body or Mind, or by some Adversity which it was not
in their Power to foresee and prevent. And these are as Humble as they are
Poor. They quietly submit to Providence, they are thankful for the little they
have, they are industrious and prudent according to their abilities; and
instead of envying their Neighbors, they rejoice in their prosperity. They are
beloved by every one; and their Neighbors feel a peculiar Pleasure in granting
them relief from time to time. So that, in the midst of their Poverty, they are
really Happy, and want none of the necessaries of Life, and enjoy many of its
conveniences.

GO to the Schools of the Prophets, to the Seminaries of Learning, and see a
little picture of Heaven. The whole Society in perfect Love and Harmony, making
swift advances in all Knowledge divine and human, growing up in Love to God and
to the human kind, and ripening for public Service, under the indefatigable
Labors of their wife and learned Instructors, whom they love and honor, as
dutiful Children do their Parents.

MEAN while Peace and Plenty, universal Love and Harmony reign from Town to
Town, through all the Province, through all the Kingdom, yea, through all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, where Righteousness thus prevails. And Heaven looks down
propitious, and declares, "Blessed shall thou be in thy Basket and in thy
Store, blessed shall thou be in the House and in the Field."

NOR let any think this a description of a fictitious state of Things. Rather
let every one know, that all this, and more than all this, shall be
accomplished, when once that petition, so often put up by the true followers of
Jesus, by his special direction, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on Earth
as it is in Heaven," is answered, and his holy Religion comes to take place
among mankind, when once "the Stone cut out without hands becomes a great
Mountain, and fills the whole Earth." Nor will what is written fail of an
accomplishment in its season. For there has already "come forth a rod out of
the stem of Jesse, and a branch has grown out of his roots," and he has taken
"the throne of his father David," that he may reign over "every Nation,
Language and Tongue," and the Kingdom, and the "greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven" is to be given to him. At present, for wise and holy ends,
Satan is suffered "to deceive the Nations;" but the day draws high, when he is
to be "bound a thousand Years." And then "the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion,
and the Fa^ling together, and a little Child shall lead them. And the Cow and
the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together: and the Lion
shall eat Straw like the Ox: and the sucking Child shall play on the hole of
the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice-den. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all God's holy Mountain: For the Earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea." -- And thus
Righteousness tends to exalt a Nation, and to render all the Inhabitants of the
Earth happy. -- O, how glorious is the Religion of Jesus Christ! When shall the
Day come, that it shall effectually take Place in the hearts of Mankind!

But, on the other Hand,

III. SIN is a reproach to any People. It is a reproach it self, and in its
effects and consequences naturally sinks a People into Contempt, and brings
down the Judgments of Heaven upon them.

WHEN Civil Rulers have no fear of God before their Eyes, or regard to the
public Weal, and act an arbitrary and tyrannical Part -- When Subjects despise
the Deity and contemn all Authority, are full of Coffeehouse and Murmuring,
divided into angry Parties, ready to take Fire on every occasion -- When
Ministers of the Gospel are unstudious and ignorant, or preach Error and
practice Wickedness, neither caring for the honor of Christ, nor the Salvation
of immortal Souls, but devoted wholly to their ease, or to their worldly
interest, or to support Error and encourage Wickedness -- When people live
without God in the World, secure in Sin, stupid to their eternal Interest, hate
the Gospel, grudge Ministers all they have, envy the Rich, despise the Poor,
and perpetual discord reigns in Town, and Churches -- When neighbors live in
Malice and Envy, hateful and hating one another, their Conversation tainted
with Ill Nature, and their traffic full of deceit and fraud; or if they are
fair to the face, revile behind the back, and no Man's word or promise to be
trusted. -- When People spend their time in Idleness, their substance at
Taverns, in gay dressing, in high living, in Lawsuits, until Poverty comes
like an armed Man -- When Peace and Harmony are clean gone, and jarring, angry
Passions reign, no Godliness, no Humanity, Sabbaths profaned, family Prayer
neglected, Hearts and Hands unclean, Whoredom rampant, no Government civil,
ecclesiastical, or domestic, all Riot and Confusion: How contemptable is such a
Community! how miserable is such a People! The higher these and such like
Distempers rise, the greater is their Wretchedness. And if they do but begin to
creep in among a People, they bring reproach and misery along with them. For,
as Virtue and Happiness, so Vice and Misery are naturally connected together.
As "Wisdoms ways are Pleasantness and all her paths Peace"; so "to the Wicked
there is no Peace: but they are like the troubled Sea, whose waves cast up Mire
and Dirt."

BESIDES, it may be expected, although the full Vials of divine Wrath are
reserved for the world to come, that yet God in righteous Judgment will
sometimes in Anger look down on such a Nation, and spread a Curse over all
their Blessings, so as to render them "Cursed in their Basket, and in their
Store, in the House, and in the Field, and in all they put their hand unto."

AND thus we see what is meant by Righteousness, and how Righteousness exalts a
Nation, and how Sin is a reproach to any People: and so we are prepared,

IV. TO consider, that the only way for us in this Colony to be a happy
Community, is to be a righteous People. -- And here let the following
particulars be attended to. -- That we in this Colony are under great external
Advantages to be a happy People. -- That notwithstanding our external
Advantages our own Vices may render us very Miserable. -- But, if our external
Advantages were improved as a virtuous People might improve them, we might be
very happy. -- And it is the Duty of all, especially of those in Places of
public Trust, to do all in their Power to promote a universal Reformation.

I. WE in this Colony are under great external Advantages to be a happy People.
We sit under the shadow of our Mother Country, and are protected by the Fleets
and Armies of one of the best of Kings.. Canada, which has been a scourge to us
for many Years, is at present in the hands of his-British Majesty, our gracious
Sovereign, our indulgent Father. Louisbourg; is demolished, Crown-Point is our
own, Oswego; Niagara, and Pittsburgh are in our hands. Our Seacoasts are in no
fear of an invading Fleet; our Frontiers are secure from the ravages of Popish
and Pagan cruelty, our Alarms are at an end, and we dwell quietly, each one
secure under his own Vine, and under his own Figtree. -- And we dwell in a good
Land, in a fertile Country, where we may eat bread to the full, And no greater
degree of Industry is necessary in general than is really for the happiness of
a Community. Might we live in Idleness, and yet enjoy ot fullness of all
Things; we should not be happier, but rather a more miserable People: as
Idleness, in the present state of Mankind, is naturally productive of many
Vices, which bring greater misery along with them into a Community., than
attends a life of honest labor. -- In a word, we live in so good a Land, and
enjoy such advantages for Navigation, that, were we virtuous and wise; were we
prudent and industrious, we might have enough of all the good things of this
world; and be in debt to no other Province or People upon the face of the Earth.

AND, as to civil Privileges, no Community under heaven enjoys greater, than
we do. Nor is it easy to conceive what greater civil Privileges can be enjoyed
than we enjoy. Once every Year, we may unite as Brethren, and choose out our
wisest and ablest Men, to make our Laws, to guide our public Affairs, and
provide for the decision of all our civil Controversies. And all our Towns are
so many Corporations, inverted with Power to take care of their own public
concerns, and suppress Idleness and Debauchery, and every kind of Immorality.
And even every little Parish has, so far as it needs, for its own well-being,
as part of the whole, full Power and Authority to manage and order its own
Affairs. Mean while each Family is a distinct Kingdom of its own, and for the
defense of its rights and properties stand entitled to the wisdom and strength
of the whole Community.

And as to our religious Privileges, every Man has the Bible in his own hands,
and is at liberty to read and think and Judge for himself. Every Man, as he is
at the Day of Judgment to stand or fall for himself; so is now at liberty to
worship God in that way, which he verily thinks will be at last approved of by
his Judge, every Parish is an ecclesiastial Society, invested with full Power
to choose their own Minister and provide for his support. And every particular
Church is at liberty to come into what Connections they judge most for their
own Edification. Were any particular Parish and Church disposed to be
independents, they might be so, Or if they choose to form themselves on the
Presbyterian Plan, they have their liberty. Or if they desire to declare for
the Church of England, there is none to hinder them. Or if they choose to be in
connection with neighboring Churches, agreeable to ecclesiastical Constitution
of this Government, the door is open, and they are welcome to all the
privileges of such a connection, only submitting to the Orders, and performing
the Duties, which are necessarily implied in the very nature of the connection
it self. And every Parish, whether connected or unconnected, is still an
ecclesiastical Society, and possessed of all the Privileges, which our Laws
give to all ecclesiastical Laws in common And had we now but a wise and
understanding Heart to discern the good and right way, and could we all to a
man agree in our religious Sentiments, we might, as one family, live together
in perfect Love and Harmony, as brethren in Christ Jesus, and grow up into a
meetness to live together for ever, in the world of Love and Harmony above. Or
if we differ in some lesser Matters, which all sides agree not to be essential,
we still may be happy, if we can only do as we would be done by, let others
peaceably and quietly enjoy that Liberty, which we should be glad to enjoy in
like Circumstances. And if we differ in important Points, with the Bible in our
hands, he who is found to be in an Error, will, at the last Day stand
inexcusable before his Judge; speechless, and self-condemned.

SUCH are our civil and religious Privileges. -- Mean while, we have a
seminary of Learning in the heart of our Colony, designed for the training up a
sufficient number of youth, for public Business; that when our Rulers and
Teachers, now on the stage, are dead and gone, others may be prepared to take
their Places, and do worthily in their day and generation. -- And such are our
external Advantages to be a happy People. -- But,

2. NOTWlTHSTANDING all our external Advantages to be a happy People, our own
Vices may render us very Miserable: and, instead of appearing honorable in the
eyes of our Neighbors we may sink down into contempt and rain. For,
notwithstanding the goodness of our Land, and all our advantages for
Navigation, yet luxury, idleness, debauchery, dishonesty and multiplied law
suits may bring us to Poverty. And if idleness and extravagant high living
should so increase among us, that all we have to export out of the Government
should yearly fall many Thousands in value below the Goods imported, our
Farmers may soon be obliged to resign their Lands to pay their Debts. And if so
many Estates should be found to be Insolvent, that our wealthiest Merchants
could scarce escape Breaking; and if our Lands must be made over to Gentlemen
in other Provinces, and we become their Tenants, and have nothing to leave to
our Children but Poverty and Slavery, what a contemptible appearance shall we
make in the eyes of our Neighbors. A wise Man foreseeth the evil and hides
himself; but the Fool goes on and is punished.

AND all our civil and religious Liberties and Privileges, if we divide into
Sects and Parties, and grow Angry, and if we abuse our Liberties to the
purposes of Strife and Contention, to bite, and devour, and oppress, they may
cease to administer to our comfort in this World, and only serve to render us
so much the more inexecusable and miserable in the World to come. And our
College, if not well instructed and governed, instead of being a nursery of
Learning and Piety, may become a seminary of Error and Wickedness, and serve
but to infect all our Land. And while our idleness, our extravagances, our
parties, our errors and our wickedness in general, all join to render us a
miserable People, they will at the same time naturally prepare us for and bring
down the Judgments of God upon us. And it may come to pass, when our iniquities
are full and we ripe for destruction that the cup of trembling, which has been
put into the hands of our Sister Canada, may be given us to drink. -- Our
Sister Canada, I say; for Canada, with all her wickedness, is as much our
Sister, as Sodom of old was the Sister of Judah, who were by profession God's
peculiar People, And God greatly resented it, that the Jews, in their
prosperity, took no notice of the remarkable Vengeance, which he had executed
on Sodom their Sister. And this is brought in, among the rest of their crimes,
in the time of their visitation, when they were Captives in Babylon, to justify
the divine severity toward them. Ezekiel. xvi.56. For thy Sister Sodom was not
mentioned by thy Mouth in the Day of thy pride. And yet, proud as they were of
their own goodness, God looked on the Jews more wicked than the Sodomites. ver.
48. As I live, faith the Lord God, Sodom thy Sister has not done, she nor her
Daughters; as thou have done, thou and thy Daughters. For when a People who are
lifted up to Heaven with Privileges, yet go on impenitent in their Sins, they
are in the eyes of God more guilty than the worst of the heathen. Therefore it
was, that our Savior denounced such heavy woes against Coraizin, Bethsaida and
Capernaum because they repented not. It shall be more tolerable, says he, for
Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment than for you.
Mat. xi.20, -- 24. -- And thus, with all our glorious Privileges, if we go on
impenitent in our Sins, we shall be miserable while we live, and it will be
more tolerable in the day of Judgment for Canada than for us. --

But on the other hand,

3. SHOULD God now of his infinite Mercy through Jesus Christ, after all our
aggravated Provocations, give us Eyes to see and Ears to hear and Hearts to
understand; and should we all, high and low, rich and poor, old and young, be
brought each one to know the Plague of his own Heart; and not cover, but
confess our Sins; repent and return to God through Jesus Christ, and become
Christians indeed, how soon should be healed! God would become our friend, and
we should become friends to one another. We should have one Lord, one Faith one
Baptism, one God and Father, and we all should become Brethren, united together
in the most cordial Love, and then there would be an end to all our Divisions.
-- Mean while, pride and a luxurious Disposition being mortified, those
expensive and extravagant ways of living, to which our pride and luxuriousness
now prompt us, would be looked upon with abhorrence, and laid aside with shame
and regret, as infinitely unbecoming a people professing godliness. And
Idleness would begin to appear to us, as it did to St. Paul, a scandalous
Crime. We sold look upon an idle Christian, as a disorderly Walker, and in
obedience to the Apostle's command, withdraw ourselves from such. 2 These iii.6,
-- I4. And not to provide for our own Households would be esteemed a practical
apostasy of Christianity, a denying of the Faith, and being worse than
Infidels; 1 Timothy v.8. -- The noise of Riot would therefore be no more heard in
our land. Taverns would be empty; industry would take place; prudence,
frugality, honesty, and all the social Virtues. In consequence of which our
Debts would soon be paid; the Farmer, the Tradesman, the Merchant get out of
their embarrassed Circumstances, and all things begin to put on another face.
And now we should begin to be in a disposition to make a right Improvement of
all our external Advantages to be a happy People. -- And

IF all our external Advantages were improved, as a virtuous People might
improve them, we might be very happy. If Solomon's Character of a virtuous
Woman ( Prove xxxi.) should become the common Character of our Women; and St.
Paul's sentiments of Industry should be practically espoused by our Men; we
should soon have a fullness of all things. And if humility and love, love to
God and to Mankind, if this, which is indeed the true christian Temper, should
take full possession of all orders and ranks of Men, there would soon be an end
to all our Parties, and to all our Contentions. For, from whence come wars and
fightings among you, says the Apostle, Come they not hence even of your Lusts,
that war in your Members. If our Lusts therefore were mortified there would be
an end to all Wars and Contentions. And if love to God and to Mankind took full
possession of our Souls, we should of course feel and live as brethren, in the
most cordial Friendship. -- And now,

WE should naturally unite in Choosing those to rule over us, who are our
wisest and ablest men; and they would naturally be affected toward the
Community as a Father is toward his Children; and we should love and reverence
them as our Fathers; our Ministers would all be united in the same Faith; our
Churches would walk together in love; and peace and love would reign through all
our Towns; and no People under heaven would be happier than we. -- And let me
add,

4. IT is the Duty of all, especially of those in places of public trust, to do
all in their Power to promote a universal reformation.

IT is the Duty of each and every one of us to be religious ourselves, to
repent and be Converted, to Give up our selves to God through Jesus Christ, and
live in the daily exercise of every divine virtue and Christian Grace, and in
the practice of all social Duties, as the servants of God. -- This is our Duty
previous to a Consideration of our temporal Interest. For God is worthy of
supreme love and universal Obedience, as he is by Nature God. And he has an
original entire right to us, as he is our Creator. And if we bring the work of
our redemption into the account, and the eternal rewards of heaven, we are
bound, we are under infinite obligations, not only in Duty, but in Gratitude
and interest to love God and live to him, and do all we can to promote his
honor, and the interests of his Son's kingdom in the world. And all this
previous to any earthly Consideration. Yea, all this although we were so
circumstanced, as that we might loose our lives for the profession and practice
of Christianity. -- But when to all this we add, that we in this Colony are in
fact in such Circumstances, that it would be every way for our present interest
to become strictly religious, that it is the readiest and directest way to
become a happy People, yea the only sure and Certain way, this still further
obliges us. And to go on in our sins, under these Circumstances, is not only to
despise God and the redeemer, and the eternal Joys of heaven, but to be even
stupid to our own present interest and happiness in this world. -- Besides,

THOSE who are in public trust, are not only under all these obligations to be
religious themselves; but they are all under peculiar obligations to do all
they can to promote a universal reformation in others. -- And suffer me here to
state and urge these obligations in an address to our Rulers and Teachers. --
And

First -- TO our Rulers. -- May it please your HONORS, and you Gentlemen
REPRESENTATIVES, to you belongs it to lend the way, and it is your
indispensable Duty to do all that lies in your Power, in your several Places
and Capacities, to bring about a universal reformation among us, and so make us
a happy people. -- You owe this Duty to God, who has in the Course of his
Providence done you this honor, to Constitute you our Rulers. He is the Father
of your spirits, he formed your Minds, he qualified you for Government, and has
distinguished you from your Brethren and Neighbors, and raised you up to rule
over us. He has committed this People to your Care, and made them your
Children, and he has given you wisdom, and put the sword in your hands, and you
are sworn to be faithful: and God is your Witness, and will be your Judge at
that Day, when divested of your present offices, you appear before the bar of
Christ to receive your final sentence, in the presence of the assembled
universe. And if you are unfaithful you never can answer it to the Almighty;
but will stands at his Bar as self-condemned, as you have some times seen
guilty Criminals stand at yours.

HIS HONOR, the Governor, by and with your advice and desire, has lately sent
his MAJESTY'S Proclamation through the Colony, and ordered it to be read twice
every year in all our Congregations. It may therefore be Considered as your
Joint act. And therein you Earnestly and Strictly require all Persons within
this Government, of every Character rank and degree, to exert themselves in the
practice and encouragement of piety and virtue, and in preventing and punishing
vice, profaneness and immorality. And you Command and enjoin Judges, Justices
and other Magistrates, and all informing officers, that they be vigilant and
strict in Causing the Laws for promoting Religion, Virtue and good Manners to
be duly observed, and in the discovery, prosecution and punishment of all
persons who shall be guilty of the breach of the Laws made for preventing and
punishing profane, vicious, desolute and immoral practices. And you exhort all
his Majesty's Good Subjects in this Colony, to contribute all in their power,
both by example and influence, toward a general reformation of manners,
seriously Considering their indispensable Duty therein, and the awful
Consequences of a neglect thereof. -- And now, Gentlemen, you may remember the
words of the Lord to his people of old, they have well said all that they have
spoken. O that there were such an heart in them! ( Deuteronomy v.28, 29) -- It is
easier, you are sensible, to issue out such a Proclamation, than it is to act
up to the true purport and spirit of it. -- Dismal is the remark, says a late
writer in England, that no Country has more or better Laws to curb these vices
than we have, but yet no Country is so Corrupted with drunkenness and idleness
as England is at present, Consuming all orders of People. And he adds, one can
fearce number all the excellent Laws made from Queen Elizabeth's time to this
hour, against drunkenness, swearing, idle and desolute Persons, and all vice in
General; but such is the gross neglect of them, as if they had not been
enacted. Thus far this writer. See London Magazine, for 1760. p. 423.
-- O never let it be said of us, according to the ancient proverb mentioned by
the Prophet Ezekiel, as is the Mother, so is the Daughter. Remember, Gentlemen,
the words of the Lord to good old Eli, who, when he heard of the wickedness of
his Sons, did something equivalent to the issuing out of a proclamation to put
Laws in execution, without an actual reducing the proclamation into practice.
He Called them to an account, and said unto them. Why do ye these things? For I
hear of your evil doing: by all this people. Nay my sons, for it is no good
report that I hear. -- But was this enough in the Eyes of God? No. Hear what
God says. I will Judge the house of Eli for ever, for the iniquity which he
knows: because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. (1 Samuel ii.23, 24. and iii.13.) and Gentlemen, is not all the power in the Colony
virtually in your hands? Have you not as much power to restrain immoralities in
any of us, as Eli had to restrain his Sons? Have not we chosen you to be our
Fathers, and called our selves your Children, and put ourselves voluntarily
under your Authority? And if you should take your sword in hand, and go
thoro'ly to work to suppress drunkenness, idleness, and all kinds of
debauchery, Heaven and Earth will be on your side. None but the vilest of the
people will raise a clamor. And shall their clamor intimidate you? God
forbid! Wherefore as the people said to Joshua when about to extirpate the
wicked Cana^^ni^es, only the Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses.
Whosever he be that does rebel against thy Commandment, and will not hearken
unto thy words in all that thou Commande^ him, he shall be put to death: only
be strong and of a good Courage. So I say unto you, in the behalf of all sober,
well-minded people in Connecticut, Gentlemen, the Lord be with you in your
attempts to suppress vice and immorality. And let that man be severely
punished, that shall dare to resist you. Only be strong and of a good Courage.
-- And pray, Gentlemen, as you have leisure at this interview, take opportunity
to strengthen one another in this good work: Agree and combine together to
carry his Majesty's proclamation into execution. The Sword is put into your
hands for this very purpose. God Commands you to be faithful. Your King calls
upon you. Your Oath obliges you. God will be with you, and all good men will
stand by you. And if you are indeed faithful in the sight of God in this, and
in all your other Duties, you will have the approbation of your own Minds
Living and Dying, and the eternal rewards of heaven in the world to Come. --
Which may God of his infinite Mercy grant through Christ!

Secondly. -- TO the Ministers of the Gospel here present. -- Reverend Fathers
and Brethren, when our Rulers are making efforts to bring about a general
reformation, how ought we to be affected? And what ought to be our Conduct?
Should not we be ready to look up to heaven and devoutly say, Blessed be the
Almighty who has raised us up such a King, and has put this thing into the
hearts of our Rulers. And now may the Lord confirm the heart of our King and of
our Rulers in this good work. -- and in the mean time our whole Conduct should
declare to our rulers and to the world, that we are with them in this thing. --
Honor, our Governor, in his Proclamation, has recommended it to us, to
inculcate upon our hearers, the importance of this Great and Good Work, and to
assist by our public Ministry and private Council and Advice in promoting the
same. -- And Now what shall we say to our Great Master at the Day of Judgment,
if we should be cold and indifferent upon such an occasion as this, and when
thus Called upon? Our Savior was Zealous against all manner of Wickedness at
the risque of his Life. His Apostles and first Ministers were of the same
Spirit; and in the midst of mighty opposition, went every where, preaching,
that Men should repent and turn to God. And shall we be lukewarm with these
examples before us? And that when we have so many things to animate us from
Heaven and Earth? God Forbid. -- Wherefore let us upon this occasion afresh
devote our selves wholly to the work of the Ministry, and be agreed and united
to do our utmost to bring about a universal reformation.

AND behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! And if we should all Cordially unite in preaching up the true Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and in bearing testimony against error and wickedness of every
kind; and if we should all be thoro'ly engaged to maintain the discipline of
Christ in his house, and to prevent the unqualified from entering into the work
of the Ministry, and to strengthen the hands of our Civil Authority in
suppressing vice: If Rulers and Teachers throout the Colony, should be united
as one man to bring about a universal reformation, might we not hope for the
Divine Blessing and expect to see true religion yet prevail in our land; a land
originally settled for religious purposes; a land under many singular
obligations to be holy to the Lord? -- May God Almighty give us such an heart
of his infinite Mercy through Jessus Christ.

TO Conclude, with one word to the Congregation in general. -- From all that
has been said, the true Source of all our woes in this Colony may easily be
discerned, and the only way for a Cure. Righteousness exalts a nation; but
Sin is a reproach to any people.

AND if we look back to the beginning of the World, the experience of all past
ages serves to Confirm us in these Sentiments. -- How happy was Man at first,
when Sin was a thing unknown; And had mankind remained in their primitive state
of innocence and rectitude, in love to God and one another, Misery had been for
ever unknown, and this had been a happy World, near akin to Heaven. Sin is the
source of all that misery and ruin which has spread through this apostate race.
It turned our first parents out of paradise, and subjected them and all their
race to Death. It bro't down a flood on the old world, and fire and brimstone
on Sodom, and all the plagues on Egypt. It caused the Carcases of six hundred
Thousand Israelites to fall in the Wilderness, and was the source of all the
Judgments which came on God's peculiar People in the days of their Judges and
of their Kings. It laid a foundation for their babylonish Captivity, and
afterwads for their destruction by the Romans, Mean while, it has spread Misery
and Ruin among all other Nations upon the face of the whole Earth from age to
age. -- And this dreadful Monster, this first born of Satan, this universal
destroyer, which we Call Sin, has entered into this Colony! nay, has entered
into our hearts, and is the source of all our Calamities, Civil, Ecclesiastical
and Domestic. -- And shall we hug the viper in our Bosoms, and Caress the
source of all our woes! God forbid. -- Rather having found out the hateful
Monster, let us with a holy indignation bring it out before the Lord, and treat
it as Samuel did Agag. -- This is the Achan, this is the troubler of our
Israel, wherefore by a universal Agreement let it be doomed to Death. And while
our Rulers and our Teachers arm themselves against it, let every Man in the
Colony join to stone it with stones, till it is dead. So let Sin be slain.
Pride, Luxuriousness, Contentiousness, Malice, Envy, Idleness, Dishonesty, or
by whatever other name it is Called, it is Sin, and let it die. And let
Righteosness Come and reign in its stead. And then small we become a glorious
and happy people, and our shame shall be wiped away. -- O who shall deliver us
from this odious, dreadful Monster! -- Behold the great Messiah is appointed to
bruise the Serpent's Head, and is now exalted at his Father's right hand to
give repentance and remission of Sins. Therefore in his Name let us look up to
God, and Cry mightily for deliverance. -- And may heaven hear our Cry, and send
us help, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

