OBSERVATIONS ON THE Two Campaigns against the Cherokee INDIANS, in 1760 and
1761. IN A Second LETTER from PHILOPATRIOS.

Ita cuique eveniat ut de republica meruit: CIC. FACTS AND DATES are stubborn
Things. CHARLESTOWN: Printed and Sold by PETER TIMOTHY. MDCCLXII.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
IN my last, of the 17th of December, published in the supplement to your
Gazette No. 1428, I promised you a copy of col. Grant's letter, wrote from
Keehowee to our lieutenant governor the 3d of July 1760; and that I would also
endeavor to vindicate our Rangers from his ^njurious treatment: my copy of
this letter I now send you, and will be answerable for the exactness of it, as
I compared it myself very carefully with the original laid before the assembly
the 11th of July 1760, when I had the honor of a seat there. The observant
reader of my former letter, might easily perceive it could not have been long
about, from several matters contained therein; particularly general Amherst's
letter, taken from the London Gazette of the 19th of September, which arrived
here but a day or two before its publication. The sight of col. Grant's
insinuation against the Rangers, in the general's letter, with respect to their
behavior in the first campaign, determined me to publish the colonel's second
letter, not only in hopes of clearing these people, but, by doing so, of
answering a still more material purpose that will be mentioned hereafter: this,
and another of the 4th of June, were all the letters that were laid before the
assembly from any regular officer that campaign: The last was published by
authority, and why the other was not too, has been often admired as; it was
certainly expected at the time: however, as it was not, the insinuations
therein, is we^l as the colonel's difficulties, were only laughed at, (...) by
m^st of the gentlemen that saw that letter. And as not one of the Rangers, or
(...), were (...) called to account by the (...) their (...) the day of action,
though he (...) and ought to have done it, the public was (...) their con^^^^
must have been irrepro^^^able: (...) we find he h^^ revived that mat^^r himself
and him^^ it to the genera^ too (which it was though* HE would have been
ashamed of doing, as (...) letter was not published, his friends as I imagine^
pre^enting^:) it has become too public not to be taken (...) notice of. This
was not possible to be done in the short time between the arrival of the gaze
(...) the general's letter and the colonel's ^a^^ing, as much of the old affair
was forgot; besides, to r^collect it again, enquiries were to be made from many
persons, some at a great distance, which necessarily took up time, and in the
interim the colonel sailed for Martinique. Their vindication was, at first,
(...) I intended and thought sufficient to answer all my purposes; but, in
doing that, I was led insensibly (...) many other observations on the colonel's
letters, and on the first c^m^aign that occasioned them; and, from thenc^, to
make some remarks on the second, by which it will incidentally appear, whether
the first was of any and what use to the second, as a matter of mere
experience. Since these materials could not be got ready ea^ly enough for the
colonel's entertainment before he left this place, it was thought immaterial
when they were published, and therefore that I might take my own time to do the
whole together, and introduce the affair of the Rangers in its most natural and
proper place among my observations. This is the best reason I can give why you
had them not before.

In the weekly Gazette of the 4th of June and 16th of July, are two letters
from "THE CAMP" at Ninety-Six and Fort Prince George, dated the 27th of May,
and 2d of July, 1760, the first of which furnishes only a few hints; the last
seems calculated (notwithstanding its being dated the day before) to be
explanatory of the colonel's last letter, in which manner it will be chiefly
made use of. Whenever these letters are referred to, to avoid long repetitions,
I beg leave to mention only the numbers of the gazettes they are contained in,
No. 81 and 87.

It Is needless to say, how commendably and industriously cautious the publisher
of that paper h^s been, to prevent being in the least suspected of any
prej^^ice against col. Grant: his many corrections, from time to time, of any
and every thing di^^evered to have escaped him, that might even seem to have
the most distant tendency that way, sufficiently prove it (of which one
instance will be men^^^^ed presen^ly) and at the same time render any
quotations from his gazettes the less liable to objection from the coloned;
however^ (...) shall confine myself almost, if not altogether, to those letters
and now proceed, to show upon what foundation they stand.

In the paper No. 80, immediately preceding the first letter, the publisher
informs us, " as it is expe^ted the advices from the army will henceforth (...)
daily more and more interesting, the public are desired to observe, that ALL
the intelligence published in this paper, and dated from the Camp, is from good
authority, and may SAFELY be depended on; sometimes perhaps, reperts from or
concerning the army may be mentioned, but the next succeeding advices from "the
Camp," will confirm, correct, or contradict them."

The authority of the second letter must be unex^eptionable, as, besides its
standing equally with the first on the above foundation, being date^ from "the
Cam^," the publisher, in his paper of the 30th of July, has given it the
following farther s^nction, " On saturday last arrived from the camp at
Congarces, lieutenant colonel Grant, by whom we have a confirmation of ALL the
particulars of the action near Et^h^^y, contained in the letter in the first
page of this paper of the 16th instan^ excepting as to the quantity of corn
found in Etch^^y, which was there said to be 500 bushels; but the report of Mr.
Wi^sox, the commissary, who is now here, under whose care the ^^rn was put, is,
that the quantity was not lest than 600 bushels, all which was destroyed,
except what was made use of by the detachment, besides a quantity of calav^^^^^
or Indian beans, between 80 and 100 bushels, and a great many large heaps of
^^rn flour."

This extraordinary letter the curious reader is desired to compare throughout
with the colonel's; to enable him so to do, notwithstanding its length, I must
beg you will give it a place next before his: indeed it would go very much
against me to part them, as they seem so nearly related; the printed letter
appearing to be an excellent prophetical commentary on the other, and, as some
think, wrote by the colonel himself, especially, since a passage in the
postscript that seems to contradict this supposition, is declared to be
s^urious. This postscript I must beg leave to give the reader here (and is the
only notice I intend to take of it) together with that important discovery made
three weeks after it was printed; how necessarily, will soon be perceived, on
comparing it with a passage or two in the co^onel's last letter.

"P.S. Col. Montgomery and col. Grant are well, but busy writing dispatches:
They have both had some hairbreadth ^s^apes, as all of us had, but (...)
nothing: How (...) Grant escaped their rifles is amazing, as he was the only
man in the line of foot on ^o^seback. The provincial officers, Merrisor,
Grinnan, Macpherson, Macdonald, T^^^all and Be^^j^^ [or Bosher] behaved
extremely (...), and distinguished themselves; as likewise and caps. O'Niel,
and ^^icut. Dargan of capt. Russel's company of ditto [this ditto should be of
Rangers] (cap^. Russel being (...)) who were part of the baggage guard under
capt. Peter Gordon; Mr. Colquhoun, capt. Morrison's ^e^tenant, after his
captain fell, led on the company with spirit."

The remark on this postscript, in the weekly Gazette of the 6th of August
following, runs thus, "the paragraph in the second page of (...) paper of the
16th ult. relating (...) and Da^gan, designed to appear in a separate article,
was inadvertently put as part of a postscript to the letter in the first pa^^
of the same paper; a mistake which a severe fit of sickness preventing the
usual and necessary attention is such matters, occasioned to pass unnoticed and
uncorrected, which we hope the gentl^^^^ who favored us with th^^ letter will
excuse."

Before I leave this matter, I would desire the reader to observe, that,
excepting in this suspicious postscript, Col. M********Y is no where m^^^ioned,
either directly or otherwise, throughout this very long and wonderful letter
that col. Grant has so particularly adopted. The reason of this observation you
will soon discover.

As I shall make great use also of the colonel's first letter, dated from
Keehowee the day after the success at the Lower-Settlements, published in both
gazettes, I must beg the favor of you to reprint that letter too, immediately
after the letter No. 81 from Ninety-Six, and both before the colonel's adopted
and second letters, that gentlemen may, without the trouble of referring back
to their old newspapers (which may perhaps be mislaid) be possessed, in an
unprejudiced manner, of my principal authorities in one view, and thereby more
easily judge, whether the quotations and reasonings from thence are fair and to
the purpose: but, it is necessary to observe here, that the two passages in the
colonel's first letter, printed in italicks, were, at the time of its
publication, suppressed, for obvious prudential reasons.

Referring my reader to my principal vouchers, the letters just mentioned,
which will be printed at the end (especially to the three last) for all matters
relating to the first campaign in 1760, let me here inform him, in a few words,
that I shall endeavor to prove the following propositions: First. That col.
Grant had the principal direction of the first campaign. Secondly. That he lost
two fine opportunities that campaign, of relieving Fort Loudoun, and gloriously
and effectually reducing the Cherokees. Thirdly. That our Rangers did not
deserve the cruel treatment they met with seem him -- N.B. It will be necessary
to ^^ew this, before we come to the second opportunity the colonel lost.


After these three propositions are discussed, I shall pass to the colonel's
second camp^ign in 1761, in order, first, to discover, if the former was of
any, and what, use to the second, as a matter of mere experience. And here it
will be shown.

That col. Grant remedied none of the matters he complained of in his first
campaign; that his conduct glaringly demonstrates, his whole dependence was on
the known cowardice of the I^^ians; for which and other reasons, he might have
gone to the Valleys with ease, in the time he took before he returned to
Keehowee, and several times afterward. The situation the colonel has reduced
us to with the Indians, will be s^ewn to be very shameful and precarious; and
that he may be sent to us perhaps a third time to complete his work, the
consequence of which will be pointed at.

I am now, in the first place, to prove, from the colonel's letters, especially
from the first, that he had the principal direction of the campaign in 1760;
and consequently, that to him we and our posterity will be long indebted, in
the highest degree, for the mighty wonderful seats done therein. This having
bean of late made a question by some few, who, particularly since col. Grant
favored us with his last visit, have complimented col. M -- y with it, makes
it necessary to discuss it here in limine; and how can we decide this point
better, than by the assistance of these two letters, which were both laid
before the legislature of the province, and the first printed by authority, the
only one that was so during that campaign? Col. M -- y, it is generally
believed, had the THE NAME, which is not worth disputing about: but who assumed
the THING is the question. It plainly appears then, by the first letter, beyond
all contradiction, so much so, that it is needless to trouble you with any
quotations, that col. Grant thought himself at least upon an equal footing with
col. M -- -- y, from the share he claims of the merit in planning and ordering,
as well as in executing the successful enterprise there mentioned; which,
though it is amazing to think, how he could aim at making it of half the
importance he did, may be truly called a wellconducted soldier-like
transaction; the only one in both campaigns worth relating. In HIS supposed
consequences of it, in regard to the most essential object of the war, a Peace,
does he not step still higher? when alone declaring, "the correction you will
allow has been pretty severe; and I dare say, the whole nation will readily
come into terms, and will not be very fond of breaking them; and I think peace
with them is a desirable event for this province;" which most improbable
dare-say, that he takes so much care to assure his honor is peculiarly his own
(for col. M -- y's opinion in this grand concern he is left to guess at) we
find prevailed (by what immediately follows in that letter, which deserves the
reader's particular attention) and undoubtedly occasioned the long unhappy
delay at Fort Prince George, at that most critical juncture, when a moment's
time ought not even to have been risqued. This in all probability was the great
cause (as I shall endeavor to show more at large by and by) of the loss of
Fort Loudoun; the massacre of great part of the garrison; and of the lasting
dishonor then brought upon his majesty's arms; together with the long tram of
misfortunes and heavy taxes, entailed upon the province ever since, and for
years to come, even supposing the Indians to continue quiet, which I am afraid
I may in my turn " dare say" too they will not very long (should the French but
have an opportunity of supplying them) even if we submit to pay for our people
they have still prisoners amongst them.

To return from this digression, does not col Grant also assume a right of
advising his honor, and corresponding with him, when he says, "it will be
necessary you should write a letter to encourage some of the Rangers to go to
Fort Loudoun," etc. etc and "I shall be glad to hear from you as s^on as
p^ssible," etc. Since we find (...) in this and the last instance seizing and
possessing himself of the most conspicuous station, the top of all, and thence
viewing, judging and directing every thing around him, we cannot wish him nor
he push himself h^ her; therefore it is time, on the other hand, to enqui^e a
little after col. M -- y; and here give me leave to ask, if there is one single
passage in all that so important letter, where he is represented as transacting
alone any one thing, or even giving his opinion sepa^ately, relative to either
war or peace with the Cherokees? is not the language throughout either, "col. M
-- y and I were convinced" -- "were resolved," etc. -- "WE shall make use of
Tifto^y," -- "WE shall send off an express," -- or, "I informed you," -- "I
dare say" -- "I think," etc. -- "I have been obliged to s^nd a guard"? Can this
be the style of one under command? Does it not rather plainly show the
contrary? As to the title to the printed letter, which belies the contents, any
person may see how unnaturally it stands there: it is certain no such was to it
when laid before the assembly, and how so apparently a^kward and inconsistent
an headpiece came to be tacked to it afterward, is not easily accounted for:
surely, whoever did it, must not have read the letter, or he could never have
been drawn into so unlucky a mistake, to the prejudice of col. Gran^'s military
fame, and perhaps modesty too, with all who read that account, without the
honor of knowing HIS so respectable abilities.

Part of the last clause in this letter, as some gentlemen understand it, is
too material to this question not to be quoted here, "Col. M -- y desires his
respects to you; he does not trouble you with a letter, as I have wrote so
fully." Doubtless, this passage is intended to make it appear the colonel saw
this letter before it was sent; but I must beg to be excused for doubting that
he did, from the cautious wording it, for it is not said that he did: however,
if he did see it (as these gentlemen argue) and admitted col. Grant's right to
make use of the remarkable expressions therein, it establishes, beyond all
contradiction, the point com^^ded for. As to the letter col. M -- y begs his
honor to forward to general Amherst, nothing positive can be drawn from
thence, to invalidate this matter, unless the contents were known, and known to
be his, for it is not said whose letter it is, and it is not unlikely to be one
o^ those several letters, which col. Grant takes so much pains to tell his
honor he was "so fatigued in writing;" besides, many officers might have the
honor of writing a letter to the general.

It Is time now to see, what the second letter contains relative to this point;
but first, it is necessary to guard you not to lose sight of the subjects of
each, which are of somewhat different complexions; the first, a pompo^s
exaggerated account of an advantage gained over the Indians; the other, a most
curious apology for an unaccountable retreat. -- This clue will help you to
discover col. Grant's admirable delicacy in one or two nice hints, and
particularly in the following passage, the only one in either letter where col.
M -- y is even permitted to appear to have the sale direction, which he is
honored with just before "we stole a mare^ upon them in the night" to get safe
back to Keehowee! a most suspicious ill-favored junc^^^^ indeed! "in this
situation" (we are told) "col. M -- y thought it advisable to return to Fort
Prince George," etc. No I, no We here! what modesty! what selfdenial! When the
action was a little more conspicuous, as in a pretty little affair at the close
of this letter, who but "I was obliged to march a company of light infantry
into the fort to bring them to reason," and in the first letter, " both col. M
-- y and I were resolved to take the advantage of their ^eg^^gence, by a forced
march that night."

Though I am apt to think there is some very material mistake in representing
the first and last of these actions (unless they are averaged, and col. M -- y
had the whole honor or the first allowed him by col. Grant, in order to rep^^
him for what col Grant had before borrowed of him out of the last, if so, then
to be sure this point is f^irly settled) as I have heard them related in a
quite diff^^ent manner, that this last was the particular remarkable case,
wherein col. M -- y, for once, contrary to col. Grant's opinion, "resolved to
take advantage of the Indians negligence," etc. and in the other situation,
that col. Grant, contrary to col. M -- y's judgment "thought it advisable to
return to Fort Prince George," to which col. M -- y as usual, but with great
reluctance, consented, otherwise the destruction of the Middle Settlements,
perhaps, would not have been deferred, to produce those glorious laurels reaped
there the succeeding campaign, at least without trying a second "brush" with
the Indians: and here I cannot help lamenting (supposing this to be true) how
unfortunate it was for the province, that col. M -- y, if he was clearly
commander in chief, who had begun this campaign with so spirited and successful
a specimen of his judgment at Twelve-Mile creek, should ever afterward, and
most unhappily at Etchowih, give it up (begging col. Grant's pardon, with all
his accomplishments) to an officer every way so manifestly beneath him.

If there can be any person unacquainted with any of the gentlemen that were on
that campaign, who, notwithstanding all that has been said, still remains
dubious in this point, he is requested to compare the printed accounts of the
two campaigns in 1760 and 1761 together; and the great similarity, or rather
"SAMENESS" of the transactions, and miraculous relations of both, will, if any
thing can, amply convince him, that none but one and the same great negotiating
genius, admirably skilled in Indian politics, presided throughout.

Upon the whole of this matter, as it appears, by these two letters and from
other circumstances, that col. Grant had the greatest share in the direction of
all the principal actions of this campaign, even in thinking "it advisable to
return to Fort Prince George" which his over-nice delicacy to col. M -- y, to
be sure, made him desirous to conceal; I shall therefore most readily concur
with him, in giving him the credit of them all, excepting that which took its
rise from Twelve-Mile creek, which he must pardon me, for the reason just now
mentioned, for doubting of his right to any share in, unless in entirely
marring the good effects of it, by that singular ill-timed "dare say" of his,
which not only rendered that action altogether useless, but made it prejudicial
too. Henceforward, when I speak of the colonel, without mentioning any name, I
would be understood to mean col. GRANT, and him only.

I shall now proceed to show, that the colonel lost two fine opportunities in
1760, of relieving Fort Loudoun, and gloriously and effectually finishing the
war with the Cherokees*

The first and best opportunity of all was lost, by the ill judged
unaccountable delays at Keehowee, after the surprise of the Lower Settlements:
for, had a proper and speedy advantage been taken of the apprehensions those
Indians were then undoubtedly under, the army might, immediately after that
stroke, have run through all the towns in the nation, with little hazard, as
the terror of it would have spread, faster than the troops could have marched,
and they would have been in the midst of the Indian towns, one after another,
in all probability, before the Cherokees could have had time to recollect
themselves, and act properly in their own defense: besides this, the
uncommonness of the thing, would have made a durable impression on those
savages, and not unlikely on their abettors, the Creeks too, to the honor and
dread of his majesty's arms for many generations, and the lasting security of
this his province. This supposition col. Grant cannot possibly object to as
improbable, because he has said, " we shall make use of Tistory, etc. to inform
their nation, that though they ARE IN OUR POWER, we are ready to GIVE them
peace"? From this speech to our lieutenant governor too, whom surely he would
not, for the good of his majesty's service and the safety of the province,
endeavor to deceive, it plainly appears, he cannot deny this step to have been
feasible. Now let us see if it was not absolutely necessary too. Had the
attempt been made, and success crowned it, the utmost expectations and wishes
of the people would have been thereby answered, together with general Amherst's
intentions, signified to our then governor, in the following words, "that at
present the troops new in the province must solely pursue the ends they were
sent for, viz. the most effectual punishment of the Cherokees and their
abettor^." -- " So soon as that work is completed, they must that instant come
away;" their own declared designs would at the same time have been accomplished
too [See No. 81] " of throwing in a supply of flour, cattle, and other
necessaries into Fort Prince George and FORT LOUDOUN," the latter then in a
known miserable starving condition, as appeared from a letter, in the weekly
gazette, from that garrison, by the express that passed through the camp
(mentioned in letter 81) when at Ninety-Six, with dispatches dated from thence
the 17th of May, at which time they, after "having bartered away every thing,
even their shirts and blankets, yet had not five weeks provision left." Ought
not every motive of honor, generosity and humanity too, to have concurred to
excite a speedy endeavor to relieve those forlorn people, even if col. Grant
had not declared the nation to be "IN HIS POWER? but as he did, what could be
his motive to hesitate? was there a moment to spare? Is it usual, when a
garrison is reduced to the last extremity, to desist from taking all advantages
of an enemy, especially a savage one, when not only our friends liberties, but
their lives too, were known to be at stake? why then were three weeks suffered
unfeelingly to be trifled away at Keehowee, for runners to go backwards and
forwards upwards of 300 miles, by that means give some of the Rangers time and
occasion to cool, be disgusted, and desert; our friendly Indians to leave us;
and the Cherokees an opportunity to recover their spirits and despise us, to
steal our horses, and collect themselves together by calling in all their
hunters? and, above all, to risque the lives of above 200 fellow subjects at
Fort Loudoun, then looked upon by the Indians as their certain prey? when, by
col. Grant's largest accounts, we had but 40 Indian prisoners, and all of them,
excepting two or three, women and children (and the women they are known to
regard very little) to insure our 200. Could it be thought, the Cherokees were
such fools, to let slip so fine and critical an opportunity of imposing upon
us, given them by the colonel, and to make so stupid an exchange? give up the
means of glutting their darling passion, revenge, and reduce ^s besides to what
terms they almost pleased, then so evidently, for the sake of that garrison,
just falling with it into their own power? Are not these natural and obvious
arguments that must be supposed to occur at the time? and if just, where then
was the least shadow of a reason, to support that most improbable,
preposterous, and presumptuous "dare-say," the cause of so many and such
lasting mischiefs and disgraces?

But here give me leave to observe, that though the expectations of the army's
proceeding to Fort Loudoun were so general, as to be the subject of most
conversations, especially after the troops left our back settlements, and the
passage of a letter, just now quoted, from the "the Camp" at Ninety-Six,
confirmed those designs, which had also reached the fort at Keehowee, where it
was heard, that it was fully determined to relieve Fort Loudoun, and they
wished it might be done in time. I say, that notwithstanding this, it should be
asserted so roundly, after the return from Etchowih, that the army never
intended to go to Fort Loudoun at all, appears, amongst the many
extraordinaries done and said, and unsaid at that time, altogether the most
extraordinary of all; especially when col. Grant says, in his first letter, "WE
shall send off an express this evening to capt. Demere, etc. to tell the
Little-Carpenter, that he may come down with some other headmen, to treat; but
that it must be done in a few days, or he may expect to see ALL the towns in
the UPPER nation in ashes." For God's sake, what could be the view of this
cruel tantalizing message to that unfortunate gentleman? for such it must be,
if never intended to be performed: what purpose could it answer but to throw
him off his guard, by making him depend on relief (which he certainly did) that
was never intended, and thereby prevent his making a push in time, before the
strength of the garrison was too much exhausted by short allowance and bad
provisions? and farther, to make his majesty's arms appear still more
contemptible to the Indians, by such despicable childish threats, mere
gasconading! which I am sorry to say has been kept too steadily to ever since,
and with just as much success.

It Is true, the colonel says, " in MY OWN opinion, it is next to impossible for
us to think of proceeding over the mountains; and if they had not been
surprised, the very country we have been in was impractible, if they had
spirit, which I much doubt of." This is the first hint of any objection to go
to Fort Loudoun, which was so new and surprising to the assembly, that, in
their answer to his honor the lieutenant-governor's congratulatory message,
sent them on the success at the Lower-Towns, together with the colonel's
letter, they could not help joining with his honor in sentiments, and words
too, that " that important event might be a means of restoring and establishing
peace with the Indians upon a sure and lasting foundation, IF PROPERLY
IMPROVED." These words of his honor, were then thought ominous, and to allude
to the above expression of the colonel's. -- How could the colonel, consistent
with the above declaration, write to his honor, "the nation was in our power,"
and threaten, if the upper Indians, or those "over the mountains" did not come
"to treat," to lay all "their towns in ashes"? or, how could he desire the
governor "to encourage some of the Rangers to carry flour and cattle to Fort
Loudoun"? Could part of the Rangers do, what was "next to impossible" for the
whole army to do? I believe the colonel was, resolved indeed, not to proceed,
"over the mountains;" and, that his "own opinion" SHOULD prevail,
notwithstanding "he much doubted of the Indians spirit," the only thing that
could prevent him, -- but more of this by and by.

If it was never intended to go "over the mountains" to Fort Loudoun, what can
be the pretense for not pushing immediately as far as was? the utmost
expedition was required, as well to return to the general, as to relieve that
garrison; this would have saved time at least, and added no little weight and
authority to the express to the Little-Carpenter. If the messenger, together
with Tiftowih and the Old-Warrior of Estatowih, could have assured the upper
nation, that the army set out with them, the Little Carpenter would then have
had something to work upon their fears, and urge them to secure the garrison
for their friends, by laying them in immediately the corn required, which in
all probability would have been done too, had the army marched with the
messengers, (...) it is well known they were much frightened when they first
heard of the troops destroying the Lower Towns: but when they had time and
opportunity GIVEN them: to make use of evasions, was there room to expect any
other? especially, as the army's unaccountable halting must certainly look
suspicious, and give these wily people just reason to think (as it is known they
did) that the colonel was afraid of proceeding further; and in the interim
while they were amusing us, must not this suspicion, especially at that most
critical juncture, be a fine topic for their warriors to enlarge upon in their
town-houses, to excite their nation to continue a resistance which that
circumstance, and that ONLY, made so likely would terminate in their favor to
the utmost of their most sanguine wishes?

I am very sorry to be obliged to acknowledge here, that the province did not,
just at that time, properly consult (...) own safety, and act with that spirit
it apparently has ever since. Of this the remarkable regiment of 1000 men, so
hastily voted for the 13th of February 1760, to be raised, paid, and discharged
again by the 1st of July following, is a very conspicuous instance. The members
then met together (only 21 besides the speaker) were divided in their opinions
of the proper measures to be taken at that most critical juncture; ten were for
agreeing with the committee, to provide for only 500 men, to proceed with some
Rangers, to relieve Fort Prince George, at that time closely beset by the
Indians; this the other eleven disagreed to: immediately after this, a motion
was made and carried, to provide for 1000 men; and in about ten res^lves, one
after another, the pay of the officers and men was determined upon; but two
more resolutions at the close, that the field officers pay should not commence
'till the regiment was formed, nor that of the captains 'till they had raised
half their men, together with no tents being allowed, bounty-money, or even
present pay provided, effectually destroyed every thing that was carried
before: whether its being almost a b^re house, or what else prevented that
necessary matter being then properly and usefully designed, is difficult to
say; however, this is certain, that the gentleman that made the motion was, the
same evening, very sorry he had not joined the other ten, and so carried the
500 men only, which, it is not unlikely, would have been better encouraged and
provided for: but, the end of his motion was, in order to relieve Fort Loudoun,
which, in the message to the governor upon these matters, was THEN very rightly
declared by the house, as "not to be done by the province in its present
calamitous state," for before that message was ordered to be drawn, when the
two last res^lves were carried, many gentlemen thought not an hundred men of
that regiment would ever be seen together, and so it proved. The smallpox then
raging in Charlestown, prevented the public business being carried on in a
proper manner, as considerably above half the members of the house, upon that
account, were afraid of coming to town, which in all probability was the
principal reason of matters being carried in that uncommon manner at that time;
for they no sooner met in larger numbers at the sorry, but every thing went in
a prudent, proper, and spi^ited manner. Could that regiment have been raised,
that, with the Rangers then provided for, would have been thought full
sufficient to have gone to Fort Loudoun. Most of those gentlemen that were for
the regiment, were of opinion general Amherst could not have been able to spare
us any men, from that important campaign he was then engaged in, and therefore
the matter seemed to depend on ourselves entirely* The other gentlemen
flattered themselves he would, and were not disappointed; indeed the (...) of
that scheme must have occasioned their (...) it must have been absolutely
impossible for a gentleman of the t^nth part of his excellence's penetration
and judgment in military (...), to (...) a copy of these extraordinary votes of
the house were sent by governor L^^elton, to be a moment in suspense to give
them their just weight, and ^e at the same time convinced, how little we were
acquainted, at that time, with the proper encouragement to raise troops; and
the large detachment of picked m^n he sent us so immediately afterward, which
he could very illy spare at that important season, sufficiently shows his
excellency placed NO dependence on the assembly's resolves in that matter,
exclusive of the many difficulties he might apprehend from the smallpox, th^n
known to be raging amongst us.

However, the same excuse may be pleaded, for this government's acting in this
manner at this time, as has been pleaded by all the Northern provinces, when
first in like circumstances; none of them (when under no providential
distresses) took less time than Carolina to recollect themselves and act
properly; the war was entered into only a few months before; time and
experience had not then convinced us of our errors, and taught us to f^ll upon
the properest expedients; indeed when the people did, so soon as August
following, they proved to no purpose; but this was not the fault of the
representatives of the province, who acted properly; not a moment's time was
lost by them, after the troops returned from the Cherokee country; at that
period, and ever since, they have acted with as much spirit as any assembly in
America without exception.

When the troops arrived here, and marched into the Cherok^e country, an entire
dependence was placed on them, that they would certainly do our business, as
they were reckoned so fully sufficient, that all other expense to raise more
men was thought absolutely needless. The army certainly "might have gone to any
town in the nation," as col. Grant himself, in his second letter, tells us,
even after the action at Etchowih, or, in other words, might have gone through
the nation; no pretense of want of men there hinted at, a^ one of the causes of
their return; but the impractability of carrying their wounded with them: And
that there was no complaint of this sort, when the army marched from Ninety-Six
to the nation, appears by the letter dated from thence (No. 81) which tells us
138 were LEFT, as scouting parties, to guard the back settlements, a service
that might have been done according to law by the militia of the province;
besides, the settlers thereabouts would have cheerfully done that safe and easy
duty for the short time wanted, if those scouts could not have been spared. In
short, more men would have been rather an encumbrance than of any service, and
was thought so at the time, and I believe found so the year following, upon
account of the additional number of wagons, etc. that must have been got:
besides, the same letter (No. 81) also says, "it is but justice, to mention the
hearty manner in which the ^ieutenant-governor has co-operated with us, without
which we could not have been thus far advanced."

Now it will be necessary, before we proceed to the second opportunity the
colonel lost, to introduce a vindication of our Rangers, from his most severe
reflections upon their conduct the day of action, in his letter to our governor.

This is the more readily undertaken, and particularly scrutinized, as I think
the poltroonry that whole corpse, and indeed all our people (excepting three
captains) is accused of, an oblique reflection on the province: for whoever can
suppose so considerable a sample arrant cowards, must imagine most of the rest
only wanted opportunity to prove themselves so too; for it seems hinted, that
capt. Morrison also, of our only company of provincials (not Rangers, as letter
87 calls him) might not have been killed "but he unfortunately was abandoned by
his people." The waggoners are included in the same condemnation with the
Rangers; and even the poor guides, were, most of them "not worth a ^^illing,"
or perhaps had some "little design." The charge against the Rangers is very
heavy, " I think there was a waggoner and a Ranger killed, and five or six of
the^ wounded: I am sorry that I cannot say (...) thing in their favor; they
behaved most infamously, (...) fifty deserted the night before we marched, and
they run off to a man the m^ment they heard the firing begin, "excepting capts.
Grinnan and O'Neil, who don't seem exempted out of any particular favor to
them, but that it was necessary they should be tick^ed into a difficulty of
utterance, that the reproach might sall the surer on the rest. What pity this
famous letter had not been printed at the time; then no doubt this pretty
stratagem must have taken. To this heavy accusation, let me add a passage of
col. Grant's letter to general Amherst, upon his return to Keehower, after the
notable exploits last summer, as taken from the London Gazette No. 10140,
alluding to this old affair " they [the Rangers] seem now to despise the
In^i^ns, as much as they were susp^cted to fear them before." Now you have the
whole of this indictment before you, of which I shall grant, first, that "(...)
fifty" did deser^ at Keehowee; and then attempt to show, that (...) a SINGLE
man of the rest, who were ALL in the action near E^chowih, run off or deserted,
and lastly, endeavor to prove, that these men, so far from behaving most
infamously, did not give the least reason to be even SUSPECTED of ^ea^ing the
Indian^.

Gr^nting that near fifty, or rather about forty, as letter 87 expresses it,
did desert at Keehowee though by the victualling receipts not above thirty
appears to have done so without returning again, fifteen of which, not fifty "
the night before the army marche^;)" this is not surprising at all; but that
three times as many did not, I confess to be very much so; for a (...)
desertion or such as are acquainted with the woods and by passes, is ever to be
expected in an (...) American camp, on a remore frontier, where (...) have only
the barest necessaries of life to subsist (...) amongst our back settlers, who
are mostly (...), and the least used to confinement of perhaps any sort of
people whatever, besides, many of our Rangers have been for years accustomed to
the Indians, and perfectly know their dispositions, some of which must be
supposed not to want sagacity and discernment, at least that scanty pittance it
required, to see that such a destructive have, and unnecessary consumption of
provisions, for three weeks at Keehowee, at that most critical juncture, must,
in all probability, according to the then latest accounts, overset one of the
principal ends of their coming, the relief of Fort Lo^doun, and therefore might
go ^ff upon that account: Besides, must it not incense these people, to find
their comrades picked off in looking after their horses, and the colonel not
only tamely submitting to those, and other continual, almost daily insults of
their ^^^lping parties, ^iting upon, killing, and scalping the troops, within
hearing, and sometimes within sight, of the picque^: But when one ruinous and
unconditional opportunity, given to Tiftow^h to bring about a peace, was (...),
still to see six days more added afterward; did it, from these circumstances,
require much conjuration to discover the colonel's resolves? was it not (...)
that neither Tif^owih nor the Old Warri^r, (...) influence lay entirely amongst
the Lower Settlement Indians, should not be threatened, that the army would
march immediately, upon the first insult from (...) scalping (...)? Add to
these things, that the (...) were well (...) with the woods, the Reg^l^rs (...)
strangers; those therefore might (...) with impunity, while the chief merit
perhaps of (...) these lay in necessity. However, I would not be understood, by
any means, to endeavor to (...) who did behave "infamou^^y," (...) to be owing
to a far other (...) cowardice: but thus much may be said, (...) ^he army
pus^^ed forward immediately, after the success at the Lower Towns, there would
not have been any occasion to take any of their horses from them for
pack-horses, and then not a man of them, by all accounts, if well used, would
have (...); and a suspicion of so common a thing as this, ought, amongst other
reasons, to have had its due influence, and prevented that, I was going to say
"(...) inf^m^^:" halt that occasioned it. Had the colonel proceeded to the
Divisings, or Middle Settlements, before he halted, it would have had the
appearance, at least, of doing business, and made them easy; besides, the
risque of falling into the savages hands, ther^ all round them, would have been
so very great, almost inevitable, as to have prevented this evil effectually.

I pass now to those of our people that deserve to be vindicated, who were in
the action near Etchowih, and continued with the army 'till they returned to
Keehowee; no^ one of which run off. Where could they run to? into the Indians
mouths? And here, begging the colonel's pardon, would not the expression have
been a little more candid and suitable to the present case, if the Word IN had
been made use of, instead of OFF? If it had been said, "they ran" IN "to a man,
the moment they heard the firing begin," it would have implied, they were
before off from the main body, to which they run in, without any ambiguity;
whereas, though they run off to a man, may infer the same thing, yet it also
signifies, and much more aptly, especially with strangers to the Cherokee
country, their running off altogether, and deserting the army entirely; which
it is known, by the provision receipts, dated the day before the action and the
day after the return to Keehowee, that not a single man did: in fact, it would
have required ten times more courage to have done so, than to remain with the
troops. But, to be sure, there could be no "little design" here to mislead,
only a small in^^^ertency: however, though I have ventured to a^^end (...) so
far as it regards our Rangers, capt. Grinnan's in particular, who were near a
quarter of a mile from the main body when the firing began, I am not half
satisfied with it yet: this place, and another similar to it, may still undergo
another correction; I mean the reflection on capt. Morrison's men: it is said, "
he was unfortunately abandoned by his people:" Is not this expression too
general, taking in, as may be thought, ALL his small company, that is, all the
provincials? whereas, it is known, he had not more than twenty three men with
him, advanced a full quarter of a mile in front of the army: the rest were in
the rear, mixed with the Range^s, under his lieuts. Colquhoun and Tatnal.

Now, instead of ab^nd^ning or running in or off, had any of the clever little
dapper fellows that, we are informed, were so much admired by marshal Broglio,
for their wonderful prowess, been in either of these situations (and why some
of their brethren were not, is surprising) then truly, we should have been
told, assist me all ye puffing deities, to express myself properly on this so
arduous an occasion! that these handful of heroes, after making a noble stand,
being overpowered with numbers, were obliged to retire (or retreat) to the main
body, or perhaps return, as the colonel did to Keehowee; and why (...) two
advanced parties, one consisting of only 23 provincials, the other of a few
Rangers, who pretend to no heroism, only a common share of manly rational
courage, should be expected to support themselves al^n^, (87) "'till the
grenadiers and light-infantry formed," against the shock of such "a very
considerable body of Indians, of the Lower, Middle, and Upper settlements, with
some Creeks and Chactaws, advantageously posted," cannot easily be accounted
for. Were any of the regulars upon these advanced parties when the firing
began? I am told no, by numbers I have enquired of. Was there a fair trial
then? Perhaps our people were blamed for taking to trees. If so, why were not
the Highlanders there, to prevent them, and teach them better? Being left to
themselves, with their own officers, was it not natural to fight in their own
way, the Indian manner? If there can be any who are not yet convinced, that the
words "run off" ought to be changed to "run" in, before they can be applied
here to the Rangers, let such only endeavor to reconcile the following passage
to their own manner of understanding their running off to a man: " the number
of Rangers much diminished, some of their horses employed in carrying flour,
OTHERS not very fond of walking," or, as letter No. 87 expresses it, " (...)
were in great (...) for horses to (...) the wounded; MANY of the Rangers
dismounted." But the thing itself is in no manner of way applicable to the
cattle-guard or body of Rangers, who was in the rear of all, as we learn from
No. 87. " In the center of the pack-horses, was an officer and twenty (...)
from the pi^quet; and in the (...) the where was the captain of the pi^quet
with fifty men and (...) officer, followed be the cattle under (...) care of a
body of Rangers." Now, I say, this body of Rangers, under capt. O'Neil, neither
retired, retreated, were drove in, or run off, or on, unless it was to take
care of the cattle, their particular charge, and keep them together, which was
so effectually done, that "every thing was saved:" "nay, we have ^ot l^st a bag
of flour by the enemy, or a (...)," according to letter No. 87. The colonel
indeed says, that "capt. Peter Gordon s^eved every thing:" Very true. The merit
of the whole is very justly given to that brave officer, who commanded the
picquet, and had the captain of the cattle-guard, who was it seems of "use in
the ^ear," under his direction during the ma^ch: But if it is implied, from
this passage, that the Rangers did not enable captain Gordon to ^^ve the
cattle, may it not be equally so too, that the other men, who were not more
under his command, did not assist to save the pack-horses?

I shall now, in the last place, endeavor to prove, that the Rangers, so far
from behaving "most infamously," did not give the le^st reason to be even
"suspected" of fearing the indians. The proof of this point, is in a great
measure ^^viated, by what has been just now said, that " every thing was saved,
and not a bu^lock lost." What greater (...) be desired, that these people did
their duty? especially, if we consider, how hardly (...) Gordon must be
pressed, when "he took up the best post he (...) find, and sustained the i^
attack," that is, the attack of the whole body of Indians, for we are told just
before, without any (...), " when THE Indians sound, that it was impossible to
prevent our getting to the (...), THEY endeavored to cut off outpack horses
and cattle, (...) the c^^tain of the picquet, from doing us any harm i^ that
way." Now is it reasonable to think, that this gentleman, without the
assistance of the Rangers, with only his picquet-guard, when he too
"unfortunately was ^^^^d^ned," by his colonel, six miles from Et^^ow^h, and
never had a reinforcement sent him, though earnestly pressed for, 'till after
the army got there, could in the interim defend himself, so many hours, against
an attack that we are told (No. 8^) "came in such a variety of quarters, that
they were obliged to divide themselves into small parties, some with officers,
some with sergeants; they were pressed (...) on by the enemy," etc. Is it
probable, I say, that to small a number of men, could defend themselves on all
sides, and at the same time take care of such a number of pack-horses "before,"
and such a large gang of cattle "be^^^nd" them, so as not to lose a single one,
on foot too? Does not this matter speak for itself? and is it not remarkable,
that such a piece of general and notorious poltroonry should not be as
generally e^posed, and branded with infamy? But, on the contrary, their general
behavior in that action, was applauded in numbers of letters. A particular
fellow or two might have behaved "infamous^y" (though I don't know of any that
did) as will often be the case among a body of men, which will always pass
unregarded by the candid.

Who could have expressed himself more strongly in their favor, than the
colonel himself, in his first letter, dated only 24 days before this
astonishing change? where, after a long encomium on their good behavior, and
desiring his honor to thank them for it, he concludes, " in fo^rt, I am
extremely pleased with THE WHOLE." Can any man, the least acquainted with human
nature, be made to believe, that any considerable body of troops, consisting of
two distinct corpse (suppose regulars and provincials) of the same nation, shall
have behaved so extremely well at one time, as the whole to merit applause,
and, only 25 days following, that one of th^se (...) corpse. still acting in
conjunction with the other, should to a man turn out out such arrant Poltroons?
Perhaps history might furnish us with a rare instance of the same entire united
body behaving, the whole, just afterward in this scandalous manner, owing to
some general, unaccountable pa^nic, and much such an instance is mentioned in
marshal Saxe's reveries; but I believe no example can be pretended to be shown,
where one corpse, after having a little while preceding so remarkably
distinguished themselves, should, almost immediately afterward, when
intermixed in different places with the same body of troops they acted in
conjunction with just before, to a man picked out, behave so infamously; while,
on the other hand, " when the action (87) was expected to be were general than
ever, has fronting each other, that the valor, discipline, and steadiness of
the [other body o^] troops, stewed itself in a manner worthy of admiration;
they received the fire of the Indians, looking them boldly in the face, with
shouldered arms, and with as little concern, seemingly, as ever you sa^ a
contine^ on his past by a town guard." Is not this proving too much?

Credat Judaeus Apeila

Quad cunque astendis mihi sit, incredulus (...).

Farther, if one of these distinct corpse had advanced parties out "when the
firing began," the other none, is it fair and candid, to judge, or can any
judgment rather be formed, on so unequal a footing, from these parties being
obliged to retire to the main body? Where the case was otherwise, as in the
cattle-guard in the rear, there it is plain, by the best proof that can be
given, the after-delivery of THE WHOLE they had in charge, that their conduct
could not, and ought not, to be even "suspected." Was it candid in the colonel,
not to have informed the governor, of the situation Morrison's and Grinnan's
people were in, "when the firing began," and of the number of men they had with
them each? As to the sneer, "I think there was a waggener and a Ranger killed,"
etc. it might as well have been spared; for the return at the end even of the
letter No. 87, shows, there were 13 of our people altogether, killed and
wounded, and 84 of the regulars; which is not very far from a proportion, and
without at (...) men ^oo; and our people acquainted with the Indian manner of
fi^h^^^^, would occasionally, according to the American custom, take to trees,
especially the handful that were on advanced parties, by themselves, which
would, and very likely did, save many.

The behavior of the colonel, then only major Grant, to our neighbors the
Virginian, at Fort (...) Ques^e, in 1758, will (...) give (...) off it of our
Rangers, ^s ^hese two (...) similar. We were the told, " the (...) so, that the
surprise was compl^^t; (...) must have succeeded, but for an (...) orders, in a
provincial officer, the might they (...) the Ohio: and by this man's quitting
his (...) morning, the party was in a manner (...) to piece^." This man must
have been either major Lewis or capt. Bullet, the only provincial officers who
commanded any separate parties. But capt. Bullet, after a useful and noble
stand, was obliged to retreat, and got safe back to the army; where, we find,
on account of these insinuations, he desired, and obtained from general Forbes,
a court martial on his conduct, which was approved of, and he of consequence
acquired with honor. Major Lewis was unfortunately taken prisoner with major
Grant, and remained upwards of a year in captivity; and, at his return, we find
him continued in his rank in the Virginia regiment, which is no sign of any
misbehaviour of that gentleman: And, whether major Grant's being taken
prisoner, and general Forbes's success, and then dying while he was so, were
lucky or unlucky circumstances to him at that time, is not a little dubious;
but, it is more than probable they alone prevented that miscarriage being
strictly and properly enquired into, which no doubt the colonel greatly
^^ments. But pray give me leave to recommend to your perusal, that part of
general Forbes's expedition that relates to this affair, and the very humourous
answer thereto by a New Englandman, as you will find them in the Gentleman's
Magazines for April and May 175^; I am persuaded they will not only clear up
several matters very smaller to the point before us, but highly divert you
betides. In that affair, as w^ll as this, it was (...) lay the blame somewhere,
and where could it (...) possibly more judiciously and conveniently placed in
to (...) on the provincials, who, to be sure, know (...) of military matters,
even rewarding their (...). N^w (...) are not ALWAYS to be (...) regulars, is
it much to be wondered (...) to be expected, they will grew (...) Where is the
encouragement for any gentlem^n in the provinces, of spirit and fortune, who
(...), to turn ^ut? Have they ever an opportunity of showing them? Are they not
always commanded? Of (...) vail are the new regulations by act of parliament in
their savor? Will not, and does not, a (...), a particular commission, and
even a rotation commission, supercede, notwithstanding that act, a provincial
officer, of any rank, merit, or standing whatever; as well in purely Indian
matters as others? And notwithstanding this great and constant care to put it
out of their power to do any mischief, yet (to (...) this head with the (...)
New-Englandman) " Unhappy provincials! if (...) are you are (...) the regulars,
they (...), through not is truth part of your (...): If (...), it is all years,
though you happen to be (...) a small part of the (...), and have no (...);
[^he exact case of ours] at if regulars were in their (...) when not (...) with
provincials, and provincials of no kind of vain^ without regulars." --

Now let me proceed to the second opportunity the colonel, in all probability,
lost, of effectually and gloriously finishing the war with the Cherokees, by
his unnecessary return from Etchowih.

Here, though several very forcible arguments a^ hominem might be drawn up,
from the 40 dead bodies that he tells us, six days after the action, so gravely
and positively, without any restriction whatever, "were found in three
different ^^^les," to convince you how such a circumstance must naturally have
spirited up the forces to proceed, especially as that number is of ITSELF
double of our killed, notwithstanding the Indians were so advantageously
posted; yet I shall make no use of it at all to that purpose; and here I am
sorry, that it is entirely out of my power to avoid perhaps giving offense to
my readers of sentiment and delicacy, by calling this a most barefaced attempt
to impose on the public, by this his ipse dixit alone, unsupported by any
evidence, and void of even the least appearance of probability to any attentive
and reflecting reader: for, was not the "march stole upon the Indians in the
night, in order to get clear of the dangerous passes near that town"? Does not
the colonel say himself, " the Cherokees, etc. gave us no trouble 'till we got
near (the town) Etchee"? Does he not farther represent the place of action,
where this trouble happened, as having passes, "the Indians had taken
possession of every pass"? Were not th^n these at least, some of the passes
that the night march was to avoid? If so, is there any probability of any
party's being so owl-eyed as to discover these three holes? farther, who, the
least acquainted with the Indians customs, can think, that they would leave
their friends bodies so exposed, upon so suspicious a place as the field of
battle, for above two days; when, at six miles distance from the army, they had
so many fine opportunities, during that time, of carrying them off, at least of
burying them, when they took the pains to throw them into holes? and if they
were buried, as letter 87 says " the next day (the 28th) the Indians went to
bury their dead, and they scratched up ours and left them above ground;" is it
credible, that any man would wait to dig them up and count them, when it is well
known the army marched that night, and the succeeding day, to their old camp
near War-Woman's creek, which, according to the same letter, is 30 miles? What
time, in this case, had any party, supposing them equipped with spades, if not,
with long nails, to be so dangerously curious? If there was a party, who was
the officer? If a single person was so hardy, what was his name and character?
These were questions often asked, by numbers of gentlemen of the assembly,
besides others, when the army returned, especially when it became necessary to
scrutinize into the particulars of the colonel's letters, to take off that
fatal influence they had upon too many (which I pointed out in my last) who
could not think any gentleman that regarded his character, and especially one
that bore so considerable a commission in his majesty's service, would attempt
to assert any thing so roundly, of such consequence too, that he could not
support: But, notwithstanding this strict enquiry, by such numbers, neither the
party, nor a single man of any character, could ever be named, that saw this
remarkable phoenomenon, though from the colonel's own words "were found" and
those of his adopted letter No. 87 "we had occasion to see," etc. this must be
thought to be a notorious and general fact, that every man in the army knew, or
might know, the certainty of.

Now, though I despised taking any advantage, to prove the point before us,
from the last article, which is given up as altogether fabulous; yet the
colonel must not be allowed to take any, in his mavelous account of the
wounded, represented to be, every one of them, in a terrible condition, beyond
probability: indeed, it may be called a traveller's letter altogether, for not
one thing in the ordinary way happened to this gentleman during that campaign.
The return referred to in letter No. 87, tells us, there were 20 killed and 77
wounded, 67 rank and file, 1 drummer, 1 sergeant, Mr. Monro, surgeon's mate,
and 7 commission officers, viz. ensign Eddington, and capt. Peter Gordon, of
the Royals; capt. Sutherland, lieut. McMartin and lieut. McKinnon, of the
Highlanders; lieut. Tatnal, of the provincials; and capt. Farrel, of the
waggoners. This account corresponds better with the colonel's "above sixty
men," than it does with his "many officers;" however, that is a trifle. What I
would chiefly observe, is, that of the eight gentlemen here named, only the two
first were disabled, the rest very slightly hurt, Mr. McMartin and Mr. Tatnal
the most; (...) certain the whole six thought nothing of it. Now, if out of
eight officers named, we find only two, that is, the fourth part of them, much
hurt, after being told too, that "none of them can walk, every one of them must
have an attendant:" Have we not occasion to suspect, from thence; from the
story of the dead bodies; and that of the Rangers (wherein "I am sorry that I
cannot say any thing in" his "favor," and it would be too indelicate to say he
"behaved most infamously" to them; that the remainder of the wounded, returned
by the lump, were not in a worse condition in proportion, especially as it is
well known, that not more than 3 or 4 at most died before the army reached the
Congarees: indeed I have been informed, by those that were in the action, by
some, that not above a dozen, by others, not exceeding 20 at furthest, were so
badly off as the colonel represents, however, let us allow 27 were, and that
the other 50, if left in a good post, would have been able to give their
assistance, only to defend it if attacked, which that they ought to have been I
shall attempt to show presently.

Enough has been said already to prove "the Rangers are much diminished" ought
not to have been lugged in here as one of the causes of this famous return, for
"they run off to a man" he told us before: but if he intends those that
deserted at Keehowee, what is meant by "some of their horses were employed in
carrying flour"? dild they go without their horses? so far from it, his darling
letter No. 87 tells us, "they deserted with not only their own, but a great
many m^^e:" We are told farther, that "others" (which? horses?) "not very fond
of walking;" why were they not whipped then? no switches at hand? hard indeed!
If the men are meant, I agree entirely with the colonel; I believe they were
not a little out of humor, to return to their friends to be certainly laughed
at; but if they had been ordered to face to the right about, it would perhaps
have made them happy, and as "fond of walking" as any of the rest: I wish they
had been tried.

Now, Sir, the mist being so far cleared away, as to enable us to discern
things a little more in then natural proportions, let us return to our point,
and enquire, whether the actual condition of the army at this time at Etchowih,
only 20 killed, 27 at most disabled, and 50 slightly hurt, made it advisable
for the colonel, merely out of compassion for the wounded, to return; not run
off, by no means, my gentle render, think so; none but Rangers act so "most
infamously" as that: The colonel, he, truly, at midnight (No. 87) "(leaving the
huts standing and fires burning.)" "STOLE" away, very quie^ty and slowly, ONLY
30 miles! not a step farther, before he camp'd; so ease and gentle a march in
that smooth level country, could not possibly you know even disturb, much less
distress the wounded; besides, what (...) astonishing effect this inconceivable
piece of smart generalship must have had upon the savages! In short, this
warlike stratagem, equally surprised all sides. The Indians were as surprised
in the morning, to find the troops were on their march back, as they, it is
well known, were and surprised at midnight, with such marching orders; and the
whole province was surprised at the reasons given, after so many and so great
encouragements that the colonel, by his own accounts, appears to have had to
proceed. Could it be expected, to penetrate into the Cherokee country without
one general "brush," even before, and much less after, the suspicious and
shameful delays at Keehowee, which served no purpose but to instill a mechanical
unknown courage into the Indians, by finding their continual insults tamely
(and as THEY said) not warrier-like borne by the colonel? After so many
incitements for the Indians to stand one general "brush," could it be expected
to lose fewer men than he did? Did the colonel think there would be no wounded?
If he thought otherwise, why did not HIS insuperable difficulties, about them,
prevail at Keehowee, and prevent his marching from thence at all? He tells us
himself, "we might have gone to any town in the nation;" and who doubts it^ why
did he not go then? "it was absolutely impracticable to proceed with the
wounded." Why was not a post fixed, to secure them? He no where gives us the
reason; and does not venture to say openly himself, that he had not men enough
to spare, for that purpose: however, as he says so through his adopted letter
(87) let us quote that entire curious passage here, " the towns of the
Middle-Settlements, satisfied by this time that they could not obstruct our
progress, had nothing for it but to carry every thing away; and our number of
wounded made it IMPRACTICABLE" (his own word) " to carry them farther: we had
no FORT to lodge them in, nor could we SPARE a detachment to cover them;
humanity could not allow of their being left a sacrifice, for the sake of
burning a parcel of empty houses." Here, Sir, the whole difficulty, that
occasioned this famous return, is said to be, the want of forts, and want of
spare men to cover the wounded. Did not capt. Peter Gordon glaringly show, how
easily both these pretenses might be obviated? Did not that brave officer, from
the best post he could FIND, beat off the different attacks of "THE INDIANS,"
repeated for so many hours, notwithstanding he was then so hampered with such a
number of pack-horses before, and cattle behind? And did he not do it
effectually, so as to save "EVERY THING;" not so much as (87) "a bag of flour
lost by the enemy, or a bullock." Is not this a KNOWN and allowed fact, that
capt. Gordon did so? If he had not, I don't know what the colonel would have
done for his breakfast next morning, or his troops either, unless their
knapsacks were full; but perhaps he would rather have gone without, to have had
a better excuse for returning. The leaving the cattle and pack-horses six miles
behind him, for so many hours, looks a little suspicious; especially after he
had wrote from Keehowee, " in MY OWN opinion, it is next to impossible, for us
to proceed over the mountains," and seems, as if he was determined, to make his
opinion good. What else can account for such conduct? If two hundred men, which
were the most that capt. Gordon had with him, including provincials, Rangers,
packhorse-men, etc. could, from the best post they could find, or rather no
post at all, defend themselves so long "and save every thing," what danger
could there be, when a post might have been CHOSEN OUT, entrenched and
stockaded, in little time and with ease, of a few men, free from all
encumbrances, defending the wounded from any attacks whatever of the Indians?
Would not their feeble attempts, so far from being dreaded, been laughed at?
Were Indians alone ever known to attack the slightest stockade or entrenchment
by assault, much less the cowardly Cherokees? Might not what materials the
ruined houses did not supply have been easily furnished from the neighboring
woods? Would not this have eased the wounded greatly, supposing they had been
left at Etchowih, where, by the colonel's corrected account of letter 87, there
were provisions full sufficient for these people, without taking any from the
army, excepting a little beef, for a change? Though it would perhaps have been
rather more spirited, and answered several good purposes, to have carried the
wounded with them one very easy march more (not even 30 miles) or a second, if
they were not attacked in the first, and then left them in a post: Would not 20
men, besides the 50 that were so slightly hurt, with a few rifles from the
Rangers or provincials, been fully sufficient for this purpose? besides,
carrying the disabled a march or two, might have deceived the Indians, and made
them conjecture, this post was more for the tired men, or other purposes, than
entirely with a design to secure the wounded. Is there any reason to think the
colonel might not have taken these steps, and proceeded as far at least as he
did the second campaign, but that he did not try? And did not every motive,
that could possibly actuate the mind of a man of honor, urgently press the
experiment at that time, even supposing the risque had been much greater? Was
he not convinced his enemies were contemptible? Were not the full 1180
regulars, rank and file, he had with him, including sergeants, equal to any in
his majesty's service? Did they show any signs of fear? on the contrary, does
he not tell us, "the troops behaved remarkably (...)"? and had he not 270, rank
and file, of Rangers, and provincials besides, exclusive of packhorse-men and
guides? Was he not acquainted, at Ninety Six, with the "very disagreeable news
from the Greeks" (8^) who had just murdered many of our traders, and seemed to
wait only the event of that expedition to break out entirely against us? Did
not this point out the necessity of striking some blow, to intimidate those
Indians, and make them give us satisfaction? Is it not wholly owing to the want
of such a blow, at that time, that we were obliged tam^^ to put up with so many
murders of our fellow subjects, by these wretches, in cool blood, without
daring ever since to resent them? Did he not recollect too, that the honor of
his majesty's arms was at stake, when he silly stole that surprising march in
the night, which though the Indians might admire, as the monkey did the
wonderful feats of the rope-dancer, as very smart indeed considering who did
them, yet might they not (...) had the some reason as pug had, to think, they
were nothing to what they could perform themselves, and therefore be plumed on
thus discovering their own superiority? Besides these strong motives, where was
his compassion that we have been told so much of, and which alone induced him
to return? Was it all confined to his own wounded? Had he no fellow feeling for
our back-settlers; no bowels for the poor distressed garrison of Fort Loudoun,
whom he had deceived too by tantalizing them with expectations of relief? Had
the 200 poor souls cooped up in that sort, any the least chance to escape the
butchering "hands of the savages" but by his assistance? Was he not acquainted,
before the march from Keehowee, there could be no hopes from Virginia? an
express having arrived at Charles Town from thence 13 days before, then
bringing accounts, that only the 24th of the preceding month (May) the assembly
of that colony had passed an act to make provision for 700 men; which it could
not possibly be expected, could be raised, armed, supplied with carriages and
provisions, and march, time enough to save that garrison.

But all these motives of encouragement, honor, humanity, and necessity,
united together, we find were not sufficient, to prevail with the colonel,
after one general "brush" with the Indians, and that a successful one too, to
march on; ^^s surprising, that such an adept in Indian matters should not
recollect, that no people under the sun are more remarkable than Indians,
especially the cowardly Cherokees, for never rallying again, in a large body,
if once routed; had he thought of this, he might have expected to have
proceeded without interruption, but then, that would have been acting contrary
to "his own" FIRST "^pi^ian." Is it not a most mortifying aggravation, to be
told, at this most calamitous juncture, "we have succeeded in every thing we
have attempted; the Indians have been best every where; they never had the
smallest advantage:" -- "The Indians will not forget this attack sorn." What
does the colonel mean? Was he sneering at our distresses; letting us know, that
he could have answered the general's intentions, and assifted us, but would
not? Upon the whole, may not every man see, the troops could not be seized with
a pannic? and I don't believe there is a man in the province thinks they were.
What then could be the colonel's inducement to return at any rate? Was his
honor offended at the provoking officiousness of the printers, or others, who
had so publicly contradicted his first letter to our governor, by their
impertinent title? Did this therefore oblige him to think another expedition
absolutely necessary, where he might have the NAME also, the only thing this
then acting lieutenant colonel wanted, to make a complete commander in chief,
and, by an appare (...) conquest, GAIN ALL to himself: and that he was not
without expectations of returning again, may be gathered, from his being beard
to tell some gentlemen, before he went aw^^, that "it was mere th^^ probable,
he should return to Carolina again, before Christmas;" about which time to
accordingly did return, not only a real lieutenant colonel of his majesty's
40th regiment, obtained in the interim (by his merits perhaps in painting) at
New York, but an extraordinary commander in chief besides: but these
circumstances, however strong, to be sure, cannot, and ought not to be expected
to have any weight, against a gentleman so extremely remarkable for his
delicacy, candor, and tenderness for the reputation of others.

If general Amherst's orders were so contrary (which is hardly credible) to his
declaration to his honor the lieutenant governor, why did not the troops
immediately return after the surprise of the Lower Towns, without a moment's
loss of time? It would certainly have been less prejudicial to have done so,
and looked like dispatch, and not improbably have answered all the purposes
those forces were sent for; the general's, by rejoining him early enough to be
of service upon that most important campaign he was then engaged in; and ours,
by the mischief being done so suddenly and unexpectedly, and the troops
immediately vanishing, having such a strong resemblance to the Indians own
manner of fighting, which they dread indeed, that they might not unlikely,
through apprehensions of such another dreadful and unlooked for visit in a
different quarter, have been so intimidated as to give us the satisfaction we
wanted. It Is surprising this had no weight with the colonel, one so thoroughly
versed in Indian matters! As the affair was managed, that large detachment was
not of the least service any where that campaign; for it joined the general (as
was before supposed it would) too late; when his glorious business was
completed; though the troops were uncommonly fortunate, for the time of year,
in getting expeditiously over the bar, and in having an unusual fine passage to
New York. To us indeed, the army may be said to have been of prejudice, for the
stroke at the lower settlements, though a fine one for a beginning, losing all
its favorable weight, by the suspicious delays at Keehowee, and the lamentable
retreat from Etchowih that presently followed, served only to exasperate those
Indians the more, which was, very soon after, woefully experienced by our back
settlers: And our representatives in assembly, as soon as they were informed
the troops were on their march back, were so much alarmed threat, as
immediately to address the lieutenant governor, and represent to him, " that
they apprehended the province to be in a much more dangerous situation, at this
juncture (11th of July) than at the time the troops arrived here."

Amongst so many scarce plausible excuses that the colonel makes for his
RETURN, as he calls it, is it not surprising, that the only short and
sufficient one (had it been true) should not be so much as once hinted,
throughout this curious apologetical letter; I mean that which was verbally
propagated, with so much industry, when the colonel, several days before the
army, made his appearance amongst us, that the troops were obliged to come away
as they did, and that it was never intended to go to Fort Loudoun at all. Had
experience shown it to be safer and easier, after such reports had answered
their intended purposes, to unsay an hundred of them, ever so universally
spread, rather than one unguarded assertion expressed in writing?

Though almost endless reflections might be made here, on the colonel's letters
relating to this campaign; yet I shall conclude this head, with only one or two
observations more, and then pass to the next (...) First then, let me ask, how
the colonel came to know, " that there was not an Indian within 60 miles of the
fort; the frontier is therefore much advanced"? Was his camp near War-Woman's
creek half that distance? Did he not march to this camp the first day, upon his
return from Etchowih? And does he not tell us, "the Indians gave us no trouble
the first day's march"? And were they not so complaisant, "the second, that
they intended to entertain us in a very strong pass"? Indeed, if they had not
waited on the colonel so far, they must have been very nimble the next day
after he marched from Keehowee, to have had it in their power to resent the
contempt he had shown their intended entertainment, by killing and scalping one
Jefferson, a Buff soldier, in sight of Fort Prince-George: This is a known
fact, and publicly mentioned at the time, though as publicly unsaid again,
and that in the same paper too that informed us, a week or two afterward, of
the colonel's return to Charics-Town, which he did, on particular business,
some days before the army reimbarked.

How will the colonel clear the following passage of a glaring contraction, not
to say imposition. "'It Is really unlucky, that a peace could not be brought
about; we have succeeded in every thing we have attempted:" Was not this peace
attempted? What else made him halt three shameful weeks at Keehowee, before he
marched?

Let us now proceed to make some remarks on the second campaign, in 1761: in
order, amongst other things, to discover, if the first was of any, and what
use, to the second, as a matter of mere experience.

Here, Sir, I must acknowledge myself extremely puzzled, to find out any
improvement made in the second, upon the first campaign, notwithstanding the
colonel was so many months appointed to the command before he took the field.
The marches were certainly much more slow and tedious now than before, and
excepting that the pack horses were divided into brigades, and these severally
interspersed, and guarded by the different corpse, a general sameness apparently
runs through both, This "disposition" the colonel tells us, "was right in the
country we were to act in," and to be sure it must be so; otherwise, were it
not too presumptuous, one would be apt to think that disposition was more
rightly calculated for the people he was to act against, than for the country
he was to act in; and nothing can more evidently demonstrate, that the
colonel's chief dependence, from the very beginning, was, on the known
cowardice of the Indians, than his setting out with this order of march; for
had they suddenly and vigorously attacked any one corpse, might not that have
been cut to pieces before the next saw its danger, or if it did, could have
come to its assistance in time, when itself was so encumbered with two or three
brigades of provision-horses, besides batt horses, between it and the other.

From the complaints in 1760, for want of posts and spare men, it might have
been reasonably imagined, that the colonel would, as he had it in his power,
have remedied those HIS then insuperable difficulties, for surely HE could not
pretend to be any stranger, either to the Indians want of spirit, way of
fighting, or natural advantages of situation, after he had before (87) "
penetrated into their country, in spite of the united force of lower, middle,
and upper Cherokees, I mean such as were disposed for war, which most of them
were, excepting a few old men: -- and what is equal to forcing our way to their
town and destroying them, have returned and carried a large train of wounded
men, sixty miles at least, through the most hazardous country in the world, in
spite of all their efforts to distress us." If any difficulty still occurred
to him, had he not time and opportunity to get abundant satisfaction, while in
Charlestown and in our settlements, regarding the situation, distance, number
of warriors and houses, etc. of every town in the nation; and to provide
himself with honest intelligent guides, void of any "little design," and worth
more then "a shilling"? Is it not reasonable to think, this experienced
officer, so well acquainted with every thing that could be necessary for the
campaign, would take care to provide accordingly? especially, when he had so
much time, and might have taken much more if he thought proper, as there was no
necessity for taking the field so early as he did.

Supposing him thus furnished with every thing necessary, for it would be a
reflection on his military capacity to think otherwise, we will endeavor to
see, presently, if with the troops he had when he marched from Keehowee,
whether he might not have gone to the Valleys at least.

Might it not, I say, have been expected, that the colonel would certainly have
fixed posts as he went along, to secure the wounded, which we were told, "in a
remote frontier is a distressing circumstance," and "it was absolutely
impracticable to proceed with them," "nor could we spare a detachment to cover
them." (87) Were there any complaints for want of men this last summer, or any
other assistance whatever? Were not about 50 negroes, at his own request,
furnished him, particularly for this purpose; as appears by his honor the
lieutenant governor's message to the assembly, dated the 2d of April last? "
Call. Grant, same days before be marched out of town, represented to me, that in
order to penetrate into the midst of the Cherckes town, through their
mountainous country, with the more success, and with as much safety as possible
to the troeps, he propesed to secure his communication with Fort Prince-George,
by establishing posts as he advanced, where he might lodge his wounded, sick,
and his provisions; therefore he thought it necessary, that I should assist him
with about 50 able negrae men expert in the use of axes and spades. -- I
thought it reasonable to consent thereto, and desire you to make provision for
the same." -- Notwithstanding he had these negroes, was any communication
secured with Fort Prince George; any post established at all, excepting he four
days 913 men, with the wounded, etc. halted at Cowhih, while the colonel went
with 1448 rank and file to Stickowih branch; were they not lugged about every
where else with the army, for thirty days, from the action near Etchowih until
its return to K^^^owee? Does not this show the tenderness for the wounded in
1760 a mere pretense? Does it not also plainly show, that the colonel was
determined to aval himself of them this campaign, in an indirect manner, by
unnecessarily, though ingeriously and over carefully, carrying them every where
with him, that they might unobservedly retard the march, fatigue the men with
carrying them, and give a color to such laboriously dilatory proceedings?

The colonel told us in 1760, "destroying an Indian town may be creditable, but
it is in fact a matter of no great consequence, when the savages have time to
carry off their effects; -- we might have gone to any town in the nation" but "
then we should have found it, or indeed rather them all, abandoned." It Is true,
the cornfieldsd were destroyed last summer, as far as the colonel went; but
would not these have been abandoned too the year before as well as the houses,
and therefore as easily destroyed? Did they not carry off their effects last
year? If they had not, would it have been much matter? Excepting a few pieces
of gold, or perhaps a watch or two, that some of them might have got from the
Fort Loudoun officers, or others they murdered, I believe "their most valachle
effects" and the " every thing that might have been left in their houses, which
you may believe would not ^scape," would have consisted in a few deer-skins,
some paint, beads, and a few strings of wampum. It would very much o^^^ge the
curious, and no doubt highly entertain them besides, if the colonel would be
kind enough to publish an account of the Cherokee movables, in his own fine
picturesque manner.

From the extraordinary risques the colonel run of his own character, and the
pains he and his friends took in one thousand seven hundred and sixty, to MAKE
us believe " the Indians would not forget that attack soon -- they lost at
least 50 men," etc. it appears plain, that he knew, as well a^ the assembly,
what WOULD please us, what WOULD distress the Indians INDEED, destroying them
wherever they were met with, the only thing that can: Is it not surprising
then, that notwithstanding this, the colonel should still go on in the old
road, and be kind enough to give his friends the Cherokees as little trouble as
possible? Why else was not a commission officer sent to major Thomson, in the
last action near Etchowih, with that most interesting order "to go to the left,
behind the hills, and endeavor to get in the rear of the enemy"? Was not a
commission officer sent with all the other orders of little moment to that most
important one; this, upon which so much depended, must be trusted, truly, to a
nameless blundering sergeant of the Rangers? Was it this same nameless
blockhead, that found the 40 dead bodies in the three different holes the year
before? If it was, it is highly necessary the colonel should tell his name, and
be so far cleared of entirely inventing that story himself. We were also told
the first campaign "we might have gone to any town in the nation." It was not
doubted then; and the last summer's exploits have demonstrated, that he might.
What hindered him in 1760? why "(...) should have had a brush to get at it,"
etc. Have we not the greatest reason to think, that, had the colonel only then
made the experiment, and proceeded one march farther, that he would have had
reason to think himself mistaken, and to expect no more interruption the first
than he had last year? After the general brush the 10th of June last, did the
colonel meet with the least opposition afterward? Excepting one indiscreet
waggoner, who was shot by a few sculking warriors as be was going with a torch
in his hand in the night to get water, the army, or any party, not even the
straggling packhorse-men, who were sometimes, only two or three together, a
mile or two from the camp, looking for their horses, w^^ not so much as fired
at, 'till he returned to Keehowee. What did the colonel chiefly depend on this
last campaign? Was it not on the KNOWN cowardice and ignorance of the Indians?
What excuse but that, could be have had, for that otherwise most rash
enterprise to the towns on Stickowih branch, supposing an unexpected
miscarriage had happened; and would not that have been a good and sufficient
plez with all the candid? Had he not had numerous instances to confirm him,
that their general national character was justly fixed, as being abjectly
pusillanimous to the last degree? What signifies fortifications, natural or
artificial, if the people are known not to have spirit or skill to defend them?
Was not the rou^^ to Stickowih branch so difficult, that the men and horses,
many of them, could not keep their feet, but were frequently tumbling down? I
am informed, by many of the gentlemen who were there, and have favored me with
their journals, that one hundred men of spirit and conduct might have kept off
and ruined the colonel's whole detachment. Did not all the guides say, that
route was vastly more difficult and dangerous than any besides, all the way
even to Fort Loudoun? Yet, notwithstanding all these dangers and difficulties,
did not the colonel effectually accomplish these designs, with that detachment
only, and return to the 913 at Cowhih the 4th day, about 11 o'clock, without
the loss of a man, or being so much as fired upon, after marching in all,
backwards and forwards, full forty miles, equal, upon account of its
difficulty, almost to double the distance, of any route the army had already
p^ssed, or were to pass in their march back? Does not this plainly show, how
happily, how honorably, and how easily, all our disgraces, miseries and heavy
taxes, might have been p^ an end to last year, had no delays been made at
Keehowee, or had only ONE march more been ventured upon from Etchowih? The
colonel, in 1760, in one respect, would have run less risque than he did the
year after, as the grand design was, or ought to have been then, the relief of
Fort Loudoun: there would have been no necessity for separating the troops to
destroy the corn fields, which might have been omitted 'till their return: they
might have pushed forward with all expedition, in one compact body, 'till they
had first answered that most material purpose. Now let us compare the two
armies together. In 1760, the colonel had full 1450 rank and file, including
sergeants, of regulars, rangers and provincials only, that warched from
Kechowee; and had he made no delays there, he would have had 1500, besides
Indians. Last year, he had about 2400 rank and file, including guides,
waggoners (now packhorsemen) Indians and negroes. Were not 800 out of the 1200
picked Royals and Highlanders he had in 1760, returned to New York? In the room
of these, he had 980 men, including sergeants, of the battalion corpse and
Burton's regiment, that marched from Keehowee. Were tho^^ troops he had before,
and these men of Burton's, just raised, so hastily collected together, and so
ordinary that nothing but the name of regulars could recommend them, to be
compared together? The colonel will hardly say they were, notwithstanding it
must be allowed, that regiment had all the advantage that a diligent and
experienced major could possibly give it, who did honor to his majest^^'s
service, by his indefatigable application to his duty and care of those troops
under him; yet the whole 800 pick^d men that went away, taken collectively,
were certainly vastly more than preserable to the 980 that the colonel had in
their room. The battalion corpse were as good troops as the former, but there
were but few of them. The 380 Royal, he had both campaigns. The rest, were
provincials, Rangers, waggoners, guides, Indians, and 40 negroes. What value he
would set on the first four of these (especially the Rangers) his opinion last
year plainly shows; And were they not all new-raised troops, particularly the
provin^^^ls? It Is true, he passed great compliments on both, and they deserved
them: but did he not do the same at first, in 1760? and may it not be purely
owing to the same cause, success? He thought mighty matters were done at the
lower settlements his first campaign, and therefore to be sure it was pity to
rob the Rangers of a little praise. In short, he was then "extremely pleased
with the whole." But did not he himself do vasily more wonderful things, last
summer, by his own accounts? How then could we expect any other, than to hear
"the whole" praised again? Had it been otherwise, we should soon have been told
the old story of the provincials "abandoning" their officers; "the Rangers and
waggeners running off to a man;" and most of the guides being "not worth a
shilling." As to the Indians, does he not say himself, in his letter to the
lieutenant governor dated the 15th of July last, " he never could bear an
Indian, before he was acquainted with the upper Chickesaws?" The Catawbas
leaving him at K^ehowee, in 1760, it is certain he thought of n^ moment. Upon
the whole, the number of troops employed in 1760, were amply sufficient to have
gone through the nation: he then said as much himself; at least they were en^
(...) to have prevented the business of the last campaign; which has fully
confirmed that opinion, the superiority in 1761, was more in numbers than in
real strength; especially, as no posts were fixed, and the additional quantity
of provisions carried about ^^^ry where with the army, must have greatly
weakened, encumbered, and retarded the line of march, much more so, than the
additional number of raw and ordinary troops could have strengthened it.

Let us begin with the army's arrival at Keehowee, the 27th of May last. Did
not the colonel then find the Little Carpenter there, and give him a talk to
the Indians, to this effect, that " if any would come in as friends, and s^ay
at (...) peaceably and quietly as friends, they should not be ^^lested or any
of their effects meddled with"? Did not the Little-Carpenter set out with this
talk to the Great-Warrior, the 29th, and promise to return in twelve days? Was
not the giving or sending any talk, at that time, entirely inconsistent with
the governor's advice, asked for by the colonel? Was there any the least
propriety in then giving a talk at all, much less in sending one, especially to
the Great-Warrior, after his monstrous and notorious murder of capt. Demere and
all his officers but one, 25 of his men, and making prisoners of the rest, when
he had granted a capitulation too? Must not the Great-Warrior think this
savoured a little of (...) year's behavior at Keehowee; of which what the
Indians then thought has been hinted already. Only supposing all the Cherokees
had remained peaceably in their town^ what satisfaction could the colonel have
taken of them? He would (...) not have broken his word surely, after promising
that their persons and effects should be secure?

He marched from Keehowee the 7th of June, with full thirty eight days
provision, and reached Stickowih old-town, 34 miles from thence, on the 9th
early in the morning the day the Little-Carpenter's 12 days expired: this place
is also called the Dividings, from the path to the Middle and Valley
settlements parting just there; and would have been an allowed good place to
have fixed a post at, and secured a communication with Fort Prince George. The
colonel knew, from the guides, that he must return here, before he could
proceed to the Valleys, a thing then expected, and ge^rally and publicly,
talked of throughout the army; and what does the colonel say prevented him,
when, at his return to Keehowee, he wrote to his friends, that he intended even
^^^n to go, if the Great-Warrior did not come in; which account was very
carefully and industriously propagated in town; but, notwithstanding this,
general Amherst's printed letter in the London Gazette, and col. Byrd's to our
lieutenant governor, laid before the assembly by his honor in September last,
that must have both been wrote just at his return to Fort Prince-George,
plainly show, he had no intention of going there at all. Now suppose only, a
post had been fixed here, and full one half, or more, of the p^ckhorse loads of
provision^ had ^^en left, under the care of (...) men with a few ri^^es: That
day, with the number of men he had, properly disposed (which to be sure the
colonel, who had seen so much service, could not be at any loss about) would
have been full sufficient to have completed this necessary matter, and made it
impregnable to the Cherokees: However, let us allow two days more to do that
business, and march to his camp near Estatow^h old-town, only 7 miles farther;
this would have eased and secured the line of march, vastly more than the want
of these 100 men would have weakened it; and besides, the colonel would have
had many spare horses, for the sick, wounded, and other purposes. The 12th, the
colonel would have marched from hence, and the action have happened (supposing
the Indians had waited for him) at the same place, and at night he would have
reached Etchowih as before. The day after the action (now the 13th) suppose the
troops had reached Noucasih, where there was a warm townhouse that the sick
and wounded might have been placed in, the bulk of the remaining provisions
might have been left here too; they would have been secured from an attack from
the Indians, as the land all round was cleared at a sufficient distance: but
supposing the colonel had liked the situation of Cow^^^, as it had been
described to him, better, it is not much matter; this place was only three miles
farther, and that whole day's march, supposing he had gone there, would not
have been, at most, above six miles, only one fifth part so far as the march
the year before, upon his return to Keehowee, when there were fewer carriers,
abundantly more wounded, and they too, by description, in a far worse
condition, though, by the bye, more of the wounded died this campaign, before
the army returned to Ke^howee, than the year before 'till they reimbarked.
Supposing then the colonel had pushed to Cownih the day after the action,
letting alone the interjacent towns 'till his return, some of them might have
been useful in his march back. This day, the 13th, suppose an express had been
sent off to Ninety-Six, as before to capt. Russel, for a fresh supply of
provisions to be sent to Keehowee, to wait the colonel's orders. And, at Cowhih
let us halt the next day, the 14th; when parties might have been sent out to
destroy the Indian houses, or rather huts, at Eyoree, only two miles distant
from his camp, and the cornfieldsd thereabouts and about Cowhih, in all about
40 houses and 200 acres of corn; this would have been easy work for that day,
and discovered whether the Indians were inclinable for another brush. The next
day, the 15th, supposing parties were sent to destroy the other towns
thereabouts, or, that the colonel proceeded to Stickowih branch; it is not so
very material which was done first; it will ma^e no alteration in time;
however, as the enterprise to Stickowih branch seems rather to claim the
preference, because, from yesterday's proceedings, the Indians might have been
induced to think the army would go to work at the other towns to day: let us
then suppose, the colonel moved off as before, to Stickowih, with his 1448 rank
and file, including Indians, negroes and guides, the 15th; and left 813 rank
and file, instead of the 913, to guard the sick, provisions, etc. then allowing
him his own time, he would have destroyed the five towns thereabouts, vi^.
Stickowih, Kittow^h, ^^^^roetchih, Tasantih, and Ellijoy, and returned to
Cowhih the 18th before noon, and these troops had the remainder of the day to
rest. The next day, and for two days afterwrds, suppose 700 of the detachment
that had halted at Cowhih, had been sent, with 300 others, to destroy the 120
houses and 180 acres of corn at Usanah, Cowhihtchih, and Burning-Town, the
farthest of them only seven miles distant from Cowhih, marching from town to
town, this work would have been as safe as easy; for, after the affair at
Eyoree, that at Stickowih branch, and that of capt. Peter Gordon the year
before, the colonel must have been convinced, no body of Indians would dare to
interrupt so large a detachment. The 21st, at night, let us suppose these
troops return to the colonel at Cowhih. The next day, the 22d, halt at Cowhih,
and destroy those honses. The 23d, the whole army march back to Noucasih, only
3 miles: a sufficient detachment of light troops might have been sent before,
to destroy the 160 houses and 420 acres of corn at that place, and at Taffih,
Whatogah, Canugah, and Noihowih, in the way thither. And the next day, the
24th, suppose the army halt at Noucasih, and complete yesterday's work if
necessary. Now the Middle Settlements also, on this side Stickowih branch, are
completely destroyed; the colonel has been allowed sufficient time too, seven
days, to march backwards and forwards from town to town, not 30 miles, besides
the day the army is supposed to do nothing else but march from Etchowih to
Cowhih, only 6 miles, which are included in the 30, to destroy in all 390
houses and 800 acres of corn, and 70 of these houses and 100 acres of the corn
close to his camp too at Cowhih; was it not abundantly more laborious and
difficult, besides dangerous, to march backwards and forwards full 40 miles,
with only his 1448 rank and file, to destroy the 190 houses and 530 acres of
corn on Stickowih branch, and at Ellijoy in his way back to Cowhih? which he
did in less than half the time. But supposing the detachment left at Cowhih had
been ordered, might it not, in the time it had, have completed a post,
sufficient, with 100 tired men, to have secured all the wounded, and what
provisions were left, only for a few days? This post need not to have been very
strong; a few scouts might have been ordered to watch it; the army too would
have been all round it; and then the whole body, when both divisions joined
again, might have been employed in destroying those middle towns, etc. by
detachments, which would have saved several days. However, as one would be
determined to differ from the colonel as little possible, all possible
contrivance has been made use of, to go the most round-about way to work that
could be thought of, and I believe it would puzzle any ingenuity but the
colonel's to spin out the time one day longer; besides all this, the colonel
had the whole summer before him; supposing he had first of all laid in a
sufficient stock of provisions at the Dividings, he might have taken his own
time and way too, and completed every thing we wished for, long before the 16th
of October, when, and not before, he left Keehowee to march downwards. The 25th
of June, let us march from Noucasih to the Dividings, only 22 miles: when the
colonel was last at Etchowih, only 3 miles within Noucasih, he could go with
all his wounded, LOADED pack-horses, and litters, from thence to his camp near
War-Woman's creek, full thirty miles: this shows he can make no difficulty
here, unless he is so very unfortunate as never to be able to make one single
good march, upon the same ground too, but when it is a stolen one.

Now we are at the Dividings, let us halt the next day, the 26th. On the 27th,
suppose 500 men had been dispatched to Fort Prince-George, without or with all
the sick and wounded, with the pack-horses, to bring back the fresh supply of
provisions that was ordered from Cowhih the 13th (to be sure it would have been
hurrying matters too much, to have left or sent such orders before); and the
same day, suppose 1200 light troops, free from any encumbrance, only six or
eight days provision each, had been dispatched to the Valleys, might not these
men have done that work too with ease, and returned back again to the Dividings
in that time; the whole march, backwards and forwards, not exceeding 100 miles
at farthest; as good a route too as any the troops had gone yet; and the seven
Valley towns lay all in one open valley, from the first to the last not
exceeding 12 miles. These 8 days would have brought the 4th of July, when at
least 10 days provision would have been left for the colonel's detachment at
the Dividings; indeed there would have been more, because the 500 with the
sick, etc. that went away 8 days before, need not to have carried above three
days provision with them at most, so their allowance would have been saved for
the remaining five days, and in fact ^till they returned.

If the colonel th^nks I march too fast, I would only beg leave to remind him
of the affair in 1760 that t^^k its rise from Twelve-mile creek. He told us
then, that " after marching 8^^ miles from Ninety-Six in three days, without a
ba^ting day," notwithstanding they had drawn the carriages up the steep and
rocky banks at Twelve-Mile creek, "by the force of men; the horses could not do
it, being fatigued and worn out;" and " the men were a little fatigued with a
march of 20 miles that morning, from Beaver-Dams to the river;" yet those
troops could still proceed from thence the same night, and never halt 'till
they had effectually destroyed the Lower-Towns, much more scattered than the
Middle; which they did after a march of 60 miles by 4 o'clock the next evening,
without sleeping. Here are 124 miles marched in five succeeding days (should be
six from 28th of May to 2d of June) without a halt, and three of then
encumbered with wagons, that is, 20 or 25 miles a day for 5 or 6 days
together. Now is there any more than one single day's march, according to the
foregoing scheme, so long? the only long one proposed is 22 miles; the rest are
very easy indeed. In the march to the Valleys, eight days are allowed to light
troops, free the whole time from all encumbrances but their provision, to march
only an hundred miles at farthest, not thirteen miles a day. Is there any
comparison between the marches in 1760 and last summer? In those, 124 miles are
marched in five or six days, many towns destroyed, and much other fatiguing
business done: in these, only 176 miles, backwards and forwards, in 33 days,
even including the separate marches of detachments (see the scheme at the end)
about 5 miles a day: And if the colonel had gone to the Valleys, as was
expected, that would have been but 100 miles more, about 8 miles per day on an
average, only a third part of the marches in the first campaign.

It may not be amiss to observe here, by the bye, that ten acres of Indian co^^
are much sooner and easier pulled up, and effectually ^^^^^ro^ed, th^n one of
wheat or any British grain; as, it is supposed, there are at least 1000 stalks
of wheat for one of Indian corn in an ^^re of ground, and a stalk of this may
be ^^^ed up with very little trouble or stooping.

The colonel, if he had planned his matters well, mi^nt have met the 500 at the
Dividings, on his return from the Valleys; if not, an express sent off
immediately, would, in a day or two at most, have informed him, whether they
might be expected in time. If a disappointment had happened, he could have
returned to Keehowee immediately; if not, another 500 if necessary, might have
been sent to escort the provisions, etc. to him. Now, had this step been taken,
the colonel, two days after he had received a fresh supply of provisions, might
have proceeded to Fort Loudoun, to take ample satisfaction of those principal
aggressors, the Great-Warrior and the rest of the murderers there bouts and
convinced those savages, that we had spirit and power enough effectually to
^umbl^ their insolence; and then, very probably, this would have had some
effect on the Creeks too, and made them glad to give us satisfaction. As (...)
dependence was to be placed on the Virginia forces last year as the year
before; but if the colonel did really expect (which is hardly possible) that
col. Byrd would be near the upper towns about this time, would not his marching
have greatly facilitated his enterprise, and confounded those Indians. However,
if the scheme to Fort Loudoun, which I believe was just as much intended as
that to the Valleys (though this was expected, the other not) had no: been
undertaken, has there not been at least enough said, to show, the colonel had
fall sufficient time, and to spare, to have gone to the Valleys and done the
necessary business there; which had he done, there would not have been occasion
for above a week or ten days halt at his return to Keehowee, at most; indeed,
what purpose could a longer halt have answered? as this would have more than
completed "HIS work." Is it usual to send repeated messages to enemies that we
have so terribly mauled, to c^^x them to come to a tr^aty* Would they not have
come fast enough of themselves, at least with the first invitation? Must it not
be expected, if the Indians were over prevailed upon to send any deputies, that
they would send such as they did? a few second-rate fellows to cajole us, that
had no interes^ at all; with the Little-Carpenter, who had lost all his, and
was besides always known to be our friend, at least in appearance: And indeed
how could he show himself more so, than by so kindly mediating, and
endeavoring to pocify the Great-Warrior, the Standing-Turkey, and
Judd's-Friend? How condescending, to stand proxy for all these three
head-warriors of the nation, when the colonel had declared he would treat with
no others? When this tripple proxy was asked, "are you come to sue for peace?"
how could he but take the hint, and answer Yes? When this limited
plenipotentiary objected to the reasonable and known satisfaction wanted, only
four of the principal murderers to be delivered up, and said, "he must return
to the nation and consult his people, as he could not agree to it himself;" was
not the colonel as good-natured to save him the trouble, by telling him, that
"if the governor would pass over that matter he should have no objection"? This
could not be intended, to be sure, to give him the least expectation, that that
principal article, the sole object of the war, would be remitted? However, was
not this subtle Indian politician as ready here to take the hint again, and
visit Charlestown to try, notwithstanding he had not a jot more power to
consent to that matter here, if not given up, than when with the colonel? He
could not but see, what weight the colonel's dex^rous conduct and powerful
abilities must certainly have, to oblige us to concur. Now, supposing the
colonel had not staid at all at Keehowee, when "his work was completed
already," if the Valleys had been part of it, might not the Indians have sued
for peace, or let it alone, just as they pleased? (Or, was he sure, that WE
could not possibly perform our part in treating, so wonderfully well as HE did
his in fighting?) (...) there, in this case, have been any great danger o^
sudden attack from the Cherokees, in want of p^sions that they could no where
be supplied with from the upper nation?

The repeated messages, and fruitless solic^^tions, (...) the Great-Warrior, to
come down, could (...) serve to make him despise us the more, and ^ncrease his
importance, already too great, in his own nation. What greater proof could the
colonel desire, to be convinced of the nothingness of his laborious
peregrination, than the Great-Warrior's not coming at once? Was not this
abundantly sufficient to convince him he was mistaken; and that it was
absolutely necessary to make (...) "generally expected march to the Valleys" as
soon as possible! But all could not persuade him to keep his word, when a
detachment of 1000 or 1200 light troops would have been sufficient and might
have gone almost ten times to the Valleys, in the time he so destructively
negotiated away at Keehowee and Ninety-Six, 'till numbers deserted* Every body
was tired out and dissatisfied, excepting the favorite suttling company, who
were all of them well pleased " I DARE SAY." You must have heard, how a curious
certificate, relative to the colonel's honor in this marter, was obtained in
Charlestown, which, it is to be hoped, was at last amended, and generally, as
well as obligingly signed, entirely to his satisfaction, with no other view, to
be sure, but, at a proper time, to be laid before the public; for what use else
can this genuine proof of conscious innocence be of, so condescendingly and so
timely anticipated? and the emphatical manner in which it MUST be penned, no
doubt will immediately, upon sight, remove every outward scruple. Had it not
been for the 14 weeks unnecessary delays at Keehowee, and five week more at
Ninety-Six, the colonel might have been in Charlestown long before the
general's orders arrived to go to the West Indies; but these had well nigh made
him come too late to Martinique, to be present even at its capitulation.

Would not the coming away from Keehowee, without sending to the Indians at
all, have shown we despised them at least, and bid them defiance? especially,
if the colonel had but DONE HIS UTMOST to destroy as many as be could the day
of action, the only thing that can have any lasting effect upon them, as the
assembly, the best judges of the temper of the Cherokees, plainly declare, in
their advice to his honor the lieutenant governor in September last, when the
Little-Carpenter first came down to treat: which message is so much to my
purpose, not only in this, but so many other things I have advanced relative to
this campaign, that I must beg leave to quote the greatest part of it here. "
We are very sorry to find ourselves obliged, by the necessities and particular
circumstances of the province, to advise your Honor to recede from the first,
and what you considered as the grand article, that must be infist^d on to
satisfy our honor, and show to the world an evident acknowledgment of our
superiority in arms, and at the same time to revenge the blood of our fellow
subjects the late unhappy garrison of Fort Loudoun. We flatter ourselves we do
not err, when we think that no province in America can have exerted themselves
more vigorously than we have done this year: and with the assistance his
majesty has been graciously pleased to afford us, we had the greatest reason to
hope, a solid and lasting peace would have been the happy conclusion of the
campaign; especially, as the commanding officer had declared, "that he would
not agree to any terms till he was in the center of the Cherokee nation, and
that no preliminaries should ever be signed by him but in one of their
town-houses." Had this been done by a speedy, and, we may say, generally
expected, march, to the Valley, since the army's return to Keehowee, we flatter
ourselves we should not be reduced to this disagreeable necessity, of advising
your Honor to accept a peace, upon terms so precarious, and less honorable
than we had reason to expect: but notwithstanding these expectations, we have
foundation to think, by col. Byrd's letter to your Honor, dated only seventeen
days after col. Grant's return to Keehowee, that a peace was determined upon;
for col. Byrd says, "my orders were, to cooperate with, and assist, col.
Grant. That gentleman writes me, he has completed his work already; so that
could (...) proceed, I should not answer that end." -- We dread the unhappy
consequences that may attend col. Grant's depending too much on the importance
of destroying the Middle Towns; a thing be made light of last year, for in the
letter your Honor then laid before this horse, dated 3d July, 1760, he says,
"Destroying an Indian town may be creditable; but, in fact, it is a matter of no
great consequence, when the savages have time to carry off their effects"
Again; "we might have gone to any town in their nation; but we should have had
a brush to get at it, and then we should have found it, or indeed rather them
all, abandoned," which was the case this year. We conceive that the ONLY THING
in a Cherokee way, that will any effect to bring those savages to a firm and
lasting peace, is, to destroy as many of their people as we can, and when an
opportunity offers so to do, to miss it by no means, which, we fear, has been
too much the case in the late expedition and defensive action: and we are not
without our apprehensions, that your Honor's information, that "their young
men entertain no very respectable opinion or dread of the English manner of
fighting Indians, though our numbers are formidable," may be too well grounded.
From these reasons; as the province is already greatly loaded with taxes; and
as we have little prospect of the war being carried on in a different, and what
we conceive more effectual, manner, than hitherto has been done; or that the
colonel of the provincial regiment, though of great influence, merit, and
abilities, and well acquainted with the interest of the province, and the
proper manner of treating the Cherokees, will ever be consulted: we are REDUCED
TO THE NECESSITY of advising your Honor to agree to a peace, etc. etc."

In consequence of the above advice, the representatives of the province "were
reduced to the necessity of giving," for the reasons therein mentioned, his
honor and the Little-Carpenter agreed upon the twelve articles which were
signed by both the 23d of September last, and then published in the gazettes.
The first, and part of the last, is all I will beg leave to mention here.

Article 1st. " All the English prisoners, negroes, horses and cattle i^ their
possession to be delivered up IMMEDIATELY to (...) Grant." Part of the last
article, "That some of the he^amen from the Upper, the Valley, the (...) and
Lewer Settlements, shall come down to Charles Town, to confirm these
stipulations," etc. What was the principal reason that th^se articles of peace
were not con^^^med and ratified at this time? Was it not, (...) had not brought
down our people that (...) amongst them? If there was any other (...) not, that
the quality of the eight pret^n^^^ (...) C^rp^nter had then with him, (...)
sufficient even to gloss over (...) our g^ea^ necessities might (...) to (...)
at the d^lusi^n?

When to (...) were signed the Little-Carpenter returned to his nation, and
visited us again in Decenter, fin by to rati^y and confirm them, with about 70
men, women and (...) only eight, by his well known (...) November given to
capt. Mac^^^^^ in coming down, were dubbed headmen; of these, perh^ps one or
two at most, might have some little influence, in his or their own particular
town, but not one of any general weight in their settlements, much less
THROUGHOUT the nation, not even the Little-Carpenter himself, as the Fort
Loudoun affair glaringly demonstrated; for, what weight had he then, even in
the upper towns alone? Did not the Great-Warrior and Standing-Turkey sign the
garrison's capitulation; and was it not soon after fatally convinced of their
weight and treachery? What could the Little Carpenter then do? Why, he saved
one gentleman's life. How? Did he not give all he had for him, even his rifle?
It Is true, with his great interest among the Indian wenches, he now and then
procured the garrison some small pittance of provisions; but did not the other
warriors threaten to kill these wenches, if they could find them out? Need any
thing more be said, to prove he had lost all his interest even among his own
people? The Great-Warrior, Standing-Turkey, and Judd's Friend, the three KNOWN
leading men of the Cherokee nation, thought, to come down would show a
condescension beneath them; and when these brevetted occasional headmen came,
were they not again without our prisoners? (horses and cattle, to be sure, are
not worth notice.) Notwithstanding this, we still finally confirmed and
ratified the peace the 18th of December: and why could we not have done it as
well in September, and saved our 500 pounds, not tribute, to be sure, the
Indians will not take it in that light, but charity-money, besides other expenses?
Indeed the dread of ill usage to our unhappy fellow subjects amongst them, was
the principal motive in the assembly, for giving that sum; next to the
colonel's management having so uselessly exhausted our funds, and disgusted our
people in general, that it would be next to impossible for the province to
raise any respectable body of men, even to oppose them should they break out
again, and much more has he put it out of our power to raise troops for other
purposes: Besides, as the peace WAS FINALLY RATIFIED, the assembly, though they
did not approve of its being so without our prisoners being FIRST delivered up,
yet, that they might throw no impediment in the way of so desirable an event,
were induced to vote this sum. But I would ask here, if there was a pin to
choose, between the eight acting headmen the Little-Carpenter had with him in
September, and those that attended him in December? Why did they not the last
time bring our prisoners? They told us truly they were still a hunting; and so
they have been ever since, to this day, poor fellows! Instead of getting any
skins by their long hunt, I wish they may be able to save their own. -- Surely
capt. Watts must have been right, when he said, in the council chamger, at the
time the peace was ratifying, that the Little-Carpenter, "demanded presents, by
way of ransom, for the prisoners not yet delivered." I wish no mistake has
happened, as it is believed we shall find that to be the case, directly or
indirectly, at last, if we have them at all, which is much doubted by many. --
What the representatives of the province, at this time thought of this peace,
and the methods taken to bring it about, cannot be laid before the reader in a
clearer and better manner, than by some of the transactions that passed in
assembly at this time, relative to a certain curious talk o^ the
Little-Carpenter's, delivered to capt. Mackintosh at Fort Prince-George, the
15th of November* copy of which I shall subjoin, as it came to my h^^^s the
other day from a gentleman, who had it from one of our warriors that was
present when the Little Carpenter gave it, and then took it down AS he sp^ke
it, with capt. Mackintosh's answers* This talk the then assembly could not be
favored with a ^ight of, though repeatedly desired, in order to judge properly
of the temper of the Indians, and advise his honor the lieutenant governor
accordingly, upon that most essential matter the final ratification of the
peace; for which, and other reasons, that vigilant assembly, with great
prudence, spirit and judgment, took care not to slip the only critical moment
they had, just before their dissolution, that happened almost immediately after
his present Excellency's arrival, to make him acquainted, as well as they
could, in so short a time, with their opinion on that so momentous a concern to
the province.

Here follow, in their order, all the messages, and parts of messages, relative
to that talk, together with a letter from capt. Mackintosh, and part of a
message regarding the Rangers, and the talk itself; on all which I shall leave
the judicious reader to make his own observations, and beg leave to refer him
to my last for some of mine, if they are thought worth his attention.

Mr. speaker and gentlemen,
COlonel Grant having sent me a copy of the talk delivered on the 16th of
November last at Fort Prince-George, by the Little Carpenter, to be transmitted
to him and me, I send the same for your perusal. I also send you the copy of a
talk from Tiftowih and the Wolf, to capt. Mackintosh at Fort Prince-George,
upon their resettling the Lower Towns, that you may have the most authentic
information I have received relative to these matters. -- think it proper to
observe to you, that col. Grant acquaints me, that he will give the
Little-Carpenter a pretty severe talk, for hinting, that the people in whose
hands the English prisoners are, expect to receive presents for them, though he
(the Little-Carpenter) owns he thinks it unreasonable. -- When these Indians
arrive in town, WE shall be better able to judge what is necessary to be done
for the service of this province concerning Cherokee affairs.

3d Dec. 1761. William Bull.


May it please your honor,
WE observe, by the Little-Carpenter's talk delivered the 16th of last month,
that he had given another the preceding day. We desire your honor will be
pleased to procure us a copy of that talk, that we may have the fullest
information of the present dispositions of these Indians.

3d Dec. 1761. By order, etc. Benjamin Smith, speaker.


Mr. speaker and gentlemen,
FOR answer to your message of yesterday, I acquaint you, that since col. Grant
marched up the country, to proceed upon the expedition against the Cherokees, I
have carried on my correspondence with those Indians by the intervention of
col. Grant ONLY; and therefore, since that time, I have not sent to, nor
received from the officer commanding at Fort Prince-George, any talks upon
Indian affairs, as was the usual practice before; neither has colonel Grant
transmitted to me any other than what I sent you yesterday: but, according to
your desire, I will endeavor to procure any such as you mention, by writing to
col. Grant.

I have indeed received a letter from capt. Mackintosh, chiefly an apology from
the Little-Carpenter, for his not coming down according to the time appointed,
pointed, and sent at his earnest request; however, I send it for your perusal.

Dec. 4, 1761. William Bull.


Capt. Mackintosh's letter is as follows: Fort Prince-George, 16th Nov. 1761.
May it please your Honor,
THE Little-Carpenter arrived here the 14th inst, with the following headmen;
prince of Chotih, the Old Warrior of Estatowih, Capp^, the Second Man of
Stickowih, half Breed Will, Slave-Catcher of Tomawtlev, the Raven of Noucasih
and others, and a large gang of men and women, that he says wants to be down to
hear the talk that your Honor is to give.

The Carpenter earnestly begs that I should write your Honor and Col. Grant,
to excuse, if possible, his not returning to Charles Town at the appointed
time, as he says, I know the nature of his countrymen, the distance of the
towns, and the difficulty of getting the head warriors together; that if your
Honor will excuse him, and he sees this letter in Charlestown upon his
arrival, he will think that I am that friend to his nation and countrymen that
they say I am; and if he does not, he will think otherwise: His doubting me is
owing to a quarrel we had yesterday about provisions, and his ever craving
appetite, and his giving me a very impertinent talk, calling all the world
liars, particularly the province of Carolina. According to the Carpenter's
desire, I wrote col. Grant all he had to say here. I have the honor to be, etc.

Lachlan Mackintosh.


May it please your honor,
THIS house, before they proceed to take under consideration your message of
the 18th instant, recommending that the Cherokee deputies now in town may be
furnished with necessaries to defend them against the severity of the weather,
think it absolutely necessary to be informed, if those deputies have agreed to
the several articles recommended to your honor by this house; and therefore
humbly desire, that you will be pleased to order to be laid before us, any
treaty that has been ratified with them, and all conferences and other papers
relative to the said treaty; and also the Little Carpenter's talk of the 15th
of last month at Fort Prince-George.

By order, etc. Benjamin Smith, speaker.
21st Dec. 1761.

Mr. speaker and gentlemen,
COL. Grant, upon application made to him for the Indian talk desired in your
message to me instant, sends for answer, that the Carpenter's to the governor
was transmitted to him; if there had been another talk with the lieutenant
governor, it should have certainly been sent.

22d Dec. 1761. William Bull.


May it please your excellency,
THIS house having received a message from his honor the lieutenant governor
the 19th inst. recommending some necessaries to be given to the Cherokee
deputies now in town, have resolved, that a sum not exceeding L. 500 be
granted, to be laid out in necessaries, for such of the Cherokee Indians now in
town, to defend them against the severity of the weather, as your excellency
shall think proper: though, at the same time, we cannot but declare our
disapprobation of the methods taken, te make it appear, that the Indians sued
for peace, and of the manner and terms (different from those recommended by
this house) upon which the same is concluded.

By order, etc. Benjamin Smith, speaker.
24th Dec. 1761.



Part of his honor the lieutenant governor's message regarding the Rangers,
dated the 17th of December, is as follows: Mr. speaker and gentlemen,
AS the time at which the continuance of the rangers will expire, is very near,
I recommend ^t to you to consider, whether it will not be prudent to continue
them, until the Indians have given us a PROOF of their sincerity in the treaty
of peace lately concluded, by delivering up the prisoners according to the
stipulation of the first article thereof.

William Bull.


Fort Prince George, November 15th, 1761. A TALK from the LITTLE-CARPENTER, to
Mr. Mackintosh
WHAT is this they are going to do with me and my people now? It is not enough,
for the people of Carolina, to be always telling me lies; but now, the Dreadful
Warrior, as they call him (for my part, I will call him the Corn-Puller) is
making a strong house at Ninety-Six, for me and my people, while they stay
there, and then to drive us to Charlestown like a parcel of sheep. The house
has two apartments, one for the men and one for the women. And now that is true
what the Virginia people and col. Byrd said, that Carolina and col. Grant spoke
with two tongues; and when I was last in Carolina I saw it; for I was promised,
wherever I come, to get provisions, rum, fresh horses, etc. and I never got
either, but starved me. And now, when I bear what they are going to do with me,
I and all my people will turn back. -- Upon which Mr. Mackintosh enquiring how
he came by this news, the Carpenter said, from The Cherokees are known to
despise their wenches, and disregard all they say.
two wenches who left col. Grant at Ninety-Six making the strong house. -- Mr.
Mackintosh told him, how ridiculous it was, for him to believe wenches, who he
knew went always about telling lies, and desired be might send down an Indian
fellow with a white man, to convince him what a lie they invented. -- The
Carpenter said, it was possible they might lie, as well as the people of
Carolina; but tomorrow I will come, and give you a talk to send to the
governor and col. Grant; but you must give me a great deal of flour and beef,
for I am not alone, I have got a great many with me. I want to ask you, what
you will give for each prisoner that is come down; if you pay well for those
that it come now, all the rest will come down; if not, I know not bew it shall
be; one hundred and fifty weight of leather a piece is the leas? you can give
for them, for I was told to deliver them to you. -- Mr. Mackintosh told him, he
heard they was to be given in exchange for their own people. -- The Carpenter
said, that col. Grant told him, their people in Charlestown HE took in war,
and it was what ME would, to deliver them up; if they got nothing for them they
brought down now, they would bring no more down. -- Mr. Mackintosh told the
Carpenter, he could not presume to say any more on that head, but that he would
write to the governor and col. Grant tomorrow when be came to the fort.




Now, Sir, you plainly see the awkward and contemptible situation the colonel's
fine management has reduced us to with the Cherokees, even with our old friend
too the Little-Carpenter. The expense this province alone (exclusive of any
assistance) has been at in the war with these savages, for very little more
than two years, amounts to upwards of L. 750,000 currency, more than equal to
L. 107,000 sterling, of which full two-thirds might have been saved, had the
colonel, in 1760, only marched immediately after the surprise at the Lower
Settlements, without any delays, and loss of time spent in negotiations with
the Indians, which no body, as ever I heard of, thought he had any business
with; the province wanted his assistance only to fight them.

The Indians remain still quiet, and perhaps they may continue so 'till the
French are able to supply them, though even this is very doubtful, for the spring
is not yet far enough advanced, so as to cover the trees with leaves, and give
them the opportunity of that secure cover they so much value in war. Our
prisoners are still out upon the hunt, and if they are permitted to keep them
(as well as the horses and cattle) or are paid for them, perhaps they may take
compassion on us, and trouble us no more, especially as, it is to be hoped that,
it will soon be out of the power of the French to supply them; this the matter
seems entirely to turn upon: but only suppose this contingency should happen,
what one rational security have we, that they would not immediately break out
again and join them? Do not all their talks, all their behavior, plainly show,
they will do only what they please, and are so far from fearing, that they
despise us and make us their dupes; and will keep in with us just as long as it
suits their humor, or 'till they can be supplied elsewhere, and no longer?

The colonel, very soon after his return from the French, after the affair at
Fort Duquesne, was sent to us the first time, and did worse than nothing: He
was sent to us again, a second time, and did twice as much: And, it is very
probable, he has not yet shown us half he can do in the same way; another
expedition may be still necessary; the Valleys, the Upper towns, the principal
aggressors, have not yet lost any of "THEIR most valuable effects;" only
suppose (no unlikely thing) that those should break out again, may we not have
the colonel sent to us a third time " to bring them to REASON"? and does the
province want any thing more, than his presence a third time, as a commander in
chief, to make all our estates as purely negative, as the pay of the soldiers
and many of the officers was to them, when the monopolizing company of suttlers
took their last leave of the camp.

This, Mr. Timothy, is my apprehension, and the principal occasion of this
second trouble to you; and if the matters that are here taken notice of, are in
the least degree instrumental to prevent so terrible an evil, I shall think I
have done the public some service; if not, liberavi animam mea^. But, are we
not particularly and extremely unfortunate, in these glorious and happy times
all round us, when the numerous officers in his majesty's service have so
generally distinguished themselves, that it is impossible to name them all, and
to particularize any, would be showing a want of delicacy to the rest; that in
these times, I say, we should twice running have this gentleman sent to our
assistance, upon a most easy business indeed (...) which he had each time very
evidently in his power to accomplish, and completely answer all our wishes; but
instead of doing it, has made matters abundantly worse, by mistaking his
talents and business too. Have we any thing to blame for this but pure ill
fortune? Many have thought indeed, that the transactions in 1760 ought to have
been timely laid before the general, which would perhaps have had some effect,
to prevent this complete master of insinuation, painting, and design, from
coming here the second time; but whose business was this? You Will say, the
assembly ought to have concurred to give them the proper weight and sanction;
but this could not be had from that assembly, whose three years sitting,
according to law, expired a few days after the colonel left us, in August,
1760; and very soon after the next assembly met, (...) account of his late
majesty's demise arrived, which very soon occasioned that too to be dissolved,
before any thing of this sort could have been properly done; and in the interim
this gentleman was appointed again.

Numberless advantages, no doubt, attend the present glorious times, wherein
his majesty's arms have so universally succeeded every where, but here; not in
the colonel's rhetorical figurative manner, on paper only, but really in the
downright honest British manner. But even amongst us, who are so particularly
unfortunate as to be the only exception, is it a small advantage, arising
purely from these times, to be able to point out the cause of our misfortunes,
in a more open, plain and easy manner, than the times (as reported) no very
great interval since, would have suffered us to do consistent with safety and
prudence? when it was suspected to be, avarice all, and

Our flag, inverted, trail'd along the ground. Then, how could it be expected,
that WE should be able to make use of those delicate expressive hints, -- Sir
Billy served the crown,
Blunt could de business, H^ggins knew the town.
Now, even an American may tell out the grievances of an injured province, in
his own uncouth manner, without danger of giving offense, tempera mutantur. The
heart is now sound, the touched parts are not above skin deep at most, are soon
distinguished, and as soon removed, to the great case and advantage of the
rest. Avarice, artifice, pretense, imposition, designing self-sufficiency,
neglect, and gross misrepresentation, may be pointed at, whatever little dirty
corner they may sneak into and huddle together, without that nice and difficult
delicacy that must have been absolutely necessary heretofore, when so general a
room was supposed to be afforded them. To make use of that nice style now,
would, if we were able, be not only altogether unnecessary, but an affront to
the times, and imply a doubt of that so general and visible change for the
better.

I gave you some reason to expect in my laft, that I would furnish you with a
calculation of the profit gained on a hogshead of rum sold by the suttlers in
Mr. Lyttleton's camp at Keehowee in December 1759; and also of that gained by
the suttling company last summer at same place, in col. Grant's camp. The two
principal suttlers in 1759 paid 32 s. 6 d. per gallon for their rum in
Charlestown. The beginning of last summer this article might have been bought
for 14 s. per gallon, and even at 13 s. 9 d. as I have been well informed a
considerable quantity was then bought by the suttler. Now supposing a hogshead
of rum of about 110 gallons to weigh about 1000 lb. which I am informed is
allowed for a hogshead one with another. -- This at 6 l. per cent. the freight
to Keehewee, amounts to 60 0 0 Say 110 gallons rum cost in 1759, 32 s. 6 d. per
gallon in Charlestown, 178 15 0 Then the 110 gallons and freight cost at
Keehowee in 1759, according to this calculation, 238 15 0 But allowing 16
gallons for leakage and pilferage, which is about 15 per cent. then the
remaining 94 gallons, supposed to be sold at Keehowee, must cost there the
above 238 l. 15 s. that is about 50 s. 9 d. per gallon. AGAIN, allowing the
freight, which was the same last summer as in 1759, to be 6 l. per cent. on
1000 lb. 60 0 0 Then 110 gallons at 14 s. cost in Charlestown 77 0 0 L. 137 0
0 Then deducting 16 gallons as before for leakage and accidents, the remaining
94 gallons will cost 137 l. at Keehowee, that is about 29 s. 2 d. per gallon.

Then as one gallon of rum that cost at Keehowee in 1759, 50 s. 9 d. was never
sold for more (though sometimes for considerably less) than 6 l. per gallon.
The same quantity that cost only 29 s. 2 d. last summer, ought to have been
sold there, in order to gain the like proportional profit, at 3 l. 8 s. 10 d.
(say 3 l. 9 s. or even 3 l. 10 s.) which leaves above 140 per cent. clear gain;
but it was still sold at 6 l. therefore the difference, 50 s. currency, upwards
of 7 s. sterling. per gallon, that is above 170 per cent. MORE (over and above the
other moderate profit of ONLY 140 per cent.) was exorbitantly squeezed out of
the poor soldiers pockets. -- N.B. As the army in 1759 did not then halt above
three weeks, and that in the middle of winter, at Keehowee, and the troops last
summer were fourteen weeks there, the suttling company this last campaign,
besides other advantages in so long a halt, had an opportunity of putting off a
prodigious quantity of other goods, more than the suttlers in 1759 could; for
which reason, the company might have afforded their goods much cheaper, in
proportion, than the others were able to do* in the summer too, when grass was
plenty, it would have been worth while to have had wagons and horses of their
own, especially for so long an opportunity, and this I am told that company
had, which must make their freight much lower still, as there was no danger
then of their horses perishing in the woods for want of food. In my last I took
notice of the advanced price on several other articles.

It Is high time, Mr. Timothy, to finish this tedious letter. The matters
mentioned therein, happened during the three difficult and laborious assemblies
I had the honor to serve in. Whether my remarks are to the purpose, or no, the
candid reader will certainly be the best judge: I am sure, he will at least be
convinced, that I have not, in that time, been inattentive to the most
materials concerns of the public. I shall hardly ever trouble you with a third
letter. I am conscious of no prejudices against any man, or that I have
exceeded the bounds that truth, honor, sincerity, and duty to the public
prescribe.

Prejudices of MOST sorts, of a national nature, between man and man, are
contemptible to the last degree; but ALL those of a domestic nature, are not
only so, but infamous and hurtful too, and subversive of the true general
interest of the community. I call all those demestic prejudices between man and
man, where any set of individuals of the same monarchy, because they happen
accidentally to be born in this street, this parish, this county, or this
larger division of it, or for any other as partial trifling distinction
whatever, are influenced thereby in their interdealings, connections and
judgments, to the injury of their fellow subjects born in a different part. All
the individuals of the same monarchy, from one extreme to the other, ought to
be thought countrymen, and have such a regard for each other as is consistent
with the whole. The small limited preferences that nature may point out among
friends and relations, can be but few, and if not carried beyond her bounds,
cannot have a bad tendency, as none of her rules have. All the men in a parish,
and more so in a large division of a monarchy, cannot be thought to know each
other; time and accident ought to be allowed their due effect with all subjects
alike; and nothing can be more despicable and prejudicial to a community, than
for any set of men, to make the intervention of what they contractedly call a
countryman, the fine qua non, or test of their sincerity, friendship, and
favors. Is not this dividing a kingdom against itself, the consequence of
which we know very well from the highest authority? -- There cannot be many,
surely, amongst us, if any, of these narrow destructive sentiments; but if
there should, they ought to be pitied: And, if a contrary behavior, of
impartiality and generosity among their fellow subjects, receiving them with
open arms every were, will not open their eyes, and make their little hearts
glow with more enlarged and grateful sentiments, and restore them to their
true, general, and equal gravitation, they must be left to feel the natural
consequences such a selfish behavior, when generally perceived, must occasion.
NOTHING can possibly be said for ANY of these domestic prejudices between man
and man; they must be ALL as odious as hurtful. As to SEVERAL of the national
while mankind are divided into different monarchies and governments, and,
according to the fluctuating situation of all human affairs, frequently
involved unhappily into a state of war with each other, SOMETHING may be faid
in their favor: for instance, under the many gallant and prudent officers at
this time in his majesty's navy, may not, and has not, a good use been
frequently made, of that common prejudice that our most useful experimental
philosophers, the honest British tars have among them, that one Briton is as
good as six Frenchmen. In short, national prejudices between man and man may be
sometimes serviceable; but domestic, are always destructive and abominable, and
whatever may be thought, Tros Tyrius que mihi nullo discrimine agetur,
A Wolf or Forbes I equally admire:
That for his generous well-timed intrepidity when the national circumstances
required it, to despise all dangers, and attempt every thing, even under such
great and numerous disadvantages as he had to encounter at Quebec: This for his
determined steadiness and fortitude, to be overcome by no difficulties, but
still to push forward, and clear his way as he advanced, 'till he had fully
accomplished his most important work at the Ohio, though at the same time
death-struck, and carried upon a litter many hundred miles, through frosts and
snows, in the midst of winter. Military heroism cannot well be carried farther,
than it was by these two gentlemen, who will ever be remembered with honor, as
long as any spark of it remains in the British American colonies.

My aversion to appear in print, was the only reason I did not sign my name to
my first letter: As I did not do it then, that is an additional reason for my
omitting it now: Indeed the sensible reader will regard the arguments and them
only; if they are not to the purpose, no name whatever can make them so, and
much less mine. However, it may be necessary to conclude here, with what I told
you when I delivered my last, not to conceal from any person, whose motive of
enquiry is not impertinent curiosity only, what is the real name of

Your most humble servant, PHILOPATRIOS.
FARM, 26th March, 1762.
To Mr. Peter Timothy.
P.S. As you have been so long prevented, for want of assistance, to print the
foregoing letter, it gives me an opportunity of remarking (I wish I could say
of congratulating the public) on the news from Fort Prince-George dated the 6th
ult. and printed in the last weekly gazette, from whence we are assured, this
is the firmest peace that ever was made with the Cherokees; that the chain is
bright, the path is strait, the talk is good, the hatchet is buried, and the
sun shines. -- The white PRISONERS are delivering up, and the commandant
expects the whole every day, with all the negroes, in terms of the treaty. One
prisoner, and no more, as ever I heard of (perhaps a breeding woman, and so
reckoned PRISONERS) was delivered up (before the date of that letter) since the
Little-Carpenter left Charlestown in December last. At the time that double or
treble prisoner was brought in, that politician was said to be coming down with
the rest, thirty more, and might be expected in a few days. Now it seems, he is
gone to Virginia. -- Our prisoners are STILL out a hunting: or, they will not
come away, but th^^se to stay with the Indians: or, they are afraid to stir, on
account of the Northern Indians, who are pretended to be about their towns, and
may kill them by mistake for Cherokees, being dressed and painted like them:
These, and such like ridiculous pretenses, have been long trumped up, and are
still making, and no doubt if the Cherckees should tell us, their enemy Indians
have killed all our prisoners, it would readily be believed, by some, as highly
probable; and those looked upon as very faithless and unreasonable, who would
scruple their veracity, and suspect them to have bad any hand in it themselves.

It Is now (the oath of May) almost a twelvemonth since the colonel, by his own
account to the general, last (...) drove about 5000 of the Cherokees into the
woods and mountains (wherefrom? the woods and mountains: much like driving a
shoal of fish from one pond into another) where, having nothing to sub^^^t
upon, they MU^T either starve or SUE for peace. How did the colonel know they
had nothing? I never heard of much corn he destroyed, excepting in the fields;
what was remaining of the preceding crop, for aught he then knew, was h^d and
secured in these mountains, and it is very probable it was so, besides other
provisions, sufficient to serve them, with a little horseflesh now and then as
a relisher, for it seems, by this inteiligence, they have EATEN all OUR horses.
More houses, or rather huts, are soon fitted up and refurnished, as we know
they saved all their most valuable effects, unless they got spoiled in moving.

The two principal criterions, to judge of the Indians peaceable intentions
(together with their continuing quiet) are, their delivering up our prisoners,
and not joining the French should they be able to supply them. This last, which
is by far the surest sign, would demonstrate their sincerity; but this we have
not an opportunity to judge by yet, and God forbid we ever should. Their long
shuffling delays in regard to the other, give us the highest reason to suspect
their cordiality toward us, as well as to think, the French influence amongst
them, together with the co temptible opinion their young men entertain of our
expeditions and manner of fighting, are the grand cau^es of these proceedings.

Surely, after so many mistakes, the public have a right to expect, that the
co^ (...) will forbear contin^ing these (...) at least 'till all ou^ ^ris^ne^s
(...) ^^^^ered up. (...) been (...) ^een ta(...) on the ^olones's ^.

(...) ^n my boy (...) out this mor(...) from Fort Pr^^^ (...) 18 days (...)
^ince of Chote, and (...) from Chate, with ALL the pri^^^rs and (...), and came
down as far as Great T^^^^, and (...) to New Hyw^ssee for seven prisoners tha^
were there. When K^^et^ta or Sam ^ehn's friend, a young fellow, had heard the
message from the runner, he called cut his two priseners a man and a woman,
belonging to the indepen^^ it campanies, took his gun and sh^t them both,
desiring the runner to tell the warriors they might NOW take them. On the
runner's going back to Talien with this account, they were thrown into such
confusum, that they RETURNED with their prisoners and negr^es. This account it
seems is confirmed by a letter from the Little-Carpenter by a runner,
(RETURNED) to capt. Mackintesh, dated 16th of last month, who says, he has not
forgot his promise concerning the prisoners seattered among their people, and
that he shall, in SIX DAYS, set off, with all the prisoners in their nation.
Sam Behu's friend (he says) while he was out, killed a man and a woman, and, as
he is informed, i^ gone to the French. This murder of which another copy of
this same letter says I hope the governor will think NOTHING, is "very
inadvertently" omitted here, or was too (...) in this abstract) they are (...)
THE PA^^ (...). These pass (...) them to (...) week (...), and (...) above.

T^^us are (...) from hence it appe (...), that our p^honers (...) to be
delivered up (...) than they were in September last. The (...) to " (...)
IMMEDIAT^^." They (...) the same (...), it is true: But THEN, they we^e bare of
necessaries, from having no trade; NOW, they are fall of goods, supplied from
the other provinces, and need not care "a shi^ing" for us. What is this owing
to? is it not (amongst other causes) to the peace being FINALLY RA^FIED, before
our prisoners were ACTUALLY delivered up? If no pe^ce had been ratified, no
traders could, with any p^etence, have been sent amongst them by our
neighbors; but AFTER it was, must it not be expected, that traders would push
amongst them, and try who could get first to market? Might not the p^^^^nces
near us think it a piece of artifice, to defire them, after the peace WAS
ratified, to wait 'till ou^ prisoners come down, in order to secure the first
and (...) of the tra^e to ourselves: I am far from thinking any such mean and
low cunning was interded; I am certain of the contrary: but don't mankind judge
of public bodies, as well as individuals, according to appearances? what else
have the generality to judge by? ^^w, VERY FEW, have been a mitted into the
secrets o^^state; and, in Indian affai^s, interpreters may be manage^, are not
always to be relied on, and will. not SOME FIMES be understood.

Yours, as before.

LETTERS referred to in the foregoing. (No. 81.) Taken from the Weekly Gazette,
of June 4. 1760. [Printed for (and published by) Mr. (...) Wills.]
Camp at Ninety six, May 27.
ON the arrival of the wagons the second time from Monck's corner, we
proceeded on our march the 17th instant, at four in the morning, for Ninety-six
fort, leaving an officer with a detachment from the Highlanders to bring up the
wagons that were not ready to march from the camp; that day encamped at
Miln-creak; 18th, at Hollow-creek, where the remainder of our wagons, with the
detachment joined us: The 19th and 20th were obliged to halt to refresh the
hor^es and repair the broken wagons; here king ^i^^ler and about forty
Catawbas fa^^ured us with their company: The 21st, the arm^ reached the Little
Saluda river, after being severely pelted with rains during the march; the
rains continued all that night, and were so heavy next day ^s to prevent our
marching: The 23d we lodged at Saluda Old-Town, where there is only the vestige
of one house; (...) Mr. A^kin joined us; and on Saturday 24th May, at ten
o'clock in the morning, we arrived at Ninety six, where there is a ^ockade, and
a great number of miserable people, chiefly women and children, cooped up in
it. Captain Thomas Bell who commands this fort is a good sort of a man; the men
who are with him are to be put into pay, and left as a garrison, for none else
can be spared. We halt here till the cattle can be collected, of which two or
three droves are coming up to us. Twenty wagons are sent back to Congarees to
bring up more flour.

"At Hollow-Creek we had an express from Fort Prince-George, which the
messenger lest 13th instant, and since the negro Abram is arrived with
dispatches from that fort and Fort Loudoun. This negro, who is the property of
one Mr. Behn, has certainly executed the commands of the government, in
delivering the letters at both forts, with surprising dispatch, in the midst of
so much danger: His master, who is now here, says he has no objection to his
being made free, but as he has lost his all, except this negro, in the present
troubles, hopes the province will not let him be a sufferer.

"Yesterday colonel Montgomery reviewed the provincial troops, who made a very
decent appearance. The following is the distribution of those that go to the
Cherokees, captains Grinnan, Beaujeau, Watts, Russel and O'Neal of the rangers,
lieutenants Macpherson and Rayford (the last with cattle) of ditto, and captain
Morison of the provincial regiment, with 335 private men: Besides these, an
officer and ten men of t^^ rangers, are to join the army on the march, with
cattle. The f^llowing are the scouting parties LEFT to pr^tect the back
settlements, while the army is gone to the Cherokees, (...) B^own of the
rangers, and lieutenant Vann of captain W^^^'s com^^^^, of ditto, with
forty-seven men, from Ninety (...) ^o fort M^ore and Savannah Old Town: captain
Pear^^^ (...) forty two men from Ninety-Six to Broad-River; (...) Richburgh of
(...) Beaujea^'s company, with (...), from Broad-River to Cat^^^-River, and
^eute(...) with twenty (...), from Ninety-Six to (...), exclusive of officers.

"We (...) we expect to (...) in t^^^ive days; our march thither must be as our
carriages will all (...) which no do (...) The province must raise m^re troops
for in (...) will become of it when we are g^^e, and we shall certainly embark
as soon as we return from the Cherokee country. The troops march with uncommon
spirit; and I believe it is evident where an army was to be maintained it an
uninhabited country, the gentlemen in the direction of our affairs have credit
from their dispatch, as a single hour does not appear to have been thrown away;
and at the sa^e time it is but justice to mention the hearty manner in w^^^^
the lieutenant governor has co-operated with us, without which we could not
have been thus far a^^anced. The Cata^^^ Indians with us are all i^ number
(...) WE EXPECT LITTLE FROM THEM. The cattle are as wild as deer, without the
assi^ance of the rangers, who are all mounted, it would be impossible to
collect or d^^ve them."

Colonel Grant's FIRST Letter. (By Authority.)
The following letter to his honor the Lieutenant Governor, containing a
particular account of the success of his (...) arms under the command of the
hon. col. Montgomery, ^s published for the ^^formation and satisfaction of the
public.

"SIR,
"I Informed you in my letter by Price, that we should march the 28th from
Ninety-Six, which we did, and arrived the 1st of this month at Twelve-Mile
river, (...) had that pass su^^ciently reconnoitred the night before; and that
morning we passed it without up (...), and drew up about (...), upon a r^^ing
ground rear the river. About 4 in the (...) our carriages ^ot to camp, having
been (...) steep and rocky banks by the force of men: (...) not do it, being
satigued and wore out, with a (...) without a halting day.

(...) no opp^^^tion at Twelve-Mile river, and at (...) scouts finding no
Indian tracks near us, both (...) and I were convinced, that they knew (...)
march, and were resolved to take the advantage of their negligence, by a forced
march that night, though the troops were a little fatigued with a march of 20
miles that morning, from Beaver Dams to the river: We therefore encamped in a
square, upon very advantageous ground, and leaving our te^ts standing, with 120
of the king's troops, a few (...), and about (...) ranger (...) a guard to our
camp wagons, ca^^le, etc. we (...) at eight at night, through the woods, in
order to surprise (...), which by that road was about 25 miles from our camp
upon the river. After we h^^ marched about 16 miles, a dog was heard barking at
some distance in our front and the guides informed us, that there were a few
houses about a quarter of a mile from the (...), called Little K^owee, of which
indeed they had not informed us before: To prevent any inconvenience from these
houses, the light infantry company of the Royal was detacked to surround the
houses, and put the Indians to death with their ba^onets. By an accident* a
s^out which had been at Fort Prince-George that very day, were encamped near
the houses, and upon discovering our men, they fired at them; a sew of ours
returned the fi^e, but immediately rushed in upon them, and most of those who
were without the houses, and all who were in them, were put to death with
bayonets, except the women and children, according to the orders which had been
given. We proceeded directly on our march to Estatoe, and found a few houses on
the road just deserted; the beds were warm, and every thing was left in the
houses, which you may believe did not escape. We arrived early in the morning
at Estatoe, which was abandoned about half an hour before: ten or a dozen o^
them, who had not time to escape, were killed; The town, consisting of above
(...) houses, well provided with ammunition, corp. and in short all the
necessaries of life, we plundered and laid in ashes; many of the inhabitants
who had endeavored to conceal themselves, I have reason to believe perished in
the flames, some of them I know of for certain. In order to continue the blow,
and to show those savages that it was possible to punish their insolence, we
proceeded on our march, took all their towns in our way, and every house and
town in the Lower nation shared the same fate with E^^at^e. I could not help
pitying them a little: Their villages were agreeably situated; their houses
neatly built and well provided, for they were in the greatest abundance of
every thing: They must be pretty numerous. Estatoe and Sugar-Town cons^^^^^ at
least of 200 houses, and every other village at least (...) houses. After
killing all we could find, and burning every house in the nation, we marched to
Keowee, and arrived the second of June (after a march of above (...) miles
without sleeping) at four in the evening at fort Prince-George. There must have
been from ^0 to 80 Cherokees killed, with about 40 prisoners; I mean men,
women, and children. Those who escaped must be in a miserable situation and can
possibly have no resource but flying over the mountains, in case their friends
there will receive them: they can have saved nothing: some of them had just
time to run out of their beds; others left their sepann warm upon the table and
in their kettles. The surprise in every town was almost equal, as the whole
affair was the work of a very few hours. They had, both at Estatoe and
Sugar-Town, plenty of ammunition, which was destroyed; and every where
astonishing magazines of corn, which were all consumed in the flames: they had
not even time to save their most valuable effects: The soldiers sound money in
many houses; 3 or 4 watches were got; their wampum, their clothes, skins, and
in short every thing. Many loaded guns went off when the houses were burning. I
had almost forget to tell you that we itnended to save Sugar-Town, as the place
nearest the fort (where they even had a stockade fort): Centries were placed
for the security of the town, but we found the body of a dead man, whom they
had put to the torture that very morning, it was then no longer possible to
think of mercy.

"Our loss is very inconsiderable. Three or four men killed, and lieutenants
Marshal and Hamilton, of the Royal, wounded; it is hoped both will recover, though
Mr. Marshal is not out of danger.

" In my own opinion, it is next to impossible for us, to think of proceeding
over the mountains; and if they had not been surprised, the very country we
have been in, was impracticable, if they had spirit, which I much doubt of. The
correction you will allow has been pretty severe: and I dare say, the whole
nation will (...) come into terms, and will not ^e very (...) (...) and I th^nk
prace (...) for this (...) and the (...) form their nation, that thou (...) we
are ready to give them peace, (...) allies of the white (...); and we shall
(...) express this evening to c^pt D^^^re, to inform him (...) what has
happened, and to desire him to acquaint the Little (...) with it, and to tell
him, that he may come down with some other headmen to treat; but it must be
^one in a few days, or he may expect to ^^e all the t^^ns in the upper nation
in ashes, but that we are willing to give his people terms upon his account
Capt. Stuart will be directed to come with them, and we shall (...) upon the
Little-Carpenter's precuring some corn for the fort (...) can be sent them. The
people in this fort art very (...). I have been oblig^^ to send a guard from
the camp to take charge of the prisoners. They complain that they have received
no say and have been ill (...). Pra^ mention in what very you would choose to
have it garrisoned. We cannot (...) of ours, and we shall only continue here
'^ll we have settled with the Cherckees. It will likewise be necessary that you
should write a letter to encourage some o^ the ^angers, to carry flour and
cattle to Fort Loudoun, and at the same time to thank them for their behavior
here. They have ^^ted with spirit, have done what they were ordered, and have
been of great use to the detachment. Capt. Grinnan has (...) by his readiness
to do every thing he was desired. And in (...) I am extremely pleased with the
whole.

I have been a good deal out of order, since we returned to Fort Prince George;
I am a little better today, but am a good deal fatigu^^ in ^^iting several
letters: I shall be glad to hear from you as soon as possible. Col. Montgomery
desires his respects to you; he does not trouble you with a letter, as I have
wrote so fully: But he begs that you may forward one of the enclosed lette^s to
g^neral Amherst, by an express scooner, if no other opportunity offers.

I have the honor to be, Sir.

Your most obedient and most humble servant, JAMES GRANT.
Camp near Fort Prince-George, June 4, 1760.
(No. 87.) Contained in the first Page of the Wee^^y Ga^^^^^ of the 16th of
July, dated
" Camp at Fort Prince-George, July 2, 1760.
"MY last, of about half a dozen lines, was written 22d June, in the hurry of
our preparation for the march: For ^^^ing that the release of the prisoners
detained at this fort, had not the effect of bringing about an accommodation of
differences, after the blow we had given in the lower nation, notwithstanding
that Tiftoe and the Old Warrior of Estatoe had used all their influence for
that purpose, as well as the Little-Carpenter ^n the Upper nation, it was found
necessary to carry the correction a little farther, in order to sicken the
savages of the war, who, it seems, after calling general councils often,
determined to oppose our entering their country, by arms, rather than trust
their persons in our hands at a treaty, giving for a reason, the putting the
hostages to death, and the seizure and confinement of some more of their
headmen, at Fort Prince-George: These were obstructions to a peace which we
could not surmount, and of consequence hostilities, as far as people in our
circumstances could carry them, were determined on.

(...) Bags for carrying flour were made with all expedition, out of the
soldiers tents and waggon-cloths, and pack-saddles, with the necessary
furniture for them, out of bear-skins and bullock hides; all the invalids were
left to reinforce the fort and guard our baggage, for two shirts, a bear-skin
and a blanket, with a little rum, was all that any officer could propose to
carry: tents for the troops could not be thought of in our circumstances.

" June 24th. Early in the morning we set out on our march and arrived that
night at Okonee-Creek, distant about 12 miles from Fort Prince-George, but the
night before our march ABOUT FORTY rangers diserted, with not only their own
horses, BUT A GREAT MANY MORE, which occasioned a distress in carrying on the
flour-bags.

"2^th. We proceeded from Okonee to a strong post, about half a mile below the
War-Woman's creek, where we encamped in a square, with guards advanced from
each face, and the picquets laying out to cover our people in cooking and
taking up water, the flour with a guard over it was in the center of the
square, as well as the horses tied up in the nighttime; almost all this day we
marched through the ^gliest ground, and most dangerous passes ever troops had
to penetrate through, narrow defiles and gaps of mountains, where one would
imagine a handful of men could ruin an army more numerous far than our little
detachment, however every precaution was taken, where horse could not ^o, which
frequently was the case, the tops of the mountains, which overlocked the line
of march, were scoured by grenadiers and light infantry, This march was about
17 or 18 miles.

"26th. We arrived safe at Stickoe old town 12 miles from our former
encampment, through passes rather more dangerous than in the former days march.

"27th. In the morning we found ourselves within 18 miles of the nearest town
in the middle settlements, called Etchoey, one of their mother towns, and
consequently what they call a beloved one; if we were to be opposed at all,
this day's march was the time to look for an attack, and you may believe we
prepared accordingly, our picquet being formed from the line of regulars, this
night the grenadiers and light infantry were relieved from their share of that
duty, because they were to march in front in the morning, and the two battalion
corpse formed the piquet, which fell in course of roster, to be commanded by
capt. Peter Gordon. A few light horse went in front to make discoveries, with a
few more on the flanks, but where the ground was very suspicious, platoons of
grenadiers and light infantry, were ordered out to scour the thickets, and
other places of ambuscade, the grenadiers and light infantry were followed by
the Highlanders, and the Royal fell in the rear, next a baggage guard of
regulars, in front of the baggage and packhorses, which were led by officers
servants and waggoners, who were armed before we left fort Prince George; in
the center of the packhorses was an efficer and twenty men from the picquet,
and in the rear of the whole was the captain of the picquet with 50 men and one
officer, FOLLOWED by the cattle under the care of a body of rangers.

"After marching 12 miles, four Indians were discovered, one of which was
apprehended by Beamer the guide; he told COLONEL GRANT that the Indians did not
expect us so soon, but to this HE paid no credit, as he was fatisfied they must
have seen us every day on our march, (the Indian is still in custody.) After
marching a mile farther, we came to an ugly kind of plain, covered with wood
and brush so thick that one could scarce see three yards distance in some
places; and an ugly muddy river, with steep clay banks running through it,
overlooked on one fide by a very high mountain, and on the other by hilly
uneven ground, a situation, in all its parts, well adapted to the Indian method
of fighting, and through this infernal place must our road inevitably go,
because the creek or river was only practicable for the baggage and provision
horses in one place.

"Capt. Morison of the rangers [should be per^inci^^, (...) foot] who was in
front, rushed in to scour and reconnoitre the thicket, and advanced bristle,
followed by very few of his people, when the enemy fired on him from all
quarters, he fell with the first fire, and it was a loss, as he was a
determined gallant soldier, never smiling to execute with spirit what was
recommended to him: it would be worthy of the province to do something for his
family as he fell in their service.

" As from at the firing DEGAN the grenadiers and light infamily formed, and
were ordered to charge the enemy in the thicket, which they did with uncommen
spirit, and a very heavy fi^e ensued on both sides, the fire being heavy, the
Royal, which was the rear corpse, and at that time by their situation most
contiguous, were ordered down to the road to furtain the grenadiers and light
infantry, and get between the enemy and the rising grounds on the right, while
the Highlanders pushed on toward the left to attack on that quarter, and get
between them and the mountain* The enemy were forced to give wa^, after some
loss on both sides, and made, as was first imagined, toward the mountain, in
doing which they must have suffered confiderably; they were fired upon bristly
as they were along, as the troops were prepared to receive them: the grenadiers
and light infantry were called in, and the Royal having got to the front of the
Highlanders, by the short out they had through the plain, were ordered to fall
in there, by which means the Highlanders became the rear corpse, in this form
the line faced toward the enemy, who had taken themselves to the face of the
mountain, by stretching away at a confiderable distance: if was upon this
occasion when the action was expected to be mere general then ever, both
franting each other, that the valor, (...), and steadiness of the troops,
(...) itself in a manner worthy of admiration; they received the fire of the
Indians. LOOKING THEM BOLDLY IN THE FACE, with (...) arms, and with as little
concern seemingly, as ever you saw a (...) his pest by a town-(...); judging it
improper to throw away their own, because the enemy kept at too great a
distance for them to cut deep upon them; however they galled us a little with
their rifies, of which they seemed to be possessed of a considerable number. --
Their hooping and hallowing rever staggered the troops, upon which the enemy
stretched away to attack the line on the left flank, and for that purpose came
creeping along a hollow way, out two platoons of lieutenant colonel GRANT's
company, whe^ing to the left to receive them and cover the slanks, they were
forced to retire and keep at a confiderable distance; by this time we received
(...) to face to the right, and push toward the town, which was about five
miles distance, which the enemy perceiving get beyond the hill, and ran as fast
as possible to alarm their women and children in the town, finding is
impracticable to stop the passage, and under the cover of the line, many of the
officers baggage horses passed the river, but several of the barmen mistaking
the ford, the gentlemen lost their baggage, and had their horses drowned: We
fustamed little loss after the line was ordered to face to the right and murch,
but a few passing shots at the lest of the Highlanders wh^ brought up the rear,
which wounded a few men. When we came near the town, some of the enemy were
discovered in the edge of the wood, upon which the grendiers and light infantry
were ordered to march up in columns for forming more expeditiously, and upon
receiving our first fire they chose to save themselves by flight: We crossed
the river and took pessession of the town, which was ordered not to be burnt,
both upon account of the corn it contained, and that we might have houses to
put our wounded men in, the number of which was very confiderable. The action
lasted about an hour, Capt. Manly Williams of the Royal was killed, truly a
gentleman, and an extreme good officer, it is a loss to the service. -- After
we had passed, a party lay in ambuscade for the picquet with our
provision-horses and cattle; the attack first began in the hollow, when our
people thought it expedient to take possession of a rising ground hard by, and
there defend themselves; the attack came i^ such a vari^ty of quarters, th^^
they were obliged to divide themselves into small parties, some with officers,
some with sergeants; they were pr^ssed ^igerem^^^ on by the ene^y, and as often
repulsed them with loss on both sides, the number of wounded being considerable
on our part, a sort of breast-work was made of flour-bags, and they were thrown
within it. The enemy renewed their attack, and being repulsed, thought proper
to retire, and capt. Gordon determined to keep his post TILL^NL WAS RELIEVED
FROM THE CAMP. -- The first thing that was done after our cressing the river
near the town, was to send two bundred regu^ars to supp^rt captain Gorden, and
bring the provision and cattle to camp, they all arrived safe and brought their
wounded with them. -- Capt. Peter Gordon of the Royal was slightly wounded,
lieut. MacMartin of the Highlanders, wounded, and ensign Edington of the Royal
had his thigh broke, lieut. MacKinnon of the Highland light infantry wounded,
Mr. Mun^oe surgeon's mate to the Highlanders wounded, and several more in the
different corpse, of which I have sent you a particular return; Capt, Sutherland
received a corfiderable contusion in the arm. Capt. Greenan joined the
grenadiers, finding it impessible to pensuade his people to follow him; lieut.
Tatnel of the provincials, a promising young officer, was wounded.

" It was tewards worning before the piequet, with the two hundred that were
sent out to j^in them, arrived with their wounded, the provisions, bullocks,
etc. were carried in safe, and our dead buried. -- We stayed in the town of
Etchoe^ two days, with the boards of the houses over us, by way of huts, and
got our wounded dressed, and litters made for carrying them. The next day, 28th,
the Indians went to BURY their d^ad, and they seratched up ours and left them
above ground: in their return they fired from a hill above our camp for some
time, but parties being sent out to different quarters, they ch^se to take
themselves away after being fired upon by some of the advanced guards of the
camp. We found in the town above 500 bushels of Indian corn.

The ^owrs of the Middle Settlements, sati^fied by this time that they could
not ^bstruct our pregress, b^d nothing for it but to carry every thing away;
and our number of wounded made it impracticable to carry them further: we bad
(...) fare is ledge (...); (...) for the (...) of (...) a par^^^ of (...)
therefore we were ordered to march the 29th (...) night with the (...) and
^ight infantry to cover the wounded, etc. who were (...) with a soldier or two
to take care of (...) and (...) and by this prudent (...) an (...) of wounded
men was av^ided, in th^^^ (...) a ready deseribed. -- We (...) early in the
(...) to be (...) the came, in (...) pass (...) in half a (...) of (...) the
dru^s beat, and the line of (...) was forme^, (...) and co^mer from the Royal
were sent out to (...) every thing on the ^ight flank, and the same number of
officers and men from the Highlanders, with the like orders, were se^^ out to
(...) tops of the (...) on the (...) ^^nk; that of the Highl^^ ders sell in
with them in their camp. a^acked them, beat them off, killed two, (...) two
(...), a bag of powder and another of shot, their pipes, (...) and (...)
thir^s. We had one man (...) in this ^^tack, and (...) too, for his thigh was
broke: When our rear came up, another party began to fire on them at the p^ss,
when an (...) and twenty men of the ^^^ldand light intentry were sent to take
possession of the po^^ of the (...) that commanded the ford; he fell in with a
party of them lying on their belliers, with their ^elocks presented (...),
killed tour of them, first (...), and dispersed the rest: in th^s (...) we had
one man sho^ through the body, who dred that night; however our ^^^^ing enemy
grew tired of keeping company with us, and never mele^ted us ^terward^on our
march.

"Before our rear, which was a long one, passed through the place of action, we
had (...) the burying places of the (...) hole there were seventeen b^dies, in
another ^ourteen, and in a third five; upon the whole, from the weight and
continuance of the fire, ^t does not appear that there could be less th^n forty
or fifty killed, besides their wounded and what they lost on their see^ing
parties, which, from the quantity of provisions and ammu^ition taken, must have
been very strong.

"We were in great distress for horses to carry the wounded, MANY of the
rangers were d^^^^ ^ed, and a few bags of flour thrown into the river, in order
to make up the number of horses wanted.

"Thus you see we have pe^etr^ted into their country in spite of the united
ferce of lower, (...), at were disp^sed for war, which ^^st of the^ were,
except a (...); and by what the interpreters tell us, from their language in
the time of action, there were a few Creeks and Choctaws among them; and what
is equal te for^ing (...) way to their (...) and (...) returned and car^ied a
large train of (...) be mest baz^rdo^s ^^^try in the (...), in (...) as, ^ay we
have not lest a (...) of (...) by the (...) BUILOCK.

"The fatigus was immense, not an officer or s^ldier complained, the detachment
has all along been in high spirits, judging nothing too difficult for them. --
Never did greater harmony appear than does among the corpse of our little army,
a happy circumstance at all times, particularly on a derached service, and to
say no (...), believe me, I do not exaggerate, when I tell you, that more
steadness or more real spi^^^, never was among troops. I am, -- Your, etc.

[ (...) P.S. to (...) is refer^^^ book to (...)]

KILLED. Re^als Capt. Williams and (...) ^vivates, 9 Highblanders, Two
^^^jeants and 6 private 8 Previncials. Capt. Morrison, and I private 2
Waggexers. Private 1 Total killed 20 WOUNDED. Capt. Peter Gordon, (...)
Edington, (...), and 32 private 35 Capt. Sutherland, Lt. Mar-Martin, and Lt.
McKinnon, Mr. Munre surgeons mate, a sergeant, 12 corporals, 1 drummer, and 1^
private 31 Lieut. Tainel and 7 private 8 Capt. Farrel, contused with 2 slight
wound in the breast, and 2 private 3 Total wounded 77

Col. Grant's SECOND Letter.
"SIR,
"COL. Montgomery informed you of our intended march from Keowee town. We left
that place the 24th, and foor perceived that our guides had misinformed us
about the reads, very likely from ignorance, a few perhaps had some little
design in representing things in as favorable a light as possible, in order to
induce us to go on, that they might have some chance of recovering their
horses, or some of their other effects; but let that be as it will, they are
very bad judges of the sort of road necessary for the march of a body of
troops, and when we came to have a little brush, they knew no road at all, I
must except from the number Beamer, who is hardy and intelligent, and Boil and
the Collier have merit; Jones behaved well 'till he was wounded; the others are
not worth a shilling.

"'It Is next to impossible for troops to go to the Middle-Settlements without
forming posts at different places: if the people who are in possession of the
country had spirit to defend it, there are passes innumerable; the whole
country the strongest and most difficult I ever was in; a very few men properly
conducted might retard the march of an army. But our friend^ the Cherokees,
were kind enough to give us no trouble, 'till we got near Etchoe, their beloved
town. About SIX miles from that place, we found a considerable body of Indians,
of the Lower, Middle, and Upper Settlements, with some Creeks and Chactaws (if
we can believe people who pretend to know their language). They were posted
upon very advantageous ground, had taken possession of every pass, and seemed
determined to defend the town in the best manner they could; but the troops
behaved so remarkably well, that the Indians were drove from post to post, and
the detachment arrived in very good order at Etchee, though I must own the
march was troublesome, the difficulties of the country not to be imagined, and
the fire of the Indians, though at a distance, as they have a number of rifles,
did execution. Poor capt. Williams with about 17 of our men killed, many
officers wounded, and above 60 men; those we carried with us to the town, and
have brought back with us to this place. I think there was a waggoner and a
ranger killed, and sive or six of them wounded: I am sorry that I cannot say
any thing in their savor, they behaved most infamously, near fifty deserted
the night before we marched, and they run off to a man the moment they heard
the fi^ing begin, at which time poor capt. Morrison was killed, when he was
advancing and doing his duty like a gallant good officer. I assure you he is a
less to the prevince, but be unfortunately was abandened by his people. Poor
(...) that he could not (...) ranger to stand, quit (...) horse and went on
with our (...), and behaved the whole day extremely will, (...). Ones^ was
likewise of use; in the rear, which was has purt, according to the order of
march of that day.

"When the Indians found that it was impossible to prevent our gesting to the
town, they endeavored to cut off our pack-hertes and (...), but were prevented
by the captain of the pirquet from doing us any harm in that way. Capt. Peter
Gorden who was upon ^^at duty, (...) up the best p^st he could find, (...)
their attack, and saved every thing, ^till a reinforcement was sent to him, and
then brough, up the whole to (...) town ca^^p.

"The Indians w^ll not terget this attack soon, they (...) at (...) fifty men,
forty of their dead bodies were found (...) three different (...), I hardly
think that they have so many wounded in preportion, our (...) never fired but
when they were near them. Destraying an Indian town may be creditable, but it is
in fact a matter of no great consequence, when the savages have time to carry
off their effects. E^^^^^ (...) us dear. The killed I look upon as a tried,
people are then prended for; but the wounded in a remote frontier is a
distressing circumstance. We might have gone to any town in their nature, but
we thould have had a (...) to get at it, and then we thould have found it, or
indeed rather them all abandoned, but the lift of our wounded must have
increased, at sixty miles from fort Prince George, it was impossble to send
them back; there was no such thing as leaving them to fall into the hands of
savages, and it was absolutely impracticable to preceed with them; many of them
are carried upon litters, none of them can walk, every one of them must have an
attendant, and some of them are in such a fituation, that they must have two or
three upon the march. The number of rangers much diminished, some of their
horses employed in (...) not very fond of walking; in short, we were obliged to
(...) ^our, in order to get horses for our waunded.

"In this situation col. Montgomery thought it advisable, to return to fort
Prince George, and from thence to proceed to the place of ^mbarkation. There is
not an Indian within sixty miles of the sert, the frontier is therefore much
advanced. The Cherckces have suffered much, but they will not treat, and it is
impossible to force them to come into terms; that must be a work of time, and
you knew that no body of troops can extirpate an Indian nation. It Is really
un^^^ky that a peace could not be brought about. We have succeeded in every
^ung we have attempted, the Indians have been beat every where, they never have
had the smallest advantage, and yet the province is still in a ^crape, for it
appears to me that those savages cannot be convinced that a (...) man is honest.

"We continued two days at E^chce, and then stale a march upon them in the
night, to get clear of the dangerous passes near that town, with our wounded
and pr^risions. They gave us no trouble the first day's march. The second they
intended to entertain us in a very strong pass: they had come in three be aies
near our camp: the most considerable body was scrprized in their camp on the
top of a (...), which commanded a defile where we were to pass: they were
imm^diately beat off, abandoned two bags of flour, a bag of ammunition, one of
file, about 60 blankets, their t^myhawks, wampum, (...). This you see was a
scout of some distinction. Another was used (...) in the some manner; one of
our s^anking parties fell ^n upon their ^ear, fleed upon them at ten yards
distance, when they were (...), being (...) on ^^^ing upon our line of march.
They were beat off every where, (...) much; and indeed they have never come
near us ^^^ce.

"We have left from 6 to 8 months (...) Prince George, and forty (...) but the
garrison remains there unwillingly. The provin^^als defer^ed last night in a
body, and are come off. The independen^y stood to their arms this morning, and
declared to lient M^in, that (...) go to (...) Town and would (...) no longer
there upon (...). I was obliged to march a (...) of light (...) bring them to
reason, and ^t (...) we were obliged to leave a sergeant and (...) of the
Royal, and a (...) the (...), to strengthen the garrison and to keep (...) and
prevent (...). But I (...) upon some method (...), as (...) call off those men,
(...) any of the king's ^roops (...) garrison. We shall (...) down the (...) to
(...). I shall (...) a letter (...) Ninety-Six, (...) of waiting of (...)
Charle^ ^own. I have the (...).

Your most (...) GRANT."
July 3d, 1760.
To be Corrected.
PAGE 4, Line 9. after public, (...) and other reasons." Line 14, (...) "I" --
P. 11, L. 23 (...) juncture. -- P. 12, L. 23, for remain, read remains. --
(...), read reducing. -- P. 17, L. 1^, (...) as -- P. 22. L. (...) for then,
read there. -- P. 24, L. 18, for the, read OUR. -- P. 2^, L. 2, after without,
insert all. -- P. 38, L. 3. after not to. (...) the comma -- P. 39, L. 1. for
threat, read thereat. l. 24. (...) campaign. -- P. 40, L. 6. for contraction,
read contradiction. -- P. 42, L. 26. after campaign, insert too. -- P. 44. L.
14. for was, read were. -- P. 47. L. 10 for last, read the preceding. L. 23,
fir^^e (...) not. -- P. 48. line L. 4. after September last, insert "in
consequence of ^ol Grant's letters to them." -- P. 52, L. 35. for 173, read
170. -- P. 56, L. 14. for this, read the. -- P. 57, L. 14, after will, insert
have -- P. 59, L. 27, after those, insert eight. -- P. 70, L. 29, for
preference, read Preferences. L. 33, for more so, read much more so. -- P. 74,
L. 21, for seven, put SEVEN. L. 39, (...) the) after murder, " and (...) it
before (of which. -- P. 75, L. 6, after passages, insert, 'each big with a
g^^^ing contradiction.'

Gentlemen that have Phil^patri^s's first letter, are desired to correct the
following errors therein, viz.

Page. Col. Line. 1 1 24 from the bottom, after have been, insert rather. 1 1
20 from ditte, for more, read indeed. 2 3 31 from the tap, after his, insert so
long. 2 1 48 from the bottom, for or the Indians, read as the Indians, 3 2 71
from the top, for this and the last, read this last. 3 3 Last (...), for major,
read mag^s.

Day of the Month No. of days destroying the middle settlements, exclusive of
Stickowih Branch. A particular SCHE^^^^ of the Transactions of each Day,
according to the preceding Letter, from the 7th June, when the Army march
(...), to the 4th July, when they are supposed to return to the Dividing. No.
of miles marched by the whole army when together. No. of miles marched by
detachments backwards and forwards. Number of houses and acres of corn
destroyed at the middle settlements, exclusive of Stickowih-Branch. 118 58 176
100 276 late 7 Marched from Keehowee with thirty eight days provisons, and
camped at Ocunnih Old Town, 10 Miles marched by the whole (...) together By
detachment^, exclusive of the Valley, Miles supposed to he marched by ^^is
scheme ( exclusive of the Valleys) fully equal to the whole the col. did march
in 33 days from June 7 to July ^, when he returned to Keowee Miles to the
Valley, and back, if the colonel had gone those. Total number of miles 8
Marched from Ocunnih to Tucktreetchih Old Town. ( N.B. This day and yesterday's
march are exactly comsormable to the colo^^l's (...)anner.) 16 House Corn. 9
Marched f^^^ ^uckareetchih to the Dividings; got there by eight o'clock A. M.
as the colonel did in his own way. Halt the remaind(...)e day here, and set to
work about a post, 8 10 Haltandmdash;Emp(...)bout the post all this day, 11
Halt ^^il; employed as before. After dinner march from the Dividings to
Herbert's spring, near Estatowih Old Town, leaving 100 men in po^^ here. 7 12
This day the action would have happened, according to this scheme (instead of
the 10th) after which march to Etchowih, as the c^^^nel did is his own ^ay. (
(N. B. This town was distroyed by some Indians after the (...) it in 1760.) 12
13 March from Etchowih to Co^hih,, without doing any thing else but send off
(...) to (...) to Capt. Rusiel for more provisions, 6 14 1 Halt at Cowhih, and
destroy by detachments 100 acres corn ^e^^ the camp a^ this, place, and 40
houses and 100 acres at Eyoree 4 10 200 15 to 18 ^13 halt here, while the
colonel, with (...), including Indians, (...) and negroes, march to
Stickowih-Branch, and destroy the following towns, andamp;c. viz. (...)
containing 60 houses and 200 acres of corn. S^toweh, 60 100 In all 190 houses
and 530 acres of corn, 40 (...) ^0 100 Tala^^h 20 70 E^joy, destroyed in their
way back 20 60 N. B. The colonel returned to Cowhih the 4th day before noon,
and halted the other half of the dayandmdash;The same is allowed here that he
took himself. 19 to 21 3 Suppose ^00 of the 813 that halted before, march
together with 300 others to destroy Usanah, houses 20 and 50 acres corn, 14 120
180 Cowhihtchih, 30 30 Burning-Town, 70 100 (The (...) these 1000 men return to
the colonel (having marched not five miles per day on an average.) 22 1 This
(...) haltandmdash;employed in destroying the 70 houses about the camp at
Cowih, 70 23d and 24th 2 This day, suppose the army march to Noucasih, sending
detachments before to destroy Whatogah, 40 houses and 70 acres corn, 3 160 420
Tassih, 20 50 Canugah, Noihowih, and N^ucasih, 100 300 7 N. B, These 7 days
employed in the Middle Settlements Only, exclusive of the 13th when the army
are supposed to have done nothing at all but march 6 miles to Cowhih. 25 The
whole army march from No^cas;ih, back to the Dividings, 22 26 Halt at the
Dividings, Acres of corn. 530 800 1330 27th to 4th July. Send off 500 men the
27th to Keehowee, for the provisions ordered by the colonel the 13th, and at
the same time 1200 more light troops free from all encumbrances, but their
eight days provision each, are detached to the Valleys, to destroy the 7 towns
there, all within one open valley, from the first to the last not exceeding
twelve miles.andmdash;This work is supposed to be completed in eight days,
which bring the 4th July, only 12andfrac12; miles per day; however, if that
time is not thought sufficient, more might be allowed, as there are ten days
still to spare, 100 Houses. 190 390 580 N. B. As this time the colonel had not
reached the Dividings, in the way he proceeded, in his return to Keehowee,
without geting to the Valleys at all. 5 to 12 The colonel has all this time
full to wait for a fresh supply of provisions, in order to proceed farther,
STILL reserving two days provisions to march to Keehowee; but there must be
more than sufficient provisions left to last the detachment to the 14th,
because the provisions of the 500, andamp;c. for 15 or 16 days, would be saved,
as they need not to have taken above 2 or 3 days providsions with them. 34
Destroyed at Stickowih-Branch, and Ellijoy, Ditto at Middle-Setttlements, Total
N. B. From the Dividings back to fort Prince-George.


