A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, SOLD BY RIVINGTON and BROWN, BOOKSELLERS AND STATIONERS
FROM LONDON, At their Stores, over against the GOLDEN KEY, in HANOVER-SQUARE,
NEW YORK: AND Over against the LONDON COFFEE-HOUSE, IN PHILADELPHIA.

At both which Places will be found, a constant Supply of Books, with all the
new Articles as they are published in Europe; and from whence all Orders
directed to them from the COUNTRY, whether in a wholesale or retail Way, will
be punctually complied with.

M,DCC,LXII.

BOOKS OF ENTERTAINMENT, etc.
No. 1 THE CONNOISSEUR, a Collection of elegant Ess^ys and Writings upon the
Modern Manners, Customs, Virtues, and Vices of Mankind, written with infinite
Vivacity, by Doctor Thornton and Mr. Colman. -- The Conncisseur amongst a great
Variety of Subjects, treats on the following; -- A^ Acc^unt of a new Order of
F^males called Demi Reps Account of a Plague lately broke out, with the Eff^cts
of it amongst Members of Parliament. Officers of the Army and Navy, Aldermen,
the Nobili^y, Maids of Honor; at Court, etc. etc. -- Letter on Married People
Fondling and T^ying before Company, with the B^h^viour of a Lo^ing Coup^^^a^
Dinner; -- On Free-thinking. -- Letters complaining of the Whisperers and
Giglers amongst the ^^^ir Sex, Last^nce. of their rude B^haviour during ^isi;
at Divine Service* etc. etc. -- On B^t^; parti^u^^^ly the Custom of staking one
Man's Life against an other. -- Letter, proving the City of London to be an
University, and that Arts and Sciences are taught there in greater Perfection
than at Oxford and Cambridge -- Description of a Quack Doctor, and of a Company
of Strolling Players. -- Character of Lady Belle Modeley, and the Colonel her
Husband, with the Education of their Son and Daughter, and the Consequences
thereof. -- On the Vanity of People making Appearance above their
Circumstances, wi^h the Pride and Poverty of a certain little French Man. -- On
Conscience, with the Terrible Exit of Tom Dare Devil, a Buck and an Atheist,
together with his Life and Actions. On Boxing, with a D^scription of a very
Famous Boxing Match betwe^n Slack and Petit. -- Letter on Duelling, with
Proposals for making Duels public Diversions. -- Letter on Snuff taking.
Letter on the Villas of Citizens and Tradesmen, with a Description of a
Sunday's Visit to a Citizen at his Country House. -- On Dress. -- On Courtship.
-- On Orator Henley. -- On the Turf, with a sprightly Description of the Famous
Newmarket Horse Races. -- Study of the English Language Recommended. -- An
humerous Survey of the Audience at the Play, the Behavior of Persons in the
Boxes, Pit, Gallery, of the Ladies of Pleasure, and of the fine Gentlemen on
the Stage. -- Two pretty Letters from a pretty Miss in Breeches, and from a
Blood in Pettycoats. -- On Frolicks. -- On good Company. -- Characters of a
Gamester, Drunkard, Lounger, Wranglers, etc. etc. -- Of keeping Secrets. -- Of
Matchmaking. -- Of Drinking. -- Of Love. -- Of keeping Low Company. -- Of the
Knowledge of the World, etc. etc. -- This most excellent Miscellany has passed
through many Editions, is universally read, and has greatly contributed to reform
the depraved Taste and Manners of the Age, etc. etc.

No. 2 The ADVENTURER, by the Celebrated Dr. Hawkesworth. -- This Work has
likewise passed through several Editions, is written with Spirit and Elegance,
and contains amongst other Subjects, the History of Melissa. -- The Story of
Opsinous. -- Story of Mr. Friendly and his Nephew. -- Several fine Eastern
Stories. -- A Parallel between an Evening spent at the Play House, and the
several Stages of Life. -- Unhappiness in Marriage occasioned by Impruden
Choice, exemplified in many Characters. -- The Origin of Cunning. -- Folly of
Extravagance in the Story of Misargus. -- The Adventures of an Halfpenny. --
Parallel between Alexander the Great and an Highwayman. -- The Infam^ of
Betraying Private Conversation. -- On Lying. -- The Hero distinguished from the
Man of Modern Honor, in which the not accepting a Challenge, is declared
Honorable by the Articles of War, illustrated in the Story of Eugenio. --
Account of Tim Wildgoose, and of Ned Froth. -- Real Story of the Reverend Mr.
Simon Brown, a celebrated Author, and a remarkable Lunatic. -- A Visit to
Bedlam with Dean Swift. -- The Miseries of Life. -- The Adventures of a Lo use,
etc. etc. etc.

3 The RAMBLER, by the Learned and Ingenious Samuel Johnson, containing some of
the finest Essays in the English Language, amongst the rest, upon the following
Subjects. -- Affability. -- Affectation. -- Affliction. -- Ambition. --
Amusement. -- Anger. -- Authors. -- Beauty. -- Bashfullness. -- Benificence. --
Business. -- Censure. -- Conversation. -- Curiosity. -- Education. -- Fear. --
Flattery. -- Happiness. -- Health. -- Humor. -- Knowledge. -- The Ladies. --
Learning. -- Old Age. -- Pevishness. -- Pleasure. -- Politeness. -- Time. --
Truth. -- Virtue; interspersed with excellent Novels, Tales, etc. etc.

No. 4 The WORLD. -- A Collection of Polite Essays written by the Earl of
Chesterfield, Lord Orrery, Mr. Walpole, Sir. Charles Hanbury Williams, Mr.
Cambriage, Mr. Moore, Mr. Joseph Warton, Mr. ^^ventry, Mr. Whitehead, Sir. D.
Dalrympl^, (...) Mr. Cooper, and many others of the most d^stinguished
Characters in the Annals of Litterature; the Essays are upon a great Variety of
Subj^^^s in genteel Li^e, calculated to divert at the same T^me that they
improve the Taste and Sentiment of the Reader.

5 The F^MALE SP^CTATOR, written by Mrs. Eliz. Haywood to rectify those Errors,
which small, as they may seem at first, may if indulged, grow up into greater,
till they at last become Vices, and occa^^on all the Mis^o^tunes of our Lives;
this is a Book of very great Entertainment, containing amongst others, the
following Subjects. -- Fortune a Breaker of Friendship. -- The Husband's
Stratagem. -- A Widow's Reason for Marrying. -- The ^ountry Ladies Surpirse. --
The hard Fate of two Sisters. -- A Dut^h Woman's Story. -- An Adventure at
^raves^nd. Second Marriages condemned. -- The Coquette a She Fop. -- Story of a
Tailor in Love with Queen Elizabeth. -- Celemena's Story. -- Str^phon and
Celia, etc. etc.

6 The Story of Iemmy and Ienny I^ssamy, written by Mrs. Elizabeth Haywood,
containing much Humor and Adventure, with many useful and ex^mplary Hints to
young Persons of both Sexes, designed to make the Reader wiser and better.

7 Epistl^s for the Ladies, written by Mrs Elizabeth Haywood, containing a
Variety of pleasing Novels, and Romances; calculated to form the Style in
Letter wri^ing.

8 The Invisible Spy, written by Mrs. Elizabeth Haywood, containing interesting
and instructive Histories, with many S^^nes and Adventures.

No. 9 The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless, by Mrs Elizabeth Haywood, with
her Amors and Adventures, containing a great Variety of Incidents, instructive
and entertaining.

10 Letters from Felicia to Charlotte, by Mrs. Collier, containing a Series of
the most interesting Events, interspersed with Moral Reflections; chiefly
intending to prove, that the Seeds of Virtue are implanted in the Mind of every
reasonable Being.

11 The Droll Adventures of Roderick Random, by Doctor Smollett.

12 The Adventures and Deplorable Fate of Ferdinand Fatham, by Doctor Smo^lett,
wri^ten with a View of instructing the Ignorant and entertaining the Vacant,
subjecting Folly to Ridicule, and Vice to Indignation; the Author has roused
the Spirit of Mirth, wakened the Soul of Compassion, and touched the Secert
Springs that move the Heart, adorning Virtue with Honor and Applause, and
branding Iniqu^t^ with Reproach and Shame.

13 The E^^ertaining Adventures of Peregrine Pickle, Commodore Trunnion, etc.
etc. In which are given the Characters of many considerable Persons, now
existing in Europe, and amongst others, that of the Celebrated Lady Vane, from
Mater^als wrote by herself, and dressed up in a pretty Novel, by the Ingenious
Doctor Smollett, in which is exhibited a View of that Lady's Intrigues
Gallantries, Elopements from her Lord, etc. The like not to be equaled in any
other real History of the pr^sent Age.

14 The Devil upon Crutches, with Asmodeus's Crutches, and Dialogues between
two Chimneys of Madrid, an Humerous Satire upon the Follies of Mankind in
General.

15 The Devil upon Crutches in England, or an Humerous Satire upon the Vices of
our own Mother Country.

No. 16 The Life and Adventures of James Ramble, interspersed with the various
Fortunes of certain Noble Personages.

17 Memoirs of a Man of Quality, written by himself after his Retirement from
the World.

18 The Tell Tale, a Collection of pleasant and diverting Jests, and Sayings of
the liveliest Wits of the Age.

19 Love Letters between Lord Gray and his Sister, extremely soft and amorous.

20 Cato's Letters, or Essays on Civil and Religious Liberty, by Mr. Gordon.

21 The Independent Whigg, or a Defense of Primitive Christianity against the
Exorbitancy and Encroachments of Fanatical and Dissaffected Clergymen, by Mr.
Gordon.

22 The Adventures of a Guinea, a most extraordinary Modern Novel, wherein are
exhibited the Character of all the principal Persons who have appeared in
public Life in Great Britain and America during the last Seven Years, with
curious and interesting Anecdotes of their Lives. A Book of infinite
Entertainment, read with extreme Delight by all those who have a Desire of
Knowing the secret History of Britain, her Kings, Ministers, Courtiers, and
others of inferior Rank; the following Characters in particular are to be found
in this Work; King George the 2d. -- Sir Peter Warren; General Wolf; Mr. Pit;
Several Admirals, Generals, and Captains, at Sea and Land; The Lords of the
Court; The Countess of Y -- The Marquis of G -- Several Bishops; The Reverend
Mr. George Whitefield; Lord Loudoun; Lord George S -- The King of Prussia; The
Dutch Nation; Lord Chesterfield; Lord Colvil; Lord L -- Kitty Fisher; Jenny
Douglass; The Momus of the Age, Samuel Foot, Esquire etc. etc.

No. 23 Shaftesbury's Characteristics, 3 Vol. containing a Letter concerning
Enthusiasm. -- An Essay on the Freedom of Wit and Humor. -- Soliloquy. -- An
Enquiry concerning Virtue and Merit. -- the Moralists, a Philosophical
Rhapsody. -- Reflections. -- A Notion of the Historical Draught, or Tablature
of the Judgment of Hercules

24 SPECTATOR, 8 Vol. by Addison, etc. containing Adventures of Brunetta and
Phillis. -- Story of Inkle and Yarico. -- Life of Pharamond. -- Monsieur
Pontignan's Adventures. -- Vision of Mirza. -- Dr. Kennet's Accounts of Country
Wakes. -- Behavior of Charles the Great to his Secretary, who had debauched
his Daughter. -- Will. Honeycomb's Application to rich Widows. -- Story of a
traveiling Dervise. -- Adventures of Amanda. -- Prince Eugene compared with
Alexander. -- Adventures of Fidel^o. -- Story of Basilicus Valentinus and his
Son. -- Flavia's Character and Amor with Cynthio. -- Fairs for buying and
selling of Women. -- Nemesis an Old Maid, a great Discoverer of Judgments. --
Amor of King Edgar with a Servant Maid. -- Story of Hilpa. -- Story of
Penelope's Web. etc. etc.

25 TATLER, by Addison, containing Aesculapius's Recipe for Love. --
Batchelor's Scheme to govern a Wife. -- Medicine for a Scold. -- Life of Mr.
Bickerstaffe; of Dronico a Sharper. -- Description of a Rural Squire, etc. --
Treatment of a young Lawyer that endeavored to debauch a Merchant's Wife. --
Character of Alexander. -- Sir Francis Bacon. -- History of Joseph. --
Adventures of Palmede, etc. etc.

26 Smollet's History of England, with 180 elegant c^^^ of the principal
Subjects of the Work, -- with his History of the War in Europe and America,
minute^ relating every Particular that has occurred in the last sixteen Years,
being a Continuation of the above History of England to the Year 1761. -- The
Public has given such a favorable Reception, that more of this Work has been
sold than of any History published in the Memory of Man. -- The following
Characters of Mr. Secretary Pit, and the immortal General Wolf, are given
here as Specimens of the Style in which Doctor Smollet has written his History
of England, and his History of the present glorious War in Germany, America,
and in the East and West Indies. -- William Pit, Esquire was appointed Paymaster
General of the Forces, and Privy Counselor: He displayed a surprising Extent
and Precision of political Knowledge, an irrisistble Energy of Argument, and
such Powers of Elocution, as struck his Hearers with Astonishment and
Admiration. It flashed like the Lightning of Heaven against the Ministers, and
Sons of Corruption, blasting where it smote and withering the Nerves of
Opposition; but his more substantial Praise was founded upon his disinterested
Integrity, his uncorruptible Heart, his unconqurable Spirit of Independence,
and his invariable Attachment to the Interest and Liberty of his Country. --
The following is the Character given by Dr. Smollett of General Wolf. -- The
Death of General Wolf was a national Loss, universally lamented. He inherited
from Nature, an animating Fervor of Sentiment, an intuitive Perception, an
extensive Capacity, and a Passion for Glory, which stimulated him to acquire
every Species of military Knowledge that Study could comprehend, that actual
Service could illustrate and confirm. This noble Warmth of Disposition seldom
fails to earl forth and unfold the liberal Virtues of the Soul. Brave above all
Estimation of Danger, he was also generous, gentle, complacent, and humane; the
Pattern of the Officer, the Darling of the Soldier: There was a Sublimity in
his Geni^s which soared above the Pitch of ordinary Minds; and had his
Faculties been exercised to their full Extent by Opportunity and Action; had
his Judgment been fully matured by Age and Experience, he would, without Doubt,
have rivaled in Reputation the most celebrated Captains of Antiquity.

27 Lord Anson's celebrated Voyage round the World, performed in the Years
1740, 41, 42, 43, 44. Compiled from his Lordships Papers, and containing a very
great Variety of interesting and affecting Events. Illustrated with Charts,
Maps, Views, etc.

28 Du Halde's History of China, containing a general View^ of the Empire of
China. -- Antiquity of the Chinese Monarchy. -- Two Novels, and a Chinese
Tragedy. -- Captain Beering's Travels into Siberia.

39 Hanway's Travels into Russia and Persia, containing the Rise of the British
Trade to Persia. -- Description of Moscow, Schah Nadir's Palace, with an
Account of the Trade and Religion of the Persians. -- The Manner of ordering
Silk Worms. -- The English and French Trade to the Levant. -- Revolution in
Persia. -- Description of Petersb ^urg. Berlin, the Prussian Guards,
Curiosities in Dresden. -- An Account of Hanover, Hamburg. Altena, Amsterdam,
Harlem, Rotterdam, etc. -- Origin of the Persian Empire. -- Revolutions in
Persia, from the Year 1700 to 1727. -- Birth of Nadir Shah, his Robberies,
Victories, Reign, War with the Turks, the Great Mogul, etc. his Assassination,
and the Reign of his Successor Adil Shah.

40 The Voyages and Cruises during the late Spanish and French Wars, of that
Generous, Brave, and Skilful, but Unfortunate Officer Commodore Walker. Besides
an entertaining Narration of Events in his Cruizes against the French and
Spaniards, the Commodore discovers himself to be perfectly Master of the
Passions, Humors and Affections of the private Seamen; as the Reader will find
in the Course of this diverting Relation of his Adventures.

No. 41. The Lives of the Poets of Great Britain, and Ireland, to the Time of
Dean Swift, by Cibber, 5 vols, Containing the Lives of Chaucer, Spencer,
Raleigh, Dryden, Johnson Cartwright, Howel, Cowley, Davenant, Milton, Hobbs,
Butler, Waller, Rochester, Otway, Oldham, E. of Roscommon, Denham, Etheridge,
Mountford, Shadwell, Dryden, Farquhar, Philips, Garth, Addison, Prior,
Congreve, Steel, Booth, Dennis, Lansdown, Wharton, Ward, Smith, Mrs. Row,
Savage, Swift, Philips Trap, Thompson, Pope, Hill, Theobald, Croxal, Pit,
Lillo, Chandler.

42. Plutarch's Lives, 9 vol. containing, the Lives of Plutarch, Theseus,
Romulus, Lycurgus, Numa, Solon, Poplicola, Themistocles, Camillus, Pericles,
Fabius, Alcibiades, Coriolanus, Timoleon, Emilius, Pelopidas, Marcellus,
Aristides, Marcus Cato, Philopemenon, Flaminius, Pyrrhus, Marius, Lysander,
Scylla, Lucullus, Nicias, Crassus, Agesilaus, Eumenus, Pompey, Alexander,
Julius Caesar, Phocion, Cato Minor, Agis, Cleomenes, Gracchus, Domosthenes,
Cicero, Dion, Brutus, Artaxerxes, Aracus, Galba, Otho.

43. The History of the Devil, written by Daniel Desoc, Father of Mr. Desoc,
late Merchant at New York. Containing his Original, a State of his
Circumstances, his Conduct public and private, the various Turns of his
Affairs from Adam to the present Time, the Methods he takes of conversing with
Mankind, with the Manner of his making Witches, Wizards and Conjurors, and how
they sell their Souls to him, etc. etc. The whole interpersed with many of the
Devil's Adventures, to which is added a Description of the Devil's Dwelling
vulgarly called HELL. The Subject of this Book is singular, the wise Part o^
the Word has been pleased with it, the^r ^^^ry Part have been diverted with it,
and the Ignorant Part has been taught by it

No. 44. The Arabian Nights Entertainments, consisting of One Thousand and One
Stories, told by the Sultaness of the Indies to divert the Sultan from the
Execution of a bloody Vow he had made to marry a Lady every Day, and have her
Head cut off next Morning to avenge himself for the Disloyalty of his first
Sultaness. Containing a better Account of the Custom, Manners, and Religion of
the Indians, Persians, etc. than is to be met with in any Author hitherto
published.

45 The Ladies drawing Room, being a faithful Picture of the Great World, in
which the various Humors of both Sexes are displayed. Drawn from the Life, and
interspersed with entertaining and affecting Novels.

46 The Letters of Pliny, elegantly translated by Mr. Melmoth, one of the most
ingenious Writers of the Age. The polite and spirited Turn of these Letters is
by no Means their principal Recommendation: They receive a much higher Value,
as they exhibit one of the most amiable and animating Characters. Pliny's whole
Life seems to have been employed in the Exercise of every generous and social
Affection: To forward modest Merit, to encourage ingenious Talents, to
vindicate oppressed Innocence, are some of the glorious Purposes to which he
devoted his Power, his Fortune, and his Abilities.

47 The Letters of Cicero to his Friends, translated by Mr. Melmoth, who has
preferred these Letters to those his Author wrote to Atticus in order the
better to trace the Conduct and inquire into the Character of Cicero, as they
show him in a greater Variety of Connections, and he is seen in almost every
possible Point of View.

No. ^8. The Letters of Sir Thomas Fitzosberne, alia^ Melmoth, on several
Subjects, written by the same most ingenious Hand.

49 Dr. Middleton's History of the Life of Marcus Tullius Cicero. -- There is
no Part of History, which seems capable of yielding either more Instruction or
Entertainment, than that which offers to us the select Lives of great and
virtuous Men, who have made an eminent Figure on the public Stage of the World.
In these we see at one View, what the Annals of a whole Age can afford, that is
worthy of Notice; and in the wide Field of Universal History, skipping as it
were over the barren Places, gather all its Flowers, and possess ourselves at
once of every thing that is good in it. -- This Work contains the History of
the Times of Cicero, including a Period above 60 Years, which for the
Importance of Events and the Dignity of the Persons concerned in them, is by
far the most interesting in prosane History.

50 Memoirs of the Great Maximilian, Duke of Sully, Prime Minister of Henry the
Great, which have always been ranked among the best of Books by the Judgment of
all the Lovers of Literature, being fraught with the wisest Maxims of State,
the finest Instructions and Examples of Morality, and a Variety of the most
important Events.

51 UNIVERSAL HISTORY from the earliest Account of Time, with Maps, Cuts, and
Notes, etc. 20 Vol. Containing the History of the World to the Birth of
Abraham; -- History of Egypt to Alexander the Great. -- History of Egypt, of
the Moabites, Ammonites, Midianites, Edomites, Amalekites, Canaanites, and
Philistines, Syrians, Phoenicians; and Holy Land. -- History of the Jews, from
Abraham to the Babylonish Captivity, and from that Period to their Entrance
into the Land of Canaan. -- Explanation of Solomon's Temple, History of the
Asiyrians, Babylonians, Phrygians. -- History of the Medes and Persians. --
History of the Scythians, Lydians, of Sicyon, Afgos, Attica, Baeotia, Thebes,
Arcadia, Thessaly, Corinth, Sparta, and the Athenians. -- History of the
Lacedaemonians, Thebans, Achaia, A^hens, Sicily and Syracuse. -- Rhodes, Crete,
Cyprus, Samos, and the Macedonians. -- History of the Seleucidae; the
Ptolomies, the Armenians, and Kingdom of Pontus. -- History of Capadocia,
Pergamus, Thrace, Epirus, Bythinia, Colchis, Ibe^^, Albania, Jews, Parthians,
Persians, Arabs. -- Roman History from Romulus to the burning of the City by
the Gauls. -- Roman History from rebuilding of Rome to the perpetual
Dictatorship of Sylla. -- Roman History, from the perpetual Dictatorship of
Sylla, to the settling of the Empire by Octavius. -- Roman History from the
settling of the Empire to the Death of Vitellius. Roman History from the Death
of Vitellius to the Removal of the Imperial Seat to Constantinople. -- History
of the Etruscans; the Constantinopolitan History. -- History of the Eastern and
Western Empire. -- History of the Carthaginians, Numidians, Mauritanians,
Ethiopians, Arabs, Spaniards, and Gauls, etc. Ancient Germans: Britains; Huns,
Goths, Vandals, Sucdes, Franks, Burgundians, Lombards, etc. Turks, Tartar^,
Moguls, Indians, and Chinese; -- A general Index to the Whole.

No. 52 The MODERN HISTORY; a Continuation of the Ancient Universal History.

53 Tom Brown's Comical Works, containing, the Quaker's Grace. -- The merry
Quack. -- The Blind Man in Love. -- Letters from the Dead to the Living --
Billet Deux. -- Odes -- Dialogues, of the Dead. -- Epigrams. -- Fables. -- The
Dispensary, etc.

54 Cibber's Plays.

55 Otway's Plays, containing Venice preserved; -- The Orphan. -- The Soldier's
Fortune. -- Ai^^hiades. -- Don Carlos. -- Caius Marcus. -- Titus and Bernice.
-- Friendship in Fashion. -- The Cheats of Scapin; etc. etc.

No. 56 Farquhar's Plays, containing Love in a Bottle. -- Constant Couple. --
Sir Harry Wildair. -- The Inconstant. -- Twin Rivals. -- Recruiting Officer. --
Beaux Stratagem. -- Letters on Love and Gallantry, etc. etc.

57 Gay's Poems, containing Rural Sports. -- The Fan. Pastorals. -- The
What-d've call it. -- Epistles. -- Tales. Eclogues. -- Miscellanies. -- Dione,
etc.

58 Behn's (Mrs.) Histories, Novels, 2 Vol. Containing her Life. -- Oroonoko,
or the Royal Slave. -- Fair Jilt. -- Nun, or the perjured Beauty. -- Agnes de
Castio. -- Lover's Watch. -- Lucky Mistake. -- Adventures of the Black Lady.

59 Adventures of Captain Robert Boil, intermixed with the Story of Mrs.
Villars, an English Lady, with whom he made his Escape from. Barbary. -- The
History of an Italian Captive.

60 Nature Displayed, being Discourses of such Parts of Natural History, as are
thought most proper to excite the Curiosity, and form the Minds of Youth of
both Sexes. -- From this Book, young Persons are made sensible of what
Treasures they possess unenjoyed, and Observations are presented on those
Things, that Distance. Minuteness, or Inattention, may have concealed from
them. The wonderful Works of Providence in the animal, vegetable, and mineral
Creation, are laid open: The Sun, Moon, Planets, with whatever is curious in
Mathematics, Mechanics, etc. are explained: Being a complete course of Natural
and Experimental Philosophy, creating in the Mind of the Reader an exalted Idea
of the great Creator; and in order the better to explain and illustrate the
several Subjects, a very great Variety of fine Cutts are added.

No. 61 The whole Works of Dean SWIFT, containing A Tale of a Tub. --
Gulliver's Travels. -- The Battle of Books. -- The Draper's Letters. -- The
Wonder of all Wonders. The History of John Bull -- The Art of Lying. -- Memoirs
of the Clerk of this Parish. -- Memoirs of Martinus Scriblerius. -- Polite
Conversation. -- Directions to Servants. -- The Story of the Injured Lady. --
Letters between Swift and his Friends. -- Tales, Riddles, all his poetical
Pieces, with his Life and Will, forming a complete Collecction of all the Works
of this inimitable Genius.

62 ADDISON's Works, containing his Poems. -- The Campaign. Rosamond. -- Cato.
-- The Drummer. -- Trial of Tariff. -- Battle of the Pigmies. -- The Puppet
Show. -- Bowling Green Resurrection. -- Of the Christian Religion, etc. etc.

63 PRIOR's Poems, containing The Lady's Looking-Glass. -- Cupid and Ganymede.
-- The Nut Brown Maid. -- Henry and Emma. -- The Process of the Mind. --
Solomon, or the Vanity of the World. -- Epistles. -- The Life of Prior. -- The
Turtle and Sparrow. -- Collin's Mistake. -- The Curious Maid. -- Bubble, etc.
etc.

64 ROWE's Plays and Works, containing Tamerlane. -- Fair Penitent. -- Jane
Shore. -- Royal Consort. -- Jane Gray. -- Ambitious Stepmother. -- The Art of
Getting beautiful Children. -- The Golden Verses of Pythagoras, etc. etc.

65 The whole Works of POPE, published by Warburton, adorned with most elegant
Cutts, containing, his Pastorals. -- Windsor Forest. -- Essay on Criticism. --
Rape of the Lock. -- Sappho to Phaon. -- Eloise to Abelard. -- Temple of Fame.
-- January and May. -- The Wise of Bath. -- The Thebais of Statius. -- Essay on
Man. -- Universal Prayer. -- Moral Essays. -- Satires. -- Dunciad. -- Memoris
of Martinus Scriblerus. -- Memoirs of P. P. Clerk of this Parish. -- The Poet
Laureat. -- His Letters to and from Dean Swift, to and from Lord Bolinbroke, to
and from Gay, Dr. Arbuthnot, Mr. Allen of Bath, and Bishop Warburton. -- An
Account of Mr. Pope's Death and Will.

No. 66 POPE's Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.

67 Shakespeare's Plays, containing The Tempest. -- Midsummer Night's Dream. --
Two Gentlemen of Verona. -- Merry Wives of Windsor. -- Measure for Measure. --
Comedy of Errors. -- Much ado. -- Merchant of Venice. -- Love's Labor lost. --
As you like it. -- Taming of the Shrew. -- All Is well that ends well. --
Twelfth, Night. -- Winter's Tale. -- King Lear. -- King John. -- Richard II. --
King Henry IV. two Parts. -- Henry V. -- Henry VI. -- King Henry VI. Part 2 and
3. -- King Richard III. -- King Henry VIII. -- Timon of Athens. -- Coriolanus.
-- Julius Caesar. -- Anthony and Cleopatra -- Titus Andronicus. Macbeth. --
Troilus and Cressida. -- Cymbeline. -- Romeo and Juliet. -- Hamlet. -- Othello.

68 DRYDEN's Plays, 6 Vols containing an Essay on Dramatic Poesy. -- Wild
Gallant. -- Rival Ladies. Indian Queen. -- Indian Emperor. -- Secret Love. --
Sir Martin Mar all. -- Tempest. -- Evening's Love, or Royal Marriages Alamode.
-- Affignation -- Amboyna. -- The State of Innocence. -- Aurengzebe. -- All for
Love, or the World well lost. -- Limerham. Oedipus. -- Troilus and Cressida. --
Spanish Friar. -- Duke of Guise. -- Albion and Albianus. -- Don Sebastian. --
Amphitrion. -- Cleomenes, King of Sparta. -- King Arthur. -- Love Triumphant.

69 DRYDEN's Virgil, 3 Vol. with Cuts, containing Life of Virgil. -- Pastorals.
-- Georgics. -- Aeneis, first six Books. Aeneis, last six Books.

70 DRYDEN's Miscellany Poems, containing Mac Flecknoe. -- Absalom and
Achitophel. -- Year of Wonders. -- Plague of Athens. -- Hind and Panther. --
Pastorals, Tales, etc.

No. 71 DRYDEN's Satires of Iuvenal.

72 DRYDEN's Fables, ancient and modern.

73 THOMPSON's Seasons.

74 THOMPSON's Works, containing The Castle of Indolence. -- The Tragedies of
Sophonisba, Agameninon, Tancred and Segismunda, Coriolanus, Edward and
Eleonora, Alfred. -- Poems, etc. etc.

75 VANBRUGH's Plays, containing The Relapse, or Virtue in Danger. -- The
Provoked Wife. -- Aesop. -- The Confederacy. -- The False Friend. -- The
Mistake. -- The Journey to London, etc. etc.

76 YOUNG's Night Thoughts.

77 YOUNG's Love of Fame.

78 YOUNG's Works, in 4 Vols. Containing Love of Fame. -- Last Day. --
Paraphrase on Job. -- Busiris. -- Revenge. -- Brothers; and Centaur.

79 Jewish Spy, by the Marquis d'Argens, 5 Vols. containing, Adventures of a
Carmelite and Sempstress. -- Two Husbands that cuckolded each other. --
Adventures of a Cordelier and a Female Votary; a Frenchman and a Spaniard, a
Chemist and his Wife. Adventures of a sick Scholar with three Physicians; an
Officer with a Coquette; and Innkeeper's Son with an English Woman of Quality.
-- Abelard, his grievous Calamities. -- Algerine Women fond of Europeans, their
Amors, etc.

80 Ladies Library; 3 Vols. On Employment; Wit and Delicacy; Recreation, Dress,
Chastity, Charity, Detraction. -- Of the Duties of a Daughter, a Wife, a
Mother, a Widow, and a Mistress. -- Of Religion, Prayer, Fasting, Repentance,
the Sacrament, Zeal, Perfection, and Scruples.

81 The Young Miss's Magazine; containing, Dialogues between a Governess of a
genteel Boarding School, and her Scholars: In which their several Faults are
pointed out, and the easy way to mend them; as well as to think, speak and act
properly; forming their Hearts to Goodness, and enlightening their
Understanding, with useful Knowledge.

No. 81 The Young Ladies Magazine: Or, Dialogues between a discreet Governess,
and several young Ladies of the first Rank under her Education; designed for
the Use and Improvement of young Ladies, when the most dangerous of all Stages
of Life, comes on, about Fourteen and Fifteen, when they are entering into the
World. The Design of these admirable Performances, is to give a just Way of
thinking, speaking and acting to young People, according to their different
Stations of Life, and they every Way do contribute to enlighten the
Understanding, and form the Heart to Goodness.

82 A new and General Biographical Dictionary; containing an Historical and
Critical Account of the Lives and Writings of the most Eminent Persons in every
Nation; particularly the British and Irish; from the earliest Accounts of Time
to the present Period. Wherein their remarkable Actions or Sufferings, their
Virtues, Parts, and Learning are particularly displayed; with a Catalogue of
their Literary Productions. -- As it is unnecessary to show the usefulness of
an accurate Historical Account of such persons and facts as have been the
objects of public attention in all Ages and Nations, nothing more can be
expected in a preface to this work, than an account of the manner in which it
is executed, and the reasons why it was not thought to be precluded by any
other work of the same kind that is already extent.

The principal of these works are Bayle's Historical and Critical Dictionary;
the General Dictionary; the Biographia Britanniaa; the Athenae Oxonienses; and
Mr. Collier's Historical Dictionary.

Bayle's Work is in 5 large Volumes in Folio, yet there are many persons of
great eminence both ancient and Modern, whom Bail has not so much as named,
though he has mentioned others of whom nothing is known, but that they were the
occasion of the subject of some useless controversy, the very Terms of which
few understand, and the Merits of which a small part even of those few are
disposed to examine. Bayle's Lives are indeed nothing more than a Vehicle for
his Criticism, and his Work seems to have been chiefly the transcript of a
voluminous Common-place-book, in which he inserted his own remarks on the
various authors he had read, and gratified his peculiar turn of mind by
discussing their opinions and correcting their mistakes; it is therefore rather
a miscellany of critical and metaphysical speculation^, than a system of
Biography. The General Dictionary, as it includes Bail, is so far liable to
the same objection: it is indeed augmented with other Articles, but they are
also written in Bayle's manner, and for that Reason the work upon the whole is
not much better adapted to general use. There are many redundancies, and (...)
there are many defects; and there is besides an objection of more weight though
of another kind^ the work consisting of no less then ten volumes in folio, for
which the purchaser must pay more tha^ so many Pounds.

The Biographia Britannica, is indeed much more an historical work than
Bayle's, but it is written upon a much less extensive plan; it contains the
Lives of those eminent persons only who were born in Great Britain and Ireland,
and of these the (...) al^ne are selected, though many others have a ^^gree of
eminence sufficient to render them objects of general curiosity.

The Athenae Oxonienses is written on a plan still more contracted, for it
contains an account of such authors only, as reueived their academic education
at the University of Oxford; so that neither, nor (...) of these performanc^,
however voluminous and expensive, contain what ought to be found in an
Universal Biographical Dictionary, and such is the work which we now offer to
the Public.

This contains some account of every life that has been sufficiently
distinguished to be recorded; not indeed a list of all the names that are to be
found in chronological and regal tables, for of many nominal rulers both of the
Church and State, it can only be said that they lived and died; but a judicious
narrative of the actions or writings, the honors and disgraces of all those
whose Virtues, Parts, Learning, or even Vices, have preserved them from
oblivion in any writing, of whatever age and in whatever language.

This Work will therefore naturally include a history of the most remarkable
and interesting transactions, an historical account of the progress of
learning, and an abstract of all opinions and principles by which the world has
been influenced in all its extent and duration. We have been particularly
careful to do justice to the learned and ingenious of our own Country, whose
works are justly held in the highest esteem; and we have also been attentive to
the instruction and amusement of the Ladies, not only by decorating our work
with the Names of all who have done honor to the Sex, but by making our
account of others sufficiently particular to excite and gratify curiosity; and,
where the subject would admit, to interest the passions, without wearying
attention by minute prolixity or idle speculations.

In the execution of this plan we have not had recourse merely to dictionaries,
nor contented ourselves with supplying the defects of one dictionary from
another, and cutting off the redundancies of all; but we have collected from
every performance in every language that had any relation to our design. For
the lives of authors, we have had recourse to their works, and for the lives of
others, to the best memoirs that are extant concerning them; we shall, however,
notwithstanding the extent of our undertaking, and the labor and expense
necessary to the execution of it, comprize this work within Twelve volumes in
Octavo, and sell them for Six Shillings a volume; so that the price of the
whole will be no more than three pounds twelve shillings when bound. In a work
so various, the materials of which are so numerous, diffused and dissimilar, we
have endeavored to select in every instance, what was in itself most eligible;
we hope therefore that when our Readers consider what we have done, they will
not withhold their approbation, upon a mere supposition that we might have done
more. Those who are acquainted with the pains and attention requisite for the
compiling of great works, will readily excuse any small defects that may have
escaped us. The Authors hope for success from the candid and judicious only,
whose approbation of this work, it is their utmost ambition to obtain, as it
has been their earnest endeavors to merit.

THE AUTHORS.

No. 83 The Matrimonial Preceptor; a Collection of Examples and Precepts
relating to the married State. The following Particulars are treated of in this
Book. The Ladies directed in the Choice of a Husband. -- Infelicities of
Matrimony produced by an imprudent Choice. -- The Causes of Disagreement in
Marriage. -- The married Condition seldom unhappy, but for Want of Temper or
Judgment in the Husband. -- A Method proposed to keep Love alive after
Marriage. -- Courtship the pleasantest Part of Life. -- Concerning Matches too
hastily made up. -- Jealousy described, and Methods of allaying it. -- On the
Brutality of Husbands. -- Matrimony and keeping Mistresses compared. -- The
Folly of unsuitable Matches. -- The Folly of extravagant Expenses after
entering upon Marriage. -- On the Tyrrany of Husbands. -- Advice to those
Ladies who have lost the Affections of their Husbands, and how to r^gain them.
-- Love and Lust distinguished. -- On matrimonial Quarrels. -- On mercenary
Matches. -- On the Duties of a good Wife. -- Matrimony the most Important
Station a Man can take in private Life. -- Characters of Good and Bad Wives. --
This Book is very proper to be perused by the Married Ladies as well as by the
Single, and is written in an elegant Style, by Mr. Addison, Sir Richard Steel,
Mr. Richardson, Author of Clarissa, Mr. Fielding, Author of Tom Jones, Mr.
Hawkesworth, Mr. Johnson, Author of The Rambler, etc. etc. etc.

No. 84 Bayle's Historical and Critical Dictionary, 5 Vol. containing the Lives
of Abelard, Achilles, Apelles, Apollo, Aristotle, Bacon, Beda, Bellarmin,
Bocace, Anna Bullen, Le Brun, Brutus, Calvin, Erasmus, Euripides, Grotius,
Heloise, Hobbes, Lais, Lucretia, Luther, Lycophron, Lycurgus, Alexander the
Great, Machiavel, Mahomet, Milton, Ovid, Pythagoras, Prynne, Sappho, Socinus,
Spinus, Spinoza, Thais, Timolcon, Virgil, Xenophanes, Zeno, Zeuxis.

85 Biographia Britannica; or the Lives of eminent Persons in Great Britain and
Ireland. Containing Addison, Alfred, Ashmole, Atterbury, Bacon, Baker, Barclay,
Beaumont, Beda, Benbow, Bentley, Bingham, Blake, Boil, Brown, Buller,
Chillingworth, Cambden, Caxton, Churchill, Coke, Cowley, Cromwell, Derham,
Dudley, Fairfax, Fleetwood, Friend, Gray, Hackluyt, Halley, Harrington, Hobbes,
Hollar, Kennet, King, Knox, etc.

86 LOCKE'S Works, 3 Vols. containing an Essay on human Understanding. Letters
to Bishop Stillingfleet, concerning some Passages relating to the Essay on
human Understanding. -- Some Considerations on Money. -- Two Treatises on
Government. -- Three Letters concerning Toleration. -- The Reasonableness of
Christianity. -- On Education. -- A Paraphrase on the Epistles of St. Paul. --
Of the Conduct of the Understanding. -- An Examination of P. Malebranche. -- A
Discourse of Miracles. -- Letter for Toleration. -- Life of Earl of Shaftsbury.
-- New Method of a Commonplace Bock. -- Familiar Letters, etc. o. 87 A new and
complete Translation of the Works of VOLTAIRE, with Notes Historical and
Critical, by T. Smollett, M. D. This Work is translated from the last Geneva
Edition, published under M. Voltaire's own Inspection: It will be embellished
with Copperplates, engraved by the best Masters.

Mr. de Voltaire, is one of the few happy authors who have lived to enjoy the
full fruits of the most extensive reputation. He has lived to see his fame
flourishing, not only in his own country, but also diffused over all the
civilized kingdoms and states of Europe; among which he is universally admired
for the fire of his genius, the brilliancy of his wit, the poignancy of his
satire, the elegance of his style: in a word, for that nameless talent which
operates like a charm, engaging the reader's attention and applause, even in
spite of himself, and as it were ^endering the performance enchanting alike to
persons of every age, nation, character, and complexion.

But how much soever he may be admired in other countries, he seems to be
peculiarly adapted by nature, for the entertainment of the English People,
distinguished as he is by that impetuosity of genius, that luxuriancy of
imagination and freedom of spirit, which have characterized the most eminent
poets of the British nation.

This congenial affinity remarkably appears in that eagerness with which his
works are procured, translated, and perused by the natives of Great Britain: an
impatience attended with some inconvenience, which it is our purpose to remove.

The works of M. de Voltaire having made their first ^ppearance in detached
pie^es* were (...) translated into the English language separately, by
different hands, with very different degrees of merit, published in various
parcels, according to the respective schemes and abilities of the different
editors and translators, who selected from the whole such pieces only as they
imagined would best suit their particular purposes: thus the translation of
Voltaire's works has been left incomplete with respect to the general plan, as
well as irregular in regard to the printing and paper, the size and execution
of the separate volumes.

It may also be pronounced defective in another sense. Our author's imagination
is so warm and impetuous, that it often transports him from image to image, and
from sentiment to sentiment, with such rapidity as obliges him to leave the
picture half disclosed, and the connection unexplained. In his prose-writings,
he usually bursts into the subject, and throws a glare of light on some
particular part, as if he took it for granted that the reader had before
considered it in every other attitude and point of view. This velocity of
impulse, added to a remarkable passion for peculiarity in point of sentiment,
has hurried him into some obscurities, inadvertencies, and errors, especially
in the execution of his historical tracts, which of all his works, are the most
universally read for entertainment and instruction. -- In order, therefo^^, to
do justice to his merit, and at the same time supply his defects, we propose to
publish a complete and ^egular translation of all his works, illustrated with
Notes historical and critical, which may correct his mistakes, elucidate his
obscurities, point out his beauties, and explain his allusion to the
satisfaction of the public.

There are already Eight Volumes of this Work published, and a Volume continues
to be published in England, at the Beginning of every Month.

No. 88 Mr. Hoyle's Games of Whist, Quadrille, Picquet, Chess, and Backgammon,
complete. In which is contained, the Method of Playing and Betting at those
Games upon equal or advantageous Terms, including the Laws of the several
Games. -- To which is now first added, Two new Cases at Whist never before
printed: Also, The New Laws of the Game at Whist, as played at White's,
Arthur's and Saunders's Chocolate-Houses in London.

89 The Pocket Companion, and History of Free Masons. Containing their Origin,
Progress, and present State; an Abstract of their Laws, Constitutions, Customs,
Charges, Orders, and Regulations, for the Instruction and Conduct of the
BRETHREN, as well as for the Information of those who are inclined to become
Free Masons. Together with a Collection of Songs, and a List of all the Lodges.
The whole improved beyond the former Edition, and continued down to the present
Time.

90 The Complete Angler; or, Contemplative Man's Recreation; with a fine Head
of Charles Cotton, Esquire engraved from an Original Painting of Sir Peter Lely.
Being a Discourse of Rivers, Fish Ponds, Fish and Fishing. In two Parts. The
first written by Mr. Isaac Walton; the second by Charles Cotton, Esquire To which
are now prefixed the Lives of the Authors, containing an Account of them and
their Works. Illustrated with Cuts of the several Kinds of River Fish, and the
Implements used in Angling; Views of the principal Scenes described in the
Book, and Notes, historical, critical, and explanatory.

To this Edition are added three Lists of Flies, never before published,
containing upwards of sixty in Number, and Directions for making them so as to
resemble Nature to the greatest Degree of Exactness; with many other
Improvements and valuable Discoveries relating to Fishing in general, but more
particularly Fly-fishing. The Cuts to the above Work are more in Number, and
greatly superior to any other Work of the Kind; which Cuts, the (...) may be
assured, cost in designing and engraving, upwards (...) two Hundred Pounds,
Sterling.

No 91 Boo^ Keeping Methodiz'd; or, a Methodical Treatise of Merchants
Accounts, according to the Italian Form. Wherein the Theory of the Art is fully
explained, and reduced to Practice, by Variety of suitable Examples in all the
Branches of Trade. To which is added, a large Appendix, containing,
Descriptions and Specimens of the Subsidiary Books used by Merchants -- Moneys
and Exchanges, the Nature of Bills of Exchange, Promissory Notes, and Bills of
Parcels. -- Precedents of Merchants Writings, peculiar to England, Scotland,
and common to both. -- The Commission Duty, and Power of Factors. -- A short
History of the Trading Companies in Great Britain, with an Account of her
Exports and Imports. -- The Produce and Commerce of the Sugar Colonies; with a
Specimen of the Accounts kept by the Factors and Store-Keepers; and an
Explication of Wharf and Plantation Accounts -- The Produce and Commerce of the
Tobacco Colonies; with a Specimen of the Accounts usually kept by the
Store-Keepers. -- The Method of keeping Accounts proper for Shopkeepers or
Retailers. -- A Dictionary explaining abstruse Words and Terms that occur in
Merchandise. By John Mair, A. M.

92 The American Gazetteer; containing a distinct Account of all the Parts of
the new World; their Situation, Climate, Soil, Produce; former and present
Condidition, Commodities, Manufactures and Commerce. Together with an accurate
Account of the Cities, Towns, Ports, Bays, Rivers, Lakes, Mountains, Passes,
and Fortifications. The whole intended to exhibit the present State of America,
with the Views and Interests of the several Powers who have Possessions in that
Part of the Globe; with six entire new Maps, which makes this Book the most
complete and satisfactory Account extant of North and South America.

No. 93 The Youth's Instructor; or, Useful Penman. Containing, the Art of
Writing, with Copies teaching how to improve in all Hands. By several eminent
Masters.

94 Penmanship illustrated, in a new Work. Containing, a great Variety of
excellent Copies in all the useful Hands, to assist Beginners and others that
would improve in that excellent Art; interspersed with various Examples,
adapted to form the Man of Business.

95 The Young Clerk and Tradesman's Directory. Exhibiting select Specimens of
various Kinds, such as Bills of Parcels, Bills, Notes, Book Debts, Accounts
Current, etc. Also, the Forms generally used in the Counting House. All
elegantly Written, and properly Graced.

96 The select Penman. Consisting of copious Extracts from all the most
excellent Performances now in Esteem.

97 The Principles of Drawing. Consisting of a great Variety of Examples of the
several Parts of the Human Body, whole Figures, Landscapes, Views and Ruins,
from the Designs of those celebrated Artists Abraham Bloemaert, and M. Le
Clerc, To which are added, Instructions and the proper Use of Instruments and
Materials necessary for Drawing, with the Method of managing them.

98 The complete Drawing Book. Containing many and curious Specimens made easy
to the Comprehension of Beginners, by the most eminent Masters. To which are
added, proper Instructions to Youth, for their Entertainment and Improvement in
this Art.

99 The complete Letter-Writer. Containing, Letter^ on the most common
Occasions in Life; on Business Courtship, Duty, Love, Amusement, Marriage,
Affection, Friendship, etc. To which is prefixed, Directions for writing
Letters in an easy and proper Manner. Also, a plain and compendious Grammar of
the English Tongue.

No. 100 A Collection of the most elegant Poems, etc. which have been published
in detached Pieces, by the Nobility, Gentry, and first Writers of England,
Scotland and Ireland, within the last Twenty Years, and now collected in Six
Volumes, commonly distinguished by the Title of Dodsley's Collection of Poems,
and written by the Earl of Chesterfield; Mr. Dyer, Author of the Fleece; Mr.
Gr^en, the charming Author of the Spleen; Mr. Gray, Author of the Elegy in a
Church Yard; Mr. Mason, of Elfrida; Mr. Shenston; Mr. Cambridge, of the
Scriberiad; Lord Littleton; Mr. Spence; Bishop Warburton; Mr. Whitehead; Lord
Bolingbroke; Mr. H. Walpole, etc.

101 The Works of the Right Honorable the late famous Lord Bollingbroke.

102 A Grammar of the English Tongue, with the Arts of Logic, Rhetoric, Poetry,
etc. Illustrated with useful Notes, giving the Grounds and Reasons of Grammar
in general; the whole making a complete System of an English Education, By John
Brightland.

103 The Roman History, with Cuts. The History of England, with Cuts. The
Grecian History. The History of France. Note, these four very useful Books are
Extracted from the most celebrated Historians, for the Entertainment of our
Youth of both Sexes.

104 The celebrated Poems and Works of Waller.

105 The Works of Virgil, translated, in 4 Vols. By Mr. Warton; Bp. Warburton,
etc.

106 The Odes and Works of Pindar, 2 Vols. by Gilber^ (...)

No. 107 The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, with very humerous
Frontispieces by Hogarth. A Collection of incomparable Sermons in 2 Vols. with
the Authors Head, finely engraved; written by the Revd. Mr. Stearne.

108 The celebrated Poems and Works of Mr. John Pomfret.

109 La Belle Assemblee, a curious Collection of remarkable Incidents, relative
to the first Quality in France, 4 Vols. with Cuts, by Madam De Gomez.

110 The Belles Letters, or an Introduction to Languages, Poetry, Rhetoric,
History, Philosophy, etc. 4 Vols. by Mr. Rollin.

111 The Novels of Cervantes, the celebrated Author of Don Quixote.

112 A Companion to the Theater, or a History of the Plots, with a Character of
most of the English Plays, 2 Vols.

113 The Sopha, a Novel, by Mr. Crebillon, 2 Vols.

114 Memoirs of a Man of Quality, one Vol.

115 The young Ladies Magazine, written by the Princess De Beaumont, who wrote
the young Misse's Magazine; this Work is adapted to young Ladies of a more
advanced Age than the former, and is an incomparable Performance.

116 The History ^f Marianne, a fortunate Country Girl, 2 Vols. written by Mr.
Mariveux,

117 Lord Orrery's Translation of Pliny's Letters.

118 Lord Orrery's Life of Dean Swift.

119 Gil Blass, 4 Vols. with Cuts, translated by Dr. Smollet.

120 The British Apollo* a Collection of well written Pieces, 3 Vols.

121 Angloni's Letters upon the Manners and Customs (...) the English Nation, 2
Vols. by Dr. Shebeau.

122 ^^dia, or ^ilial Piety, a Novel, 4 Vols.

123 ^he Monitor, or British Freeholder, 3 Vols. a Work that has occasioned
great Conversation in London, upon the undaunted Spirit and Freedom of its
Authors; many of them are supposed to be written by Mr. Charles Townsend, Mr.
Alderman Beckford, etc.

No. 124 Hudibrass, by Butler, with Cuts.

125 The Letters of Felicia to Charlotte. 2 Vols. by Mr. Collyer.

126 Ward's London Spy, a very comical Performance.

127 The Fortunate Country Maid, 2 Vols. by Mr. Mohuy.

128 Letters on the English Nation, by Voltaire.

129 The Beauties of the Spectators, 2 Vols. -- Admonitions from the Dead. --
The Tell Tale, a Collection of lively entertaining Pieces, 2 Vols. -- Halifax's
familiar Letters, by the celebrated Mr. John Hill.

130 Boyle's Voyages. -- Vaughan's Voyages, 2 Vols. by Mr. Chetwo^d.

131 Robinson Crusoe, 2 Vols. -- The Family Instructor, -- The Religious
Courtship, by Daniel Defoe.

132 The History of James Ramble, 2 Vols.

133 The Adventures of Ioe Thompson, 2 Vols. by Mr. Kimber.

134 Pamela, Clarissa, and Sir Charles Grandison, all abridg'd, and collected
into the small Compass of a single Volume, under Title of the Path of Virtue
delineated.

135 The Husband, one Vol.

136 The Wife, one Vol.

137 The Life of Mr. Cleveland, Natural Son of Oliver Cromwell, a Work full of
entertaining Incidents* 4 Vols.

138 The Bulfinch, a very good Collection of the latest and best Songs.

139 The Brothers, 2 Vols.

140 The Sisters, 2 Vols.

141 The Beauties of the English Stage, 3 Vols.

No. 142 The Union, a Collection of elegant Moder^ English and Scotch Poems, by
the best Authors.

143 Welsh Travels, a Collection of them with a Wel^ Preachment, by Dean Swift.

144 Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, exhibiting some Humerous Singularities of
some odd Scoteh Ministers, with a Specimen of their Style and Manner of
addresing their Audiences.

145 Emblems of Love, with Cuts.

146 The entertaining Correspondant.

147 A Journey to Mequinez.

148 The indiscre^t Toys, 2 Vols.

149 The Persian Tales.

150 The Virgin Unmasked, published by Mandeville, Author of the Fable of the
Bees.

151 The Jewish Spy, a Collection of Letters, somewhat in the Manner of the
Turkish Spy, 5 Vols. by Mr. D^rgens.

152 The Works of Rabelais, a very celebrated Wit of France, with Cuts, 5 Vols.

153 The new Atalantis, or the secret History of several Persons, written with
vast Freedom, which occasioned the Author to be imprisoned; written by Mrs.
Manley.

154 The Turkish Spy, 8 Vols. written by Sir Roger Manley, Father of the above
Mrs. Manley and others.

155 Cleopatra, a celebrated Romance, 8 Vols.

156 Don Quixote, by Cervantes, 4 Vols. with most elegant Cuts, by Smollet.

157 Roxana, or the fortunate Mistress.

158 The Political Life and History of Oliver Cromwell, by Mr. Banks.

159 The English Hermit, or the Adventures of Philip Quarles, with Cuts.

160 Ioe Miller's Jests, a Collection of entertaining Tales, Puns, etc.

161 Ben Johnson's Jests.

162 The (...) C^quet, or the Advent^^es of (...) by Mr. Davi^^.

No. 163 Prior's Poems, 2 Vols.

164 Dr. Fuller's Councils and Maxims for forming the Mind, and Conduct of Man,
2 Vols.

165 Letters of Lady Iuliana Catesby, to Lady Henriet^a Ca^pley, upon the
Subject of the brave Lord Ossorys Love, a beautiful Performance just published.

166 The Sentiments of Pamela, Clarissa, etc. collected by Mr. Richardson.

167 The Amors of Cleopatra and Octavia.

168 The Tartars Tales.

169 The Prince of Abyssinia, by the celebrated Mr. Samuel Johnson, A^thor of
the Dictionary, the Ram^ler, etc.

170 The Adventures of a^ Bracelet, 2 Vols*

171 The Campaign, 2 Vols.

172 The Narrative Companion, a Collecton of the very best Pieces from the
World, Connoisseur, Adventurer, etc.

173 The Moral Miscellany, a Work of the same Kind.

174 The Freethinkers, a Collection of Essays, 3 Vols.

175 Chaucers Tales, by Mr. Ogle, 3 Vols.

176 The Life and surprising Adventures of Mr. Pellow.

177 A new Edition of Esop's Fables, with Cuts, by Mr. Draper.

178 A new History of the Cruelties and Persecution^ of the Protestants, by the
French, Spanish and Portuguese Roman Catholics, very necessary for young
Persons.

179 Theodosia's Poems, 2 Vols.

180 The comical Works of Scarron, with Cuts, 2 Vols.

181 The Tour through Great Britain, with Maps (...) each Country, describing
the several City* Towns, Trade, Manufactures, etc. of England and Scotland^*
published by Mr. Richardson, Auth^^ of C^^rissa* (...).

182 The Work^ of M^^iere, containing all his Play etc. in (...) and English.

No. 183 The Stage Coach, a Novel, by Dr. Hill, 2 Vols.

184 The Winters Evenings Entertainment, a Collection of agreeable Histories
calculated to divert on Winters Evenings, 3 Vols.

185 An Account of the extraordinary Manners and Customs of the Mahometans, by
Mr. Pit.

186 The Lives of the most famous Pirates, with Cuts, 2 Vols. by Captain
Iohn^^^.

187 Mrs. Behn's Novels, with the famous one called Oron^ko, or the Royal
Slave, 2 Vols.

188 The Gentleman instructed in the Conduct of a virtuous and happy Life,
written for the Instruction of a young Nobleman; to which is added, a Word to
the Ladies, by Dr. George Hickes, 2 Vols.

189 The Arabian Nights Entertainment.

190 Fables for the Female Sex, by Mr. Moore.

191 The Beauties of the English Stage, 3 Vols.

192 The Lives of the most celebrated English Poets, by Mr. Cibber, 5 Vols.

193 The History of Jack Connor, alias Conyers, 2 Vols.

194 Le Blanc's Letters upon the English Nation, 2 Vols.

195 The Letters of A^elard to Eloise.

196 The Letters of a Peruvian Princess, very elegant.

197 Select Trials, of the many Criminals and Rascals, that have been executed
within 30 or 40 Years.

198 Dr. Parnell's Poems.

199 The Life of Count Hamilton, 2 Vols.

200 Clarissa, 8 Vols. -- Sir Charles Grandison, 7 Vols. Pamela, 4 Vols. by Mr.
Samuel Richardson.

201 The Life of the Duke of Grillon, published and recommended by the same Mr.
Richardson.

202 Joseph Andrews, 2 Vols. -- Tom Jones, 4 Vols. -- Amelia, 4 Vols. -- A
Voyage to Lisbon. A Collection of Entertaining Miscellanies, 2 Vols. -- A
Collection of sundry Plays, 3 Vols. by Mr. Fielding.

No. 204 The Seasons. And, The Whole Works, in 4 Vols. of James Thomson.

205 The Female Quixote, 2 Vols. -- The History of (...), 2 Vols. by Mrs.
Charlotte Lenox.

206 The whole Works of the Divine Dr. Young, in 4 Vols. including the
celebrated Poem on the Last Day, Paraphrase of the Book of Job, Love of Fame,
etc.

207 The History of Ophelia, just printed, 2 Vols. -- The Governess, or Female
Academy, by Mrs. Fiel^ing, Sister to the Genius.

208 The Essays and Miscellaneous Works of the ingenious Mr. David Hume.

209 The whole Works of Mr. John Hume, Author of (...), including his last Play
Aquileia, just prin^ed.

210 The Tea Table Miscellany, a Collection of the best Scotch Songs. -- The
whole Poetical Works, in 2 Vols. including the gentle Shepherd, Patie and
Roger, etc. by Allan Ramsey.

211 The Works of Horace, most elegantly translated into English, in 4 Vols. by
the Revd. Mr. Philip Francis.

212 The Works of Tibullus, translated into English, in 2 Vols. by Dr.
Grainger, Physician in London.

213 The Spectat^r, 8 Vols. with Cuts, printed on a very large Letter for aged
Persons and those who cannot read the small Editions of this Work, written by
the elegant and truly Hon. Mr. Addison. -- His whole Works, including his
Travels into Italy, etc.

N. B. There are two smaller Editions of the Spectator, besides the above, both
of which have elegant Cuts.

214 The Freeholder.

215 Ovid's Epistles. -- Ovid's Art of Love. -- Ovid's Metamorphose^, 2 Vols.
by Sir Samuel Garth.

No. 216 The Works of the immortal Shakespeare, in English, 8 Vols. with elegant
Cuts, by Theobald.

217 A smaller Edition of Shakespeare, in 9 Vols. each the length of a
reasonable Finger, by Sir Thomas Hamner.

218 Paradise Lost, with fine Cuts, Paradise Regained, with fine Cuts, by
Milton.

289 Paradise lost and Regained, with Notes Explanations, and fine Cuts, in 4
Vols. by Dr. Newton.

290 The whole Works, including all the Plays, and Opera^* 3 Vols. with fine
Cuts, by Congreve.

291 The Guardian, 2 Vols. -- The Tatler, 4 Vols. -- The Ladies Library, 3
Vols. -- The Christian Hero. -- A Collection of Plays including the Conscious
Lover^, etc. by Sir Richard Steel.

292 A Collection of Plays, including Jane Shore, the the Fair Penitent, etc.
in 2 Vols. by Row.

293 An elegant translation of Virgil, 3 Vols. with Cuts. -- All the Plays, in
6 Vols. with Cuts. -- All the Poems, in 2 Vols. -- The Fables. -- Translation
of Juvenal. -- A Collection of Miscellanies with elegant Cuts, and Heads of
^llustrious Men, now first collected, and just published in London, in 4
handsome Vols. written by John Dryden.

294 Esop's Fables, with Cuts, by Dr. Croxal.

295 The whole Works of Voltaire, including the Age of Lewis the 14th, the
Universal History, of Europe, Asia, Africa and America, in 6 Vols.

296 The Fables, with Cuts. -- The Poems: -- The Beggar's Opera, with Music.
-- The distressed Wife, by Mr. John Gay.

297 Table Talk, by Mr. Sel^en.

298 The Grecian History, by Mr. Stanyan.

299 The Plays, including the Country Wi^e, Relapse, etc. written by Sir John
Vanburgh, with Cuts.

300 Leisure Hours Amusement, a pretty Collection of Novels, 2 Vols. by Mr.
Robert Dodsley.

(...) Pompey the Little, a Novel, by the Honorable Mr. Coventry.

(...) Sir Thomas Fitz^sborn^'s Letters. -- The Letters of Pli^y. -- The
Letters of Cicero, by the admired Mr. Melmoth.

(...) The Pleasures of the Imagination, by Dr. Akenside.

(...) A Voyage to Senegal and Gor^e, by Mr. Andanson; this Book faithfully
describes the present State, Customs, Dress, Habitations, Superstitions, and
Poverty of the Negroes, and is universally allowed to be a most entertaining
and ingenious Performance.

(...) The whole Works of Sir William Temple, a new Edition with Aditions,
which renders it preferable to any that has preceeded it, in 4 Vols.

306 The present State of Europe, explaining the Interests, Connections,
Political and Commercial Views of its several Powers, comprehending also, a
clear and concise History of each Country, so far as to show the Nature of
their present Constitutions, by John Campbell, Esquire Author of the Lives of the
Admirals, the fifth Edition.

307 Reflections on the Rise and Fall of ancient Republics adapted to the
present State of Great Britain, finely written by E. Wortley Montagu, Esquire

308 The History of the Conquest of Mexico, by the Spaniards, in 2 Vols.

309 The Genine Works, in Prose and Verse, of Butler, the Author of Hudibrass,
lately published from Original Manuscripts, in 2 Vols.

310 The History of the five Indian Nations of Canada, dependant on the
Province of New York, with particular Accounts of their Religion, Manners,
Customs, Laws, Governments, their Battles and Treaties with European Powers,
their Wars with other Indians, and a true State of our Trade with Accounts of
the several other Nations of Indians in North America, their Numbers, Strength,
etc. etc. The Treaties which have been lately been made with them, written by
the Honorable Cadwallader Colden, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province of
New York.

No. 311 Travels through* Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, Switzerland, Italy and
Lorraln, giving a true and just Description of the present State of those
Counries (a great Part of which are the Seat of War in Europe) their Natural
Literal and Political History, their Manners, Laws, Commerce, Manufactures,
Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Curiosities in Art and Nature, etc.
Illustrated with fine Copper Plates, engraved from Drawings taken on the Spot,
by the celebrated John George Keys^er, Fellow of the Royal Society in London,
in 4 Vols.

312 A new History of Canada and Louisiana, Martinico, Hispaniola, Grena^es,
the Netural Islands, and all the French Settlements in the West Indies, with
good Maps, Folio. A Work that contains the Marrow of Charlevoix, and most of
the Modern Writ^rs on these Subjects.

313 Rapin and Tindal's History of England, with Cuts.

314 The History of the Turks with the Emperors Heads, curiously engraven.

315 The King of Pr^ssia's History of the House of Brandenburg.

317 The Annual Register of all the Events Historical, Political, Literary,
Miscellaneous, etc. that happen in each Year, commencing in 1758, (...) a very
well connected History of the present Wars in America and Europe. Those Persons
who are inclined to purchase this valuable annual Performance, are desired to
send their Orders to me, and they shall be constantly supplied, as soon as the
Volumes are finished.

No. 318 A Dictionary of the Lives of all those Persons of both Sexes, who have
distinguished themselves by their Virtues and Exploits, including many Hundred
British Worthies; a Work calculated to inform, entertain and improve. It is an
entire new Composition, and lately published.

319 Dr. Echard's Roman History, from the Foundation to the taking of
Constatinople by the Turks.

320 Livy's Roman History, 6 Vols.

321 A C^^lection of Voyages, 7 Vols. Twelves, with Copper Plates, pu^^ished by
Dr. Smollet and others.

322 Lord Anson's Voyage round the World, with Cuts.

323 Howel's History of England, with Cuts.

324 Kimber's History of England, with Cuts.

325 ^olaire's History of Charles the 12th of Sweden.

326 The Life of the great Duke of Marlborough.

327 The Life of Prince Eugene.

328 The Life of the famous Peter the Great, Czar of Mus^ovy.

329 The Life of Oliver Cromwell.

330 The Life of Kouli Kan.

331 An Account of the European Settlements in America, containing a History of
the Discovery of the Country, with the Manners and Customs of the Original
Inhabitants, and an accurate Description of the Spanish, Portugueze, French,
Dutch, Danish and English Settlements in it, their Extent, Climate,
Productions, Trade, Genius and Dispositions of their Inhabitants: The Interests
of the several Powers of Europe, with respect to them, and their Political and
Commerciai Views, with Regard to each other.

332 A new and complete Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, comprehending all the
Branches of useful Knowledge, with accurate Descriptions of the various
Machines, Instruments, Tools, Figures and Schemes necessary for illustrating
them, addorn'd with above 300 Copper Plates; extracted from Harris's Lexicon,
Chamber's Dictionary, the best Mathematical writters, etc. and is greatly
esteemed; it may be had bound either in 4 or 8 Volumes, Octavo. This Work is
comipled by Mr. Wishart, with the Assistance of several Gentleman, well skilled
in the various Subjects, and which has been so well received, that four
Thousand sets has been sold in six Years.

No. 333 Rownings's compendious System of Natural Philosophy, with Notes,
containing the Mathematical Demonstrations and occasional Remarks. This is the
best System extant, and is prefered to all others at Oxford and Cambridge.

334 Stone's Euclid's Elements of Geometry, the 1st, 6th, 11th and 12th Books,
from Dr. Gregory's Edition, with Additions and excellent Notes, for the Use of
the British Youth.

335 Keil's Euclids Elements, published by Cunn.

336 Stone's Mathematical Dictionary, explaining not only the Terms used in the
Mathematics, but likewise an History of the Rise, Progress, State, Properties,
etc. of Things both in pure Mathematics and Natural Philosophy.

337 Bion's Construction and principal Uses of Mathematical Instruments, a new
Edition, with great Improvements and 30 Copper Plates. A further Account of
some of the most useful Mathematical Instruments as now improved, is added to
this Edition: published by E. Stone.

338 Robertson's Treatise of such Mathematical Instruments as are usually put
into a portable Case, containing their various Uses in Arithmetic, Geometry,
Trigonometry, Architecture, Surveying, Gunnery, etc. with a Description and Use
of the Gunner's Callipers.

339 Ward's Young Mathematicians Guide.

340 Potter's System of practical (...). This Book is written ^n a plain and
(...) M^nner, and designed for the Use of Schools, and for the Benefit of
Carpenters, Joiners, Bricklayers, and other A^tificers, to whom the practical
Mathematics are of great and immediate Use, and it is recommended as the most
useful Book of the Kind; by Mr. Hammond, Author of the Book upon Algebra.

No. 341 The Elements of Natural Philosophy, delinated, from the German of
Professor Winkler.

342 Ferguson's Astronomy, explained upon Sir Isaac Newton's Principles, and
made easy to those who have not studied Mathematics.

343 Ferguson's Lectures on Mechanics, Hydrostatics, Pneumatics and Optics,
with the Use of the Globes, the Art of Dialing, and the Calculation of the mean
Times of New and Full Moons and Eclipses. The Works of this Author are
universally read and admired in the Universities, and by the Mathematicians of
Europe.

344 Emmerson's Principles of Mechanics, explaining and demonstrating the
general Laws of Motion, the Laws of Gravity, Motion of descending Bodies,
Projectiles, Mechanic Powers, Pendulums, Centres of Gravity, etc. Strength and
Stress of Timber, Hydrostatics, and Construction of Machines. A Work very
necessary to Architects, Engineers, Shipwrights, Millwrights, Watchmakers, and
any that Work in a Mechanical Way, with 43 Copper Plates.

345 Emmerson's new Treatise of Trigonometry.

346 Emmerson's Doctrine of Fluxions, not only explaining the Elements, but
their Application and Use in the several Parts of Mathematics and Natural
Philosophy, with Twelve Copper Plates.

347 Emmerson's Navigation, or the Art of Sailing upon the Sea, containing the
fundamental Principles of this Art, with all the practical Rules of computing a
Ship's Way, by plain Sailing, Mercator, and middle Latitude, with many other
useful Things thereto belonging, and several necessary Tables.

No. 348 Emmerson on Trigonometry.

349 Love's Art of Surveying and Measuring, showing by practical Rules how to
Survey, Protract, cast up, reduce or divide any Piece of Land whatsoever, with
new Tables for the Use of the Surveyor, in reducing the Measures of Land, with
the easiest Method of Surveying by the Chain, as also how to lay out new Land
in America, and to make a perfect Map of a River's Mouth or Harbor.

350 Wylde's Surveyor, possessed of the same Requisites as Love's.

351 Wilson's Surveying improved.

352 Hill's Arithmetic.

353 Wingate's Arithmetic.

354 Fisher's Arithmetic.

355 Fenning's Arithmetic.

356 Fenning's young Algebraist's Companion, or a new and easy Guide to
Algebra, introduced by the Doctrine of Vulgar Fluxions; designed for the Use of
Schools, and such who by their own Application only, would become acquainted
with this noble Science.

357 Fenning's easy Introduction to the Use of the Globes. These Works of
Fenning are much used by all the Teachers of the Mathematics and used in all
the Schools in Europe.

358 The Young Man's Companion, by Mather.

359 The Young Man's best Companion, by Fisher.

360 The Laboratory, or School of Arts, in which are faithfully exhibited and
explained a Variety of Experiments in Refining, Calcining, Melting, Assa^ing,
Casting, Allaving and toughening Gold; choice Secrets for Jewellers in
Management of Gold, in Enameling and porparing Enamel Colors, several curi^us
Experiments for casting in Silver, Copper, Bra^^, Tin, Steel and other Metals,
likewise in Wax, Pla^ster of Paris, Wood, Horn, etc. with the Management of the
respective Moulds; the Art of making and Painting Glass, preparing Colors for
Potters Work, a Collection of valuable Directions for Cutlers, Pewterers,
Brasiers, Joyners, Turners, Japaners, Bookbinders, Distillers, Lapidaries, and
Limners; the Art of making Rockets, Crackers, Fireworks of all Sorts, and of
dying Silks, Worsteds, Cottons, etc. the Art of Drawing, of Painting in Oil,
Optical Experiments, exhibiting the most surprising Performances, illustrated
with a Variety of Copper Plates.

No. 561 Halliday's easy Introduction to the Art of Gunnery, and Engineering,
illustrated with Copper Plates.

362 Keil's Introduction to Astronomy.

363 Keil's Introduction to Natural Philosophy.

364 Dr. Gregory's Astronomy.

365 Whiston's Astronomical Lectures.

366 Mair's Book-keeping Methodised.

367 Webster's Book-keeping.

368 Webster's Arithmetic.

369 Webster's Introduction to the Mathematics.

370 Dr. Edmund Halley's Astronomical Tables, with Precepts for computing the
Places of the Sun, Moon, Planets and Comets; the Precepts written by himself.

371 Simpson's Essays on several curious and useful Subjects, in Speculative
and mixed Mathematics, illustrated by a Variety of Examples, particularly (...)
the apparent Place of the Stars, arising from the progressive Motion of Light,
and of the Earth in its Orbit, the Motion of Bodies affected by Projectile and
Centripetal Forces; the mean Anomaly of a Planet given to find the true Place
in its Orbit, the Motion and Paths of Projectiles in resisting Mediums, the
Resistances, Velocities and Times of Vibratien of Pendulous Bodies in Mediums,
etc. etc.

No. 372 Simpson's Miscellaneous Tracts in Mathematics wherein the Precession
of the Equinox, the Mutation of the Earth's Axis, and the Motion of the Moon in
her Orbit, are determined.

373 Simpson's admired Treatise of Algebra.

374 Simpson's Fluxions.

375 Simpson's Trignomotry.

376 Simpson's Geometry.

377 Mac Laurin's Fluxions.

378 Mac Laurin's Algebra.

379 Mac Laurin's Account of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophical Discoveries.

380 M^ss^henbrock's Elements of Natural Philosophy, chiefly intended for the
Use of Students in the Universities, with many Cuts.

381 The Elaboratory laid open, or the Secrets of Modern Chemistry and Pharmacy
revealed, by Mr. Dossie, Author of the new and best Dispensatory.

382 The Handmaid to the Arts, teaching a perfect Knowledge of the Nature, Use,
Preparation and Composition of all the Materials used in Painting, as well
Vehicles, Dryers, as Colors, the Art of designing from Nature, the Preparation
of Inks, Cements and Sailing Wax of all Kinds, the Art of Engraving, Etching
and Scraping Metzotintos, the Art of making Glass, China, etc. etc. Calculated
to convey accurate and extensive Knowledge to Artists.

383 The H^^lo^ and M^^^irs of the Royal Academy of S^iences a^ Paris, being a
Collection of the most curious Papers relating to Mathematical Learning and
Natural Philosophy, that have been published by that Illustrious Body,
translated by Mr. Chambers, Author of the ^^lebrated Dictionary, assisted by
Dr. Martyn, with Copper Plates.

384 (...) new and excellent Treatise of Navigation.

No. 385 Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding, with a Supplement to it,
entitled, An Essay on the Origin of Human Knowledge, a very ingenious Work, and
very necessary to the Readers of Mr. Lock. The Supplement is a late Piece.

386 Helshom's excellent Lectures in Natural Philosophy.

387 Burnet's Theory of the Earth, containing an Account of its Original
Creation, and of all the general Changes it has undergone, or is to undergo
until the Consumation of all Things. The Deluge, Paradise, the Conflagration
and the new H^avens and new Earth, compose the Subject of this Work.

388 The celebrated History of the Pyrites, the Principal Body in the Mineral
Kingdom, in which is considered its Names, Species, Beds, and Origin, its Iron,
Copper, unm^tallic Earth, Sulpher, A^senic, Silver, Gold, Original Particles,
Vit^iol and Use in Smel^ing, c^mpiled from a Collection of Samples, visiting
Mines, Intercourse with Miners and Naturalis^s, and from Chemical Enquities,
with the Advantages arising from Mine Workers in general, by Henkel.

389 A Collection of valuable Tracts, upon Metals, Mines and Minerals,
essential to all who read upon the Subject of Mining.

390 Harris's Directions for the Use of the Globes.

391 Ienning's, on d^tto.

392 Robertson's Astronomy.

393 Martin's Philosophical Grammar.

394 Martin's young Trigonometer's complete Guide.

395 Martin's Newtonian Philosophy, for the Use of Academies.

396 Martin'^ Introduction to the English Language and Learning, ^ontaining a
Sp^lling Book of Arts and (...) with the true Pronouncation; the Rules of
Grammar; Lessons on all Mathematical and Philosophical Sciences, with a
particular Description of each, by way of Exercise, to enable the Scholar to
read justly and judiciously on any Subject whatsoever, and a Catalogue of such
Books in the English Language as are proper to be read on the Liberal Arts and
Sciences. This little Book has had a very rapid Sale in England, and is very
useful.

No. 397 The Works of the Immortal Francis Lord Bacon, Baron of Verulam.

398 Gravesande's Mathematical Elements of Natural Philosophy, confirmed by
Experiments, being an Introduction to Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy, published
by Dr. Desaguliers, with 127 Copper Plates.

399 The Microscope made Easy and Delightful, or the Nature, Uses and
Magnifying Powers of the best Kinds of Microsopes, described and explained for
the Instruction of such as desire to search into the Wonders of the Creation,
with Copper Plates, also, Employment for the Microscope, written by Mr. Baker,
Fellow of the Royal Society; these are the best ever published upon the
Microscope.

400 Patoun's practical Treatise of Navigation.

401 Wilson's Navigation, new Modelled.

402 Atkinson's Epitome of Navigation.

403 Mr. FRANKLIN's very celebrated Experiments it Electricity.

404 Saund^^^^^ Algebra.

405 Hayes's Neg^ciat^^ Magazine, the most authenti^ Account yet published, of
the Moneys, Weight and Measures of all the Places of Trade in the World, the
Exchanges in general, the Customs of Merchants relating thereto, and Examples
to cast them u^ by, with curious Calculations of great Use in the West (...)
and American Trades, and Tables of the intrinsic Value of any Foreign Gold or
Silver Coin, highly necessary to all who would understand Merchant's Ac^^^pts.

No. 406 Mair's celebrated Treatise of Book-keeping.

407 Martin's Library of Arts and Sciences.

408 Hawney's Practical Measurer.

409 Keay's Art of Measuring.

410 Rowland's Tables of Measuring.

411 Sher^^in's Mathematical Tables.

412 Rollin's History of Arts and Sciences.

413 Iack^s Conic Sections.

414 Euclid's Elements, by Dr. Isaac Barr^^.

415 ^arennius's Geography.

416 Salmon's Geographical Grammar.

417 Gordon's Geographical Grammar.

418 Salmon's Modern Gazetteer.

419 Salmon's Universal Traveller, or a complete Description of the present
State of all Nations of the World, brought down to the present Time, with 223
Copper Plate Cuts, describing the Habits, Customs and Manners of the several
Nations.

420 Hederici Lexicon, a new Edition, corrected by the Revd. Mr. Young.

421 Sch^ev^lius's Lexicon.

422 Ai^swerth's Latin and English Dictionary.

423 Young's Latin and English Dictionary.

424 Cole's Latin and English Dictionary.

425 Bailey's English Dictionary.

426 Martin's English Dictionary.

427 Dyche's English Dictionary.

428 Boyer's Royal French and English Dictionary, Quarts.

429 B^yer's common French Dictionary, Octavo.

430 The Pocket Dictionary, or complete Exp^sitor, showing the Part of Speech
to which each Word belongs, its true Meaning, its various S^nses, placed in
proper Order, and the Language from whence it is derived, explaining the
Technical Terms the Words are so Accented that there can be (...) Uncertainty
as to the Pronounciation. A Wor^ entirely new, designed for both Sexes.

No. 431 Dyche's Spelling Dictionary, a Collection o^ all the common Words,
proper Names of Person^ and Places, their Derivations, and Marked a^ they are
to be Pronounced, by which Persons o^ the meanest Capacities may attain to
Spell and Write English truly and correctly.

432 A Spelling Dictionary so small as to be contained in a Watch Pocket,
designed more immediately for the Ladies.

433 Virgil, with Notes in Usum Delphini.

434 Virgil, Latin and English, translated by the late Mr. Iameson.

435 Horace, Latin and English, translated by the same Hand.

436 Ovid's Metamorphoses, Latin and English, by the same.

437 Ovid's Epistles, Latin and English. by the same. N. B. These Translations
of Iameson have been hitherto distinguished by the Title of Davidson the
Bookseller, who printed them.

438 The Works of Horace, translated literally into English Prose, for the Use
of those who are desirous of acquiring or recovering a competent Knowledge of
the Latin Language, by the very Ingenious Mr. Christopher Smart, in two very
little Pocket Volumes.

439 Horace, Latin and English, translated by Watson.

440 Terence's Comedies, Latin and English, translated by Mr. Cook, in two
Pocket Volumes.

441 Terence in Latin and English, translated by Dr. Patrick, late Master of
the Charter-House-School.

442 Terence Delphini.

443 Horace Delphini.

444 Cicero's Orations, Delphini.

445 Cicero's Orations, his Orator, his Offices, on the End of Things, all
translated by Guth^ri^.

No. 446 Dr. Cockman's celebrated Translation of Tully'^ Offices.

447 Clarke's Ovid's Metamorphoses, Latin and English. -- Justin. -- Sallust --
Suetonius. -- Cornelius Nepos. -- Eutropius. -- Lucins Florus. -- Erasmus. --
Aesop's Fables. -- Corderius's Colloquies. -- Latin Grammar. -- Essay upon
Study. -- Treatise on Education. -- Introduction to making Latin.

448 Caesar's Commentaries, Latin and English, in the Manner of Clarke's
Edition, for Schools, by Mr. Towers, a British School Master.

449 Selectae e Prophanis Historibus.

450 Selectae e Vetri Testamento.

451 The London Vocabulary.

452 Greek Sentences.

453 Holmes's Latin Grammar.

454 Holmes's Rhetoric.

455 Holmes's Greek Grammar.

456 Holmes's Grammarian's Geography, with a Set of Maps.

457 Salmon's Geographical Grammar.

458 Gordon's Geographical Grammar.

459 French Grammars, Vocabularies, Dialogues, Spelling Books, Arts and
Sciences, French and English Fables, Idoms, Exercises. etc.

460 Grammars and Vocabularies, by which a Frenchman may easily acquire a
perfect Knowledge of the English Language.

461 Portroyal's Greek Grammar.

462 Portroyal's Latin Grammar.

463 Portroyal's Italian Grammar.

464 Portroyal's Rational Grammar. -- These Work^ are in the highest Esteem in
Europe.

French and English Editions of the following Books, calculated to teach the
French Language.

465 Gilblass.

466 The Devil on two Sticks.

467 Telemachus.

No. 568 The Epistolary Correspondance, a Collection of Letters in French and
English.

569 Voltaire's Candid, French; ditto in English.

570 The History of the Bible, French and English.

571 The History of Marianne, the fortunate Country Girl, French, ditto in
English.

572 The New Testament, with and without Psalms.

573 French Common Prayers.

574 Emblems of Love, in English, French, and Italian.

575 Maittaire's Greek Testament.

576 Leusden's Greek and Latin Testament.

577 The Greek Grammar, by Wittenhall.

578 The Greek Grammar for the Use of Westminster School.

579 Hutchinson's Zenophon.

580 Battie Isocratis Orationes.

581 Pindar.

582 West's Translation of Pindar.

583 Demosthenes Or^tiones Mounteney.

584 Epictetus.

585 Tacitus Latin, ditto in English, by Gordon.

586 Juvenal, Notis Delphini.

587 Justin, Notis Delphini.

588 Hutcheson's Natural Philosophy.

589 Hutcheson's Metaphysicae.

590 Sophoclis Trajediae, Johnson.

591 Ciceronis Orationes, Notis Delphini.

592 Leusden Compendium Novi Testamenti.

593 Ovid's Metamorphoses, Notis Delphini.

594 Ovid's Epistles, Notis Delphini.

595 Terence, Notis Delphini.

596 Rudiman's Rudiments of the Latin Tongue.

597 Bailey's English and Latin Exercises.

598 Kent's Lucian.

599 Castalio's and Beza's Latin Testaments.

600 Cocker's Arithmetic.

601 Mother Goose's Tales for Children, with Cuts.

No. 602 Bailey's Ovid's Metamorphoses, with English Notes.

603 Kennet's Roman Antiquities.

604 Pott^^'s Greek Antiquities.

605 Dr. Croxal's Aesop's Fables, with Cuts.

606 A new Translation of Aesop's Fa^les, with Cuts* published by Mr. Draper,
for (...) of Schools

607 The Minor Poets, Greek and Latin.

608 Johnson's Greek ^pigrams.

609 Martial Epigrammatum Delectus.

610 Barclay's Greek Rudiments, much esteemed.

611 Crucius's Lives of the Roman Poet^, 2 Vols.

612 Biographia Classica, the Lives of all the Classic Authors, the Greek and
Roman Poets, Historians. Biographers and Orators, with an Historical Account of
them and their Writings.

613 The Roman History. -- The History of England. -- The Grecian History. --
The History of France, by Question and Answer, for the Use of School^.

614 Dawson's Lexicon. -- Novi Testamenti, Alphabeticum nunc primum plene
Editum. Omnes Voces tam primativas tam Derivativas Anomalas atque Communes in
sacro Textu occurentes* cum earum resolutione Gramatic^a complectens.

615 Observations on the Classics.

616 Stirling's Pantheon.

617 The Preceptor, by Duncan, Fordyce, etc. etc.

618 Melmoth's Epistles of Cicero and Pliny.

619 Duncan's Logic.

620 Greenwood's English Grammar.

621 Greenwood's larger English Grammar.

622 Sir Richard Steel's English Grammar, commonly called Brightland's Grammar.

623 Dilworth's Spelling Book.

624 Dilworth's School-Master's Assistant, an excellent and easy Introduction
to the Learning Arithmetic.

625 Lusus Westmonasterienses sive Epigrammatum et Po^matus Minorum Delectus
quibus adjicictur Solitudo Regia.

No. 626 Grotius de Veritate Religion is Christian^^.

627 Memoria Technica, or a new Method of Artificial Memory, applied to and
examplified in Chronology, History, Geography and Astronomy, by Dr. Richard
Gray, Author of the System of E^^lesiastical Law.

628 (...) of Ancient History, Sacred and Profane, containing the most material
Translations which have been recorded for the first four Thousand Years from
the Creation of the World, to the ^irth of Christ, by Question and Answer,
calculated for Schools, and may be extremely useful to all who have not Ability
to purchase or consult the Original, from which these excellent Rudiments are
taken, by Edward Button.

629 The Church Catechism explained by way of Question and Answer, and
confirmed by Scripture Proofs, divided into five Parts, wherein a Brief and
plain Account is given of the Christian Covenant, the Christian Faith, the
Christian Obedience, the Christian Prayer, the Christian Sacrament, by John
Lewis.

630 Dr. Hildrop's lively Writings, esteemed very near equal to Dean Swift.

631 Reflections on Learning, a Book much read at the Universities, an
excellent Performance, written by Mr. Baker.

632 Fowler's Nature and Design of Christianity.

633 Bo^ce's Pantheon.

634 King's Heathen Gods.

635 The Circle of the Sciences.

636 A little Collection of Maps for the Pocket, called Atlas Minimu^.

637 The World Dispay'd, a curious Collection of Voyages and Travels, selected
from the best Writers of all Nations, in which the Conjectures of all Nations,
and Inter^olations of several vain (...) and Translators are ^^punged, every
Relation is made plain and concise, and the Division of Countries and Kingdoms
are clearly and distinctly Noted.

To the PUBLIC.
Curiosity is seldom so powerfully excited, or so amply gratified as by
faithful Relations of Voyages and Travels. The different Appearances of Nature,
and the various Customs of Men, the gradual Discovery of the World, and the
Accidents and Hardships of a naval Life, all concur to fill the Mind with
Expectation and with Wonder* and as Science, when it can be connected with
Events, is always more easily learned, and more certainly remembered, the
History of a Voyage may be considered as the most useful Treatise on Geography;
since the Student follows the Traveller from Country to Country, and retains
the Situation of Places by recounting his Adventures. It is hoped that this
Collection will be favorably received, as none has been offered so cheap or so
commodious; it consist^ of Twenty Volum^s, is adorned with a great Number of
beautiful Cuts, and contains Voyages and Travels to every Pa^^ of the Globe.

No. 638 The Art of Measuring by the sliding Rule, by G. Thomson.

639 The Gentleman's and Trader's Pocket Library.

640 Plaisted's Journey to Calcutta in the East Indies.

641 Cicero de Natura Deorum, Notis Davisii.

642 Puffendorff de Officio Hominis and Civis, Johnson,

643 Dr. Milner's Practical Greek Grammar.

644 Dr. Milner's Practical Latin Grammar.

645 The New England Accidence, by Chevers, with other sorts of Accidences and
Grammars.

646 Rudiman's Rudiments of the Latin Tongu^, with a great Variety of other
School Book^ i^ in Hebrew, Greek and Latin.

No. 647 A Present for an Apprentice, or a sure Guide to gain both Esteem and
Estate, with Rules for his Conduct to his Master, and in the World. Written by
the Lord Mayor of London.

648 A Present for a Servant Maid, or the sure Mean^ of gaining Love and
Esteem, with Directions for going to Market, for dressing Dishes of Flesh, Fish
or Fowl, and some Rules for Washing; calculated for making the Mistress and
Maid happy.

649 A new Critical Review of the public Buildings in London and Westminster.

650 The complete Letter Writer, or polite English Secretary, containing
Letters on the most common Occasions of Life, particularly on Business, Duty,
Amusement, Affection, Courtship, Love, Marriage, Friendship, etc. with a
Grammar, Instructions how to address Persons of all Ranks, either in Wrighting
or Discourse, and various forms of polite Messages for Cards.

651 Sheridan's British Education, or an Essay toward proving that the
Immorality, Ignorance and false Taste which so generally prevails, are the
natural and necessary Consequences of the present defective System of
Education, with an Attempt to show that a Revival of the Art of Speaking, and
the Study of our own Language might contribute in a great Measure to the Cure
of those Evils; a Work as well executed as it is noble in the Design, which is
to connect, ascer^ain and affix the English Language, and to revive the long
lost Art of Oratory.

652 The ^lements of Logic, by the late ingenious Mr. Professor Duncan.

653 The general History of Polybius, inimitably we^l translated from the
Greek, by Mr. Hampton.

654 Hitt's Treatise on the whole Management (...) Fruit Trees, both ^ld and
young, with the Nature of Planting and o^dering them, ad^pted ^o every Capacity.

No. 655 The Athenian Oracle, an entire Collecton of all the valuable Questions
and Answers in the old Atheni^n Mercuries, intermixed with many Cases in
Divinity, History, Philosophy, Mathematics, Love, Poetry; a Work containing an
uncommon Variety of delightful Entertainments.

656 The Beauty of Holiness in the Common Prayer, or Liturgy of the Church of
England, showing the great Perfection, Uses and Advantages of it.

657 The Works of the most Reverend and Pious Dr. (...) Sing.

658 King's excellent Essay on the Origin of Evil, with many invaluable Notes
of Dr. Law.

659 The Life of Mahomet, of great Entertainment, abounding with the most
refined Sentiments, and excellent Documents.

660 The Art of Painting, with the Lives of 300 of the most eminent Painters,
by Depiles, containing a complete Treatise of Painting, Designing, and the Use
of Prints.

661 The Constitution of the Free Masons, with their History, Charges,
Regulations, etc. for the Use of Lodges.

662 The British Housewife, or the Cook, Housekeeper and Gardiner's Companion,
directing what is necessary to be done in Providing for, Conducting and
Managing a Family throughout the Year; with Abundance of Cuts, by Martha
Bradley.

663 The complete Housewife, an excellent Book of Cookery.

664 The Lady's Companion, another good Cookery Book.

665 Mrs. Harrison's Housekeeper's Pocket Book, a very useful Piece on Cookery.

666 Mason on Self Knowledge.

667 The History of Cape Br^ton and St. Iohn^s, from the first Settlement of
them to the taking of Loucisbourg in 1758, exhi^^ting a Description of the
Country, and Utility of its Productions, the Manners, Inclinations and
Prejudices of the Indians, and such Reflections as may be of (...) great U^e to
those who shall have Occasion to deal with those People.

No. 668 The Travels of Cyrus, by the Chevalier Ramsay.

669 Brown's Estimate of the Manners and Principles of the Times.

670 Nuptial Dialogues and Debates, an useful Prospect of the Felicities and
Discomforts of a Married Life, incident to all Degrees from the Throne to the
Cottage, relating the fantastical Humors of Fops, Coquets, Bullies, Jilts,
fond Fools and Wantons, old Fumblers, Barren Ladies, Misers, Parsimonious
Wives, Ninies, Sluts and Termagants, Drunken Husbands, Toping Gossips, etc.
^^gested into Serious, Merry and Satirical Poems, wherein both Sexes, in all
Stations, are reminded (...) their Duty, and taught how to be happy in the
Matrimonial State, by Ned Ward, the facetious Author of the London Spy.

671 The Temple of the Muses, or the principal Histories of the great Heroes of
Antiquity, very necessary to those who read Classic Authors.

672 Dr. Felton's excellent Dissertation of the Classics.

673 The Beauties of the Spectator, Tatler and Guardian, containing the Marrow
of those several Volumes, upon the most interesting and entertaining Subjects.

674 The Animal World displayed, or an entertaining Description of Birds,
Beasts, Fishes and Serpents* a Work of Information, adorned with a great Number
of Figures well engraven.

676 The Beauties of England, a comprehensive View of the public Structures,
the Seats of the Nobility and Gentry, the Universities, Cities, Market Town,
Antiquities and Curiosities, with a circumstantial Account of the Cities of
London and Westminster, pointing out whatever merits the A^^ention of a
Stranger to England.

No. ^^8 The whole Works of John Lock, Esquire;

679 The History of the Puritans, or Protestant Nonconformists, from the
Reformation, with an Account of their Principles, their Attempts for a further
Reformation in the Church, and the Lives and Characters of their most
considerable Divines.

680 Modern Europe, or a Compendious History of the Kingdoms and States of
England, France, Russia, Turkey, Austria, Sweden, Spain, Denmark, Prussia,
Poland, Naples and Sicily, Portugal, Sardinia, Holland, Switzerland, Venice,
Genoa, and the Ecclesiastical State, containing what is remarkable relating to
their respective Governments, Land and Sea Forces, Capital Cities,
Universities, Number of Inhabitants, Trade, Religion, Genius, Language,
Interests and Views, with a clear and concise History of the House of Bourbon,
in France, its Views, Intrigues, and Influence; with a Map of Europe, Dedicated
to Mr. PIT, and printed in a Pocket Volume.

681 Mont^squis Reflections on the Rise and Fall of the Roman Empire,
translated from a new and much improved Edition of the valuable original.

682 The Old Practice of Piety.

683 The New Practice of Piety.

684 The New Week's Preparation.

685 Spencer's Remarks on Mr. Pope's Odysl^y.

686 The Family Library, containing a Variety of entertaining and instructing
Writings.

687 Dr. Thomson's Anatomy of the Bones.

688 The Rudiments of Physic, by Groenvelt.

689 Mission's celebrated Voyage to Italy, recommended by Mr. Addison.

No. 690 Jacob's Complete Court-Keeper.

691 Jacob's Statute Law, common placed.

692 Gregory's Astronomy.

693 The World in Miniture, an entertaining Description of every Country under
the Sun.

694 The Annals of Tacitus, an Author of singular Wisdom and Energy, elegantly
Translated, by Mr. Gordon, the Author of Cato's Letters, and the Independent
Whig.

695 A new Treatise on Ship Building and Navigation, wherein the Theory,
Practice and Application of the necessary Instruments are judiciously handled,
with the Construction and Use of a new invented Shipwright's Sector, for
readily laying down and delineating Ships of all Forms, with Tables of the
Sun's Declination, of Meridional Parts, of difference of Latitude and
Departure, of Logarithms, Sines, Tangents and Secants, by Mungo Murr^y,
Shipwright in the King's Yard at Deptford; this is the last and best Work ever
published on Ship Building.

696 The Oceana, and all the other Political Writings of James Harrington, with
an exact Account of the Life of this very extraordinary Writer, by John Toland.

697 The Maxims of the Duke de Rochefaucanlt.

698 The Military Engineer, or an excellent Treatise of Attack and Defense of
all Kinds of Fortified Places, from the French of Le Blond.

699 Vauban's Treatise of Fortifications.

700 Mons. Saxe's famous Reveries and Memoirs upon the Art of War.

701 The Partisan, or Art of War in Detachment.

702 Gibson's excellent Treatise upon the Disease, of Horses, with Directions
for the Cure of them.

703 Human Prudence, or the Art by which a Man may raise himself and his
Fortune to Grandeur.

No. 704 Two Discourses, Preached at Boston, by Dr. Jonathan Mayhew, upon the
Conquest of Qu^bee, with an Appendix giving an Account of three former
unsuccessful Expeditions against that Place.

705 Ulloa's Voyage to South America, describing at large the Spanish Cities,
Towns, Provinces, etc. on that vast Continent, with the Genius, Customs, Trade
of the Inhabitants, and an Account of their Gold and Silver Mines; the most
Accurate, Entertaining and useful Performance of the Kind ever published.

706 Hume's History of Britain, a Work of the first Class.

707 Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments; this Author's Discourse animated by
the Sentiments of Virtue, flows long, like a full and rapid Stream, and carries
the Reader through many entertaining Scenes of common Life, and many curious
Disquisitions of Litterature; and it is universal^y allowed to be the best
Composition of the Kind that ever appeared.

708 The Peerage, or the present State of every Noble Family of England,
Scotland and Ireland, in three Pocket Vols. by Salmon.

709 Naval Evolutions, or a System of Sea-Discipline: Extracted from the
celebrated Treatise of P. L'Host^, Professor of Mathematics in the Royal
Seminary of T^ulon; confirmed by Experience, illustrated by Examples from the
most remarkable Sea Engagements between England and Holland, embellished with
Eighteen Copper Plates, and adapted to the Use of the British Navy. To which
are added, an Abstract of the Theory of Ship-building; an Essay on Naval
Discipline, by a late experienced Sea Commander; a general Idea of the Armament
of the French Navy, with some practicable Observations, by Christopher O'Bryen,
Esquire; Lieutenant of his Majesty's Navy. This Work is highly necessary to all
Persons who use the Sea as Captains or Masters of Vessels, as well as
Entertaining to Readers in general.

No. 710 The Essays of Michael M^ntagine, a Work adorned with fine Sentments,
Turns of Wit, and Historical Facts, universally read, quoted, recommended and
referred to by Addison, Steel, Swift, Pope, and other Authors of the first
Class.

711 The Preceptor, containing a general Course of Education, wherein the first
Principles of Polite Learning are laid down in a Wa^ most suitable for
advancing the Instruction of Young Persons; Dedicated to the King when a Youth,
and read by His Majesty in the Course of his Education: This Book is
universally introduced in the Schools of Great Britain and America; the
following Subjects are treated of, viz. Reading, Speaking, Letter Writting,
Arithmetic, Geometry, Architecture, Geography, Astronomy, Chronology, History,
Rhetoric; Poetry, Drawing, Logic, Natural History, Morality, Trade and
Commerce, Laws, Government, Human Life and Manners.

712 Warburton's Divine Legation of Moses, in 4 Vo^s.

713 Sherlock's Sermons. The Style is animated, Nervous and Pathetic, the
Arguments irrisistible, the Eloquence to the last degree persuasive, and it may
most justly be added, that all is Plain, Simple and Manly, like the Religion
the Author explains, and the Faith he professes.

714 The Dictionary of the Holy Bible, containing at. Account of the Persons,
Places, and Descriptions of other Objects mentioned in the Holy Bible, the New
Testament and Apocrypha; the Meani^^^ of all obscure Passages are cleared up
and the seeming Inconsistancies explained; the whole forming a complete Body of
Scripture History and Divinity, and serving as a Concordance to the Bible.

No. 715 Dr. Newton's Dissertations on the Prophecies which have been
remarkably fulfilled, and are at this Time fulfilling in the World; the most
learned and ingenious Work upon the Subject.

716 A Course of Meditations on the Scenes of Nature, namely, Sleep, Darkness,
the Starry Firmament, the Moon, the Morning, and the Sun, written by the
Reverend Mr. Lee, and executed with a fine picturesque Imagination, and a
fervent Devotion, conveying humbling Ideas of Man, and elevated Conceptions of
the Divine Being.

717 Yoric^'s Sermons. The ingenious Author, the Revd. Mr. Stearne, aims at
mending the Heart; inculcating every moral Virtue by Precepts, deduced from
Reason, and the sacred Oracles; these Discourses are universally read and
admired, they are Elegant without the Affectation of appearing so, and Familiar
without Meanness.

718 The Young Gentleman and Lady instructed in such Principles of Politness,
Prudence and Virtue, as will lay a sure Foundation for gaining Respect, Esteem,
and Satifaction in this Life, and Eternal Happiness in a future State,
interspersed with such Observations and Maxims as demonstrate the Danger and
Folly of Vice, and the Advantage and Wisdom of Virtue: The main Purpose of this
Work is to countenance the Modest and the Industrious, to celebrate the Wise
and the Valiant, to encourage the Good and the Pious, to confront the Impudent
and Idle* and to contemn the Vain and Cowardly; the Author has marked out the
several Shoals and Quicksands of Li^e, on which the Young of both Sexes too
often Split; has treated on Matters which relate to the Ladies, as they are
concerned to approach or fly from the other Sex, or as they are tied to them by
Blood, Interest, or Affection; the Young Gentleman is furnished with Rules,
Cautions Counsels and Maxims, tending to instruct, impove and to render an
amiable and an excellent Man.

No. 719 A complete Body of Gardening, or plain Directions for raising all the
Products of a Garden, Fruits, Roots and Herbage from the Result of a a long
Experience with the Culture of all Sorts of Flowers, illustrated with Pictures
of above 600 Plants, Flowers, etc. etc.

720 Du Hamel's practical Treatise of Husbandry; containing many useful and
valuable Experiments and Observations in modern Husbandry, including the most
approved Practice of the best English Farmers.

With His Majesty's Roval License and Authority.

721 A complete Body of Husbandry; containing Rules for performing, in the most
profitable Manner, the whole Business of the Farmer, in Cultivating, Planting,
and Stocking of Land, in judging of the several Kinds of Seeds, and of Manures;
and in the Management of Arable and Pasture Grounds: Together with the most
approved Methods of Practice in the several Branches of Husbandry, and in
Breeding and Preserving Cattle, and Curing their Diseases: To which is annexed,
The whole Management of the Orchard, the Brewhouse, and the Dairy. Compiled
from the Original Papers of the late Thomas Hale, Esquire and enlarged by many new
and useful Communications on Practical Subjects; from the Collections of Col.
Stevenson, Mr. Randolph. Mr. Hawkins, Mr. Storey, Mr. Os^orne, the Revd. Mr.
Turner, and others. A Work founded on Experience; and calculated for general
Benefit; consisting chiefly of Improvements made by modern Pract^tioners in
Farming; and containing many valuable and useful Discover^^es, never before
published, illustrted with a great Number of Cuts, containing Figures of the
Instruments of Husbandry of useful and poisonous Plants, and various other
Subjects, engraved from Original Drawings.

The Proprietors of the Complete Body of Husbandry, esteem it a Duty equally to
the Public a^a themselves, to insert the following, received from the Country.
ORDERED, THAT the Churchwardens and Overseers, do forthwith apply to Mr.
Rivington, for the Complete Body of HUSBANDRY.

Published by the KING's Authority.

And that the same be chained in the Vestry-Room, for the Public Use of the
Parishioners, to be consulted by them on all Occasions, in that Place, and not
elsewhere: And that the Name of the Parish be set on the Book, to prevent its
being stolen.

By the Vestry.
Lanteglos, juxta Camelford, Cornwall, March 6, 1757.
SIR,
WE desire you to execute the above Order, and we wish our Example may be
followed by every Parish in the Kingdom, who are

Your Humble Servants, Churchwardens.
John Barnes, John Seccombe,
Overseers.
Jonathan Rundell, Joseph Tingcombe,


Note, any Nobleman, or Gentleman, desirous to make a Present of this Book of
Agriculture and Farming to his Parish, may, by applying to James Rivington
asorementioned, be supplied with it.

722 Macquer's Elements of the Theory and Practice of Chemistry; a Work
heartily recommended to the Perusal of every one whose Taste and Profession
leads him to the Study of Chemistry.

723 Gouch's Cases and Practical Remarks in Surgery, with Plates describing
Machines of easy Application and approved Use; these Cases are the mature
Result of long and judicious Remark.

No. 724 The Chemical Works of Dr. Neuman, abounding with useful practical
Remarks and Experiments. (...),

725 Burlamaquis natural and political Law; a Work which relates to the moral
Duties of Life, and the Foundation of Human Contentment and Happiness,
containing noble Maxims of true Christian Policy and excellent Rules for the
Government of our Lives; the Authors is of a noble Family of Lncca, which
removed to Geneva, there to be sheltered from Popish Persecution.

726 Hutcheson's Inquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue;
treating of the various Pleasures Human Nature is capable of receiving.

727 Hutcheson's Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and
Affections, with Illustrations on the moral Sense; an ingenious Work connected
with the Inquiry into the Ideas of Beauty and Virtue.

728 Ferguson's Lectures on Mechanics, Hydrostaties, Pnemuatics and Optics,
with the Use of the Globes, the Art of Dialing, and the Calculation of the mean
Times of New and Full Moons and Eclipses; a more useful and entertaining
Compendium of experimental Philosophy, never was published; and this may be
read without almost any previous Knowledge of Geometry, and with little more
Assistance than the Rules of common Arithmetic.

729 The Lawyer's Magazine; containing whatever is useful, instructive or
entertaining, in the Theory and Practice of the Law of England; illustrated
with Observations and Notes; a Work very necessary to Members of the Councils
and Assemblies, Lawyers, Attorneys, Gentlemen of Estates* and Tradesmen of all
Denominations. Amongst others, the following particulars are here teated of;
how the Laws of England regard Life, Sex, Age, Liberty, Health and Reputation;
the Law concerning Merchants, Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, Ancestor and
Heir, Guardian and Minor, the Nature of Estates, real and personal, how holden,
how acquired, and forfeited; conveyancing, and the various Forms of Deeds made
use of therein, etc. etc. etc. To which is added, an impartial Review of all
the new Law Books, as they are published, and of all those which have been
printed since December, 1760.

No. 730 The Statutes at Large, from the Magana Charta to the End of the last
Parliament, 1761, in eight Vols. Quarto.

731 An Analysis of the Laws of England, with a spirited manly Exhortation to
the Study of the Law; a Work that merits the Attention of every Person
possessing a Fo^^ of Property in the Kingdoms and Provinces o, England.

732 Historical Law Tracts; the Author, the Hon. Mr. Home, possesses in a high
Degree all the Talents requisite for Writing upon the Subject of Law, in the
most rational and instructive Manneer; and with a remarkable Perspicuity, a
Subject seemingly dry and abstruse becomes in his Hands not only Instructive
but Amusing.

733 The Law of Bills of Exchange, promissory Notes and Insurances; containing
all the Statutes, Cases at large, Arguments, Resolutions, Judgments, Decrees
and Customs of Merchants, concerning them; methodically digested by Mr.
Cunningham, who has collected into one Body, all the Laws and Cases relating to
the foregoing Subjects, which are dispersed up and down in the huge unweldy and
expensive Volumes of the Law, and by this means has done an eminent Service to
Merchants, Tradesmen* and others concerned in these Matters.

No. 734 The Practice of a Justice of Peace; concerning the Statutes which give
Jurisdiction to that Magistrate; with a greater Variety of Precedents formed
upon the Words of the Acts of Parliament than in any other Book extant.
Compiled and published under the Direction of the Right Hon. Lord Ward, by T.
Cunningham, Esquire

735 Post^ctwhaite's grand Dictionary of Trade and Commerce, which is of itself
a complete Library, being a Work absolutely necessary for every Merchant and
Tradesman, illustrated with many excellent Maps which form a complete Atlas.

736 The Theory and Practice of Commerce and Maritime Affairs, from the Spanish
of Uzstariz, a Book of excellent Character.

737 A Plan of the English Trade and Commerce, a well written Piece, by the
celebrated Daniel Defo^. This Work exhibits a complete Prospect of the Trade of
England at Home and Abroad.

738 The Laws, Ordinances and Institutions of the Admiralty of Great Britain.

739 The artificial Clock-maker.

740 Select Essays on Commerce, Agriculture, Mines and ^isheries, containing
some very curious Disquisitions on the Nature of Commerce and Manufactures, and
many solid Reflections and sagacious Observations upon Agriculture.

741 The Complete Tradesman, directing him in the several Parts and
Progressions of Trade, from his first Entrance upon Business, to his leaving
off, particularly with regard to Diligence. Over-^^^ding, Diversions, expensive
Living, Surety ship, early Marrving, Compositions, Partnership, Credit
Punctuality, borrowing Money, Discounting Book-keeping, Projects, etc.
calculated for the Use of all our Tradesmen as well in the City a Country; this
excellent Treatise is written by the Ingenious Daniel Desoe, it has not only
save Thousands of young Tradesmen from Destruction, but (by an inflexible
adherance to its Dictates) a^^isted them in accumlating large Fortunes.

No. 742 A general Treatise of Naval Trade and Commerce, a Work of great
Character.

743 The British Cu^ioms, containing an Historical and practical Account of
each Branch of that Revenue, the Rates of Merchandise as settled by the Laws of
England, with the nett Duties payable in all Circumstances of Goods imported,
exported or brought Coastwise, and the nett Drawbacks to be repaid on due
Exportation, as also the Bounties payable out of Customs. This is the last and
by much the best Treatise on this Subject, is written by Hen^^ Saxly, Esquire and
old and excellent Officer of the Custom-House in London, its Merit and Utility
is such that no Merchant whether in Europe or America can Act Correctly and
with Precision without it.

744 Halspenny's new and complete System of Architecture.

745 Halspenny's 12 beautiful Designs for Farm Houses.

746 Garr^^t's Designs for Farm Houses, by which a Person may be his own Judge
before he begins to build, what sort of a House will best suit the Farm he
intends it for without leaving it to unskilful Workmen, calculated to serve any
Country.

747 A ne^^ Book of (...) Work, containing a great Variety of Designs, useful
for Painters, Cabinet Makers, Carvers, Smiths with Gates of various Sorts;
P^laste^, Fences for Beaufets, Tables, Rails, Stair-Cases, Galleries,
Balconies, Sign and Lamp Irons, Door Lights, Gratings, Brackets, Pedest^ls,
Weather-Cocks, Spindier, etc. on Twenty Copper Plates, by I. Jones.

748 Gibbs's Architecture.

749 Gibbs's R^^^es for Drawing.

750 (...) Builder's Treasury, designs for Builders and other Artists.

No. 751 Langley's Builder's Chest Book.

752 Langley's Builder's Jewel.

753 Langley's Builder's Golden Rule.

754 Ware's Palladio's System of Architecture.

755 Swann's Architecture.

756 Salmon's London new Art of Building.

757 Salmon's Builder's Guide.

758 Salmon's Builder's Vade-mecum.

759 Salmon's Builder's Estimater.

760 Hoppus's Builder's Repository.

761 The Builder's Companion or Workman's general Assistant, demonstrating all
the principal Rules of Architecture, from the Plan to the Finish of the Work,
with clear Instructions annexed to each Subject, useful to all Masons,
Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Carpenters, Jayners, and all concerned in the various
Branches of Building, with 77 Copper Plates. By William Pain.

762 The Modern Builder's Assistant, or a concise Epitome of the whole System
of Architecture, by Halspenny, Morris, etc. -- Morris's se^ect Architecture,
being regular Designs for Town and Country Houses.

763 Household Furniture for the Year 1760, by a Society of Cabinet makers and
other Artists, with 183 Designs for all Sorts of Workmen.

764 Morris's Architecture improv^^, being a Collection of Modern and useful
Designs.

765 Hal^penny's Country Gentleman's and Builder's Pocket Companion, containing
Designs, etc. for Lodges, Huts. Summer-Houses, ^^ottos, etc.

766 Halspenny's Useful Architecture, consisting of Designs and full
Instruction for erecting Farm-Houses, Inns, Parsonage-Houses, etc. with their
several Offices, etc. of various (...) highest Expense of Building which (...)
^. 500, and the smallest under (...)*

No. 767 Over's Ornamental Architecture, in the Gothic, Chinese and Modern
Taste.

768 Price's British Carpenter, or a Concise and easy Treatise on Carpentry, in
a more practical Method than has hitherto been made Use of, recommended to the
perusal of all Artizans, by the celebrated Hawksm^or, James and Gibbs.

769 The Builder's Dictionary, or Architect's Companion, explaining the Theory
and Practice of the various Branches, of Masons, Carpenters, Joiners,
Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Painters, Glazers. Smiths, Turners, Carvers,
Plumbers, with the Quantities and Proportions of all Kinds of Materials used in
Building, Directions for choosing, preparing and using them, with Rules for the
Valuation of Houses, etc. Illustrated with 200 Copper Plates.

770 Lex Mer^^teria Rediviva, or the Merchants Directory, being a Complete
Guide to all Men in Business, whether as Traders, Remitters, Owners of Ships,
Freighters, Captains, Insurers, Brokers, Factors, Supercargoes, Agents;
containing an Account of the Trade of our American Colonie^^: Particularly, of
Hudson's Bov, Virginia, Mar^land. New York, Pennsylvania, Iersey, New England,
connecticut, Nava-Scotia, Georgia, Bar^^d^^, St. Kits, Nevis, and all the
Caribbee I^lands, the Ba^amas and Bermuda, Newseuadland, and of the Trade and
Connections between Great Britain and all other States in the World; and a View
of the general Traffic of Foreign Nations, describing the Manufactures and
Products of each. Published with a View of being servicable to many who need
Assistance upon their entering upon Business, and as a Remembrancer to those of
longer Practice in Trade, who may want a (...) any difficulty in the Course of
their (...).

No. 771 The Court and City Register, for the Year 1762. Containing, 1. New and
correct Lists of the Lords and Commons, etc. 2. The Court and City Register 3.
New Lists of the Army and Navy, with the Addition of some Lists never yet
printed, the Whole carefully corrected at the Public and Offices, to the Time
of Publication.

772 Henrietta, written by Mrs. Lenox, one of the most pleasing Novels that has
appeared for some Years.

773 The History of Madam Pompadour, Mistress of the present King of France.
Whoever is desirous of attaining a just Idea of the French Court, must peruse
this spirited entertaining Performance.

774 The Prince of A^^^inia, a Tale written by the Celebrated Mr. Samuel
Johnson, and filled with the most judicious observations upon Life, the nicest
Distinctions upon Conduct, and in every respect worthy of the learned and
sensible Author of the Rambler.

775 The History of Ophelia, a Novel, my Mrs. Fielding, which preserves that
Delicacy peculiar to Female Writers, and affords as much Entertainment and
Recreation, as most Productions of this kind.

776 The Memoirs of Nin^n de L'Enclos, with her Leters to Mons. d^ St.
Evermont, and to the Marqui^ de Sevigne, collected and translated from the
French, by a Lady.

777 H^u Kiou Choaan: Or, the Pleasing History; a Translation from the Chinese
Language; to which is added, 1. The Argument, or Story of a Chines* Play. 2. A
Collection of Chinese Proverbs. An^ 3. Fragments of Chinese Poetry, with Notes,
etc

778 The Complete Housewife, or Accomplished Gentle woman's Companion, being a
Collection of upward of Six Hundred of the most approved Receipt in Cookery,
Pastry, Consectionar^, Pr^serving Pickles, Cakes, Creams, Jellies, Made Wine
Cordials, with Copper Plates, curiously engraven, for the regular Disposition
or Placing of the various Dishes and Courses, and also Bills of Fare for every
Month in the Year. To which is added, a Collection of above Three Hundred
Family Receipts of Medicines, viz. Drinks, Syrups, Salves, Ointments, and
various other Things of sovereign and approved Efficacy in most Distempers,
Pains, Aches, Wounds, Sores, etc. particularly Mrs. Stephens's Medicine for the
Cure of the Stone and Gravel, and Dr. Mead's famous Receipt for the Cure of a
Bite of a mad Dog; with several other excellent Receipts for the same, which
have cured when the Persons where disordered, and the salt Water ^ail'd; never
before made public; sit either for private Families, or such publickspirited
Gentlewomen as would be benefi^ient to their poor Neighbors; with Directions
for Marketing, by E. Smith.

No. 779 The Art of Cookery, by Mrs. Glass, esteemed a great Improvement on all
the Books on thi^ Subject ever yet published.

780 The Director: Or, Young Woman's best Companion, being the plainest and
cheapest of the Kind ever published. The Whole makes a Complete Family Cook and
Physician. Containing above Three Hundred easy Receipts in Cookery, Pastry,
Preserving, Candying, Pickling, Colla^ing, Physic, and Surgery. To which are
added, plain and easy Instructions for choosing Beef, Mutton, Veal, F^^h, Fowl,
and other Eatables. Directions for Carving, and to make Wines. Likewise Bills
of Fare for every Month in the Year, with a complete Index to the Whole. A Book
necessary for all Families; by Sarah Iackson, collected for the Use of her own
Family, and printed at the Request of her Friends. The Third Edition, corrected
and greatly improved by the Author: Particularly with an Addition of several
new Cuts, which at one View show regular and easy Forms of placing the
different Sorts of Dishes from two to nine in a Course, either in the middling
or ^e^teelest Manner. With a Cut of 13 Dishes, showing how to set off a long
Table in a common Way, or after the modern Taste: Not in any other Book extant.
Also several Cuts representing the trussing of Fowls, etc. Dr. Mead's Account
of a Person bit by a mad Dog, and his infalliable Cure. The Negro Cresar's Cure
for Poison, and likewise for the Bite of a Rattle-Snake.

781 The new Heloise, or the Letters of two Lovers, living in a Village at the
foot of the Alps; written by the Celebrated Mr. Rousseau of Geneva, who has
published the following Apology; by way of Preface to that Work, in a Dialogue
between himself and his Friend. The following Extract from this Piece will
serve to convey a just Idea of this much admired Novel. Roussea^. Without
complaining of Injustice, I will tell you, in my turn, in what light these
Letters appear to me; not so much to excuse their defects, as to discover their
source. The perceptions of Persons in Retirement are very different from those
of People in the great World; their Passions being differently modified, are
differently expressed; their imaginations constantly impressed by the same Objects,
are more violently affected. The same small number of Images constantly return,
mix with every Idea, and create these strange and false notions so Remarkable
in People who spend their Lives in solitude; but does it follow that their
Language is Energi^? No; it is only Extraordinary: It is in our Conversation
with the World that we learn to speak with Energy; first, because we must spea^
differently and better than others, and then, (...) every Moment obliged to
affirm what may not be believed, and to express Sentiments which we do not
Feel, we endeavor at a persuasive manner which supplies the place of interior
persuasion. Do you believe that People of real Sensibility express themselves
with that Vivacity, Energy, and Ardour, which you so much Admire in our Drama
and Romances? No; true Passion, full of itself, is rather Diffusive than
Emphatical; it does not even think of persuasion, as it never supposes that its
Existence can be doubtful. In Expressing its feelings it speaks rather for the
Sake of its own Ease, than to I^form others. Love is painted with more Vivacity
in large Cities, but is it in the Village therefore less Violent?


Friend. So that the weakness of the Expression is a Proof of the strength of
their passion.


(...). Sometimes, at least, it is an Indication of its Reality. Read but a
Love-Letter written by an Author who Endeavors to Shine as a Man of Wit: If he
has any Warmth in his Brain, his Words will set Fire to the Paper; but the
Flame will spread no farther: You may be charmed, and perhaps a little moved,
but it will be a fleeting Agitation which will leave nothing except the
Remembrance of Words. On the contrary, a Letter really directed by Love,
written by a Lover influenced by a real Passion, will be Tame, Diffuse, Prolix,
Unconnected, and full of Repetitions; his Heart overf^owing with the same
Sentiment, constantly returns to the same Expressions, and like a natural
Fountain flows continually without being exhausted. Nothing Brilliant, nothing
Remarkable; one Remembers neither Words nor Phrases; there is nothing to (...)
admired, nothing striking; yet we are moved without knowing why. Though we are
not struck (...) of Sentiment, we (...) touched with its Truth; and our Hearts,
in spite of us, sympathize with the Writer. But Men of no sensibility, who know
nothing more than the Flowery Jargon of the Passions, are ignorant of those
Beauties and despise them.


Friend. I am all Attention.


Rousseau. Very well, I say, that in real Love Letters, the Thoughts are
common, yet the Style is not Familiar. Love is nothing more than an Illusion;
it creates for itself another Universe; it is surrounded with objects which
have no Existence but in Imagination, and its Language is always Figurative;
but its Figures are neither just nor regular; its Eloquence consists in its
disorder; and when it reasons least, it is most convincing. Enthusi^sm is the
last degree of this Passion. When it is arrived at its greatest height, its
object appears in a state of Perfection; it then becomes its Idol; it is placed
in Heaven; and as the Enthusiasm of Devotion borrows the Language of Love, the
Enthusiasm of Love also barrows the Language of Devotion. Its Ideas present
nothing but Paradise, Angels, the virtue of Saints, and the delights of Heaven.
In such Transport, surrounded by such Images, is it not natural to expect
sublime Language? Can it possibly debase its Ideas by vulgar Expressions? Will
it not, on the contrary, raise its Style, and speak with adequate Dignity? What
then becomes of your Epistolary Style? It would do mighty well, to be sure, in
writing to the object of one's adoration: in that case they are not letters,
but hymns.


Friend. We shall see what the world will say.


Rousseau. No; rather see the winter on my head. There is an age for
experience, and another for recollection. Our sensibility may be extinguished
by time; but the soul, which was once capable of that sensibility, remains. But
to return to our letters: If you read them as the work of an author who
endeavors to please, or piques himself on his writing, they are certainly
detestable. But take them for what they are, and judge of them in their kind.
Two or three young people, simple, if you will, but sensible, who mutually
express the real sentiments of their hearts, without an intention to display
their wit. They know and love each other too well, for self-admiration to have
any influence among them. They are young, and therefore think like young
people. They are not natives of France, how then can they be supposed to write
correctly? They lived in solitude, and therefore could know but little of the
world. Entirely filled with one single sentiment, they are in a constant
delirium, and yet presume to philosophise. Would you have them know how to
observe, to judge, and to reflect? No; of these they are ignorant; but they are
versed in the art of love, and all their words and actions are connected with
that passion. Their ideas are extravagant, but is not the importance which they
give to these romantic notions more amusing, than all the wit they could have
displayed. They speak of every thing; they are constantly mistaken; they teach
us nothing, except the knowledge of themselves; but in making themselves known,
they gain our affection. Their errors are more engaging, than the wisdom of the
wise. Their honest hearts, even in their transgressions, bear still the
prejudice of virtue, always confident, and always betrayed. Nothing answers
their expectations; every event serves to undeceive them. They are deaf to the
voice of discouraging truth: They find nothing correspond with their own
feelings, and therefore, detaching themselves from the rest of the universe,
they create, in their separate society, a little world of their own, which
presents an entire new scene.


Friend. I confess, that a young fellow of twenty, and girls of eighteen,
though not uninstructed, ought not to talk like philosophers, even though they
may suppose themselves such. I own also, for this distinction has not escaped
me, that these girls became wives of merit, and the young man a better
observer. I make no comparison between the beginning and the end of the work.
The detail of domestic occurrences may efface, in some measure, the faults of
their younger years: The chaste and sensible wife, the worthy matron, may
obliterate the remembrance of former weakness. But even this is a subject for
criticism: The conclusion of the work renders the beginning reprehensible: One
would imagine them to be two different books, which ought not to be read by the
same people. If you intended to exhibit rational personages, why would you
expose them before they were become so? Our attention to the lessons of wisdom
is destroyed by the child's play, by which they are preceeded: We are
scandalized at the bad, before the good can edify us. In short, the reader is
offended, and throws the book aside in the very moment when it might become
serviceable.


Rousseau. One the contrary, I am of opinion, that to those who are disgusted
with the beginning, the end would be entirely super^luous; and that the
beginning will be agreeable to those readers to whom the conclusion can be
useful. So that those who do not read to the end will have lost nothing,
because it was an improper book for them; and those to whom it may be of
service would never have read it, if it had begun with more gravity. Our
lessons can never be useful, unless they are so written as to catch the
attention of those for whose benefit they were calculated.

I may have changed the means, and not the object. When I endeavored to speak
to men, I was not heard; perhaps in speaking to children I shall gain more
attention; and children would have no more relish for naked reason, than for
medicines ill disguised.


Friend. Here again I am afraid you are deceived; they will sip on the edge of
the Vessel, but will not drink the liquor.


Rousseau. Be it so; it will not be my fault; I shall have done all in my power
to make it palatable. My young folks are amiable; but to love them at thirty,
it is necessary to have kown them have when they were ten years younger. One
must lived with them a long time to be pleased with their company; and to taste
their pegins, it is necessary we should first have deplored their sailings.
Their letters are not interesting at first; but we grow attached by degrees,
and can neither continue nor quit them. They are neither elegant easy,
rational, sensible, nor eloquent; but there is sensibility which gradually
communicates itself to our hearts, and which at last is found to supply the
place of all the rest. It is a long romance, of which no one part has proper
effect. At least, such were its effects upon power to move us, and yet the
whole produces a me; pray were not you touched in reading it?


F^iend. No; yet I can easily conceive your being affected; if you are the
author, nothing can be more natural; and if not, I can still account for it. A
man of the world can have no taste for the extravagant ideas, the affected
pathos, and false reasoning of your good folks; but they will suit a recluse,
for the reason which you have given; now, before you determine to publish the
manuscript, you would do well to remember that the world is not composed of
hermits. All you can expect is that your young gentleman will be taken for a
Celadon, your Lord B. for a Don Quixote, your young damsels for two Astreas,
and that the world will laugh at them for a company of fools. But a continued
folly cannot be entertaining.


Rousseau. The very reason which would make you suppress this work, will induce
me to print it.


Friend. What! the certainty of its not being read?


Rousseau. A little patience, and you will understand me. As to morals, I
believe that all kinds of reading are useless to people of the world; first,
because the number of new books which they run through, so generally contradict
each other, that their effect is reciprocally destroyed. The few choice books
which deserve a second perusal, are equally ineffectual; for, if they are
written in support of received opinions, they are superfluous; and if in
opposition, they are of no use; they are too weak to break the chain which
attaches the reader to the vices of society. A man of the world may possibly,
for a moment, be led from his wonted path by the dictates of morality; but he
will find so many obstacles in the way, that he will speedily return to his
former course. I am persuaded there are few people, who have had a tolerable
education, that have not made this essay, at least once in their lives; but,
finding their efforts vain, they are discouraged from any future attempt, and
consider the morality of books as a jargon of idleness. The farther we retreat
from business, great cities, and numerous societies, the more the obstacles to
morality diminish. There is a certain point of distance where these obstacles
cease to be in^urmountable, and there it is that books may be of use. When we
live in solitude, as we do not then read with a design to display our reading,
we are less anxious to change our books, and bestow on them more reflection;
and as their principles find less opposition from without, their internal
impression is effectual. In retirement, the want of occupation obliges those,
who have no resource in themselves, to have recourse to books of amusement.
Romances are more read in the provincial towns than at Paris, in towns less
than in the country, and there they make the deepest impression; the reason is
plain.

Now it happens unfortunately that the books which might amuse, instruct, and
console the people in retirement, who are unhappy only in their own
imagination, are generally calculated to make them still more dissatisfied with
their situation. People of rank and fashion are the sole personages of all our
romances. The refined taste of great cities, court maxims, the splendor of
luxury, and epicurean morality; these are their precepts, these their lessons
of instruction. The coloring of their false virtues tanishes their real ones.
Polite manners are substituted for real duties, fine sentiments for good
actions, and virtuous simplicity is deemed want of breeding.

What effect must such representation produce in the mind of a country
gentleman, in which his freedom and hospitality is turned into ridicule, and
the joy which he spreads through his neighborhood is pronounced to be a low
and contemptible amusement? What influence must they not have upon his wife,
when she is taught, that the care of her family is beneath a lady of her rank;
and on his daughter, who being instructed in the jargon and affectation of the
city, disdains for his clownish behavior, the honest neighbor whom she would
otherwise have married. With one consent, ashamed of their rusticity, and
disgusted with their village, they leave their ancient mansion, which soon
becomes a ruin, to reside in the metropolis; where the father, with his cross
of St. Lewis, from a gentleman becomes a sharper; the mother keeps a
gaming-house; the daughter amuses herself with a circle of gamesters; and
frequently all three, after having led a life of infamy, die in misery and
dishonor.

All our productions verge to the same goal. Tales, romances, comedies, all are
levelled at the country; all conspire to ridicule rustic simplicity; they all
display and extol the pleasures of the great world; it is a shame not to know
them; and not to enjoy them, a misfortune. How many of those sharpers and
prostitutes, with which Paris is so amply provided, were first seduced by the
expectation of these imaginary pleasures? Thus prejudice and opinion contribute
to effect the political system by attracting the inhabitants of each country to
a single point of territory, leaving all the rest a desert; thus nations are
depopulated, that their capitals may flourish; and this frivolous splendour with
which fools are captivated, makes Europe verge with celerity toward its ruin.
The happiness of mankind requires that we should endeavor to stop this torrent
of pernicious maxims. It is the business of the clergy to tell us that we must
be good and wise, without concerning themselves about the success of their
discourses; but a good citizen, who is really anxious to promote virtue, should
not only tell us to be good, but endeavor to make the path to happiness
agreeable.


Friend. Pray, my good friend, take breath for a moment. I am no enemy to
useful designs; and I have been so attentive to your reasoning, that I believe
it will be in my power to continue your argument. You are clearly of opinion,
that to give to works of imagination the only utility of which they are
capable, they must have an effect diametrically opposite to that which their
authors generally propose; they must combat every human institution, reduce all
things to a state of nature, make mankind in love with a life of peace and
simplicity, destroy their prejudices and opinions, inspire them with a taste
for true pleasure, keep them distant from each other, and instead of exciting
people to crowd into large cities, persuade them to spread themselves all over
the kingdom, that every part may be equally enlivened. I also comprehend, that
it is not your intention to create a world of Arcadian shepherds, of
illustrious peasants laboring on their own acres, and philosophising on the
works of nature, nor any other romantic beings which exist only in books; but
to convince mankind that in rural life there are many pleasures which they know
not how to enjoy; that these pleasures are neither so insipid nor so gross as
they imagine; that they are susceptible of taste and delicacy; that a sensible
man, who should retire with his family into the country, and become his own
farmer, might enjoy more rational felicity, than in the midst of the amusements
of a great city; that a good housewife may be a most agreeable woman, that she
may be as graceful and as charming as any town coquet of them all: in short,
that the most tender sentiments of the heart will more effectually animate
society, than the artificial language of polite circles, where the ill-natured
laugh of satyr is the pitiful substitute of that real mirth which no longer
exists. Have I not hit the mark?


Rousseau. It Is the very thing; to which I will add but one reflection. We are
told that romances disturb the brain: I believe it true. In continually
displaying to the reader the ideal charms of a ^tituation very different from
his own, he becomes dissatisfied, and makes an imaginary exchange for that
which he is taugh: to admire. Desiring to be that which he is not, he soon
believes himself actually metamorphosed, and so becomes a fool. If, on the
contrary, romances were only to exhibit the pictures of real objects, of
virtues and pleasures within our reach, they would then make us wiser and
better. Books which are designed to be read in solitude, should be written in
the language of retirement; if they are meant to instruct; they should make us
in love with our situation; they should combat and destroy the maxima of the
great world, by showing them to be false and despicable, as they really are.

Those who aspire to same must calculate their works for the meridian of Paris;
but those who write with a view to do good, must write for the country. How
many worthy people are there who pass their lives in cultivating a few paternal
acres, far distant from the metropolis, and who think themselves exiled by the
partiality of fortune? During the long winter evenings, deprived of society,
they pass the time in reading such books of amusement as happen to fall into
their hands. In their rustic simplicity, they do not pride themselves on their
wit or learning, they read for entertainment rather than instruction; books of
morality and philosophy are entirely unknown to them. As to your romances, they
are so far from being adapted to their situation, that they serve only to
render it insupportable. Their retreat is represented to be a desert, (...)
that whilst they afford a few hours amusement, (...) prepare for them whole
months of regret (...) Why may I not suppose that, (...) this ^ook, like many
(...) into the hands of those inhabitants of the fields, and that the pleasing
picture of a life exactly resembling theirs will render it more tolerable? I
have great pleasure in the idea of a married couple reading this novel
together, imbibing fresh courage to support their common labors, and perhaps
new designs to render them useful. How can they possibly contemplate the
representation of a happy family without attempting to imitate the pleasing
model? How can they be affected with the charms of conjugal union, even where
love is wanting, without increasing and confirming their own attachment? In
quitting their book, they will neither be discontented with their situation,
nor disgusted at their labor: on the contrary, every (...) around them will
assume a more delightful aspect, their duties will seem ennobled, their taste
^or the pleasures of nature will revive; her genuine sensations will be
rekindled in their hearts, and per^^iving happiness within their reach, they
will learn to taste it as they ought: they will perform the same functions, but
with another soul; and what they did before as persants only, they will now
transact as real patriarohs.




No. 782. By the King's Authority, dedicated to His Majesty. On Monday, the
first of September, will be published, the first Volume (to be continued
monthly in small Pocket Volumes, till the whole is complete) of a new Work,
entitled The British Plutarch; Or, Biographical Entertainer* Being a select
Collection of the Lives at large of the most eminent Men, Natives of
Great Britain and Ireland; from the Reign of Henry VIII. to George II. both
inclusive. Whether distinguished as Statesmen, Patriots, Warriors, Divines,
P^ets, Philosophers. The whole faithfully (...) of entertaining Occurrences,
both in private and public Life; much useful Knowledge; and genuine Accounts of
several Persons and Facts, hitherto unknown or misrepresented. Adorned with
Copper Plates, neatly engraved.

The public are desired to take notice, that the British Plutarch will contain
many entertaining and remarkable lives, never before published. Addresses to
the Public, with what is (...) a Plan of the Work, are, upon these occasions,
became so hackneyed, and are in reality in themselves so fallacious, that the
authors of the British Plutarch beg leave to refer such as may be inclined to
encourage this undertaking to the Preface to their First Volume, in which the
many advantages this Collection of English Biography will possess over every
other extant, will be particularly, and, it is hoped, satisfactorily, set forth.

Those who are inclined to take in the above valuable Work, are desired to send
in their Names immediately to our Stores in New York, Philadelphia, and Boston,
that so the Number commissioned from England may be ascertained.

The following Books were the Library of a Gentleman of genteel Taste, they are
in good Condition, and will be sold at reasonable Rates.

FOLIOS.
Chambers's Dictionary, 2 Vols. Cambden's Britannia, 2 Vols. Rapin's History of
England, 2 Vols. Universal History, 7 Vols. Temple's Works, 2 Vols. Burnet's
History of his own Times, 2 Vols. Gordon's Tacitus, 2 Vols. T^l^otson's Works,
3 Vols. Pussendorf's Law of Nature. Wood's Institutes. C^rease's Book of Rates.
Laws of Virginia, 2 Vols. Several pieces of Popes; bound together* Lock's
Works, 3 Vols. Milton's Prose Works, 2 Vols. Sidney on Government. Machiavel's
Works. Penn's Works, 2 Vols. Pennsylvania Laws, 1714. Ditto. -- 1742. Ditto. --
1728. Lawrence's Gardening. Laws of Newcastle, etc. Senex's Two Sheet Maps.
Popple's Map. General Atl^s, Senex's. Holy Bible. Oxford. Johnson's Dictionary.
Jacob's Law Dictionary. Jervis's Don Quixote, 2 Vols. Boyer's French
Dictionary. Chub's Tracts. Templeman's Survey, with Maps. Geographia antiqua et
nova, with Maps from Cellarius. Price's British Carpenter. Liberty, a Poem by
Thompson Religion of Nature by Wollaston. Shaw's Abridgment of Boil, 3 Vols.
Malcolme's Arithmetic and Book-keeping Survey of the Leviathan. Milton's
Paradise Lost (Newton,) 2 Vols. Essay on Man, a New Dunciad. New Jersey Bill in
Chancery.
OCTAVOS.
Baskerville's Milton, 2 Vols. Pyle on the Old Testament. Pyle on the New
ditto. 2 Vols. Lord Holles Memoirs. Crouch's view of the British Customs, 2
Vols. Newton's System. Tale of a Tub. Cicero of Old Age. Byng's Expedition.
Floyer of the Asthma. Hammond on the Bible. Life of the Duke Marlborough, 2
Vols. Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough. Otherside of the Question.
Francis's Horace, 2 Vols. Buckingham's Works, 2 Vols. Kennett's Antiquities.
Greave's Works, 2 Vols. Echard's Roman History, 5 Vols: Toland's Pieces, 2
Vols. Warburton's Legation, 3 Vols. Ditto's Julian. A view of Lord
Bolingbroke's Philosophy. History of England, 4 Vols. Plutarch's Lives, 8 Vols.
Cibber's Life. Rapin's Critical Works, 2 Vols. Baxter on the Soul, 2 Vols.
Clarke's Paraphra^e, 2 Vols. Swift's Miscellanies, 3 Vols. Independent Whig.
History of Charles XII. Virgil, 2 Vols. Arbuthnot of Aliments. Nelson's
Justice. Critical History of England, 2 Vols. Fidde's of Morality. Accomplished
Conveyancer, 3 Vols. Attalantis, 4 Vols. Collection of Voyages, 4 Vols.
Dunciad. Horace, Latin. Gentleman instructed. Horace, 3 Vols. Latin and
English. Christianity as old as the Creation. Floyer of Cold Baths. Euclid's
Eliments. L'Estrange's AEsop. Every Man his own Lawyer. Billinghurst's Arcana,
etc. Lock's Human Understanding, 2 Vols. Bland's Military Discipline.
Cromwell's Life. Gordon's Grammar. Hammond's Practical Surveyer. Builder's
Dictionary, 2 Vols. Pope's Works, 9 Vols. Smollet's History of England, II
Vols. Keysler's Travels, 4 Vols. Chamberlain's State of Great Britain, 2 Vols.
Quincey's Dispensatory. Age of Lewis XIV, 2 Vols. Sherlock's Practical
Discourse. Fable of the Bees. Emenologia. Wood's Survey of Trade. Laws of
Poetry. Dr. Sacheveral's Trial. The Trade of Great Britain considered. Faction
detected. Sydenham's Works. Hobb's View and Survey, etc. Atkinson's Epitome. A
short Method with the Deists. Mariners Kallendar. Warburton's Sermons, 1st Vol.
Stith's History of Virginia. West on the Resurrection. Rogers's Voyage.
Barrow's Navigation. Cyrus's Travels, 2 Vols. Angeloni's Letters, 2 Vols.
Crouch's Book of Rates. Sherlock's Discourses, 2d and 3d Vols. Kettilb^'s
Receipts. Ellis's Voyage. Nelson 's Companion for the Festivals and Fasts. Duty
of Man. Taylor's Living and Dying. Swain's North-West Passage, 2 Vols. Burnet's
Theory, 2 Vols.
DUODECIMOS.
British, Scotch, and Irish Compendium, 4 Vols. Le Nouveau Testament. French.
Holy Bible, 2 Vols. The Skimmer. Court Register. French Plays. Gilblas. French
3 Vol. Hervey's Meditations, 2 Vols. Swift's and Pope's Miscellanies, 4 Vols.
Craftsman, 7 Vols. Roderick Random, 2 Vols. Hubner's Geography. Hudibras. Life
of Prince Eugene. Ca^o's Letters, 4 Vols. Addison's Travels. King's Heathen
Gods. Pope's Odyssey, 5 Vols. Turkish Spy, 8 Vols. Gazetteer. Addison's Works.
Pope's Miscellany, 2 Vols. Pope's Homer, 6 Vols. Spectator, 9 Vols.
Shakespeare's Works, 9 Vols. Tom Jones, 6 Vols. Farquhar's Plays, 2 Vols.
^atler, 4 Vols. ^an Brugh's Plays, 2 Vols. ^ope's Works, 3 Vols. ^ives, etc. of
the ancient Philosophers. ^wist's Miscellanies. Roman History, Questions and
Answers. Connoisieur, 4 Vols. Matrimonial Preceptor. The Complaint, or Night
Thoughts. Mariners Compass Rectified. Hervey's Dialogues, 3 Vols. Telamaque.
Milton's Paradise Lost. History de la N. France, 6 Vols. Congreve's Works, 1st
and 3d Vols. The Pocket Farrier. The Christian Hero. Greek Grammar. By she is
Poetry. De Moliere Comedies. ^ale's Contemplations, 3 Vols. 3 Bulkeley's
Voyages. Complete Exchanger.
The greatest Variety of elegant Pocket-books with Knives, Scissars, Pencils,
Cork-screws, etc. etc.

Also an elegant Assortment of JEWELLRY; consisting, of DIAMOND, GARNET, and
PAST ORNAMENTS for LADIES and GENTLEMEN, and of GOLD, PINCHBECK and SILVER
BUCKLES.

With the VERY BEST GREEN, and BOHRA TEAS, FINEST SNUFFS.


