CONSIDERATIONS ON KEEPING NEGROES; Recommended to the PROFESSORS of
CHRISTIANITY, of every Denomination.

PART SECOND.

By JOHN WOOLMAN.

Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment; but you shall hear the Small as well
as the Great: You shall not be afraid of the Face of Man; for the Judgment is
GOD's. Deuteronomy. i. 17. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. 1762.

THE PREFACE.
ALL our Actions are of like Nature with their Root; and the Most High weighs
them more skilfully than Men can weigh them one for another.

I believe that one Supreme Being made and supports the World; nor can I
worship any other Deity without being an Idolater, and guilty of Wickedness.

Many Nations have believed in, and worshipped a Plurality of Deities; but I do
not believe they were therefore all wicked. -- Idolatry indeed is Wickedness;
but it is the Thing, not the Name, which is so. Real Idolatry is to pay that
Adoration to a Creature, which is known to be due only to the true GOD.

He who professes to believe in one Almighty Creator, and in his Son JESUS
CHRIST, and is yet more intent on the Honors, Profits and Friendships of the
World, than he is in Singleness of Heart to stand faithful to the Christian
Religion, is in the Channel of Idolatry; while the Gentile, who, under some
mistaken Opinions, is notwithstanding established in the true Principle of
Virtue, and humbly adores an Almighty Power, may be of that Number who fear
GOD, and work Righteousness.

I believe the Bishop of Rome assumes a Power, that does not belong to any
Officer in the Church of CHRIST; and if I should knowingly do any Thing,
tending to strengthen him in that Capacity, it would be great Iniquity. There
are many Thousands of People, who by their Profession acknowledge him to be the
Representative of JESUS CHRIST on Earth; and to say that none of them are
upright in Heart, would be contrary to my Sentiments.

Men who sincerely apply their Minds to true Virtue, and find an inward Support
from above, by which all vicious Inclinations are made subject; that they love
GOD sincerely, and prefer the real Good of Mankind universally to their own
private Interest; though these, through the Strength of Education and
Tradition, may remain under some speculative and great Errors, it would be
uncharitable to say, that therefore GOD rejects them. -- He who creates,
supports and gives Understanding to all Men, his Knowledge and Goodness is
superior to the various Cases and Circumstances of his Creatures, which to as
appear the most difficult.

The Apostles and primitive Christians did not censure all the Gentiles as
wicked Men, Romans ii. 14. Col. iii. 2. but as they were favored with a Gift to
discern Things more clearly, respecting the Worship of the true GOD, they with
much Firmness declared against the worshipping of Idols; and with true Patience
endured many Sufferings, on that Account.

Great Numbers of faithful Protestants have contended for the Truth, in
Opposition to Papal Errors; and with true Fortitude laid down their Lives in
the Conflict, without saying, That no Man was saved who made Profession of that
Religion.

While we have no Right to keep Men as Servants for Term of Life, but that of
superior Power; to do th^s, with Design by their Labor to profit ourselves and
our Families, I believe is wrong; but I do not believe that all who have kept
Slaves, have therefore been chargeable with Guilt. If their Motives thereto
were free from Selfishness, and their Slaves content, they were a Sort of
Freemen; which I believe has sometimes been the Case.

Whatever a Man does in the Spirit of Charity, to him it is not Sin: And while
he lives and acts in this Spirit, he learns all Things essential to his
Happiness, as an Individual: And if he does not see that any Injury or
Injustice, to any other Person, is necessarily promoted by any Part of his Form
of Government, I believe the merciful Judge will not lay Iniquity to his
Charge. Yet others, who live in the same Spirit of Charity, from a clear
Convincement, may see the Relation of one Thing to another, and the necessary
Tendency of each; and hence it may be absolutely binding on them to desist from
some Parts of Conduct, which some good Men have been in.

CONSIDERATIONS ON KEEPING NEGROES, etc.
AS some in most religious Societies amongst the English are concerned in
importing or purchasing the Inhabitants of Africa as Slaves; and as the
Professors of Christianity of several other Nations do the like; these
Circumstances tend to make People less apt to examine the Practice so closely
as they would, if such a Thing had not been, but was now proposed to be entered
upon. It is however our Duty, and what concerns us individually, as Creatures
accountable to our Creator, to employ rightly the Understanding which he has
given us, in humbly endeavoring to be acquainted with his Will concerning us,
and with the Nature and Tendency of those Things which we practice: For as
Justice remains to be Justice, so many People, of Reputation in the World,
joining with wrong Things, do not excuse others in joining with them, nor make
the Consequence of their Proceedings less dreadful in the final Issue, than it
would be otherwise.

WHERE Unrighteousness is justified from one Age to another, it is like dark
Matter gathering into Clouds over us. We may know that this G^oom will remain
till the Cause be removed by a Reformation, or Change of Times; and may feel a
Desire, from a Love of Equity, so speak on the Occasion; yet where Error is so
strong, that it may not be spoken against without some Prospect of
Inconvenience to the Speaker, this Difficulty is likely to operate on our
Weakness, and quench the good Desires in us; except we dwell so steadily under
the Weight of it, as to be made willing to endure Hardness on that Account.

WHERE Men exert their Talents against Vices generally accounted such, the ill
Effects whereof are presently perceived in a Government, all Men who regard
their own temporal Good, are likely to approve the Work. But when that which is
inconsistent with perfect Equity, has the Law, or Countenance of the Great in
its Favor, though the Tendency thereof be quite contrary to the true Happiness
of Mankind in an equal, if not greater, Degree, than many Things accounted
reproachful to Christians; yet as these ill Effects are not generally
perceived, they who labor to dissuade from such Things, which People believe
accord with their Interest, have many Difficulties to encounter.

THE repeated Charges, which GOD gave to his Prophets, imply the Danger they
were in of erring on this Hand. Be not afraid of their Faces; for I am with
thee, to deliver thee, faith the Lord, Jer. i. 8. Speak all the Words that I
command thee to speak to them; diminish not a Word, Jer. xxvi. 2. And thou Son
of Man, be not afraid of them, nor dismayed at their Looks. Speak my Words to
them, whether they will hear or forbear, Ezekiel. ii. 6.

UNDER an Apprehension of Duty, I offer some further Considerations on this
Subject, having endeavored some Years to consider it heartily. I have observed
People of our own Color, whose Abilities have been inferior to the Affairs
which relate to their convenient Subsistence, who have been taken Care of by
others, and the Profit of such Work as they could do, applied toward their
Support. -- I believe there are such amongst Negroes; and that some People, in
whose Hands they are, keep them with no View of outward Profit, do not consider
them as black Men, who, as such, ought to serve white Men; but account them
Persons who have Need of Guardians, and as such take Care of them: Yet where
equal Care is taken in all Parts of Education, I do not apprehend Cases of this
Sort are likely to occur more frequently amongst one Sort of People than
another.

IT looks to me that the Slave Trade was founded, and has generally been
carried on, in a wrong Spirit; that the Effects of it are detrimental to the
real Prosperity of our Country; and will be more so, except we cease from the
common Motives of keeping them, and treat them in future agreeable to Truth and
pure Justice.

Negroes may be imported, who, for their Cruelty to their Countrymen, and the
evil Disposition of their Minds, may be unfit to be at Liberty; and if we, as
Lovers of Righteousness, undertake the Management of them, we should have a
full and clear Knowledge of their Crimes, and of those Circumstances which
might operate in their Favor; but the Difficulty of obtaining this is so
great, that we have great Reason to be cautious therein. But, should it plainly
appear that absolute Subjection were a Condition the most proper for the Person
who is purchased, yet the innocent Children ought not to be made Slaves,
because their Parents sinned.

WE have Account in Holy Scripture of some Families suffering, where mention is
only made of the Heads of the Family committing Wickedness; and it is likely
that the degenerate Jews, misunderstanding some Occurrences of this Kind, took
Occasion to charge GOD with being unequal; so that a Saying became common, The
Fathers have eaten four Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on Edge.
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, two of the inspired Prophets, who lived near the same
Time, were concerned to correct this Error. Ezekiel is large on the Subject.
First, he reproves them for their Error. What mean ye, that ye do so, Chap.
xviii. Verse 1. As I live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have Occasion any
more to use this Proverb in Israel. The Words, any more, have Reference to Time
past; intimating, that though they had not rightly understood some Things they
had heard or seen, and thence supposed the Proverb to be well grounded; yet
henceforth they might know of a Certainty, that the Ways of GOD are all equal;
that as sure as the Most High lives, so sure Men are only answerable for their
own Sins. -- He thus sums up the Matter; The Soul that sins, it shall die.
The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father; neither shall the Father
bear the Iniquity of the Son. The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon
him; and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him.

WHERE Men are wicked, they commonly are a Means of corrupting the succeeding
Age; and thereby hasten those outward Calamities, which fall on Nations, when
their Iniquities are full.

MEN may pursue Means which are not agreeable to perfect Purity, with a View to
increase the Wealth and Happiness of their Offspring, and thereby make the Way
of Virtue more difficult to them. And though the ill Example of a Parent, or a
Multitude, does not excuse a Man in doing Evil, yet the Mind being early
impressed with vicious Notions and Practices, and nurtured up in Ways of
getting Treasure, which are not the Ways of Truth; this wrong Spirit getting
first Possession, and being thus strengthened, frequently prevents due
Attention to the true Spirit of Wisdom, so that they exceed in Wickedness those
before them. And in this Channel, though Parents labor, as they think, to
forward the Happiness of their Children, it proves a Means of forwarding their
Calamity. This being the Case in the Age next before the grievous Calamity in
the Siege of Jerusalem, and carrying Judah Captive to Babylon, they might say
with Propriety, This came upon us, because our Fathers forsook GOD, and because
we did worse than our Fathers.

As the Generation next before them inwardly turned away from GOD, who yet
waited to be gracious; and as they in that Age continued in those Things which
necessarily separated from perfect Goodness, growing more stubborn, till the
Judgments of GOD were poured out upon them; they might properly say, Our
Fathers have sinned, and we have borne their Iniquities: And yet, wicked as
their Fathers were, had they not succeeded them in their Wickedness, they had
not borne their Iniquities.

To suppose it right, that an innocent Man shall at this Day be excluded from
the common Rules of Justice; be deprived of that Liberty, which is the natural
Right of human Creatures; and be a Slave to others during Life, on Account of a
Sin committed by his immediate Parents; or a Sin committed by Ham, the Son of
Noah; is a Supposition too gross to be admitted into the Mind of any Person,
who sincerely desires to be governed by solid Principles.

IT is alleged, in Favor of the Practice, that Joshua made Slaves of the
Gibeonites.

WHAT Men do by the Command of GOD, and what comes to pass as a Consequence of
their Neglect, are different; such as the latter Case now mentioned was.

IT was the express Command of the Almighty to Israel, concerning the
Inhabitants of the promised Land, Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor
with their Gods: They shall not dwell in thy Land. Exodus xxiii. 32. Those
Gibeonites came craftily, telling Joshua, that they were come from a far
Country; that their Elders had sent them to make a League with the People of
Israel; and as an Evidence of their being Foreigners, showed their old Clothes,
and c. And the Men took of their Victuals, and asked not Counsel at the Mouth
of the Lord; and Joshua made Peace with them, and made a League with them, to
let them live; and the Princes swear to them.

WHEN the Imposition was discovered, the Congregation murmured against the
Princes: But all the Princes said to all the Congregation, we have sworn to
them by the Lord God of Israel; now therefore we may not touch them; we will
even let them live, let Wrath be upon us; but let them be Hewers of Wood, and
Drawers of Water unto the Congregation.

OMITTING to ask Counsel, involved them in great Difficulty. The Gibeonites
were of those Cities, of which the LORD said, Thou shall save alive nothing
that breaths; and of the Stock of the H^^ites, concerning whom he commanded
by Name, Thou shall smite them, and utterly destroy them: Thou shall make no
Covenant with them, nor show Mercy unto them, Deuteronomy. vii. 1. Thus Joshua and the
Princes, not knowing them, had made a League with them, to let them live; and
in this Strait they resolve to make them Servants. Joshua and the Princes
suspected them to be Deceivers: Peradventure you dwell amongst us; and how
shall we make a League with you? Which Words show, that they remembered the
Command before mentioned; and yet did not enquire at the Mouth of the LORD, as
Moses directed Joshua, when he gave him a Charge respecting his Duty as chief
Man among that People, Numb. xxvii. 21. By this Omission Things became so
situated, that Joshua and the Princes could not execute the Judgments of GOD on
them, without violating the Oath which they had made.

Moses did amiss at the Waters of Meribah; and doubtless he soon repented; for
the LORD was with him. And it is likely that Joshua was deeply humbled, under a
Sense of his Omission; for it appears that GOD continued him in his Office, and
spared the Lives of those People, for the ^ake of the League and Oath made in
his Name.

THE Wickedness of these People was great, and they worthy to die, or perfect
Justice had not passed Sentence of Death upon them; and as their Execution was
prevented by this League and Oath, they appear content to be Servants: As it
seems good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.

THESE Criminals, instead of Death, had the Sentence of Servitude pronounced on
them, in these Words, Now therefore ye are cursed; and there shall none of you
be freed from being Bondmen, and Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water for the
House of my God.

WE find, Deuteronomy. xx. 10. that there were Cities far distant from Canaan, against
which Israel went to Battle; unto whom they were to proclaim Peace, and if the
Inhabitants made Answer of Peace, and opened their Gates, they were not to
destroy them, but make them Tributaries.

THE Children of Israel were then the LORD's Host, and Executioners of his
Judgments on People hardened in Wickedness. -- They were not to go to Battle,
but by his Appointment. The Men who were chief in his Army, had their
Instructions from the Almighty; sometimes immediately, and sometimes by the
Ministry of Angels* Of these, amongst others, were Moses, Joshua, Othniel, and
Gideon; See Exodus iii. 2. and xviii. 19. Josh. v. 13. These People far off from
Canaan, against whom Israel was sent to Battle, were so corrupt, that the
Creator of the Universe saw it good to change their Situation; and in case of
their opening their Gates, and coming under Tribute, this their Subjection,
though probably more mild than absolute Slavery, was to last little or no
longer than while Israel remained in the true Spirit of Government.

IT was pronounced by Moses the Prophet, as a Consequence of their Wickedness,
The Stranger that is within thee shall get above thee very high* and thou shall
come down very low: He shall be the Head, and thou the Tail.

THIS we find in some Measure verified in their being made Tributaries to the
Moabites, Midianites, Amorites and Philistines.

IT is alleged in Favor of the Practice of Slave-keeping, that the Jews by
their Law made Slaves of the Heathen, Levit. xxv. 45. Moreover, of the Children
of the Stranger that do sojourn amongst you, of them shall ye buy, and of their
Children, which are with you, which they beget in your Land; and they shall be
your Possession; and you shall take them as an Inheritance for your Children
after you, to inherit them as a Possession, they shall be your Bondmen for
ever. -- It is difficult for us to have any certain Knowledge of the Mind of
Moses, in Regard to keeping Slaves, any other Way than by looking upon him as a
true Servant of GOD, whose Mind and Conduct were regulated by an inward
Principle of Justice and Equity. To admit a Supposition that he in that Case
was drawn from perfect Equity by the Alliance of outward Kindred, would be to
disown his Authority.

Abraham had Servants born in his House, and bought with his Money: And the
Almighty said of Abraham, I know him, that he will order his House after him.
Which implies, that he was as a Father, an Instructor, and a good Governor over
his People. -- And Moses, considered as a Man of GOD, must necessarily have had
a Prospect of some real Advantage in the Strangers and Heathens being Servants
to the Israelites for a Time.

As Mankind had received and established many erroneous Opinions and hurtful
Customs, their living and conversing with the Jews, while the Jews stood
faithful to their Principles, might be helpful to remove those Errors, and
reform their Manners. -- But for Men, with private Views, to assume an absolute
Power over the Persons and Properties of others; and continue it from Age to
Age in the Line of natural Generation, without Regard to the Virtues and Vices
of their Successors, as it is manifestly contrary to true universal Love, and
attended with great Evils, there requires the clearest Evidence to beget a
Belief in us, that Moses intended that the Srangers should as such be Slaves to
the Jews.

HE directed them to buy Strangers and Sojourners. -- It appears that there
were Strangers in Israel who were free Men; and considering with what
Tenderness and Humanity the Jews, by their Law, were obliged to use their
Servants, and what Care was to be taken to instruct them in the true Religion,
it is not unlikely that some Strangers in Poverty and Distress were willing to
enter into Bonds to serve the Jews as long as they lived; and in such Case the
Jews, by their Law, had a Right to their Service during Life.

WHEN the Awl was bored through the Ear of the Hebrew Servant, the Text faith,
He shall serve for ever; yet we do not suppose that by the Word for ever, it
was intended that none of his Posterity should afterward be free; when it is
said in Regard to the Strangers which they bought, They shall be your
Possession, it may be well understood to mean only the Persons so purchased;
all preceding relates to buying them; and what follows, to the Continuance of
their Service. You shall take them as an Inheritance to your Children after
you; they shall be your Bondmen for ever. It may be well understood to stand
limited to those they purchased.

Moses, directing Aaron and his Sons to wash their Hands and Feet, when they
went into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, faith, It shall be a Statute for
ever to them, even to him and his Seed throughout all Generations. And to
express the Continuance of the Law, it was his common Language, It shall be a
Statute for ever throughout your Generations. So that had he intended the
Posterity of the Strangers so purchased to continue in Slavery to the Jews, it
looks likely that he would have used some Terms clearly to express it. The Jews
undoubtedly had Slaves, whom they kept as such from one Age to another; but
that this was agreeable to the genuine Design of their inspired Lawgiver, is
far from being a clear Case.

MAKING Constructions of the Law contrary to the true Meaning of it, was common
amongst that People. -- Samuel's Sons took Bribes, and perverted Judgment. --
Isaiah complained that they justified the Wicked for Reward. -- Zephaniah,
Cotemporary with Jeremiah, on Account of the Injustice of the civil
Magistrates, declared that those Judges were Evening Wolves; and that the
Priests did Violence to the Law.

Jeremiah acquaints us, that the Priests cried Peace, Peace, when there was no
Peace; by which Means the People grew bold in their Wickedness; and having
committed Abominations, were not ashamed; but, through wrong Constructions of
the Law, they justified themselves, and boastingly said, We are wise; and the
Law of the Lord is with us. These Corruptions continued till the Days of our
Savior, who told the Pharisees, You have made the Commandment of God of none
Effect through your Tradition.

THUS it appears that they corrupted the Law of Moses; nor is it unlikely that
among many others this was one; for oppressing the Strangers was a heavy Charge
against the Jews, and very often strongly represented by the Lord's faithful
Prophets.

THAT the Liberty of Man was, by the inspired Lawgiver, esteemed precious,
appears in this; that such who unjustly deprived Men of it, were to be punished
in like Manner as if they had murdered them. He that steals a Man, and
sells him; or if he be found in his Hand, shall surely be put to Death. This
Part of the Law was so considerable, that Paul, the learned Jew, giving a brief
Account of the Uses of the Law, adds this, It was made for Men-stealers, I Tim.
i. 10.

THE great Men amongst that People were exceeding oppressive; and, it is
likely, exerted their whole Strength and Influence to have the Law construed to
suit their Turns. -- The honest Servants of the Lord had heavy Work with them
in regard to their Oppression; a few Instances follow. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, amend your Ways, and your Doings; and I will cause
you to dwell in this Place. If you thoroughly execute Judgment between a Man and
his Neighbor; if you oppress not the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow;
and shed not innocent blood in this Place; neither walk after other Gods to
your Hurt, then will I c^use you to dwell in this Place, Jer. vii. -- Again a
Message was sent not only to the inferior Ministers of Justice, but also to the
chief Ruler. Thus says the Lord, go down to the House of the King of Judah,
and speak there this Word; execute ye Judgment and Righteousness, and deliver
the Spoiled out of the Hand of the Oppressor; and do no Wrong; do no Violence
to the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow; neither shed innocent Blood in
this Place. Then adds, That in so doing they should prosper; but if ye will not
hear these Words, I swear by myself, says the Lord, that this House shall
become a Desolation, Jer. xxii.

THE King, the Princes and Rulers were agreed in Oppression before the
Babylonish Captivity; for whatever Courts of Justice were retained amongst
them; or however they decided Matters betwixt Men of Estates, it is plain that
the Cause of the Poor was not judged in Equity.

IT appears that the great Men amongst the Jews were fully resolved to have
Slaves, even of their own Brethren, Jer. xxxiv. Notwithstanding the Promises
and Threatenings of the LORD, by the Prophet, and their solemn Covenant to set
them free, confirmed by the Imprecation of passing between the Parts of a Calf
cut in twain; intimating, by that Ceremony, that on Breach of the Covenant, it
were just for their Bodies to be so cut in Pieces, -- Yet after all, they held
fast to their old Custom, and called Home the Servants whom they had set free.
-- And ye were now turned, and had done right in my Sight, in proclaiming
Liberty every Man to his Neighbor; and (...) had made a Covenant before me, in
the House which is called by my Name; but ye turned, and polluted my Name, and
caused every Man his Servant, whom he had set at Liberty at their Pleasure, to
return, and brought them into Subjection, to be unto you for Servants, and for
Handmaids: Therefore thus says the Lord, ye have not hearkened unto me, in
proclaiming Liberty every one to his Neighbor, and every one to his Brother.
Behold, I proclaim Liberty to you, says the Lord, to the Sword, to the
Pestilence, and to the Famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the
Kingdoms of the Earth. -- The Men who transgressed my Covenant which they made,
and passed between the Parts of the Calf, I will give into the Hands of their
Enemies, and their dead Bodies shall be for Meat unto the Fowls of the Heaven,
and the Beasts of the Earth.

SOON after this their City was taken and burnt; the King's Sons and the
Princes slain; and the King with the chief Men of his Kingdom, carried Captive
to Babylon. -- Ezekiel, prophesying the Return of that People to their own
Land, directs, Ye shall divide the Land by Lot, for an Inheritance unto you,
and to the Strangers that sojourn amongst you; in what Tribe the Stranger
sojourns, there shall ye give him his Inheritance, says the Lord God. Nor is
this particular Direction, and the Authority with which it is enforced, without
a tacit Implication, that their Ancestors had erred in their Conduct toward
the Stranger.

SOME who keep Slaves, have doubted as to the Equity of the Practice; but as
they knew Men, noted for their Piety, who were in it, this, they say, has made
their Minds easy.

To lean on the Example of Men in doubtful Cases, is difficult: For only admit,
that those Men were not faithful and upright to the highest Degree, but that in
some particular Case they erred, and it may follow that this one Case was the
same, about which we are in Doubt; and to quiet our Minds by their Example, may
be dangerous to ourselves; and continuing in it, prove a Stumbling Block to
tender-minded People who succeed us, in like Manner as their Examples are to us.

BUT supposing Charity was their only Motive, and they not foreseeing the
Tendency of paying Robbers for their Booty, were not justly under the
Imputation of being Partners with a Thief, Prove. xxix. 24. but were really
innocent in what they did, are we assured that we keep them with the same Views
they kept them? If we keep them from no other Motive than a real Sense of Duty,
and true Charity governs us in all our Proceedings toward them, we are so far
safe: But if another Spirit, which inclines our Minds to the Ways of this
World, prevail upon us, and we are concerned for our own outward Gain more than
for their real Happiness, it will avail us nothing that some good Men have had
the Care and Management of Negroes.

SINCE Mankind spread upon the Earth, many have been the Revolutions attending
the several Families, and their Customs and Ways of Life different from each
other. This Diversity of Manners, though some are preferable to others,
operates not in Favor of any, so far as to justify them to do Violence to
innocent Men; to bring them from their own to another Way of Life. The Mind,
when moved by a Principle of true Love, may feel a Warmth of Gratitude to the
universal Father, and a lively Sympathy with those Nations, where Divine Light
has been less manifest.

THIS Desire for their real Good may beget a Willingness to undergo Hardships
for their Sakes, that the true Knowledge of GOD may be spread amongst them: But
to take them from their own Land, with Views of Profit to ourselves, by Means
inconsistent with pure Justice, is foreign to that Principle which seeks the
Happiness of the whole Creation. Forced Subjection, on innocent Persons of full
Age, is inconsistent with right Reason; on one Side, the human Mind is not
naturally fortified with that Firmness in Wisdom and Goodness, necessary to an
independent Ruler; on the other Side, to be subject to the uncontrollable Will
of a Man, liable to err, is most painful and afflicting to a conscientious
Creature.

IT is our Happiness faithfully to serve the Divine Being, who made us: His
Perfection makes our Service reasonable; but so long as Men are bluffed by
narrow Self-love, so long an absolute Power over other Men is unfit for them.

MEN, taking on them the Government of others, may intend to govern reasonably,
and make their Subjects more happy than they would be otherwise; but, as
absolute Command belongs only to him who is perfect, where frail Men, in their
own Wills, assume such Command, it has a direct Tendency to vitiate their
Minds, and make them more unfit for Government.

PLACING on Men the ignominious Title SLAVE, dressing them in uncomely
Garments, keeping them to servile Labor, in which they are often dirty, tends
gradually to fix a Notion in the Mind, that they are a Sort of People below us
in Nature, and leads us to consider them as such in all our Conclusions about
them. And, moreover, a Person which in our Esteem is mean and contemptible, if
their Language or Behavior toward us is unseemly or disrespectful, it excites
Wrath more powerfully than the like Conduct in one we accounted our Equal or
Superior; and where this happens to be the Case, it disqualifies for candid
Judgment; for it is unfit for a Person to sit as Judge in a Case where his own
personal Resentments are stirred up; and, as Members of Society in a well
framed Government, we are mutually dependant. Present Interest incites to Duty,
and makes each Man attentive to the Convenience of others; but he whose Will is
a Law to others, and can enforce Obedience by Punishment; he whose Wants are
supplied without feeling any Obligation to make equal Returns to his
Benefactor, his irregular Appetites find an open Field for Motion, and he is in
Danger of growing hard, and inattentive to their Convenience who labor for his
Support; and so loses that Disposition, in which alone Men are fit to govern.

THE English Government has been commended by candid Foreigners for the Disuse
of Racks and Tortures, so much practiced in some States; but this multiplying
Slaves now leads to it; for where People exact hard Labor of others, without a
suitable Reward, and are resolved to continue in that Way, Severity to such who
oppose them becomes the Consequence; and several Negroe Criminals, among the
English in America, have been executed in a lingering, painful Way, very
terrifying to others.

IT is a happy Case to set out right, and persevere in the same Way: A wrong
Beginning leads into many Difficulties; for to support one Evil, another
becomes customary; two produces more; and the further Men proceed in this Way,
the greater their Dangers, their Doubts and Fears* and the more painful and
perplexing are their Circumstances; so that such who are true Friends to the
real and lasting Interest of our Country, and heartily consider the Tendency of
Things, cannot but feel some Concern on this Account.

THERE is that Superiority in Men over the Brute Creatures, and some of them so
manifestly dependant on Men for a Living, that for them to serve us in
Moderation, so far as relates to the right Use of Things, looks consonant to
the Design of our Creator.

THERE is nothing in their Frame, nothing relative to the propagating their
Species, which argues the contrary; but in Men there is. The Frame of Men's
Bodies, and the Disposition of their Minds are different; some, who are tough
and strong, and their Minds active, choose Ways of Life requiring much Labor to
support them; others are soon weary; and though Use makes Labor more
tolerable, yet some are less apt (...) To^l than others, and their Minds less
sprightly. These latter laboring for their Subsistence, commonly choose a Life
easy to support, being content with a little. When they are weary they may
rest, take the most advantageous Part of the Day for Labor; and in all Cases
proportion one Thing to another, that their Bodies be not oppressed.

Now, while each is at Liberty, the latter may be as happy, and live as
comfortably as the former; but where Men of the first Sort have the latter
under absolute Command, not considering the Odds in Strength and Firmness, do,
sometimes, in their eager Pursuit, lay on Burdens grievous to be borne; by
Degrees grow rigorous, and, aspiring to Greatness, they increase Oppression,
and the true Order of kind Providence is subverted.

THERE are Weaknesses sometimes attending us, which make little or no
Alteration in our Countenances, nor much lessen our Appetite for Food, and yet
so affect us, as to make Labor very uneasy. In such Case Masters, intent on
putting forward Business, and jealous of the Sincerity of their Slaves, may
disbelieve what they say, and grievously afflict them.

ACTION is necessary for all Men, and our exhausting Frame requires a Support,
which is the Fruit of Action. The Earth must be labored to keep us alive:
Labor is a proper Part of our Life; to make one answer the other in some
useful Motion, looks agreeable to the Design of our Creator. Motion, rightly
managed, tends to our Satisfaction, Health and Support.

THOSE who quit all useful Business, and live wholly on the Labor of others,
have their Exex^i^e to seek; some such use less than their Health requires;
others choose that which, by the Circumstances attending it, proves utterly
reverse to true Happiness. Thus, while some are diverse Ways distressed for Want
of an open Channel of useful Action, those who support them sigh, and are
exhausted in a Stream too powerful for Nature, spending their Days with too
little Cessation from Labor.

SEED sown with the Tears of a confined oppressed People, Harvest cut down by
an overborne discontented Reaper, makes Bread less sweet to the Taste of an
honest Man, than that which is the Produce, or just Reward of such voluntary
Action, which is one proper Part of the Business of human Creatures.

AGAIN, the weak State of the human Species, in bearing and bringing forth
their Young, and the helpless Condition of their Young beyond that of other
Creatures, clearly show that Perfect Goodness designs a tender Care and Regard
should be exercised toward them; and that no imperfect, arbitrary Power should
prevent the cordial Effects of that Sympathy, which is, in the Minds of
well-met Pairs, to each other, and toward their Offspring.

IN our Species the mutual Ties of Affection are more rational and durable than
in others below us; the Care and Labor of raising our Offspring much greater.
The Satisfaction arising to us in their innocent Company, and in their Advances
from one rational Improvement to another, is considerable, when two are thus
joined, and their Affections sincere; it however happens among Slaves, that
they are often situate in different Places; and their seeing each other depends
on the Will of Men, liable to human Passions, and a Byas in Judgment; who, with
Views of Self-interest, may keep them apart more than is right. Being absent
from each other, and often with other Company, there is a Danger of their
Affections being alienated, Jealousies arising, the Happiness otherwise
resulting from their Offspring frustrated, and the Comforts of Marriage
destroyed. -- These Things being considered closely, as happening to a near
Friend, will appear to be hard and painful.

HE who reverently observes that Goodness manifested by our Gracious Creator
toward the various Species of Beings in this World, will see, that in our Frame
and Constitution is clearly shown that innocent Men, capable to manage for
themselves, were not intended to be Slaves.

A PERSON lately traveling amongst the Negroes near Senegal, has this Remark;
Which Way soever I turned my Eyes on this pleasant Spot, I beheld a perfect
Image of pure Nature; an agreeable Solitude, bounded on every Side by charming
Landskips, the rural Situation of Cottages in the Midst of Trees. The Ease and
Indolence of the Negroes reclined under the Shade of their spreading Foliage;
the Simplicity of their Dress and Manners; the Whole revived in my Mind the
Idea of our first Parents, and I seemed to contemplate the World in its
primitive State. M. Adanson, Page 55.

SOME Negroes in these Parts, who have had an agreeable Education, have
manifested a Brightness of Understanding equal to many of us. A Remark of this
Kind we find in Bosman, Page 328. The Negroes of Fida, says he, are so
accurately quick in their Merchandise Accounts, that they easily reckon as
justly and quickly in their Heads only, as we with the Assistance of Pen and
Ink, though the Sum amounts to several Thousands.

THROUGH the Force of long Custom, it appears needful to speak in Relation to
Color. -- Suppose a white Child, born of Parents of the meanest Sort, who died
and left him an Infant, falls into the Hands of a Person, who endeavors to
keep him a Slave, some Men would account him an unjust Man in doing so, who yet
appear easy while many Black People, of honest Lives, and good Abilities, are
enslaved, in a Manner more shocking than the Case here supposed. This is owing
chiefly to the Idea of Slavery being connected with the Black Color, and
Liberty with the White: -- And where false Ideas are twisted into our Minds, it
is with Difficulty we get fairly disentangled.

A TRAVELLER, in cloudy Weather, misseth his Way, makes many Turns while he is
lost; still forms in his Mind the Bearing and Situation of Places, and though
the Ideas are wrong, they fix as fast as if they were right. Finding how Things
are, we see our Mistake; yet the Force of Reason, with repeated Observations on
Places and Things, do not soon remove those false Notions, so fastened upon us,
but it will seem in the Imagination as if the annual Course of the Sun was
altered; and though, by Recollection, we are assured it is not, yet those Ideas
do not suddenly leave us.

SELFISHNESS being indulged, clouds the Understanding; and where selfish Men,
for a long Time, proceed on their Way, without Opposition, the Deceiveableness
of Unrighteousness gets so rooted in their Intellects, that a candid
Examination of Things relating to Self-interest is prevented; and in this
Circumstance, some who would not agree to make a Slave of a Person whose Color
is like their own, appear easy in making Slaves of others of a different
Color, though their Understandings and Morals are equal to the Generality of
Men of their own Color.

THE Color of a Man avails nothing, in Matters of Right and Equity. Consider
Color in Relation to Treaties; by such, Disputes betwixt Nations are sometimes
settled. And should the Father of us all so dispose Things, that Treaties with
black Men should sometimes be necessary, how then would it appear amongst the
Princes and Ambassadors, to insist on the Prerogative of the white Color?

WHENCE is it that Men, who believe in a righteous Omnipotent Being, to whom
all Nations stand equally related, and are equally accountable, remain so easy
in it; but for that the Ideas of Negroes and Slaves are so interwoven in the
Mind, that they do not discuss this Matter with that Candor and Freedom of
Thought, which the Case justly calls for?

To come at a right Feeling of their Condition, requires humble serious
Thinking; for, in their present Situation, they have but little to engage our
natural Affection in their Favor.

HAD we a Son or a Daughter involved in the same Case, in which many of them
are, it would alarm us, and make us feel their Condition without seeking for
it. The Adversity of an intimate Friend will incite our Compassion, while
others, equally good, in the like Trouble, will but little affect us.

AGAIN, the Man in worldly Honor, whom we consider as our Superior, treating
us with Kindness and Generosity, begets a Return of Gratitude and Friendship
toward him. We may receive as great Benefits from Men a Degree lower than
ourselves, in the common Way of reckoning, and feel ourselves less engaged in
Favor of them. Such is our Condition by Nature; and these Things being
narrowly watched and examined, will be found to center in Self-love.

THE Blacks seem far from being our Kinsfolks, and did we find an agreeable
Disposition and sound Understanding in some of them, which appeared as a good
Foundation for a true Friendship between us* the Disgrace arising from an open
Friendship with a Person of so vile a Stock, in the common Esteem, would
naturally tend to hinder it. -- They have neither Honors, Riches, outward
Magnificence nor Power; their Dress coarse, and often ragged; their Employ
Drudgery, and much in the Di^^: They have little or nothing at Command; but
must wait upon and work for others, to obtain the Necessaries of Life; so that,
in their present Situation, there is not much to engage the Friendship, or move
the Affection of selfish Men: But such who live in the Spirit of true Charity,
to sympathise with the Afflicted in the lowest Stations of Life, is a Thing
familiar to them.

SUCH is the Kindness of our Creator, that People, applying their Minds to
sound Wisdom, may, in general, with moderate Exercise, live comfortably, where
no misapplied Power hinders it. -- We in these Parts have Cause gratefully to
acknowledge it. But Men leaving the true Use of Things, their Lives are less
calm, and have less of real Happiness in them.

MANY are desirous of purchasing and keeping Slaves, that they may live in some
Measure conformable to those Customs of the Times, which have in them a
Tincture of Luxury; for when we, in the least Degree, depart from that Use of
the Creatures, which the Creator of all Things intended for them, there Luxury
begins.

AND if we consider this Way of Life seriously, we shall see there is nothing
in it sufficient to induce a wise Man to choose it, before a plain, simple Way
of living. If we examine stately Buildings and Equipage, delicious Food,
superfine Clothes, Silks and Linens; if we consider the Splendor of choice
Metal fastened upon Raiment, and the most showy Inventions of Men, it will yet
appear that the humble-minded Man, who is contented with the true Use of
Houses, Food and Garments, and cheerfully exercises himself agreeable to his
Station in Civil Society, to earn them, acts more reasonably, and discovers
more Soundness of Understanding in his Conduct, than such who lay heavy Burdens
on others, to support themselves in a luxurious Way of living.

George Buchanan, in his History of Scotland, Page 62, tells of some ancient
Inhabitants of Britain, who were derived from a People that had a Way of
marking their Bodies, as some said, with Instruments of Iron, with Variety of
Pictures, and with Animals of all Shapes, and wear no Garments, that they
should not hide their Pictures; and were therefore called Picts.

DID we see those People shrink with Pain, for a considerable Time together,
under the Point or Edge of this Iron Instrument, and their Bodies all bloody
with the Operation; did we see them sometimes naked, suffering with Cold, and
refuse to put on Garments, that those imaginary Ensigns of Grandeur might not
be concealed, it is likely we should pity their Folly, and Fondness for those
Things: But if we heartily compare their Conduct, in that Case, with some
Conduct amongst ourselves, will it not appear that our Folly is the greatest?

IN true Gospel Simplicity, free from all wrong Use of Things, a Spirit which
breathes Peace and good Will is cherished; but when we aspire after imaginary
Grandeur, and apply to selfish Means to attain our End, this Desire, in its
Original, is the same with the Piots in cutting Figures on their Bodies; but
the evil Consequences attending our Proceedings are the greatest.

A COVETOUS Mind, which seeks Opportunity to exalt itself, is a great Enemy to
true Harmony in a Country: Envy and Grudging usually accompany this
Disposition, and it tends to stir up its Likeness in others. And where this
Disposition arises so high, as to embolden us to look upon honest industrious
Men as our own Property during Life, and to keep them to hard Labor, to
support us in those Customs which have not their Foundation in right Reason; or
to use any Means of Oppression, a haughty Spirit is cherished on one Side, and
the Desire of Revenge frequently on the other, till the Inhabitants of the Land
are ripe for great Commotion and Trouble; and thus Luxury and Oppression have
the Seeds of War and Desolation in them.

Some Account of the SLAVE TRADE, From the Writings of Persons who have been at
the Places where they are first purchased, viz.
BOSMAN on Guiney, who was a Factor for the Dutch about sixteen Years in that
Country (Page 339) thus remarks: But since I have so often mentioned that
Commerce, I shall describe how it is managed by our Factors. The first Business
of one of our Factors, when he comes to Fida, is to satisfy the Customs of the
King, and the great Men, which amounts to about One Hundred Pounds, in Guiney
Value, as the Goods must sell there. After which we have free License to trade,
which is published throughout the whole Land by the Crier. And yet before we
can deal with any Person, we are obliged to buy the King's whole Stock of
Slaves, at a set Price; which is commonly one Third or Fourth higher than
ordinary. After which, we have free Leave to deal with all his Subjects, of
what Rank soever. But if there happen to be no Stock of Slaves, the Factor must
resolve to run the Risk of trusting the Inhabitants with Goods, to the Value of
One or Two Hundred Slaves; which Commodities they send into the Inland Country,
in order to buy with them Slaves at all Markets, and that sometimes Two Hundred
Miles deep in the Country: For you ought to be informed, that Markets of Men
are here kept in the same Manner as they of Beasts are with us.

MOST of the Slaves which are offered to us, are Prisoners of War, which are
sold by the Victors as their Booty. -- When these Slaves come to Fida, they are
put in Prisons all together; and when we treat concerning them, they are all
brought out in a large Plain, where, by our Surgeons, whose Province it is,
they are thoroughly examined, even to the smallest Member, and that naked, both
Men and Women, without the least Distinction or Modesty. Those which are
approved as good, are set on one Side. The Invalids and Maimed being thrown
out, the Remainder are numbered, and it is entered who delivered them: In the
mean while a burning Iron, with the Arms or Name of the Company, lies in the
Fire, with which ours are marked on the Breast. This is done, that we may
distinguish them from the Slaves of the English, French, or others. When we
have agreed with the Owners of the Slaves, they are returned to their Prisons,
where, from that Time forward, they are kept at our Charge, cost us Twopence a
Day a Slave, which serves to subsist them, like our Criminals, on Bread and
Water: So that, to save Charges, we send them on board our Ships the first
Opportunity; before which their Masters strip them of all they have on their
Backs, so that they come aboard stark naked, as well Women as Man, in which
Condition they are obliged to continue, if the Master of the Ship is not so
charitable (which he commonly is) as to bestow something on them, to cover
their Nakedness.

THE Inhabitants of P^p^, as well as those of C^t^, depend on Plunder and the
Slave Trade, ^n both which they very much exceed the latter; for being endowed
with more Courage, they rob more successfully, and by that Means increase their
Trade: Notwithstanding which, to freight a Vessel with Slaves, requires some
Months Attendance. In the Year 1697, in three Days Time I could get but three
Slaves; but they assured me, that if I would have Patience for other three Days
only, they should be able to deliver me One or Two Hundred. Same Author, Page
310.

WE cast Anchor at Cape Mizurada, but not one Negroe coming on board, I went on
Shore; and being desirous to be informed why they did not come on board, was
answered, That about two Months before the English had been there, with two
Vessels, and had ravaged the Country, destroyed all their Canoes, plundered
their Houses, and carried off some of their People for Slaves; upon which the
Remainder fled to the Inland Country. They tell us, they live in Peace with all
their Neighbors, and have no Notion of any other Enemy than the English; of
which Nation they had taken some then: And publicly declared, that they would
endeavor to get as many of them, as the two mentioned Ships had carried off of
their Natives. These unhappy English were in Danger of being sacrificed to the
Memory of their Friends, which some of their Nation carried off. B^s^^^n, Page
440.

EXTRACTS from a Collection of VOYAGES. Vol. I.
THE Author, a P^pis^ Missionary, speaking of his departing from the Negroe
Country to ^^azi^, says, I remember the Duke of Bambay (a Negroe Chief) one
Day sent me several Blacks, to be my Slaves, which I would not accept of; but
sent them back to him. I afterward told him. I came not into his Country to
make Slaves; but rather to deliver those from the Slavery of the Devil, whom he
kept in miserable Thraldom. The Ship I went aboard was l^aded with Elephants
Teeth, and Slaves, to the Number of Six Hundred and Eighty Men, Women and
Children. It was a pitiful Sight to behold how all these People were bestowed.
The Men were standing in the Hold, fastened one to another with Stakes, for
Fear they should rise, and kill the Whites: The Women were between the Decks,
and those that were with Child in the Great Cabin: The Children in the
Steerage, pressed together like Herrings in a Barrel; which caused an
intolerable Heat and Stench. Page 507.

IT is now Time (says the same Author) to speak of a brutish Custom these
People have amongst them, in making Slaves; which I take not to be lawful for
any Person of a good Conscience to buy. --

HE then describes how Women betray Men into Slavery, and adds, There are
others going up into the Inland Country, and through Pretense of Jurisdiction,
seize Men upon any trifling Offense, and sell them for Slaves. P. 537.

THE Author of this Treatise, conversing with a Person of good Credit, was
informed by him, that in his Youth, while in England, he was minded to come to
America, and happening on a Vessel bound for Guiney, and from thence into
America, he, with a View to see Africa, went on board her, and continued with
them in their Voyage, and so came into this Country. Among other Circumstances
he related these. They purchased on the Coast about Three Hundred Slaves; some
of them he understood were Captives of War; some stolen by other Negroes
privately. -- When they had got many Slaves on board, but were still on that
Coast, a Plot was laid by an old Negroe, notwithstanding the Men had Irons on
their Hands and Feet, to kill the English, and take the Vessel; which being
discovered, the Man was hanged, and many of the Slaves made to shoot at him as
he hung up.

Another Slave was charged with having a Design to kill the English; and the
Captain spoke to him in Relation to the Charge brought against him, as he stood
on Deck; whereupon he immediately threw himself into the Sea, and was drowned.

SEVERAL Negroes, confined on board, were, he said, so extremely uneasy with
their Condition, that after many Endeavors used, they could never make them
eat nor drink after they came in the Vessel; but in a desperate Resolution
starved themselves to Death, behaving toward the last like Madmen.

IN Randall's Geography, printed 1744, we are informed, That in a Time of full
Peace nothing is more common than for the Negroes of one Nation to steal those
of another, and sell them to the Europeans. It is thought that the English
transmit annually near Fifty Thousand of these unhappy Creatures; and the other
European Nations together, about Two Hundred Thousand more.

IT is through the Goodness of GOD that the Reformation from gross Idolatry and
Barbarity has been thus far effected; if we consider our Conditions as
Christians, and the Benefits we enjoy, and compare them with the Condition of
those People, and consider that our Nation trading with them for their Country
Produce, have had an Opportunity of imparting useful Instructions to them, and
remember that but little Pains have been taken therein, it must look like an
Indifference in us. -- But when we reflect on a Custom the most shocking of any
amongst them, and remember that, with a View to outward Gain, we have joined as
Parties in it; that our Concurrence with them in their barbarous Proceedings,
has tended to harden them in Cruelty, and been a Means of increasing Calamities
in their Country, we must own that herein we have acted contrary to those
Worthies whose Lives and Substance were spent in propagating Truth and
Righteousness amongst the Heathen. When Saul, by the Hand of Doeg, slew Four
Score Priests at once, he had a Jealousy that one of them at least was
confederate with David, whom he considered as his Enemy. -- Herod slaying all
the Male Children in Bethlehem of two Years old and under, was an Act of
uncommon Cruelty; but he supposed there was a Male Child there, within that
Age, who was likely to be King of the Jews, and finding no Way to destroy him,
but by destroying them all, thought this the most effectual Means to secure the
Kingdom to his own Family.

WHEN the Sentence against the Protestants of Marindol, etc. in France, was put
in Execution, great Numbers of People fled to the Wilderness; amongst whom were
ancient People, Women great with Child, and others with Babes in their Arms,
who endured Calamities grievous to relate, and in the End some perished with
Hunger, and many were destroyed by Fire and Sword; but they had this Objection
against them, That they obstinately persisted in Opposition to Holy Mother
Church, and being Heretics, it was right to work their Ruin and Extirpation,
and raze out their Memory from among Men. Foxe' s Acts and Monuments, Page 646.

IN Favor of those Cruelties, every one had what they deemed a Plea. -- These
Scenes of Blood and Cruelty among the barbarous Inhabitants of Guiney, are not
less terrible than those now mentioned. They are continued from one Age to
another, and we make ourselves Parties and Fellow-helpers in them; nor do I see
that we have any Plea in our Favor more plausible than the Plea of Soul, of
Herod, or the French in those Slaughters.

MANY who are Parties in this Trade, by keeping Slaves with Views of
Self-interest, were they to go as Soldiers in one of these Inland Expeditions
to catch Slaves, they must necessarily grow dissatisfied with such Employ, or
cease to profess their religious Principles. And though the first and most
striking Part of the Scene is done at a great Distance, and by other Hands, yet
every one who is acquainted with the Circumstances, and notwithstanding joins
in it for the Sake of Gain only, must, in the Nature of Things, be chargeable
with the others.

SHOULD we consider ourselves present as Spectators, when cruel Negroes
privately catch innocent Children, who are employed in the Fields; hear their
lamentable Cries, under the most terrifying Apprehensions; or should we look
upon it as happening in our own Families, having our Children carried off by
Savages, we must needs own, that such Proceedings are contrary to the Nature of
Christianity* Should we meditate on the Wars which are greatly increased by
this Trade, and on that Affliction which many Thousands live in, through
Apprehensions of being taken or slain; on the Terror and Amazement that
Villages are in, when surrounded by these Troops of Enterprisers; on the great
Pain and Misery of groaning dying Men, who get wounded in those Skirmishes, we
shall necessarily see, that it is impossible to be Parties in such a Trade, on
the Motives of Gain and retain our Innocence.

SHOULD we consider the Case of Multitudes of those People, who in a fruitful
Soil, and hot Climate, with a little Labor, raise Grain, Roots and Pulse, to
eat; spin and weave Cotton, and fasten together the large Feathers of Fowls, to
cover their Nakedness; many of whom, in much Simplicity, live inoffensive in
their Cottages, and take great Comfort in raising up Children.

SHOULD we contemplate on their Circumstances, when suddenly attacked, and
labor to understand their inexpressible Anguish of Soul, who survive the
Conflict* should we think on inoffensive Women, who fled at the Alarm, and at
their Return saw that Village, in which they and their Acquaintance were raised
up, and had pleasantly spent their youthful Days, now lying in a gloomy
Desolation; some shocked at finding the mangled Bodies of their near Friends
amongst the Slain; others bemoaning the Absence of a Brother, a Sister, a
Child, or a whole Family of Children, who, by cruel Men, are bound and carried
to Market, to be sold, without the least Hopes of seeing them again: Add to
this, the afflicted Condition of these poor Captives, who are separated from
Family Connections, and all the Comforts arising from Friendship and
Acquaintance, carried amongst a People of a strange Language, to be parted from
their Fellow Captives, put to Labor in a Manner more servile and wearisome
than what they were used to, with many sorrowful Circumstances attending their
Slavery; and we must necessarily see, that it belongs not to the Followers of
CHRIST to be Parties in such a Trade, on the Motives of outward Gain.

THOUGH there were Wars and Desolations among the Negroes, before the Europeans
began to trade there for Slaves, yet now the Calamities are greatly increased,
so many Thousands being annually brought from thence; and we, by purchasing
them, with Views of Self-interest, are become Parties with them, and accessory
to that Increase.

IN this Case, we are not joining against an Enemy who is fomenting Discords on
our Continent, and using all possible Means to make Slaves of us and our
Children; but against a People who have not injured us.

IF those who were spoiled and wronged, should at length make Slaves of their
Oppressors, and continue Slavery to their Posterity, it would look rigorous to
candid Men: But to act that Part toward a People, when neither they nor their
Fathers have injured us, has something in it extraordinary, and requires our
serious Attention.

OUR Children breaking a Bone; getting so bruised, that a Leg or an Arm must be
taken off; lost for a few Hours, so that we despair of their being found again;
a Friend hurt, so that he dies in a Day or two; these move us with Grief: And
did we attend to these Scenes in Africa, in like Manner as if they were
transacted in our Presence; and sympathise with the Negroes, in all their
Afflictions and Miseries, as we do with our Children or Friends; we should be
more careful to do nothing in any Degree helping forward a Trade productive of
so many, and so great Calamities. Great Distance makes nothing in our Favor.
-- To willingly join with Unrighteousness, to the Injury of Men who live some
Thousand Miles off, is the same in Substance, as joining with it to the Injury
of our Neighbors.

IN the Eye of pure Justice. Actions are regarded according to the Spirit and
Disposition they arise from: Some Evils are accounted scandalous, and the
Desire of Reputation may keep selfish Men from appearing openly in them; but he
who is shy on that Account, and yet by indirect Means promotes that Evil, and
shares in the Profit of it, cannot be innocent.

HE who, with View to Self-interest, buys a Slave, made so by Violence, and
only on the Strength of such Purchase holds him a Slave, thereby joins Hands
with those who committed that Violence, and in the Nature of Things becomes
chargeable with the Guilt.

SUPPOSE a Man wants a Slave, and being in Guiney, goes and hides by the Path
where Boys pass from one little Town to another, and there catches one the Day
he expects to sail; and taking him on board, brings him home, without any
aggravating Circumstances. Suppose another buys a Man, taken by them who live
by Plunder and the Slave Trade: They often steal them privately, and often shed
much Blood in getting them. He who buys the Slave thus taken, pays those Men
so* their Wickedness, and makes himself Party with them.

WHATEVER Nicety of Distinction there may be, betwixt going in Person on
Expeditions to catch Slaves, and buying those, with a View to Self-interest,
which others have taken; it is clear and plain to an upright Mind, that such
Distinction is in Words, not in Substance; for the Parties are concerned in the
same Work, and have a necessary Connection with, and Dependence on, each other;
for were there none to purchase Slaves, they who live by stealing and selling
them, would of Consequence do less at it.

SOME would buy a Negroe brought from Guiney, with a View to Self-interest, and
keep him a Slave, who yet would seem to scruple to take Arms, and join with Men
employed in taking Slaves.

OTHERS have civil Negroes, who were born in our Country, capable and likely to
manage well for themselves; whom they keep as Slaves, without ever trying them
with Freedom, and take the Profit of their Labor as a Part of their Estates,
and yet disapprove bringing them from their own Country.

IF those Negroes had come here, as Merchants, with their Ivory and Gold Dust,
in order to trade with us, and some powerful Person had took their Effects to
himself, and then put them to hard Labor, and ever after considered them as
Slaves, the Action would be looked upon as unrighteous.

THOSE Negroe Merchants having Children after their being among us, whose
Endowments and Conduct were like other Peoples in common, who attaining to
mature Age, and requesting to have their Liberty, should be told they were born
in Slavery, and were lawful Slaves, and therefore their Request denied; the
Conduct of such Persons toward them, would be looked upon as unfair and
oppressive.

IN the present Case, relating to Home-born Negroes, whose Understandings and
Behavior are as good as common among other People, if we have any Claim to
them as Slaves, that Claim is grounded on their being the Children or Offspring
of Slaves, who, in general, were made such through Means as unrighteous, and
attended with more terrible Circumstances than the Case here supposed; so that
when we trace our Claim to the Bott^^, these Home-born Negroes having paid for
their Education, and given reasonable Security to those who owned them, in case
of their becoming chargeable, we have no more equitable Right to their Service,
than we should if they were the Children of honest Merchants who came from
Guiney in an English Vessel to trade with us.

IF we claim any Right to them as the Children of Slaves, we build on the
Foundation laid by them, who made Slaves of their Ancestors; so that of
Necessity we must either justify the Trade, or relinquish our Right to them, as
being the Children of Slaves.

WHY should it seem right to honest Men to make Advantage by these People more
than by others? Others enjoy Freedom, receive Wages, equal to their Work, at,
or near, such Time as they have discharged these equitable Obligations they are
under to those who educated them. -- These have made no Contract to serve; been
no more expensive in raising up than others, and many of them appear as likely
to make a right Use of Freedom as other People; which Way then can an honest
Man withhold from them that Liberty, which is the free Gift of the Most High to
his rational Creatures?

THE Upright in Heart cannot succeed the Wicked in their Wickedness; nor is it
consonant to the Life they live, to hold fast an Advantage unjustly gained.

THE Negroes who live by Plunder, and the Slave Trade, steal poor innocent
Children, invade their Neighbors Territories, and spill much Blood to get
these Slaves: And can it be possible for an honest Man to think that, with View
to Self-interest, we may continue Slavery to the Offspring of these unhappy
Sufferers* merely because they are the Children of Slaves, and not have a Share
of this Guilt.

IT is granted by many, that the Means used in getting them are unrighteous,
and that buying them, when brought here, is wrong; yet as setting them free is
attended with some Difficulty, they do not comply with it; but seem to be of
the Opinion, that to give them Food and Raiment, and keep them Servants,
without any other Wages, is the best Way to manage them that they know of: And
hoping that their Children after them will not be cruel to the Negroes,
conclude to leave them as Slaves to their Children.

WHILE present outward Interest is the chief Object of our Attention, we shall
feel many Objections in our Minds against renouncing our Claim to them, as the
Children of Slaves; for being prepossessed with wrong Opinions, prevents our
^eeing Things clearly, which, to indifferent Persons, are easy to be seen.

SUPPOSE a Person Seventy Years past, in low Circumstances, bought a Negroe Man
and Woman, and that the Children of such Person are now wealthy, and have the
Children of such Slaves. Admit that the first Negroe Man and his Wife did as
much Business as their Master and Mistress, and that the Children of the Slaves
have done some more than their young Masters: Suppose, on the whole, that the
Expense of Living has been less on the Negroes Side, than on the other (all
which are no improbable Suppositions) it follows, that in Equity these Negroes
have a Right to a Part of this Increase; that should some Difficulties arise on
their being set free, there is Reason (...) us patiently to labor through them.

As the Conduct of Men varies, relating to Civil Society; so different
Treatment is justly due to them. Indiscreet Men occasion Trouble in the World;
and it remains to be the Care of such, who seek the Good of Mankind, to
admonish as they find Occasion.

THE Slothfulness of some of them, in providing for themselves and Families, it
is likely, would require the Notice of their Neighbors; nor is it unlikely
that some would, with Justice, be made Servants, and others punished for their
Crimes. Pure Justice points out to each Individual their Due; but to deny a
People the Privilege of human Creatures, on a Supposition that, being free,
many of them would be troublesome to us, is to mix the Condition of good and
bad Men together, and treat the whole as the worst of them deserve.

IF we seriously consider, that Liberty is the Right of innocent Men; that the
Mighty GOD is a Refuge for the Oppressed; that in Reality we are indebted to
them; that they being set free, are still liable to the Penalties of our Laws,
and as likely to have Punishment for their Crimes as other People: This may
answer all our Objections. And to retain them in perpetual Servitude, without
just Cause for it, will produce Effects, in the Event, more grievous than
setting them free would do, when a real Love to Truth and Equity was the Motive
to it.

OUR Authority over them stands originally in a Purchase made from those who,
as to the general, obtained theirs by Unrighteousness. Whenever we have
Recourse to such Authority, it tends more or less to obstruct the Channels,
through which the perfect Plant in us receives Nourishment.

THERE is a Principle, which is pure, placed in the human Mind, which in
different Places and Ages has had different Names; it is, however, pure, and
proceeds from GOD. -- It is deep, and inward, confined to no Forms of Religion,
nor excluded from any, where the Heart stands in perfect Sincerity. In
whomsoever this takes Root, and grows, of what Nation soever, they become
Brethren, in the best Sense of the Expression. Using ourselves to take Ways
which appear most easy to us, when inconsistent with that Purity which is
without Beginning, we thereby set up a Government of our own, and deny
Obedience to him, whose Service is true Liberty.

HE that has a Servant, made so wrongfully, and knows it to be so, when he
treats him otherwise than a free Man, when he reaps the Benefit of his Labor,
without paying him such Wages as are reasonably due to free Men for the like
Service, Clothes excepted; these Things, though done in Calmness, without any
Show of Disorder, do yet deprave the Mind in like Manner, and with as great
Certainty, as prevailing Cold congeals Water. These Steps taken by Masters, and
their Conduct striking the Minds of their Children, whilst young, leave less
Room for that which is good to work upon them. The Customs of their Parents,
their Neighbors, and the People with whom they converse, working upon their
Minds; and they, from thence, conceiving Ideas of Things, and Modes of Conduct,
the Entrance into their Hearts becomes, in a great Measure, shut up against the
gentle Movings of uncreated Purity.

FROM one Age to another, the Gloom grows thicker and darker, till Error gets
established by general Opinion; that whoever attends to perfect Goodness, and
remains under the melting Influence of it, finds a Path unknown to many, and
sees the Necessity to lean upon the Arm of Divine Strength, and dwell alone, or
with a few, in the right committing their Cause to him, who is a Refuge for his
People, in all their Troubles.

WHERE, through the Agreement of a Multitude, some Channels of Justice are
stopped, and Men may support their Characters as just Men, by being just to a
Party, there is great Danger of contracting an Alliance with that Spirit, which
stands in Opposition to the GOD of Love, and spreads Discord, Trouble and
Vexation among such who give up to the Influence of it.

Negroes are our Fellow Creatures, and their present Condition amongst us
requires our serious Consideration. We know not the Time when those Scales, in
which Mountains are weighed, may turn. The Parent of Mankind is gracious: His
Care is over his smallest Creatures; and a Multitude of Men escape not his
Notice: And though many of them are trodden down, and despised, yet he
remembers them: He sees their Affliction, and looks upon the spreading
increasing Exaltation of the Oppressor. He turns the Channels of Power, humbles
the most haughty People, and gives Deliverance to the Oppressed, at such
Periods as are consistent with his infinite Justice and Goodness. And wherever
Gain is preferred to Equity, and wrong Things publicly encouraged to that
Degree, that Wickedness takes Root, and spreads wide amongst the Inhabitants of
a Country, there is real Cause for Sorrow to all such, whose Love to Mankind
stands on a true Principle, and wisely consider the End and Event of Things.

FINIS.

