A VINDICATION OF THE CONDUCT OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PROVINCE
OF THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY: MORE PARTICULARLY, IN THE LAST SESSION OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY.

By James Otis, Esquire A Member of said House.

"Let such, such only, tread this sacred Floor,
Who dare to love their Country and be Poor;" Pope.

"Or good though rich, humane and wise though great.
Jove give but these, we have naught to Fear from Fate!"
Anon. BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street. 1762.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Vindication, was written in order to give, a clear View of
Facts; and to free the House of Representatives, from some very injurious
aspersions, that have been cast upon them, by ill-minded people out of doors.
Whether the writer has acquitted himself as becomes a candid and impartial
vindicator, is submitted to the judgment of the public; which is ever finally
given without Favor or affection; and therefore the appeal is made to a truly
respectable and solemn tribunal? At the same time that a sincere love is
professed for all men, and the duty of honor and reverence toward superiors
is freely acknowledged, it must be allowed that one of the best ways of
fulfilling these Duties, is in a modest and humble endeavor, by calm reason
and argument, to convince mankind of their mistakes when they happen to be
guilty of any. The more elevated the person who errs, the stronger sometimes is
the obligation to refute him; for the Errors of great men are often of very
dangerous consequence to themselves, as well as to the little ones below them.
However it is a very disagreable task, to engage in any kind of opposition to
the least individual in Society; and much more so when the opinions of
Gentlemen of the first rank and abilities, and of public bodies of men are to
be called in question.

The world ever has been and will be pretty equally divided, between those two
great parties, vulgarly called the winners, and the loosers; or to speak more
precisely, between those who are discontented that they have no Power, and
those who never think they can have enough.

Now, it is absolutely impossible to please both sides, either by temporizing,
trimming or retreating; the two former justly incur the censure of a wicked
heart, the latter that of cowardice, and fairly and manfully fighting the
battle out, is in the opinion of many worse tha^ either. All further apology
for this performance shall be sum'd up in the adage. Amicus Socrates, amicus
Plato, sed magis Amica veritas.

A VINDICATION, etc.
A Quorum of the house of representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, being met, on the 8th of Sept. A.D. 1762. according to
prorogation, informed his Excellency the Governor by a committee chosen for
that purpose, that they were ready to proceed to business. The committee
returned that they had delivered the Message. Mr. Secretary came down soon
after with a message from his Excellency, directing the attendance of the House
in the council chamber. Mr. Speaker with the House immediately went up; when
his Excellency was pleased to make the following Speech; of which Mr. Speaker
obtained a Copy, and then with the house returned to their own Chamber.

His Excellency's speech is as follows. Viz.

Gentlemen of the Council, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
I HAVE been always desirous to make your Attendance in this General Court as
unexpensive to your Constituents and as convenient to yourselves as the Nature
and Incidents of the public Business will allow. But, as, whilst the War
continues, this Province, however happy in the Operations being removed at a
Distance, must expect to bear some Share of the Trouble and Expense of it: It
will sometimes unavoidably happen that I must be obliged to ca^^ you together
at an unseasonable Time.

I HAVE now to lay before you a Requisition of His Excellency Sir JEFFERY
AMHERST, who, observing that the great and important Services on which His
Majesty's Regular Troops are now employed, and the Uncertainty of their Return,
render it absolutely necessary, that Provision should be made in Time for
garrisoning the several Posts on this Continent during the Winter, desires that
you would provide for continuing in Pay the same Number of Troops that remained
during last Winter; that is, Six Captains, Thirteen Subalterns, and Five
Hundred and Seventy Two Privates, amounting in the whole to Five Hundred and
ninety one Men.

I MUST observe to you that the Necessity of this Request arises from the
present vigorous Exertion in the West Indies; which promises effectually to
humble the Pride of our Enemies, and pave the Way to Peace. As this glorious
Expedition cannot but have your entire Approbation, I doubt not but you will
readily embrace this Opportunity to give a public Testimony of it.

THE French Invasion of Newfoundland must give you great Concern upon Account
of the National Loss which the Interruption of the Fishery there must have
occasioned, although this Province will not, in its own particular, greatly
suffer thereby. But I am persuaded that the Reign of the French in those Parts
is by this Time near over; and I flatter myself that this Government will have
some Share in the Honor of putting an End to it.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,

THE great Alarm which spread itself over the Country upon the French getting
Possession of a strong Post in Newfoundland, obliged me with the Advice of
Council to take some cautionary Steps which have been attended with Expense.
But as these Measures were advised with an apparent Expediency, and have been
conducted in the most frugal Manner, I doubt not but what has been done will
have your Approbation. I shall inform you of the Occasion of these Expenses,
and order the Accounts thereof to be laid before you.

Gentlemen of the Council, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives.

As I have called you together at this Time with Reluctance, so I shall be
desirous to dismiss you, as soon as the public Business shall have had due
Consideration. This, I apprehend, will take up not many Days; after which I
shall be glad to restore you to your several Engagements at your own Homes with
as little Loss of Time as may be.

FRA. BERNARD.
Council Chamger, Sept. 8, 1762.
This speech (with General Amherst's Letter therein referred to) being read,
the Consideration thereof was appointed for the next morning at nine of the
clock.

September the 9th, the house agreeable to the order of the day, entered into
the Consideration of his Excellency's speech.

In the course of the debate the following speech was made, as nearly as can be
recollected by memory;

Mr. Speaker,
"This Province has upon all occasions been distinguished by its loyalty and
readiness to contribute its most strenuous efforts for his majesty's service. I
hope this spirit will ever remain as an indelible Characteristick of this
People. Every thing valuable is now at stake. Our most Gracious Sovereign, and
his royal Predecessor, of blessed memory, have for some years been engaged in a
bloody and expensive, but most just and necessary War, with the powerful
Enemies of their Persons, Crown and Dignity; and consequently of all our
invaluable civil and religious Rights and Privileges. The Almighty has
declared the justice of this War, by giving us the most astonishing series of
Victories and Triumphs recorded in ancient or modern story. From these
Successes we had reason to hope that the War would have ended last year in a
glorious peace. Our King and Father has condescended to tell us that his
Endeavors for that purpose were frustrated by Gallic Chicanery and Perfidy.
The King of Spain has been prevailed upon to break his Neutrality, to forsake
his alliance with Great Britain, to turn a deaf Ear to the Interest and Cries
of his own Subjects, and to attach himself to the Party of France and of Hell.
But Heaven still smiles upon his Majesty's Arms. We have within this Hour
received undoubted Intelligence of a memorable Victory obtained by Prince
Ferdinand of Brunswick; and of the Reduction of the Havannah, the Key of the
Spanish Treasury. Besides an immense Value in specie we have taken and
destroyed one quarter of the Spanish navy. This has been done at a bad Season
of the year and in Spite of as Gallant a defense as ever was made of a strong
Hold. Mr. Speaker, the Fate of North America, and perhaps ultimately of Great
Britain herself depends upon this War.

Our own immediate Interest therefore, as well as the general Cause of our King
and Country, requires that we should contribute the last penny, and the last
drop of Blood, rather than, that by any backwardness of ours, his Majesty's
Measures should be embarrassed; and thereby any of the Enterprises, that may be
planned for the Regular Troops miscarry. Some of these Considerations, I
presume, induced the Assembly, upon his Majesty's Requisition, signified last
Spring by Lord Egremont so cheerfully and unanimously to raise thirty three
Hundred Men for the present Campaign; and upon another Requisition, signified
by Sir Jeffery Amherst, to give a handsome bounty for inlisting about nine
Hundred more into the regular Service. The Colonies we know, have been often
blamed without Cause; and we have had some share of it. Witness the miscarriage
of the pretended Expedition against Canada in Queen Anne's Time, just before
the infamous Treaty of Utrecht. It is well known by some now living in this
Metropolis* that every Article, that was to be provided here, was in such
readiness, that the Officers, both of the army and navy, expressed the utmost
Surprise at it upon their arrival. To some of them no doubt it was a
Disappointment; for in order to shift the Blame of this shameful affair from
themselves they endeavored to lay it upon the New England Colonies. I
remember, that by some, who would be thought faithful Historians, the
miscarriage at Augustine in the last War, has been attributed to the neglect of
the Carolinians. But it is now notorious to all, th^^ the ministry of that Day
never intended that any good should come of that Enterprise; no^ indeed of any
other by them set on foot, during the whole War. The Conduct of that War, so
far as the ministry were concerned, has been judged to be one continued abuse
upon the Sovereign and his People. Thank God, we are fallen into better Times.
The King, the ministry, and the People are happily united in a vigorous pursuit
of the common good. Surely then if we should discover the least remissness in
his Majesty's Service, as we should be truly blameworthy, we may depend upon
having matters represented in the strongest light against us, by those who
delight to do us harm.

I am therefore clearly for raising the men, if Genesis Amherst should not inform
us, by the return of the next mail, that he shall have no occasion for them.
But as his Letter is dated the 4th of August, before even Moore Castle was
taken, and since the Reduction of the Havannah* a number of the Regulars are
returned to New York it is possible the General may have altered his
Sentiments, as to the necessity of these Provincials.

Waiting 2 or 3 Days however cannot make any odds in this Business, as our
Troops are all inlisted to the last of October. Upon the whole Mr. Speaker, I
am for a Committee to take the Governor's Speech and the present Requisition
into Consideration, and make report" This being seconded, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Otis, Mr. Tyler, General Winslow, and Mr. Wit, were appointed a Committee to
take said Speech and Requisition into Consideration, and make report. The
Committee waited a few Days for the Return of the Express, but hearing nothing
further about the men it was taken for granted that the General expected them.
The Committee therefore without debate unanimously reported to the House in
favor of raising them at the bounty of Four Pounds each, that is, ten
Shillings more than was given in the Spring. This Report was likewise almost
unanimously accepted, and the men are now inlisting.

Here is another Instance of the readiness of this Province to do every thing
in their Power for his Majesty's Service. This Spirit notwithstanding many
ungenerous Suggestions to the contrary, has remarkably discovered itself in
most if not all the British Colonies during the whole War. This Province has
since the year 1754, levied for his Majesty's Service as Soldiers and Seamen,
near thirty Thousand m^n besides what have been otherwise employed. One year in
particular it was said that every fifth man was engaged in one Shape or
another. We have raised Sums for the support of this War that the last
Generation could hardly have formed any Idea of. We are now deeply in debt, but
should think our selves amply rewarded if Canada should be retained.

The House did not ent^^ into a particular Consideration of the latter part of
the Governor's Speech, at this Time; as it is general; and an explanatory
message was expected, with particular accounts of all the expenses alluded to.
Accordingly Sept. the 14th Mr. Secretary came down with the following message,
from his Excellency, Viz.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
"SOON after the French Invasion of Newfoundland, the Inhabitants of Salem and
Marblehead, who were concerned in the Fishery North-West of Nova Scotia, were
alarmed with Advice that a French Privateer was cruising in the Gut of Canso;
and petitioned for protection for their Fishing Vessels then employed in those
Seas.

AS the King George was then out on a Cruize, and the Massachusetts-Sloop was
just returned from Peno^scot, I fitted the latter out in the readiest and most
frugal Manner I could. I put on board her twenty-six Provincials, which I had
within my Command, and augmented her Crew which was established at six Men. to
twenty-four; and having compleately armed her. sent her to the Gut of Canso, to
the Protection of the Fishery there.

FROM thence she is just now returned, after a Cruize of about a Month; in
which she saw no Enemy, although she heard of a French Pirate being in those
Seas, and looked after him; and has in some Part answered her Purpose, by
encouraging the Vessels there to stay to complete their Fares.

SHE now waits for Orders; and before I disarm her, and reduce her Crew, it may
deserve Consideration whether it may not be advisable to keep up her present
Complement, 'till the King George is discharged from the Service she is now
engaged in; which I refer to your Deliberation."

FRA. BERNARD.
Council Chamger, Sept. 11, 1762.

A little paper only, accompanied this message, with a short account of the
Difference to the Province by the Governor and Council's enlarging the
Establishment, which amounted to about Seventy two Pounds. But no notice was
taken of the (...) and other Bills which must finally swell this account much
higher. However it was neither the (...), nor the expen^^ of it* that gave the
House s^ (...), as the manner of it; that is, the enlarging an Establishment
without the knowledge of the house, and paying it without their privity or
consent. The Council minute relating to this Affair stands thus.

"At a General Council held at the Council Chamber in Boston upon Monday the
9th Day of Dec. 1761.

Present.

His Excellency the Governor.

Hon. Thomas Hutchison, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Mr. Danforth, Judge Lynde,
Brigadier Royal, Capt. Erving, Brigadier Brattle, Mr. Bowdoin, Mr. Hancock, Mr.
Hubbard, Mr. Gray, Mr. Russell, Mr. Flucker, Mr. Ropes.

Upon representation made to his Excellency the Governor from a Number of
Persons Inhabitants of the Towns of Salem and Marblehead, for some protection
to be afforded to the Fishery, they having received an account of a French
Privateer in the Gut of Canso. Advised that his Excellency give orders for
fitting out the Sloop-Massachusetts, in order to proceed on a cruize, to the
Gut of Canso, and Bay Vert, for the protection of the Fishery, and to continue
her said cruise not exceeding one Month; and as his Excellency proposes to put
on board twenty-six Provincials, and ten men out of the Ship King George,
provided she arrives seasonably, toward manning of the said Sloop: Advised
that her proper Crew be augmented to twenty-four men, officers included, upon
the following Wages, viz. Captain L.5 6 8. per Month, Lieut. L.4 0 0. Master
L.4 0 0. Master's mate L.3 6 8. Boatswain L.3 6 8. Boatswain's-mate L.3 0 0.
Gunner L.3 6 8. Gunner's-mate L.3 0 0. per Month, and each Private L.2 13 14.
per Month: and that the Commissary General put in Provisions for said Cruize
accordingly."

The Protection of the Fishery is undoubtedly a very important object, and the
Province at the beginning of the War built a Ship of twen^y Guns, and a Snow of
sixteen-Guns, for the immediate protection of the Trade. I wish the Interests
of Commerce were more attended to by those who have it in their Power to
cherish them. The trade in the opinion of some has never received a Benefit
from those Vessels equal to the Tax Trade alone has paid for their Support.
However if more are wanted* when that necessity appears, doubtless the assembly
will establish more, in the mean time, no more can be lawfully established at
the public Expense. There has been an Instance or two of the Governor and
Council's taking upon them in the recess of the Court to fit out the Province
Ship, in a very unusual and unconstitutional manner, as appears by the
following Extracts from the Council Records.

"11th of September 1760 Present in Council the Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
the Honorable Jacob Wendell, Samuel Wa^^s, Andrew Oliver, John Erving, James
Bowdoin, William Brattle, Thomas Hancock, and Thomas Hubbard, Esqr's.

His Excellency having communicated to the board some Intelligence he had
received of five Privateers being cruizing off the Southern Provinces in La^.
39.28. and asked the advice of the Council with respect to manning the Province
Ship King George. Advised that his Excellency give Orders for immediately
completing the Ship's Complement of Men, by directing Captain Hallowell to
beat up for Volunteers upon the Encouragement of eight Dollars per man for the
Cruize over and above the Wages agreeable to the Establishment. Advised and
Consented that a Warrant be made out to the Treasurer to pay unto Captain
Hollowell the Sum of One Hundred and sixty Pounds sixteen Shillings, to pay the
Bounty of said Men, he to be accountable."

To the Honor of General Brattle he was single in his Opposition to this
Resolution.

"21st of May 1761. In Council,

Present the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, the honorable John Osborne. Jacob
Wendell, Andrew Oliver, John Erving, William Brattle, Thomas Hancock, and
Thomas Hubbard* Esqr's.

Whereas Intelligence has been received of two Privateers cruizing off
Block-Island which have already taken diverse Vessels bound to and from the
Colonies, and the Ship King George having no more than thirty men belonging to
her, Officers included, and there being no prospect of any further men
inlisting upon the present Establishment, and the appropriation for the Service
of said Ship being exhausted, and his Excellency having proposed to put fifty
men of the new raised Troops on board said Ship to serve for one Cruize only;
therefore in order to complete the Complement of Men; advised that his
Excellency give orders to Captain Hallowell to send the Ship down to Nantasket
without Delay, and to impress from all inward bound Vessels, coasters and
Provincial Vessels excepted; also to inlist Volunteers upon a Bounty of ten
Dollars each; provided the money can be procured; and for that Purpose it is
further advised that a Warrant issue upon the Treasurer for seven Hundred
Dollars, to be paid out of such Sums as shall be subscribed by any Merchants or
other persons, for the above services, upon the credit of a Reimbursement to be
made by I wish the words had been, "to be recommend^d to"
the General Court at their next Session."

There had been some other Proceedings that were very much disrelished by
former Houses, e. g. In three Days after the Heirs of Lieutenant Governor
Phipps had received a Denial from the House to bear the Expense of his Honor's
Funeral, the Governor and Council paid it. Some other extraordinary accounts
had also been allowed contrary to the known and express Sense of the House. All
these matters together alarmed the present House, and they thought it high time
to remonstrate. Accordingly when the Governor's Message relating to the Sloop
Massachusetts was read, (upon a motion made and seconded) it was ordered as an
Instruction to the Committee appointed to answer it, to remonstrate against the
Governor and Council's making and increasing Establishments without the Consent
of the House. Though no Notice is taken of this Instruction in the printed Votes
of the House. The Journal stands thus, "Read and Ordered, that Mr. Otis, Mr.
Tyler, Captain Cheever, Col. Clap and Mr. Wit, take said message under
consideration, and report an answer thereto."

Sept. the 15th, The committee reported the following answer and Remonstrance,
Viz.

May it please your Excellency,
"The House have duly attended to your Excellency's message of the 11th,
Instant, relating to the Massachusetts Sloop, and are humbly of opinion that
there is not the least necessity for keeping up her present complement of men,
and therefore desire that your Excellency would be pleased to reduce them to
six, the old establishment made for said Sloop by the General Court.

"Justice to our selves, and to our constituents oblige us to remonstrate
against the method of making or increasing establishments by the Governor and
council.

"It is in effect taking from the house their most darling privilege, the
right of originating all Taxes.

"It is in short annihilating one branch of the legislature. And when once the
Representatives of a people give up this Privilege, the Government will very
soon become arbitrary.

"No Necessity threfore can be sufficient to justify a house of Representatives
in giving up such a Privilege; for it would be of little consequence to the
people whether they were subject to George or Lewis, the King of Great Britain
or the French King, if both were arbitrary, as both would be if both could levy
Taxes without Parliament.

"Had this been the first instance of the kind, we might not have troubled your
Excellency about it; but lest the matter should grow into precedent; we
earnestly beseech your Excellency, as you regard the peace and welfare of the
Province, that no measures of this nature be taken for the future, let the
advice of the council be what it may."


Which being read, was accepted by a large majority, and soon after sent up and
presented to his Excellency by Captain Goldthwait, Mr. Otis, Captain Tailor,
Mr. Cushing and Mr. Bordman.

The same day the above remonstrance was delivered, the Town was alarmed with a
report that the House had sent a message to his Excellency refl^cting upon his
Majesty's person and government* and highly derogatory from his crown and
dignity, and therein desired that his Excellency would in no case take the
advice of his majesty's council. About five of the clock P. M. the same day Mr.
Speaker communicated to the house a Letter from the Governor of the following
purport.

"SIR,
I HAVE this morning received a message from the house, which I here enclose,
in which the King's name, dignity, and cause, are so improperly treated, that I
am obliged to desire you to recommend earnestly to the house, that it may not
be entered upon the Minutes in the terms it now stands. For if it should, I am
satisfied that you will again and again wish some parts of it were expunged;
especially if it should appear, as I doubt not but it will, when I enter upon
my vindication, that there is not the least ground for the insinuation under
color of which that sacred and well-beloved name is so disrespectfully brought
into Question.

Yours, etc. FRA: BERNARD.
September 15th.
To the Honorable Speaker of the House of Representatives."

Upon the reading of this letter, it was moved to insert these words, to wit,
with all due reverence to his Majesty's sacred Person and Government, to both
which we profess the sincerest attachment and loyalty be it spoken it would be
of little importance, etc. But a certain member crying "Raze them," "Raze
them," Meaning that part of the remonstrance which is in Italick.
the proposed amendment was dropped, it being obvious, that the remonstrance
would be the same in effect, with or without the words excepted against. These
dreadful words, under which his Excellency had placed a black mark, were
accordingly erased and expunged, and the Message returned to the Speaker.

In the course of the debate a new and surprising doctrine was advanced. We
have seen the times when the majority of a council by their words and actions
have seemed to think themselves obliged to comply with every Thing proposed by
the Chair, and to have no rule of conduct but a Governor's will and pleasure.
But now for the first time, it was asserted that the Governor in all cases was
obliged to act according to the advice of the council, and consequently would
be deemed to have no Judgment of his own.

In order to excuse if not altogether justify the offensive Passage, and clear
it from ambiguity, I beg leave to premise two or three data. The natural
liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on earth, and not to be
under the will or legislative authority of man; but to have only the law of
nature for his rule. The liberty of man in society, is to be under no other
legislative power, but that established by consent in the common wealth; nor
under the dominion of any will, or restraint of any law, but what that
legislature shall enact according to the trust put in it. Freedom then is not
what Sir Robert Filmer tells us, O. A. 55. A liberty for every one to do what
he lists, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any laws. But freedom of
men under government, is to have a standing rule to live by, common to every
one of that society, and made by the legislative power erected in it; a liberty
to follow my own will in all things where that rule prescribes not, and not to
be subject to the unknown, unconstant, uncertain, arbitrary will of another
man; a freedom of nature is to be under no restraint but the law of nature.
This freedom from absolute arbitrary power, is so necessary to, and closely
joined with a man's preservation, that he cannot part with it but by what
forfeits his preservation and life together. For a man not having power over
his own life, cannot by compact or his own consent enslave himself to any one,
nor put himself under the absolute arbitrary power of another, to take away his
life when he pleases: no body can give more power than he has himself. He that
cannot take away his own life, cannot give another power over it.

Locke's DISCOURSE on GOVERN'T. Part II. CHAPTER IV. The legislative, whether
placed in one or more, whether it be always in being, or only by intervals,
though it be the supreme power in every commonwealth, yet in the utmost bounds
of it, it is limited to the public good of the society, it is a power that has
no end but preservation; and those can never have a right to destroy, enslave
or designedly to impoverish the subjects.

These are the bounds to which the trust that is put in them, by the Society,
and the laws of God and nature, have set to the legislative power of every
common wealth, in all forms of government.

First, They are to govern by established promulgated laws, not to be varied in
particular cases; but to have one rule for rich and poor, for the favorite at
court, and the countryman at plough.

Secondly, These laws ought to be designed for no other end ultimately, but the
good of the people.

Thirdly, They must not raise taxes on the property of the people, without the
consent of the people, given by themselves or deputies.

Fourthly, The legislature neither must not can transfer the power of making
laws to any body else, nor place it any where but where the people have.

Id. Chapter XI. Where the legislative and executive power are in distinct hands,
as they are in all moderated monarchies and well formed governments, there the
good of the society requires that several things should be left to the
discretion of him that has the supreme executive power. This power to act
according to discretion for the public good, without the prescription of Law,
and sometimes even against it, is that which is called PREROGATIVE.

This power, while employed for the benefit of the community, and suitably to
the trust and ends of government, is undoubted Prerogative, and never is
questioned. For the people are very seldom or never scrupulous or nice in the
point, they are far from examining Prerogative whilst it is in any tolerable
degree employed for the use it was meant, that is for the good of the people,
and not manifestly against it. But if there comes to be a question between the
executive power and the people, about a thing claimed as a prerogative, the
tendency of the exercise of such prerogative to the good or hurt of the people,
will easily decide the question. Prerogative is nothing but the power of doing
public good without a rule. The old question will be asked in this matter of
Prerogative, But who shall be judge when this power is made a right use of? I
answer, between an executive power in being with such prerogative, and a
legislative, that depends upon his will, for their convening, there can be no
judge on earth, as there can be none between the legislative and the people.
Should either the executive or legislative, when they have got this power in
their hands, design or go about to destroy them, the people have no other
remedy in this, as in other cases, when they have no judge upon earth, but to
appeal to heaven. Nor let any one think that this lays a perpetual foundation
for disorder, for this operates not 'till the inconveniency is so great that
the majority feel it, and are weary of it, and find a necessity to have it
amended. But this the executive power or wise Princes never need come in the
danger of; and it is the thing of all others, they have most need to avoid; as
of all others the most perilous.

Id. Chapter XIV. "Fatherly authority, or a right of fatherhood in our Author's
sense (i. e. Sir Robert Filmer) is a divine unalterable right of sovereignty,
whereby a Father, or a Prince, (and a Governor might have been added) has an
absolute, arbitrary, unlimitted, and unlimitable power over the lives,
liberties and estates of his children and subjects: so that he may take or
alienate their estates, sell, castrate or use their persons as he pleases, they
being all his slaves, and he Lord proprietor of every thing, and his unbounded
will their law."

Lock on Govt. B. I. Chapter II. He that will not give just occasion to think that
all government in the world is the product only of force and violence, and that
men live together by no other rules but that of beasts, where the strongest
carries it, and so lay a foundation for perpetual disorder, mischief, tumult,
sedition and rebellion, (things that the followers of that hypothesis, i. e.
Filmer, and the advocates for passive obedience, so loudly cry out against)
must of necessity find out another rise of government, another original of
political power, and another way of designing and knowing the persons that have
it, than what Sir R. Filmer has taught us."

Lock on Govt. B. II. Chapter II. This other original Mr. Lock has demonstrated
to be the consent of a free people. It is possible there are a few, and I
desire to thank God there is no reason to think there are many among us, that
cannot bear the names of LIBERTY and PROPERTY, much less that the things
signified by those terms, should be enjoyed by the vulgar. These may be
inclined to brand some of the principles advanced in the vindication of the
house, with the odious epithets seditious and levelling. Had any thing to
justify them been quoted from Col. Algernon, Sidney, or other British Martyrs,
to the liberty of their country, an outcry of rebellion would not be
surprising. The authority of Mr. Lock has therefore been preferred to all
others* for these further reasons. 1 He was not only one of the most wise, as
well as most honest, but the most impartial man that ever lived. 2. He
professedly wrote his discourses on Government, as he himself expresses it, "To
establish the throne of the great restorer king William, to make good his title
in the consent of the people, which being the only one of all lawful
governments, he had more fully and clearly, than any Prince in christendom* and
to justify to the world, the people of England whose love of liberty, their
just and natural rights, with their resolution to preserve them, saved the
nation when it was on the brink of slavery and ruin." By this title, our
Illustrious Sovereign GEORGE the III. (whom GOD long preserve) now holds. 3.
Mr. Lock was as great an ornament, under a crowned head, as the church of
England ever had to boast off. Had all her sons been of his wise, moderate,
tolerant principles, we should probably never have heard of those civil
dissentions that have so often brought the nation to the borders of perdition.
Upon the score of his being a Churchman however, his sentiments are less liable
to the inviduous reflections and insinuations that High-flyers, Jacobites, and
other stupid Big^ts, are apt too liberally to bestow, not only upon Dissenters
of all denominations, but upon the moderate; and therefore (...) the most
valuable part of the Church of England itself


1. God made all men naturally equal. 2. The ideas of earthly superiority,
pre-eminence and grandeur are educational, at least acquired, not innate. 3.
Kings were (and plantation Governor's should be) made for the good of the
people, and not the people for them. 4. No government has a right to make hobby
horses, asses and slaves of the subject, nature having made sufficient of the
two former, for all the lawful purposes of man, from the harmless peasant in
the field, to the most refined politician in the cabinet; but none of the last,
which infallibly proves they are unnecessary. 5. Though most governments are de
facto arbitrary, and consequently the curse and scandal of human nature; yet
none are de jure arbitrary. 6. The British constitution of government as now
established in his Majesty's person and family, is the wisest and best in the
world. 7. The King of Great Britain is the best as well as most glorious
Monarch upon the Globe, and his subjects the happiest in the universe. 8. It is
most humbly presumed the King would have all his plantation Governors follow
his royal example, in a wise and strict adherence to the principles of the
British constitution, by which in conjunction with his other royal virtues, he
is enabled to reign in the hearts of a brave and generous, free and loyal
people. 9. This is the summit, the ne plus ultra of human glory and felicity.
10. The French King is a despotic arbitrary prince, and consequently his
subjects are very miserable.

Let us now take a more careful review of this passage, which by some out of
doors ha^ been represented as seditious, rebellious and ^^^^terous. I hope none
however will be so wanting to the interests of their country. as to represent
the matter in this l^ (...) the east side of t^ (...), though re^ent inst^nces of
such a conduct might be quoted, wherein the province has after its m^^t
strenuo^^ eff^^ts, during this and other wars, been p^inted in all the (...)
colors that avarice, m^ (...) the worst pass^^^s could su^^est.

The house (...), that "it would be of little conseq^^nce to the people,
whether they were subject to George or Lewis* the King of Great Britain or the
French King, if both were arbitrary, as both would be, if both could levy taxes
without parliament." Or in the (...) words transposed without the least
alteration of the ^^nse.

"It would be of little consequence to the people whether they were subject to
George the King of Great Brit^^^, or Lewis the French King* if both were
arbitrary, as both would be, if both could levy taxes without parliament."

The first question that would occur to a philosopher, if any question could be
made about it, would be whether the positi^^ were true. But truth being of
little importance with most modern politicians, we shall touch lightly upon
that topic, and proceed to inquiries of a more interesting nature.

That arbitrary government implies the worst of temporal evils, or at least the
continual danger of them is certain. That a man would be pretty equally
subjected to th^se (...) under every arbitrary government, is clear. That I
should die very soon after my head should be c^t off* whether by a ^^bre or a
br^^d sword, whether cho^ (...) to ^^atify a tyrant by the christian name of
T^^^^, D^^ or H^^ry is evident. That the name of the tyrant (...) be of no more
(...) to save my life than the name of the executioner, needs no Proof. It is
therefore manifestly of no importance what a prince's christian name is, if he
be arbitrary, any more, indeed, than if he were not arbitrary. So the whole
amount of this dangerous proposition may at least in one view be reduced to
this, viz. It is of little importance what a King's christian name is. It is
indeed of importance that a King, a Governor, and all other good christians
should have a christian name, but whether Edward, Francis or William, is of
none, that I can discern. It being a rule to put the most mild and favorable
construction upon words that they can possibly bear, it will follow that this
proposition is a very harmless one, that cannot by any means tend to prejudice
his Majesty's Person, Crown, Dignity or Cause, all which I deem equally sacred
with his Excellency.

If this proposition will bear an hundred different constructions, they must
all be admitted before any that imports any bad meaning, much more a
treasonable one.

It is conceived the house intended nothing disrespectful of His Majesty, his
Government or Governor, in those words. It would be very injurious to insinuate
this of a house that upon all occasions has distinguished itself by a truly
loyal spirit, and which spirit possesses at least nine hundred and ninety-nine
in a thousand of their constituents throughout the province. One good natured
construction at least seems to be implied in the assertion, and that pretty
strongly, viz. that in the present situation of Great Britain and France, it is
of vast importance to be a Briton, rather than a Frenchman; as the French King
is an arbitrary despotic Prince; but the King of Great Britain is not so de
jure, de facto, nor by inclination; a greater difference on this side the Grave
cannot be found, than that which subsists between British subjects, and the
slaves of tyranny.

Perhaps it may be objected that there is some difference even between
arbitrary Princes in this respect at least, that some are more rigorous than
others. It is granted, but then let it be remembered, that the life of man is as
a vapor that soon vanishes away, and we know not who may come after him, a
wise man or a fool* though the chances before and since Solomon, have ever been
in favor of the latter. Therefore it is said of little consequence. Had it
been No instead of little, the clause upon the most rigid stricture might have
been found barely exceptionable.

Some fine Gentlemen have charged the expression as indelicate. This is a
capital impeachment in politics, and therefore demands our most serious
attention. The idea of delicacy in the creed of some politicians, implies that
an inferior should at the peril of all that is near and dear to him (i. e. his
interest) avoid every the least trifle that can offend his superior. Does my
superior want my estate? I must give it him, and that with a good grace, which
is appearing, and if possible being really obliged to him that he will
condesend to take it. The reason is evident; it might give him some little pain
or uneasiness to see me whimpering, much more openly complaining at the loss of
a little glittering dirt. I must according to this system not only endeavor to
acquire my self, but impress upon all around me a reverence and passive
obedience to the sentiments of my superior, little short of adoration. Is the
superior in contemplation a king, I must consider him as God's vicegerent,
clothed with unlimited power, his will the supreme law, and not accountable
for his actions, let them be what they may, to any tribunal upon earth. Is the
superior a plantation governor? he must be viewed not only as the most
excellent representation of majesty, but as a viceroy in his department, and
qu^ad provincial administration, to all intents and purposes vested with all
the prerogatives that were ever exercised by the most absolute prince in Great
Britain.

The votaries of this sect are all Monopolizers of offices, Peculators,
Informers, and generally the Seekers of all kinds. It is better, say they, "to
give up any thing, and every thing quietly, than contend with a superior, who
by his prerogative can do, and (as the vulgar express it) right or wrong, will
have whatever he pleases. For you must know, that according to some of the most
refined and fashionable systems of modern politics, the ideas of right and
wrong, and all the moral virtues, are to be considered only as the vagaries of
a weak or distempered imagination in the possessor, and of no use in the world,
but for the skilful politician to convert to his own purposes of power and
profit.

With these, The Love of Country is an empty Name,
For Gold they hunger: but never thirst for Fame.


It is well known that the least "patriotic spark" unawares "catched," and
discovered, disqualifies a candidate from all further preferment in this famous
and flourishing order of knights errant. It must however be confessed they are
so catholic as to admit all sorts from the knights of the post to a garter and
Star; provided they are thoroughly divested of the fear of God, and the love of
mankind; and have concentrated all their views in dear self, with them the only
sacred and well-beloved name, or thing in the universe. See Cardinal Richlieu's
Political Testament, and the greater Bible of the Sect, Mandeville's Fable of
the Bees. Richlieu expressly in solemn earnest, without any sarcasm or irony,
advises the discarding all honest men from the presence of a prince, and from
even the purlieus of a court. According to Mandeville, "The moral virtues are
the political offspring which flattery begot upon pride." The most darling
principle of the great Apostle of the order, who has done more than any mortal
toward diffusing corruption, not only through the three kingdoms, but through the
remotest dominions, is, "that every man has his price, and that if you bid high
enough, you are sure of him".

To those who have been taught to bow at the name of a King, with as much ardor
and devotion as a papist at the sight of a crucifix, the assertion under
examinamination may appear h^rsh; but there is an immense difference between
the sentiments of a British house of commons remonstrating, (...) those of a
courtier cringing for a favor. A house of Representatives here at least, bears
an equal proportion to a Governor, with that of a house of Commons to the King.
There is indeed one difference in favor of a house of Representatives; when a
house of Commons address the King. they speak to their Sovereign* who is truly
the most august Personage upon earth: When a house of Representatives
remonstrate to a Governor, they speak to a fellow subject; though a superior, who
is undoubtedly entitled to decency and respect; but I hardly think to quite so
much Reverence as his master.

It may not be amiss to observe, that a form of speech may be, in no sort
improper, when used arguendo, or for illustration, speaking of the King, which
same form might be very harsh, indecent and even ridiculous, if spoken to the
King.

The expression under censure has had the approbation of diverse Gentlemen of
sense, who are quite unprejudiced by any party. They have taken it to imply a
compliment rather than any indecent reflection, upon his Majesty's wise and
gracious administration. It seems strange therefore that the house should be so
suddenly charged by his Excellency with Impropriety, groundless Insinuations,
etc.

What cause of so bitter Repentance, again and again, could possibly have taken
place, if this clause had been printed in the Journal, I cannot imagine. If the
case be fairly represented, I guess the province can be in no danger from a
house of Representatives daring to speak plain English, when they are
complaining of a grievance. I sincerely believe the house had no disposition to
enter into any contest with the Governor or Council. Sure I am that the
promoters of this address had no such view. On the contrary, there is the
highest reason to presume that the house of Representatives will at all times
rejoice in the prosperity of the Governor and Council, and contribute their
utmost assistance, in supporting those two branches of the legislature, in all
their just rights and pre-eminence. But the house is and ought to be jealous
and tenacious of its own privileges; these are a sacred deposit entrusted by
the people, and the jealousy of them is a godly jealousy.

But to proceed with our narration; on Saturday about a quarter before one of
the Clock, Mr. Secretary came down with his Excellency's vindication, which is
as follows.

"Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
I Have received an Answer from you to a Message of mine; informing you of my
having upon a sudden Apprehension of Danger, fitted out the Province Sloop to
protect a considerable and very interesting Fishery, belonging to this
Province: Upon which Occasion you are pleased to observe, that the Method of
doing this, which you call making or increasing Establishments is taking from
the House the Right of originating Taxes, annihilating one Branch of the
Legislature, and tending to make the Government arbitrary.

These are hard Words: and the Consciousness of my own Integrity will not
permit me to submit in Silence to such Imputations. I know what the Privileges
of the People are, and their Nature and Bounds: and I can truly say that it has
never been in my Thoughts to make the least Invasion of them. If therefore you
think proper to send such a Charge as this to the Press; I must desire that my
Vindication may accompany it.

In Order to which I shall first consider what the legal and constitutional
Powers of the Governor and Council are, then state the Fact in Question, and by
Application of the one to the other, see whether the Conclusions
bef^^^mentioned will follow. In this Disquisition I shall not inqui^e whether
any Ne^^^^y can be sufficient to justify a House of Representatives in giving
up the Privilege of originating Taxes; as I do not believe that such a (...)
was ever des^^ed by any Person concerned in the Government, or that any
Governor and Council since the Revolution attempted or ever will attempt to tax
the People.

The Business of originating the Taxes most certainly belongs to the
Representatives of the People, and the Business of issuing Money out of the
Treasury^, as certainly belongs to the Governor with the Advice of the Council.
In general all Votes and Orders for the Charge of the Government originate in
the House of Representatives, and the Money for defreying such Charges is
issued by Warrant of the Governor with the Advice of Council, without any
further Reference to the House of Representatives.

But as it is impossible that the General Court should provide for every
Contingency that may happen unless they were continually sitting; there will
sometimes be Cases in which the Governor, with the Council, is to be justified
in issuing Money for Services not expressly provided for by the General Court:
Of these there are two very obvious.

The one is, where a Danger arises so immediate and imminent that there is no
Time for calling together the Assembly. In this, I apprehend there is no other
Limitation of Expense, but in Proportion to the Evil impending: For the Safety
of the People being the supreme Law, should at all Events be provided for.

The other is, where the Expense of some necessary Service is so
inconsiderable, as to be not worth the while to put the Province to the Charge
of the Assembly's meeting for that Purpose only, at an Expense perhaps ten or
twenty Times more than the Sum in Question.

This I take to be the Law and Usage of every Royal Government on the
Continent. In that over which I formerly presided, where the People were very
averse to frequent or long Sessions of the Assembly, I have upon an Emergency,
with Advice of the Council only, raised Three Hundred Men at a Time, and
marched them to the Defense of the F^^^tic^^; and when the Assembly has met,
have received their Thanks for so doing.

Now let me state the Case in Question. Most of the principal Merchants in
Salem and Marblehead, who were considerably interested in a Fishery near the
Gut of Canso, in which I am told upwards of One Hundred Vessels from this
Province were employed, received Advice that there was a French Privateer or
Pirate cruising in those Parts. It has appeared since, that this Alarm was not
peculiar to th^^ Province: It reached Quebec, from whence an armed Schooner was
fitted out to look after this Frenchman. It re^ched New York, from whence
General AMHERST a^^ised me of this French Vessel. These Merchants therefore
applying by their Deputies to me for an immediate Protection of their Fishery,
I laid the Matter before the Council, and it happening that the Province Sloop
was just returned from Penobscot, it was advised by the Council, that she
should be immediately fitted out to go to the Protection of this Fishery: this
was done in the most frugal Manner possible; out of Fifty Men put on board the
Sloop, only twenty-four were charged to the Province, the rest were drawn out
of the Provincials employed at Castle-William, and in the recruiting Service;
the Ammunition and Military Stores were taken from the Castle, to which they
have been restored without Loss or Expense; the Men were engaged only for one
Month, after which they were not to be continued without the Advice of the
General Court. This is the true State of this Transaction; and surely I may say
it deserved a very different Animadversion than what it has had.

Now to apply it to the Censure it has met with: This was an Act which the
Governor with the Council had a Right to do; it was a legal and constitutional
Exercise of the Powers vested in them; it was an Exertion of the Executive
Power of the Government, distinct from that of the Legislature. If it was wrong
and ill advised (which I don't mean to admit) it could amount to no more than
an improper Application of the public Money, by those who have lawful Authority
to apply such Money to the public Purposes. When this Distinction is
considered; how can this Act, whether right or wrong, be applied to the Right
of originating Taxes, annihilating one Branch of the Legislature and making the
Government arbitrary?

As for the discretionary Part of the Act, after I have had the Advice of the
Council, and the Approbation of my own Judgment and Conscience* I shall not
enter into any f^rther Argument about it, than just to observe; That if the
Governor and Council legally acting in the Executive Administration, and
determining to the best of their Judgment and Skill, with a conscientious
Regard to the Good fo the People, shall be liable to be called to account for
Difference of Opinion only, the Government will be very much weakened. But I
shall persuade myself that a steady Attention to the Peace and Welfare of the
Province, which you recommend to Me, will always sufficiently justify my
Conduct: and in that Confidence I hope I shall never fail to exert the Powers
which have been committed to Me for the Defense and Protection of the People of
this Province, by all lawful and constitutional Means.

FRA. BERNARD."
Province-House, Sept. 18, 1762.

This being read, the Secretary instantly informed the Speaker, that his
Excellency directed the attendance of the house in the council chamber.

The two houses had finished the public business; and before this the house of
Representatives had by a committee asked a recess, so it was presumed the house
was sent for to be prorogued, as it turned out. The Speaker rose to, go up to
the council, without desiring the house to attend him, the usual and regular
form, which it is presumed was forgot. But it was moved that his Excellency's
vindication, according to his desire, should be printed in the Journal. This
motion was seconded, and passed in the affirmative by a great majority. Then a
motion was made and seconded, for a committee to prepare a Reply to this
vindication in the recess of the court, and to make report at the next session;
this also passed in the affirmative by a considerable majority, and Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Otis, and Mr. Tyler, were chosen a committee for said purpose.
Then the House immediately attended his Excellency in the Council Chamger. When
his Excellency, after giving his assent to two or three bills, prorogued the
court.

It was wished, at least by the moderate part of the house, that his Excellency
had thought fit so far to give up the point, as to wave any contest about it,
by assuring the house, that if his right was ever so clear, he would not
exercise it, if grievous to the people. A like condescension crowned heads have
practiced, and found their account in it; as I am persuaded his Excellency
would, if the unanimous vote of thanks from the whole representative body of
this people is worth any thing. This I guess he would have had: And as it is a
maxim that the King can do no wrong, but that whatever is amiss is owing
entirely to those about him; so, with regard to his Excellency, we ought to
presume the best; and that it is to be charged to the account of some weak or
wicked advisers, that this business did not end happily. However, the matter is
now become very serious, by his Excellency's vindication; which we shall next
consider.

The Charter of the province of the Massachusetts Bay, has invested the
Governor and Council with power to issue (without the concurrence of the House,
as it is now construed, or rather as the genuine sense of the Charter has been
waved by former Houses) the ^onies out of the treasury. But the Question is*
Whether this power be limited? If it is unlimited, the privilege of levying
taxes by originating them in the House of Representatives, is of very little
value. What Representative would plume himself upon the privilege of
originating taxes, if the money could be squandered away at pleasure; which in
other words may happen hereafter to be just as the tools and sycophants of
power shall advise. This power the ^o^e, in the nature and reason of the thing,
should (...) to be limited, by some usage or cu^^om, if not by something more
explicit. The words of the Ch^rter are. "And we do for us, our heirs and
successors, gi^e and grant, that the said General Court or Assembly, shall have
full power and authority to name and settle annually, all civil officers within
the said province, for the time being; and to set forth the several duties,
powers and limits of every such officer to be appointed by the said general
court or assembly; and the forms of such oaths, not repugnant to the laws and
statutes of this our realm of England, as shall be respectively administered
unto them, for the execution of their several offices and places; and also to
impose fines, mulcts, imprisonments, and other punishments; and to impose and
levy proportionable and reasonable assessments rates and taxes, upon the
estates and persons of all and every the proprietors or inhabitants of our said
province or territory, to be issued and disposed of by warrant, under the hand
of the Governor of our said province, for the time being, with the advice and
consent of the Council, for our service* in the necessary Defense and support
of our government of our said province or territory, and the protection and
preservation of the inhabitants there, according to such acts as are or shall
be in force within our said province." Here seems to be an express limitation
of the power. Nothing is left to usage or custom, much less to discretion. It
is manifest from the Charter, that the Acts of the province are the only legal
and constitutional justification to the Governor and Council, in issuing any
money out of the treasury: "According to such Acts as are or shall be in force
within our said Province," are certainly no unmeaning words.

It is clear from hence, that without the aid of an Act of the province, the
Governor and Council cannot legally take a shilling out of the treasury, let
the emergency be what it may. It is agreed with his Excellency, that in issuing
Money from the treasury, as the charter has of late years been construed, the
Governor and Council are mere executive officers. They are controllers-general
of the Treasury, i. e. the treasurer cannot pay without their warrant; but then
they are as much bound by the acts of the province, as the treasurer himself.
He, the Treasurer, indeed may be called to an account, but they cannot, being in
other respects two branches of the Legislature. The only remedy therefore is a
remonstrance, and when that proves ineffectual, the house may and ought to
refuse to supply the Treasury, and stop a few Grants and Salaries; which would
soon bring matters right without any dangerous shock to Government, or
weakening thereof; but what the whole world must impute to a Governor and
Council, that would oblige a House to have recourse to the last resort, but
one; I mean as we are a dependent Government, a dutiful and humble remonstrance
to his Majesty.

The Parliament of Great Britain have as the last resort, been known to appeal
to Heaven, and the longest sword; but God sorbid that there ever should be
occasion for any thing of that kind again; indeed there is not the least danger
of it since the glorious revolution, and the happy establishment resulting
therefrom. It was formerly the custom for the Speaker of the house to sign all
warrants upon the treasury, but this was at last either tamely given up, or at
least waved.

It may be objected, that though our supply bills appropriate by far the greatest
part of the sums raised, yet something is always expressly left for
contingencies, and the Governor and Council may and must in the nature of the
thing apply this at discretion. I answer, 1. Even this is issued by force of an
act, and not by virtue of any general power in the Governor and Council,
independent of the act. 2. Neither custom nor usage suppose that this sum
appropriated for contingencies could be applied to the fitting out of men of
war, and making establishments for them; for armed vessels is one express
appropriation in our acts, which sh^ws that this is not considered as a
contingency, and that the assembly do not expect any further charge for this
article, than they have appropriated. This Vessel's Expense was drawn f^r upon
the Appropriation for armed Vessels, as appears by the War^^nt and ^oll.


3. All our Governors and Councils have not always confined themselves to the
appropriation for contingencies but some have drawn for what they deemed
contingencies when they have known the appropriation to be expended, and in
short have not confined themselves to any appropriation in payment; whatever
they may have done in the form of their warrants. 4. If the Governor and
Council can fit out one man of war, inlist men, grant a bounty and make
establishments, why not for a navy, if to them it shall seem necessary, and
they can make themselves the sole judges of this necessity. The rumor in the
case of the Massachusetts was that fourteen privateers instead of one pyrate
were cruizing off Canso. What could this one poor sloop have done against such
odds? Salus populi est supre^a Lex. Why then did not the Governor and Council
fit out fourteen men of war, or at least enough to take fourteen privateers? It
has been said that there were no privateers among the fishermen, but that when
they discovered the sloop, she was taken for one, and that many of the
fishermen ran home in a fright, and lost their fares. How true this is I cannot
say, but have heard it reported, and believe there is at least as much ground
for it as there was to believe the story of fourteen privateers. The Governor
and Council doubtless meant well as to the protection of the fishery, and had
there been no unjustifiable extension of their power, every one would have
thankfully acquiesced. The money for fitting out this sloop might have been
raised by the Governor and Council's promise to recommend a reimbursement to
the assembly. They might perhaps have borrowed it of the Treasurer upon the
same terms, and the privileges of the House thereby would have been preserve.
It would be a very easy thing to raise twenty times the sum wanted to fit out
this sloop upon the credit of a like recommendation. This method was taken in
fitting out the King George in 1761, as appears by the vote of Council, and the
Governor's message afterward to the house of Representatives, and their vote
thereupon, which last are as follow^.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
The provision made the last session for manning the King George was soon found
insufficient for the purpose, and-after bea^ing up for a month the crew
amounted to but thirty men. In this condition the ship remained, when I
received advice that there were two French privateers on the coast, and that
there were several more to be expected: I immediately called a Council; at
which attended a committee of the merchants. The council were of opinion, that
the ship should be immediately fitted out: and in order to do it with more
expedition, I offered that if the crew could be quickly completed to an
hundred men, I would put fifty provincials on board for a short cruize. It was
therefore "advised to raise seventy men, and to give ten Dollars bounty: But
there was no fund in the Treasury to resort to for this purpose. It was
therefore concluded to order the Treasurer to borrow seven hundred Dollars of
the merchants on the credit of the province, (not on the credit of a
recommendation, as it should have been and perhaps was meant) which was
accordingly done; and I must desire you would take care for the repayment
thereof."


The House, after long debate, ^ and diverse referrences, on the second of June,
voted, "that the province treasurer be directed to repay the seven hundred
Dollars borrowed of the merchants on the credit of the province, for bounty, in
order to man the ship King George."

I want to know why the same method of raising the money might not have been
taken the first time (...) f^^ting out the ship King George, and in fit^ (...)
M^ssachusetts

However, even this method of supplying the treasury by the Governor and
Council's ordering subscriptions upon the credit of the province (by which it
is presumed a recommendation to the assembly is meant) is by no means a
justifiable practice.

The Governor and Council have naturally a great influence in (...) Houses of
Representatives, and when the money i^ once taken up and applied, it would seem
hard to make the subscribers lose it; and so in time it would come to be a
thing of course, for the House to reimburse all expenses the Governor and
Council should be pleased to create in the recess of the assembly; and after a
course of tame acquiescence in such a practice, the House would become as some
desire to have it, a very insignificant* unimportant part of the constitution.

It is therefore the indispensible duty of the House of Representatives, to be
very cautious how they allow or approve of any expenses incurred even in this
way.

His Excellency is pleased to wave any inquiry "whether any necessity can be
sufficient to justify a House of Representatives in giving up the privilege of
originating taxes?" for this reason only expressed; viz. "I don't believe (says
his Excellency) that such a cession was ever desired by any Person concerned in
the government, or that any Governor and Council since the revolution,
attempted or ever will attempt to tax the people" I wish I could exercise as
much charity toward former Governors and Councils, as for his Excellency and
the present honorable Council; but I cannot. I am verily persuaded, that we
have had some Governors and some Counselors, since the revolution* that would
gladly have been as absolute as Turkish Bashaws; and that the whole tenor of
their actions has given convincing proof of such a disposition.

A tax upon the people in form* by issuing a tax bill, and ordering an
assessment, I believe has not been attempted by a Governor and Council since
the revolution. This would be too alarming. The vulgar are apt to be forcibly
affected with names and appearances, rather than by realities. If the money can
be drawn out of the treasury without any regard to the appropriations, made by
the acts of the province; and the House whenever called upon, will without
murmuring supply the treasury again; they serve the purpose of a very
convenient machine to quiet the people; and the money flows in with greater
ease and plenty than if the Governor and Council were, ad libitum, to collect
and dissipate the public treasure.

It is observable, that in France and other despotic governments, it is often
with great difficulty, and sometimes with hazard, that the revenue is
collected. Had Richlieu and Mazarine convinced the parliaments that it was a
great privilege to be allowed to vote as much money as was called for, and for
any purpose the court might want it, the government would have had the
appearance of liberty under a tyranny; which to those ministers would have been
a vast ease and security. But those great politicians either never thought of
this refinement, or, the parliaments were too stupid to be convinced, of the
utility of such a plan.

His Excellency proceeds, "The business of originating the taxes most certainly
belongs to the Representatives of the people; and the business of issuing money
out of the treasury, as certainly belongs to the Governor and Council." To say
nothing of the doubt that might justly be made, whether a non-claim, waver, or
even an express concession by any former house, of the privilege of joining in
a warrant, for issuing the money, can be binding upon their Successors? Would
not a stranger to our constitution be lead to think, from this general
assertion of the Governor, that he with the Council, could issue money without
regard to the acts of the pro^^^ce, and the appropriations thereby made; and
that the house indeed, had no right to appropriate, bu^ (...) the burden of
taxes on the people? (...) his Excellency in the next period says, (...) all
votes and orders (and acts might (...)) for the charge of the government,
originate in the House of Representatives; and the money for defreying such
charge, is issued by the Governor, with the advice of the council, without any
further reference to the house of Representatives."

That this is true in fact, to wit, that after the money is raised, his
Excellency and their Honors have no further reference to, or regard for the
house, is possible. But that they have had some regard to appearances is
certain from the form of their warrants.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. By his Excellency the GOVERNOR.
YOU are, by and with the Advice and Consent of his Majesty's Council, ordered
and directed to pay unto A. B. the sum of (...)

Which sum is to be paid out of the appropriation for (...)

For which this shall be your warrant.

Given under my Hand at Boston, the (...) Day of (...) 176^, in the (...) Year
of His Majesty's Reign. F. B.

To Mr. Treasurer.
By Order of the Governor, with the Advice and Consent of the Council.

A. O. Secr'y.




Now, if after the house have supplied the treasury, the Governor and Council
have a right to issue the money without further regard to the house of
Representatives; why are the words Out of the appropriation for, etc. inserted,
but to salve appearances? Otherwise it might run thus, "Out of the public money
in the treasury." "But as it is impossible, (says his Excellency,) that the
General Court should provide for every contingency that may happen, unless they
were continually sitting; there will sometimes be ca^^s i^ which the Governor
and Council is to be justified ^n ^^^uing money for services not expressly
provided f^ (...) ^eneral Court; of these there are two very (...) The one is,
when a danger arises so im^ (...) ^ent, that there is no Time for calling toge^
the ^mbly. In this I apprehend there is no o^ (...) of expense, but in
proportion to the evil (...). For the safety of the people being the supreme
law, should at all events be provided for. The other is, where the expense of
some necessary service is so inconsiderable, as to be not worth the while to
put the province to the charge of the Assembly's meeting for that purpose only,
at an expense perhaps of ten or twenty times more than the sum in question."
Frequent and long sessions I know are burdensome to the people* and many think
they had better give up every thing, than not have short sessions. But let
these consider that it is a very poor bargain, that for the sake of avoiding a
session extraordinary, sacrifices the right of being taxed by their
Representatives; and risques ten or twenty times the sum in the end, to be
levied by a Governor and Council. I know too, that some gentlemen in order to
lessen the weight of a House of Representatives* are constantly exclaiming
against long and frequent sessions; the people are gulled with the bait, and
the house when they meet, are often in want of time to complete the public
business, in the manner that they would wish, and the nature of some affairs
requires. What is the consequence? Why, it is become a very fashionable
doctrine with some, that in the recess of the court, the Governor and Council
are vested with all the powers of the General Assembly. It is costly and
unpopular to have frequent and long sessions; therefore they shall be few,
short and hurried; and in the mean time, the Governor and Council shall have a
right to do what they judge "the supreme law," the good of the commonwealth,
requires, and no limitation or bounds are to be set to the money they expend,
but their sovereign judgment of the quatum of the impending evil; for, "the
safety of the people being the supreme law, should at all events, and by all
means (but that of calling an assembly togother) be provided for." This is a
short method to put it in the power of the Governor and Council, to do as they
please with the men and money of the province; and those Governor's who can do
as they please with the men and money of a country, seem to me to be, (or at
least are (...) pretty fair way soon to be) arbitrary; which in plain English
means no more than to do as one pleases. As to those inconsiderable services,
not worth while to put the province to the charge of an assembly; it seems to
be of no great importance whether they are performed or not. 2. There is always
an appropriation for contingencies, great and small. If this sum should be
exhausted sufficient might always be procured upon the credit of a
recommendation from the Governor and Council, for a reimbursement. 3. Any
particular service had better suffer, and the province suffer that way, than
lose such a privilege as that of taxing themselves; upon which single
privilege evidently depends all others, Civil and Religious.

His Excellency tells us of "the law and usage of every royal government upon
the continent;" and that, "in that over which he presided formerly, he had upon
an emergency, with the advice of the Council only raised three hundred men at a
time, and marched them to the defense of the frontiers, and when the assembly
has met has received their thanks for so doing."

Whether the assembly of this province equal the assembly of New Jersey, in
gratitude or any other virtue, I shall not presume to determine. But this I am
sure of, that this province has been more liberal in their grants to his
Excellency, than to any of his predecessors. Instead of any debate about his
salary, three grants have been made in less than two years, amounting to near
three thousand pounds sterling in the whole; besides the very valuable island
of Mount Desert, which the province thought they had a right to grant, subject
to his Majesty's confirmation; and which his Excellency doubtless will have
confirmed to him. All this with the ordinary perquisites, besides the full
third of all seizures, must amount to a very handsome fortune, obtained in
about two years and two months. His Excellency has not been pleased to tell us,
whether the assembly paid the expense of this extraordinary (...), or whether
the Governor and Council ordered it to be paid? Now if the assembly paid it, as
they doubtless ought, after thanking his Excellency, and thereby admitting the
utility of the measure, their privilege was saved. But if the Governor and
Council paid it out of the treasury, and the House acquiesced in the
infringement of their privilege, it cannot be produced as a precedent for us,
let it be ever so royal a government. His Excellency has a right to transport
any of the militia of this province to any part of it, by sea or land, for the
necessary defense of the same: and to build and demolish sorts and castles, and
with the advice of the council in times of war, to exercise martial law upon
the militia, but then it is with the House to pay the expense, or refuse it as
they please. No man by charter can be sent out of the province but by an act of
the three branches of the legislature. The King himself applies to parliament
to support his army and navy, and it is their duty to do it, and they ever have
and will do it; and the supplies for these ever originate in, and are
appropriated by the House of Commons; in whose money bills the House of Lords
will not presume to make any amendment; consent or reject in the whole is all the
power they exercise in this particular.

His Excellency next proceeds to state "the case in question, "by which I
suppose is meant the facts relative to fitting out the sloop Massachusetts. The
facts mentioned, I take it for granted are in the main true, but the most
material one seems to be omitted, namely, that the Governor and Council made an
establishment; in consequence of which the expense of this fitting out or a
great part at least has been paid out of the Treasury, by warrant from the
Governor and Council. There is also a small mistake in his Excellency's saying
the sloop was then returned. She was expected, but her return was uncertain.
Had the sloop been sent and the pay or reimbursement referred to the House,
there might have been no complaint as to this particular step. But the main
question is not as to the right of sending the sloop, but of making, or
increasing her establishment, and paying it out of the public moneys without
the consent of the House; not only in this, but in a number of late similar
instances, that have induced the House to question the right of the Governor
and Council to draw moneys out of the treasury in this way. Or more properly,
as it results from the remonstrance of the House, and his Excellency's
vindication: The question is in effect, whether the House have a right to
appropriate the money they agree to levy upon their constituents?

It being pretty evident I hope by this time, that if the Governor and Council
can issue what they please, and for what they please, that the House has no
right to appropriate; and it is as clear that if the right of appropriation is
of any avail or significancy, the Governor and Council cannot issue the moneys
from the treasury for what they please; but are bound and limited by the
appropriations and establishments made by the acts of the province, to which by
the way they are two parties of three in the making.

His Excellency having given us his state of the case in question, proceeds "to
apply it to the censure it has met with" as his Excellency is pleased to
express it. By which I presume his Excellency means the application he had
promised in the beginning of his vindication. "I shall consider, says his
Excellency, what the legal and constitutional powers of the Governor and
Council are; then state the fact in question, and by the application of the one
to the other, see whether the conclusion before mentioned will follow."

Here again there seems to be some little obscurity, by reason of these words,
"fact in question"; there being no question about the facts, but about the
right, not so much about the right of fitting out the vessel, as the Governor
and Council's right to pay for it out of the treasury, without the consent of
the House. What question can there be about facts? There is no doubt but that
the vessel was sent, and that in consequence of an application from some Salem
and Marblehead gentlemen.

I therefore presume to read the second paragraph of his Excellency's
vindication according to the sense and spirit, (though not strictly agreeable to
the letter*) thus, "In order to my vindication (dele to which) I shall 1.
Consider what the legal and constitutional powers of the Governor and Council
are. 2. State the facts. 3. By application of the legal and constitutional
powers of the Governor and Council to the fact, see whether the conclusions
before mentioned will so low." According to this division, which in the spirit,
though not in the letter, is a very good one; his Excellency has given us his
sense of the legal and constitutional powers of the Governor and Council. His
Excellency is undoubtedly as well acquainted with the nature of these powers*
as "wh^^ the privileges of the people are, their bo^^ds and th^^ nat^^e." I
presume his Excellency also has the same thorough knowledge of "what the
pri^^ledges of the House of Representatives are, their nature and their
bounds;" which last are more immediately the subject of inquiry, than those of
the people. Though it is true, that the privileges of the House are the great
ba^^ier to the privileges of the people, and whenever those are broken down,
the people's liberties will fall an easy prey.

His Excellency having finished his state of fact* proceeds according to the
method premised to the third and last (...) of discourse, which is, with his
Excellency the application; not "of the case in question, to the censure it has
met with," though the latter words seem to import this; but of the legal and
constitutional powers of the Governor and Council, to the facts, in order to
make his conclusions. This is evidently his Excellency's meaning. The
application is mental. The conclusions are express. The first his excellency is
pleased to make is in these words. "This was an act which the Governor with the
Council had a right to do." I am no great admirer of the syllogistic form of
reasoning, and this dress is very uncourtly. yet all conclusive reasoning will
bear the test of the schools. Let us try an experiment. His Excellency's whole
vindication may nearly in his own words be reduced to this categoric syllogism.

"All the money for defreying the charges of the government is issued by
warrant of the Governor with the advice of Council, without any further
reference to the house of Representatives."

The principal merchants in Salem and Marblehead were frighted with a rumor of
a privateer: upon their application the Governor and Council took the alarm,
fitted out an armed vessel* and by their warrant defreyed the charge out of the
treasury without any reference at all to the House of Representatives."

Therefore,

1. "This was an act which the Governor with the Council had a right to do." No
man in his senses to be sure can deny the major proposition, for the word is
plainly implies a right; according to Mr. Pope and other great authorities,
"whatever is is right." The minor is a (...) facts; therefore the way is cl^ar
to follow his Excellency in the rest of his inferences. 2. Inference. "It was a
legal and constitutional exercise of the powers vested in them." 3. "It was an
exertion of the executive power, distinct from that of the legislative." 4. If
it was wrong, etc.

His Excellency then proceeds to ask the House a very important question. But
before we consider what answer may be given to that question* and probably
would have been given, had there been time before the court was prorog^^ed; I
beg leave to make a few observations upon his Excellency's three last
inferences. I have ^^r^fully examined the Charter, and the laws of this
province, and think I may challenge any man to show any thing in either, that
gives the least color of right to the Governor and Council, to fit out an
armed vessel to cruize upon the high seas, at the expense of the province, or
to grant a bounty for inlisting the seamen, or to impress them when they will not
inlist fast enough, as in the case of the ship King George, or to make an
establishment for the officers and seam^^s wages, much less to issue the money
from the treasury for defreying these charges by warrant of the Governor and
Council, without any reference to the House of Representatives, who must upon
supposition of such powers be strangers, total strangers to the expense thus
brought upon the province.

But we are told that " this is an exertion of the executive power of the
government, distinct from the legislative."

I am as much for keeping up the distinction between the executive and
legislative powers as possible. Happy, very happy, would it be for this poor
province, if this distinction was more attended to than it ever yet has been. I
am heartily rejoiced however, that his Excellency seems here to discountenance
and explod^ the doctrine that some among us have taken great pains to
inculcate, viz. that in the recess of the general assembly the whole power of
the three branches devolves upon the Governor and Council. If I may compare
small things with great, without offense, this doctrine is as absurd as if a
man should assert that in the recess of parliament, the whole power of
parliament is devolved upon the King and the House of Lords. Had such a
doctrine always prevailed in England, we should have heard nothing of the
oppressions and misfortunes of the Charles's and James's; The revolution would
never have taken place; the genius of William the third would have languished
in the sons of Holland, or evaporated in the plains of Flanders; the names of
three George's would doubtless have been immortal; but Great Britain to this
day might have been in chains and darkness, unblessed with their influence. I
take it for granted therefore, his Excellency must mean by "power of the
government," not the power of the whole province in great and general court
assembled. but only the executive power of the Governor and Council, distinct
from the legislative, as just explained by him. Names are sometimes confounded
with things by the wisest of men. It is however of little importance what the
power is called, if the exercise of it be lawful. If the power of taxing is
peculiar to the general assembly, if the charter has confined it to the general
assembly, as I think it evidently does, and this act of the Governor and
Council is a tax upon every inhabitant, as it clearly is, being paid out of
money raised by their representatives upon them for other purposes, which must
remain unsatisfied; and so much more must be raised upon them as is thus taken
away: It follows that as all taxation ought to originate in the House; this act
of the Governor and Council is so far from being an executive act peculiar to
them, that it is evidently taking upon them in their executive capacity, or
what other n^ne else, you are pleased to give it, a power not only confined by
the charter, law and constitution of the province, to the general assembly or
legislative body of the province, but so far confined to one branch of that
body, that it can lawfully and constitutionally originate only in the (...).

If therefore this a^^ was wrong and ill-advised, which I think has been
abundantly proved, whether his Excellency will be pleased to admit it or not:
it ^^uld "amount to more than an improper application of the public money by
those who have lawful authority to apply such money to the public purposes."
It is granted, should the treasurer without warrant do such an act, it would be
no more than an improper application of the public money by one who has lawful
authority to apply such money to the public purposes, by warrant from the
Governor and Council. Should the treasurer act without such warrant, he would
be accountable. But when he has the Governor and Council's warrant, that
perhaps will justify* or at least, ought to excuse him, be the warran^ (...) or
wrong; because it would be hard to make him ^^^^erable for the conduct of his
superiors, and to expect him to set himself up as a judge against the Governor
and Council, one of which joins in his choice, and the other has an absolute
negative upon him. But upon supposition the Governor and Council act wrong, and
misapply the moneys of the province, which his Excellency seems to concede, is
at least a possible case. What is to be done? I agree with his Excellency that
they are not liable to be called to an account, and it would be a ridiculous
vanity and presumption in the House to think of any such thing. We have no body
to institute a suit against the Governor and Council; no court to try such a
suit; all that would be left therefore in so unhappy a case (if the privilege
of the House of joining in all issues from the treasury has been given up by
former assemblies, and that is binding upon their successors, "which I don't
mean to admit") is to remonstr^te. This method the House have taken in the
present case, rather than at this juncture reclaim their ancient privilege of
joining in all warrants for the issues from the treasury. However, I conceive
that the right of joining in such warrants can never die. But to confine
ourselves to his Excellency's inferences, let us for a moment concede that this
act by the Governor and Council, at most is only a misapplication of the
public moneys. The conduct of the House is certainly to be justified. The
Governor and Council of the province misapplying money, is a grievous event, a
terrible misfortune, and a dreadful example to inferiors. It would be enough to
infect seven eighths of the petty officers in the community. Whenever a
peculator, great or small, should be called to an account after such an event
repeated, and passed unnoticed by the House, he would at least console and
comfort, nay even plume himself with such like reflections as these. "My
betters have done so before me. They make what applications they please of the
public money, without regard to law, or the duty of their trust, and so will
I." Though with regard to the present Governor and Council, it is presumed a
misapplication can proceed only from an error in judgment, which the wisest are
in a degree subject to, not from any supposed pravity of inclination; yet it
would be of dangerous tendency, and therefore a proper subject of remonstrance.
A remonstrance is not an insolent and presumptuous "calling a Governor and
Council to an account for difference of opinion only", nor any charge of wilful
evil, but only of error in judgment, and a humble endeavor to point it out;
relying always upon their known goodness and wisdom, that whenever they shall
discover the truth, they will readily follow it. The House of Commons
remonstrating (as they have sometimes done) I believe would be astonished to
hear their humble petitions to the Throne called "hard words and groundless
insinuations, etc. and viewed as calling the King to account. It is true, that
the Governor and Council may do many things, if they are so disposed, which
they cannot be called to an account for in this world; but this will hardly
prove that they have a right to do them, especially after the whole body of the
people by their Representatives complain of them as grievous. It is by no means
a good inference in politics, any more than in private life* or even in a
state of nature, that a man has a right to do every thing in his natural power
to do. This would be at once to make a man's own will and his power, however
obtained, the only measure of his actions.

But in answer to his Excellency's grand question, it will appear that this
act* and the like instances complaine^ of* are more than a bare misapplication
of the pub^^^ money; they are what the house called them "a ^^thod, (and they
might have added a lately devised (...), the first instance almost being in the
case of the (...) King-George, in 1760.) of making and increasing
establishments by the Governor and Council," in effect taking from the House
their most (...) privilege, that of originating all taxes." "In short (i. e. a
short method for) annihilating one branch of the legislature"

And it remains infallibly true* when once the Representatives of a people give
up this privilege, the government will very soon become arbitrary, (...) the
Governor and Council may then do every thing as they please.

His Excellency asks, "When this distinction is considered, how can this act,
right or wrong, be applied to the right of originating taxes, annihilating one
branch of the legislature, and making the government arbitrary." His
Excellency, through his whole vindication, seems to speak of the single act of
fitting out the sloop, and don't once mention the establishment made for her,
or the payment thereof; much less the two instances of fitting out the ship
King George: All which the house had in view, as is manifest by their saying,
that, "had this been the first instance, they might not have troubled his
Excellency about it." However, if this was the only instance that ever had
happened of such an exertion of the executive power by the Governor and
Council, it seems to be very applicable to the right of originating taxes, and
to have a tendency to make the Governor and Council of the province arbitrary.
If the Governor and Council have a right to draw what money they please out of
the treasury, under a notion of discretion which they are to exercise, as
executive officers of the government; it follows, that for so much charge as
the government incurs, by the exercise of this discretionary power, by so much
the province is taxed by the Governor and Council, without any privity or
consent of the house; so much charge then as is incurred by this discretionary
power, the house cannot be said to originate. Their right of originating taxes
therefore is so far taken away; their power as to this ceasing and coming to
nothing, by the Governor and Council exercising it themselves, without the
house, may be said to be annihilated. And when the power and privilege of any
branch of the legislature ceases, is taken away and annihilated, then the
government is so far arbitrary. The house are so modest as only to say, "that
in such a case it will soon become arbitrary."

Can any man be so unreasonable as to contend that the province is not as much
taxed by the Governor and Council's paying for this sloop out of the money
already raised, as if the house had voted it? What is the difference? The
people pay the reckoning whether the Governor and Council take upon them to arm
vessels out of money raised for other purposes, or the house vote to raise
money for arming vessels. When the money is gone out of the treasury for
arming, vessels, the debts of the province contracted by the three branches of
the legislature must nevertheless be paid, and other moneys must be levied
instead of those taken away by the Governor and Council. And as according to
his Excellency's distinction. there is no limitation of the discretionary
expense, so long as the good of the whole, in the opinion of the Governor and
Council shall require it; they may spend every farthing in the treasury, and
for what they please. Suppose his Excellency should judge it expedient and
absolutely necessary upon the apprehension of some imminent and immediate
danger (of which he is in fact absolutely by the charter the sole judge) to
march all the militia to the frontiers. This he can do without even the advice
of the Council. Suppose the Council, though not consulted, as they need not be,
as to the utility of the march, should place such absolute confidence in his
Excellency's wisdom (...) to sign a warrant for drawing every farthing out of
the treasury for the paying and subsisting this armament. Could not as much be
said for all this, as is said for fitting out the sloop?

The House of Representatives, should they presume to remonstrate, might with
the same propriety be given to understand that "there was not time to call them
together", that "the danger was immed^^te and imminent, and in such a case
there is no limitation of expense, but in proportion to the evil impending;"
"for the safety of the people being the supreme law, should at all events be
provided for." Furthermore, "this was an act the Governor and Council had a
right to do:" "It is a legal and constitutional exercise of the powers vested
in them". "It is an exertion of the executive power of the government, distinct
from the legislative." Nay let us go but one step further, and I think the
reasoning will be complete on the side of his Excellency, or on the side of the
House. All things are possible, and when his Excellency and the Council we are
now blessed with, are taken from us, we may have a Governor and Council, that
after they have given out orders to array and march the militia, and by warrant
drawn all the money out of the treasury, may alter their minds as to the
imminent danger, lay by the expedition, but instead of replacing the money in
the treasury, divide and pocket it among themselves.

The reader no doubt starts at such a supposition, it is only a bare possibility
as stated. The House might possibly remonstrate in such a case. But I hold that
upon the principles advanced by his Excellency, it would be wrong in them so to
do, and that it ought to be taken for a satisfactory answer, That "if it were
wrong and ill advised in the Governor and Council (thus to convert all the
treasure of the province to their own use, which they might not mean to admit)
yet it would amount to no more than a very improper application of the public
money, by those who had lawful authority to apply such money to the public
purposes."

"When this distinction is considered, how could such an act, whether right or
wrong, be applied to the right of originating taxes, annihilating one branch of
the legislature, and making the government arbitrary." Perhaps such future
Governor not understanding law distinctions so well as his Excellency our
present Governor, might expressly add^ and so good Messieurs Representatives you
have nothing to do but to supply the treasury again, tax the many headed
monster An opp^^bious Name by some given to the People.
once more, and when you have done it, the first moment I think sit I Will draw
it all out again, under color of some sudden imminent danger; and if you don't
like it, you may even go h -- g yourselves, as they at least most certainly
would richly deserve, who should tamely submit to such usage.

To conclude. Would all plantation Governors reflect upon the nature of a free
government, and the principles of the British constitution* as now happily
established, and practice upon those principles, instead (as most of them do)
of spending their whole time in extending the prerogative beyond all bounds;
they would serve the King their master much better, and make the people under
their care infinitely happier.

Strange it is, that when King's and many other mighty men have fallen in their
attempts upon the liberties of the people of Great Britain* that plantation
Governor's don't all consider the Act of 13th of George the second, Chapter
vii. which is a plain declaration of the British parliament, that the subjects
in the colonies are entitled to all the privileges of the people of Great
Britain. By this act of parliament even Foreigners having lived seven years in
any of the British colonies, are deemed natives, on taking the oaths of
allegiance, etc. and are declared by said act to be his Majesty's natural born
subjects of the kindom of Great Britain, to all intents, constructions and
purposes, as if any or every of them had been, or were born within the kingdom.
The reasons given for this naturalization of foreigners, in the preamble of the
act are, that "the increase of the people is the means of advancing the wealth
and strength of any nation or country, and that many foreigners and strangers,
from the lenity of our government, the purity of our religion, the benefit of
our laws, the advantages of our trade, and the security of our property might
be induced to come and settle in some of his Majesty's colonies in America, if
they were made partakers of the advantages and privileges which the natural
born subjects of this realm do there enjoy." Nor is any new privilege given by
this act to the natives of the co^onies, it is merely as to them a declaration
of what they are entitled to by the common law, by their several charters, by
the law of nature and nations, and by the ^aw of God, as might be shown at
large, had I time or r^om.

All settled attempts therefore, against the libe^ty of the subject, in any of
the plantations, must end in the ruin of the Governor who makes them; at least
they will render his administration as uneasy to himself, as unhappy for the
people. It is therefore the indispensable duty of every one, and will be the
sincere endeavor of every honest man, to promote the utmost harmony between
the three branches of the legislature, that they may be a mutual support to
each other, and the ornament, defense and glory of the people Providence has
committed to their care.

I am convinced that if his Excellency will in al^ cases take the advice of the
general assembly, (which however contemptably some may affect to speak of it,
is the great council of this province, as the British parliament is of the
kingdom) that his administration will be crowned with all the success he can
desire. But if instead of this, the advice of half a dozen or half a score, who
among their fellow citizens may be chiefly distinguished by their avarice,
ignorance, pri^^ or insolence, should at any time obtain too much ^eight at
court, the consequences will be very unfortunate on all sides.

Had the writer of these sheets any thing to ask or fear from his Excellency,
for himself, a very slender modern politician would quickly perceive the
incompatability of this performance with a court interest. That he has done
every thing he could in his small sphere to make his Excellency's
administration prosperous to him and happy for the people, abundant proofs have
been given: and they will one day be convincing to hi^ Excellency. He has never
opposed his Excellency in any thing but what he would have opposed his own
Father in. And he takes this opportunity publicly to declare, that in all his
legal and constitutional measures, his Excellency shall find him a fast though
humble friend and servant: But the Liberty of his country, and the Rights of
mankind, he will ever vindicate to the utmost of his capacity and power.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 12. Line 6. for Dec. 1761. read August 1762. Page 20 line 5 from bottom,
for inviduous read invidious. The candid Reader is desired to correct any
others with his Pen.

Advertisement.
ALL anonymous Reflections upon this Performance, will be treated with neglect.
But if the writer is wrong in the Principles advanced, and any Gentleman will
condescend to refute them, and give his Name to the Public, as Truth only is
sought after, the Obligation to the Discoverer shall be gratefully acknowledged.


