THE FELICITY OF THE TIMES. A SERMON PREACHED AT CHRIST-CHURCH, CAMBRIDGE, ON
THURSDAY, XI AUGUST, MDCCLXIII. BEING A DAY OF THANKSGIVING FOR THE GENERAL
PEACE. BY EAST APTHORP, M. A. MISSIONARY AT CAMBRIDGE.

PSALM CVI. 5. That I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the
gladness of thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY GREEN AND RUSSELL, AT THEIR PRINTING-OFFICE IN QUEEN STREET
MDCCLXIII.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR of the BAHAMA ISLANDS, AND
Lieutenant General of HIS MAJESTY's Army.
SIR,
THE Public will readily concur with me, in the propriety of addressing to YOUR
EXCELLENCY a Sermon on the safety, Peace, and happiness of my Country; to all
which Your counsels were so manifestly conducive, during Your patriot
administration of the affairs of this government. But whatever indulgence may
be given to this discourse, on account of the subject, and of Your protection:
nothing less than the authority of Your request could have induced me, to
publish Sentiments intended only for a small and candid audience; and which are
more expressive of an honest Love for my Country, than of the correct or
instructive writer* I could indeed willingly resign any pretensions in Science,
for the nobler ambition, even in private life, always to act and think as
becomes a good ^itizen; who, while he aims at the most expanded ^^^rity, is yet
with preeminence of Love attached to his King, to the pure Establishment of the
Church of England, to the free and happy constitution of his Country, to the
true interest of this Continent, and to the cause of Virtue and Religion in
this his native Colony.

IT is not my province to particularize the faithful services, by which, in
Your public station, You have always consulted the safety and promoted the
welfare of HIS MAJESTY's American dominions. Those important benefits are
recorded in the hearts of all who wish well to these Colonies. I therefore only
congratulate YOUR EXCELLENCY, that Your generous labors and patriot counsels,
as far as they have contributed to our present greatness, have been crowned
with a felicity beyond your virtuous ambition. Among the Statesmen and
Commanders, who have been the instruments of Heaven in this great revolution;
YOUR EXCELLENCY esteems that title your truest glory: and amidst the effulgence
of the English Dominion, you discern its fairest luster, to consist in the
preservation and extension of pure Religion, and rational civil Freedom.

WHILE with supreme complacency you contemplate the present greatness of
Britain and America: such a scene recalls to my mind that memorable period of
ancient story, when on the defeat of PHILIP PHILIP II father of ^er^eus, the
l^st of the Maced^^^n tyrant^^ d^s^ated at Cy^^^ ^ha^e by the consul
FLAMINING^. ^^t. Ch^. 1 7. Vid. L^v. lib. XXXIII. 32, 33.
King of Macedon, and the consequent Treaty of Peace; the Roman people restored
the Liberty of all the Grecian states. The narrative is so glowing and
animated, that I shall give it YOUR EXCELLENCY in the words of your favorite
historian.

Isthmierum statum ludicrum aderat. -- Expectatione crecti, qui deinde status
futurus Graeciae, quae sua fortuna esset, non taciti solum opinabantur, sed
sermonibus etiam ferebant. Romani ad spectaculum consederunt. Praeco in mediam
arenam processit, et, tuba silentio facto, ita pronunciat. S. P. Q. R. et T.
QUINTIUS Imp. PHILIPPO Rege Macedonibusque devictis, liberos, immunes, suis
legibus esse jub^t -- omnes gentes, quae sub ditione PHILIPPI Regis fuerant.
Audita voce praeconis, majus gaudium fuit, quam quod universum homines
caperent. Vix satis credere se quisque audisse: alii alios intueri mirabundi,
verut somnii vanam speciem. -- Tum ab certo jam gaudio, tantus cum clamore
plausus est ortus, ut facile appareret, nihil omnium bonorum gratius, quam
Libertatem esse. Nec praesens omnium modo effusa laetitia est; sed per multos
dies, gratis et cogitationibus et sermonibu^ revocata: Esse aliquam in terris
gentem, quae sua impensa, suo labor ac periculo, bella gerat pro liberate
aliorum: nec hoc finitimis aut propinquae vicinitatis hominibus, aut terris
continenti junctis praestet: maria trajiciat, ne quod toto orb terrarum
injustum imperium sit; et ubique jus, fa^, lex potentissima sint: una voce
liberatas omnes Graeciae atque Asiae urbes: hoc spe concipere, audacis animi
fuisse; ad effectum adducere, virtutis et fortunae ingentis.

WITH the sublime, the delightful consciousness, of having loved and served
this Country; and of having laid the plan and foundation of its present
felicity and extensive dominion: may YOUR EXCELLENCY enjoy, in the calm Evening
of Life, the applause of good men, the favor of Your Sovereign, and the
acceptance of GOD!

I am, May it please YOUR EXCELLENCY, Your most faithful and obedient Servant
EAST APTHORP.

THE PRAYER.
GREAT and mighty GOD, who art exalted far above all praise, and whose eternal
majesty reigns over all: we adore thine universal love displayed in all thy
works; we praise thee for our being and preservation^; and above all, for the
pure light of the glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, by whom thou have reconciled
the world to thyself; who has taught us to know thee, the only GOD; and has
obtained for his faithful servants life and immortality.

O GOD, in thy hand is power and might, thou rulest in the kingdoms of men, and
thou alone give Greatness and Strength. We this day praise and extol thy
name, for the abundant manifestations of thy favor and protection to us, our
nation, and our King. Adoring the providence of thy Goodness, we look back with
praise and wonder, on the dangers from which thou have preserved us, on the
deliverances thou have granted us, and the successes with which thou have
prospered us, during an extensive and calamitous war. To thy favor and mercy
we thankfully ascribe the Enlargement of our dominion, the protection of our
lives, our property, our freedom and religion, and of every thing that is most
dear to us. We devoutly praise thee, for restoring to the nations the great
blessing of Peace, and putting an end to the desolation of War. Thy wisdom,
ever producing good from evil, can make even the fury and confusion of War, to
advance among mankind the cause of truth and virtue. Grant that our past
calamities, may correct and reform our sins and vices. So rule the hearts, and
restrain the ambition of Princes, the crimes and impiety of mankind; that the
Peace which thou have given us may be secure and l^sting. Propitiously behold
from thy throne the dominion, which thy right hand has planted for us, on this
Continent. Make it ever f^ourish and advance, under our King and His
Descendents, in such prosperity, greatness and opulence, as may be truly good
for it; but especia^ly in thy best blessings of Freedom and Religion. Behold
with mercy and compassion the barbarous inhabitants: grant such success to our
defensive arms against them, as may eventually promote thy Glory, with their
and our benefit: that our necessary war with them may soon end in a firm and
lasting Peace; by which they may be softened to humanity, formed to a social
life, and at length enlightened by thy saving truth.

With our praises for thy past and present mercies, we implore thee, most
gracious GOD, to continue thy loving kindness to us and our whole nation.
Prosper and enlarge the universal Church; remove the Errors and Superstitions
of mankind, that they may know and obey the Tr^^^: preserve a^ Ch^^stians in
righteousness of life, and u^ite th^^ i^ (...) and Love. Give the King a l^^g
life: bless his r^yal Family; and crown him with Felicity. Grant that (...)
always consult the Peace and Freedom and Happi^^^^ ^f Mankind, and defend thy
true Religion and Virtue. Give wis^^^ and integrity to His Ministers, and all
in authority under H^^, that they may faithfully serve him in promoting the
good of his people. And to us and all His subjects g^ve thy heavenly grace,
that thy goodness may lead us to repentance: that we may improve all thy
mercies, by leading quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; in
all things adorning thy holy Gospel, by our Unity, Peace, and Righteousness.

Accept, O LORD, our peculiar Praises, for the various blessings thou have
conferred on this Province in particular; by preserving it from Invasion,
Famine, Sickness, and giving us in all our settlements, even in the midst of
war, the tranquillity of Peace: by relieving us after the time that thou had
afflicted us with droughth and scarcity; renewing the face of the earth, and
filling us with Plenty. O continue and complete the bounties of thy Providence.
Give us true Repentance, and pardon our great and innumerable sins, which
render us unworthy the least of all thy mercies. Bless the GOVERNOR, the
Magistrates, and Ministers, of this Province. Grant that all in their several
stations may faithfully serve thee, promote the welfare of thy People, and
support among us true Religion and Virtue.

Finally, O LORD, while thy bounties transcend our utmost praise, and while our
hearts labor to conceive thy goodness: teach every one of us to express our
thankfulness by the Faith and Holiness of our lives: and crown all thy present
Benefits with thine eternal Mercies in JESUS CHRIST: in whose name and words we
pray for all mankind.

OUR FATHER which art in heaven! Hallowed be thy name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil. For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

THE FELICITY OF THE TIMES.
PSALM ^^^VII. 12. Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem!
Praise thy GOD, O Sion!
13. For he has made fast the bars of thy gates,
And has blessed thy children within thee.
14. He makes Peace in thy borders,
And fills thee with the flour of Wheat. --
19. He shows his word unto Jacob,
His statutes and ordinances unto Israel.
20. He has not dealt so with any nation.
Neither have the heathen knowledge of his laws.

THIS psalm, by the consent of most interpreters, was composed after the return
of the Jews from the Babylonian captivity, to celebrate the divine goodness in
the restoration and felicity of their commonwealth. It is a natural and elegant
description of the general Providence of GOD over his people, and of the PEACE
and Tranquillity they enjoyed under the Persian monarchs, especially under
Cyrus and the elder Artaxerxes The I XXII. and other version^ formed upon it,
divide this Psalm into two parts, and ascri^e it, t^gether with the CXI. VI and
CXI VIII. to the p^^phets (...) and Z^^h^^^^n. It is observable that the III
but Books o^ (...) P^^^ms, from the ^ XXIIId. are generally compositions of a
much l^t^r date, th^^ the pr^ceeding Collection
. As the verses read to you contain a summary of our own public happiness: In
the view of assisting your pious sentiments, I shall begin and end my discourse
with the duty and tribute of Praise to GOD, which is the purpose of this
solemnity: and shall make a recital of those n^tional blessings, included in
and connected with the General Peace, the great subject of our present
thankfulness.

O Prai^^ the Lord, (...) it is a good t^i^g to (...) praises unto our God;
yea, a ^oyful and (...) thi^^ it is to be thank^ul. Thus auspiciously the
Psalmist enters on the subject of the felicity of his Country, by beginning at
the source from whence it was derived. Praise is the natural expression, the
overflowing of a thankful heart. The benefits received from the goodness of GOD
are the causes of religious thankfulness: which will always rise in proportion
to the sense and conception we have of that amiable attribute. This is no time
to insist on the arguments, which support a truth so obvious, as that the World
is governed by a beneficent Providence. This is among the first principles of
natural religion, as well as of the doctrine of Christ; who extend^ the idea of
a divine super intendence, so far as to assure us, that not a sparrow falls to
the ground, without our heavenly Father ^. But whatever doubts some may have
weakly entertained concerning a particular Providence; regarding the affairs
and conduct of individuals: all, who believe a GOD, have concurred in adoring
his dispensations in the public interests of human Society, in the rise and
declension of kingdoms, in the great events of war and peace, and above all, in
preserving and extending true Religion. On these depend the order and happiness
of civil life: in these, as they now affect ourselves, I think we may discern
the hand of GOD, great in counsel and mighty in work. And when the greatest
national blessings are showered upon us from the riches of His goodness: the
ingenuousness of the human mind, the wisdom of civil government, and the
authority of religion, incline and oblige us to praise and thank the author of
all happiness. Praise, considered as a species of Prayer to GOD, is neither of
use to convey our sentiments, as if they were unknown to Him, from whom nothing
is hid; nor is to be supposed acceptable to Him, on account of any subserviency
to His glory and perfection. But the simple intention of all Prayer and Praise,
is to exercise in ourselves virtuous and devout affections; a trust and
dependence on GOD, and a consciousness of his moral Providence, by which he
has inseparably connected happiness with virtue, in the whole plan of divine
government. If we are attentive to the intrinsic nature of all religious acts;
we must be sensible that no Praise can be acceptable to GOD, but as it proceeds
from his virtuous and sincere worshippers. The righteous shall praise thy name:
and, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; for it becomes well the j^^t to be
thankful PSALM CXL. 13. XXXIII. I.
. As it is a profanation of His benefits, to misuse them to vice; or even to
estimate them only in a selfish and secular view: so the best improvement of
the divine savor, is to consider it as a motive to virtue.

To thus improve our recent blessings, and in some degree to proportion our
gratitude for them: let us weigh and consider their moment and importance; and
raise our affections, to just sentiments and expressions of love, adoration,
praise and duty. To this end, we must enlarge our hearts and minds, to take in
the idea of public felicity, to comprehend the welfare of the human race, and
to conceive the influence both of the past war and present Peace on the Civil
and Religious interests of mankind.

ALTHOUGH our attention is principally fixed on the blessing of the Peace; yet
this does not exclude other subjects of Thankfulness, which crowd upon our
thoughts on this solemnity. These, the author of this psalm in part presents to
our view, in those exulting expressions. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem! praise
thy God, O Sion! for he has made fast the bars of thy gates, and has blessed
thy children within thee. It is a beautiful image, familiar to the sacred
writers, to represent Jerusalem and Sion (the capital and citadel of their
country) as the mother of all its cities and inhabitants: and this manner of
personifying the metropolis of Judaea is still to be seen on the coins and
medals of Antiquity. particularly those of VESPASIAN and TITUS, on which Judaea
is represented in the attitude so pathetically described by the prophet
JEREMIAH, in his Lamentations. See Cabnet's dict of the Bible* III. 548.
A remark of this kind may give some light to the style of Scripture: Nor does
this image unaptly express that dependence which we ourselves, as Colonies,
have on our Mother Country. During this calamitous war, we have experienced
such a protection from it, as with the utmost propriety claims our praises to
GOD, for His blessings to her children: blessings so great, both to Us and our
parent-kingdoms, that our Nation has never been at so exalted an highth of
glory and prosperity, as in this auspicious year. Every advantage, that can
protect or adorn a people, is now poured upon us in full measure; and all,
improved in the possession, by the striking contrast of the dangers and
calamities, from which both EUROPE and AMERICA have just emerged.

WE have seen, for some years past, war and desolation let loose on all the
world. In the estimation of a benevolent heart, even our splendid victories
have been dearly purchased, by the destruction of the human species, both on
our own and the enemies part. Disease and Infection have been auxiliaries to
the wide wasting Sword; and innumerable unknown disasters have concurred in
depopulating mankind. Scarcity and Famine have combined in the general ruin;
while, either the fury of men has destroyed the means of subsistence; or GOD,
to punish their crimes, has withheld the fertility of the Earth, and given
successive seasons of drougth and barrenness. But it is impossible to collect
the materials of calamity, or even for the imagination to comprehend them all;
as they have appeared in all parts of the world, during the whole continuance
of the war. If we ourselves have seen less of these distresses, than other
countries, or than other parts of our own; if we have known them rather by
report than experience; this should be considered as our singular felicity, an
unmerited distinction in our favor, that should excite the warmest emotions of
praise and thankfulness.

AMONG the many blessings of this Year, which GOD has so crowned with his
goodness; he has not only given us Peace in our borders, but has filled us
wit^ the fit^r of (...), the best productions of an exuberantly fertile Season.
This bounty is so conspicuous, that it would be blindness not to discern,
impiety not to acknowledge it with thanksgiving, and sing praises unto our GOD,
who cove^eth the ^eaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains. The varieties in the ordinary
course of things afford the clearest proofs of an interposing Providence. Was
the natural world left entirely to the original laws of matter and motion,
without a divine Mind to continually regulate them, those laws would always act
mechanically and uniformly. Thus, Philosophers have demonstrated, that the
mechanical effect of what is called Attraction, in the system of the world,
would be the destruction of the system; did not an omnipotent mind so attemper
those irregularities, as to maintain the order of the universe. The varieties
in nature are the interpositions of GOD. The common effects of Droughth and
Heat, would always go on increasing with their cause: and the course of nature,
left to itself, would be still more confirmed in barrenness and scarcity. A
change of seasons, from excessive Dryness to abundant Rains, being opposite to
the mechanical process of Nature, manifests a divine superintendence. Thus in
the renovation of the almost exhausted powers of vegetation, GOD has not left
himself without witness, in giving rain from heaven, and a fruitful season;
filling our hearts with f^^^ and gladness. ACTS XIV. 17. vid. ^CL XXXVIII. 25
-- 3^.
As a farther claim to our thanks and duty, we must not omit the general Health
we have enjoyed in the present year, in climates not a little obnoxious to
epidemical disease and sickness. Thus the LORD, rejoicing in his works, renews
the face of the Earth; and repairs the decays of his past visitations, War,
scarcity, and sickness, by an extraordinary indulgence of health, fertility,
and Peace. HE GIVES PEACE IN THY BORDERS. Peace, the best of all our civil
blessings, let us ingeminate with grateful hearts and voices, till the incense
of our Praise reaches to the Heavens, and ascends to the throne of GOD.

THE general advantages of Peace are too obvious to need a recital: whether as
putting an end to the calamities of a state of War; or as attended with
Tranquillity and Opulence, Freedom, Science, and the Arts that are necessary or
ornamental to social life. I shall not therefore detain you on this topic; but
shall consider the present Peace, more especially as it affects ourselves in
these colonies. Without entering far into political discussions, (which would
be to step out of my province, into one foreign to my place and duty, as well
as to my ability) we may all discern the advantageous situation in which the
happy conclusion of the war has placed us. Our Country has been, from its
first settlement, a disputed prize between us and our rivals the French. Other
nations too have put in their claims among us, and have possessed the finest
territories on the Continent; which have been ceded to us by several treaties.
FRANCE has remained a continual thorn in our sides: their colonies have been
the schools of superstition and cruelty, wherein the native barbarity of the
Indians, has been trained to the utmost fierceness and hatred against us: and
their projects of dominion have been vast and politic. The injustice of France
led them, prematurely for their own purpose, but providentially for our safety,
to anticipate the war by incroaching on our settlements in a time of profound
Peace. They had, with every art of human policy, formed the ambitious plan, of
surrounding and limiting our territory, with the view of more easily invading
and dispossessing us: and they had proceeded so far in the execution that, to
all appearance, they had not left it in our power to prevent it, by the utmost
exertion of our own strength. But GOD looked down from heaven, as he did of old
on the builders of Babel. -- Behold, this they begin to do, and now nothing
will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. GENESIS XI. 6.
To frustrate a design, so threatening to the liberty and religion of this vast
continent, was an object, 'dignus vindice,' worthy a divine interposition. Our
countrymen, of this Province especially, though undisciplined and unused to
arms, had by their spirit and courage in the preceding war, taught the English
how to conquer in America: and Providence, during the last years of the war
just concluded; by an amazing series of victories, and by the wisdom of our
King; by every title of conquest and treaty, has given us the just,
undisputed, and peaceful possession of a territory, whose value and extent we
are not able to estimate. Arise, walk through the land, in the length of it,
and in the breadth of it: for all the land which thou see, to thee will I
give it, and to thy seed for ever. GENESIS XIII. 17.15.


REFLECT on the improbability, that so extensive a Country, to which so many
different nations had their respective claims, should, in so short a time,
become the rightful possession of the ENGLISH ONLY, to the exclusion of every
competitor. History affords no parallel to it, not even in the mighty growth of
the ROMAN republic; which (as its best historian -- Quae ab exiguis profecta
initiis, eo creverit, ut jam magnitudine laboret sua. LIVE. proem. lib. 1.
observes) 'increased from the smallest beginnings, to a Greatness, that
labored with its own weight.' It is, on the contrary, the peculiar happiness
of OUR country, that it is capable (under proper regulations,) of perpetual
improvements, without endangering its safety by the effects of its own
opulence. It will for ages admit of vast numbers of settlers from all the
protestant countries of Europe; to cultivate in security our fertile lands, to
enrich themselves by arts and industry, and to enjoy the freedom of our
government and purity of Religion. Our climate naturally produces hardy bodies
and active minds. While the slavish African and the effeminate Asiatic bow
beneath the yoke of savage tyranny; Liberty and Reason make fair amends for the
inclemencies of our less genial sky. Our Country will always find sufficient
employment for its inhabitants, in agriculture and a simple commerce:' a
circumstance, which in the natural course of things, will retard the corruption
of manners and depravation of Religion; effects chiefly to be dreaded from an
iniquitous and excessive Trade, and an inundation of wealth and luxury. Could
Vice and Irreligion, the pests of public happiness, be restrained, from
increasing with our Greatness: we might exclaim with the Jewish lawgiver, 'The
eternal GOD is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: Israel
shall dwell in safety ALONE, the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn
and wine, also his heaven shall drop down dew. Happy art thou, O Israel; who is
like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is
the sword of thine excellency! (...) U^ERON XXXIII 27 -- 29


To fix your attention on that superintendence, which it is atheism to exclude
from these great revolutions; the cause in which the nation has been engaged
was such as might even deserve the protection of the Deity: a cause the most
just, and most interesting to mankind, that perhaps ever influenced the fate of
Empire. To repress tyranny and usurpation, was the political motive, -- and, by
an overruling Providence, to enlarge our dominion, and to defend the purity of
religion, has been the happy event -- of the Britannic arms. But vain might
have been all our successes, and our very trophies destructive, had they not
been thus timely followed by an advantageous and honorable Peace --
advantageous, by the acquisition of new dominions -- glorious, by every
circumstance, that can add to our national fame and authority: and we hope,
lasting, not only from the equity and moderation with which it has been
negotiated; but by disabling our Enemies, removing them from too near a
neighborhood, and, during the war, weakening their naval force in such a
manner as to check (perhaps, for the remainder of the present age) the
enterprizing and incroaching genius of that nation. Thy tacklings are loosed,
they could not well strengthen their most, they could not spread the sail Nudum
remigio latus,
Et malus celeri saucius africo,
Antennaeque gemunt: ^c sine funibus
Vix durare carinae
Possunt imperiosius
Aequor: non tibi funt integra lintea
Non Dii, quos iterum pressa voces malo.
HOR. lib. I. od XIV.
: then is the prey of a great spoil divided -- Look upon Zion, the city of our
solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation -- for there the
glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein
shall go no hostile galley with cars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.
ISAIAH XXXIII. 20 -- 22.


WHEN we thus reflect on the many civil advantages to our Continent, and to the
whole British empire, resulting from a war so successfully conducted, and
terminated by so beneficial a Peace; we cannot but wonder at that spirit of
faction, murmuring, and insatiable political avarice, which amidst these ample
glories, still repines for more; and clamours for yet greater accessions of
wealth and territory. This is worse than disloyalty to a most excellent King;
it is an impious ingratitude to the providence of GOD. Too much of this ill
temper; (the popular effect of an overgrown prosperity, which kicks against the
hand that feeds it) has prevailed in our Mother Country: where the only danger
to Liberty is from its own excesses. May heaven avert from us the infatuation
of discord, repining, and disaffection! As we have the greatest share in the
blessings of the Peace, we should have the deepest sense and express the
fullest acknowledgment of them: grateful to the wisdom and benevolence of our
august and gracious King; thankful, beyond the utmost expression of our
praises, to HIM who governs the hearts of Princes, and rules in the kingdoms
of men.

THERE is indeed some cloud over the happy face of things on this continent,
from the commotions of the Southern Indians; which, like a baleful smoke, have
arisen from the ashes of the recent war. But if we may be permitted to
conjecture the effect of these incursions; we may hope and trust in the divine
goodness, that they will eventually complete the public tranquillity: either by
obliging the Indians to recede, from our frontiers; or, by preventing their
communication with the French; or lastly, by what is of all the most desirable,
a firm treaty of Peace with them. Such a treaty might ascertain their
territory, and lead them to a state of civility and settlement; it might induce
them to throw themselves on the humanity of our nation, and to learn from us
the arts of life; it might open the way to an equitable and mutually beneficial
commerce. Their experience of our national humanity, justice, and fair dealing,
would conciliate their confidence and good opinion: and this would go a great
way toward recommending the Gospel to their reception. If they are not
introduced to the knowledge of it by these previous steps of humanity,
commerce, and social life; I think it must for ever be impracticable to fix on
their minds any rational and lasting impressions of the Christian Religion. The
experience of all ages since the Church has been destitute of miracles,
demonstrates, that no great good can be done by religious missions for the
conversion of Infidels, till the two objects, hitherto kept distinct, of
Civilizing and Saving, are joined in one consistent design; and act uniformly
in concert to support each other. Civility will prepare them to admit Religion;
and Religion will prevent them from falling back into barbarism. Even in human
sciences, and much more in the divine science of Redemption, there is required
not only the ability and faithfulness of the teacher, but the capacity,
inclination and perseverance of the learner. And it is not rational to expect
such dispositions from Savages always in arms or hunting or pillage, never
fixed to any residence, and characterized by the inconstancy of their manners.
Ou il ne rest plus d'hommes, il n'y a plus d' eglifes. et comment convertir
des brutaux toujours armez, toujours courans au pillage, et don't on n'entend
pas la langue? FLEURY, III^^ dis^ours sur l'hist. Eccles.


CLEAR as I am in my own opinion on this important subject, (which never can be
more seasonably considered, than in this time and situation of public affairs)
I mean not to represent the conversion of the Indians as a work that should be
neglected. It is, I think, incumbent on all who love our Lord JESUS CHRIST in
sincerity, to assist and encourage every attempt to bring these savage nations
out of their darkness, into the light of His Gospel. The use of these
sentiments, is, at this time especially, to lead considerate persons, to
examine the best methods of making such attempts successful. And this I suppose
can no otherwise be effected, than by some extraordinary effort of the
Government, both here and in Britain. Great things might be expected, should
the present Indian war be happily terminated by treaties of Peace and Commerce,
with an express stipulation in regard to Religion. If they are thus brought
under the protection of our King; the civil power and humanity of the nation
may lead the way, by all the steps before traced out, to introduce with
authority and influence such a system of Religion, as may be not only
rationally taught, but rationally heard and learned. Other methods,
particularly that of Schools and Seminaries for the Indian Youth, may be made
very useful, in subserviency to a royal and national encouragement. The Royal
favor has been extended, among us, to seats of Learning commodiously placed
for this purpose. And, as we actually see such a disposition in our King; may
we not venture to assert that it is peculiarly incumbent on Princes, to be in
this instance the nursing Fathers of the Church? The pretensions of extending
the Gospel to the nations of America, are perhaps the first claim Europeans
originally had to their territories in this new world. Those claims indeed are
confirmed to the present occupants, by the same title as all other dominion* by
discovery, conquest, treaty, and prescription. Yet the honor and virtue of
Christian states, is essentially interested in making good their original
claim; by exerting their power in communicating those heavenly blessings which
would be a rich alternative for an useless and unoccupied territory. The plea
of enlarging the kingdom of CHRIST by the conversion of Infidels, has been
indeed made the abominable pretense of much perfidy, cruelty and usurpation
both by the French and Spaniards. But as nothing of this kind has ever
disgraced* or is to be apprehended from, the equity of the English nation: we
may therefore hope that GOD will make thou his instruments to accomplish his
will: For thus says the LORD GOD behold I will lift up mine h^nd to the
Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: -- and kings shall be thy
nursing-fathers, and queens thy nursing-mothers: and thou shall know that I am
the LORD. ISAIAH LXIX. 22, 23. Even should the Indians ever learn Christianity,
it is much to be feared it will be in the same manner an excellent
Church-historian describes the conversion of the Goths. 'Les barbares, ^n
dev^nant Chr^tiens, ne quitterent pas en^ierement leurs anciennes m^^rs: (...)
d^meurerent la plus part l^gers, chang^a^^, emporte^; agissans plus pa^
passion, que par raison -- Ces p^^ples continu^ient daus leur mepris pour les
Latres et pour les arts, ne s' c^^^pant que de la chasse et de la guerre.'
FLEURY. III^^ dis^. Nothing can prevent this consequence, but a vigilant
attention to their civility and settlement, as well as their Christian
instruction




THE accomplishment of this and many other magnificent prophecies, relating
both to the purity and propagation of the Gospel, may perhaps be greatly
influenced by the present PEACE: whose effects on the RELIGION of mankind may
now, in the last place, be usefully attended to. That which is our most
glorious distinction, the Christian and the Protestant Religion, has received
such advantages from the prosecution of the war and its happy conclusion* that
they open to us an ample field of Praise and admiration. He shows his word
unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. This the Psalmist with
reason places as the last and highest instance of the divine favor. We then by
a much stronger obligation are bound to praise Him for His word and will
revealed to us by CHRIST JESUS, who is the substance and accomplishment of all
those good things of which the Jewish Law was only a shadow.

THERE is no instance, wherein the providence of GOD appears more conspicuous
in educing good from evil, than in overruling the events of War to the support
and propagation of true Religion. As the moral government of the universe must
be ever the main object of a divine administration; I think it certain, that
the great revolutions in the history of mankind, have, either in the way of
favor or punishment, been mainly subservient to maintain or extend the
influence of Religion. That the events of Arms and fortunes of Empire, have
been always determined by the prescience and supreme power of GOD; appears with
the fullest evidence from the many prophecies of Scripture, and their
historical completion: and that conquest and dominion have been the
providential means of diffusing Truth and Religion over the world, may be shown
from ancient and recent facts.

THE victories of ALEXANDER were so swift, that he rather flew than marched: as
the prophet Daniel characterizes him, he had the wings of an eagle, and he
touched not the ground DAN. VII. 6. VIII. 5.
. The effect of his rapid conquest of the East, was a revolution as great in
religion as in Empire. The Learning and Language of the Greeks was introduced
into Egypt, Syria, and most other parts of Asia. And the first translation of
the Scriptures, the only pandect of true religion, had great effects even on
gentile manners and philosophy.

THE Roman Empire, under AUGUSTUS, extended itself over all the civilized and
many barbarous parts of the world. It was, in the style of Daniel, 'dreadful
and terrible and strong exceedingly, and conquered the whole Earth DAN. VII. 7,
23.
:' This universal empire was the theater, destined for the reception of the SON
OF GOD, 'whose kingdom alone is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him.' VII. 27.
The Augustan age was the fittest era of the Christian Revelation, 'the
fullness of time, when GOD sent his SON.' GALAT. IV. 4.
The manners of men were prepared for Religion by learning and civility: and
the uniting the world under one monarch, by opening an intercourse among the
various nations associated in his dominions, made the communication of truth
and divine knowledge easy and expeditious.

AFTERWARD, when Religion was sufficiently nurtured in the school of Adversity
and Persecution under the Roman tyrants; GOD raised up the great CONSTANTINE,
to establish the Christian Faith throughout the empire. The victories of that
Prince fixed the Church of CHRIST in that peaceful and prosperous state, which
is perhaps meant by that noble description in St. John's apocalypse, of a great
multitude converted to the Faith, of all nations and tongues, standing before
the throne, hymning Salvation to our GOD and to the Lamb. REVELAT. VII. 10.


THE astonishing defection from the purity of the Gospel foretold in the Jewish
and Christian prophecies, was certainly accomplished in the Papal dominion. It
would be too large and abstruse an enquiry, to show the exact correspondence of
the inspired descriptions with the grandeur and declension of antichristian
Rome. I will only show, by pointing at some illustrious periods of history, in
how clear a manner Almighty GOD has made the victories and conquests of
favored nations his instruments of weakening the Papal tyranny; of freeing the
world from ignorance, superstition, and imposture; and of gradually restoring a
pure gospel, the original doctrine of JESUS CHRIST. Popery has for a thousand
years prevailed throughout the greatest part of Europe. It was perhaps at its
highth both of superstition and authority, in the beginning of the Reformation;
when all Europe trembled at the thunders of the vatican, and the Popes were
both warlike and politic Princes. A great part of Germany; -- and England,
under a King impatient of control, -- adhered to and protected the
reformation: and our happy nation has been ever since the favored instrument
of Providence, in delivering Mankind from a Superstition, which at once
inslaves and blinds her votaries. To assert the freedom of the human mind, and
open a way for still farther emancipating the nations from this grievous yoke;
is probably, in the views of Providence, one great object of our late conquests
and the present Peace. As the Christian world is at present divided into two
great Societies, Popery and Protestantism: it is certain that all the successes
of the war have terminated in favor of the latter against the former: in
weakening the power and extent of Superstition, in advancing the sacred
interests of Truth and Freedom.

MAY we not then conclude that the purpose of the Deity, in giving empire to
the English nation, is to maintain and diffuse among Mankind the blessings of
humanity, freedom, and religion? In adapting human means to effect his
counsels, may it not be probable; that our Nation is now raised to this highth
of greatness and dominion, to be the refuge and asylum of Truth and Liberty: by
its influence and example to free the western world from Error and
Superstition; and to fix on this extensive Continent, what will be its peculiar
glory, the universal establishment of Civil Freedom and true Religion?

CHRISTIANITY indeed disclaims all methods of extending itself, but those of
Truth and Persuasion: and it may be objected, that it is not for the honor of
Religion, that it should be promoted by arms and conquest. To vindicate this
argument, it must be a firm principle, that a war entered into expressly with
the design of forcing the consciences of men, and obliging them to adopt the
religion of the conqueror, is the highest injustice and impiety. The
distinction between the wars which promote Truth, and those which render
Superstition and Imposture triumphant, consists in this. The wars which in
their event promote true Religion are merely political; but in the extending of
imposture and fals^ Religion by force of arms -- as in the case of Mahomet, and
the popish crusades -- those wars were expressly religious; undertaken to
promote, not civil interests, but false opinions: which can never be obtruded
on mankind otherwise than by violence and usurped authority. Apply this
distinction to the late War: the issue of which in the present Peace has been
so favorable to the cause of Truth. The War, now so happily terminated, was in
itself merely a political and commercial quarrel between rival nations.
Religion was not the human object in the conquests that have promoted it: and
it may be doubted whether as to military measures, it has at all influenced the
deliberations of the cabinet of any Prince in Europe. Yet the events of a War
conducted only on political views, have been so overruled by a propitious
Providence, as to effect the great ends of GOD's moral government: the
correction of vice, by the calamities it has brought upon the world; the
preservation and enlargement of Religion, by giving victory and dominion to the
just cause. The past War has certainly awakened our Mother Country from that
slumber of Honor Courage and Probity, into which a profligate system of
politics, and an overgrown commerce had gradually thrown her: thus it has
served to punish our enormities, and retrieve our expiring virtue. Here then we
must discern and adore that Providence, which draws from human affairs, effects
and consequences least in the intention of its instruments and agents: which
from the political and commercial contests of rival princes, accomplishes every
moral purpose of a divine administration: checks and and chastises the crimes
of mankind: gives victory and conquest to the juster cause: and by War itself
enlarges the empire of the PRINCE OF PEACE:

HOWEVER flattering may be our ideas of the national glory and greatness: the
Felicity of our Country so much transcends its Virtue, that we must refer it to
some other cause; and what so probable, as that which is here assigned? that we
are made the happy instruments of accomplishing the views and purposes of
divine Providence, on account of the Freedom of our civil Government, the
purity and excellence of our Religion? Civil, like intellectual Liberty is
better felt than explained: we enjoy it in fact; and England and her Colonies,
by being so fair examples of both Civil and Religious Freedom, will naturally
be a check to foreign despotism; and we may hope, always a safe retreat, a
sacred asylum, from Tyranny and Persecution.

Thus to discern JESUS CHRIST to be the end, His GOSPEL the object of all human
revolutions, affords a convincing argument (among innumerable others) both of a
moral Providence and of the truth of Revealed Religion. So characteristic is
that description of its divine author: a crown was given unto him, and he went
forth conquering and to conquer. REVELAT. VI. 2.


IF this theory be admitted -- can there be a nobler subject of pious gratitude
and thanksgiving? Empire, glory, commerce, are great objects to Kings and
Statesmen: but in the counsels of GOD, they are only secondary attentions, and
subservient to his universal plan of moral government; to which the interests
of virtue and religion are of the first importance, as being intimately
connected with the happiness of his intelligent Creatures.

EVERY political blessing of Liberty and Empire, Peace and Security, should
therefore lead us to fulfill the intentions of the Deity; and to concur with his
administration, by improving them, publicly, and every one of us, to the
purposes of Religion. As we have reason to think, that the successes of the War
and benefits of the Peace are intended for the furtherance of Truth and
Christianity: let us rightly improve the inestimable privilege we ourselves
enjoy, of a pure and uncorrupted Gospel. GOD has not dealt so with any Nation,
neither have the heathen knowledge of his laws.

To give a greater weight to my application of these words, and induce you to
consider the bounties of Heaven as MOTIVES TO VIRTUE, -- I shall apply to this
purpose the reflections of a noble Writer (...) of CLARENDON. Contemplations on
the PSALMS. p. ^64.
on the passage before us. Besides the general benefits of GOD's Providence,
there is yet another part of his bounty, his pure natural bounty, unpurchased
by any pretense or good will of ours, which may exalt us more than all the rest
that he has ever done for us: which is, the distinction that he has made
between us that are Christians, and all the other nations of the world; by
communicating his judgments, and making known to us what he has done for us;
which he has concealed from all the world besides. They are still left in
their native ignorance, under the same blindness that covered their Fathers for
so many generations: to find out by the light of their Reason the dark method
of their creation and the author of their being: and which they can hardly know
to be worth their enquiry, by not knowing that he takes farther care of them,
or expects any retribution or acknowledgment for them. -- Whereas, we, by the
inestimable benefit of his Scriptures, do not only know our Creator and
Redeemer and all that they have done for us; but likewise what our duty is
toward them, and what they can require from us. We know the conditions and
mutual promises between us; and can urge and prove those promises, and demand
the performance of them, if we have on our parts performed the conditions (or
but honestly endeavored to perform them) which were annexed to those promises.
And now, if we shall wander farther from this trodden beaten way, than those
miserable uninstructed people; who, notwithstanding the dismal darkness they
are in, have approached as much nearer to it, as we have gone from it; we must
expect, that GOD will keep up the distinction still, in the distribution of his
favors; and draw them nearer to him, and into the right way; and suffer us to
wander farther out of it, and to possess that darkness, that we so wretchedly
affect.

THUS far that wise and virtuous statesman: who, though his thoughts are
adapted to the unhappy times he lived in; may teach us a right improvement of
our inestimable blessing in the revelation and purity of the gospel: and to
'esteem the benefit of having the scriptures communicated to us, as an
indispensable obligation upon us to please God: to observe all those
injunctions He has laid upon us; and as punctually to forbear doing any thing,
which He has expressly forbidden us to commit.' Amidst our schemes and
projects, of extending the gospel to the barbarous nations around us; let us be
careful, that the spirit of it be not lost or neglected among its professors,
by holding the truth in unrighteousness. Cherchons la method de convertir les
infidelles. -- Attachons nous d'abord au plus essentie^: a nous reformer nous
memes, par un grand application a la priere, au reglement de notre interieur et
de nos moeurs. Ensuite faisons part aux autres des veritez que Dieu nous aura
fait connoitre, sans contention, sans aigreur, sans reproaches. Pratiquons les
premiers ce que nous croyons le meilleur, et qui depend de nous. Revenons a la
priere, et attendons avec patience, qu'il plaise a Dieu d'avancer son oeuvre.

^LEURY, dis^. II. sur ^ hist. Eccles.
The restoring of Christianity among ourselves, in principles and manners, is
the great improvement we should make of the felicity of the times. Whether
Peace and security, or Adversity and persecution best promote the temper and
practice of Religion, is a problem that History will generally decide against
us. Times of Peace and public Prosperity are too commonly Times of Vice and
Irreligion. Be it our care to improve the goodness of God, as the strongest
motive to Love and serve him: nor make Him those ungrateful returns of
supineness and indifference in the Christian life, which are apt to accompany
the external security of the Church. Since God has done so great things for
us; let it not be said, to our condemnation, 'this people honors me with
their lips, but their hear^ is far from me. In vain do we worship him, if our
crimes and ingratitude should provoke him to change his perverted blessings
into correcting or avenging punishments. But I refrain from every inauspicious
thought, on a subject that demands the utmost exultation of our Praise. Only
let our performances in some measur^ ^^p pace with our professions; and our
returns of love and duty be in some proportion to our undeserved mercies.

IF then we prize our CIVIL LIBERTY: let us not use it for a cloak of
licentiousness, but as the servants of GOD, I PET. II. 16.
by our conscientious subjection to laws and government. If we glory in our
political greatness, PEACE, and security; and are apt to pride ourselves in our
prosperity, as if we should never be moved; perverting our blessings by
voluptuousness and luxury: let us 'make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, nor
put off from day to day; lest suddenly the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in
our security we be destroyed ECCLUS. V. ^.
.' If we value ourselves on our RELIGIOUS PRIVILEGES, let us not rely upon them
as alone sufficient to our salvation, nor make them a subject of strife and
uncharitableness. Trust not in lying words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these: but thoroughly amend your ways and your doings
JEREM. VII. 4, 5.
. Let the principle of Religion ever accompany the profession of it. While, in
its external mode and polity, we are solicitous to follow Peace with all men;
let us be continually attentive to its effects on the heart and manners, and
studious to cultivate that Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord
HEB. XII. 14.
. Let the abundant goodness of GOD, of which we have so many recent instances,
lead us to repentance, animate our feeble and inconstant virtue, and raise our
contemplations, from the bounties of his Providence, to his inestimable love
displayed in our redemption by JESUS CHRIST, the author of eternal salvation to
all that obey him HEBR. V, 9.
. To His mediation we are no less indebted, for all our spiritual hopes and
happiness; than to the beneficent Creator and Governor of the world, for every
present good. Let us then, publicly and in particular, express our continual
thankfulness, by a conversation becoming the gospel of CHRIST: and as we are,
in outward profession a truly Christian people; as, probably for this reason,
our nation is made the greatest and most powerful of all the Christian states;
let us be careful to adorn the purity of our Faith by an equal sanctity of
manners. So shall the effects of our heavenly Religion be answerable to its
natural tendency and design; productive of 'Glory to GOD, Peace on earth, and
Benevolence among men.' The work of Righteousness shall be Peace; and the
effect of Righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever LUKE II. 14. ISAIAH
XXXII. 17,
.

Now unto the blessed and only potentate, who pours his benefits upon us, who
makes wars to cease in all the world, and gives his people the blessing of
Peace: to Him be rendered the thankful tribute of our Praise, through JESUS
CHRIST, our blessed Redeemer: to whom, with the FATHER, and the ETERNAL SPIRIT,
be ascribed all Glory in Earth and Heaven. AMEN.

The Reader is requested to make the following Corrections.
PAGE 3, line 7, for council read counsel.

-- line 18, read consciousness.

p. 15. marg. for ISAIAH LXIX. read, XLIX.

p. 18. line 26 for, at present, read, principally.

The passage in page 7. line 1, 2. is a misrepresentation, that the writer
wishes to retract, with any other mistakes, quas aut incuria fudit, Aut humana
parum cavit natura --


